THE TRVE DIFFERENCE BETVVEENE CHRISTIAN SVBIECTION AND UNCHRISTIAN REBELLION:
WHEREIN THE PRINCES LAWFVLL power to command for truth, and indepriuable
right to bear the sword are defended against the Popes censures and the
Jesuits sophismes uttered in their APOLOGY and DEFENSE OF ENGLISH CATHOLICS:
With a demonstration that the things reformed in the Church of England by the
Laws of this Realm are truly Catholic, notwithstanding the vain show made
to the contrary in their late Rhemish Testament: by THOMAS BILSON Warden of
Winchester. Perused and allowed by public authority.

Matthew. 22. Yield to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and to God the
things which are Gods.

August. contra epist. Permen. Lib. 1. Cap. 7. These men inobedient and impious
in either, neither yield Christian love to God, nor humane fear to Princes.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes Printer to the University, MDXXCV.

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT, VIRTUOUS AND NOBLE PRINCESS, ELIZABETH BY THE GRACE OF
GOD QVEENE OF ENGland, France and Ireland, Defendor of the faith, etc.
MOST RENOWNED AND Virtuous Princess: I am in hope, it shall seem no
presumption, to offer these my rude labors to the sight and view of your
Majesty: The cause is Christ's, as being the defense of his will and ordinance,
who has mercifully placed and mightily preserved your Highness in your fathers
throne: and expects, as it were in recompense, that the power which he has
given you, and honor which he has heaped on you, should be employed to
protect his truth, and safegarde his Church within your Realm. Which your
religious and gracious disposition so wisely considers and so carefully
puts in execution, that not only with good liking you bear the title to
be DEFENDOR of the Christian faith, but with many dangers and some envy you
stoop to the very burden of harboring the afflicted, and helping the
distressed by all convenient and godly means: not refusing with Princely
courage and constancy to endure the displeasures and abide the disfavors of
such as seek to restoare or uphold the decayed and accursed kingdom of
Antichrist. A thing rare in so high a state, but a great blessing from God our
Savior, to be both protector of his persecuted servant, and partaker of his
sons reproaches: which perhaps worldly minds do warily shun: but your
Christian wisdom well perceives to be the assured sign of Gods favor, and
to have his undoubted promise of an immortal and far more glorious Crown,
than this, which he has already possessed you with.

This good and long experience of your Majesty's most willing inclination and
affection to plant piety and relieve innocence, might embolden me, if there
were no farther cause, to press to your Highness for the Patronage of so good
a purpose: but as the case now stands, besides this general inducement, I
have a special ^nforcement to lead me to this onset. The whole discourse
does so directly and namely treat of your Majesty's Scepter, Sword, and
Crown, that neither I might ask protection of any other but of your royal
person, nor such demurres be published without your Highness leave.

So is it, most gracious Sovereign, that certain your subjects borne,
forsaking your happy government and their native Country, upon doubt of
Religion as they pretend, have feated themselves in two Societies or Colleges,
which they call Seminaries, founded and furnished at the Popes charges beyond
the Seas, the one at Rome, the other at Rhemes: Apol. chap. 3.
with purpose thither to draw the best wits out of England, as well from
both universities as from other Grammar schools, there to train them to their
fancies, and faction, and thence to direct them back into this Realm, for the
reconciling of poor souls, as they say, to the Catholic Church: or in truer
terms, for the perverting of simple and ignorant persons from the duty which
they owe to God and your Highness.

This attempt being thoroughly looked into by the Lords and others of your
Majesty's most wise and worthy Counsel, was thought, as in deed it is, very
dangerous and pernicious to your Realm, that the capital enuier of your
state, disturber of your peace, and pursuer of your person should allure and
abuse so great a number of your subjects with a show of liberality: and have
them in such bondage, by the Rules of their Society, that they must obeie the
will of their SVPERIOR, (the Popes Agent among them) none other-wise than they
would the voice of Christ from heaven: Campian in his 2 article.
(for so themselves profess:) and thereupon by your Highness authority,
proclamation was given out, that none should depart the Realm without license:
and a time prefixed for those that were abroad, to return home, upon some
pains there specified, and farther threats if your Highness were thereunto
provoked.

The Guiders of these ungodly Societies in steed of obeying your Highness
edict, fell to defend their own act in departing this Land and resorting to
Rome: as also the Popes intent in erecting those Seminaries, and appoincting a
number of them to be sent into England to reduce the Realm to the Romish
obedience, which they call the faith of their fathers. And because they were to
lay the fault of their unlawful departure and long absence, either on
themselves, which they would not, or on the state from which they were
estraunged, they (declaring their founder by their fruits) spared not in a
slanderous pamphlet of theirs entitled, An Apology and t^^e declaration of
the institution and (...) of the two English Colleges, to charge your
Christian, mild, and advised regiment with no less crimes than heresy,
tyranny and blasphemy: as the only causes why they departed and absented
themselves so long from their natural country: ag^ising none of your
Ecclesiastical Laws to be orderly or duly made (but calling them strange
and unnatural dealings, fol. ^7
violent disorders, fol. 38
which to all posterity must needs breed shame and rebuke, repugnant to the
laws of God, the church and nature) and most of all spurning at the act and
oath which abolished the Popes usurped power out of this Realm, and declared
your Highness to be the SVPREME bearer of the sword, and establisher of
public Laws within your Dominions (a power confirmed to Princes by God, and
therefore not to be infringed or claimed by Priests or Popes.) And to make
their matter more saleable in the ears of the simple they used all their
Rhemish art and eloquence to deface and traduce that right of your authority
and band of our obedience with cauilling Sophismes and flourishing terms: as
if that SOVERAIGNTIE used by your Highness were a thing improbable,
unreasonable, unnatural, impossible: fol. 10
and the O THE yielded by us fol. 12
intolerable, repugnant to God, the Church, your Majesty's honor, and al men's
consciences. Of such wastfull words, and mighty bragges that book is full,
having otherwise for matter and proof nothing in it, that is worth the
reading, much less the answering: as being rather a Rhetorical declamation of
an ungracious wit, than a substantial confirmation of their acts and
attemptes against God and the Magistrate.

But, as it seemed, they trusted rather to their practices, which have been of
late very rife with the Church of Rome: than to their proofs, of which theie
be utterly destitute: and therefore they dispatched into your Highness
Realm under the conduction of one more presumptuous than learned, (as his
writing and disputing, whiles he lived, declared) a whole swarm of
Boie-priestes disguised and provided at all assaies with secret instructions
how to deal with all sorts of men and matters, and with commission from Rome
to confess and absolve such as they should win with any pretense or policy
to mislike the state and affect novelty, and to take assurance of them by
vow, oath, or other means, that they should be ever after adherent and
obedient to the Church of Rome and to the faith thereof: which there made the
ruder and vnwiser sort believe was christian and Catholic.

Religion only founded in their mouths, and the faith of their Fathers: and
yet that poison they carried covertly in their hearts, and cunningly in their
books, that your Majesty's deceived and beguiled Subjects by the very
sequence of their Romish faith and absolution were tied to obeie the Pope
depriving your highness of the sword and scepter: and bound to assist him, or
whom he should send to take the same by force of arms out of your Highness
hands.

I know, most noble Sovereign, they stoutly denied this, and earnestly
protested in open audience, that they had no such meaning, but for their parts
did account your Majesty their lawful and true Princess, and taught all
others so to do (having first obtained, like wily Friars, a dispensation at
Rome, that to avoid the present danger, they and all other their obsequents
might serve and honor your Highness for a time until the bull of Pius the
fifth might safely be executed): The dispensation of Campian and Parsons.
and it may be the common sort of such as they perverted, were not acquainted
with these heinous mysteries: but yet this was the full resolution of them all,
which I last reported, as well appeared by their examinations: and this very
conclusion stood in their written books as a ruled case, that they must rather
loose their lives than shrink from this ground-woorke that the Pope may
deprive your Highness of your Scepter and Throne: and the reason is added,
because, say they, it is a point of fayeth, In their cases of conscience: the
55. Arti.
and requires confession of the mouth, though death ensue.

This dangerous, if not devilish Doctrine was not printed nor publyshed to the
sight of all your Subjects, until the time that some of the chief procurers
and kindlers of this flame, for these and other interprises of like condition
and quality were by the just course of your Highness Laws adjudged to death.
After whose execution the almes-men of Antichrist saw no remedy, but they
must either leave their brethren as rightly condemned for hatching rebellion
under a show of Religion, and be in danger to dissolve the plotte which they
had laid to bring this Land to the Popes subjection, (the true end and
intent of their Seminaries and full repaiment of all his charges) or else with
all their cunning undertake the quarrel of their vn-holie father: and plead
the cause of their unlucky brethren. Having no better choice, they resolved,
as venturers must, that have a desperate case in hand, to try what success
they might get by facing and shifting in such sort as the simple should
hardly discern them. To that end have they put forth A Defense of English
Catholics: Wherein according to their wonted vain, many things are stately
and stoutelie avouched, but nothing attempted or intended to be proved, save
only the Popes power to deprive Princes: which with all furniture of wit
and words they labor to infer: not shaming to say, that Subjects bearing
arms against their natural Princes upon the Popes warraunt, do an holy, just
and honorable service: The Defense of Catholics the 5. chap.
and that this has been the faith of this Land ever since it was converted
unto Christ.

Against this canker, consuming the very soul and conscience where it takes
hold, I thought it not amiss, In the third part of this book.
to oppose the Sovereign salve of Gods eternal will and commandment, and to
let it appear to your Graces people, that Princes are placed by God, and so
not to be displaced by men: and subjects threatened damnation by Gods own
mouth if they resist, from which no Popes dispensation shall save them: and
therefore the Jesuits Doctrine in that point to be as wicked, as their proofs
be weak: having neither Scripture, Council, nor Father, for a thousand
years that ever allowed, mentioned or imagined any power in Popes to depose
Princes.

I have thereto added a confirmation of the right which the Laws of this Land
do attribute unto your Highness, In the second part.
and an explication of that oath, which the Jesuits so much stumble at: laieng
my foundation in the sacred testimonies of the holy Ghost, and persuing the
same in the continual practice of Christ's church for eight hundredth years and
upward, (so long as there was either godliness in Bishops to regard their
duties, or courage in Princes to call for their own) and justifying every part
thereof severally and sufficiently by divine and humane both authorities and
examples.

The Jesuits absurdities and allegations pretended against your Majesty's
interest to bear the sword over all persons and in all causes, without
dependence or reference to any earthly tribunal or superior, I have likewise
particularly refelled, and proved them both impertinent to their purpose, and
nothing obstant to that Supreme power of the sword which is claimed and used by
your Majesty: but their objections to be mere cauils and mistakings of a
matter which they do not or will not understand: as also their flieng this
Realm, and running to Rome I have examined, In the first part.
and not only found them repugnant to the ancient laws of the Conqueror and
other your noble progenitors, but also showed great difference between the
Catholic Fathers writing and sometimes going to the Bishop of Rome, as to
their fellow servant and a dutiful subject to the same state that they were:
and our English Italians giving him an Antichristian power to turn and wind
the whole church at his will, and dispose kingdoms and displace Princes, if
they be not obedient and suppliant to his Censures.

Lastly because the temper and color of all their wicked sayings and doings
is the catholic faith and the catholic service, In the fourth part.
I have entered a special discourse, that the reformation of the church in
this Realm made by your Majesty's power and laws is wholly and truly
catholic: such as the Scriptures do preciselie command and the ancient fathers
expressly witness was the faith and use of Christ's church for many hundrethes.

These things most (religious and worthy Princess) I have done sincerely,
that the doctrine and precepts of our Savior might take place before the
devises and pleasures of me^: familiarly, that the meaner sort of your subjects
which are most obnoxious to this infection might perceive the way to recover
their former health: and temperatly, that the enemy should not think himself
rather illuded then answered. Which if it please your most excellent Majesty
to like and allow that it may pass to the hands of your people, I trust in
Christ that such as have any fear of God before their ^yes, and care of life
to come will hold themselves satisfied, and the rest be better advised before
they run headlong into that extreme perdition of body and soul, and
horrible downfall of disobedience, and infidelity to God, and their Prince.

The king of kings and Lord of Lords bless and preserve your Majesty, and as
he has begun a good and glorious work in you, and in this Realm by you: so
continue the same by lightening you with his holy Spirit, and defending you
with his mighty arm as he has done from the day, that he chose you to
be the Leader and Guider of his People: that you may long keep them in
truth and peace by the assistaunce of his grace, to the praise of his glory,
increase of the Godly, and grief of his and your enemies. Even so Lord Jesus.

Your Majesty's most humble and dutiful subject, THOMAS BILSON.

THE GENERAL CONTENTS of every part.
The first part Examineth all the proofs and places of the Jesuits Apology,
their forsaking the Realm and running to Rome, what aid the Fathers sought at
Rome: and how the Bishop thereof in all ages has been resisted: the intent of
his Seminaries: and virtues of his Clergy.

The second part Proves the Princes supreme power to command for truth
within her Realm: and the Pope to have been a duetifull subject to the Roman
Emperors Ecclesiastical Laws for eight hundred years and upward: answers
the Jesuits authorities and absurdities heaped against the Princes regiment:
searches the safest way for the Princes direction in matters of religion, and
concludes the Pope in doubts of doctrine to be no sufficient nor superior
judge.

The third part Refelleth the Jesuits reasons and authorities for the Popes
depriving of Princes, and the bearing of arms by subjects against their
Sovereigns upon his censures: declares the tyrannies and injuries of
Antichrist seeking to exalt himself above kings and Princes: and conuinceth
that no deposition was offered by the Pope for a thousand years after Christ,
and none agnised by any Christian Prince until this present day.

The fourth part Shows the reformation of this Realm to be warranted by the
word of God and the ancient faith of Christ's Church, and the Jesuits for all
their crakes to be nothing less than Catholics.


To the Christian Reader.
IT is some time since, good Christian Reader, that lighting on the Jesuits
Apology, I received the same with purpose to refute it, if the matter so
imported. Perusing it over, I found it curiously penned with picked terms,
and beautified with plausible and popular persuasions and reasons: but as for
substance or learning, or weight of proof, I saw nothing in it that should
occupy a mean Scholar the space of two days. Laying that book therefore
aside I determined at mine own choice and liberty to handle the matters there
most impugned, I mean the oath and the Princes supremacy, in such sort as men
of mean capacity, abused by their secret whisperinges and open raylings might
plainly perceive, both the Princes power to command for truth to be lawful
and good, and the Jesuits cauils impugning the same to be vain and childish.

As I was in this resolution, and saw no cause, for that I should refute no
direct adversary, to make more have than both health, which was not great: and
business, which I cannot want, would suffer me: there happened an injury to be
offered to the inheritance of the College where I am, by a false title derived
from before the foundation of the house, and so strengthened on every side with
ancient deeds and evidence, that the forgerie was hard to be discerned and
harder to be convinced but by infinite searching in the muniments of many
churches and Bishoprics as well as in our own, and reexamining sundry large
and laborious commissions which they had taken out before my time, to testify
the keeping and justify the delivering of those suspected deeds and ligiers.
To the de^ecting and impugning of this, no person was or would be used (I
speak for the pains and not for the skill) but my self, the cause was so
huge, the comparing of the circumstances and contrarieties both of deeds and
witnesses so tedious: the proof so perplexed and intricate: and the danger so
nearly touched the whole state of the house: I was forced for two years to
lay all studies aside and addict my self wholly first to the deprehending, and
then to the pursuing of this falsehood.

No sooner had I breathed from this unwonted travel, and betaken my self to
my former purpose, but my hap was to light on the Jesuits Defense of English
Catholics, not having the Authors name, but in order of writing and phrase of
speech resembling right D. Allen the maker of their Apology: Looking earnestly
into the contents thereof, I perceived the penman to have such confidence in
his tongue that he doubted not but to ouerrule the world with words, and his
pretensed policies. So far he wadeth in other men's causes and common wealths:
So boldly he pronounces what himself pleases of Popes and princes, and of
their titles, Counselles, Laws and actions, neither allows he any man to
be religious or catholic but such as himself likes: and euerie-where he
shows a special care to smooth and stroke his holy Fathers endeavors and
censures, acts and judgments, wars and wickedness with terms of the
greatest devotion and reverence: subiecting all things under his feet,
inuesting him with both swords, and suffering no man, king nor Caesar to have
assurance of honor or life longer than he kneeleth down and adoreth the image
of the beast. In this maiestical course and surrly conceit he goes on,
thinking he can captiuate kingdoms with the volubilitie and intemperauncy of
his tongue; which is so swift to furnish a lie, that he disdaineth the
baseness and plainness of truth.

The sauciness and egernesse of that Defense, I was then, and am yet persuaded
to ouerskip: as having learned that princes affairs and actions are above my
vocation, and wholly without my profession: neither do I think it lawful for
private men rashly to speak, or possible for them uprightly to judge of
Princes doings, unless they be fully acquainted with the secrets and
circumstances of the things, which Princes use not to commit to many, nor to
any but those that are of their counsel. I therefore then did and now do
determine to leave this peremptory prater, whosoever he be, to his own vain:
knowing that besides open rightes and titles, secret preuentions are often used
between Realms, and sometimes reuenges, which Magistrates by lawful means
may procure. Only the Popes power to deprive Princes, which with all his
skill, learning and eloquence he seeks to prove and persuade to the people
of this Realm, (as the chiefest Bulwark of their Defense, that were condemned,
he says for religion, we say for treason, and in deed the very ground of all
their actions) I thought needful to examine; and to let the simple see, on
what a sandy slime they have built as well their consciences as their Colleges,
and in how wretched and unrighteous a quarrel they have hazarded their lives in
this world, and their souls in the next, to enlarge the power and make up the
purse of their Rhemish founder.

Taking that therefore in hand I have word by word refelled the fifth
chapter of their Defense which purposely treats of this matter: and inserted
so much of the fourth as tended to this end, the rest being a voluntary pang
of their unbridled eloquencc: as also I have ripped up the shameful attemptes
and tumults of Popes these last five hundred years, (for before that time
Antichrist neither was, nor durst be so bold) presuming to displace and depose
their Lord and Master, the Roman Emperor, and incountering him and other
Princes with treasons, poisons, battayles, bloodsheds, periuries, and
treacheries, such as Christendom never before tasted of, and ever since rued.
Where, I have not only opened the facts and noted the meeknes of their martial
spirits, but have unfolded the causes and quarrels for which those Princes were
thus pursued with such excommunications and deprivations from Rome; showing as
I go, the Italian stories in favor of their countrieman and foreman the Pope,
to be exceeding partial.

The like order I would have followed in their Apology, but that, as I first
protested, I found nothing in it worthy to be refuted, unless I should have
banded their idle and empty terms back again to them with others of the
same making, and so brought the cause of Christ and truth of Religion to a
warfare of words: which I neither ought, nor would. If any man think me no
indifferent judge of their pains, it may please him to cast his eye on the
second sheet, and he shall find all the proofs and places of their Apology
answered in three leanes: and of those few and weak quotations to have made
a conquest in open writing had been incke and paper ill employed. I would
therefore not take that course, which seemed to me neither needeful nor
profitable: but to benefit the poor deceived subjects of this Realm and
bring the Jesuits cause to the touchstone in deed, I have chosen the
principal intentes of their Apology, on which their whole foundation
stands; and after mine own course debated them more exactly and largely than
the confutation of their Apology would have suffered me.

The chiefest matters of the Apology.
For where they pretend they departed for lack of the Catholic Sacrifice,
Sacraments and Service, which want in this Realm; Cap. 1.
and because they were forced by oath to confess an unnatural and impossible
power in the Prince to be supreme Governor of all persons and causes as well
ecclesiastical as temporal: Cap. 4.
and in their absence they resort for relief to none but to him that is the
head of their catholic communion, Cap. 2.
the chief Pastor and Bishop of their souls in earth, and the vicar
general of Christ, to whose predecessors all the famous Fathers called for
aid, comfort and counsel in their like distresses: and train up such as
come unto them in obedience to the churches Laws, Cap. 5.
Apostolic Traditions both written and unwritten, and to the precepts of
Ancients and Superiors, who have the promised spirit of truth: and are sent
back again into this Land to execute spiritual offices, and to absolve in
foro conscientiae the penitent people from their sins, of what sort soever,
schism and heresy not excepted: Cap. 6.
who sees not that these assertions being the several branches of their
Apology, depend either on religion, that is in strife betwixt us: or on the
Princes power, which they impugn: or on the Popes claim to be head of the
church, which we deny? And therefore the proof or disproofe of their
particular actions, must be fet and derived from those chief and capital
springs.

The consideration whereof first induced me to neglect the rouing discourses,
and vaunting florishes of their Apology no less void of truth than of
proof, and to betake my self to a stricter and directer kind of examining
Rome, and siding themselves with the Pope as Christ's Vicar general against
their Prince, for which they have no president in the primative God and
practice of Christ's church: and therefore the oath importing the same to be
good and godly. Thirdly the Popes censuring and depriving princes of their
crowns, I show to be nothing else but a wicked and unchristian

Other incident and adjacent matters I have handled, and those not a few, as
the general and special contents before and after will better insinuate: but
these four be the points that bear the burden both of their first Apology
for their Seminaries, and last Defense of English Catholics. By these shall we
soon discern the truth or falsehood of their pretenses and clamors against the
Princes Laws and such as are authorized by her highness: and therefore from
the sober and sad discussing hereof, if they get them, as they have done to
outrageous and tragical exclamations, we must leave them as men wilfully
diuerting from the right way, and crying as loud as they can for life, to
drown the voices of such as would recall them.

If they look that all the parts of their Defense should have bin answered in
like sort as the fifth chapter is, that labor I say for a man of my calling
would have bin as fruitles, as it is needles: the proofs that are not here
discussed, may ^afely be despised, the rest of their rolling rhetorik, a divine
neither need regard, nor should repeat. As much as is enforcing, and to their
purpose, is here comprised: their politik observations, as they be for the most
part falls and passing sla^derous: so to their defense are they idle and
altogether superfluous; and argue rather minds laden with malice, and tongues
fraighted with poison against the present state even for very temporal and
civil affairs: than any religious or dutiful respect of authority and
submission to the Magistrate. But such is the doctrine and education of their
Romish seminaries: they fell first to flattering, and because that took no
place, in a rage they be now run to leude and open slaundering. An example
whereof, to him that has the book, and may read it, appears, as through the
the whole, so in few lines page 177. more spiteful words than which the
rankest caterpiller in Rome could not have uttered against the state and
kingdom where we live: not touching the persecution which they suffer, but
obiecting in plain words to the whole body of her Majesty's most honorable
and most christian Counsel, ignominious practices, and plaguie injustice: The 8
chapter of their Defense, page 177.
yea even piracies, proditions, spi^ries, and soul arts to afflict and coosen
the world round about us, with many such disloyal, unnatural, untrue and
dishonest both surmises and reproaches, whereof that fardle is full.

This is one of the reasons why I neither might nor would at large refell their
Jesuitical Defense of English Catholics, as they term it: in deed an
artificial inuectiue defacing and slaundering the public Government of this
realm to the uttermost of their powers. The other is for that the sum and
effect of those chapters which I have omitted, and might not without offense to
the state be published, are wholly reduced to those principal questions which I
have handled.

The sum of the Defense.
In their first, second, and fourth chapters their chief scopes are these, that
1 cap.
Many Priests and catholic in England have bin condemned and executed for
mere matter of religion: that 2 cap.
Campian and the rest of the Priests condemned and executed upon pretense of
treason, were never yet guilty of any such crimes: but 4 cap.
behaved themselves very discreetly, and nothing seditiously in their answers
to the questions of the Bull of Pius Quintus. In these the wise Reader soon
perceives the whole contention touches the Popes jurisdiction and claim
denied him by the Laws of this Realm, and his power to deprive the Prince of
her crown and scepter, which was the sole respect the Bull of Pius Quintus
had. The justifying then of these two foundations with clear and pregnant
proofs had been requisite for the Jesuits, if they had purposed to manifest
the innocence of their brethren: where now by their rhetorical vagaries
inucighing at the parts and circumstances of their inditementes, conuictions
and executions, they storm at the course, which the Judges observed, but say
nothing to the crime wherewith the guilty were burdened.

The Popes power to deprive Princes, they will say, they have fully proved: and
so their brethren in truth and equity to be cleared. If that were so, they
said somewhat: but as I have showed they profferre it often, they never prove
it. And therefore on the contrary part, as I need not strengthen the public
judgments of this Realm with the particular reports, behauiors, hopes and
enterprises of the Jesuits having their trial in Courts of Record and
places of usual and open justice: neither is that incident to my calling or
requisite in these cases: so for the maine and general ground of the crime
there fastened on them, and after punished in the^; which was, that to aid,
assist, persuade or defend the Popes Bull depriving the Prince of her crown
and throne, to encourage her Subjects or enemies on that pretense to rebellion
or invasion, was high and heinous treason, the truth, I say of this illation,
is evident by the third part of this my book, where that point of their
Defense is refuted.

So for the rest, which would needs venture their lives in the like quarrel: I
mean for inuesting the Pope with the princes sword: the Jesuits should have
brought sound and sufficient proof that the Pope by Gods law has a
Sovereign and supreme power over this Realm, to make Laws, to appoint
penalties, to dispose the goods, lands, and bodies of Clerks and others, for
such causes and crimes as they count spiritual. For this is the power which
the Pope lately usurped in this Realm; and from which he is now rightly and
orderly repelled by the Laws of the same. It is no treason with us to make him
chief Pastor of your souls, nor to give him an Episcopal or Apostolical
authority over the whole Church, though that also be a wicked and frantike
Heresy: but to give him an external dominion, and coerciue jurisdiction over
this Realm above and against the Prince, which the Apostles of Christ neither
had, nor could have without apparent injury to the Magistrate: this is it the
Execution of justice does duly respect, and this is far from any matter of
faith or religion. Right to command, and power to compel belong properly to
the sword by the Law of God: which they can not attribute to the Pope, but
they must make him a Superior Magistrate to the prince in guiding and
prescribing the use of the sword, and consequently the prince to hold her
sword and scepter at his pleasure: and if she refuse, to be streightway
displaced.

This wily conueiaunce to tie Princes swords fast to the Popes side, and to
spoil them of their Crowns, if they do not execute his rage, is the chiefest
plotte that Jesuits have at this instant to resettle the kingdom of
Antichrist, for which they have not so much as the paring of any Scripture or
Council, or Father in the Church of Christ for a thowsande years: and yet in
our days it must be a mere matter of Religion: and the forefront of their
brethrens defense. But no marvel if they, which make open rebellion a point of
their faith, so soon consent to have the Popes presumption holden, as the
surest key of their Religion.

To their third chapter, that they have great cause to complain of iniust
persecution, intolerable severity and cruelty toward Catholics in
England: and we no reason to do the like for the justice (as thy call it)
done on us in Queen Mary's and other Princes days, I need not reply. To
this conceit of the Jesuits, that they may consume whom they will with fire
and faggotte, and no man must stop them of their passage, or hinder their
pastimes without injustice and cruelty: what should I say, but that I thin^e
the Scribe was skant waking, whiles he was penning this drowsy Divinity?
What learning, I will not ask what wit, was in this, to make such definitive
resolutions that no Prince may amerce or imprison their adherentes without
intolerable severity and cruelty? forsooth, they might hang and burn old
and young, men and women, for doubting of their Decretalles, and all this with
praise, though it never pleased any good man in the Catholic Church that
Heretics should be put to death for only religion as S. Augustine very
earnestly avouches?

Their sixth chapter is a marvelous profound Rhetorication, that it is much to
the benefit and stabilitie of Common wealths and specially of Kings
Scepters, See pa. 19. cap. 6.
that the differences betwixt them and their people for Religion or any other
cause for which them may seem to deserve deprivation, may rather be decided,
by (the Pope as the Jesuits would have it, and so they shall be on the surest
side) than by Popular mutiny and fantasy of private men as (we) desire and
practice, or else they belly us, which is no wonder in such Seminists. To these
trifling and tedious discourses of men trusting wholly to their tongues, and
seeking with deintie speech and couched terms to hoodwinck Princes eyes, and
delight subjects ears, that all the world may dance in a string, after the
pope and his nourceries, what other answer should we give, then, that, if
there were not a God to be served and honored, who has committed the sword to
Princes, and will exact at their hands the well using of the same for the
public maintenance of his will and worship, surely Princes should do more
safely to follow that advise of the Jesuits. For their holy father will never
leave practicing by all the means he possibly may to subvert their states,
and shorten their lives, except they receive his keys and busse his shoes.

The wars of Ireland and dangers of England, which this roming man so much
bableth of, as matters of State, I refer to such as be Commonwealth men, The
defense cap. 7. fol. 140.
I will not pass the bounds of my profession; the Pope may continue his old
worme-eaten claim to the Sovereignty of Ireland, which these loving subjects
plead in open writing against the Crown of England: and God no doubt has
means enough to visit our sins, unless it please him to be merciful and
gracious to this Realm; but as we from the bottom of our hearts, submit our
selves to his holy will, and wisdom, as well to taste of his chastisement,
whereof all his children are partakers, as to enjoy his blessings: so let these
profane Rouers and Vaunters understand, that the arm of God is long enough to
reach even them and their holy father at Rome, and to take from him his desired
usurpation of the kingdoms of England, Scotland, France and Spain, etc.
though he shuffle never so shamefully to keep them in his obeysaunce.

For the matters handled, this may suffice: for the manner, I have not many
things, good Christian Reader, to warn thee of. By form of Dialogues I
thought best to lay open the whole before thine eyes, as well for avoiding of
tedious repetitions, as for adding of perspicuitie, to the points, which I
would have known to the simpler sort, as far as the nature and weight of the
things themselves permit. And being to refute no certain text, I was
constrained to take this course, that I might in the adversaries person object
not only what they had said, if it were worth the hearing, but I am sure what
they could say, that the matter might be more manifest. If any think I favor
my self in opposing: I catch not after cauils nor use to seek for novelties,
as having to do with carping and quick eyed adversaries,
besides that in every part I bring the very choice of their strongest and
latest proofs, as in the first and second part, their Apology: in the third,
their Defense of Catholics: in the fourth, their Rhemish Testament: whether I
spare to press and pursue the same to the uttermost, let the Christian Reader
in Gods name be my judge. It may be the adversary would have often replied in
hotter and larger manner: but my intent was to discuss the things, and not to
hold on a brable in words: and of that which to any purpose might be said I
have omitted nothing.

And yet sometimes though seeldom where the place so forces, I stick a little
at a letter, and show how great a change it makes in the sense, which is
soon missed in the printe: Part. 4. page 583. Part. 1. page 53. Chrysostom. epi.
1. ad Innocen.
As where in Saint Augustine they printe Esset, I think it should be Esse:
And so likewise in Chrysostom, (whose Greek exemplar I then had not when I
first mistrusted the Latin) the word is printed (...), Suffer thy self to
be entreated to write. Which the verbes precedent and consequent import should
be (...). Suffer your selves to be entreated to write, and so the other part
of the sentence does plainly convince where he says (...), and grant us to
enjoy your letters still, and your love, and all other things as before. for is
easily ouerseene: and yet in the matter the difference is much, though not so
much that it should either help them, or hurt us: as they perhaps will
imagine. In these and such like corrections of words or printes I leave the
learned reader to his judgment when he considers the sentence: and yet I see
no reason why the adversary should build himself on such suspected places.

In the fourth part, I have examined the chief and public actions of the
Rhomish Church, which are now reformed by the laws of this Realm: and not
only refuted them as vncatholike, but confirmed the Sacraments and Service of
the Church of England to be consonant to the sacred Scriptures and Catholic
Fathers. In handling the which, where their Rhemish Testament offered any show
of proof, I have particularly refelled their authorities: where they failed, I
was constrained to make the Jesuit supply of his own the best objections that
they have. Other things named in the beginning of my fourth part, because the
volume increased, and they were not so material parts of the Church Service
as the former, I have reserved to be handled by themselves in a several
treaty.

Of quotations and translations I had special care in my copy, that they
should be direct and true, howsoever the Composers have now and then displaced
the one, and in the other not distinguished my additions, which I sometimes
interserted to illustrate the rest, with an other letter and two enclosures in
my copy: and this caveat I am forced to give thee gentle Reader, that
whatsoever in alleging is enclosed with two half Moons () though it be the
same letter with the rest, yet it is no part of that authority which I cite,
but my adiection to show the force of the place I produced, because I could
not stand beating on every word, without extreme loss of time and labor.

The Lord tread down Satan under our feet, that the honor may be his, and
the comfort ours, and abolish the strength of wickedness till his coming.

THE TRVE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN CHRISTIAN SVBIECTION AND UNCHRISTIAN REBELLION.
THE FIRST PART EXAMINETH ALL THE PROOFS AND places of the Jesuits Apology,
their forsaking the Realm and running to Rome, what aid the Fathers sought at
Rome: and how the Bishop thereof in all ages has been resisted: the intent of
his Seminaries: and virtues of his Clergy.
THEOPHILUS the Christian. PHILANDER the Jesuit. THEOPH. It is so long since I
saw you, Philander, that I had almost forgotten you: I thought I should
remember your face, but this apparel made me doubt of you.


Philand. Even he, Theophilus: and though you have descried me, where I would
not be known, yet I trust for old acquaintance you mean me no harm.


Theo. If you be as far from doing evil, as I am from wishing you evil, I
dare warrant you for any hurt you shall have: but what means this strange
attire? are you weary of a studients life, The Jesuits disguised.
that you fall to ruffling in your latter days?


Phil. Not choice, Theophilus, but fear drives me to this: I take small pride
in going thus disguised.


Theo. What need you fear if you be faultlesse? true men hide not their
heads.


Phi. Not where truth may take place, but where falsehood over bears all, it
is time for true men to hide their heads except they will loose them.


Theo. Is your case so desperate, that you stand in danger of loosing your head?


Phil. Not my deserts, but the rigor of your laws give me just cause to fear
that which so many of our side have felt.


Theo. Your frindes never felt the least part of that they did to others,
neither have they cause to complain but of too much ease.


Phil. You have spoiled them of their goods, cast them in prisons among
thieves, They complain of cruelty.
hanged them as traitors: call you this ease? what could they feel worse?
what could you do more?


Theo. Whom mean you? the Northren rebels, or Irish conspiratours, that were
thus hardly dealt with?


Phi. As though you knew not, whom I meant. Their heads and quarters pitched in
rows on your gates and bridges are to this day witnesses of their constancy,
and momiments of your cruelty.


Theo. Though I can guess, you only ean tell whom you mean. Belike the Jesuits
that lately suffered for Treason.


Phi. Treason was objected to them for a color to make them odious to the
people, but in deed religion was the very cause why they were condemned: for
would they have recanted their faith, they should never have been brought to
the bar.


Theo. It may be Pardon was offered them, so they would recant their Traiterous
assertion, that Popes at their pleasures may depose Princes, and discharge
their subjects from all obedience, which Christian mildnes in seeking their
amendment, and showing them so much favor, does not quite them from the
lewdnes of their enterprise. The Princes mercy is no proof of their
innocence. But in sadness Philander are you since your departure become a
Jesuit, that you take their part so freshly?


Phi. The question you ask me, is very dangerous, considering the straitnes
of your laws: Yet promise me that you will not bewray me, and I will be plain
with you, what I am. I love not to dissemble, much less to deny my vocation.


Theo. Promise me likewise, that you will attempt nothing against your duty to
God and your Sovereign, and I will do the best I can for your safety. Without
this condition I may not yield to your petition.


Phi. I require no more: but will you perform that?


Theo. None so deceitful, as those that be most mistrustfull. Having our
former acquaintance for a warrant, and my promise now made you for your better
security, why fear you?


Phi. Blame me not if I be somewhat curious in disclosing my self: They be
curious to disclose themselves.
life is sweet, and that now must I put wholly into your hands, which is no
small adventure.


Theo. Were your life in my hands, as it is not, you should well perceive we
delight not in blood: Howbeit you cast greater peril than you need. The laws
of this land do not touch you so near for entering the new found order of
Jesuits, neither for infecting the simple with the leaven of your doctrine, but
only for making devotion a cloak for sedition. Leave your undermining the
Princes right and state by these secret and subtle means, and I see no
danger of death that is toward you.


Phi. If I be taken with any practice against the Prince, They pretend
obedience.
I refuse no kind of torment: only from preaching and publishing the
Catholic faith I neither can, nor will be drawn.


Theo. Well proffered if it be well performed. In deed true Christians ever
endured, never displaced Princes, no, not when they were tyrants and
heretics: for God is not served with resisting the sword, which himself has
ordained to cherish the good, and chasten the bad, but with duetiful obedience
to Magistrates when their laws agree with his: and in case their wills be
dissonant from his, the^ is he served with meekenes, and readiness to bear, and
abide that, which earthly powers shall inflict. And this was the cause why the
Church of Christ always rejoiced in the blood of her Martyrs, patiently
suffering the cruel rage both of Pagans and Arrians, and never favored any
tumult of rebels, assembling themselves to withstand authority.


Phi. Tell us that we know not, this we never doubted of.


Theo. Then if your late Jesuits were sent hither as Pioners to make ready the
way for the Popes bull, that should disherite the Prince, and give her crown
to an other, what say you, were they justly condemned for Treason, or no?


Phi. You shall never be able to prove them sent to that end.


Theo. I do not as yet say they were, but what if they were, do you think
them Martyrs or Traitors?


Phi. I am sure they were not. For I my self came in the same message with
them, and know what charge was given both to them and to me, that in no wise
we should meddle with matters of state.


Theo. I thought all this while by the counterfaiting of your apparel, and
earnest defending of Jesuits, that you were of that crewe.


Phi. You urge me so far, that I can not conceal it. The truth is, I am of
their society, and have so been ever since my last going beyond the Seas: and
am now sent back with others to labor the conversion of this Realm, and to
reconcile men to the Catholic faith, and Apostolic Sea, for the saving of
their souls.


Theo. I am the more sorry for it, if sorrow would help: your lighting on them
was unhappy: your joining with them is ungodly.


Phi. You do the men great wrong to carry that hard opinion of them without
cause: for my part I protest I never met with a more religious, virtuous, and
learned company, than the Jesuits are.


Theo. You take light occasions to set forth your own praises, as if it were a
point of perfection to commend your selves. They commend themselves.



Phi. Though we strive to excel others in learning and virtue, which we
lawfully may, yet brag we not of it.


Theo. You need not. The maker of your Apology does it for you: whose fingers
ytched till he came to the comparing, and advancing of himself and his
fellows, in this insolent manner. Apolog. cap. 5.
Our wits, says he, be of God in as plentiful measure as theirs: our
foundation in all kind of faculties, requisite for the study of divinity, is
as deeply laid as theirs: our diligence rather more than theirs: our time
both of age and study more complete than theirs commonly can be: our order,
method, and course of divinity much more profitable than theirs: we have more
disputations, lessons, conferences, examinations, repetitions, instructions,
catechizings, resolutions of cases, both of conscience and controversy,
methodes and manners to proceed to the conversion of the deceived, and such
like exercises in our two Colleges tha^ are in their two Universities
co^tayning near hand 30. goodly Colleges. As for the Masters and professors of
our Colleges, specially the Roman readers, we may be bold to say, They be in
all kind, the most choice and cunning men of Christendom, for virtue, learning,
etc. Now for that part of education which pertayneth to Christian life and
manners, our chief endeavor is in both the Colleges to breed in our scholars
devotion, etc. Which is done by diverse spiritual exercises, as daily
examinations of their consciences, often communicating or receiving the. B.
Sacrament, much praying, continual hearing and meditation of holy things.


Phi. Can you in all this charge him with a lie?


Theo. Whether it be true or false that he says, we neither care, nor come to
discuss. The comparison of wits, ages and exercises would rather beseem boys
in the school, than divines in the Church: this vaunting of virtue, learning,
often communicating, much praying, continual meditation of holy things is
fit for Pharisees, unfit for Christians. Better is, Sententiarum ex August.
decerptarum 118.
says Austen, an humble confession in doing evil, than a proud vaunt in doing
well.


Phi. To speak truth is no vaunt.


Theo. To speak truth in the commendation of your selves, is the greatest
pride you can show. Prouer. 27.
Let an other man praise thee, says Solomon, and not thine own mouth. But
this is the just reward of your error, that you take notable pains to please
your selves with an inward persuasion of your own worthiness, and to be
reverenced of others for ye deepenes of your learning and holiness of your
lives: which desire of glory so possesses your heads, yt when other heraults
fail you, you stick not, openly to the whole world, to blaze your own
virtues.


Phi. We never spoke but forced, and that in the necessary defense of our
selves.


Theo. Who forced Campion to write back to Rome not only what admiration, but
what veneration (a word fitter for Saints than friars) himself, and his band
of Jesuits had gotten in England, by their singular learning and holiness. The
Priests, Camp. in Epist. ad praepositu^ ordinis general.
says he, of our society, they excelling in knowledge and sanctity, have
raised so great an opinion of our order, that the veneratio^, which the
Catholics yield us, I think not good to be spoken but fearfully. The framer
of your Apology what occasion had he to brave both Uniuersities, in such sort
as he does, as well with the scholasticall, as spiritual exercises of your two
Colleges, but only that he would have the Jesuits wax famous for the greatness
of their skill, and pureness of their lives, that the chiefest praise might
redound to him self, The Jesuits answer this proclamation with vaunting of
their private orders and exercises.
and others the Masters and Governors of those two Colleges?


Phi. We were charged in open proclamation, that we lived contrary to the laws
of God and the Realm.


Theo. And does your daily disputing, or much praying discharge you from that?


Phi. It shows our domestical conversation to be honest and orderly.


Theo. That is nothing to this purpose. The Princes Edict did not mean your
private disputatio^s or devotions, of which you crack, but objected unto you,
that you trained up your scholars in false and erroneous doctrine, and used
them to lewd and ungodly purposes, as to withdraw the people from their
obedience to God and the Magistrate.


Phi. Let your Edict mean what it will, our Apology clears us from all that
was untruly surmised against us, and I am right glad you have seen the book:
for there shall you find us sufficiently proved to be both good subjects and
good Catholics, notwithstanding your often and earnest inuectiues to the
contrary.


Theo. If facing and cracking will do the deed, the conquest is yours: Your
defender has fraighted his book with so many solemn protestations,
patheticall exclamations, and confident asseuerations: but to the wiser sort,
that are led with evident truth, not with eloquent speech, unless you make
some better demonstration of your integrity to God and your Prince, than I yet
see, you be like to go neither for good subjects, nor for good Catholics.


Phi. Can you wish for a better than our Apology?


Theo. I never met with a worse. No one thing proved in all their Apol.



Phi. What does it lack?


Theo. Not words, they be copious and curious enough: but I never saw fewer
or weaker proofs.


Phi. What one point is there left unproven?


Theo. Nay, what one thing have you justly proved?


Phi. Come to the parts. The first chapter gives the reasons of our leaving
this land, and living beyond the seas, what say you to those? be they not
evident? be they not sufficient?


Theo. Repeat them your self, lest I chance to miss them. Apolog. cap. 1.
Sect. 8.

The causes why they fled the Realm.





Phi. The universal Lack of the Sovereign sacrifice and Sacraments
Catholiquely ministered, without which the soul of man dies as the body does
without corporal food: this constraint to the contrary services, whereby men
perish everlastingly: this intolerable oath repugnant to God, the Church, her
Majesty's honor, and all men's consciences: and the daily dangers, disgraces,
vexations, fears, imprisonments, empouerishments, despites, which they must
suffer: and the raylings and blasphemies against Gods Sacraments, Saints,
Ministers, and all holies, which they are forced to hear in our Country are
the only causes why so many of us are departed out of our natural Country,
and do absent our selves so long from that place, where we had our being,
birth, and bringing up. These they be, what fault find you with them?


Theo. The self same that I find with the rest of your Apology: You say what
you list, and never offer to prove that you say: your bare word is your best
argument, and other authority than your own, you produce not.


Phi. The matter is so manifest, that it needs no proof.


Theo. That presumption is so foolish, that it needs no refuter.


Phi. If you doubt or deny them, we be ready to prove them.


Theo. That must you first do, before we refell them. Yet lest you should
glory too much of your painted sheath, the reply to your first chapter may
shortly be this.

The sacrifice which Christ offered on the cross for the sins of the world
we believe with all our hearts, Our sacrifice.
and reverence with all our might: accounting the same to be perfect without
wanting, eternal without renewing, and this is our Sovereign sacrifice. The
Lords table, which himself ordained to be the memorial of his death and
passion we keep and continue in that manner and form that he first
prescribed, and this may be called, and is a sacrifice, both in respect of the
thanks there given to God for the redemption of man, and the bloodshedding of
our Savior expressed and resembled in that mystery. More than this no
Catholic father ever taught, and less than this our Churches do not receive.

Touching the Sacraments, Our Sacraments.
I mean baptism and the Supper, if Christ and his Apostles did minister them
Catholiquely, we can not fail, but do the same: we swerve not a jot from
their example: the Scriptures will not lie, let them be judges. Show but one
word, element, or action added, omitted, or altered in either of them, and we
grant your Apology to be sound and good, which otherwise we see to be
replenished with many spiteful slanders, and shameful errors. But if the
Catholicisme, which you stand on, were not known to them, as in truth it was
not, the lack of some ceremonies, which be matters indifferent, and set your
abuses aside, may be kept, or left without hurting the faith or offending the
godly, can be no just cause for you to fly the realm, and forsake the Prince.

The divine service here established you may lewdly despise, Our divine service.
you shall hardly disprove: ye Psalms, yt we sing, be David's: ye books yt we
read, be Canonical: ye prayers yt we make, be consonant to ye rule and
proportion of faith and true godliness: and (...) quitting them for our own
parts to the present possessioners and incombents, or to whom soever God shall
permit.


Theo. You fled the Realm not forced to that extremity, but moved with a
private dislike of the Princes regiment: An answer like their Apology.
and therefore if the lack of your Country were not eased by many supplies,
both abroad as you grant, and from home, as we know, you may thank your
selves: you were the first autors and wilful contriuers of your own woe. You
want no commodities, nor courtesies in the common wealths, where you live: yet
such is your Nicenes, that you can not bear the ordinary difficulties, and
accidents that follow strangers in every place, without sorrowful bewayling
before God, and often lamenting one to another the hard state of your long
banishment. Your daily prayers have their daily purposes, your continual
sighs and tears show the secret grief, you conceive to see your counsels
disclosed, and attempts defeated: which rather enforces the sharpnes of your
humor, than the goodness of your cause. That you be willing to come home we
well believe, howbeit that proves not your departure lawful, nor your return
peaceable. The Wolf would feign be with the sheep, and the Lion is glad to
be with his pray: Yet this is no token of their friendly meaning. To prevent
all suspicion of evil, you deeply protest, that you void your thoughts of
honor and preferment, relinquishing those to the present incumbents, and
addressing your selves to serve the poor souls to their salvation. The strife
betwixt us is not for Bishoprics and benefices, but for Christ's glory, and
the Princes safety, whom God has appointed both your and our Sovereign: and
therefore your renouncing of titles and dignities before hand, sauoreth of your
accustomed vanity, and nothing concerns the matter. Salvation of souls is
well pretended, but ill performed. Your bores of oil, your glasses of holy
water, your fardles of other consecrated trifles, wherewith you have fraighted
this Realm, are slender helps to save souls: nay rather, your reconciling of
those, that receive you, to the Sea of Rome: your trayning them to neglect of
the scriptures, and reverence of your fancies: your leading them from the
Church of God, and communion of their brethren, to your barbarous and
Idolatrous Mass: your withdrawing them from their obedience to the Princes
wholesome and Christian laws, is their utter destruction and your assured
condemnation. Yet to prove your selves loving worms, you wish to be admitted
to your Country, in what state soever, were it in penance and poverty never
so great: even so the snake being frozen lies quiet and still, waxing once
warm he uses not only to stir, but also to sting. Your sugared words can
not sweeten the bitterness of your actions. God has blessed her Majesty with
greater respect of religion, than to suffer the veneme of your doctrine to
poison her people: and with better intelligence of your drifts, than to harbor
a rowte of Jesuits, the very forerunners and factours of her open and
professed enemy. The Pageants of your holy father and founder, were so lately
tried, and are so justly feared, that her highness neither with her safety may,
neither of her wisdom will permit you to begin a new revel. Her grave and
worthy Counsel perceive that a small leake sinketh a strong vessel, and the
least spark kindles a mighty flame.


Phi. Call you this answering? The proofs and places of their whole Apolo.
answered in six leaves.
You say what you list without warrant or witness.


Theo. And what did you when you sent us over whole chapters, yea the most part
of your Apology, bringing no better nor other reason nor proof than your
simple word, which is, God knows, a single proof?


Phi. You will hardly speak well of our doings or writings.


Theo. Let your book be seen. If I lie, reprove me.

Your first chapter has in all five authorities, The 1. chapter of the Apolog.

Socrat. eccl. (...) lib. 2. ca. 18 and lib. 4. ca. 12.16. Niceph lib. 11. ca.
49.50. Amb. lib. 5. de Bas. traden. Cyp. epist. 5. Niceph. lib. 9. chap. 23.
Sect. 8.


and not one of them touches any matter in question. The three first show,
that certain Arrian Emperors suffered true and false religion in one City, a
proper president for Christian Princes: the two next prove, that godly men
assembled in private houses, when they could not in Churches for fear of
persecution. We never said otherwise.

Your second chapter has five other places besides the first book of Bid,
which we doubt not of. Three declaring that the Romans twelve hundred years
ago were devout and charitable; The second Chapter of the Apology.

Hiero. Epist. 16. Eusebius. lib. 4. Cap. 22. Hiero. praef. lib. 2. in Epist. ad
Gal. August. de vtilit. cred. Cap. 17. Cypri Epi. 55.

See folio 222.


which is nothing to our days, or your purpose: the other two you safely
enforce to help the Sea of Rome, and yet were they so meant, they conclude but
coldly for you.

Your third chapter alleges S. Austen twice, mary not against us, but at
rouers to make up your reckoning: and once S. Hierom, warning a gentlewoman of
Rome, to prefer the faith of Innocentius and Anastasius, which at that time
he knew to be sound and sincere, before certain poisoned plants then freshly
springing in Rome. This advise we refuse not, and at this day we seek to
recall your holy father from his new found heresy and tyranny to the right
imitation of their faith and humility, The third Chapter of the Apolo.

Hiero. Epist. 8. ad Demetriadem.


that were godly, learned and ancient bishops in that Sea before him.

On your fourth and fifth chapters, which are the chief strength and force of
your Apology, you bestow some more cost, but not much, or at lest not much to
the matter in question.

Your fourth chapter even at first entrance you fill the page with eleven texts
of scriptures, The fourth Chap. of the Apolog.

Luc. 22.10. Mat. 16.28.18. Ioh. 14.16. Esa. 59. Deuteronomy. 17. Mala. 2. Act. 15. 1.
Cor. 14. and 1. Tim. 2. 1. Pet. 2. Esa. 60.


declaring what promises and assistance from God ye true preachers and
ministers of his word have: then allege you S. Paul prohibiting women to teach
or speak in the Church, and S. Peter, calling Princes humane creatures: these
be things that we neither doubt of, nor strive for. This done you draw near
the skirmish, and arming your selves with three scriptures and seven fathers,
you think to vanquish and ouerrunne the Princes power in causes
ecclesiastical: but soft Sirs, you mistake your weapons, their force is not
great.

The nation and kingdom, says God to Sion, that will not serve thee shall
perish. The kingdom, he says not the king: but grant it were directly spoken
of kings: August. contra Cresco. lib. 3. ca. 51.
what service that is which God requires of kings, if you do not know, S.
Austen will tell you. In this, says he, Kings serve God, if their kingdoms
they command that which is good and forbid that which is evil, not in
temporal affairs only, but in matters of religion also. And again, Ye
Kings serve Christ, in making laws for Christ. Agust. Epi. 48.
So that the commanding their people to reverence the word and obey the will of
God, and the making of strait laws to keep men in the faith and Church of
Christ, that is I say the service, which Princes owe to God and his Sion, and
which you deny lawful for them to meddle with.

Acts. 20. and Hebr. 23.
By the two next places of S. Paul you prone that Pastors and Bishops be rulers
of the Church. That word Rulers you catch hold of, as if the words in S. Paul
did not also signify feeders and leaders, which be the two signs and duties
of good shepherds: and yet we never denied but the messengers and disposers of
Gods mysteries by preaching the word, administering the sacraments, and well
using the keys, have their internal and spiritual regiment over the souls
and consciences as well of Princes, as others: which is the true meaning of the
place that you bring out of Nazianzene. Nazian. ora. 15.


Epist. ad solit. vit. degentes.
Athanasius, Suidas in Leon. Lib. imperf. ad Constantium.
Osius, Leontius, Hilarie and Epist. 33. ad for.
Ambrose, sharply reprove Constantius, and Valentinian, for taking upon them to
change the faith, and abolish the godhead of Christ: and plainly told those
Princes they were no judges of faith, nor arbiters of doctrine; which was true,
which false: neither might they so much as interpose their judgment or
authority, whiles such cases were debated. That very lesson have we from the
beginning taught with our lips, and sealed with our blood, more steadfastly
than you. We never gave prince, nor Pope, right to control the truth, or
reuerse the word, which God has established in his Church: and the constant
auouching thereof against earthly States and powers, has cost us, as you can
not choose but know, many thousand men's lives: Yet this is no let, 1. John.
4. Mat. 7.
but Princes, as well as other private persons, may try spirits, and beware
false Prophets. And this, I trust, you dare not impugn, that Princes may do
that for Christ which you defend they must do for Antichrist: grant us that,
we require no more.

Chrysostom is the last of the seven. Christ, says he, when he willed Peter
to feed his sheep, Lib. 2. de Sacer.
committed the charge of (them) to Peter, and Peter's successors. Meaning by
Peter's successors not only the bishops of Rome, but him self and all other
Bishops, Ibidem.
as appears by his own words in the same place. This was Christ's purpose at
that time (when he said feed my sheep) to teach Peter, and the rest of us,
how well he loved his Church, that therefore we also should take the charge
and care of the same Church with all our hearts. Ambro. de dignitat.
sacerdo^ali, Cap. 2.
Ambrose extends the words of Christ in like manner to al Bishops and
preachers. It was thrice repeated by the Lord, feed my sheep. Which sheep,
and which flock not only Peter received then in charge, but he with us, and
we all with him received them in cure. August. de agone Christi, Cap. 30.
And so does Austen, When it is said to Peter, it is said to all: Love thou
me? Feed my sheep.

That women may not undertake this charge to feed Christ's sheep, it was
needelesse to cite Chrysostom, S. Paul said it before in other words, and
we be far from any such folly. These be the maine and mighty proofs
wherewith you thought to shake the Princes seat, which conclude utterly
nothing against that we defend, nor against that her Majesty claymeth or
uses.

The rest of your authorities, which be six, touch not us at all, nor any
thing in question betwixt you and us: Epist. 57. a^ Damas.
save the last, where S. Hierom writes to Damasus, He that gathers not with
thee, scatters. Which words we grant were very true, when S. Hierom spoke
them, for that Damasus rightly professed the Christian faith, which the Bishop
of Rome now does not: and by gathering with him, is meant no subjection to him,
but a fellowship with him in teaching the same truth, and keeping the band of
peace, which is common to all Christians.

Your fifth chapter, The 5. Chap. of the Apolog.
which should clear you from false doctrine, and prove you to be good
Catholics, has in all but one Section of twenty six lines to that purpose:
the rest is a desperate discourse of your own, full of your bold assertions
and vain presumptions, without scripture, or father, that helps you, or
hinders us. Enchiri. 110. and haeresi. 53. Contra Vigilantium. Lib. 6. contra
Iulianum. In 10. Cap. ad Hebreos. Lib. 7. ind. 2. Epist. 109. and 53. Lib. 1.
de paenit. Cap. 2.
For prayer for the dead, you allege S. Augustine; for honoring of Kelikes
and Pilgrimage, S Hierom; for vocation of Saints, worshipping the cross, and
memories of Martyrs, S. Cyril; for the sacrifice of the Mass, Saint
Chrysostom; for the corporal presence of Christ in the Sacrament, the Lateran
Council for Images, the second Council of Nice, Gregory to Serenus, and
Damascene: for the power of Priesthood to remit sins, S. Ambrose. A weak
foundation to bear so great a frame.

Cyril, Chrysostom, and Ambrose in the places which you quote, teach nothing
less than those errors and abuses which you mayntaine. The second Council of
Nice was very near 800, the Lateran Council above a thousand years after
Christ, both too young to make any doctrine Catholic. Gregory likes that
stories should be painted in the Church, but adoration of the^ he detesteth,
which yet that wicked Council of Nice, did after establish. Damascene, you may
take back again: his credit is so small, that we need not answer him.

S. Hierom is hot against Vigilantius, and so hot, that Erasmus is feign to
say, Argumentum Epistolae aduersus Vigilantium.
Conuiciis debacchatur Hieronimus: Hierom rayleth without measure: Yet the most
honor that he gave to the bodies or ashes of Martyrs, by whom God after their
deaths wrought great miracles, was to be fairly wrapped, and honestly kept in
their Chapels: The tending of tapers, and setting up of wax candles before
them, he denies to be used in the Church: in other places if any such thing
were, Hierom aduersus Vigilant.
he imputes it to the unskillfulness and simplicity of some Lay men and
devout women, that had zeal, but not according to knowledge. What is this for
your defense? You make new Relikes, you set forth unshamefast Legends, and
devise false miracles to deceive the people: you give them Pardons for many
thowsande thowsande years: you promise them help in all their needs, and
effect in all their desires: you make a very mart of the graces and gifts of
God, to cause men to run from place to place, from Saint to Saint, from
shrine to shrine, to increase your offerings: which wickedness if S. Hierom had
seen in his time, he would have taunted you a little better than ever he did
Vigilantius.

August. de cura pro mortuis gerenda, ca. 1.
In the prayers which were made to God at his Altar, we grant with S. Austine,
The commendation of the dead, by the custom of the Universal Church, had a
special place, but your prayer for souls in Purgatory was never Catholic.
And where you send us to S. Austens Enchiridion ca. 110. for that kind of
prayer, look again to the words, and you shall find there no certain
doctrine, but a doubtful division, consisting of three parts, and not one of
them proving your Purgatory. Augu. Enchir. ca. 110.
When the sacrifices of the Altar, or any other alms are offered for all, that
were baptized before they died: for such as are very good, they be, says he,
thankesgiuings (to God:) for those that be not altogether ill, they be
propitiations (that is procuring of mercy:) for such as be very bad, though
they be no helpers to the dead, they be some comforts to the living: and whom
they profit, they profit them thus far, either to purchase them full
remission, or at least, more tolerable damnation. The first part of this
division, that sacrifices for the dead, are thankesgiuings to God, is a point
that now you can not hear of: the last, that they comfort the living, but
help not the dead, by no means you will admit: the middle is it, that you
stand on, and that is nothing but this, whom they profit, they procure either
full remission, or at lest a more tolerable damnation. Where S. Austen does not
affirm which of the twain they shall procure, but uses a disjunctive, and of
the twain rather enclineth to the later, as the likelier, by correcting him
self in this wise, they shall have remission, or at lest a more tolerable
damnation. And for your better assurance that S. Austen, on whom you rely,
never taught your Purgatory for a matter of Catholic faith, we send you back
to the same father, Augu. Enchir. ca. 69.
and the same book, the 69. chapter, where he says, It is not incredible,
that there is some such thing after this life: and whether it be so, it may be
a question, and it may be either found out, or lie hid, that some of the
faithful obtain salvation by a Purgatory fire so much the sooner, or later,
by how much the more, or less they loved the transitory goods of this life.
If it may lie hid, then is it no ground of Christian faith which must be fully
believed of all men, neither could the prayers of the Church depend upon the
doubtful opinion of Purgatory, August. de ciui^at. Dei, lib. 21. ^a. 27.
which by S. Austens own judgment, is superfluous to be discussed, and most
dangerous to be resolved.

The rest of your places in this chapter, amounting to the number often, do
you little good, and us less harm: we receive them without exception or
distinction. The words of Maximinus the Arrian you wittingly pervert to make
them like ours: wherein you discover your malice, and touch not our doctrine:
for Arius, as you may read in that disputation, Disputat. Athanas. contra
Arium Laodic. habita.
which Athanasius had with him, vpbrayded the fathers for using the word (...)
not found in all the books of the new or old testament: whereas the Church of
Christ always professed to believe nothing, but what was plainly written in
the sacred scriptures. The self same cauil Maximinus urged S. Augustine with.
August. contra Maximinum Arrian. Epist. lib. 10.
Hae vero voces, quae extra scripturam sunt, nullo casu a nobis suscipiuntur:
These words (and not as you translate, these sayings) which are not in the
scripture, by no means we receive. This objection we grant was both foolish
and heretical, and if we urge you with any such, spare us not. We strive with
you not for names and words, but for points and Principles of faith, and those
we say must be proved by the scriptures. Romans 10.
S. Paul said so before us, Faith is by hearing, and hearing out of the word of
God. Mauger your traditions and unwritten verities, this is a Christian and
Catholic position, which all the fathers confirm with one consent, as shall
be showed in place convenient. In the mean time we say with Basil, that I
trow was no Arrian, Basil. sermo. de fide.
Manifestus: est a fide lapsus, and crimen maximae superbiae, vel a scripto
recedere, vel non scriptum admittere: It is a manifest fall from faith, and a
sin that argues infinite pride, either to leave that which is written, or
admit that which is not written.

Your sixth chapter handles no matter of religion, The 6. Chapter of the
Apology.

Iren. lib. 4. ca. 32. Cyp. epist. 63.

Chry. homil. 17. in Epi. ad Heb. Amb. in Psalm. 38. Conc. Nic. ca. 14. Hier.
epist. 1. ad Heliod. Leo. ep. 81. ca. 2.

Amb. li. 5. ep. 33. Cyp. ep. 5. Au. de ciu. Dei, li. 22. ca. 8. lib. 10. conf.
ca. 12.13. Eusebius. in vita Constable. li. 4. ca. 45.

Chry. de sacerd. Amb. in 1. Tim. 4. Greg. li 2. ep. 9.93. lib. 7. ep. 63. lib.
77. ep. 57. ad 3. interrog. Aug.


as being purposely made to excuse you from Treason: and has nothing in it any
way material, save only that upon the name of Mass Priest, you fall into a
great rage, and will needs prove, the Apostles themselves, and the ancient
fathers of all ages were mass priests. And that you do full clarkly. For
wheresoever you find the word oblation or sacrifice in any father, you
presently put him in the Deck for a Mass Priest. I marvel you be not
ashamed, professing so deep knowledge, to send us over such vain trifles. The
very children in England do know the Lords supper is a sacrifice of
thanksgiving, and a memorial of Christ's oblation on the cross, daily
renewing his death in a mystery, which is the true meaning of the twelve
places that here you bring, and of twelve hundred mo, that might be brought to
the like effect: but this is nothing to the sacrifice of your mass, where you
profess that Christ is covered with accidents of bread and wine, and offered
really with your hands to God his father for the remission of your sins:
show but one father for this kind of sacrifice, and we will agnise not only
these whom you name, but also Melchisedec and Malachie for Mass Priests.

Searching five hundred four score and thirteen years after Christ with all
diligence, you find the word Missa twice: once in Ambrose, and once in Leo:
and in a bravery you demand of us, Were they Mass Priests, that said those
masses? But what if the word Missa did then not signify the Mass, but a
dismissing of the Catechists before, and of the faithful after the Lords
supper: where is your great and glorious triumph become? Look to the fourth
Counsel of Carthage, the 84. Canon: Council. Cartha. ginensis 4. Canon. 84.
Let the Bishop forbid no man to enter the Church, and hear the word of God,
neither Jew, Gentile, nor heretic, vsque ad missam Catechumenorum: that is,
till the Catechists be sent away: not, until the Catechists mass. For they
which were not yet baptized, could not be present at the ministration of the
Lords supper, and therefore Missa does signify the dismissing of them: as the
manner was in the primitive Church to send away, first the Catechists, next the
Repentants, and last of all to give the faithful leave to depart when the
communion was ended: I^e, missa est. Go your way, depart.

S^mo. 237. de tempore sub nomine August.

Ambros. Lib. 5. Epist. 33.


which three dimissions were sometime called in the plural number, Missae, and
missarum solemnia. The like phrase is elsewhere to be found in the works of S.
Austen: Post sermonem fit missa Catechumenis: After the sermon the Catechists
are willed to depart: and Ambrose in the same epistle which you quote, Post
lectiones atque tractatum, dimissis Catechumenis: After the reading and
expounding of the scriptures, the Catechists being demised: Where these words,
that you stick on, follow: Ego mansi in munere, missam facere caepi: I went
forward, and sent the rest away: that might not be partakers of the mysteries.
Missam facere, not, dicere.
And that missam facere is not to say mass, as you dream, but to give leave
to depart, the very Latin tongue would lead you if you were not more than
froward: Mass, and yet no Mass Priests.

Inter August. Epist. 31.34.35. Grego. Lib. 1. Epist. 72.86. Lib. 3. Epist. 30.
Lib. 5. Epist. 6. Lib. 7. Epist. 53.126.


and so may you find the word missa in Leo, Gregory and others, and yet they
no Mass Priests.

To maintain your beads, Agnusdets, and other consecrated creatures: you note
where S. Austen and Paulinus as familiar friends, sent each other cakes, and
where Gregory gave some monuments of Peter, Paul, and others to Princes and
Bishops, for presents. This is not answerable to your enterprise: you bring us
certain toys hallowed, as you say, with the Popes blessing: and where you
deliver them, you take promises, vows and oaths, that such persons shall keep
communion, and yield subjection to the Bishop of Rome: which is nothing else but
the slocking of her Majesty's people from her, and the deuoting of them, their
bodies, goods, and forces to serve the Popes turn.

That power to forgive sins must be holden in Capite of the Pope, you
produce Cyprian, who says no such thing in that place, which you cite, but
only calls the Church of Rome a principal Church, Cyprian. Epistola 55. Leo
Epist. 89.
whence unity among priests, (in former ages) did spring: and Leo, whose
private affection in aduauncing his Sea, does carry light credit in the
judgment of wise men, and is far from a Catholic consent in the judgment
of all men: yet if he mean as Cyprian and Austen do, Cyprian. de vnitate
Eccles. August. in Ioh. tract. 50. Idem in Ioh. tracta. 124.
when they say: Exordium ab vnitate proficiscitur vt ecclesia vna monstretur:
The beginning (of this power) came from one (which was Peter) to declare the
Church to be one: Et Petrus quando claues accepit, ecclesiam sanctam (and
vniuersam) significauit: ecclesia ergo, quae fundatur in Christo, claues ab
eoregni caelorum accepit in Petro: Peter when he received the keys signified
the holy (and Universal) Church: for the Church which is built upon Christ,
received of him the keys of the kingdom of heaven in Peter. If this be his
meaning, as it may well be, we refuse him not: and then, ab ipso, quasi quodam
capite, must be, from him the first that had it. For caput is either the
chief, or the first: otherwise that the Apostles held their function, and
power, under, and of Peter, in capite, is a false and erroneous sense, flatly
resisted by S. Paul, Gal. 2.
affirming, that they which seemed to be somewhat, (as James, Peter, and
John,) bestowed nothing on him: and refuted by our Savior him self, where he
says: John. 20.
As my father sent me, so I (not Peter) send you. The rest of your
authorities, be they scriptures or fathers, impeach not us, nor our doctrine,
but are such as we may well admit, without any doubt or scruple.

Your seventh and last Chapter has neither text nor title, The 7. Chap. of the
Apolo.
that is any way prejudicial to us. We grant your allegations, and deny your
applicatio^s. Martyrs be glorious witnesses of Gods truth, and their death is
precious in his sight: but flatter not your selves, you be no Martyrs. You bend
your selves against God, and his anointed, in a wicked and desperate quarrel,
and receive your deserts for preparing the subjects of this Realm by color
of religion to take her Majesty for no Queen, when the Pope shall say the
word; and to be ready to refuse their allegiance, and join with any stranger
that will invade the land.

This is the whole furniture of your Apology: Not one place more in all the
Apology touching us than here is answered.
to my knowledge I have not omitted one place that makes any thing for you.
The rest is a fardle of phrases, shadowed with fair pretenses and plausible
perswasio^s, fit to prevail with worldly minds, that never tasted the truth:
which if we should seek to repel with like manner and order of writing, we
should but wast paper, and weary the reader: and therefore if you list to
discuss the Principal intents of your Apology, more exactly than hitherto
you have, I will join this issue with you, that, notwithstanding all you have
said, or can say, you be neither good subjects, nor Catholics: If not, I will
refer the judgment of your proofs to ye learned, and leave you to God.


Phi. We know our cause to be so good, that we need not shrink from any
trial.


Theo. Then take what help you can of your Apology to defend your selves, and
as we pass through your chapters, object you that which you think strongest.
Your vauntes and vanities I will not answer, but only such things as be most
material.


Phi. Content with that.


Theo. And as occasion is offered I will show, that you neither obey God, nor
your Prince.


Phi. Do what you can, we fear you not.


Theo. If you think any thing worth your pains, in your first chapter, you
were best begin.


Phi. Have we not good cause to find our selves agreeued, Apolog. Cap. ^.
Sect. 2.
that so many strange nations having their Churches with freedom to serve God
after their manner in our Country, only Catholics (which in our fathers
days had all, and for whom and by whom all Churches and Christianity arose)
can by no intercession of foreign Potentates, nor no sighs nor sorrows of
innumerable most loyal subjects, obtain one place in the whole land to serve
their Lord God after the rites of all other good Christian Princes, Priests,
and people of the world?


Theo. If you mean that strangers have leave to profess diverse religions in
this Realm, Strangers have not diverse religions in this Realm.
you wittingly slander us against your own conscience: for in England the
people both strange and liege, worship God the father in spirit and truth,
according to the Gospel of his son, agreeing together in the substance of one
faith, and the right order of Christ's sacraments: only strangers are
suffered in their Churches to use that tongue, which they best understand, as
S. Paul appoints: 1. Cor. 14.
and to retain such ceremonies of their own, as be neither against faith,
nor adverse to good manners: and therefore by S. Austens judgment go for
INDIFFERENT, Epist. 118.
and may be borne in Christian unity without offense or confusion. But if
this be your meaning, that where strangers have freedom to serve God, after
the same manner that we do, you should also be licenced to bring in your
Mass, notwithstanding it be quite repugnant to the service of God, which this
land receives. Your consequent is more than absurd: because their faith and
religion agrees with ours, yours is clean contrary.

Next you sorrow to see no mediation of friends, no threats of foes, no tumults
at home, no despites abroad, able to withdraw the Princes heart from liking
and loving the truth: but the godly rejoice to see so perfect a mirror of
faith and devotion in a Christian Queen, that she rather chooses to suffer
your wrongs and abide your reproaches with patience, than to step one foot
from that Lord which has graciously blessed, and mightily preserved her
person, Scepter, and people from the jaws of his, and her enemies.


Phil. Apol. chap. 1. sect. 2.
And where no Jew, no Turk, no Pagan, can by the law of God, nature or
nations, he forced from the manner, and persuasion of his own Sect and service
to any other which by promise or profession he or his progenitors never
received: only we (that neither in our own persons, nor in our forefathers,
ever gave consent to any other faith or worship of God, but have in precise
terms by protestation and promise bound our selves in Baptism to the
religion, faith, and service Catholic alone) are against divine and humane
Laws, and against the Protestants own doctrine in other nations, not only
bereaved of our Christian dew in this behalf, but are forced by manifold
co-actions to these rites which we never knew nor gave our consent unto.


Theo. Papists may be forced to truth.
Few men without your cunning, could huddle so many, so manifest untruths in
one sentence. No Jew, no Turk, say you, may be forced from his religion. If
that were so, what makes it for your defense, which challenge both the names
and rooms of Christian men, and are in respect thereof, for just cause,
required to perform that in deed, which you pretend in word, and by
moderate correction driven to keep the Christian faith, which in Baptism you
professed. For heretics of al sects and sorts may be compelled to follow
truth, though infidels might not: and so your inference fails when you say,
no law forces Jews or Pagans from their persuasion, therefore not Christians:
nay rather, if we grant Jews and Turks excusable for these two reasons,
lack of knowledge, and want of promise: certainly Papists being neither void
of the first, nor free from the last, may, yea must, be compelled of Christian
magistrates, for dread of punishment, tempered with good instruction, to
forsake their heresies and forbear their idolatries, wherewith Christ is
dishonored, and his truth defaced.

Forcing to religion without former promis.
As the joints of your argument be loose, so be the parts untrue. For king
Darius seeing Daniel strangely delivered from the Lions den made this decree,
that all people, nations, and languages in the world should reverence and
fear the God of Daniel. Daniel. 6.
Likewise the king of Niniueth at the first denouncing of Gods wrath by Jonas
immediately with the consent of his Counsel caused this proclamation to be made
through the City, Jonas 3.
that man and beast should put on sackcloth, and cry mightily to God, and
every man turn from his evil way. Lo, Sir, two kings precisely commanding
their subjects, (and therefore ready to punish the refusers) without delay to
worship a strange and unknown God, (albeit the true God) whom neither they,
nor their forefathers made promise to serve; and yet I think, you will not say
they brake the Law of God, nature, or nations in so doing. S. Austen will
assure you, that the King of Nineveh did God good service by compelling the
whole City to please God. Episto. 50.
A third instance for this matter is the calling of Paul; first as a Jew,
Acts. 9.
and so within the limits of your assertion: then strooken with blindness, and
amassed with terror from heaven; and therefore compelled to Christianity by
corporal violence, y touched Paul nearer, than impouerishments or
imprisonments, wherewith you find your selves grieved. Behold (says that
learned father) in Paul, August. Epistola 50.
Christ first compelling, afterward teaching; first striking, then comforting;
and he that entered into the Gospel, constrained with bodyly punishment,
labored more than all those, that were called only by mouth.

I might refel your idle flourish by the later examples of Polonia, Munster.
Cosmogra, lib. 4. fol. 894.902. Idem lib. 3. fol. 719.743.
Russia, Lithuania, forced at the commandment of their rulers to forsake
their ancient Idols, and receive baptism: By the long and sharp wars,
which diverse good Princes maintained of purpose to compel the Saxons and
Vandales to ye faith: By the sore vexations and afflictions of the Jews in
every Christian common wealth: Al which, both old and new, first and last,
serve to convince that Pagans and Jews have been forced by rigor of laws, and
other means, to yield to ye truth, without any former promise, or farther
knowledge, which you stiffly deny: but as I said this is not our question. You
are no Jews, no Pagans, but in show Catholics, in deed heretics: you were
baptized, you challenge an interest in ye Church and Sacraments: by reason of
this your first promise, and next your outward profession of Christ's name, you
stand in duty bound, and of right may be compelled to serve God, not as your
own fancies persuade you, nor as the Church of Rome leads you; but according
to the prescript of his word, and that tenor of faith, which the Prophets and
Apostles did teach.


Phi. We bound our selves in precise terms by protestation in Baptism to the
religion, Apolog. Cap. 1. sect. 2.
faith, and service Catholic alone: other faith and worship of God we never
consented unto, neither in our own persons, nor in our forefathers.


Theo. This is your common charm wherewith you bewitch many simple souls,
bearing them in hand, that in Baptism they vowed to profess your Italian
religion: which God knows is nothing so. For in whose name were you baptized,
Philander? In Pius the fifth, or Gregory the thirteenth? I think you were not,
I know you should not; 1. Cor. 1.
no not in Peter's, or Paul's, but in Christ's alone. Then stand you bound by
baptism to yield faith and obedience to no person or place, but only to
Christ the first author, and ordayner of this sacrament.

Preach ye the Gospel, Mark. 16.
says Christ, He that believes and is baptized shall be saved. Al men bound by
Baptism unto truth.
What else must you preach, what else must they believe, that will be baptized,
but the Gospel? ergo the preacher and the believer, that is the baptiser and
the baptized are bound precisely to the Gospel. Gal. 3.
All ye, says Paul, that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, and
are the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus [hauing] one Lord, Ephesians. 4.
one faith, one Baptism. Perceive you not, that in baptism, which no
Protestation of yours can frustrate, the believers do put on Christ their
Lord, not his pretended vicar; and are made the sons of God, not the vassals
of Rome, by faith, which depends neither on man nor Angel, but directly
belongs to God and his word? 1. Peter. 1. Acts. 8. Romans 10.
If thou believe with all thine heart, says Philip to the converted Eimuch,
thou may be [baptized.] Now faith comes of hearing, and (that) hearing of
the word of God, as Paul witnesses. So that when you were Christened you made
promise to believe nothing save the word of God, whereby faith is engendered and
nourished.

John. 10.
My sheep hear my voice, says our savior, a stranger they follow not, but
flee from him. And in baptism you received no man's mark but his, and for that
cause stand bound to regard no man's voice but his alone. Doubt you this? Then
view the Commission that Christ sent you to baptize with. Mat. 28.
Go teach all nations, baptising them in the name of the father, and the
son, and the holy ghost, teaching them to observe all the things, which I
have commanded you. This text needs no gloze. Baptism binds no man to the
Bishop or Church of Rome, but to the will and precepts of Christ. Therefore prove
your religion and service, (which you stoutly, but falsely term Catholic) to
be commanded by Christ, or else women and children, No man bound to popery by
Baptism.
be they never so seely, will collect by the manifest words of our savior, that
their promise in baptism does streitly bind them from believing your errors,
and admitting your masses, until you show good and effectual warrant out of
the word of God, that you do, what Christ did, and teach, what he taught; Mat.
23. John. 10. Ephe. 4. James. 4. Esa. 55.
without adding or altering any jot. For this is the duty that baptism
requires of us; to believe no teacher but one, which is Christ; to follow no
stranger, to regard and obey no Lord, or lawmaker in ye Church, but only ye
son, whom the father appointed to be Master, leader, and ruler of the
Gentiles.

And as for your odious outcrie, since the laws of this Realm force you to
nothing, but what is directly commanded in ye scriptures (as by discussing your
Apology shall appear) and you vowed, when you were Christened, to believe and
obey the will of God reueiled in his word: let the world judge, whether your
Sovereign offer you wrong, in seeking with mild and gentle correction to
reform your frowardnes; or you rather forgetting your promise to God, and
duty to your Prince, take the way to forsake the Christian faith, and
withstand authority.


Phi. Apolog. Cap. 1. sect. 2. Athanas. ad solitariam vita^ agentes. Hilar. ad
Constantium Augustum.
It is against your own doctrine in other nations that any should be forced to
religion.


Theo. When you note the places and name the men, I will answer you more
directly, than I can at this present to so general an objection. Howbeit with
what face can you reprove the sober and moderate proceedings of his Realm,
which revenge the smalest contempt of your idle ceremonies with insufferable
torments? for shame rebuke not that in others which in your selves is most
rife. But grant some well disposed persons happily warned you, that true
religion uses to persuade, not to compel: that God did rather teach than
exact the knowledge of himself, How some have mislyked forcing to religion.
and winning credit to his precepts by the strangenes of his heavenly wonders,
despised the will that is forced to confess him: Their purpose was to move your
clergy to delight rather in teaching than in tormenting their brethren. Grego.
Episto. lib. 2. Cap. 91.
They thought it a strange and new kind of preaching (for bishops) to drive men
to believe with whipping, as Bonner did: or else they detested your violent and
furious manner of compulsion, which neither took pains to persuade, nor allowed
me^ time to learn those things which you forced them to believe. They knew,
that if such as wander astray, should be terrified, and not instructed, it
might be counted a wicked ouerruling. August. Epist. 48.
Or last of al, if they spoke resolutely without limitation, they were nus^ed
with overmuch pity, which also beguiled S. Austen at ye first, in the self
same point, until he took better aduiseme^t. August ibide^.
I was once so minded, says he, that I thought no man ought to be forced to
Christian unity, but that we should deal by persuading, strive by disputing,
conquer by reasoning, least they proved dissembling Catholics, whom we
knew professed heretics.

Our doctrine which you say, What we teach of forcing to religion.
makes so much for you, is this: that your Prelates should not make it their
occupation to persecute to death al sorts, ages and sexes, which refuse your
schole tricks, or reject the dregs of your Clementines and Decretals; but
rather with mildnes and patience seek to recover such as you think lost: yet
in Princes who bear the sword, and are Gods Liuetenants not only to procure
peace between men, but also by laws to maintain ^^^igio^ toward God, we
neither did nor do dispraise moderate correction when need so requires: only
we would have such as stray from truth, August epist. 127.

Idem contra Cresconium lib. 3. Cap. 50.

Idem contra literas Petilia. lib. 2. cap. 86. Chry. in Matthew. homil. 47.
Codicis. lib. 1. tit. 5. de haereticis and Manicheis.

Idem leg. Arriani. August. de haeresibus, haere. 46.

Saint Austen defends the same.

August. Epist. 48.

Idem Epist. 50. The Donatists would have none compelled to faith.


corrected, not murdered. For it never pleased any good men in the Catholic
Church that heretics should be put to death, as Austen affirms. Many laws
were made to punish them, but no Princes law commanded the^ to be slain. Yea
the Lord does not forbid to skatter the couents of heretics, to stop their
mouths, to bar them freedom of speech: but to murder and kill them, that he
forbids says Chrysostom. And therefore your tyranous and barbarous havoc
of old, young; men, women; learned, unlearned; we detest with heart, and
dissuade with tongue, wishing al Princes to follow the steps of Gratian,
Theodosius, Arcadius, Honorius, and other Christian Emperors, who with
convenient sharpnes of positive laws amerced, banished, and diversely punished
heretics, yet none received judgment of death, except only ye Maniches, whose
monstrous blasphemies in agnising ye devil for a god, and beastly defiling ye
sacred Eucharist deserved no less.

Such manifold coactions decreed by virtuous Princes, when the Donatists rayled
at for life, the learned and catholic father S. Austen earnestly defended to
be lawful, and highly commended in sundry places. Think thou (says he to
Vincentius) no man ought to be forced to righteousness, when as thou read
that the master said to his servants: Compel all that you find to come in: and
also that Paul was forced to receive and embrace the truth by the great and
violent co^pulsio^ of Christ, except thou judge goods and lands dearer to men
than their eyes? Where is now (says he to Bonifacius) that, which these
[Donatists] harp at so much? it is free for a man to believe or not to believe*
what violence did Christ use? whom did he compel? behold Paul (for an example:)
Let them mark in him, Christ first co^pelling, and afterward teaching; first
striking, and the^ comforting. Let them not mislike that they be forced, but
examine whereto they be forced. Ibidem.
And citing that part of the second Psalm, Be wise ye kings, understand ye
that judge the earth, serve the Lord in fear: how do (says he) kings serve
the Lord in fear, but when they forbid and punish with a religious severity
those things which are done against the commandments of God: as Ezekiah did
serve him, by destroying the groves and temples buylt against the precepts of
God: as Josiah did in like manner: as the king of Nineveh did, forcing the
whole City to please God: as Nabuchodonosor did, restraining all his subjects
from blaspheming God, with a dreadful law.

Gaudentius reason, that the peace of Christ invited such as were willing, but
forced no man unwilling, Idem contra 2. Gaudentij Episto. Lib. 2. cap. 17.
the same father refuteth in this wise: Where you think that none must be
forced to truth against their wills, you be deceived, not knowing the
scriptures, nor the power of God, which makes those willing [at last] which
were unwilling [at first.] Did the Ninevites repent against their wills,
because they did it at the compulsion of their king? What needed the kings
express commandment, that all men should humbly submit themselves to God, but
that there were some amongst them which neither would have regarded nor
believed Gods message, had they not been terrified by the kings edict? This
Princely power and authority gives many me^ occasion to be saved, which
though they were violently brought to the feast of the great householder, yet
being once compelled to come in, they find there good cause to rejoice that
they did enter [against their wills.] When Petilian objected that no man must
be forced by laws to do well or to believe, S. Austen replieth: Idem contra
literas Petiliani lib. 2. Cap. 83.
To faith in deed may no man unwilling be forced, but yet by Gods justice, or
rather mercy. The breath of faith is chastened with the rod of affliction.
Because the best things are freely chosen with good lyking, must not therefore
ill deeds be punished by sincere Laws? You be not forced to do well by these
laws that are made against you, but forbidden to do evil. Preposterous were
discipline to revenge your ill living: but when you first contemn the doctrine
that teaches you to live well. And even they which make laws to bridle your
headynes, are they not those, which bear the sword, as Paul speaks not
without cause, being Gods ministers and executors of wrath on him that does ill?

Who list to be farther satisfied, that Christian Princes may compel their
subjects to the true worship of God prescribed in his word, and punish the
refusers, let him read at large the places above cited, or shortly consider
that the spirit of God commends king Josiah, 2. Cor. 34. Josiah commended for
compelling Israel to serve God.
for making all Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to the covenant, which he
renewed with God and COMPELLING ALL THAT WERE FOUND IN ISRAEL TO SERVE THE LORD
THEIR GOD. So that you might have well spared your wanton complaint to God, and
kept in your Crocodiles tears. Your Sovereign does nothing against you, but
what is agreeable to Gods and man's law, consonant to the doctrine of our
Churhes, and much easier than that which your selves practiced on others:
neither is this our question, what rites you consented unto, but what faith
Christ delivered his Church in the writings of his Apostles and Evangelists:
for to that every man which is baptized may be lawfully forced by the Princes
authority, let him and his forefathers assent to what they list, except you
can prove that baptism serves no longer for a sacrament of Christian
religion, but goes now for a Romish recognisance.


Phi. Our grief of heart is much increased, Apolog. cap. 1. sect. 3.
either when we look into other States and Countries, as Germania,
Suitzerland, Suecia, Boemia, and the like, where though there have been great
alterations in religion these late years, yet lightly none be forced so, but
if they can not have the exercise of their profession in one torritorie,
Canton, town, Church or Parish, yet they may have it near them in an other,
as also in all the Provinces and Kingdoms subject either to the Persians or
the Turk at this day. The old Christians be permitted to use freely their
devotions: or when we look back to the like distresses of Catholics in old
time when certain Emperors were chief fautors of Arianisme and other Sects,
who yet were often enduced of their natural benignity to yield certain
Churches or at lest Oratories in Churchyards and other places adjoining,
Socrat. li. 2. ca. 18. and li. 4. ca. 12.16. Niceph. li. 11. ca. 49.50. Lib. 5.
de Basil. trad.

Two religions in one Realm.


for the Catholic service in their dominions. So did Constantius the Arian
Emperor and Valens grant to S. Athanasius and his followers in Alexandria:
which Valens God plagued afterward, because he would not suffer the same at
Antioche. Valentinian also the younger proffered the like to S. Ambrose in
Millan.


Theo. Are you well in your wits to lament the lack of that in this Realm,
which God in plain words detesteth, and with sore plagues reuengeth? Have you
forgotten how sharply king Achab and the commons of Israel were reproved of
Elias for that error? He did not say, why permit you not those that will to the
Lord, 1. King. 18.
those that list, to Baal; but how long halt you between two sides or
opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him [forsaking al other,] if Baal be (God)
get you after him. Psalm. 18. Esa. 48. Deuteronomy. 10.
Since then it is confessed on both parts, yours and ours, that there can be
no God save the Lord, and he never meant to surrender any piece of his glory,
but is so ielous of it, that he will be served, and only served with all our
heart, mind and strength: these things I say being out of question, I reckon it
can not stand with a Princes duty to reuerse this heavenly decree ( THOU
SHALL WORSHIP THE LORD THY GOD, Matthew. 4.
AND HIM ONLY SHALL THOU SERVE) with establishing two religions in one Realm:
the first authorized by Christ and bequeathed in his testament to the Church:
the next invented of Antichrist and flatly repugnant to the prophetical and
Apostolical scriptures. For if God be truth, Psalm. 31. and John 14. John 8.
they which presume to worship him with lies (as in contrary faith must needs
come to pass) serve now not God, but the devil, a liar himself and the
father of lies: whose service no Christian Prince may so much as tolerate.

What are (says Vincentius) strange Gods but strange errors, Vincentius
Lirinens. aduersus haereses.

Heresy is an inward idolatry.


which ye scriptures so call figuratively, for that heretics reverence their
opinions no less than the Gentiles their Gods? By the which we learn that
the first precept forbidding more Gods than one barreth all other services of
the same God, save that which himself has appointed for himself. August. de
vera religione Cap. 38.
It is the vilest and basest kind of idolatry, when men worship their own
fancies, observing that for a religion which their deceived and swelling minds
imagine. Then may not Princes wink at corrupt and vicious religion, which is
an inward and ghostly worship of Idols, Matt. 6.
seeing no man, and therefore no Prince, can serve two masters: and the service
that Princes yield Christ, in respect of their royal vocation, consists in
making laws for Christ, which if they do likewise for Antichrist, it can not
be salued, but that they serve God and Mammon, or rather cease to be the
servant of Christ in that they renounce their master by serving his
adversary. Now what account God will exact for his name blasphemed, his son
refused, his sacraments profaned, his word exiled: and what answer must be
made for the ruin of faith, harvest of sin, murder of souls consequent
always to the public freedom of heresies, I leave to be fully considered
and wisely prevented by Christian Magistrates, who must think that silence
provoke, and sufferance boldeneth their subjects to forsake God and his
Church, even as in civil affairs the slacking of justice does maintain
disorder.

Apolog. Cap. 1. sect. 7.
So that in this point your defender betrayeth his unsettled humor, which
admonishes her Majesty that she must answer (to God) not only for things
done by her commandment and knowledge, but for whatsoever is done unjustly by
her name or authority, though she never knew thereof: And yet here find great
fault, that her Highness (respecting her duty to God and account that she must
make) denies to bear the burden of your wicked abuses and poisoned errors:
which no prince can avoid, that permits your Masses and licenceth your
rites, because the seeing and suffering your impieties is a plain consent and
in manner an open communion with your unfruitful works of darkness.

We may not imitate examples, except they be good.
To cover the shamefulnes of your demand you produce certain kingdoms and
Countries affected in religion otherwise than you, nevertheless content to
suffer your service within their dominions. If it were so, what infer you
thence? that we safely may do the like? Your consequent is nothing worth:
their doings can be no discharge for us: we may not imitate the vices, but ye
virtues of good men. First prove they do well, then urge their example. Your
sovereign perceiving by Gods law, what every Prince ought to do, regards
not what other Princes please to do: deserving thereby the more thanks with
God, and praise with men, for that in guiding her people she rather embraces
Christian piety, than irreligious policy.

No news to see diverse religions in diverse states.
But in deed you do the Germans and Heluetians wrong, to quote their names
for tolerating two religions. The reformed Churches and States there be so
far from admitting the full Dose of your heresies, that by no means they can
digest one dram of your ceremonies: the rest I think persisting in
ignorance, retain your faith in ye same fashion they were wont. Amongst whom
because many Dukes, Landgraues, Marquesses, Counties, yea Bishops, Barons,
Abbots and Gentlemen have regal jurisdiction within their precincts, it is no
news to see many laws under many Lords, and in diverse regiments diverse
religions. As for the kings of Suetia, Bohemia, Polonia, (not able to reduce
their Countries to the profession of one faith) neither we may reprove the^, as
negligent, nor you can allege them as indifferent: since not their own fault
but other men's force keeps the^ from attempting any redress by their
princely power, which the nobles restrain and Commons receive with this
prouiso, that their accustomed freedom of conscience be no way prohibited or
interrupted.

Howbeit this kind of dealing in my judgment is very captious. When you should
exemplify two religions under one Magistrate, you tell us of several rulers
bent to maintain their several faiths: in steed of showing some that be
willing to join falsehoode with truth, you repeat such as can not avoid that
confusion. We looked for Princes which at least had been Christians, you make
your supply with infidels and heretics. To pass the loosenes of your first
allegations, what means the lewdnes of your latter examples? Is your cunning
so small or purpose so vile, that you bring Pagans and Arians to countenance
your intention? What folly, what madness was it for you to think that a Prince
furnished with so rare gifts of wisdom, learning and virtue, would swerve
from the steps of the famous and worthy kings of Judah to be sorted with
Saracens: Saracens and Arians unfit examples for Christians. Psalm. 16. David's
zeal.
and repeal the laws of religious and ancient Emperors, to take part with
the chiefest vpholders of Arianisme? For if God him self had not decided the
case, but examples of men might bear some sway, King David was so far from
suffering the worship of any strange God within his Realm that he
protests, Their offerings of blood will I not offer, neither make mention of
their names with my lips. When would he think you confirm their honor and
service with his royal authority that thus disdayned them common humanity?
The good kings of Judah were favored and blessed of God for walking in the
ways of David their father, and purging the land from all sacrifices and
ceremonies not prescribed by Moses Law: contrariwise Solomon was rejected, for
admitting other Gods to be served within his dominions besides the God of
Israel, Salomons doubling with God.
though this toleration were granted in respect of his own wives that were
strangers, and Ieroboams politic devise to worship the same God in Dan and
Bethel after a new manner turned to the destruction of him self and his
posterity.

Which fearful effects of God wrath made Constantine to decree, Christian
Princes could suffer no heresy to be publicly professed.

Eusebi. de vita Constant. lib. 3. Cap. 63.

Socrat. lib. 5. Cap. 2.

Codicis 1. tit. 5. lege omnes.


that al temples of heretics should be without any denial overthrown: and in
no place public or private, from that day forward should their asse^blies be
suffered. Iouianus refused to gouer^e those which were not found in faith. I
says he, that am a Christian, can not become your Emperor that are the
disciples of Iulia^: a renegate from Christ: Gratian at his first entry
finding al places full of Arians and the laws of Valens his uncle making for
them, fearing some general tumult if he should presently distress so many,
gave leave, that every Religion might have Churches and Oratories with freedom
and immunitie. But being once selted, and joined with Theodosius, he commanded
that al heresies should keep silence for ever, as interdicted by Gods and man's
law: that none should any longer presume to teach or learn profane doctrine.
The same prohibition did Arcadius and Honorius continue with great severity:
Ibidem leg. Cuncti.
Let all heretics understand that all places must be taken from them as well
Churches and other open places of resort, as private houses: in all which let
them be debarred from service both by night and by day: the (Lord) deputy to
be fined an hundred pounds, if (he) permit any such thing in sight or in
secret. Theodosius the younger, and Valentinian his cousin comprising in a long
beadrole sundry sorts of heretics, Ibidem leg. Ariani.
appoint that no where within the Roman Empire their assemblies or prayers be
suffered: and that all laws made to prohibit their meetings should be
revived, and stand good everlastingly. These we take to be meeter Presidents
for Christian Princes than Turks, Persians, and Arians, not worthy to be named
in the Church of God, much less to be followed.

No more would the Arians. Four stories wrested by the Ies.
But imagine the credit of your Arian Emperors were less than it is, why
should you pervert their actions? why deprave you four stories in six lines?
Constantius and Valens were not enduced, as you pretend, of their natural
benignity, to yield Athanasius a Church in Alexandria: they were compelled
much against their wills, of necessity to suffer that, which of courtesy they
would never have consented unto. For Constans the West Emperor denounced open
hostility to Constantius his brother if Athanasius were not restored. Socr.
lib. 2. Cap. 18.
He, says Socrates, driven to this extremity, was advised by the Bishops of
his own faction, Socra. li. 4. cap. 16.
rather to grant Athanasius the regiment of a Church than to feel the smart of
civil wars: and Valens knowing that an infinite number in Egypt and
Alexandria favored Athanasius, and fearing least a sedition kindled in those
parts (the people being vehement and fierce by nature) might endanger his
state, ceased from molesting him and his followers. These things expressed in
your Author you purposely skip, urging the facts and dissembling the causes.

Niceph. li. 11. cap. 49.

Idem lib. 11. cap. 50.


With like boldness you falsify the reason, why Valens was afterward punished.
It is true that he did tear the supplication of Terentius his Captain,
requesting one church for the Catholics at Antioch. It is also true that his
army was ouerthrown, and himself terriblie consumed in fire by the Goths:
but that he was therefore plagued because he would not suffer two faithes to be
planted in Antioch, that is your own surmise. Nicephorus has no such
circu^sta^ce. Neither did Vale^tinia^ profer ye like to S. Ambrose. Lib.
epistolaru^ 5. oratione contra Auxentiu^.

S. Ambrose chooses rather to yield his life, than one of his Churches to the
Arrian service.


You wrest the story from his right course to serve your purpose: but he
required Ambrose to diliuer up a church in Milla^, to the which he with other
Arians would resort. To this Ambrose made answer: If I be forced [from my
Church] I can not resist, I will never consent to yield my right. Naboth
defended his vine with his blood, shall I betray the Church of Christ?
[Valentinian] shall rather take from me my life than my faith. And for ought
that I see, ye constant refusal of this grave, learned and godly Bishop
withstanding to death the toleration of two religions in one City, does
prejudice your assertion more than the demand of a rash young Arian ca^ further
it.

If you tell us, that your Catholic service may be suffered in this Realm,
notwithstanding both Gods and man's laws banish heretical assemblies, then you
recant the permission of two contrary faithes in one Realm, and resume the
case which lies in question betwixt us; fondly supposing your selves to be
right Catholics, and those that mislike you, to be condemned heretics; which
is still denied by us, and of your part never yet proved. Athanasius and
Ambrose were Catholics in deed, Athanasius and Ambrose were Catholics: and
therefore Papists be not.
but not acquainted with your worshipping of Images, your adoring the
Sacrament, your praying in a strange tongue, your changing the Lords supper
into private Masses: the rest of your impieties they never hard, they never
taught: and therefore till you can make good proof that your faith and
religion agrees with theirs, they standing by your own confession for
Catholics, you must of consequent, as differing from them in many substantial
points of doctrine, be reputed for heretics.


Phi. Which only grace of our Prince if we might have obtained, Apol. Cap. 1.
Sect. 4.
no pleasure, profit, or preferment that the world beside yields in any part
of Christe^dom should have kept us out of our dearly beloved country so long,
for whose salvation, and so much liberty of conscience as is mentioned, we
have often wished diverse of our persons in perpetual prison, for pledge and
warrant of the peaceable and loyal demenor of our brethren the Catholics,
and for security of the state, whereof her wise Counselors have always in
such cases greatest regard. But neither this durst our Catholic brethren
demand in their manifold fears, doubts and disgraces at home, nor we in such
suspicion and misconstruction of all our actions, could ever with hope attempt
it abroad. And, alas, much less then the grant of public places for
exercise of our ancient religion, would have given us infinite contentment of
the Catholics within, and have called home most of them abroad, when both
sorts would have counted it a singular grace, during the distress of these
days, to have had by permission, pardon conniuence, their soul rights
(without which men perish doubtless everlastingly in there private houses and
chambers, yea in prisons, in the closest and least offensive manner in the
world: as the Apostles and Confessors did often in the primitive Church,
Cyprian. Epist. 5. Niceph. lib. 9. cap. 23.
and S. Cyprian testifies that some did in his time, and S. Anastasius him
self did with the Catholics in Antioch.) From all which, being by rigor of
penal statutes, diligent inquiry of temporal Officers, watchfulness of
ministers, spies, and promotors, continually restrained, and by them often
chased from their houses, spoiled of their goods, disgraced and discouraged in
all their affairs, many thousands, yea the far greater part of her
Majesty's subjects languish away in sorrow and sadness irremediable.


Theo. You departed this Country neither expecting her Majesty's leave, nor
regarding her laws, The wise demaundes of the Jesuits.
and would you now be fet home with a triumph injurious to God, infamous to
the Land, dangerous to the Prince? No man asks of his equal any thing but
that which is honest and safe for the graunter: only the Jesuits step forth
confidently, to demand at their Sovereigns hands, no less than the manifest
breach of Gods law, joined with the subversion of her royal estate. For how
displeasant is it to God, that light should be matched with darkness, and
Christ yoked with Antichrist? And how pernicious it is for her Majesty's quiet
and happy continuance, to suffer him, that has already cursed her person,
removed her crown, discharged her subjects, invaded her dominions (whose
seedmen, and sworn legates ye be) to steal from her the peoples hearts under a
cloud of Catholic religion and fained devotion, the most honorable and wise
Sages of this Realm so well conceive, that I guess you shall have much to do,
with all your colorable pretenses and eloquent florishes to shadow the
clearness of their long and grounded experience.

To salve this sore, we shall have you foorthcomming for warrant that your
brethren shall use loyal and peaceable behavior. Were this contention for
earthly, not heavenly things; and did it concern not Christ's glory, but her
graces indemnitie; what a toie this is, for a few shifting Friars to think
them selves meet pledges for a Princes security? A few Friars think
themselves sufficient hostages for a Prince.
Submission to God and your Prince would better become you, than this malepert
kind of prescribing, on what conditions you will return, what hostages you
will give, what laws you will agnise: which covenants whether you rudely
purpose them, or manerly wish them, no Magistrate will receive, least your
burning hearts, and unquiet heads slide from misliking to murmuring, and so to
resisting.

But your brethren are so bashful at home, that they never durst demand any
such thing, and you so fearful abroad, that you could not attept it with hope:
yet are you so bold that you scatter this inuectiue which charge the state
with many vile and uncivil outrages, and your associates of the North were so
brainsicke, that putting themselves in arms against their liege Lady, The
bashfulnesse of Papists.
they required by solemn proclamation forsooth, not only safe conduct for your
Mass, but also ye releasing of prisoners, vanishing of preachers, reuersing of
laws and displacing of cou^selers.


Phi. If the grant of public places for our service seem much we will content
our selves with chambers and prisons.


Theo. The priuatnes of the place, when the fact is il, neither acquitteth the
doer from wickedness, neither excuses the permitter from negligence. Private
permission of error, unlawful as well as public.
No corner is so secret, no prison so close, but your impiety there suffered
does offend God, infect others, and confirm your own frowardnes. If your
religion be good, why should it lack Churches? if it be naught, why should it
have chambers? A christian Prince may not pardon or wink at your falsehood. S.
Paul has put in a caveat against that sleight of permitting, which in truth is
consenting. Romans 1.
Elie reproved his sons, yet was he sharply punished of God for his
indulgence, 1. Sam. 2.
which is all one with your conniuence. S. John says, John. Epist. 2.
he that lodges, or bids an heretic God speed, is partaker of his evil
works. The^ how can the Magistrate bear with your sacrilegious profaning the
Lords supper, or license the rest of your blasphemies, and hope to be free
from your plagues? When Valentinian the younger was requested to wink at the
renewing of an altar for the Paga^s in Rome, S. Ambrose disswadeth him in these
words: All me^ serve you that be Princes, Ambros. lib. 5. Epist. 30.

God allows no conniue^ce


and you serve that mighty God. He that serves this God, must bring no
dissimulation, no conniuence, but faithful zeal and devotion: he must give no
kind of consent to the worship of Idols, and other profane ceremonies. For God
will not be deceived, which searches all things, even the secrets of [our]
hearts. This earnest desire to serve God in her Princely vocation without any
shrinking or wavering, has bin so long planted, and is so well settled in her
Majesty's devout mind, that no possible means ever could, as you presently
find; ever shall, as we trust in Gods mercy, quench in her Highness that
religious affection.


Phi. This the Apostles and confessors did often in the primitive Church, and
S. Cypria^ testifies that some did in his time, and S. Athanasius himself did
with the Catholics in Antioch.


Theo. What did they? The Apostl^ had private places, but not private Masses.
merchandise private Masses, or feed men with demie Communions? Did they mock
the simple with prayers not understood, or weary them with empty gestures? They
did no such thing, but Priest and people joined together to celebrate the Lords
supper, tasting al of one bread which was broken, of one cup which was blessed:
and offered thanks to God with one consent of heart and voice, for the flesh of
Christ yt was wounded, and blood y^ was shed for the remission of their sins.
This was done in prisons, whiles persecution lasted in chambers, if necessity
forced, and in those churches which ye Christians freque^ted.

Strain Cyprians words at your pleasure, yet will they never be drawn to make
for your vanities. He warns the people not to flock to ye prisons in heaps
least their resort be noted of Infidels, and by that means all access denied:
he rather advises them, that a Priest and a Deacon by course, should visit
the Confessors. To what end you shall find at large in a leter of his to
Cornelius. Let us not leave the^ naked and unarmed, who^ we provoke and incite
to the skirmish, but defend them with the munitio^ of the body and blood of
Christ: Cypr. lib. 1. Epist. 2.
our Eucharist having that virtue to safeguard the receivers. How do we prepare
the^ to take the cup of Martyrdom, except we first admit them in the church, as
co^munica^ts, to drink of the Lords cup? The cup of the Lords table then
thought needful for Martyrs, which the Ies. now bar the people from Niceph.
lib. 9. cap. 23. 1. Corinthians. 10. Matt. 26. 1. Cor. 11.
He yt concludes both kinds to be needful for such as were ready to spend
their lives in ye profession of Christ's name, doubtless never meant to procure
the^ a private Mass, that should keep the^ from receiving of either.

Athanasius refusing Leontius the Bishop of Antioch for heresy, did
communicate in private houses with such as favored Eustathius. It skilleth not
where, but what he did: our Savior appointed neither time, nor place, to be
respected in his supper, but the word and elements: charging us to do what he
did, which is to break and give, that all may be partakers of one bread; to
divide the cup, that all may drink thereof. Do that which he commanded to be
done, who first ordained this mystery. Do that which S. Paul received of the
Lord, and delivered to the Church of Corinth: do that I say which the primitive
Church of Christ always did, and as for places we will not greatly strive.

The rigor of penal statutes, searches of temporal officers, and watchfulnes of
(poor) ministers, does maruelously trouble your spirits. I will not requite you
with the flames you kindled in England to burn your brethren to dust; with
that holy house which your Friars have planted in Spain, resembling the
tortures of Neroes garden; The Popish mercy.
with the Massacres of Province, Piemont, and Paris. Let pass with silence the
cruel executions of your inordinate rages: God give you grace to repent your
murders past, and soften your unmerciful hearts in time to come: you were
brought up in lambs lease belike, that you startle thus at the fatherly
chastisement, wherewith this Realm seeks your amendment, and sucketh not
your blood. Compare the penalties, which you fret at, with the laws of former
Emperors, and you shall see that her Majesty's gracious inclination to show
you favor above your deserts has eased the burden, and tempered the
sharpness of their ancient edictes, which restrained such as forbear to
communicate with the Church of Christ, The ancient penalties of heresy and
schism.

Codic. lib. 1. tit. 5. Manicheos. Ibidem cu^cti. August.


from buying, selling, disposing, bequething goods or lands by will or
otherwise, yea from receiving any legacies, or enjoying their fathers
inheritance, the place (where schismatic service was said) chapel or
house to be forfaited, and the Bishop and Cleargie-man to pay ten pound
weight in gold, or to be banished.

S. Austen, when it was expected by reason of the goodness of his nature, that
he should mediate for some part of these penalties to be released, gave this
quick and stout answer: Aug. Epist. 48.
Yea marie, what else, I should gainsay this constitution, that you loose not
the things which you call yours, and you without fear spoil Christ of all
his: S. Austen allowed and commended those penalties.
that the Roman laws should permit you to make your last wills, and you with
cauelling reuerse that which God bequethed our fathers: that in buying and
selling your contracts might be good, and you share that among you which Christ
bought, when he was sold: that you might freely give what you list, and what
the God of Gods has bestowed on his own children from East to West should be
void: that you should not be banished from the place where your bodies rest,
and you drive Christ from the kingdom (purchased) with his blod to reach from
sea to sea. Nay, nay, let Princes [on Gods name] serve Christ in making laws
for Christ.

You need not complain of rigor so long as our penal statutes be far more
favorable than these laws, Our penalties far gentler tha^ those.
which the Christian Emperors established, and the Catholic fathers
commended. Acquaint the world with the persecution that you suffer in England,
and your untrue reports shall soon be convinced. The greatest brunt your
friends did bear till this last revolt, which you procured (if they joined
therewithal no traitorous intent) was imprisonment, where no man was denied
the freedom of his goods, the comfort of his wife, the succor of his friends:
the basest among them never knew, what dungeon, stocks, or Irons meant: yet say
you, They were chased from their houses, spoiled of their goods, and handled I
know not with what extremity.


Phi. Apol. Cap. 1. Sect. 5.
Neither be such men miserable only by so long lack of things necessary to
salvation, but much more that they be enforced to things which assuredly
procure damnation. In which case very lamentable it is to think upon all the
distressed consciences that throughout the Realm repine with inconsonable
sighs and groans against their receiving, hearing and using of the pretended
Sacraments, Service, Sermons and other actions, whereunto they be
inuoluntarilie and against their will drawn, and especially for the oath of
the Queens soueraintie in spiritual regiment, a thing improbable,
unreasonable, unnatural, impossible: and yet the form thereof so conceived in
statute, and so tendered, that the takers must swear upon the Evangelists
(howsoever they think in deed) that they acknowledge even in their conscience
that, which never learned man of any sort or sect did ever think to be true,
and which they know every Catholic man to condemn in heart, and which the
chief makers of the same, by exempting themselves from it by a special
prouiso, have judged either damnable or very dangerous. Which oath therefore to
exact of most Officers in the Commonwealth of every one that is preferred in
the Universities, or otherwise almost throughout the Realm, and namely of all
such as they suspect think it untrue, is nothing else but wittingly to drive
men to pitiful torment of mind, remorse and utter desperation. Which thing if
her Majesty did know, she would never of her natural clemency, for a title
and claim that never king (much less Queen) Christian nor Heathen, Catholic
nor Heretic, in her own dominions or in all the world beside before our age,
did chalendge or accept, suffer her poor subjects to be so inwardly and
deeply afflicted in their souls, etc.


Theo. I confess the lack of things necessary to salvation makes men very
miserable: but you should have showed what those things are which this Realm
wants: your mouth is no measure what is requisite for the saving of our
souls, and your reader I dare say, looked for some grauer authority. Receive
with meekenes the word that is graffed [amongst you] says James: it is able to
save your souls. James. 1.
So long as we refuse no part of the Gospel, which is the power of God for
the salvation of every believer, al other wa^ts we nothing esteem. Romans 1.
S. Paul does acertaine us, 2. Tim. 3.
that the Scriptures are able to [direct and] instruct to salvation by faith in
Christ Jesus. Less we believe not, more we need not; dream you what you
list of damnation or salvation, the comfort of Scriptures shall nourish our
hope. Romans 15.


It greeueth you sore to think on the distressed consciences of such as be
drawn against their wills to frequent our Sacraments and Service. Begin you
now to mislike that any man's conscience should be forced? Then why did you, why
yet at this day do you force numbers with extreme violence to recant and
forswear the perswasiou of their faith? The Jesuits would force, but not be
forced to religion.
what reason can you bring that you may compel others, and none must compel
you? Where gat you that exemption? Or if compulsion be lawful for both sides
alike, why grate you so much at our small and easy penalties, when your selves
be justly charged with many cruel and unchristian tragedies? Your
inquisiting, your burning, your murdering of thowsands without any respect of
innocent or ignorant is in deed very lamentable: this kind of compelling,
which her Highness uses, neither can your friends deny to be charitable,
nor your self gainsaie to be semblable to that coaction, which the Scriptures
commend in Josiah, which the most virtuous Emperors followed in the primitive
Church, and which S. Austen upon deep de^^ating the case, found allowed by God
himself, as the chiefest point of that service, which he requires of
Christian Princes.

Our Sacraments, Service and Sermons are, you say, pretended: we say, reformed
by the constat of Christ's will and testament: farther defense till you name the
faults shall be needless; Lightly said without proof may be lightly
contemned without answer.

The Princes interest to Persons and causes ecclesiastical sticks in your
stomachs, as a thing improbable, unreasonable, unnatural, impossible, which
never king, much less Queen, Christian or Heathen, Catholic or Heretic in
this land or in all the world beside before our age, did challenge or accept.
If great vauntes were sound proofs, the victory were yours. You have words
and crakes at will, they cost you nothing: as for the matter in question, when
we are come to your fourth chapter, Examining the oath respected to the fourth
chapt.
where you seem to show the ground of these speeches, it shall then appear,
notwithstanding your tempest of terms here, and trifling cauelles there, that
the power of Princes to command for truth, and to make laws for Christ,
stands not only with probability, possibility, reason and nature, but also
with evident utility, necessity, religion and equity, confirmed expreslie by
the Scriptures, and plainly warranted by the laws, actions and examples of the
most famous and renowned Princes that ever were: keep your courage for that
combat, the time is not long.


Phi. I am content to respect you till then: yet this I will add by the way;
the contents of that oath for the Princes supremacy, never learned man of any
sort or sect did think to be ever true. Many learned men of their side as well
as ours have both taken, and defended the oath.



Theo. No? what did the Bishops and Preachers of England for these fifty
years, which liked and accepted this oath for good and godly? Not a learned
man among them, say you: then happy be those Seminaries of yours, that of
ignorant boys, starting hence but last day, can so soon bring forth learned
and grave Divines. What say you then to some of your own sect, I mean
Tonstall in his Epistle to Cardinal Poole, and Gardener in his Oration of true
obedience? Did not either of them take this or the like oath, and willingly
defend the same?


Phi. They changed their minds in Queen Mary's time.


Theo. They did so, but their latter inconstancy does not abolish the truth of
their former confession. Well if this whole Realm be void of learning (such
is your modesty) come to strangers. Was there ever any learned of our side,
that impugned your errors? I trust you will not reject them as unlearned, left
men begin to doubt not of your learning, but of your right wits. Grant
them to be learned, and I will prove their judgments to go with ours in this
question.

You require me to show their words. Ywis that were no great masterie. Read
Molineus against your holy Fathers abuses, Peter Martyr upon the 19. chapter of
Judges, Symlerus his preface before Boethius, Cassianus, Gelasius, etc. Other
nations both by words and deeds have allowed and showed that power of the
Prince, which the oath proposes.
And tell me what difference betwixt us and them. But I choose rather to
produce the Common wealths, where these learned men and infinite mo did, and
do live: for beholding their deeds, what need we their words? Their actions
will testify their opinions. Scotland, Flaunders, Denmark, Suetia, Polonia,
Bohemia, the free Cities and States of Germany, Suytzerland, and other
nations, which have displaced your impieties, and received the Gospel: made
they this change by the Popes permission and assent of his Bishops, or else
by the Magistrates aid and assistance? The first of these twain you dare not
avouch; for God knows it went much against your wills: then must you
confess the second, and so those learned Preachers and writers which either
at first persuaded and encouraged, or at this day commend and allow the
Princes and Magistrates of those kingdoms and Countries, for removing
Antichrist with all his trinckettes out of their dominions, and embracing the
truth of Christ by public authority, yea for reforming their Churches and
setting an order in causes Ecclesiastical as far forth in every point, as
her Highness has done in this Land: all these learned and worthy Divines, I
say, consent with us in this, that the Magistrate may lawfully settle matters
of Religion, maugre your Romish Idol, and punish error and iniquity by the
temporal sword as well in Bishops and Priests as in others: which is the
very sum and effect of this oath that you by no means can away with.


Phi. The chief makers of it themselves have judged it either damnable or
very dangerous.


Theo. This no doubt is a vehement accusation, if it can be proved; if it be
rashly surmised, then is it as pestilent a slander. Go to, what reason
leads you to charge the Nobles of this Land in this sort?


Phi. The Barons exempted themselves from taking this oath by a special
prouiso.


Theo. What if they did not exempt themselves, but her Majesty for the
confidence she reposed in her Nobles, The Nobles of this Realm shamefullie
slaundered by the Jesuits.
and for a difference between them and the Commons, would not have their
oaths, but accepted their honors as sufficient pledges of their fidelity,
will you wrest her Graces good opinion of them to their utter and open
diffamation? Or what if some Barons of this Realm skant fully resolved in
that point (which then was no wonder) made means to be respited for a season
till they might be farther instructed, which could not be granted to
particular persons by name without infamy to themselves and injury to the
rest; and for that cause, least any should be pointed at, or distrusted more
than others, this general exemption were devised as most indifferent; who but
a wrangling Jesuit would infer that the chief doers in heart condemned
their own law?

You demand, how my supposals can be proved. That needs not, your ^ile and
infamous report is sufficiently confuted, if I bring other and better
occasions, that were but possible. For where many good reasons of this
exemption may be produced, why do you spitefully presume the worst: and that
upon a blind suspicion, without any proof? Why do you rashly conjecture
their secret thoughts, which you by no means could know? why boldly pronounce
you that of Christian and godly States, which no sober man will suspect in
Turks and Infidels? to wit, that they met in Parliament to make wicked and
bloody laws against their own consciences? And what if I could not resolve
you whence this exemption first sprang, (such matters of counsel pertaining
little to your vocation and mine) yet due respect to their places, which we
should not despise: good trial of their wisdoms, which we can not deny:
common charity to their persons, which we may not purposelie diffame;
withhold me Philander, and should have restrained you from this lewd and
insolent reproching the consciences of so many noble men and worthy
Counselors, except you could show some just and inevitable proof, which you
can not, having for your dishonest surmise no surer ground than this, that the
Statute does not compel Barons or any temporal person above that degree to take
this oath, but exempteth them from the penalties of this Act, provided for
others of meaner calling and less credit with her Majesty.


Phi. To exact this oath of most Officers in the Commonwealth, and of every one
that is preferred in the Universities is nothing else but wittingly to drive
men to pitiful torment of mind, remorse, and utter desperation. The oath
exacted of Officers and proceeders.

The law barreth Papists from preferments and offices, until they demonstrate
their obedience by oath. Is that to drive them to desperation?

The Jesuits buzzing in corners does trouble their consciences, and not the
oath.





Theo. Why so good Sir? Is this consequent, that he which keeps your men from
degrees and offices drives them to desperation? Gape your friends so
mightily for honor and lucre, that rather than they will lack earthly
preferments they can not choose but ve^ter their souls? No law forces them to
seek for offices and dignities, but only debarreth them from such, until they
renounce that usurped authority, which your holy Father claims to command,
correct and depose Princes at his beck. If any be tormented in mind for
abiuring that unjust title, which the Pope pretends; blame not the Laws of
this Realm, which you can not disprove; blame the covetous and ambitious humor
of those, that for worldly respects would rush headlong against the
persuasion of their hearts; blame your odious and erroneous whispering in
their ears, which has troubled and altered their conceits, that were caulmed
and settled in quietness. Such temporising hipocrites, if any such be so vexed
in mind, as you tell us (which I scantly believe: for ambition and gain breed
in them rather delight than remorse) yet were they not thereto driven by the
Magistrate, who proposed this law with condition, and left them to the choice;
but their greediness first baited them, next your secret buzzing in corners
disordered their unconstant affections, and now perhaps foolish fantasy does
afflict them, without reason of their parts, or occasion of ours.


Phi. But to compel namely all such as you suspect to think it untrue, that
is wilfully to force men to desperation.


Theo. The time was when you and your fellows cared little for driving others
to desperation. The strange torments you devised and practiced on thowsandes,
to compel them from the confession of their faith without any regard of their
consciences, can witness the same: mary now the sword is out of your hands,
you grow so tender and delicate that neither religion nor obedience may be
forced on you, for fear least you fall to desperation. You can shift for your
selves, I perceive, what ever betide your neighbors: The Magistrates may
compel two things that be lawful, though desperation do ensue.
but in sadness Philander where learned you this divinity, that subjects may
not be compelled against their wills, if they list to pretend conscience, least
they despair? Shall the peevish opinion of such as be froward and ignorant,
or to speak with favor, the private persuasion of such as be weak, s^^ppe
Magistrates from yielding that service which God requires of them? May Princes
displease God, to please men? or break the least of his precepts, to content
never so great a multitude? No doubt they may not. For rulers in making their
laws must depend on the will of God revealed in his word, A thief may be
hanged, though he would pretend desperation.
not on other men's consciences. Idolaters, heretics, and schismatikes lack
not an inward and strong persuasion of their sects, yet dare you not deny, but
Christian Princes ought to force their subjects from idolatry, dissension,
and heresy.

The Scriptures commend Josiah, for compelling the people to serve God: 2.
Chronic. 34. Luc. 14.
the servant is charged to compel the guestes that were loath to come: God has
ordained the sword (which never entreats or persuades, but only commands
and compels) to punish falsehood and assist truth. Now men that be willing
need no forcing, ergo Princes may compel their subjects, that is constrain
them against their wills to keep the faith and communion of Christ's Church,
notwithstanding they pretend, or in deed have never so resolute and strong an
opinion to the contrary.

The Donatistes, rather than they would be forced from their fancies, slew
themselves, August. epist. 50. and 204.

The Donatists were not spared though they offered themselves violence.


yet this did nothing fraie the Church of God from compelling them by the
rigor of Princes laws, without any respect to their wilful desperation. We
grant he that wounds a weak conscience sins against Christ; mary to be
grieved with that which is good, is no weakness but wickedness; and he that
tendereth or regards a wicked conscience, by your leave, is a fauorer and
confirmer of his evil works. To such says Paul, I gave no place, no not an
hour: 1. Corinthians. 8. Galat. 2. Galat. 1.
for if I should [so] please me^, I were not the servant of Christ. We may not
for things indifferent trouble the weak minds of our brethren, yet this rule
binds no Magistrate to remit the punishment of error and infidelity, because
God has charged them to suffer no kind of evil unrevenged, (and this is the
greatest) whose voice they must hear, whose will they must obeie, though they
were sure thereby to scandalize never so many both aliens and subjects.


Phi. Woe to that man by whom offenses come.


Theo. True Sir, but an offense fondly taken, Luc. 17.
not justly given, entangleth no man besides the taker. Blessed is he (says
Christ) that is not offended at me. Where cursed is he that takes an offense,
Luc. 7.
the giver is blessed for ever. We preach Christ crucified a stumbling block
to the Jews, and woe to me (says Paul) if I preach not the Gospel, 1. Cor. 1.
1. Cor. 9. 2. Cor. 2.
yet does it bring the wicked to their destruction, and is the savor of death
unto death in them that perish. Then as the minister must dispense the word of
truth, be therewith offended and greiued who list: Offense taken not justly
given hurts no man but the taker.
so the Magistrate may draw the sword of justice to compel and punish such
as be blindly led, or maliciously bent to resist sound doctrine; without any
respect what afterward befalls such overthwart creatures. If upon compulsion,
desperation ensue; woe not to the compeller, using those means which God has
appointed, and discharging that duty, which God has commanded; but woe
rather, and double woe to the despayrer, who first framed his conscience to
forsake truth and believe lies; and now receiving the just reward of his error
has his heart hardened, that when good discipline, which heals others, is
applied as a wholesome medicine to recover him, it causes or shows him to be
past cure, without any sinister action, or ill intention of the Magistrate.

Thus much for the making, and exacting of that oath. The contents whereof shall
be fully discussed when we come to the place which I named. We stand too long I
fear about these foolish and impertinent quarrels. I will pass to your second
Chapter as finding nothing left in your first, but an action of unkindness
against such as call you Fugitives: which name you well deserve, though you be
loath to bear.


Phi. That is but your saying, which we little regard.


Theo. Much less need we regard your slanderous and false reports published
of purpose to deface this Realm: they be but your sayings, which no good man
esteems.


Phi. You fall now to words.


Theo. What else have you done, since we began? We be now come to the shutting
up of your first Chapter; reuiew the same: what one line, what one letter have
you proved, that hurts us, or helps you?


Phi. You were not here to look for many Scriptures or Fathers: we give you
the reasons of our departure, which be matters of fact, and admit no proofs.


Theo. If you can not prove them, we need not disprove them; and so let us
end with this, and proceed to the next.


Phi. You answer not half that which we have objected.


Theo. You object much and prove little: which forces me to neglect the most
part of that you have objected. For when you heap up idle words, that are but
wind; and reign over your adversaries with Lordlike vauntes, which are better
despised than answered; why should I follow your vain humor, or bring the
cause of Christ to a mere brable or words, as your Apology does?


Phi. Say your pleasure.


Theo. Your first Chapter we have seen: what does your second contain?


Phi. Their running to Rome.
The causes of our repairing sometime to the City and Court of Rome.


Theo. If this be all, I will never open my mouth for the matter. Your private
actions and secret purposes we can not see, we need not search. Therein you
may pretend what you please, without any truth, and we believe what we list
without any wrong.


Phi. In faith and truth they were none other, but to make humble s^te for the
establishment, Apolog. chap. 2. Se^ 6.
and perpetual foundation of the College or Seminary which his Holiness had
long before instituted in place of the hospital of our nation there: this was
one thing. Another was, that the Governors of that College in Rome above, and
of this other now resident in Rhemes beneath might give and take mutual
direction for correspondence in regiment, discipline and education most
agreeable to our Country men's natures, and for prevention of all disorders
that youth and companies of Scholars namely in banishment are subject unto.


Theo. It may be this you did, but did you nothing else?


Phi. It was strongly surmised we know, that our going to Rome was to procure
some matter against the Prince, but God is our witness it was no part of our
meaning.


Theo. That intelligence was given by such as were daily conversant with you,
and those articles of confederacy between the Pope, and others to invade this
Realm were rife in your Seminaries there, and closely sent to your friends
here; but whether interprised and followed by common consent amongst you, or
only devised and scattered by some of you, to strike a fear in the peoples
hearts to make them the readier for your persuasions, we can not exactly say:
this we be sure, such practices in subjects be lewd and seditious.


Phi. If that informatio^ were true.


Theo. What reasons have you to prove it false?


Phi. Enough: The second chapter of our Apology does refell it at large.


Theo. You refell it in deed, as your manner is; that is, you say that you will
without any further proof or pains. Certain young fellows, Apolog chap. ^.
sect. 1.
say you, Fugitives from their Masters, deprehe^ded in diverse cosinages,
counterfaiting of letters, and plain thefts have of malice, hope of impunity
and lucre traitorously slaundered you. Thus as if you sat supreme Judges over
all the world, you bring nothing to quite your selves and confute your
adversaries, but only the breath of your own mouths.


Phi. We give you an oath for our discharge: A Jesuits oath is no great
assurance: they have such cunning to make oaths, and power to dispense with
oaths.

Apolog. Cap. 2. Sect. 2.


will you not believe us, when we swear?


Theo. If we do it, is more of our good meaning than your well deserving; you
dispense so fast with the breach of oaths.


Phi. You misreport us, we do not so.


Theo. That shall appear in place convenient. I will not now disgresse from the
matter. An oath, you say, we have to purge al suspicion: Let us hear it.


Phi. The principal of the viage does protest, that he neither joined with
rebel nor traitor, nor any other against the Queen or Realm, or traitorously
sought or practiced to irritate any Prince or potentate to hostility against
the same. Further inuocating upon his soul that he neither knew, saw nor heard
during his abode in the court of Rome, of any such writings, as are mentioned
in the proclamation of July, containing certain articles of confederation of
the Pope, king of Spain and other Princes for the invasion of the Realm.


Theo. We hear you swear, but mean you plainly?


Phi. Why doubt you that?


Theo. You teach others, Inter quaestiones ad tribunal indicis pertinentes,
quaest. 2. quomodo respondendum in tribunali haereticorum.
when they be called before such as you count heretics; sophistice iurare, and
sophistice, respo^dere, sophistically to swear, and sophistically to answer,
that is to mock the Magistrate with a captious and cunning oath or answer. And
therefore unless you give us a preciser and strickter oath than this, we trust
you not. You did not traitorously seek or practice to irritate any Prince or
Potentate to hostility against the Queen or Realm: What needed this
addition, you sought it not traitorously? Your meaning may be, you sought it,
but lawfully.


Phi. What fraud you suspect, where we mean simply?.


Theo. Then for the better explication of our selves, They make it no treason
to invade the Land, if the Pope so command upon pretense of heresy and
schism.
do you think it treason for an English man to join with the Pope or any
other appointed by him to invade the Land for the restoring of Religion, and
execution of the sentence, which Pius the fifth pronounced against her Majesty?


Phi. That sentence is extrauagant.


Theo. Not so. For if you count it no treason, as we can prove the most part of
you do not, to obey ye Pope deposing the Queen, then in your own conceits may
you safely swear, you did not these things trayterouslie, though touching the
factes it were certain you did them.


Phi. What a compass you fet to entrap us?


Theo. What euasions you get to delude us? but how does this clear the rest of
your side?


Phi. We be most assured that no English Catholic would or could be the
author thereof.


Theo. It is much to be sure what every man of your faction would or could
do: you must be gods and not men, if you can do that.


Phi. We know they would not.


Theo. Leave this folly, you can not search the secrets of other men's
hearts, nor account for their deeds: in a matter so impossible; the more
vehement, the more impudent.


Phi. Apolog. chap. 2. sect. 2.
It verily may be thought (and so is it certain, that some of the principal
ministers of the forenamed Princes have a^nswered being demanded thereof) that
the Protestants having exercised skill and audacitie in such practices and
counterpractises (of which France, Flaunders, Scotland and other countries
have had so lamentable experience) did contriue them to alter her Majesty's
accustomed benignity and mercy toward the Catholics.


Theo. It is great pity that Papists be no practisers. Ask England,
Scotland, Flaunders, France, Spain, Italy, Scicile, Germany, what practices
they have found, I say not in your temporal men, but in the Priests, Prelates
and Pillours of your Church. Popes for these 600. years have been nothing else
but practisers.
Righter Macheuels than the Popes themselves Christendom has not bred: mary
this indeed you were always better with poisons and Treasons, than with
papers and pamflets: and yet you spared neither Scriptures, Councels, nor
Fathers; but corrupted and enterlaced them to serve your turns.

As for the procurers and setters of this late confederacy to assault the
Realm, if you know not who they were, Charles Paget and others with you can
tell; or if they would dissemble, Throckmorton has told. There shall you see,
whether this were a mere devise and sleight of ours, or a lewd intent and
practice of yours. These be the chief points of your second Chapter: the
rest is lippe-labour and noe way concerns your cause.


Phi. Yes: we prove it lawful for men in our case to fly to the Bishop of
Rome, for relief either of body or soul.


Theo. We be sure you will say it with boldness enough, but will you prove
it?


Phi. We will prove it.


Theo. How?


Phi. Apolog. Cap. 2. Sect. 5.

Hiero. Epist. 16

A fond flourish for their going to Rome.


Whither should we rather fly than to the head, or as Saint Hierom speaks
(to the most secure part of our Catholic communion) to the rock of refuge in
doubtful days and doctrines, to the chief Pastor and Bishop of our souls
in earth, to the Vicar general of Christ, out of the compass of whose fold
and family no banishment can bring us: to him that by office and unction had
received the grace of love, pity and compassion: to him that counts no
Christian nor domestical of faith a stranger: This is no flattery.
to him whose City and Seat is the native home of all true believers, and the
pattern of all Bishoply hospitality and benignity.


Theo. Whither now Masters, are you well advised?


Phi. Why not?


Theo. You presume that to be most true, which is most in question betwixt us;
and as if your unshamefast flatteries were sound and substantial verities,
you conclude without proving the precedents, or respecting the consequent. For
first, what witness bring you, that the Pope is as you say, the head, the
rock of refuge in doutful days and doctrines, the chief Pastor and Bishop of
your souls in earth, the Vicar general of Christ: or that his seat is the
native home of all true believers, and the whole Church his fold and family?
What ancient Father or Council ever liked, or suffered these proud and false
titles? Why prove you not that which you speak? Or why speak you that which
you can not prove? In so weighty matters do you think it enough to say the
word, and by and by we must hush?


Phi. We have elsewhere brought you so many demonstrations for these
things, that now we take them to be clear.


Theo. Omit these vauntes, we ask for proofs: and till you bring them, by
your own rule we need frame you no farther answer.


Phi. Make you merry with that advantage, but yet Saint Hierom is not so
shifted.


Theo. His name you set in the forefront to lead on the rabble of your unsavory
speeches, but the words of Saint Hierom do little relieve you. For let it be
that Athanasius and after him Peter Bishops of Alexandria, Hiero. ad Princip.
epitaphium Marcell.
declining the persecution of the Arian heresy, fled to Rome as to the safest
port of their communion; because Rome was then free from the tumults of Arians,
so long as Constans lived, Rome was then safe from Arians whiles Constans
lived, but not after when the Bishop of Rome was banished by the Arians.

Apol. Cap. 2. Sect. 5.

Bid lib. 1. hist. Ang.

The prete^ces of their running to Rome


and ready to receive such as suffered affliction, for the truth of Christ,
which is all that Saint Hierom says: what infer you thence? that Rome is
now the like? This illation comes twelve hundred years too short of your
antecedent, and no way depends upon S. Hieroms words; unless you think
that Rome now, because she bears the same name, must also challenge the same
virtues, and praises, which Rome so long since both had and deserved; which
were very ridiculous. But is this all you will add before you grow to your
maine conclusion?


Phi. The greatest part is yet behind. For as I began, whither should we
rather fly than to him, whose Predecessors gave us our first faith in the time
of the Britanes, restored it after in the days of the English, recovered us
from Paganism, from Arianisme, from Pelagianisme, from Zwinglianisme: often
received, harbored, and relieved, diverse blessed Bishops and Priests of our
nation, as well in the times of their prosperity, as persecution; and who have
received again of all our Princes, Prelates and People, all duetifull and
correspondent honors and good Offices for so many hundred years together,
when they and their dominions flourished in much glory and felicity, and were
dreadful to Gods enemies, the Churches and their own: among whom her
Majesty's Father for his worthy writings and doings against the Lutherans
received the glorious and eternal title of Defender of the faith, to him of
whose Predecessors all the famous Fathers called for aid, comfort and counsel
in their like distresses, Cyprian of Cornelius and Stephanus, Athanasius of
Julius and Marcus, Chrysostom and Augustine of Innocentius, Basil of Tiberius,
Felix and other Bishops of Italy: Hierom and Milecius of Damasus, Theodorete
of Leo the great, and all the rest of otherholy Popes, as time and necessity
required: Lib. 4. cap. 22. Eccle hist.
to him whose Seat (as Eusebius reports of Saint Denis of Corinth) did
always send relief to all the Christians persecuted, and condemned to
mettalles, and refreshed all the faithful coming unto it as the Parent the
children: to him who as he canonically succeeds all these in Seat, doctrine
and dignity, so is inferior to none, far passes many, and resembles most
Saint Gregory the great our Apostle in all charity, hospitality, zeal, and
tenderness of heart and affection toward the desolate, namely our nation: for
the spiritual calamity whereof the writer of this has seen him weep full
heartily, and has heard him say, the goods of that holy Seat, whereof he had
the dispensation, were for the poor afflicted domesticals of faith. Finally,
whither could we with more hope have recourse, than to him, by whose bounteous
goodness so many Patriarchs, Bishops, learned, Gentlemen and Christians of
all sorts, English, Scottish, Irish, Almans, Hungarians, Syrians, Armenians,
Cyprians, and all other under the Turk, or any way for Christ's sake oppressed
or impouerished have been and shall be relieved.


Theo. A long process to little purpose. Grant that diverse good men in times
past have sent and gone to Rome for counsel and comfort in cases of distress,
which is all in effect which you can or do say: what conclude you now?


Phi. That we may do the like.


Theo. The like you may, but not the contrary.


Phi. We follow precisely their steps.


Theo. That we deny. Well, The Jesuits go to Rome, but not as the Fathers did.
you may go to Rome as they did, and so your journey not differ from theirs in
the pains, which you take; nor the place, which you see; but you neither
carry with you the same minds, that they did; neither does your holy Father
content him self with those means, which his predecessors used. For the
ancient Bishops of Rome were duetifull and obedient Subjects to the
Christian Emperors, and dealt by petition and supplication in most humble wise
for their afflicted brethren: they never offered arms, nor encouraged Rebel
against the superior Powers, no not when Constantius the Arian banished
Liberius the Bishop of Rome for dissenting from his opinion; nor when Julius
the Apostata renounced the faith, and openly fell to Gentilisme: but ever
submitted them selves to the same Laws and pains that other godly Bishops
did, when the Prince took part with error. And for this cause the traueling
then to Rome, whiles the Bishop there embraced the truth, obeyed the State, and
assisted their brethren by good and lawful means, could no way be
displeasant to God, injurious to Princes, nor dangerous to commonwealths: In
our days it is far otherwise. The Pope now takes upon him to depose
Kings, to invade Realms, to authorize rebellion, yea to curse all that yield
any subjection, or duty to those Magistrates that withstand their fantasies:
Which vile and intolerable presumption of the late Bishops of Rome, neither
Cyprian, nor Athanasius, nor Chrysostom, nor Augustine, nor Basil, nor
Hierom, nor Theodorete in their times ever found or feared. And therefore both
you must alter the leude persuasions of your hearts, and your holy Father
must leave his wholly practices to pull Princes out of their thrones by
stirring sedition and inuading their Dominions, before your flocking to Rome
can be warranted by these examples.


Phi. I marvel you still object that, which wre by oath have purged. You know
we have sworn that in going to Rome we had no such intent.


Theo. Your oath, if it be true, clears one man for one viage; but which of
you does, or can swear for all other times and persons? Howbeit in this place
we do not urge you with your intentes nor attempts against her Majesty, we
only weigh the strength of your argument, that you may sly to Rome, as well
as some learned and ancient Fathers have done. This collection of yours is not
good: They may not go to Rome in these days though the Fathers did, when the
Bishop of Rome behaved himself as a duetifull subject to the Emperor.
because the bishop of Rome now claymeth full power to deprive Princes of
their Crowns, and discharge their Subjects from all obedience, contrary to
the word of God, and examples of Christ's Church; which in those days, whiles
these Fathers, whom you mention, lived, the Bishops of Rome neither did or
durst presume.


Phi. We meddle not with the Popes claim, he can answer for himself.


Theophil. You must meddle with it, and bring inevitable proof for it, before
your consequent will be current, or your slight to Rome lawful.


Phi. If we sought to Rome, for succor against the Prince, your saying were
somewhat, but I have often told you we do not.


Theo. And I have told you as often, that grant you did not, the Popes claim
to discharge Kings and Queens at his pleasure, is enough to reuerse your
argument. If this pride and tyranny be unlawful: resorting to him, and
partaking with him, can not be lawful.
We care not what you dissemble of policy for a season, but what he
chalengeth for ever as of right. His pride, not your craft is the thing we
stand on, and that being such as the learned Fathers whom you name, never saw
nor suspected, makes so great a difference between those days and these,
that from their fact to yours no good consequent can be framed.

And yet I could tell you besides, that when he commands you must and will
execute. So that although you were no seekers nor prouokers of his unchristian
dealinges against our Sovereign, you neither may, nor do refuse to be
commenders, assisters, perfourmers of his ungodly purposes, tend they never
so much to the prejudice of this Realm, and disturbance of her Majesty's
Title, State, and welfare. Which tyranous usurpation in him, and traiterous
affection in you, no Father, that is Catholic, Not one of their examples
touches the Popes power over Princes: but convince rather the contrary.

Counsel and comfort may be fet from any place as well as from Rome.


did ever allow; no Prince, that is ancient, did ever endure. And as for your
skattered and maimed examples, which here you heap to fraie the simple with
empty names and lofty words, not one of them avouches and such matter or
meaning.


Phi. If they prove not the Popes jurisdiction over Princes which you
stoutelie deny, yet I trust they prove, that we may send, or go to Rome, to
be resolved in doubts of Religion, and to be relieved in times of
affliction, which is all we require.


Theophil. Counsel in cases of faith, and comfort in days of danger, be no
signs of authority, but duties of Charity, neither those peculiar to the
Bishop of Rome, but common to the whole Church of God: and therefore if your
examples reach no farther, but that Princes have been sometimes advised, and
other good men harbored by the Bishops of Rome, whiles the City was famous for
learning and religion, you take great pains to prove that which neither
helps you, nor hinders us. All this may be granted, and your running to
Rome no whit the sooner concluded to be lawful.


Phi. What reason barreth us now from traveling to Rome more than others
heretofore?


Theo. Your holy Father pretends and exercises in our days a monstrous and
pernicious power over the Church of Christ, which at that time when these godly
men wrote, and repaired to Rome, was neither attempted by him, nor mistrusted
by them. So that they might resort to the Bishop of Rome, The Fathers resorted
to the Bishop of Rome as to their brother and fellow servant.
as to their fellow servant without offense to the Church, or contempt to the
state: because the Bishops then behaved themselves as religious members, not as
presumptuous heads of the Church; and lived as subjects, not as superiors to
the Prince: you can now not fly to the Bishop of Rome, but you must do violent
wrong to them both: to the Prince by renou^cing your subjection, breaking your
oath, and bearing arms against your liege Lady, when the Pope commands: to
the Church in thinking and teaching the Bishop of Rome to be the decider of
all doubts, vpholder of all truth, expounder of all Scriptures, Confirmer of
all Councelles, dispenser with all laws, yea supreme and infallible Judge of
all men and all matters, that any way touch or concern Religion. Which
strange and incredible pride those examples which you bring, are so far from
allowing, that we need no better witness to confute you with.


Phi. You do but jest I dare say.


Theo. Examine the particulars, and you shall find them make clean against
you, or at least nothing for you. The Bishop of Rome, you say, gave us our
first faith in the time of the Britanes, restored it afterward in the days of
the English, recovered us from Paganism, from Arianisme, from Pelagianisme,
from Zwinglianisme. This last I may skip as a fond effect of your distempered
choler. The Gospel now preached among us you call in your heat Zwinglianisme:
from the which though some of you be lightly stepped, I trust in God, the worst
your holy Father can do, shall never remove us. That this land was infected
with Arianisme and Pelagianisme, Bid Eccle hist. gentis Ang. lib. 1. Cap. 8.
lib. 1. Cap. 17.

This land recovered from Pelagianisme by two French Bishops.

Lib. 1. Cap. 17.


as many other places then were, I find it reported in the story of Bid:
that the Bishop of Rome recovered us from both, or from either, I find it not;
yea rather certain it is, the Bishops of France our neighbors upon
request made unto them by the Britanes, sent Germanus and Lupus two french
Bishops, chosen in a Synod by the general liking, to convert this Realm
from Pelagius error, which also they did with great celeritie. So that of those
four recoueries to the faith, which you reckon in favor of the Bishops of
Rome, the last is the present estate which we strive for, the two next be
false, the first is only left and that furthereth your conclusion but little.


Phi. Will you deny that the Bishop of Rome first caused the Britanes and
Saxons to be christened?


Theo. I will deny nothing that is true: presume you no more than you prove,
and we shall soon grow to an end, Lucius an ancient king of the Britanes
wrote to Eleutherius Bishop of Rome for his help, Bid. Eccle. hist. gentis
Angl. lib. 1. Cap 4.

Lucius Christened, and Edelbert converted from Rome.


that him self and his people might be baptized: and Gregory the great sent
Augustine the Moncke to see whether he could king Edelbert and the Saxons. Does
this prove the Pope superior to Princes, or that he may send his factours
hither without the Princes leave?


Phi. There was somewhat in it, that Lucius sent so far.


Theo. This Realm was then rude, learning here skant, religion newly sprung,
and no where settled, Coilus, his father, brought up at Rome from a child, The
occasions of Lucius sending unto Rome.
and one that of his own accord yielded both friendship and tribute to the
Romans, Lucius himself a great favorer of the Roman Empire, and no place
near home so famous and well furnished with able men to serve his turn as
Rome. What marvel then if Lucius, so well acquainted and frinded at Rome
before, thought best to be thence directed and instructed at his first entry
to the Christian faith? But can you prove that Lucius was bound to do that
he did, or that Eleutherius did any thing against the Princes will?


Phi. I say not so.


Theo. Then this example makes little for you, which be sent hither not only
without the Princes leave, but against her liking and Laws, to withdraw the
peoples hearts from her, and to prepare them for a farther purpose: Gregory's
fact in sending to convert the Saxons makes less. They that came from Rome,
would not enter this land nor preach here without the Kings express license.

Bid lib. 1. Cap. 25.


For Augustine and his fellows, notwithstanding they were sent from Rome, as
you are, and taught nothing but subjection and obedience to Princes, which you
do not; yet would they not enter this land without the kings consent and
permission, but rested in the Isle of Tenet til his pleasure were known; and
offered not to preach in this Realm before the king in express words gave
them license. They came not in disguised as you do, they lurked not in
corners, they traueled not by night, they brought no bulls in their bosoms to
discharge the subjects and depose the Prince: the Bishop of Rome that sent
them, neither stirred rebellion, nor invaded king Edelberts dominion. And where
you being subjects offer that wrong to a Christian Queen, which they being
strangers did not to an heathen king; yet would you bear men in hand you
follow their example; but lay down the true report of these stories and see
how handsomely they fit your conclusion. Eleutherius being requested by king
Lucius sent some to baptize him and his subjects; and Gregory sent others to
t^^e whether king Edelbert would give them leave to preach to the Saxons: ergo
you may flee to the Bishop of Rome notwithstanding he profess him self an
open enemy to the Queen.


Phi. You still press us with that which we never meant.


Theo. You still defend your selves there where we do not strike. This is the
very drift and scope of all your examples, as your own words witness: Apolog.
Cap. 2.

What greater hostility than this could the Turk himself offer?


And sor us of the school and Clergy, whither should we rather flee than to
him. Now that he has openly showed himself an enemy to her Highness, in
accursing her Person, in removing her Crown, in forbidding her subjects to
obey her, in ayding rebels against her, and assaulting her land with force,
you can not so much as doubt, would you never so feign; the facts are so
notorious and fresh in the memories of all men.


Phi. We noted this in you, that where the Britanes and Saxons received
preachers from Rome with honor and thanks, you persecute them with all kind
of torments.


Theo. Your attempt is as contrary to theirs, as your reward is diverse from
theirs. They came with religion to God and submission to Princes, you come with
neither.


Phi. I would you knew it, we come with both. And you may be ashamed to
charge us with two such heinous crimes, proving neither.


Theo. Have patience till we come to the place, where both shall be
discussed, and see whether that which is now said shall then be proved or no:
but in the mean time go forward with the rest of your examples.


Phi. We flee to him of whose predecessors all the famous fathers called for
aid, comfort and counsel in their like distresses, as Cyprian of Cornelius and
Stephanus, Athanasius of Julius, Chrysostom and Augustine of Innocentius,
Basil of Liberius, Felix and other Bishops of Italy, Hierom and Miletius of
Damasus, Theodoret of Leo the great, and all the rest of other holy Popes.


Theo. This is no reasoning but rouing. You flourish with a few general and
doubtful terms, neither opening the causes, nor expressing the circumstances.
They called, you say, For aid, What aid the fathers sought at Rome.
comfort and counsel. What aid? such as the Bishops of Rome might and did
yield in those days without chalenging any supremacy? That is nothing to your
purpose, neither will that warrant your gadding to Rome. Such as none could
give but they that were rulers and heads of the whole Church? That were
somewhat, if it could be proved: but your examples co^taine no such thing.
Uiew the particulars.

Cypri. lib. 1. Epist. 1. and li. 2. Epistola 1.
Cyprian in his epistles to Cornelius and Stephanus never calls them
otherwise than brethren and colleagues: and in matters concerning the regiment
of the Church as well gives as takes both counsel and comfort. But can you
show that Cyprian ever allowed any man to run to Rome for help against the
judgments and acts of other Bishops? Cypria^ misliketh running to Rome.
if you can not, as we be right sure you be not able, then can we show you,
where Cyprian misliketh, and plainly reproves this posting of yours to Rome,
writing to Cornelius. He says, that certain persons condemned in Africa by
the Bishops there, Cypri. lib. 1. Epist. 3.
Romam cum mendaciorum suorum merce nauigauerunt, sailed to Rome with their
freight of lies: adding farther, And now what is the cause of their coming?
for either they like that they did, and so persevere in their wickedness; or if
they mislike and relent they know whither they may return. For where it is a
thing prescribed to us al, and besides that equal and right, that every man's
cause be there heard, where the crime was committed; and every Pastor has his
portion of the flock assigned him, which he must govern and rule, as one that
shall give an account of his doings to God, Oportet vtique eos quibus praesumus
non circu^cursare: Those that be under us must not run thus about [to Rome]
but there plead their cause, where they may find both accusers and witnesses;
unless perhaps a few desperate and loose companions take the authority of the
Bishops of Africa to be less than [at Rome.]

The like he says of one Basilides that being deprived of his Bishopric
procured letters from Rome for his restitution. Cyprian. lib. 1. Epistola 4.

Cyprian encourages the Spaniards to neglect the Popes letters.


Neither can this infringe the ordering [of the next Bishop,] lawfully
finished, that Basilides running to Rome deceived Stephanus our colleague by
reason he is far off, and not acquainted with the truth of the case, getting
himself to be restored unjustly to the Bishopric from the which he was
justly deposed. If Cyprian did not like that Cornelius should meddle with
matters concluded in Africa, neither esteemed the restitution of Basilides made
by Stephanus, but rejected it as void and unjust, what other aid think you
would he call for at their hands, but only such mutual concord, as should
profit the Church, and well beseem the servants of Christ?


Phi. If Cyprian would not, Athanasius did; who being Patriarch of Alexandria
fled twice to Rome for succor, in his own person, and was there not only
received and harbored, but also restored to his former dignity of Julius,
notwithstanding the Councels of Tyrus and Antioche had decreed the contrary,
and Constantius the Emperor consented thereto.


Theo. The troubles of Athanasius gave Julius good cause both to claim and use
the uttermost of his authority. How Julius helped Athanasius.
The wrong offered Athanasius was so shameful, the madness of Arians subuerting
the faith and oppressing the Church so manifest, the rage of Constantius,
assisting their heresy with all his might so cruel, that if ever the Bishop
of Rome would stir, this time must needs force him to do his best.


Phi. And so he did I warrant you.


Theo. What did he?


Phi. You know well enough, he summoned the Arians to appear before him,
examined their proceedings, reuersed the sentence given against Athanasius, and
placed him in his Bishopric in spite of his adversaries.


Theo. Can you prove that Julius did all this alone without the help of others,
or that he did any part of this as head of the Church and Uicar general to
Christ? He did all that he did, as Patriark of the west with the help of the
west Bishops.



Phi. What cauils you invent when you be urged with any thing?


Theo. What broken reeds you lean too and think them strong pillars? It is
well known the Bishop of Rome was not only Patriarch of the West parts, but
of ye four Patriarchs also which were the chiefest Bishops of Christendom, in
order and account the first. By reason whereof no Council could be general
unless he were called, no matters concerning the whole Church or principal
Patriarks could be handled, The Bishop of Rome had his prerogative from the
city of Rome, not from Peter.
unless he were present or privy to the same. Which prerogative was given him
by consent of men, not by grant from Christ; in respect of the City that was
the Seat of the Empire, then ruling the world; not in token of any supremacy
descending from Peter. Thus much we grant without any proof of yours, and
more than this, if you would sweat out your hearts, you shall never prove by
these nor any other examples of the primitive Church.


Phi. Then by your own confession he was the chiefest and highest Bishop in
the world. He was cheef among them, not supreme over them.



Theo. He was before the rest in honor and dignity, but not over the rest in
power and authority. His place was first when the Patriarchs met, but his
voice not negative: he might assemble his province and consult with them, but
not conclude without them: himself was subject both to the decrees of
Councels, and to the laws of the Christian Emperors even in causes
ecclesiastical: and was oftentimes not only resisted by famous men, but
ouer-ruled as well by provincial as ecumenicall Councels, when he attempted
any thing against the Canons. Which differs much from the supremacy that he
now chalengeth and usurps. And therefore you did well to walk in a mist of
ambiguous words, to cover the lamenesse of your conclusion.


Phi. Why did Athanasius flee to the Bishop of Rome for help, if Julius had
naught to do with his matter?


Theo. Athanasius being wrongfully thrust from his Bishopric, and an other
forciblie set in his room by certain Arians assembled at Antioche, upon this
pretense, that he was deposed in the Council of Tirus, before he was banished,
and after his return presumed of his own head without a Council to reenter
and keep his place: and finding the East Church not able to succor him, for
that Constantius the Emperor supported his enemies with a strong hand: Atha.
sought to the west Emperor and to all the west Bishops that his cause might be
heard in a Council.
fled to the Bishop of the West, where Constans a religious and courteous
Prince, brother to Constantius, reigned, and made his complaint, as reason was
he should; first to the Bishop of Rome, the cheifest man amongst them and the
ringleader of the rest, with whom he was joined in consort and communion as the
right and true Patriarch of Alexandria, desiring no more but that his case
might be heard, and the desperate and furious proceedings of his adversaries
against him examined in a just and lawful Council. Which petition of
Athanasius does not prove the West Bishops to be controllers and overseers of
such things as were done in the East, much less ye Bishop of Rome to be
supreme Judge over all: but rather shows that the Church of Christ was guided
by the common consent and mutual agreement of both parts, as well East as
West, indifferently balanced; and that the West Bishops might call for a reason
of the sentence given against Athanasius, before they allowed the same, or
received his successor to the fellowship of their communion.


Phi. Socrat. lib. 2. Cap. 15.
The ecclesiastical history says otherwise; that Athanasius opened his cause
to Julius Bishop of Rome, and that he upon the prerogative of the Roman See
wrote threatening letters in his behalf, and restored him to his place,
reproving them that rashly deposed him.


Theo. Socrates as an Historiographer notes in few words the chief points,
and chief persons: but if you will take the pains to read the particular
discourse of these things, which Athanasius writes in defense of himself,
you shall find that true which I say.


Phi. What shall we find?


Theo. That the West Bishops were joined with Julius in all this action, and
nothing done without their Sinodal decree.


Phi. How prove you that?


Theo. Athanasius cause intimated to all the west Bishops.
First the letters of credit which Athanasius brought with him to Rome from the
Bishops of his communion in Egypt, Thebais, Lybia, Pentapolis, witnessing the
manifold wrongs which he suffered, and earnestly craving a dew reformation of
the same, were written not to Julius alone, but Omnibus vbique ecclesiae
catholicae Episcopis, to all the Bishops of the Catholic Church wheresoever:
having these words in the conclusion; For this cause in a public assembly by
the consent of us all wrate we these letters unto you, praying your wisdoms
in Christ to receive this testimony touching Athanasius, and to admit him to
your fellowship and communion, and to be moved with a zealous indignation
against the Eusebians [his enemies] the authors of these disorders; and that
such lewdnes and mischief prevail no longer against the Church, vos certe
vindices huius iniustitiae imploramus, we call for your help to be the
reuengers of their unrighteous dealing. Haec quidem Aegyptij ad omnes and ad
Episcopum Romanum Iulium scripsere: this they of Egypt wrate to all, and to
Julius the Bishop of Rome. So that in sight the complaint was made generally to
them all.


Phi. But Julius alone cited the contrary part to appear before him by a day
limited, Julius had the consent of both parts, that a council should be called.
and that argues his authority over them that were not of his Province.


Theo. Julius by the consent of both parts, and advise of all the Bishops of
Italy and other places near him, appointed the matter to be heard in a
Council, and exhorted the adversaries of Athanasius to be present at the time
and place prefixed.


Phi. What a mincing you make of this matter? Julius cited, that is Julius
exhorted them to come: Julius heard the cause, that is Julius called a Council
to hear it.


Theo. What a mountain you make of a mole hill? I repeat the very words of
Julius, and good reason in his own fact to believe him best.


Phi. If he say so; but I doubt you mistake the words.


Theo. Then may you take them righter: but I am perfect, I miss them not.
Hear first what Athanasius, Athanas. eadem Apolog.
and then after what Julius writes. Quin and Eusebiani ad Iulium literas
misere, and vt nos terrerent, Synodum conuocari iusserunt, and ipsi Iulio si
vellet arbitrium causae detulerunt: The Eusebians also sent letters to Julius,
and the rather to fray us, willed a Synod to be called, and Julius himself to
be Judge in the cause, if he would. Which Socrates does not omit. Eusebius
vero cum quod volebat perfecisset, Socrat. lib. 1. Cap. 11.
legationem ad Iulium Romanum Episcopum misit, obsecrans vt ipse Iudex esset in
causa Athanasij, and ad se litem hanc vocaret. Eusebius when he had done all
that he would, sent messengers to Julius Bishop of Rome, praying him to be
Judge in the cause of Athanasius, and to call for the hearing of this
contention.


Phi. Athanasius adversaries seem to consent, that Julius alone should sit
Judge in this cause.


Theo. That Julius as chief, but not that Julius alone should examine this
quarrel. For they required to be heard in a common Council both of East and
West Bishops.


Phi. As yet I see no such thing.


Theo. Say not so: Episto. Iulij ad eos qui ex Antiochia scripserunt citatur ab
Athanasio Apologia 2.
for Athanasius even now told you, that his enemies, to fray him, in their
letter to Julius, willed a Council to be held for this matter: and Julius in
his epistle replying to those that were gathered at Antioch the second time,
writes thus, What is there done worthy of offense? or what cause have I given
you, to whom I wrate, to be angry? An quia adhortati vos sumus, vt ad Synodum
occurreretis? Is it for that we exhorted you to meet us at a Synod? The
Bishops assembled in the great Counsel of Nice not without the wisdom of God,
gave leave that the acts of one Synod might be discussed in an other, to this
end, Julius pretends not Peter's keys for his authority.
that both they which were Judges, knowing a second examination of the self
same matter was to follow, should with all diligence weigh the cause; and those,
against whom sentence was given, might clearly confess themselves to be
condemned, not by any faction of the former Judges, but justly and worthily.
And if this were an ancient custom and the memory thereof renewed and put in
writing by the great [Nicene] Council, and you now will not suffer the same to
take place with you, trewly you do an unseemly thing. For no equity does
allow, that a few of you should abrogate a custom once received in the Church,
and confirmed by [so great] a Synod, and yet that being granted you, the
offense which you take is without al reason, for your Legates Macarius and
Hesiochus, no way able to match those that Athanasius sent, but in every thing
convicted and refuted by them, Concilium indici postularunt, literasque ad
Eusebianos and Athanasium, Alexandriam, quibus conuocarentur, mitti; vt coram
omnibus iusto iudicio de causa cognosci posset; tunc enim se de Athanasio
probaturos esse quod iam nequirent: required a Council to be summoned, and
letters to be sent to the Eusebians and to Athanasius at Alexandria, to give
them warning to come, that the cause might be debated before all, in an even
and upright judgment: [adding] that they would then convince Athanasius of
those things wherein now they failed. Yea publicly in our presence Martyrius
and Hesichius were confounded, Athanasius Priests readily answering them with
great boldness; This spirit differs much from the late spirit of Rome.
and to say the truth, Martyrius and his side were always put to the worst,
Ac proinde Concilium generale postulauit: And for that cause he requested a
general assembly of Bishops. If therefore Martyrius and Hesichius [your
agents] not requiring a Council, I had exhorted you, that they which wrote to
me on either side might be called to a Council, namely in favor of my
brethren, which complained they were oppressed: that motion of mine had been
honest and just; for so much as it is acceptable to God and agreeable to the
Canons: but now where those very men, whom you counted to be discreet and
worthy to be trusted [with your message] were the first inciters of me to call
you to a Synod, surely you ought not to take that in so ill part.

By these words, these two points are more than manifest. First that Julius
did not peremptorily command them to appear before him, but exhorted them to
meet in a lawful Council for the better discussing of matters in question:
Next, that for the warning of a Council which should examine their acts, he
pretends not his supreme power over all the Church, nor his Lieutenantship to
Christ, but groundeth himself on their consents, which were the chief authors
of this tragedy, and cites the Nicene Council agreeing with the ancient
usage of the Church, that Synodes might discuss and redress the wrongs done
by Bishops.


Phi. You can not deny but Julius heard their Legates, before the Bishops met.


Theo. I grant, for his better information he might hear them alone, but not
to give judgment thereof without others: Idem in Epist. Iudij.
so says Julius himself. Athanasius was neither condemned at Tyrus, nor
present at Mareota, where you proceeded in his absence. And you know that the
records of those acts be very suspicious, and of no force, where one part
only was admitted [to proue]. Yet we, though it were so, for the more full
discussing of the matter, did neither prejudice you that wrate against him nor
those that wrate for him: but exhorted all as many as wrate, to present
themselves here in judgment, that all things might exactly be skanned in a
Synod. In the which Synod when the contrary side refused to appear,
Athanasius was heard at large, and there received to the communion of all the
West Church as right Bishop of Alexandria, notwithstanding his former
deposition by the Bishops at Antioche, and the violent intrusion of an other
in his place.


Phi. This you say, but this you prove not.


Theo. If Athanasius say the same, Athana. Apologia 2.

Athana. heard and restored by a council.


it is proof sufficient; and that you shall hear him say. Viton the Priest
(whom Julius sent for that purpose) brought with him to the council more than
fifty Bishops, where our defense was admitted and we counted worthy to be
received to their communion and brotherly feast, and great indignation kindled
against the Eusebians, to whom they willed Julius to write back [in his own
name] for that their letters were written to him [not to them.] And so Julius
did, The council willed Julius to write in his own name because the Arrians
wrate to him and not to them.
putting them to wit (which is the thing that you stagger at) that although his
name were alone to the letters, yet the common consent, and approbation of the
Synod wanted not to the matter. Notwithstanding, says he, that I alone wrate
to you, yet I wrate the judgment and opinion, not of my self only, but of
all the Bishops of Italy, and of all in these quarters. The Bishops met at the
time appointed, and were of that mind which I now signify to you again:
wherefore though I alone write, yet I would have you know that I write the
common opinion of them all. And his Epistle ended, This, says Athanasius, the
Synod at Rome wrate by Julius the Bishop of Rome. Idem in Epist. Iulij.

Julius claims an equality with the East Bishops, no supremacy over them.




So that all this while Julius did nothing of himself without a Synod;
neither did he or the Synod challenge any superiority over the East Bishops,
but rather an equality with them; and for that cause might require to see the
reason of their doings against Athanasius, before they would reject him as no
Bishop, and communicate with Gregory that was placed in his seat. And so much
the East Bishops should have done without asking. For where a provincial
Synod binds no man out of the same Province, they were by the discipline and
custom of the Church to send their letters to the Bishops of every Province,
and namely to the chiefest; and to expect the general consent of their
brethren, before they proceeded to the deposition of a Bishop, and so great
Bishop as the Patriarch of Alexandria was, which is the thing that Julius
urges them with. Ibidem in Episto. Iulij
Si, vt dicitis, omnino in culpa fuerunt, oportuit secundum Canonem and non
isto modo iudicium fieri: oportuit scribere omnibus nobis, vt ita ab omnibus
quod iustum esset decerneretur. Episcopi enim erant, and non vulgares
ecclesiae, qui ista patiebantur. If, as you pretend, they were guilty in
deed, yet judgment should have gone forward according to the Canon [of the
Church,] and not after this [strange] sort: They should have written to all the
west Bishops, and not to the Bishop of Rome alone.
you should have written to us all, that that which had been just might have
been determined by all. For they were Bishops, and no mean Churches, that were
thus used. By this you see that in ayding and helping Athanasius, the Bishop of
Rome did neither by word nor deed take upon him to be vicar general to Christ
on earth, nor supreme judge of all men and matters in the Church, as now he
does; but claymeth rather a society with the East Bishops for himself and the
rest of his province, as having no less interest in the Church than they had.


Phi. Socrat. lib. 2. Cap. 15. Idem lib. 3. Cap. 17.
What say you then to the prerogative of the Roman See, and to that
ecclesiastical Canon, which forbids to meddle in the Church without the
consent of the Roman Bishop?


Theo. The Bishop of Rome had this prerogative, that first he should be written
unto, by reason of his place, which was first; In Epist. Iulij.
but not that he alone should be written unto. So says Julius: Cur igitur, and
in primis de Alexandria ciuitate, nihil nobis scribere voluistis? an ignari
estis hanc esse consuetudinem, vt primum nobis scribatur, vt hinc quod iustum
est definiri posset? Why then would you write nothing to us, and especially
touching the city of Alexandria? Are you ignorant of this custom that you
should write to us first, By reason his place was first and after to the rest.
that hence, that which is just, might be determined?


Phi. No better text: from Rome must be determined what is right in the
regiment of the Church.


Theo. A wise catch I promise you. Did you not hear Julius even now speak the
same words of every Bishop; Vt ab omnibus, quod iustum esset, decerneretur;
that every one might determine what was just? So that Julius by this had no
greater authority than the rest: for right was to be determined by them all.


Phi. The Canon of the Church made every thing void that was done without the
Bishop of Rome. Sozomen. lib. 3. Cap. 10.



Theo. That which you call a Canon, in deed was an order taken by the Bishops
among themselves for the better guiding of ye Church by common consent, when as
yet there were no Christian Magistrates; and the same was afterward liked and
allowed of Godly Princes, In weighty matters the consent of all the Patriarks
was to be required.
as the best way to keep the Church in peace from quarrels and factions. And
this it was. In weighty matters no provincial Council might deal without
consulting the rest of the Patriarchs, who straightway conferring with the
Bishops of their Provinces, wrate back the general opinion of themselves
and their brethren. This if any Council did omit, the Provinces round about
were at liberty to reject their proceedings, if they saw cause. This Canon or
kind of regiment observed in the Church, Julius obiecteth against the council
of Antioch. Oportuit secundum Canonem iudicium fieri, Judgment should have
proceeded according to the Canon: In Epistola Iulij.
that is, Oportuit omnibus nobis scribere, vt ab omnibus quod esset iustu^
decerneretur: You should have written to us al, that that which was just might
have been concluded by all. And as by the Canon they should have written to
al, so first to the Bishop of Rome, by reason that his place was ye first in
order among the Patriarchs, which is all the prerogative that Julius in his
Epistle claymeth for himself and his See. Socrat. lib. 2. Cap. 17. and Sozome.
lib. 3. Cap. 10.
This is that ecclesiastical Canon and privilege, which Socrates and Sozomenus
do mention when they say the Council of Antioch did against the Canons, in
that they called not ye Bishop of Rome to their assembly.


Phi. The deposition of a Bishop was no matter of such importance that a
Provincial Synod might not attempt it without the rest. The deposition of
Athanasius a matter of great weight.



Theo. Yes, the deposing of a Patriarch was in it self a matter of great
weight, and required the consent of the rest, as appears by that which the
Council of Antioch long before this did against Paulus Samosatenus, where you
shall find the causes of his condemnation laid down at large in their
letters written to all Provinces, and namely to Dionysius and Maximus Bishops
of Rome and Alexandria: Eusebius. lib. 7. Cap. 30.
but yet the wrong offered Athanasius at this time touched the faith and Church
of Christ nearer than one man's injury.


Phi. Why?


Theo. The Arians by their shifts and practices had almost gotten the most part
of the East Churches, and finding the two principal Archbishops of
Constantinople and Alexandria greatly to hinder their enterprise, for that
their provinces were very wide, and many that stoutly defended the truth, were
shielded by them, they thought best to invade them both at one time, thrusting
Paulus from his Bishopric by plain force, and pretending a Canon of their
own making against Athanasius. Which if the West Bishops had quietly suffered
without enterposing them selves and assisting their brethren, two parts of the
world by their silence had been drowned in Arianisme, and themselves in great
danger not long to remain without the same infection. This respect made them
earnest for Athanasius, as Sozomene notes. Sozome. lib. 3. Cap. 7.
The Bishops throughout the East, that favored the Nicene faith, were deposed;
and the cheifest Seats invaded [by the Arrians] as Alexandria in Egypt, The
Arrians sought by deposing him to posses the East Church.
Antioche in Syria, the Royal City [of Constantinople] in Hellespont. This the
Bishop of Rome, and the Priests of the west took to be their reproach, and
[therefore] very friendly entertained Athanasius at his coming to them, and
took upon them the defense of his cause.


Phi. This is not all that Julius did for Athanasius.


Theo. What else can you show that he did?


Phi. He called a general Council to determine this matter, Julius when he
could do no good in Athanasius cause, besought the west Emperor to put to his
helping hand.
and made Constantius the Emperor glad to receive Athanasius to his former
seat.


Theo. By mine advise you should have left out this; it will come very short of
your reckoning.


Phi. Not a whit.


Theo. Be not so peremptory.


Phi. What? was not this, that I say, done for Athanasius?


Theo. It was.


Phi. Who then besides Julius could bring this to pass?


Theo. An other if you could light on him.


Phi. What was he?


Theo. Constans the West Emperor.


Phi. Who says so besides you?


Theo. The three writers of the Church story, which with one consent agree,
that the West Emperor called the Council, and threatened his brother if
Athanasius and Paulus were not suffered to enjoy their former places. Julius
when the letters which he sent touching Paulus and Athanasius, Sozome. lib. 3.
Cap. 10.
did nothing prevail with the East Bishops, opened their cause to Constans
the Emperor. Constans wrote to his brother, that he should send some of the
Bishops of the East, to show [him] the reason why these men were deposed.
Three were chosen, who coming to Italy, went about to persuade the Emperor,
Sozome. lib. 3. Cap. 11.
that the Synod of the East Bishops had done well; and Constans perceiving
they had done unjustly, sent the^ back whence they came. And because Constans
requiring this favor at his brothers hands, that Athanasius and the rest with
him might be restored, could not obtain so much; and those that were with
Paulus and Athanasius getting to his presence besought him that a Synod might
be called, it pleased the Emperor that the bishops of either side should meet
at Sardica by a certain day prefixed.


Phi. Athanasius with tears requesteth a council of the west Emperor.

Theodoret. lib. 2. Cap. 4.


It might please him they should do so, but how prove you ye thither they came
by his authority?


Theo. Athanasius going to Constans bewailed unto him the violence that was
offered the Apostolic faith, Putting the Prince in mind of his fathers acts,
that the greatest Council that ever was, was called by him, and the
determination of those fathers lawfully confirmed; beseeching the Emperor with
tears to imitate his Father. Constans upon the hearing of these things
presently writes to his brother, and warns him to keep inuiolably the
inheritance of his fathers faith. Constantius moved with th^se letters,
appointed a Council to be held at Sardica, and willed the Bishops as well of the
East as the west to be their present. Socra. lib. 2. Cap. 20.

The Emperors letters for Athanasius restitution.


After this Council had likewise concluded for Paulus and Athanasius against
their deposers, Constans wrate to his brother the resolution of the Synod, and
exhorted him to restore them to their places; which when Constantius delayed
and differred, the West Emperor offers him this choice, either to restore
them their Churches, or if he would not, to look for hostility and war.
Whereupon the [East] Emperor, being driven to this streit, sent for Athanasius
and his fellows, by three several letters, and not only restored them, but
abolished all things that might any way be prejudicial to them.

By this you see Julius had no power to call a general Council, but Athanasius
was feign to beg it of the Prince with tears; and the Bishop of Rome was
not then taken for the last and supreme Judge on earth: But the Council sat in
Judgment after him, where matters were ended by number of voices.


Phi. Yet we said truth, that Athanasius called for aid of Julius.


Theo. I said as truly that you flourish with generalities and ambiguities, and
conclude nothing. For what have you gotten now more than we granted at first?
or which way does this example perteyne to that which is in question betwixt us?


Phi. You make too light of our proofs.


Theo. Then put you more weight to them; I take them as I find them, and for
ought that I see, you can not mend them.


Phi. Well: esteem them as you lift, they prove that the Bishop of Rome was
ever a sure refuge for the Catholics against heretics, which he never
performed more worthily than in our days.


Theo. I think in deed Rome was never fuller of devises and practices than at
this present; Antichrist is so careful for his kingdom, lest it fall, that
he spares neither men, nor money to be revenged on those that shrink from
him; Ambros. de incarnatio. Domin. sacrament. Cap. 5. Cyprian. sermo. 5. de
laps^.
but when all is done, God will strike the stroke.


Phi. No doubt he will, but never for you, that be so shamefully fallen from
his Church.


Theo. You be more shamefully fallen from his word; and consequently from
faith, which is the foundation of the Church: neither can he be joined to the
Church, which is severed from the Gospel. But we go from the matter, your
examples be not yet all discussed.


Phi. Return when you will.


Theo. Chrysostom and Augustine, you say, asked aid of Innocentius. What
Chrysostom requested of Innocentius.



Phi. They did so.


Theo. Aid they might ask, and he might yield; and yet neither make for your
purpose.


Phi. That were marvel.


Theo. None at all* Chrysostom, whom you first name, sought for help as
Athanasius did, but the displeasure which Arcadius the East Emperor had
conceived against him was so great, that Innocentius could not prevail.


Phi. It serves our turns, that Chrysostom did seek to the Bishop of Rome,
notwithstanding Arcadius by force did ouerbeare him.


Theo. Chrysostom sought nothing, but that his cause might be heard in a full
Synod before indifferent Judges.


Phi. It makes much for Innocentius supremacy, that Chrysostom sought this
at his hands.


Theo. You must make your foundation surer, before your building will stand.
You saw by the last example of Athanasius, that the Bishop of Rome and the
west Church might reject and refuse the sentence of any Provincial Synod
given against the Patriarch, unless their consents were first had; And even
the very same does Chrysostom request of Innocentius, that he would neither
admit, nor allow the proceedings of his adversaries against him, as good; nor
communicate with him, that was chosen by them to succeed in his place.


Phi. This still confirms that nothing was good, The Bishops of the west
Church were to consent before the sentence could be given.
if the Bishop of Rome did dissent.


Theo. And still that infers nothing, but y^ the Bishop of Rome and his
Province were a part of the Church, and by reason and equity were to give
their voices as well as others, before the rest might conclude any thing that
did concern, or should bind the whole Church. And this is strange that where
the Bishop of Rome for himself and his Province seeks en equality with
others, as a part of the Church; you frame him alone a superiority over all
others, as the head of the Church. Your examples show this, that others
without him could not bind ye whole Church, because ye consent was not general;
and your conclusion must be this, that he without all others, as Christ's
Uicegere^t in earth, might dispose ye whole Church at his pleasure. See you no
difference betwixt these two positions?


Phi. I confess they differ, but can you show that others withstoode him, as
well as he withstood them?


Theo. Yea that I can.


Phi. Arians perhaps or Donatists.


Theo. Nay, Catholic fathers and Councels.


Phi. Show that, and you say somewhat to the matter.


Theo. That I will show when your proofs are ended. I think not good to
mingle yours and ours together.


Phi. Ours I grant, are much after one sort, and therefore I long to hear
yours.


Theo. No have but good, anon you shall: you would feign I see rid your hands.


Phi. You shall well know the contrary. Say what you can.


Theo. I say nothing but that you gain little by Chrysostoms example.


Phi. Do we not? These be Chrysostomes words to Innocentius: Wherefore least
this confusion invade every nation under Heaven, Chrysostom. Episto. 1. ad
Innocent. tomo 5.
I beseech you write, that these unjust proceedings, both in our absence and
when we refused not judgment, may be of no force; as in deed of themselves
they are not: and let them which have done this wrong, feel the censure of
the ecclesiastical Laws, and suffer us that were neither convicted, nor
charged with any crime, nor so much as conuented, to enjoy your letters [of
communion] and charity, and likewise of all others, whose fellowship we had
before. Does he not in these words request Innocentius to pronounce the
sentence void, that was given against him, and to remove the authors of this
disorder from the communion?


Theo. To Dissent from it was enough to undo it; because neither he nor his
province were acquainted with it: to excommunicate the doers, was nothing else,
but to communicate no longer with them; which every Bishop and province might
do, when any wilful breach of the Canons was offered.


Phi. This petition was made to Innocentius alone, and not to the residue of
the West Bishops.


Theo. If Innocentius alone were spoken to, the matter is not great: Sure it is
the Bishop of Rome neither did, nor might deal in these cases without the
consent of his brethren; for fear, least when the matter came to voices as in
the end it must, his own province should take stitch against him. But how
can you prove, that he alone was spoken to?


Phi. The words be plain. Chrysostom. vt supra.
Obsecro vt scribas: I beseech you to write in ye singular number.


Theo. What if a man should distrust the print or the Copy, would it not
tempt your patience?


Phi. Have we not good cause, if you begin to discredit every thing that
makes against you?


Theo. Whether I suspect the place upon just occasion or no, your self shall
be Judge. Chrysostom in this Epistle having reported at large the violent and
enormous rage of his enemies against him and his adherents, comes at last to
make his petition not to Ionnocentius alone, Eadem episto. ad Innocentium.
Chrysostom. makes this petition to all the west Bishops.
as you conceive; but generally to the West Bishops. Igitur Domini maxim
venerandi and pij, cum haec ita se habere didiceritis, studium vestrum and
magnam diligentiam adhibite, quo retundatur haec, quae in ecclesias irrupit,
iniquitas: Therefore most reverent and religious Lords, since you see what is
done, put to your endeavors and diligence, that this wickedness which is broken
into the Church, may be beaten back. Quippe si mos hic inualuerit, scitote quod
breui transibunt omnia. Quapropter ne confusio haec omnem, quae sub celo est,
natione minuadat, obsecro, [vt scribatis] quod haec tam inique facta robur non
habeant: nobis vero literis vestris and charitate vestra frui concedite. For if
this grow to a custom, know you that al things will shortly come to naught:
and therefore least this confusion attempt every nation under heaven, I beseech
[not one of you, but al] you, to write that these things so unjustly done, may
be taken as void, and you [all] grant that we may enjoy your letters and your
favors. And so goes he on to the very end with verbes of the plural number,
leaving off with these words: Haec omnia cum ita se habere intellexeritis a
dominis meis pientissimis fratribus nostris Episcopis, Ibidem.
obsecro vt praestetis, id quod petent officij. Al these things when you shall
perceive to be true by these my Lords and most godly brethren the Bishops
[whom I have sent] I beseech you give them that assistance which they shall
ask. The whole petition from the first word to the last is made to them al
without exception: the self same sentence, where he prays them to write
has these words, A verb of the singular number thrust in among verbes of
the plural, to claw the Bishop of Rome.

Theodores. lib. 5. Cap. 34.


nobis vero literis vestris frui concedite, you [all] grant us your letters.
Now whether, obsecro vt scribas, can stand with these words literis vestris
frui concedite, or rather obsecro vt scribatis, I refer it to your self:
this you can not deny but he requires aid of them all, and prays their
common letters, which is enough to show that Chrysostom meant Innocentius
should take with him the general consent of the West Bishops. And so he did.
For this wrongful and unrighteous dealing against Chrysostom, says
Theodorete, the Bishops of Europe did greatly detest, and therefore severed
themselves from the communion of those that were the doers thereof.


Phi. I grant they did, but Innocentius alone did excommunicate the chief
doers even Arcadius the Emperor, Eudoxia the Empress, Arsacius and Theophilus
the Patriarchs of Constantinople and Alexandria. A bull absurdly forged to make
men believe the Pope did excommunicate the Emperor for Chrysostom. banishment.
Nicepho. lib. 13. Cap. 34. Cronologia Canisij. The Bull proved to be forged.
Socrat. lib. 6. Cap. 18.



Theo. Who told you so?


Phi. The bull is extant to this day.


Theo. A bull of that antiquity were news in deed.


Phi. You may soon find him.


Theo. Where?


Phi. In the 13. book and 34. Chapter of Nicephorus ecclesiastical history.


Theo. I was afraid you would have quoted Socrates or Sozomene.


Phi. Nicephorus is as good.


Theo. Not by ten parts of twelve.


Phi. Why not?


Theo. Besides that he loadeth the whole history of the Church with many
fables and visions, he lived thirteen hundred years after Christ, as your own
frinds confess: which in comparison of the rest, is but yesterday. Therefore
if Socrates, Theodorete and Sozomene, which wrote at that very time when these
things were done, report no such matter, I would feign know, which way
Nicephorus, that came a thousand year after them could light on a true constat
of this ecclesiastical censure.


Phi. Perhaps he found it in some ancient Library.


Theo. As though the Patriarks and Princes of Greece would suffer such a
president against themselves to lie quiet in their Libraries a thousand years.


Phi. That reason of yours is but coniecturall. The first year of Chrysostom
banishment.

Socrat. lib. 6. Cap. 19.





Theo. Then hear that which is effectual; and you shall see the framer of this
bull prove himself a calfe. The twentieth day of June Honorius and Aristinetus
being Consuls, Chrysostom was carried from his Church into banishment by the
Emperors Edict, as Socrates witnesses. The thirtieth of September the same
year, a mighty hayle fell in Constantinople, and the suburbs thereabout; and
the fourth day after the hayle [Eudoxia] the Empress died. The same year the
Empress died.

Socrat. lib. 6. Cap. 20.

The second year of his banishment.

Eodem Capite The third year.

Socrat. lib. 6. Cap. 21.


The next year the eleventh day of November, when Stelichon the second time and
Anthemius were Consuls, Arsacius died. The next year after that which was the
sixth of Arcadius and the first of Probus, a very religious man named Atticus
was chosen [Bishop of Constantinople.] The next year, which was the seventh of
Honorius, and the second time of Theodosius Consulship, the fourtenth day of
November John Chrysostom died in banishment. You doubt not of this account I
trust.


Phi. As yet I see no cause to doubt it. Socrates was then alive, when these
things were in action.


Theo. The same order of their deaths you shall find in Sozomene, a writer of
that age also when these troubles were hottest.


Phi. What then after all this?


Theo. Your solemn Bull avouches Chrysostom to be dead, The fourth year
Chryso. himself died.

Sozome. lib. 8. cap. 27. and 28.

The Bull supposes the Empress to be living after Chrysostoms death.

Niceph. lib. 13. Cap. 34.

A blind Prophet to threaten that she should shortly die which was dead four
years before.


and Eudoxia to be living after him, which died three whole years before him.


Phi. What? It does not I hope.


Theo. Mark the words: Tamet si enim beatus Ioha^nis vitam reliquit, in
eterna tamen secula immortalis vitae haereditatem est consecutus, Verum illa
excipiet and presentem hic paenam, and futurum sempiternum supplicium post non
multos hosce dies ei adueniens. Itaque ego minimus, and peccator cui thronus
magni Apostoli Petri creditus est, segrego and reijcio te and illam a
perceptione immaculatoru^ mysteriorum Christi. For although blessed John
[Chrysostomde] parted this life, yet has he gotten the inheritance of an
immortal life for ever: but Eudoxia shall receive a present punishment in this
world, and eternal pains that shall befall her before many days be past.
Therefore I, though the least and a sinner, to whom the throne of Peter the
great Apostle is committed, do segregate and cut off thee [O Emperour] and her
from receiving the undefiled mysteries of Christ, etc. How think you, was the
contriuer of this Bull well in his wits, to threaten that the Empress should
shortly die, which was dead long before; and to put her from receiving the
Communion, after she had been three years buried?


Phi. Perhaps Innocentius knew not of her death.


Theo. Then suerly was Innocentius all that while a sleep: for the continual
intercourse between the two Cities both for temporal and ecclesiastical
affairs was so great, the person so famous, the time so long, that no mean
man in Rome could be ignorant of her death. Sozome. lib. 8. Cap. 28.
Besides that Innocentius Legates were at Constantinople to entreat Arcadius
for a Council, a little before Chrysostom died, and there unless they wanted
both eyes and ears, they could not choose but learn, that the Empress was
dead.


Phi. She was then living as Nicephorus says.


Theo. The more he fableth, Niceph. lib. 13. Cap. 33.
the less credit he deserves. Eudoxia died before Arsacius, and after his
death was Atticus chosen: then how could she be living when Atticus was
Bishop, in whose time the Legates of Innocentius came to entreat for Chrysostom?


Phi. Let Nicephorus answer for himself. I laid before you what I find in
him.


Theo. If this be all you can say for his defense, give us leave to tell you
that this Bull bearing Innocentius name is some foolish and late forgerie
devised to persuade men that Popes in those days could quail Emperors,
which God knows is nothing so. Next for Chrysostomes cause, Chrysostom
appealed not to the Bishop of Rome, but to a Council.

Socra. lib. 6. Cap. 15.


as it helps you little, so does it hinder you much. For first Chrysostom
when himself and his Clergy were called to appear before the Synod, where
Theophilus the Patriarch of Alexandria his mortal enemy was the chief man,
appealed from them, not to the Bishop of Rome, but to a general Council. So
says Socrates. Johannes eos, a quibus vocabatur, tanquam inimicos exceptione
recusabat, and vniuersalem Synodum appellabat. Chrysostom refused those that
called him upon this exception, that they were his enemies, and appealed to a
general Council. So says Chrysostom himself: Episto. 1. ad Innocentium.
Though we were absent and appealed to a Synod, and sought for judgment, and
refused not audience but manifest enimitie; yet [Theophilus] received accusors
against me, excommunicated such as held with me, and took libels at all
their hands which had not yet purged themselves of such crimes, as were laid
to their charge; al which things are contrary to the laws and Canons.

Next when Innocentius saw the matter could not be ended but in a general
Council, Sozome. lib. 8. Cap. 28. Ibidem.

The Popes legates sent away with reproach.

They were punished by the Princes law that did communicate with the Bishop of
Rome.

Niceph. lib. 13. Cap. 30.

Sozome. lib. 8. Cap. 24.


by reason ye three Patriarks of Constantinople, Antioche and Alexandria were
against him, he sent Legates to Honorius and Arcadius, to beseech them that a
Synod might be had, and the time and place appointed. Wherein his supplication
was so little regarded, that his Legates were sent away with reproach as
disturbers of the west Empire, and Chrysostom carried farther off in banishment
than before.

Lastly when such as favored Chrysostom in the East parts, would not
communicate with his enemies, but joined themselves in communion with the
Bishop of Rome, who likewise severed himself from those that were the
beginners of this garboyle; Arcadius made this Law: If any Bishop refuse to
communicate with Theophilus, Atticus and Porphyrius, he shall loose both his
Church and his goods: If any that bear office, they shall forfeite their
dignity: If any Soldier, he shall lose his service: If any of the common
people, let them be fined and exiled.


Phi. Will you now trust Nicephorus?


Theo. Sozomene in effect says the same. For the communion of Arsacius,
Porphyrius, and Theophilus, at the suite of the Nobles, there was a law made,
that no Christians should meet at prayers out of their Churches, and those
that would not communicate with these [three Patriarkes] should be expelled.
Theodoret. lib. 5. Cap. 34.

Chrysostom. enemies were men of good account in the church.


So smally was Innocentius communion at that time respected, that the followers
of it were sharply punished.


Phi. You know what manner of men they were that did it.


Theo. Such as you may not easily despise. Entending to write the wrong done to
Chrysostom, says Theodorete, I am forced to shrink at the doers thereof for
their other virtues. Socrat. lib. 7. Cap. 2.

Theodor. lib. 5. Cap. 35.


Atticus, as Socrates confesses, was a very learned, religious, and wise man.
Porphyrius, says Theodorete, left many monuments of his benignity, being a
man endewed with excellent wisdom. Arcadius, besides that Chrysostom calls
him after his banishment, Christianissimum and pientissimum Regem, Epistola 1.
ad Innocentium. Socrat. li. 6. Cap. 23.
a most Christian and Godly prince: a little before his death wan estimation of
holiness not without the admiration of a great multitude saved from destruction
by his prayers. Theophilus, Epiphanius and others that held tooth and nail
against him were no babes in the Church of Christ. ^eo. Epist. 64. and 69.
Cyrillus a famous father was after long time with much ado drawn to yield
thus much, that Chrysostomes name should be rehearsed in the Catalogue of those
that had been Bishops. Niceph. lib. 14. Cap. 27.
Arsacius, if Cyrillus may be trusted, was a blessed man and most worthy of
commendation.


Phi. You go about to deface Chrysostom by commending his enemies.


Theo. It is the least part of my thought: Socrat. lib. 6. Cap. 21.

Chrysostom. very passionate.


and yet Socrates does not altogether excuse him, in saying he was a man
Iracundiae magis quam reuerentiae indulgens, more addicted to serve his
passions, than to reverence any person. And surely the words that he spoke of
the Empress in his sermon openly before all the people, Again Herodias is
mad, again she rages, again she daunceth, again she will have John's head
in a dish, Socrat. lib. 6. Cap. 18.
were very bitter; but my meaning is to show they were great and good men in
the Church, that about Chrysostoms quarrel, were it right, were it wrong,
neglected the communion of the Bishop of Rome.


Phi. Though they made light of it in this tumult and faction, yet Augustine,
Hierom, and others did highly esteem it.


Theo. The communion and fellowship of Christian love and peace may not rashly
be broken with any Church, especially not with the chief and principal
Churches, unless the cause be weighty and urgent; but look when the Bishop
of Rome attempted any thing against the faith or ye Canons, and tell me then
what account they made of him.


Phi. That you must look out, I know no such thing.


Theo. So will I, when my course comes, but yours as yet is not ended.


Phi. Mine shall not be long.


Theo. As short as you will. I think the best be spent.


Phi. Augustine and the fathers assembled in the Mileuitan Council ask help
of Innocentius for the condemnation of Pelagius and his heresy.


Theo. The Bishops of Africa themselves in this and an other Council held at
Carthage condemned the error of Pelagius, What help Saint Austen and others
sought of Innocentius.
as repugnant to the Scriptures, and injurious to the grace of God. And because
it was a matter of faith that indifferently concerned all, they thought it
necessary to advertise the Bishop of Rome what they had done, and to pray him
also to condemn the same: that as the infection was far spread and found many
defenders; so the condemnation thereof might be general, and ratified by the
public liking of the Bishops in every province. What can you gather by this,
but that it was then the manner of the Church, as in truth it was, by their
letters sent too and fro, both to ask and to give their mutual consents, for
the suppressing of errors, that daily sprang, when general Councels could not
be called? In which case the Bishop of Rome both in respect of his City, that
was Imperial; and his See, that was Apostolical, used to receive the first
letters.


Phi. The Council of Carthage writes thus to Innocentius: Inter August.
Epist. 90.

They requested Innocentius to concur with them in the condemnation of
Pelagianisme.


Hoc itaque gestum charitati tuae intimandum duximus, vt statutis nostrae
mediocritatis etiam Apostolicae sedis adhibeatur auctoritas pro tuenda salute
multorum: That which was done, we thought good to intimate to your charity,
that to the decrees of our meannesse, the authority of your Apostolic See
might be added, for the saving of many from infection.


Theo. First they for their parts decreed against Pelagius without the Bishop
of Rome; next they seek the consent of the Bishop of Rome, not to make that
good which they had done, but to prevail the rather with many that were out of
their Province. Idem Epist. 90.
Error ipse and impietas quae tam multos assertores habet per diuersa
dispersos, etiam auctoritate Apostolicae sedis anathematizanda est: This error
and impiety which has so many favorers dispersed in so many places, had need
be condemned by the credit and authority of your Apostolic See.


Phi. Innocentius says they did but their duties.


Theo. A man might soon entreat Innocentius to take enough upon him, and yet
the worst he says is this: Inter August. Epist. 93.

The Bishops of Rome will quickly take enough upon them.

What is meant by referring matters to Peter.


Arbitror omnes fratres and Episcopos nostros, quoties fidei ratio ventilatur,
non nisi ad Petrum, id est sui nominis and honoris authorem refer debere,
velut nunc retulit vestra dilectio: I think that all our brethren and fellow
Bishops when any matter of faith is in question, ought to refer the same to
none but to Peter the author of their office and honor, as now your kindness
has done. Where by referring to Peter he did not mean as you do, that all
faith and Religion should depend on the Popes sleeue; but that when they had
concluded as they saw cause, they should give him intelligence to this end,
that he might co^cur with them for the better repressing of heresy with full
consent. Now that which Innocentius made but a thought of, you since that time
proclaim for a Gospel.


Phi. Innocentius would not think so without some ground.


Theo. Thoughts are weak proofs, when the case is our own. And Innocentius
Epistles in answer of these two Councels, Censura in Epist. 90. and 93.
Erasmus notes for want of words, wit and learning, requisite for so great a
Prelate.


Phi. Erasmus is very bold with the Fathers.


Theo. Your decretall Epistles be even such for the most part, mary that is not
to this purpose.

Basil is the next man in your beadrole, who called, as you say, for help of
Liberius, Felix and other Bishops of Italy; Basil wrote to the West Bishops
in general, but never to the Bishop of Rome
but can you tell us where we shall find all these things that you affirm?


Phi. In his Epistles.


Theo. There be four or five Epistles of his written to the West Bishops in
general, and to the Bishops of Italy and France, for succor and help; where
the Bishop of Rome perhaps is included as one amongst the rest, but never
entreated, nor so much as named, asunder from the rest. And here may you learn
of Basil, the cause why good men being oppressed in the East Church by the
craft and power of heretics or enemies, sought to the West for aid and
assistance. Not that they took the Bishop of Rome for supreme Judge of all
doubts and doctrines, The end why the East Bishops sought to the West.
as left in Christ's steed; but that the number and concord of the West
Bishops might temper and hinder the malice of their adversaries, and bring
their quarrels to be decided in an open and even Council.

Basilij epistola 48. ad Athan.
So Basil advises Athanasius to do. For the experience that I have had in
things, I know this to be the only way to get help, that our Churches are
linked with the West Bishops. For if they will readily show the same zeal for
our Countries, which they did against one or two, that were diffamed in the
West, perhaps somewhat will be done that shall generally profit all; whereby
those that are in authority may be moved to reverence their number, and the
people every where will follow the^ without contradiction. And Basil himself
writing to the^: Basilij Epist. 61. occidentalibus frasribus.
As much comfort and help as you can, says he, delay not to yield to the
distressed and afflicted Churches. As we think the concord and unity, which
you enjoy there among your selves, to be our own happiness; so ought you to
labor with us in these dissentions which assault us. If then there be any
comfort of love, if any communion of the spirit, if any bowels of pity, be
moved to help us: take ye the zeal of godliness, and deliver us from this
tempest.

And describing at large the miserable state of the Churches thereabout The
principles of godliness, says he, be overthrown, the rites of religion
perverted, Basilij Epist. 69 Italicis ac Galli^.
faith it self in danger, godly preachers put to silence, every blasphemous
mouth is open; holy things are profaned, and those that are sound among the
people flee the house of prayers as in the which impiety is published.
Therefore while yet some stand, before a perfect and full shipwreck oppress
the Church, haste^ unto us, hasten at the length yet. What you shall do to help
us we need not tell you, but only this, that you must make speed, and the
presence of many brethren will be requisite for this matter, to this end that
they which come may make a full and just Synod. Basilij epist. 70. Galliae and
Italiae episc.
This is the chiefest thing that we require, that by your means the troubles
of our countries may be known to the Emperors own person, or if that be hard,
that some of you come to see and comfort the afflicted. The things that we
spoke, many suspect, Mark what things Basil requested of the West Bishops.

Basilij epist. 74. occidentalibus episc.

The greater number, and the further off, the less suspected of the people.

Ibidem.


as proceeding of private contention; you the farther you dwell off, the more
credit you have with the people. If therefore many of you with one consent shall
decree the same, it is evident that the very number of you concurring in one
mind with us, shall cause all men to receive this doctrine without any
doubting.

You see what help Basil asked of the West Bishops, making no mention of the
Bishop of Rome, but praying them all to join together, and to show their
zeales for the truth either by meeting in a full Synod for the comdemnation of
such errors, as were newly risen in the church; or by writing their letters to
the East Bishops, that the teachers and embracers of those impieties should be
severed from the communion of the faithful until their amendment. The
redress of these things we seek for at your hands, the which you shall
perform, if it please you to write to all the East Churches, that those which
in this sort have corrupted the doctrine of truth be then admitted to the
communion, when they correct their errors; and if they will not be brought from
this innovation, but frowardly continue the same, then the rest to depart from
them. We know it behooved us to be with you, as assessors to your wisedoms, and
in common to consider how these things should be handled: but these times do
not permit that, and the differing of it would be dangerous, for that their
poison takes hold apace.


Phi. But Basil conferring with Athanasius how to help the Church, says;
Basilij epist. 52. ad Athanasiu^.
I have thought it meet, that the Bishop of Rome be written unto, to consider
of our state, and to give us his counsel; and because it is a matter of more
difficulty to send some thence by the common decree of a Synod, The Bishop
of Rome might counsel but not command.
he himself using his own authority in this matter may chose men both able
to endure the journey, and fit for the mildness and easiness of their
dispositions, to correct those that here with us are wrested awry, or started
aside. This proves that the Bishop of Rome had authority sufficient of
himself without a Synod to send Legattes to reform things amiss in the East
Churches, which is clean against your assertion.


Theo. You mistake the matter for lack of due marking the circumstances. When
these troubles were first beginning, Why Basil required messengers from the
West patriarch.
before they came to that extremity, which after fell out, Basil knowing that
the credit and opinion of the West Church might stay many from falling, and
reduce others that were not too far gone, because it would be long to tarry the
assembling of a Synod, and the enemy perceiving their intent would hinder the
fruit of their labors: wishes that the Bishop of Rome would use his
discretion in chosing some that were fit for this purpose, and send them very
closely to see what good might be done by gentle and fair persuasions.


Phi. You qualify the text with your own additions.


Theo. You shall find them expressed in Basils own words if you weigh them
well. First he would have the Bishop of Rome written unto, to consider their
state, and to give the^ counsel, what to do. Basil epist. 52.
Next, because it is hard to have some sent by the common decree of a Synod,
he using his own authority in this [so small] a matter, may choose men fit,
etc. And that no man knowing of it, without any stir, let them come secretly by
Sea to those that are here, least the enemies of peace discrie their coming.
Lastly they fitting and applying their speech to content every man, with
mildness and gentleness may rectify such of our side as tread awry. So that
these messengers should be but mediators and procurers of peace between those
that were of the same religion and joined in communion with the West Churches.
When they come which by Gods grace shall be sent, Ibidem.
let them not occasion any schisms in the churches, but rather by all means
draw those that be of one religion to unity. Care must be had, that all things
be borne with, to win peace; and that the Church of Antioch in any case be
provided for; least that which is yet sincere in her, be weakened and rent in
pieces through respect of persons. meaning the schism at Antioch where the
Catholics had divided themselves and their Churches, some cleaving to
Miletius, and some to Paulinus.


Phi. You could never speak it in a better time. Upon this and other such
occasions I remember S. Hierom consulteth Damasus the Bishop of Rome, both what
to believe, and with whom to communicate.


Theo. Indeed S. Hieroms name is next, S. Hierom co^sulting Damasus.
and if he serve your turns he does more for you than all the rest of the
Fathers besides: but was Hierom in his old age to seek what to believe?


Phi. I say not so; but that touching the faith and communion of the Church he
submitted himself to the Bishop of Rome. His words are worth the noting.
Hiero. Damas. Episto. tom. 2.
Because the East parts are together by the ears by an inueterate madness of
the people, and Foxes there do root up the Vineyard of Christ, therefore
thought I best to consult Peter's chair, and the faith which was praised by the
Apostles mouth, thence desiring food for my soul, whence long ago I received
the garments of Christ. I know not Vitalis, I refuse Miletius, I care not for
Paulinus; he that gathers not with you, skattereth; that is, he that is not
Christ's, is Antichrists. And having opened his grief, and showed what was
demanded at his hands by the East Bishops in the matter of the Trinity, he
concludes: Ibidem.
I beseech your blessedness by him that was crucified, even the Savior of the
world, and by the Trinity, three persons of one and the same substance, that
by your letters you will appoint me whether I shall confess [there be three
Hypostases in one divine nature] or deny the same; and also that you will
signify with which of those [three] at Antioch I ought to communicate. And
urging the same matter the second time. Epist. sequent. ad Damasum.
Miletius, Vitalis, and Paulinus say they be joined in communion with you. I
could believe them if one [and no mo] said it; but now either two, or all three
lie. Therefore I beseech your blessedness by the Cross of the Lord, by the
necessary ornament of our faith, by the passion of Christ, that by your
letters you will signify with whom I should communicate in Syria. Despise not
the soul, for which Christ died. Give me leave to be as long in repeating the
words of S. Hierom, as you were even now in alleging S. Basil.


Theo. With a good will, you spend but a little the more time, and we shall
have day enough. Mary now you have said all, mark first; that most of these
praises be not several to the City of Rome, but general to the West Church.
The unthrifty children [of the East] have wasted, Epist. ad Damasum prior. S.
Hierom prefers the West Church before the East as more sincere in faith; and
not Rome before all the world.
says he, their patrimony: only with you [in the West] is the inheritance of
your Fathers kept undiminished. There the good ground yields an hundred fold
increase, that still resembles the pureness of the Lords seed: here the
corn that was cast into the furrows does degenerate into tares and oats.
Now in the West the Son of righteousness shines, in the East, Lucifer that
fell, has set his throne above the stars. You are the light of the world,
the salt of the earth, the vessels of silver and gold: here are the wodden and
earthen pots that stay for the iron rod and unquenchable fire. This comparison
he makes, as you see, not between all other places and Rome, but between the
East and West Churches; preferring the one many degrees before the other.
Secondly the reason why Hierom himself depended so much on the Church of Rome,
was, as he says, for that he was baptized in the City of Rome; and therefore
as one of that City still desires thence to be fed in Christ, where he was
first clothed with Christ. Thirdly the points that he doubted of, and
sought to be directed in, were no matters of doctrine nor Principles of faith,
but a question of words, and a dissension about the Bishopric of Antioch:
for the which trifles, who can blame Hierom if he were loath to lose the
communion of that City, where he was Christened? And as Hierom here honoreth
the Church of Rome for keeping her faith, so elsewere he takes up roundly both
the City and Clergy of Rome when occasion was offered.

And in this very place by your leave he protests that he follows no man
as chief, Ibidem.
much less as head of the Church, but only Christ. Ego nullum primum nisi
Christum sequens, beatitudini tuae, id est cathedrae Petri communione
consocior: I following none chief, but Christ; hold the fellowship of
communion with your blessedness, that is with Peter's chair. S. Hierom sought
no resolution in faith at Damasus mouth, but letters to keep him from trouble
in a strange place. Ibidem.
Neither does he pray the Bishop of Rome to appoint him what he shall believe
touching the Trinity, as if Damasus word were the rule of his faith; but where
he confessed in the Trinity three persons subsisting of one and the same
substance, with the Council of Nice, and the whole West Church: and certain
Bishops of the East not therewith content urged him precisely to grant the
word tres hypostases; and for sticking at it, traduced him as an heretic, his
request to the Bishop of Rome is, vt sieve dicendarum, sieve tacendarum
hypostaseon detar autoritas; that he might be licenced to use, or refuse that
word, without being molested at their hands any farther. When we ask them,
says Hierom, what they mean by tres hypostases, they say, three persons
subsisting: we answer that we believe the same. Ibidem.
Non sufficit sensus, ipsum nomen efflagitant; and quia vocabula non ediscimus,
haeretici iudicamur. It is not enough to believe so, they urge the very word it
self; and because we can not frame our selves to [these new] words, we be
charged with heresy. So that Hierom craved Damasus letters and authority for
his quietness, least he should be troubled in Syria where he lay among
strangers, for a word that he suspected to be skant sound. The other petition
that he makes is but to know, which of those three at Antioch were joined in
communion with the Church of Rome, and the West Bishops; that he might safely
communicate with that side. Grant these two cases wherein Hierom prays help
of Damasus, and what are you the nearer?


Phi. Nay, grant the words that Hierom speaks in his Epistle, and see what
then will follow. Ibidem.



Theo. What words?


Phi. Cathedrae Petri communione consocior; super illam Petram edificatam
Ecclesiam scio. Quicunque extra hanc domum agnum comederit, prophanus est. Si
quis in Arca Noe non fuerit, peribit regnante diluuio: I hold the communion of
Peter's chair [that is of the Church of Rome] upon that rock I know the Church
to be built. Whosoever shall eat the [Paschall] lamb out of that house, is a
profane person. If any man be not in Noah's Arc when the flood rises, he
shall be drowned. This is as much as we do affirm, or could desire for the
Church of Rome: grant this, and the quarrel betwixt us shall soon cease.


Theo. You be so hasty when you hear of Peter's chair, that you never look
at Christ himself, though he stand in your way. For Hierom in the same
sentence protests, that although he keep the fellowship of communion with
Peter's chair, Epist. ad Damasum.
yet he follows none chief but Christ. Upon that rock I am sure, says he,
the Church is built. Why may not these words now be referred as well to Christ,
as to Peter?


Phi. For shame, what an evasion this is?


Theo. Nay shame to your selves that are so wedded to your own conceits. The
words are more likely to belong to Christ than to Peter, Super illam Petram in
Hiero^ stand fitter to be referred to Christ than to Peter.
if you soberly view them. Christ's name going first, and Peter's second in the
sentence, by the very rules of Grammar, super illam Petram, upon that rock,
serves more aptly for Christ, than for Peter. Again, the vehemency of the
verb scio, I am right sure, does argue the words to be more fitly referred to
Christ than to Peter. For that the Church is built on Christ, no Christian ever
doubted: but that Peter is the Rock on which the Church is built, S. Austen
and others do plainly deny.


Phi. But S. Hierom in the third Epistle before this, says expressly, Petrus
super quem Dominus fundauit Ecclesiam: Peter on whom our Lord built his
Church. Hieron. ad Marcellum aduersus Montanum: tomo epi. 2.

Upon this rock: diversely expounded of the fathers Aug. de verbis Domini
secundum Mat. sermon. 13.

The Church built on none but on Christ. Hilar. de Trin. lib. 2.

Ibidem lib. 6.





Theo. The words of our Savior in the Gospel, Upon this rock will I build
my Church, diverse men have diversely taken. S. Austen expounds them thus: Tu
es ergo, inquit, Petrus; and super hanc Petram quam confessus es, super hanc
Petram quam cognouisti, dicens, tu es filius Dei viui, edificabo Ecclesiam
meam; id est super meipsum filium Dei vini edificabo Ecclesiam meam. Super me
edificabo te, non me super te: Thou art Peter, says Christ, and upon this
rock, which thou have confessed, upon this rock which thou have acknowledged
by saying; Thou art Christ the Son of the living God, will I build my Church;
that is upon my self the Son of the living God will I build my Church. I
will build thee upon me, not my self on thee. Hilarie likewise, Vnum est
immobile fundamentum, vna haec est faelix fidei Petra Petriore confessa, tu es
filius Dei viui: super hanc igitur confessionis Petram Ecclesiae edificatio
est. Haec fides Ecclesiae fundamentum est: This only is the immovable
foundation, this only is the happy rock of faith, which was confessed by
Peter's mouth; thou art the Son of the living God. Then upon this rock of
confession stands the building of the Church. This faith is the foundation of
the Church. So does Ambrose: Ambros. in 2. cap. Epist. ad Ephesio^.

Idem de incarnat. Dominici sacrament. cap. 5.


Dominus dicit ad Petrum, super istam Petram edificabo Ecclesiam meam; hoc est,
in hac Catholicae fidei confessione. Eides ergo est Ecclesiae fundamentum. Non
enim de carne Petri, sed de fide dictum est, quia portae mortis ei non
praeualebunt. Sed confessio vicit infernum: The Lord says to Peter, upon this
rock will I build my Church, that is, in this confession of the Catholic
Faith. Faith therefore is the foundation of the church. For it was not spoken
of Peter's flesh, but of faith, that hell gates should not prevail against it.
But that confession conquered hell. Chrysostom. homil. 55. in Matthew. Bid in cap.
21. Iohannis.
Upon this rock will I build my Church, that is, says Chrysostom, upon this
faith and confession. Bid; Upon this rock, says Christ, which thou have
confessed will I build my church. That rock was Christ, upon the which
foundation even Peter him self was to be builded. These mean as S. Paul does,
that the right and true foundation of the Church is Christ, and none else. 1.
Cor. 3.
An other foundation can no man lay, than that which is already laid, which is
Jesus Christ.

Others I know apply these words upon this rock will I build my Church,
Peter laid in the foundation of the Church as a principal member thereof.
Origin. in 16. Mat. tract. 1.
to Peter; mary not as if he alone were laid in the foundation of the Church,
and the rest of the Apostles excluded; but that which is here spoken to him,
they make common to all, or as much elsewhere to be given to all. Origin, If
only upon Peter thou think the whole Church to be built, what will thou say
to John and every of the Apostles? shall we dare say, that against Peter only,
the gates of hell shall not prevail, and against the rest of the Apostles they
shall? and not rather in them all and every one of them, that to be true,
which is said, the gates of hell shall not prevail? and that also upon this
rock will I build my Church? For if this speech, to thee will I give the keys
of the kingdom of heaven, be common to all, why then should not all that which
goes before and follows after, as spoken to Peter, be common to them all?
Hierom himself, whose authority you pretend, Hieron. lib. 1. aduersus
I^uiniaman.
as he places Peter in the foundation of the Church, so does he the rest of
the Apostles likewise. Thou will say, the Church is built on Peter:
notwithstanding the self same in another place is done upon all the Apostles,
and they all receive the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and the steadfastness
of the Church is equally settled upon them. This sense does somewhat agree with
that place of S. Paul, Ephesians. 2.
were he says: Ye be built upon the foundation (not of Peter alone) but of
the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the head corner stone. And in
that respect Paul says of James, Peter and John jointly, they that seemed to
be the pillours, Galat. 2.
gave me their right hands of fellowship.

Both these constructions we can admit, Neither of these constructions make for
the church of Rome.

Tertul. de praescription.

Cyprian. lib. 1. Epi. 3.


though we prefer the first, as most religious and cunning, nearest the true
meaning of our Savior; but you wrest the words of S. Hierom quite against him
self and all the rest of the learned and Catholic fathers. It is one thing to
say the church is built on Peter which Orige^, Hierom and others affirm in the
sense that I told you before: and an other thing to say the Church is built on
Peter's chair at Rome, which no Father ever said or thought. And therefore if
we should grant that S. Hierom in these words spoke of Peter, what are you
the better? This is no proof that Rome is the Rock, on which the Church is
built; but only that Peter is a Rock laid in the foundation of the Church,
where also the rest of the Prophets and Apostles are.


Phi. The place does mention the chair of Peter, which is Rome.


Theo. The words stand so, that they may respect either Peter himself or his
chair: but the likeness of the names Petrus and Petra both for sound and for
sense, the alluding to that, which Christ spoke to Peter in the Gospel, long
before he knew Rome; the general consent of the Fathers expounding the Rock
to be taken either for Christ or for Peter, and never for Rome, import that
these words in S. Hierom, have their relation to Peter's person, and not to his
chair. This exposition the place which you brought confirms. Petrus, super
quem Dominus fundanit Ecclesiam: Ad Marcellum tomo epistolaru^ 2. Testimonia.
Peter, on whom, (that is on whose person, not on whose successors at Rome) the
Lord built his Church.


Phi. The rest of S. Hieroms words can not be referred to Peter's person; as
namely these, that next ensue: Without this house whosoever shall eat the
[Paschall] Lamb, Hieron. Damas. quonia^ vetusto. tomo 2.
is profane. And why should the former more than these?


Theo. Peruse the words as they lie, and you shall find your own error. Upon
that rock I know the Church is built. The Church not of Rome only, but of
Christ generally. Then follows, extra hanc domum, without this house. What
house; but the church, which he said before was built on the rock? And out of
this house (meaning thereby not the particular Church of Rome, The house of
God, is the Church of God, and not the Church of Rome.

What S. Augustine means by Peter's seat.


but the Catholic church of Christ) whosoever eats the Passover, is indeed,
as Hierom says, aprophane person. This is far wide from the mark which you
shoot at.


Phi. S. Augustine I trust shoots straight, when he applies the words of
Christ in the 16. of Matthew, to the chair of Peter.


Theo. That were marvel, if he which by no means would allow Peter him self
to be the foundation of the Church, be now content to yield that honor to the
Bishop of Rome.


Phi. He does so. These be his words: Numerate sacerdotes vel ab ipsa Petri
sede, Aug. in Psalm. contra partem Donati.

From, not in Peter's seat.


and in ordine illo Patrum, quis cui successit, videte. Ipsa est Petra quam non
vincant superbae inferorum portae: Number the Priests even from Peter's seat,
and see who succeeded one an other in that rue of Fathers: that is the Rock
which the proud gates of hell do not conquer.


Theo. This place proves nothing, unless you be suffered to refer the
words, Ipsa est Petra, (that is the rock,) whither you list. You can not refer
them, but either to the succession of Priests from Peter, or else to Peter's
seat, which is all one with Peter's chair.


Theo. Why not to Peter himself?


Phi. That were far fet.


Theo. The words stand indifferent for both, as S. Hieroms did; and not only
the same reasons I made there, serve here, but also the proposition has a
manifest reference to Peter's person. He says not number the Priests in Peter's
seat, Why may not ipsa est Petra be referred to Peter's person as well as super
hanc Petram in the Gospel, as the Jesuits would have it?
but number them vel ab ipsa Petri sede, even from the very seat of Peter, that
is from the time yt Peter sat: He is the Rock, against which the proud gates
of hell do not prevail.


Phi. You seem to read, Ipse est Petra, He is the Rock; but the words are,
Ipsa est Petra, that is the Rock.


Theo. There are greater corruptions crept into S. Austens works, by the
negligence of Scribes than of a for e: Neither did I translate the words, but
give you the right meaning of them; and yet, ipsa est Petra, in S. Austen may
be referred to Peter him self, as well, as super hanc Petram, in the Gospel
expounded for Peter, which you all uphold. But grant, which is more than ever
you shall justly convince, that Peter's chair is thereby meant: Saint Austen
does not say that is the rock on which the Church is built: but that is the
Rock which the gates of hell do not conquer: not promising that Rome still
should, but witnessing that Rome then did withstand the gates of hell, by
keeping the faith undefiled, which Peter delivered.


Phi. What S. Austen lacks S. Cyprian supplyeth. Cyprian. de vnitate
Reclesiae Catholicae.
Qui Cathedram Petri super quam edificata est Ecclesia, deserit; in Ecclesia se
esse confidit? He that forsakes the chair of Peter, on which the Church is
built, does he hope himself to be in the Church? I trust these words be
plain enough.


Theo. The words as you set them be plain enough: but where says Cyprian so?


Phi. In his book De vnitate Ecclesiae Catholicae, you call it corruptly De
simplicitate Praelatorum.


Theo. Call the book how you will, so the words be there.


Phi. There shall you find them.


Theo. There we find them not.


Phi. What Prints have you? S. Cyprian lately falsified by the papists.



Theo. Prints enough. Alopecius at Cullen, Heruagius at Basil, Langelier at
Paris, Crinitus at Antuerp, Gryphius at Lions, Manutius at Rome. In all these
and diverse others we find no such wordis.


Phi. In deed I confess the words were wanting, till Pamelius a Canon of
Bruges found them in an old written copy lying in the Abbay of Cambron. In his
edition printed at Antuerp by Stelsius you shall find them.


Theo. And think you Philander, that all other copies both printed and written
lacking those words, A Canon of Bruges with his blind Ca^bron copy, has
enlarged Cypria^s text against all the copies of christendom.
Pamelius did well to put them to Cyprians text?


Phi. He laid them down as he found them written in the copy, which is kept at
Cambron.


Theo. As though the blind Abbay of Cambron were of greater credit and
authority than all the Churches and Libraries of Christendom.


Phi. I say not so.


Theo. What else do you say, when you cite these words for Cyprians, which no
copy printed, nor written has besides that of Cambron?

There have traveled in the correcting and setting forth of Cyprian at sundry
times, men of your own religion, not a few; namely Remboltus, Canchius,
Costerius, Erasmus, Grauius, Manutius, Morelius; every one of these for their
several editions searching far and near, and using the best written copies
that could be gotten or heard of, and they all agree that no such words are
found in their copies: yea Pamelius himself having as he confesses the
sight and help of eight other written copies from diverse places, found these
words in none but in Cambron copy. Either the Cambron copy, or all the
written copies in the world must be corrupted; and which of these twain think
you, do the Jesuits chose?
Since then either Cambron copy must be corrupt, or an infinite number of
other written copies, that have been viewed by these learned men of your own
side, and are yet extant in diverse Abbayes and Churches obedient to the Sea of
Rome at this hour; say your self in reason, whether we ought to believe your
Cambron copy before all the copies that have been perused, and are yet
remaining in Europe.


Phi. That were much, but how could this copy be corrupted?


Theo. What a question that is? How could whole books be thrust into the works
of Cyprian, Ambrose, Hierom, Austen and others, and ly forged under their names
not in one, or two, but in the most part of the Abbayes and ancient libraries
of the West Church? Your Monks and Friars that were so skillful in committing
these manifold forgeries were not to seek how to corrupt your Cambron copy.


Phi. It helps Pamelius very much, that Gratian 400. years ago cited the
very same words as out of Cyprian. Distinct. 39. qui cathedram.



Theo. Gratian might be deceived by the same or some other false copy, as well
as Pamelius: and of al men Gratian him self is most corrupt in alleging the
Fathers; but what if Gratian be forged as well as Cyprian? Gratian lately
augmented as well as Cyprian.



Phi. Nay then al shall be forged, that likes not you.


Theo. They that ventered on Cyprian and others, would never stick to frame
Gratian to their purpose.


Phi. This is but your suspicion.


Theo. Yes I have some reason to challenge this in your Canon law for a
corruption. The very same place of Cyprian is elsewhere alleged at large by
Gratian in his decrees, Cause. 24 quaest. 1. loquitur Dominus ad Petrium.

This place was not in the ancient decrees.


where we find no such words: and therefore this or that must needs be forged.
Again ^ohannes Seneca, who lived seven skore years after Gratian
ouer-skipp^^h this place without any gloss, as not finding it in the decrees
extant in his time.


Phi. You be deceived: there is a gloss upon this place.


Theo. I am not deceived, there is none. Look to the lesser volume of your
decrees printed by John Petit, and Thielman Keruer, and you shall see there is
none. And he that in the bigger volume of your decrees, thinking to prevent
this objection, set a certain gloss to the chapter, Qui Cathedram, showed
himself not to be his crafts master; Glos* ibidem qui Cathedra^. The gloss
lately forged as well as Gratians text.
for he grossly mistaking the words that follow, ( Episcopi vero, which are
Gratians) and thinking them to be Cyprians, put the sum of Gratians words, as
a gloss to Cyprians text, which is nothing near: and so betrayeth him a
willing, but no skilful forgerer. Last of all the relative, that you most
esteem, and I most withstand, super quam, on which [chayre] the Church is
built, And all this to make Cypria^ speak clean contrary to himself within
the compass of eight lines.

Cyprian de vmitate Ecclesiae.

Peter the first stone that Christ laid in the foundation of his church.
Cyprian de vmitate Ecclesiae.


is contrary to the plain words of Cyprian not many lines before cited by
Gratian, and confessed by Pamelius to be found in his Cambron copy, super vnum
illum edificat Ecclesiam, upon him alone (meaning Peter) Christ builds his
Church. So that either you must mend your book, and read super que^; on whom
the Church is built, or else make Cyprian so forgetful that with in eight lines he
contradicts himself and refuteth his former saying.


Phi. May not the Church be built on him and his successors?


Theo. If Peter alone were chosen by Christ to be the foundation, that is the
first stone that should be laid in the building of his Church; how can that
possibly be extended to his successors? Can you remove Peter from the
foundation where Christ laid him, and not do him wrong? Or can you change the
foundation, and not shake the building of the Church?


Phi. You took ye foundation I perceive for the first beginning.


Theo. And what call you that which is first laid in the buylding of an house,
but the foundation?


Phi. Did Cyprian mean so?


Theo. Cyprian expresses his meaning in this sort: Though Christ after his
resurrection gave all his Apostles equal power, yet for the declaration of
unity, with his own [voyce and] authority did he dispose the original of
that unity to begin in one [which was Peter]. The rest of the Apostles were
the selfsame that Peter was, endewed with like fellowship of honor and power,
but the first beginning came from o^e, Exordium and fundamentum all one.
that is, Christ chose Peter alone to be the original or first beginning of his
Church. Now this is proper to Peter's person to be the first Stone that was
laid in ^he foundation of the Church, and can not be derived from him to his
successor.


Phi. That privilege died with Peter, unless it remain in some successor.


Theo. Not so, Peter as well after death as during life, keeps the same place
which Christ gave him in the building of his Church, Peter at this day lies in
the foundation of the church where Christ placed him. Galat. 4. Ephesians. 2. Heb.
12.
unless you mean to exclude the Saints clean from the Church of Christ.


Phi. They be of the Church triumphant, not militant.


Theo. And those be not two, but one Church. Jerusalem which is above is the
mother of us all. Ye be now, says Paul, no more strangers and forreners, but
Citizens with the Saints and of the howshold of God. For you be come to the
City of the Living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to the Church of the first
borne written in heaven, and to the spirits of just men (now) made perfect.
Where you see the Saints in heaven be not removed from the Church of God, but
we received to their fellowship, they keeping still that honor and excellency
which they had in Christ before our coming. Abraham is to this day the father
of the faithful; the Patriarchs and Prophets are not deprived of their
dignity; Peter no doubt as he was, so he is the first Stone that Christ laid
in the foundation of his Church, which dignity you can not take from him after
his death.


Phi. What then shall his successor have?


Theo. The charge that he had to feed, and the same keys that were given him
and the rest, to bind and lose: Which office if the Bishop of Rome will
execute, he may have.


Phi. A fair promotio^: You mean he shall be a Bishop, as others are.


Theo. God grant he be so much. More if he will have by warrant from Peter,
you must prove it better than by such forged autorities and manned examples as
here you bring. Those that are past, your self see, were to little purpose;
Theodoretes example which is yet behind, is like the rest.


Phi. He submitted him self to Leo the great, and was by him restored to his
Bishoprike, Chalcedonens. concilij actio. 1. Leo took Theodoretes part against
Dioscorus. Euagrius lib. 1. cap. 10. Leo Epist. 61. ad Theodoretu^.
though he were not of his Province.


Theo. Leo took his part against Dioscorus the Patriarch of Alexandria, yt like
a tyrant in the second Council of Ephesus not only was the death of Flauianus
by spurning and tredding on him, but also confirmed the wicked opinion of
Eutiches, and deposed Theodorete without any just cause: who^ the Bishop of
Rome received to the communion and accepted for a lawful and Catholic Bishop,
not regarding the sentence pronounced against him by Dioscorus.


Phi. Then Leo reuersed the lewd acts of Dioscorus in that Ephesine Council.


Theo. Leo withstood the^, as all other good men did throughout the world, but
the judgment was reuersed by the great Counsel of Chalcedon, Chalcedonens.
Concilij actio. 8.
and not by the Bishop of Rome: where Theodorete was forced with his own mouth
in their presence to clear him self from all suspicion, notwithstanding his
restitution by Leo, before he could be admitted to make his complaynt against
Dioscorus.


Phi. Still you see the Bishop of Rome resisted other, and by dissenting from
them overthrew their interprises. Their examples prove the Bishop of Rome had
no such power as he now claims.



Theo. And still you see the Bishop of Rome never ended these matters at home
in his own C^^sistorie as supreme Judge of the whole earth, but ever made
suite to Christi^n Princes, that these things might be determined in full
assemblies of Bis^ops by the judgment and opinion of the most part, which is
clean contrary t^ that absolute power, he now claymeth, as Uicar general to
Christ, and the only Ruler of his universal Church. And therefore these
examples which you have brought, and many like which you might bring, prove no^
that power, which you defend at this day, to belong to the Bishop of Rome, but
rather euert the same. For what needed his predecessors with all ouetie become
suppliants to Catholic Emperors for the gathering of Bishops out of all
quarters to decide matters in doubt, and that suit often refused, as when
Innocentius messengers came back from Arcadius with a shameful repulse, and Leo
the great, whom you last spoke of, besought Theodosius the younger with sighs
and tears to grant a Council for the repealing of Dioscorus acts, The Pope
besought the Emperor with sighs and tears for a Council, and could not
prevail.
and could not obtain it: what needed, I say, such earnest and humble request
to those that neglected their prayers, if Christ had appointed them as Peter's
successors, and his deputies without depending on Princes pleasures, or other
men's voices to say but the word, which should stand good in his Church, against
all persons, in all causes both of doctrine and discipline? And what better
conviction of your falsehood can there be, than that in all these troubles and
tempests of the Church, which you have chosen out of many for your best
advantage, In all these examples the Bishop of Rome never so much as alleged
or mentioned his universal power, which your Jesuits defend.
the Bishop of Rome never so much as pretended or mentioned his Lieutenantship
to Christ, which you now defend, but ever keeping his place, which by reason of
his City was the first among the Patriarchs, and joining him self to the West
Bishops which were then a good part of Christendom, by their help and the
favor of religious Princes gate those things, that oppressed the Church and
impugned the faith, to be debated and determined by common consent, in general
and lawful Councels, without any reservation or motion of his absolute power,
or negative voice?


Phi. Our examples, you grant, prove this, that he resisted others: now show
you that others ouerruled him.


Theo. If I could not, the matter were not great, considering your examples
conclude nothing against us: As the Bishop of Rome resisted others, so others
resisted him.
but least you should flatter your selves too much in your follies, you shall
see that others withstood him, as well as he withstood others.


Phi. Were they Catholics?


Theo. I trust you dare not account them heretics. Peter, as you say, the
first Bishop of Rome, was resisted by Paul the teacher of the Gentiles; Who
they were that resisted the Bishop of Rome
Anicetus by Policarpus Saint John's own scholar; Victor by Polycrates,
Ireneus, and all the brethren of Asia; Stephanus by Cyprian; Damasus, Syricius
and Anastasius by Flauianus and all the Churches of the East, of Asia, Pontus,
Thracia, and Illyricum; Innocentius by Cyrill; Sozimus and Bonifacius by
Augustine and two hundred and sixteen Bishops of Africa; Caelestinus by
Theodorete; Leo by the great Council of Chalcedon; Gregory by the Britanes;
and many other Bishops of Rome by diverse godly Princes, Prelates, Countries,
and Councels.


Phi. I like not these general florishes which serve only to obscure the
truth, and beguile the simple.


Theo. How then can you like your Apology which consists of nothing else?
And what a slender kind of proof, was that idle rehearsal of names, which
you made even now for your running to Rome? But our particulars I am well
content you shall skan.

The first, Paul himself affirms. Galat. 2. Ibidem. Paul resisting Peter,
and that after his installation at Rome if the Romish account be true, which
most men doubt.
When Peter came to Antioch, I withstood him to his face, for he was to be
blamed.


Phi. The quarrel betwixt them was not great.


Theo. Not walking the right way to the truth of the Gospel, and compelling
the Gentiles to live, like the Jews, was no such petite fault as you make it;
but grant it were. The smaller the fault, the stronger our instance. If Paul
for a light matter resisted Peter to his face, what would he have done in a
cause of more weight?


Phi. Was Peter then Bishop of Rome when Paul reproved him?


Theo. It forces not whether he were or no. Peter as you pretend had his
prerogative not from Rome, but from Christ, long before he saw Rome; and
therefore was in as full authority when Paul resisted him, as when Nero
martyred him: and yet if their account be true, that were the first authors
of his preferment to Rome, he was rebuked at Paul's hands even when he was
Bishop of Rome. Eusebius. Chronic. in anno 44.
For, Peter (as Eusebius or some other in his name records) went to Rome, and
was Bishop there in the 44. year of Christ, that is, eleven years after his
passion, Christ being put to death in the 33. year of his age: and Paul in the
fifteenth year of his conversion, or as himself speaks, Galat. 2. The
Papists make Peter a Nonresident.
After fourteen years, came not to Rome, but to Jerusalem to confer with
Peter; which at least must be the 48. year of Christ and four years after
Peter's installation at Rome. And after that when Peter came to Antioch, and
began to dissemble for fear of the Jews which were sent from James, Paul
resisted him to his face, and sharply rebuked him, not respecting that he was
then in his pontificalibus and newly made Bishop of Rome, as you your selves
believe. Now choose whether you will disclaim Peter for no Bishop of Rome, and
so loose your succession from him, or grant that the Bishop of Rome may be
lawfully resisted as Peter was, which is the very thing you required us to
prove. One of these twain you shall never avoid; do what you can.


Phi. I may not deny that Paul did it, the Scripture is plain, I resisted him
to his face; but whether he did no more than he might, or how to his face, is a
Schole-point and a pretty question. Rhemish annor. in Epi. ad Gal. cap. 2.
verse. 11. Whether Paul might resist Peter, is an ungodly doubt.



Theo. No question at all, unless you will charge Paul with rashness in doing
it, unshamefastness in writing it, and wilfulness in directly defending it.
For by this dissension does he prove the ^oundnesse of his doctrine; and by
Peter's yielding he confirms the Galathians that were wavering. And therefore
you must either allow this resistaunce for good and lawful, or else conclude
this Epistle to be no Scripture, and Paul to be void of the holy Ghost, in
proposing an dishonest and ungodly fact of his own for a president, which to
say, were no small blasphemy.


Phi. I did not avouch it, but only move the question.


Theo. You must move no such questions, if you be a Christian: they be
reproachful to the spirit of God, and injurious to his word. You were driven to
a narrow strait, when you came to this shift. You be loath I see, to confess
either; but there is no remedy Philander, you must yield us one of these,
whether you will or no.


Phi. Let me hear the rest, and then you shall know my mind.


Theo. Resist not truth, to maintain your credit; God will surely revenge it.
This example is inevitable, study till your brains ache for an answer. But
the rest you shall hear.

Polycarpus withstood Anicetus for the observation of Easter. Eusebius. lib. 5.
cap. 26.
Polycarpus being at Rome when Anicetus was Bishop there, they dissenting in
some other small matters were by and by reconciled; but touching the
observation of Easter Day, which in diverse places was diuersely kept, Anicetus
could not persuade Polycarpus to leave those things, which he had always
observed with John the Disciple of our Lord, and the rest of the Apostles, with
whom he had been conversant.


Phi. The contention was but in words between them.


Theo. Yes they differed in deeds, and Polycarpus could not be induced by any
words to follow that manner of celebrating Easter Day, which Anicetus received
from those Apostles, that founded the Roman Church.

This controversy waxed hoatter in Victors time, who for the very same cause
went about to cut off all the Churches of Asia from the unity of communion,
Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 25.

Polycrates withstood Victor for the same cause. Ibidem.


as entangled with some strange opinion; and by letters inueighed against them
and utterly denounced all the brethren there excommunicated, but for all his
have he was quickly stayed.


Phi. By whom?


Theo. Polycrates in the behalf of the Churches of Asia, amongst other
things replyeth thus to Victor: I that have seen threescore and five years
in the Lord, and have co^ferred with the brethren throughout the world, and
have turned and searched the holy Scripture, will never be afraid of those
things that are done to terrify me. A great multitude of Bishops with
Polycrates against Victor. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 26.

Victor reproved by his own side for offering to excommunicate the churches of
Asia, that stood against him.


I could make mention of the Bishops that are with me, who^ you required me to
send for, and so I did, whose names if I would reckon they would make a great
multitude, which taking the pains to visit me, a man of small account, consent
to this Epistle. Victors deed did not please all the Bishops that otherwise
were of his side: Yea many of their letters, says Eusebius, are extant that
did sharply reprove Victor. Amongst whom Ireneus was one that wrote in the
name of his brethren of France where he was chief, and allowed [Victors
opinion] that the mystery of the Lords resurrection should be kept only
upon Sundaie. But yet he wisely and largely warns Victor, that he should not
excommunicate all the churches of God observing their ancient tradition.


Phi. They withstood him in a small and trifling cause.


Theo. You take hold of that which does hurt you. To resist whom they should
not, in a matter that they need not, is a double offense; and then should
Ireneus and others have rather reproved Polycrates and his adherentes for
neglecting their duties, than the Bishop of Rome for passing his bounds; but
in that he was stoutly resisted by the one, and sharply reproved by the
other, it is evident that neither of them took him for his sole and supreme
directer of Christ's Church on earth.

Of Cyprian, Cyprian. lib. 1. Epist. 4.
I said before, that he counseled the Church of Spain to reject Basilides,
notwithstanding his restitution by Stephanus Bishop of Rome: and how
vehemently the said Stephanus was resisted by Cyprian for the rebaptizing of
such as forsook their heresies, his Epistle to Pompeius does abundantly
witness. Cyprian. Epist. ad Pompeium contra Epist. Stephan.

Cypria^s stoutnesse against Stephanus Bishop of Rome.


Because you desired to know what answer our brother Stephanus [Bishoppe of
Rome] returned to our letters, I have sent you a copy of that he wrote. By the
reading whereof you shall more and more perceive his error, that he labors
to maintain the cause of heretics against the Church of God. For amongst
other things either superfluous, or impertinent, or contrary to themselves,
which he writes unskillfully and unwisely, he added this, etc. And having
repeated and refuted the words of Stephanus, What blindness of heart, says
Cyprian, is this and what perverseness, Ibidem.
that he will not acknowledge the unity of faith coming from God the Father
by the delivery of our Lord Jesus Christ? And where no heresy no nor schism,
can have the sanctification of healthful baptism out of the Church, why does
the inflexible obstinacy of our brother Stephanus break out so far, that of
Martions baptism, and such like blasphemers against God the Father, he
avouches children may be borne [vnto God]? It comes of too much presumption
and frowardnes, that a man had rather defend his own, though it be false and
naught, than yield to an others deeds and words. How like you this
resisistance? does it go to the quick or no?


Phi. This was an error in Cyprian, Cyprian in an ill cause resisting the
Bishop of Rome did and does go for a Martyr and father of the church.
for Stephanus held the truth.


Theo. The question is not whether Cypryan were deceived, but whether Stephanus
were resisted. I grant in this case Stephanus had the better part, but yet
Cyprian and the Bishops of Africa thought themselves to be right: and upon that
opinion of truth how far they resisted the Bishop of Rome, their acts and
Epistles declare.


Phi. Their matter, I tell you, was naught.


Theo. That does rather fasten than shake my conclusion. For if Cyprian and the
Bishops of Africa, when their cause was not good resisting ye Bishops of Rome
both in words and deeds, were taken and accounted in the Church of God for
Christian and Catholic Bishops, yea Cyprian the chief leader of them, and
most earnest against him, for a worthy Father and glorious Martyr; how much
more then in a right and just cause might the Bishops of Rome be lawfully
resisted in those days? Flauianus withstood 4. Bishops of Rome though their
cause were not much amiss.


The which I may likewise conclude by the next example, where the Bishops of
Rome were not only resisted, but at length forced to yield to Flauianus,
although their strife with him at the first seemed to carry some reason.


Phi. Did they not well to reject him, yt was made Bishop against his oath?
Flauianus was one of those that were sworn neither to seek, nor to accept the
Bishopric of Antioch, Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 3.
if they were chosen, till Miletius and Paulinus were both dead; that thereby
the Church of Antioch, which before was divided in two parts under two
Bishops, might be joined together and united in one: and he upon the death of
Miletius, whiles Paulinus yet lived, not respecting his oath, was content to
take the place.


Theo. I said there was some cause for the Bishops of Rome to refuse him,
and yet notwithstanding the goodness of their quarrel, Theodor. lib. 5. cap.
23.

Who took part with Flauianus against the Bishops of Rome.

The Prince wills Flauianus to keep his Church, though four Popes for 17.
years together impugned him.

Ibidem.


and sharpness of contention, which Damasus, Syri^ius, Athanasius and
Innocentius maintained against him, all the Churches of the East, of Asia,
Pontus, Thracia, and Illyricum took part with Flauianus, defended his election
and received his communion, though the Bishops of Rome would do neither.

And Theodosius the elder a very religious Emperor, having the courage and
wisdom of Flauianus in admiration, and seeing the number of Churches that did
communicate with him, willed him to return, and feed the Church [or flock]
committed to his charge. Against whom when the Bishop of Rome made a long
accusation, the godly Prince undertook his defense, pleaded his cause, and
exhorted them to knit their Churches together, and to leave striving and
extinguish those foolish brables. And so was the Bishop of Rome glad to give
over the quarrel, which he and three of his predecessors had for the space of
seventeen years egerly followed against Flauianus.

Ibidem.
How little Cyrillus esteemed the communion of the Bishop of Rome does well
appear by his answer to Atticus, Nice. lib. 14. cap. 27.

Cyrill esteemed not the communion of the Bishop of Rome.

Theodor. lib. 5. cap. 34.


where he vehemently diswadeth that Chrysostoms name after his death should be
put in the Catalogue of Bishops, notwithstanding Innocentius and the West
Bishops, would not communicate with Egypt or the East parts till that were
obtained.


Phi. It was a fault in Cyrill to be so vehement against Chrysostom in favor of
his uncle Theophilus the chief doer of all this, and that oversight he after
corrected, by yielding to that which before he rufused.


Theo. What moved Cyrill at the first to withstand, and after to yield, I need
not care, you may not judge; were the cause good or bad, to my purpose all is
one; this is it that I urge, neither Cyrill nor Atticus, nor the Churches with
them were reputed schismatic for lacking or neglecting so long time the
communion of the Bishop of Rome, though the matter they stood on, were skant
sound.


Phi. You should bring us an example where the Bishop of Rome was withstood by
a Council: the factes of private men carry not so great credit, as when they
be done in a public Synod.


Theo. The men, that I have named unto you, Those resistances were offered not
by private persons but by Councels and Countries.
were no such obscure persons, that you need doubt of their credit. They were
for their calling and function, Bishops and Patriarchs: for their learning and
holiness, lights in the Church of Christ, and are so taken to this day.
Neither, as you suppose, were they alone in these actions, but had the
Bishops and Churches adjoining to take their parts, and did these things,
which I spoke of, in open Council. Polycrates had with him a Council in Asia,
when he resisted Victor, Eusebius. lib. 5. Cap. 24. and. 25. Ibidem. Cap. 26.
and Ireneus had likewise an other in France, when he reproved him. Cyprian
and 84. Africane Bishops joined together in ye Counsel of Carthage, against
Stephanus. With Flauianus, Council. Cartha. de haeret. baptisandis inter opera
Cypriani.
as Sozomene writes, were the Bishops of Syria, Phenica, Armenia, Cappadocia,
Galatia: as Theodorete says, all the Churches of Asia, Pontus, Thracia,
Illyricum, besides all the East Churches. That which Cyrill defended was done
by two Councels and allowed by the three Patriarchs of Alexandria, Sozome. lib.
7. Cap. 11.
Constantinople, Antioche and their Provinces. And therefore these are no
private men nor matters, Theodoret. li. 5. Cap. 23.
as you pretend, but things done in open Synodes by no mean Bishops. And
yet to content your mind, you shall see where the Bishop of Rome clayming far
less authority than he does at this day, Socrat. lib. 6. Cap. 18.
was openly resisted in a Council of 217. Bishops to his immortal shame, and
your utter overthrow in this cause. The sixth counsel of Carthage stoutly
resisted the Bishop of Rome, and convinced him of forgery.


Sozimus Bishop of Rome, sending his Legates Faustinus, Philippus, and Asellus
to the sixth Council of Carthage, in favor of Apiarius a Priest, that fled to
Rome for aid against Vrbanus his Dioecesane, which had taken both his
function, and the communion from him for his lewdnes; amongst other things gave
them in charge, to claim this prerogative for him and his See, that if any
Bishops were accused or deposed, and appealed to Rome, the Bishop of Rome
might either write to the next Province to determine the matter, or send some
from his side to represent his person, and to sit in judgment with the
Bishops. Vide Concilium Carthaginense sextum, Cap. 3.
And to prove this lawful, he cited in writing under his hand a Canon of the
Council of Nice tending to that effect. The Godly fathers assembling
themselves out of all Africa, to the number of 217. and finding no such Canon
in their books either Greek or Latin, wrate to the Patriarchs of Alexandria,
Constantinople, and Antioche for true and authentike copies of the Nicene
Council: and seeing their own copies agree word for word with those that
were brought, and no such thing to be found in any Canon there, first by their
decree cut off appeals to Rome, and secondly by their letters traduced the
Bishop of Rome, as well for his ambition, as forgerie.


Phi. An old broken matter, Bonifacius says the diuelled Saint Augustine and
the rest to be saucy with the Bishop of Rome.
often alleged, and offen answered.


Theo. You could do little if you could not crake, but that will not serve your
turns: you must spare us a better answer. In deed Bonifacius the second
does answer ye matter in this sort: Aurelius praefatae Carthagiensis
ecclesiae olim Episcopus cum collegis suis instigante Diabolo superbire
temporibus praedecessorum nostrorum Bonifacij and Caelestini contra Romanam
ecclesiam cepit: Aurelius once Bishop of Carthage with his colleagues (amongst
whom was S. Austen with many other learned and Godly fathers) in the time of
Bonifacius and Caelestinus our predecessors, Bonifacius secundus ad Eulalium
de reconcilia. Carthaginens. Eccl. Concilio: tomo 1.
began through the instigation of the Devil to be malepart with the church of
Rome. If you take this for an answer, so is it: other I know none, that your
friends have made.


Phi. The Bishops of Africa, you know were deceived in the number of the Nicene
Canons.


Theo. I know they were not; but grant they were, this suffices me that they
resisted three Bishops of Rome, Sozimus, Bonifacius and Coelestinus one after
an other, both by their decrees and their letters. For upon occasion of
Apiarius flight to Rome, they decreed that Priests, Deacons, and other
inferior clerks, if they complained of the judgments of their Dioecesanes,
Aphric. concilij, Cap. 92.

Appeals to Rome condemned by Saint August. and his Colleagues.


should be heard by the Bishops adjoining. Quod si and ab eis prouocandum
putauerint, non prouocent nisi ad Africana Concilia, vel ad primates
Prouinciarum suarum. Ad transimarina autem qui putauerit appellandum, a nullo
intra Africam ad communionem suscipiatur: And if they think good to appeal
from them also, let them not appeal but to the Councils of Africa, or the
primates of their own Province. And he that ventereth to appeal over the
Seas [to Rome] let him be received of no man within Africa unto the communion.


Phi. This decree barreth Priests and inferior Clerks from appealing to Rome,
but not Bishops.


Theo. The Canon was fitted to the matter in question. Appiarius that ran to
Rome, was a Priest and no Bishop: and yet touching appeals of Bishops to Rome,
what answer they made, follows in their letters first to Bonifacius, before
they sent for authentike copies to the chief places of Christendom: Aphric.
council. Cap. 101.
to whom they signify, that concerning appeals of Bishops to the Priests of
Rome, they would suffer that to be kept for a while, till they could get the
Canons of the Nicene Council; and after they had received ye same from
Cyrillus and Atticus, they framed their answer to Coelestinus on this wise.

Our dew salutations remembered and done: we entreat and earnestly pray you
that hereafter you will not lightly give audience to those, Aphric. council.
Cap. 105.
that come from hence to you, neither any more receive such to the communion as
we excommunicate; because your reverence shall easily perceive that order taken
by the Nicene council. The fathers never heard of Christ's vicar general.
For if there appear a prouiso for inferior clerks, and lay men, how much more
would the Synod have the same observed in Bishops; that being excommunicated
in their own Province, they should not be sudde^ly, hastily, or unduly restored
to the communion by your holiness? And likewise your holiness must repel these
wicked refuges of pristes and other clergy men [to Rome] as becomes you: for
that by no determination of the fathers this is derogated from the church of
Africa: and the Nicene Canons do most evidently commit both inferior Clergy
men, Where then are appeals to Rome?
and the Bishops themselves to their own Metropolitanes. No doubt they most
wisely and rightly provided, that al matters should be ended in the places
where they first arose; neither shall the grace of the holy Ghost be wanting to
any Province, by the which equity may be gravely weighed, and stoutly followed
by the Priests of Christ; especially, where as every man has liberty, if he
mislike the judgment of those that hear his cause, The holy Ghost as well ^^
one pro^^ace as in (...).
to appeal to the Councels of his own Province, or to a general Council. Or
how shall the judgment over the Seas [at Rome] be good, whereto the necessary
persons of the witnesses either for sex or for age, or sundry other
impedime^ts, can not be brought? For that any should be sent [as Legats] from
your holiness side, ^
we find decreed by no Synod of the fathers. That which you sent us hither by
Faustinus, as a part of the Nicene Counsel in the truer copies, which we have
received from holy Cyril Bishop of Alexandria, The Council of Nice corrupted by
the Bishop of Rome.
and reverent Atticus Bishop of Constantinople, taken out of the originals
themselves, (which also we sent to Bonifacius your predecessor) In them, we
say, we could find no such thing. And as for your agents or messengers, send
the^ not, grant the^ not at every ma^s request, lest we seem to bring the smoky
pride of the world into the Church of Christ, The Popes claim called the
smokie pride of the world.
which proposes the light of simplicity and humility to those that desire to
see God etc.

Does your eye sight serve you Philander to mark in this old broken matter,
as you call it, how many ways the Bishops of Africa withstood the Bishop of
Rome? What the Council of Africa denied to the Bishop of Rome.
Appeals to Rome, which Sozimus claymed by the Council of Nice, they confute
by the same Council, and impugn with other grave and pithie reasons: Legates
a latere, which he challenged, they reject as never spoken of in any Council:
Running to Rome, which you make lawful, they call a wicked refuge; and sending
of messengers from Rome, a smokie pride of the world. The corrupting the
Nicene canons by Sozimus, they disprove by copies that were true and
authentike; and Apiarius whom the Bishop of Rome harbored and restored the
second time to the communion, they utterly banished from the Church of Christ;
and not therewith content, they set down a rule that if any Priest afterward
did appeal to Rome, no man in Aphrica should receive him to the communion. Was
this resisted or no?
What think you, would these men have done, if Sozimus had claimed to be head
of the universal Church, Uicar general to Christ, supreme and infallible
Judge of all men and matters ecclesiastical, and that not by consent of
Synodes, but by grant from Christ? What could they have said to your vntydie
vanities, that the Popes [seate is the native home of all true believers,]
himself [ the rock of refuge in doubtful days and doctrines,] and the whole
world [ his fold and family?]

You must frame us some better answer to this gear than Bonifacius your holy
father did. I trust in these days you dare not say, the devil led S. Augustine
and all the Bishops of Aphrica, to be pragent and saucie with Coelestinus, as he
said. For if the devil led them that in defense of themselves and their right
searched and avouched the true Canons of the Nicene Council, what spirit led
Sozimus, that began a strange and new claim; and to bolster up his pride,
wilfully corrupted the Council of Nice?


Phi. He did not corrupt the Council of Nice, Epist. Aegiptiorum ad Marcu^ pro
exempla. Niceni Concilij tomo Conciliorum 1.

The Papists to save the Popes credit have committed shameful forgeries.


but rather their Bishops of Aphrica that withstoode him were beguiled in the
number of the Nicene Canons.


Theo. He did corrupt the Council of Nice, and the Bishops that detected his
falsehood were not beguiled.


Phi. They had but twenty Canons, where the Council of Nice made threescore
and ten, as we find in an Epistle written by those of Egypt to Marcus Bishop of
Rome, for a true extract of seventy Canons after the Arians had burnt the
Authentike copy which Athanasius brought from Nice.


Theo. You rescue one forgerie with an other. When your adherents saw that
Sozimus was taken tardie with belying the Nicene Council, to save his credit
they devised that the council of Nice should make seventy Canons, though
there were never seen but twenty. And to give this tale some life they coined
a letter in the name of Athanasius and others to Marcus Bishop of Rome,
complaining what the Arians had done at Alexandria, and requesting at his hands
the true copy of those seventy Canons: never remembering how fond and foolish
a fable this would be, when it should come to skanning: and how substantially
the Bishops of Aphrica went to work, when this title was first pretended.


Phi. Rescriptum Iulij contra orientales pro Athanasio.

And he a wise man to chose the worst.


Does not Julius in his Epistle to the East Bishops repeat 27. Canons of ye
Nicene Council more than our copies have; and six of them clearer for the
Popes authority, than that which Sozimus alleged?


Theo. You come in with your decretals, as if they were some worthy monuments.
But Sirs, the more you forge, the less you gain. All the decretals you have
will not counteruaile the reason which S. Austen and the rest make to
Bonifacius. Episto. Africani conci. ad Bonif. Cap. 101.

No decretals can discredit. the diligence of the African Bishops.

Concilium Carthaginense sextum Cap. 9.


Quis dubitet exemplaria esse verissima Nicenae Synodi, quae de tam diuersis
locis and de nobilibus Graecis ecclesijs adlata and comparata concordat? Who
can doubt those copies of the Nicene Council to be most true, which being
brought from so many places, and from the noble Churches of Greece, agree when
they be compared? The letters of Marcus and Julius framed in corners, and
found at Rome, light of credit, and full of lies; are not able to frustrate
the great pains and good means which the Bishops of Africa bestowed and used
in searching the truth.

Concilij. Afric. Cap. 102. and 103.
They had their own books which were many both in Greek and Latin: they had
the very copy, which Coecilianus Bishop of Carthage, that was present and
subscribed in the Council of Nice, brought with him from thence: Their
Decretales are too young to outface the authenticke copies.
they had a faithful transcript from the Churches of Alexandria and
Constantinople out of their original records. These three copies so many
thousand miles asunder, and every one of them Authentike, when they were
brought together and compared, did word for word agree with themselves, and
with the books that were in every man's private keeping. If that be not enough,
Ruffin. lib. 1. Cap. 6.

The Popes silence then, conuinceth this forgerie since.

Mark the likelihoode of this fable, and see the shamefastnes of Papists that
mock the world with them.


Ruffinus that lived in Italy and wrate in the days of Theodosius the elder
before this matter came in question, published in his Latin history to the
eyes of all men the very same number and order of the Nicene Canons, which the
Council of Africa followed: Yea the Bishops of Rome themselves, Bonifacius and
Coelestinus, to whom this answer was made, never replied, never urged, nor
offered any mo Canons than these twenty, which were sent from other places,
though the cause required, and the time served to bring forth their seventy
Canons, as well for Sozimus discharge, as their own interest and authority
which was then not only doubted, but also resisted.

Besides, this your assertion of seventy Canons, what a peevish and senseless
fable it is? How could all the true copies of the Nicene Council throughout
the world be consumed and destroyed within three score years, and no man
mislike it, no man perceive it, no man report it? Or how could fifty Canons
be suddenly lost, and every where twenty left in fair and Authentike
writings? Why would the Arians, (for they must be the doers of it,) wreake
their malice on those Canons that did not touch them; Extat Socratis lib. 1.
Cap. 9.
and spare the Nicene creed and Epistle written to ye Church of Alexandria,
which directly condemned their impiety? Nay why did the church of Rome suffer
those 50. Canons to perish, that made most for her prerogative, and kept these
twenty safe, which rather restrain than enlarge her authority?


Phi. Trust you not Athanasius, that was present when the Canons were made? The
Canons burnt before they were made.



Theo. I trust him well, but I trust not your shuffeling in what you list under
his name. Your forged Athanasius is soon disproued. For if Julius were Bishop
of Rome when the Council of Nice was called, as Sozomene and Bid do witness;
Sozome. lib. 1. Cap. 17. and Beda distinc. 16. sexta.
how could Athanasius write to Marcus next before Julius, that the Canons of
the Council of Nice were burnt? Were the Canons burnt, trow you, before they
were made? Again, though al men did not allow the decrees of the Nicene
Council, Sozom. lib. 3. Cap. 1.
yet whiles Constantine lived, no man, says Sozomene, durst openly and
plainly refuse them, much less burn them in a furious and public tumult.

And what if Athanasius were not then near Egypt when Marcus wrate this
solemn Epistle, Athanas. not near Egypt when this letter was written thence
in his name.
will you never be weaned from these foolish forgeries? Marcus letter bears
date, decimo calendas Nouembris, Nepotiano and Secundo Consulibus: the 21. of
October, Nepotianus and Secundus being Consuls; which was the later end of the
30. year of Constantines reign. Now all that year was Athanasius kept from
Egypt at the Council of Tyrus, Rescriptuu^ Marci Athanasio and Aegyptijs.
and without returning home, fled to Constantinople, where he stayed till he
was banished into France. Neither was there any such persecution in Egypt
that year, or any time before under Constantine, as this Epistle does specify,
Vide Sozome lib. 1. Cap. 25. and 28.
but a great while after under Constantius, when Marcus was dead and rotten.
And to conclude if the copy which Athanasius brought with him from Nice were
burnt by the Arians in his time, as his letter to Marcus imports; Council.
Africa. Cap. 102.
how could Cyril that came long after him find an Authentike copy in the
same Church, as his words infer to the Council of Africa? An other forgerie
under Julius name worse than the former.



Phi. Marcus Epistle might be suspected if Julius letter did not affirm the
same.


Theo. Julius Epistle is a right pattern of your Romish records. For there
besides impudent forgerie, you shall find wilful perjury.


Phi. Why so?


Theo. Your counterfayte Julius is not content to forge Canons, Rescript. Iulij
ad Orientales Cap. 29.
but he byndeth the^ also with an oath. Veru^ me dixisse testis est diuinitas:
god is my witness, that I speak truth. The Papists have forged a decretal in
Julius name, where as his true letter is extant in Athanasius Apology.



Phi. You should the rather believe him.


Theo. Believe him? As though the right and true rescript of Julius to the
Synod of Antioche were not set down by Athanasius himself in his second
Apology to the manifest detection of your shameless forging and forswearing?
Compare that letter with this, and you will blush to see the Church of Rome so
fowlely ouershot. And yet were there no such thing extant, this blind decretall
does convict it self. For it bears date the first of November, Felicianus
[and his fellow] being Consuls: Socrat. lib. 1. Cap. 40.
which was the very year that Constantine the great died. Now the council of
Antioch y^ deposed Athanasius, A man may feel this forgerie with his fingers.

Sozome lib. 3. Cap. 5.


to the which Julius wrate, was gathered by Constantius the fifth year after
Constantines death: and so this answer to the council of Antioch was written
five years before there was any such council assembled. Again Julius himself
says in his Epistle to those of Antioch, that Athanasius [stayed at Rome] with
him one whole year and six months, expecting their presence, Athanasij
Apologia 2.

The first dated Calend. Octobris, the second calend. Nouembris the same year.


after they were cited by his first letters to show ye reason of their
proceeding against Athanasius: and these two decretals of Julius, which you
bring us, bear date just 31. days asunder, in which tune you can not go from
Rome to Antioch, and return with an answer, except you get you wings. And so
notwithstanding your shifts and devises to cloak and hide the matter, if it
would be; your holy father falsified the counsel of Nice to serve his ambition,
and the Bishops of Africa by common consent both stoutly, and rightly withstood
him.


Phi. Well Theophilus, ye truth of these things God knows, I will defend no
more than I may with honesty.


The. You were not best. God be thanked, men's eyes are open, you can not blind
the^ with such canuisadoes. But I will go forward.

Theodorete is the next, who was one of those that took part with John of
Antioch against Cyrill in the first Council of Ephesus, and both charged him
with heresy, and deposed him notwithstanding he supplied the place of
Coelestinus Bishop of Rome. Euag^. li. 1. ca. 4.



Phi. Theodorete did this in a faction to serve other men's humors.


Theo. I grant it was a private grudge between the two Patriarks, and that ye
Bishop of Antioch, with whom Theodoret came, Theodoret against the Popes deputy.
sought unlawful means to be revenged of Cyril; but yet this Theodoret and
the rest did.


Phi. It skilleth not what they did, so long as their doings were condemned by
two general Councels, and themselves glad to revoke their own acts.


Theo. In that they deposed Cyrillus and Memnon against al order, and without
just cause, and upon stomach defamed the Chapters, as heretical, which ye
council of Ephesus by Cyrils direction proposed against Nestorius, they were
worthily reproved: and when choler was a little digested, both sides did wisely
to relent, and remit al former offenses: but what counsel did ever object this
to the^ as a fault, yt they resisted ye popes deputy?

Nay rather the rest of the bishops yt held with Cyril, (when ye letters of
Theodosius came, The Legates of Rome threatened by the first Ephesine Council.
wherein he approved the deposition as well of Cyril and Memnon, as of
Nestorius) not only prescribed and limited the Popes Legate and others that
were sent in Embassage to ye Prince, what they should do, but added this
threatening: Scire aute^ volumus vestra^ sanctitate^, quod si quid horu^ a vobis
contemptu^ fuerit, neque sancta Synodus acta habebit rata, neque vos
co^munionis sinet esse participes. In Apologet. Cyril. mandatu^ Synod. Ephes^.
We give your holiness to understand, that if any of these things (which we have
appointed you) be omitted by you, neither will this holy Synod ratify your
acts, nor receive you to the communion. If you respect not those that impugned
Cyril, I show you that ye Popes legate was both commanded and menaced by those
which assisted Cyril, whom you can not choose but allow. By the which it is
evident that the lawful and general counsel of Ephesus thought they might, and
said they would, not only control, but even excommunicate the popes
vicegerent, if he did not that which was enjoined him by the Synod.

The great Council of Chalcedon gave the Bishop of Constantinople equal
privileges with the Bishop of Rome: Vide concilij Chalcedonens. actione^ 16.

The great council of Chalcedon ouerruleth the Bishop of Rome.


and when those that represented the person of Leo, ye next day desired of the
noble men that sat there as judges and moderators, that the matter might be
brought about again and put to voices, pretending that it was not orderly
past; ye council, that in ye absence of ye Popes Legates had made this decree,
in their presence confirmed ye same, they contradicting and doing what they
could for their lives to withstand it.


Phi. If they were not present, ye decree was not good.


Theo. There you beguile your self. If the bishop of Rome were not called, the
Council was not general; but though neither he nor his Legates were present,
the decree might be good.


Phi. How prove you they were absent?


Theo. Their own words to ye Judges be so. Paschasinus and Lucentius
Vicegerents to the Sea Apostolic said: If it please your highness, Actio. 16*
council. Chalcedonen.
we have somewhat to say to you. The most glorious Judges answered; say what you
will. Paschasinus and Lucentius said, yesterday after your H. were risen, and we
followed your steps, there were certain things decreed, as we hear; which we
think were done besides the order and Canons of the church. We beseech you
therefore that your excellencies would command the same to be red again, that
the whole [cou^cel or] company may see whether it were rightly or disorderly
done. The Popes Legates could not then command in general councils.
The most glorious Judges answered: If any thing were decreed after our
departure, let it be read again. And before the reading, Aetius the Archdeacon
of Constantinople said: The manner is in Synods, after the chiefest points are
concluded, to dispatch such other things as be needful. We had somewhat to do,
for the church of Costantinople. We prayed the bishops [that came] from Rome,
The Council of Chalcedon proceeding without the Romish Legates.
that they would [stay and] communicate with us. They refused, saying, we may
not, we are otherwise charged. We acquainted your honors with it, and you
willed that this holy counsel should consider of it. Your highness then
departing* the Bishops that are here, conferring of a common cause, required
this to be done. And here they are. It was not done in secret, nor by stealth,
but orderly and lawfully. They were absent as you see, and because they were
required and refused, the Council proceeded in their absence and decreed
without them on this wise.

Following every where the steps of the sacred fathers, Chalcedo. Council. cano.
28. actio. 15. repetitur actio. 16.

For what cause Rome had the supremacy given her.


we determine and decree the self same thing [which they did] for the
privileges of the most holy church of Constantinople being new Rome. Our
fathers not without good advise gave to the throne of elder Rome the chiefest
place of honor, because that city reigned [or was the Seat of the kingdome] And
the hundred and fifty Bishops which were gathered under Theodosius the ^lder in
the royal city of Constantinople, moved with the same consideration; bestowed
equal [and like] privileges on the most holy throne of new Rome: having great
reason to determine that the City which is now honored with the Empire and
Senate should enioie equal privileges with the elder Royal City of Rome, and
in Ecclesiastical affairs be advanced as the other, being the second after
her.


Phi. Neither Leo nor his Legates would ever consent to this decree.


Theo. I care not for that. First the judgment and opinion of the counsel of
Chalcedon is clear with us, that the chiefest honor and highest place was
allotted the Bishop of Rome, not as Christ's Uicar, nor as Peter's successor,
but in regard of his city, that was Imperial. Next, the same consideration
now serving them, to advance Constantinople, which moved their fathers to
prefer Rome, they thought it lawful for them to make the Bishop of
Constantinople equal with the Bishop of Rome: and so they did, notwithstanding
the Legates of Leo labored tooth and nail to prevent the same.


Phi. They placed the Bishop of Constantinople next after the Bishop of Rome,
not in equal degree with him.


Theo. The Bishop of Rome kept his place, which was first in order among the
Patriarchs, when they went in counsel; and next after him was the Bishop of
Constantinople to sit before the Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioche: but in
plain terms the Council of Chalcedon gave ye See of Constantinople (...);
equal privileges with elder Rome, and in causes ecclesiastical to be advanced
as far forth as Rome.

Against the Council of Chalcedon if you oppose the Legates or letters of Leo,
you make but a slender match. In this Council were six hundred and thirty
Bishops, double the number of the Nicene Synod; and Leo was led with private
respects to cross this Canon, Why Leo was so earnest against this Canon.
as loath to see the Bishop of Constantinople rise too fast, for fear least
at length he should offer to prick before ye Bishop of Rome, which in deed
came to pass not long after in the days of Gregory the first; and therefore
the fathers lightly rejected all that his Legates could say, when the matter
came the second time to voices, as appears in the sixteenth Action of the
said Council, where the Judges, after either side had proposed what they
could, The Romish Legates and their allegations rejected the second time in the
Council of Chalcedon.

Eiusde^ Concilij ^c^io 16.

The selfsame privileges that Rome had, given to Constantinople.

The Pope had no negative in Councels.


resolved on this wise: By these things that have bin done and alleged we
perceive the first and chiefest honor, according to the Canons, is reserved to
the Archbishop of ancient Rome: and moreover that the Archbishop of the Royal
City of Constantinople, which is new Rome, must enjoy the selfsame
prerogatives and privileges etc. Thus we conceive you. Now let the sacred and
ecumenical Councels speak their minds. The reverend Bishops answered: This
is a right judgment; we all say the same; every one of us is well contented
therewith; this is a good decree; let this determination stand in force: all
this is orderly concluded: we pray you demisse us; we al continue in the ^ame
mind. Lucentius Vicegerent to the Bishop of Rome replied: The Sea Apostolic,
which gave us this in charge, must not be abased by this decree. And therefore
whatsoever was yesterday concluded in our absence to the prejudice of the
Canons, we pray your excellencies to command that it may be put again to
voices. If not, that our protestation against it may be set down in record,
that we may know what to inform the Pope of the Universal Church. The Judges
answered: That which we pronounced, the whole Council has approved.


Phi. The Synod approved it, but the Bishop of Rome resisted it.


Theo. You confess that which I would infer.


Phi. What do I confess?


Theo. That the Council made this Canon, the Legates of Leo gainsaying it.


Phi. The more to blame they that did it.


Theo. So you reverence general Councels when you be disposed: yet this is
apparent that the council of Chalcedon over ruled the Bishop of Rome, Canons
made in Counceles mauger the Bishop of Rome and his legates.

Liberatus Cap. 13. Concilij sexti Constantinop. Cap. 36.


and mauger his Legates that were present and earnest against it, they concluded
without them that which they most misliked. Neither could Leo for all his eger
and sharp resistance prevail with them or against them; the Christian
Emperors still favoring, and the sixth general Council again confirming
that which their fathers before them had enacted at Chalcedon. Renewing the
decrees of the 150. fathers that met in this royal City of Constantinople,
and of the 630. Bishops which assembled at Chalcedon, we likewise determine,
that the Sea of Constantinople shall have equal privileges and honors with the
Seat of elder Rome, and in ecclesiastical matters be advanced as far forth
as it, being next unto it.

Which words are falsely reported or rather lewdly corrupted in your Canon
law, by putting a negative to the later part of them that draws ye whole to
a contrary sense; How the Popes law uses ancient customs.

Distinct. 22. Renouantes

A monsterous corruption of a council turning an affirmative into a negative.


Non tamen in ecclesiasticis rebus magnificetur vt illa, sed secunda post illam
existens, And yet for all that, shall not [the See of Constantinople] be
advanced in ecclesiastical affairs as high, as Rome; but be the second after
her. And so where the Council decreed, that Constantinople should be
advanced in ecclesiastical matters as far forth as Rome, you falsify ye
words and conclude, that Constantinople shall not be advanced as far forth
as Rome, which is no forgerie.


Phi. Let him answer for it, that did it.


Theo. Be your decrees no more worth now than to be thus shaken off, to
shift for themselves? Not long since they were the fairest flower in your
garland: but if you renounce your Canon law, we will press you no farther with
it.


Phi. Not so neither.


Theo. Then how can you salve this shameful corruption?


Phi. Perhaps it was mistaken.


Theo. And never after perceived?


Phi. I do not say so.


Theo. Why then not amended; Africani council, Cap. 92.

The Canon law glozeth the Council of African quite against the text.

Cause. 2. quaest. 6. placuit.

Saint Austen forged to make the Popes decretals of equal authority with the
scriptures.

De doctrina Christiana, lib. 2. Cap. 8.


but openly suffered?


Phi. An error it might be, wilful it was not, I dare swear.


Theo. Is your Canon law so free from wilful corruption, that you dare swear
for it?


Phi. As I think.


Theo. How does it handle the words of the Mileuitane and Africane Council,
which I last alleged? Ad transmarina qui putauerint appellandu^ a nullo intra
Africam in comunione suscipiatur. They that offer to appeal over the seas, let
them be received of no man within Africa to the communion. That is true says
your law, nisi forte Romanam sedem appellauerint: unless perhaps they appeal
to Rome. And so where the council purposely decreed this, to keep all men from
Rome, your law wittingly peruerteth their words, and adds, except they
appeal to Rome; Which is both a ridiculous and malicious corruption.

The like prancke you play for authorizing your decretals out of S. Augustine,
and making them equal in credit with the canonical Scriptures. In which
words you not only commit gross forgerie, but also run into heinous
blasphemy. For where S. Augustine says: In canonicis autem scripturis,
ecclesiarum Catholicarum quam plurium autoritatem sequatur, inter quas sane
illae sint, quae Apostolicas seeds habere, and epistolas accipere meruerunt. In
[esteeming] the Canonical scriptures, let [a Christian man] follow the
authority of the greater number of catholic churches; amongst whom those
[Churches] are, which deserved to have both the seats of the Apostles, and to
receive their letters. Your canon law turns and alters his words thus:
Distinct. 19. In canonicis.
Inter quas [scripturas Canonicas] sane illae sint quas Apostolica seeds habere
and ab ea alij meruerunt accipere epistolas: In the number of which [Canonical
scriptures] let those epistles be, which the Apostolic See [meaning Rome]
has, and others have received from her. And least you should think any other
Epistles are meant than such as the Bishops of Rome themselves wrate, in fair
red letters before the text these words are placed: Rubricae Ibidem
Inter Canonicas scripturas, Decretales epistolae connumerantur. The Decretall
epistles [of Popes] are counted [by S. Austen] for Canonical scriptures. What
greater blasphemy can be devised or uttered against Christ and his spirit than
that the Popes Epistles should be canonical scriptures, that is of equal
authority with the word of God? And how far S. Augustine was from any such
thought, the very place, which your law so wickedly peruerteth, does best
witness. Glosa Ibidem.
First you grossly mistake the antecedent to the relative, Inter quas
[scripturas] for Inter quas [ecclesias.] Next you change the nominative case
into the accusative, and the accusative into the nominative, as also the
plural number into the singular; saying, quas Apostolica seeds habere, for
quae Apostolicas seeds habere. Thirdly you put in these words of your own
heads; and ab ea alij: which are not in S. Augustins text. And so where S.
Austen says, Among the which those Churches are, that deserved to have the
seats of the Apostles, and to receive their letters, you say plainly: Among
which (Canonical scriptures) those Epistles are, which the Apostolic see (of
Rome) has and (which) others have deserved to receive from her. I report me
to your own conscience Philander, whether this be not a barbarous kind of
corrupting the fathers, which is often used in your canon law, as I could show,
but that I should make too long a digression.


Phi. If it be naught I excuse it not.


Theo. Come you with an if, as though the case were not clear?


Phi. A man may be soon ouerseene.


Theo. These be shrewd ouersights. But return to the matter that was first in
hand.

The britanes 4000 year ago would yield no subjection to the Popes legate.
Beda lib. 2. Cap. 2.

Bed. histo. gentis Anglorum lib. 2. Cap. 2.


The Britanes are the last that I named, but not the last that resisted the
Bishop of Rome; whom Augustine the Monk, that came from Gregory, could by no
means get to yield him any subjection, though king Edelbert slew twelve
hundred of their Monks in one day for refusing obedience to that Romish Legate.


Phi. Beda says so many were slain, but he says not for that cause.


Theo. Beda confesses that seven Bishops of the Britanes, and plures viri
doctissimi, and many very learned men utterly refused Augustine, when they met
him in a Council. His words be: At illa nihil horum se facturos, neque
illum pro Archiepiscopo habituros esse respondebant. Conferentes ad inuicem,
quia si modo nobis assurgere noluit, quanto magis, si ei subdi ceperimus, iam
nos pro nihilo contemnet? The Britanes answered they would do none of those
things [which he required] neither would they acknowledge him for their
Archbishop. Casting thus with themselves, that if now he will not so much
as rise to us, how little account will he make of us, if we become subject
unto him?

The ancient British Story, which Galfridus Monemutensis translated, writes
thus of them: Galfrid. monemutens. lib. 8. Cap. 4.
In a part of the Britanes, Christianity yet flourished, the which beginning in
the days of Eleutherius never failed among them. After Augustine came he found
seven Bishopriks and an Archbishopricke supplied with yery godly governors;
and Abbeys a great number, in which the flock of Christ was kept in good order.
Besides other Cities, in the City of Bangor there was a most noble Church of
2100 Monks, all living with the labor of their hands. Their Abbat was named
Dinooch a man marueously well learned. Who by diverse arguments made it appear,
when Augustine required the Bishops to be subject to him, that they ought him
no subjection. Edelbert therefore the king of Kent, as soon as he saw them
refuse to yield obedience to Augustine, 1200 monks in one time chose rather to
die than to be subject to the Bishop of Rome.
and despise his preaching, stirred up Edelfride and other Princes of the
Saxons to gather a great army, and go to Bangor to destroy Dinooch and his
Clergy. Who taking the City commanded the swords of his men to be turned
first upon the Monks, and so twelve hundred of them the same day decked with
Martyrdom entered the kingdom of heaven.

Lower, if I would go, examples are infinite, where the Bishop of Rome has
been not only stayed of his course, and ouerruled, but severely repressed and
deprived of his Papacy.


Phi. By some tyrants or schismatiks I warrant you. For never Catholic Prince
or Bishop would offer him that abuse.


Theo. Fitten not so fast least you recant it with shame. Godly Princes and
prelates, your own Cardinals and Councels have without any scruple, Concili.
Laterae. sub Innocentio 3 Cap. 4

The Grecians detesting the Bishop of Rome.

Paul. Aemil. in Philippo 4. Idem Aeneas Syluius, lib. 9. epitomes in decades
Blondi. Sessio vltima Florentiae in literis vnionis. Graecorum responsio in
vltima sessione Florentiae*


cited, suspended, and deposed him: which I trust is a plain kind of
resistance.


Phi. If they did all that which you speak.


Theo. I speak no more than your own men do witness.

The Grecians I will omit, that never obeyed; and long since so detesteth both
him and his Church, that if at any time the latin Priests had celebrated on
their Altars, they would not offer on the same, except they first washed them,
as (thinking them thereby to be) defiled. Michael Paleologus their Emperor
they rejected from Christian burial, for that in a council at Lions he
professed the Greek church to be subject to the Roman See.


Phi. But after in the Council of Florence they submitted themselves to the
Bishop of Rome as to the true vicar of Christ and head of the whole church and
father and teacher of al christians.


Theo. When ye question was first moved the^ at Florence, their answer was, We
have no leave [nor commission from the greek church] to speak these things.
And being urged the second time, responderunt vt pridie, they answered as
before, nolentes, vt de alia quaestione, praeter illa^ de spiritus sancti
processione, in vnionis literis vlla mentio fieret; not willing that in the
letters of union any other matter should be contained besides the proceeding of
the holy Ghost. And though they were won at length to suffer it to pass in
the letters of concord, hoping the West Princes upon that perfect agreement
would aid them against the Turk, Platina in Eugenio 4.
and two of them were made Cardinals, that by their authority the Greek
nation might be kept in obedience: Yet the whole Country, says Platina, non
ita multo post in antiquos mores recidit, not long after fell to their former
bent: but I will not urge the dislike between the two Churches. The West
Church will serve my turn better and stop your mouth sooner, in the which we
shall find presidents enowe for this purpose.

Luitprand. li. 6. Cap. 10. Ibidem Cap. 7.

The germans against the Bishop of Rome.

Platina in Gregorio 6.


Otho the great called a Council of Bishops in Italy, where John the 13. was
deposed for his infamous and lewd life: the things be so loathsome that I will
not name them. This fact of the Prince and the Synod, the Church saw,
suffered, and allowed, and received Leo the eight placed by them in his steed.

Henry the second likewise in a Council drove Benedict the 9. Syluester the
third, and Gregory the sixth, three most vile monsters, to forgo the
Popedom, and chose Clemens the second to succeed them.

About Henry the fourth and Gregory the seventh though the stories be
divided, some taking the Princes and some the Popes part: yet the Bishops of
Germany and Italy from Woormes, Mentz and Brixia sent him but homely
greetings, as Vrspergensis confesses. Cronicon Abba. Vrspergensis.
In the year of our Lord 1076 says he, there was kept a Council at Worms,
where king Henry being present, almost all the Bishops of Germany, except the
Saxons, deposed Pope Hildebrand, writing him a letter after many crimes recited
with this conclusion: For so much then as thine entrance [into the Popedome] is
infected with so great periuries; and the Church of God dangerously tossed by
reason of thy novelties; and thy life stained with so manifold infamies; we
let thee understand, that as we never promised thee obedience, so hereafter
will we yield thee none; and because no man amongst us (as thou openly gave
out) has been hereto accounted a Bishop by thee, thou also from henceforth
shall be taken by none of us for Apostolic.

The Bishops and nobles at Brixia concluded against him in these words:
Because it is certain that he was not chosen by God, Ibidem anno 1080.

This was he that first ventred to depose Princes.


but by fraud and briberie most shamelesly intruded himself; which also
subuerteth the order of the Church, and troubles the Christian Empire, which
practices to kill both the body and soul of our Catholic and peaceable king,
and maintains a perjured king which has sowed discord between those that
agreed; strife between those that were at peace; offenses between brethren; and
divorces between man and wife; and has shaken whatsoever stood quiet amongst
the godly; we assembled together in the name of God against the said Hildebrand
a most impudent person, breathing out sacrileges and spoils, defending
periuries and murderers, calling in question the Catholic and Apostolic
faith of the body and blood of our Lord, an old disciple of the heretic
Berengarius, an obseruer of diuinations and dreams, a manifest co^iurer, and
using familiarity with devils, and therefore fallen from the true faith:
adiudge him to be Canonically deposed and expelled. Ibidem anno 1083.

The Romans rejected him as well as the Germans did


And this took place three years after when the Romans desired a day to be
appointed, in the which the Pope and all the Senators should come before the
Emperor: but the Pope would not come in presence, whereupon the Romans being
moved yielded to the king, and with one consent rejected Pope Hildebrand; who
secretly fleeing gate him to Salerna, and there stayed till he dyed.


Phi. Henry did this by force, and the Bishops that so reviled the Pope were of
his faction: Platina in Gregorio 7. The later Italians make Hildebrand a Saint
for his presumption against the Emperor.

Beno Cardinal. de vita and gestis Hildebrandi. Sigibertus in anno 1084.


but the stories commend Gregory the seventh for a wise, just and mild man, a
favorer of the poor, of orphans and widows, and the only stout and earnest
defender of the Roman Church against the treacheries of heretics and power of
ill disposed princes, seeking to possess the goods of the Church by violence.


Theo. Gregory's life I will not examine, it is not incident to this matter.
Yet if we believe Beno the Cardinal that lived at the same time, he deserves
no such praise as you give him; but I respect not that in this place. Certain
it is the Bishops of Germany and Italy not onley refused but also deposed
him; yea thirteen Cardinals of the wiser and better sort, the Archdeacon and
chief president and many of the Laterane Clergy [at Rome] seeing his
intolerable Apostasy, forsook his communion: and so by the judgment of the
Romans themselves Hildebrand was turned out of his Popedom.


Phi. I know they did it, but therein they passed their bounds.


Theo. If the crimes by them objected were true, they did but their duties.


Phi. Their accusations were all false.


Theo. That is lustily spoken, but faintly proved: and yet if it were so, my
first assertion stands good, that your own Cardinals and Councels have often
resisted, and repressed ye Bishop of Rome.


Phi. And my answer stands as good, yt they were schismatikes which did so.


Theo. What say you then to the Council at Pisa, Platina in Gregori. 12. The
general Council of Pisa deposed two Popes Idem in Alexandro 5.
where the whole College of Cardinals with one consent deprived Gregory and
Benedict of their Popedomes, all nations allowing that strait sentence, besides
[a few] that favored Benedictus: and Alexander the fifth on his death bed
protesting their acts in that Council to be good and lawful? Will you now
reply that all nations, and all the cardinals, yea the Pope himself were
schismatikes? Or if you care not for that, what say you to the general
Council of Constance that deposed as many Popes as the Council of Pisa, and
not only de facto did it, but also expressly and advisedly decreed that they
might do it? Dare you think the Council of Constance to be schismatical? And
what if the general Council of Basil by manifest positions conclude you an
heretic, for holding that a Council may not depose the Pope? will you rather
incur the guilt of heresy, than forsake your new found divinity?


Phi. You load me with too many allegations at once. I can not tell which to
answer first.


Theo. I will sever them with a good will, say what you can against them. The
general Council of Pisa deposed two Popes and chose Alexander the first: ergo
the Pope may be both resisted, and deprived by a Council.


Phi. Was that Council general?


Theo. Read the Bull of John the 23. conuocating the Council of Constance,
Council. Constantiensis sessio. 1. Their church allowed the Council of Pisa for
sacred and general. Laziardi historiae vniuersalis epitome ca. 267.
Dudum felicis recordationis Alexander Papa quintus, praedecessor noster in
sacro generals Pisano Concilio tunc praesidens etc. Not long since Alexander
the fifth of happy memory, our predecessor, then sitting chief in the sacred
general Council at Pisa. Laziardus a writer of that age says: Both Colleges
of Cardinals, or at least the most part of them, called a general Council at
Pisa, where they stayed from the Annuntiation of the virgin Marie till the
xxvi. of June, with a great number of Prelates and Ambassadors of Kings,
Princes, and Universities. Upon which day, those [two] which strove for the
Popedom, being first deprived by sentence, and order of law in all things
observed, they chose Alexander the fifth.


Phi. Do al stories agree that they deposed Gregory and Benedict?


Theo. See Blondus, Auentinus, Nauclerus, Sabellicus, Paulus Aemylius, or whom
you will. Johannes Nauclerus in anno 1408.
The Cardinals of Gregory and Benedict, says Nauclerus, meeting and
conferring, resolved the city of Pisa to be the fittest place for a general
counsel to be kept. Whereupon by letters and messengers they called al Bishops,
Prelates, Princes and co^munities to come to the Counsel, that should be held
at Pisa, exhorting them to send their Legates, and to withhold obedience from
those [two] Popes, whom they had cited to be present there. In the year of our
Lord 1409. at Pisa they began to proceed, Two Popes condemned by the council
of Pisa for heretics and schismatikes.
and against both Popes Gregory and Benedict, not appearing upon lawful
citation, but wilfully refusing, they pronounced sentence of deposition and
deprivation, as against heretics and schismatikes: forbidding all Christians
to call either of them Pope, or yield either of them obedience as Bishop of Rome.
This done they went to the election of an other, whom they called Alexander the
fifth.


Phi. Might they call and keep a Council without any Pope?


Theo. Look you to that. Ibidem.

The Cardinals conclude it lawful for them to call a Counsel without the Pope,
and if need be to depose him.


Nauclerus adds that About the deposition of these two Popes there was a
great debating in the Council of Pisa; whether (granting that both these Popes
did scandalize the Church by manifest collusion, and perjury, etc.) the
Cardinals might call a council, and both of them being cited to come to the
Council, and not appearing but persisting in their contumacie, whether they
might be deposed, and an other chosen. And after long disputation in the
presence of very many Doctors of divinity, and of both laws, no man
gainesaying, but all consenting, it was concluded that it might be lawfully
and canonically done. Mark Philander: a general Council called without a
Pope, and two Popes deposed in the same for not appearing before the council,
and all this good and lawful by the judgment of your own Cardinals, divines
and Canonists, without contradiction, and the Pope himself accepting this for
a sacred and ecumenicall Council.


Phi. I marvel they went so far.


Theo. Never marvel at that. The Council of Constance deposed three Popes.

Constantiensis Con cilij sessio. 1. Sessione 3. Sessione 10. and 12. Sessione
37.

The Pope condemned for an incorrigible heretic and schismatike.

Sessio. 4. and 5. Sessio. 3. Sessio. 4. and 5.


The general Council of Constance which followed five years after this, went a
great deal farther. For when John the 23 had by his letters called the
Council, and sat amongst them in person as president and head of the
Council, the first thing they did, they began to sift him; and notwithstanding
he fled and left the Council without Uicegerent or deputy, yet they proceeded,
and not only suspended but also deprived him for his notorious Symonie and
detestable and dishonest life and manners. And likewise when by no means they
could get Gregory the 13 to resign or appear before them, they condemned him
for a schismatike and an heretic incorrigible, and cut him off as a withered
member. And least you should think this rashly or lightly done, they solemnly
decreed that the Pope was subject to them and bound to obey them, and could not
without their liking dissolve or remove the council, and to that end they did
frustrate and reuerse all that was done or might be done by the Pope present or
absent to the prejudice and disturbance of their Synod. Can you wish for
playner examples that a Council may proceed without and against the Bishop
of Rome, than these be?


Phi. I confess they make me stagger; Their own Church has allowed and
honored these Councels.
and yet I dare not trust them, unless the Church receive them.


Theo. And does your church now mislike the proceedings at Constance and Pisa,
which the church of Rome then and all other nations, by the witness of your
nearest frinds, approved and followed as right and sincere?


Phi. I refuse not the Councels.


Theo. But does your Church allow them for general?


Phi. I think she does.


Theo. Keep your thoughts to your self; my question is whether your Church
accept them, or no?


Phi. She does not reject them.


Theo. Answer directly. Does your Church embrace the^, or no?


Phi. She does.


Theo. You might have said so rather; what needed this circumquaque to no
purpose? Then I infer; the doctrine of your church, little more than eight
skore years ago, was, that a Council might ouerrule and depose the Pope, and
the same Council be called and kept without him, if he colluded or refused.
This is proved, as well by the deeds of the councels of Constance and Pisa,
which are already showed; as by their decrees, which are extant to this day.
What was concluded at Pisa by general assent, I said before: what the
Council of Constance resolved in the like case, their words shall declare.

First this holy Synod [of Constance] lawfully congregated in the holy Ghost,
Constantiensis Synodi sessio 4. The Pope bound to obey his own councels.

Sessione 5.


being a general council, and representing the catholic church militant, has
power immediate from Christ, the which [power] every one of what state or
dignity soever he be, yea the Pope himself is bound to obey in those things
that concern the faith and general reformation of the church of God, in the
head and members. Again it declares that whosoever of any condition, state or
dignity, yea though he be Pope, shall stubburnly refuse to obey the statutes,
ordinances and precepts which this sacred Synod, or any other general counsel
lawfully gathered, has already made or shall hereafter make concerning the
premises, or any their appertinents, except he repent he shall be driven to
condign satisfaction and dewly punished, and if need be, other helps and
remedies of law and Justice used. Ibidem.
Item this holy Synod orders, defines, determines and declares, that if
our said Lord the Pope being required for unities sake by this sacred Council,
do refuse to forsake his Popedom, or defer the renouncing thereof longer than
he should; as then, so now; and as now, so then; shall be counted by all
Christian faithful men to be deprived of his Popedom, and al obedience
withdrawn from him.

And not herewith content after they had cited and expected him, they proceeded
first to his suspention, and after to his deprivation in this wise: Sessio. 10.
Pope John suspended for his Popedom.
Because it plainly appears to us, that our Lord Pope John the 23. from the
time that he was chosen to the Popedom til this present, has il governed
that office to the public slander of himself and the Church, and with his
damnable life and filthy manners has given and yet gives to others an
example of loose life; and moreover has by plain Symonical contracts sold
Cathedral churches, Monasteries, Priories and other Ecclesiastical benifices;
therefore by this our sentence we pronounce and decree the said Lord Pope John
worthy to be suspended from al administration of the Popedom, both spiritual
and temporal, and we do suspend him, and by this writing forbid him the
execution thereof. And we declare that for and upon the premises, as being
notorious, we ought and mind to proceed to the final rejecting him from the
Popedom. Wherefore we streitly prohibit you and every one of you by the tenor
of these presents in virtue of your obedience, and under pain to be counted
favorers of this schism, whether you be kings, Cardinals, Patriarchs,
Archbishops, bishops or whatsoever, spiritual or secular persons, that you, nor
any of you, directly or indirectly hereafter obey, regard or assist the said
Pope John being justly suspended by us from al intermedling with the Popes
function etc.

Sessio. 12. Sententia definitiua contra Iohannem Papam 23. The Pope solemnly
deprived.
The very same causes they repeat when they deprive him, adding that his
departure from the City and sacred general Council of Constance, closely by
night, at an unseasonable hour, in strange and dissembled apparel, was
unlawful and scandalous to the Church and the Council, as troubling and
hindering the peace and union of the Church, nourishing an inueterate schism,
and swaruing from his vow, promise and oath: and therefore say they, the sacred
general council of Constance by this definitive sentence here comprised in
writing, pronounces, adiudgeth and declares the said Pope John, as
unworthy, unprofitable, and hurtful, to be removed, deprived, and deposed from
the Popedom, and from al spiritual and temporal administration thereof: and
therwithal does remove, deprive, and depose him: declaring al christians of
what state, or degree or condition soever they be, to stand quiet and
discharged from his obedience, and the fidelity, and oath, which they have made
to him: Inhibiting all the faithful of Christ hereafter so much as to call him
Pope, being now deposed from his office, or to cleave to him or any way to obey
him as Pope.


Phi. You repeat this at large, that the simple might see how solemnly the
Pope was deposed.


Theo. I do in deed, and you must think they look for your answer.


Phi. How hasty you be when you have a little advantage?


Theo. How loath you be to come to that which at length you must? For say
Philander, might the Council of Constance do that which they did, Not long
since the Pope was subject to Councels by the confession of their own Church,
and now he will be Lord over them.
or no? You hold a Wolf by the ears, I can tell you.


Phi. The truth is, I find my self in some strait. If I say they did well,
then I confess that a Council may lawfully resist and deprive the Pope, for
all this they did; if I say they did evil, then must the Council of Constance
be schismatic in offering Christ's Uicar so great and open wrong; and the
Church of Rome yea the Catholic Church that allowed and honored their acts
and decrees, fowly deceived; and Martin the Sixth whom this Council elected,
and the Christian world obeyed, no lawful successor, but a violent intruder:
which God forbid I should affirm.


Theo. Then if you dare not say the Synod did evil, you must yield they did
well, and consequently the point which you first doubted, is fully proved; that
a Council may lawfully control, correct, and depose the Pope, notwithstanding
you make him chief judge on earth and head of the whole Church.


Phi. Was Pope John lawfully chosen?


Theo. You search every angle, but in truth you can not escape. In Joan. 24. it
should be 23.

To quarrel with Pope John's election is to no purpose.





Phi. Platina says some such thing.


Theo. So some would shift the matter; but if his entry to the Popedom were
not good, his summoning the Council of Constance could not be good, and so
this Synod never lawfully called. Next the Council did not reject him as
unorderly chosen, nor disclaim him for no Bishop, but removed him from the
function which he had, as unworthy the same. And their general decree, by
which they define the Pope to be subject to the Council, must not be referred
to wrongful inuadors, but wholly restrained to lawful possessors of the Roman
See: else, no masterie for the Council to be superior to those that were no
Popes, but only usurpers. And therefore if there were any fault in his
election, since the Council did omit the same in his deprivation, and
proceeded against him for other crimes, it can do you small pleasure.


Phi. Did he not submit himself to their definitive sentence, and with his
own mouth ratify their acts whatsoever before they ventered to depose him?
Pope John when he saw no remedy, submitted himself to their wills, but did
not autorize them to be his judges.

Nauclerus in anno 1415. Vide Constan. Synodi sessione^ 11.





Theo. When Pope John saw the Duke of Austria proscribed and adjudged by the
Emperor to forfeit all his goods and lands, for helping and receiving him in
his flight, and himself now brought back and kept in prison, to abide the
determination of the Council; and foul matters objected against him, and
witnesses produced and examined upon the same: and being already suspended from
his Popedom by the Council, and then required to say for his defense what he
could; and warned against the next day to be present in the Council, to
hear the judgment that should be given upon the premises: what marvel if
he seeing no way to prevent that which the Synod would execute, thought better
to please them with a forced humility, than to provoke them to farther
bitterness with a bold defiance? But did the Council ground themselves upon
that his submission, or else did they derive their authority from Christ
without the Pope, and above the Pope? The Council grounded themselves neither
on Pope John's permission nor submissio^, but on their own power and proofs.



Phi. I know they challenged their power immediately from Christ.


Theo. By that you may see they meant to exclude the Popes consent and
allowance; which also well appeared by their doings. For they cited, suspended,
convicted, imprisoned, and assigned him a term to receive judgment before
ever he came to that submission. And last of all, if you could light on it,
there is a great difference between confessing the process, and referring
himself to the discretion of the Council, which Pope John did at length much
against his stomach, and authorizing the Judges to proceed, which they neither
did ask, nor would accept at his hands.

And least you should think I mistake the Council of Constance, ye Council of
Basil, which began 14. years after, does not only confirm that which I
defend, but also repute you for heretics that egerly withstand it. Their words
be these: Basiliensis concilij sessio 33. The Council of Basil against the
Pope.
Veritas de potestate Concilij generalis supra Papam, declarata per
Constantine^se, and hoc Basiliense Concilia generalia, est veritas fidei
Catholicae: veritas haec; Papa generale Concilium actu legitime congregatum,
sine eius co^sensu nullatenus potest autoritatiue dissoluere, aut ad aliud
tempus prorogare, aut de loco ad locum transfer, veritas est fidei
Catholicae. Veritatibus duabus praedictis pertinaciter repugna^s, est ce^sendus
haereticus. This position that a general council has power over and above the
Pope, declared in the general council of Constance and Basil, is a truth of
the catholic faith. Again that the Pope by no means can dissolve, defer, or
translate a general council lawfully called and once sitting of his own
authority, without the consent of the said council, this is likewise a truth
of the catholic faith. These two former truths he that stiffly denies, must
be taken for an heretic. Now choose whether you will forgo your assertion, or
else abide the verdict of your own Council.


Phi. Against the Council of Basil much might be said if time and place did
serve.


Theo. Time and place do serve, except you relent, by their illation to
conclude you an heretic.


Phi. That Council was neither general, nor lawful.


Theo. It is not enough for you to say the word, you must tell us why. The
Cardinals and the Bishops began to be so busy with the Pope, that the Church
of Rome is forced to renounce her own Councels.



Phi. They bent themselves against Eugenius the fourth, and did what they could
to thrust him from his Seat.


Theo. Perhaps Eugenius deserved no less.


Phi. No, they did it upon a faction, in favor of the Duke of Millan, that
hated Eugenius.


Theo. Contention is no just exception against a Synod. For so you may refuse
the best that ever were. But what can you say, why the Council of Basil
should not be counted in your Church both lawful and general? Was it not
orderly summoned as your manner is? Were not all nations called? The Bull of
Martin the fifth is extant, by the which the Council was first indicted; and
Eugenius himself, that struggled a while to dissolve the Council, was glad at
length to change his tune, and to retract all that he had done in derogation
of the Synod, and with an other Bull fairly subscribed with the Cardinals
hands, to confirm and confess the Council of Basil to be a general,
sacred and lawful Council. And here you shall see a plain president that the
Princes and Bishops assembled at Basil not only resisted Eugenius, laboring
what he could to disperse them, but also forced him to yield, and acknowledge
the lawfulness of their Synod.

Eugenius, Platina in Eugenio 4.

Eugenius forced to allow the Council of Basil, by reason of the number that
took part with the Synod.


says Platina, much distressed first with wars on every side, next for that
he saw the council of Basil began by Pope Martins decree, daily increase; the
Princes of Spain, France, Germany and Pannonie repairing thither, and
referring the common cause of christendom to the judgment of the council;
meaning to shut it up, translated the same from Basil to Bononia by the
consent of all the cardinals that were about him. But the Emperor and the rest
of the Princes and Prelates that were at Basil, were so far from obeying the
Pope, that they summoned him twice or thrice to present himself with his
cardinals at Basil, chosen by Pope Martin as a fit place to keep the council
in; otherwise they would proceed against him as a transgressor and wilful
refuser. Eugenius troubled with this message, confirms the council of Basil
with his Apostolic letters, licencing all men to go to the council.


Phi. I grant they resisted Eugenius, but I doubt of the Council whether it
were lawful or no.


Theo. Will you trust Eugenius himself?


Phi. If he say the word. Basiliensis concilij sessio 16.

Eugenius bull for the confirmation of that council.





Theo. Thus he says: Not long since for certain causes expressed in our
letters, and by the consent and advise of our brethren the cardinals of the
church of Rome, we dissolved the sacred general council of Basil lawfully
begun by the decrees of the general councels of Constance and Senes, and by
commission from Martin the fifth, and likewise from us. Mary seeing great
dissension has risen, and greater may rise by the said dissolution, we
determine and declare that the foresaid general council of Basil from the
first beginning of it was and is lawfully continued, and always has, yet
does, and ought to dure, as if no dissolution had bin made. And that our
affection and integrity to the sacred general council of Basil may plainly
appear, whatsoever has been done, attempted, or alleged by us, or in our
name, to the prejudice or derogation of the sacred general council of Basil,
we undo, revoke, frustrate, and annihilate.

If this be enough, Nicolaus the 5. that came next after Eugenius upon the
composing of the schism between the Council and the Pope, The Bull of
Nicolaus the 5. for the like purpose.

Bulla Nicolai 5. super approbatione actoru^ and gest. in council. Basiliensi.


gave out a general Bull for the confirmation of all their doings without
exception. Omnia and singula tam iustitiam, quam gratiam concernentia per ipsum
tunc Basiliense Concilium qualitercunque facta, gesta, concessa, data,
disposita and ordinata cuiuscunque naturae existant, motu proprio ex certa
scientia and de Apostolicae potestatis plenitudine, de consilio and assensu
venerabilium fratrum nostrorum sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae Cardinaliu^
praesentium serie approbamus, ratificamus, and etia^ confirmamus, rataque and
firma haberi volumus. All and every thing, that concerns either favor or
justice, done, devised, granted, given, disposed and ordered by the counsel of
Basil, of what nature soever, we of our own motion and certain knowledge by the
fullness of our Apostolic power, and with the assent and advise of our
brethren the Cardinals of the holy church of Rome, allow, ratify, and confirm
by the tenor of these presents, and will have to stand sure and firm. So that
the Council of Basil has ill luck, if after all these bulls it be not both
a lawful and general Council.


Phi. The Bishops of Rome, that came after, never liked ye Council of Basil;
but we will not strive for that: we shall see what you will infer.


Theo. No news for Popes to mislike that which pared their ambition, and
hindered their gain, as the Council of Basil did: but can you, or they deny
yt the Council was orderly called?


Phi. I do not stand so much on that.


Theo. Then I conclude, A Council might then command, correct, and depose the
Pope: and now they will be obeyed above and against Councels.
that a Council may lawfully resist, command, correct, and depose the Pope;
for so did the late Councels of Pisa, Constance, and Basil (which your Church
then held for sacred and ecumenicall) both determine in words, and practice
in deeds. You must confute, or confess this illation.


Phi. I have said what I could, and all will not help. The Councels you
prove to be general: and I see they not only resisted and deposed Popes, but
also concluded it lawful for them so to do.


Theo. Then you confess they did and might resist the Pope.


Phi. Councels I grant might, and did; but not others.


Theo. Why may not others do the like?


Phi. They must rather obey than resist.


Theo. We dispute not as yet, whether it be lawful or no for every man to
resist the Pope, the cause being just; and when that comes in question, you
must show good and apparent reason why they may not: that which I first
avouched was this: your own Cardinales and Councels, your own friends and
fellows, which you may not count schismatikes and heretics, The Pope in the
midst of his pride resisted by his own crew.
have stoutly resisted him, and restrained and limited his dominion, even in
the midst of his pride and ioylitie. For Councels I have said sufficient:
Now for others.

The famous University of Paris, which I think you will not condemn; and the
whole kingdom of France have often times opposed themselves against the Pope,
and withdrawn their obedience from him in part or in all as occasion required.


Phi. For some money matters it may be they withstood his Collectors and
Officers.


Theo. The Divines of Paris openly confuted the conclusions and articles of
John the 22. touching the beholding and seeing of God, The Divines of Paris
condemned Pope John's doctrine with the sound of trumpets. Gerson sermon. in festo
Paschae reperitur in 4. part operum. Johannes Marius de schism. and council.
cap. 2^.
and gate the same to be condemned before the king of France with the sound of
trumpets, as Gerson reports. By this, says he, appears the falsitie of
[Pope] John's doctrine, which was condemned with the sound of trumpets before
Philip king [of Fraunce] by the Divines of Paris, and the king believed the
Divines of Paris before the [Popes] court. And Ioannes Marius, John the second
Pope that sat at Auinion, fell into suspicion of heresy. For he taught and
defended certain articles touching the sight and vision of God, which the
Divines of France, king Philip taking their part, very freely contradicted.

The year before the Council of Pisa, which I last spoke of, was gathered,
when Benedict the 13. would yield to no reason, for ending the schism between
him and Gregory the 12. Charles the French king, Laziard. Epitom. cap. 267.
Joan. Marius cap. 22.

The French king discharges his realm from the Popes obedience.

Naucler. generatio. 48. circae annu^ 1438.

The Pragmaticall sanctio^ maintained in France an 100. years against the
Pope.


with the advice of the Bishops, Princes, and Universities of his Realm caused
himself to be proclaimed adherent [or obedient] to neither of the twain; and
by them all it was decreed, that the whole Church of France should depart from
the obedience of Benedict, and by the authority of this Council, all the
French Cardinals forsook him.

When the Council of Basil was ended, the Germans, the king of France, the
king of England, the Prince of Millan, and others favored the same with all
their power, neglecting Eugenius authority, then sitting in the Council of
Florence: and the rather to give it full force and effect, in the kingdom of
France, Charles the 7. in a Parliament at Burdeuz made a law, called the
Pragmaticall sanction, for the perpetual observation of those things, which
the Council of Basil had decreed. And this law the Bishops of France, and
Schole of Paris defended and followed almost an hundred years, in spite of all that Pius the 2. Sixtus the 4. Innocentius the 8. and other Bishops of Rome
could do to the contrary.


Phi. Did the Bishops of Rome labor against it so long, and could not
prevail? Robertus Guaguinus in Caro. 7.



Theo. First hear how well they did like it; and then how long they did
impugn it. The [Pragmaticall] constitution made by the authority of the
Council of Basil, the Bishops of Rome, that came after, detested as a
pernicious heresy; and not one of them, the Synod of Basil once dissolved,
did ever allow the same. Which well appears by the message that Pius the 2.
sent to Jews the 11. for the repealing of this constitution, as the king
himself reports, Ludouic. Pio 2. inter Epist. Aeneae Syluij Epi. 388.
writing back to the Pope in these words: We have consented to those things
which were advertised us in your name [by your Legate a latere] to wit, that
the Pragmaticall sanction grieved and injured both you and your See, as being
made in the time of sedition, and schism, and subuerting all right, and all
law by taking what authority they list from you. And this besides, which the
same [Legate] in the name of your holiness affirmed, that whereas by this
Pragmaticall constitution, the authority of your supreme Seat in the Church is
restrained, and a castle of liberty provided for the Prelates of our Realm;
and unity and conformity toward your Seat (as other kingdoms observe) is
refused; Guaguinus in Ludouic. 11. The Bishops of France and the university of
Paris withstod the Pope laboring to abrogate the pragmaticall sanction. Ibidem.
the foresaid law is to be removed and abolished out of our Realm, as made by
inferior Prelates against your See, the mother of all Churches.

By these persuasions, and with urging a former promise, Pope Pius the 2. (a
great favorer and express defender of the Council of Basil before his
promotion, though after blinded with ambition, of all others he most detested
the pragmaticall sanction, and called it heresy,) wan the kings good will and
had his letters to the Senate of Paris for the repealing of this law: but
neither the kings Atturny, nor y^ Bishops would consent thereto. Yea the Schole
of Paris feared not to resist the (Popes proctor) appealing to the (next)
general Counsel.

This wisdom and freedom the Clergy men of France and students of Paris
showed and used in maintaining the Pragmaticall sanction against diverse Popes
from the year of our Lord 1438. till the year 1516. which Leo the 10. (that
in our days wrested it out of their hands) is forced to confess. We weigh
with our selves how many treaties have past between Pius the 2. Sixtus the 4.
Innocentius the 8. Alexander the 6. and Julius the 2. Bishops of Rome,
Lateranensis Council. sub. Leo. 10. Sess. 11. in bulla quae incipit, primitiua.
Five Popes before Leo had labored in vain against that law.
our predecessors, and the most christian kings of France for abolishing a
certain constitution called the Pragmaticall, bearing great sway in that
kingdom: and though Pius the 2. by his Legates sent to Lodouike the 11.
persuaded him with so many reasons, that the king himself by his letters
Patents did abrogate the said Pragmatical sanction as autorized in the time of
sedition and division; yet neither the said abrogatio^, nor the Apostolic
letters of Sextus [ the 4.] made upon concordates with the Ambassadors of the
said Lodouike were received by the Prelates and Ecclesiastical persons of
France; neither would the said Prelates and Clergy obey them, or give ear
to the admonitions of Innocentius and Julius aforenamed, but would needs
stick and cleave still to the said Pragmaticall sanction. And when upon
agreement with Frauncis the French king Leo the 10. in a Council at Rome did
abrogate the said constitution, and pronounced it utterly void, the whole
University of Paris in the year 1517. appealed from the Pope and his assembly
to a general and free Council. Their words be worth the hearing.

Appellatio vniuersitatis Parisien. repevitur in fasciculo rerum expetendarum.

Paris appealeth from the Pope.

The Pope may lawfully be resisted.

The French king commanded the Pragmatical sanction to be observed in his
Realm whether the Pope would or no.

The Divines of Paris deny the Popes assembly to have the holy Ghost.


Because he which is Gods Vicar in earth, who^ we call the Pope, though he have
authority immediately from God, yet is not thereby free from sin, neither has
received license to sin: so that we must not obey him, if he decree any thing
against the divine precepts, but rather may lawfully resist him, etc. And where
as the counsel of Basil made many good and holsom decrees for the increase of
Gods service, and health and peace of others, which Charles the 7. a most
religious adua^cer, and excellent preserver of the worship of God, and
Ecclesiastical honor, in that famous counsel of the church of France held at
Burdeux caused to be recited, and commanded to be kept inviolable, as ever
since they have bin kept and observed, etc. But now the Romans eger on their
own lusts and gains; and perceiving by this means silver and gold not to come
out of the kingdom, and delphin [of Fra^ce] as before it did, and as they wish
it should; spiting these laws, have often practiced to have them abrogated by
the Bishop of Rome, which hitherto by Gods help has bin withstood; until Leo
the 10. came, who, favoring the Romans more than he should, in a certain
meeting at Rome, which is we know not how, but surely not in the holy ghost
gathred against us, has decreed we know not upon what reason, the said holsom
statutes to be abolished, and opposing him self against the catholic faith and
authority of sacred general councels, has condemned the holy council of
Basil, etc. Therefore in these writings we appeal from our Lord the Pope, not
well advised: and from his infringing the sacred counsel of Basil, and the
Pragmaticall sanctio^, to the next council that shall be lawfully and freely
called. So far your own fellows, in this very age wherein we live, durst and
did resist your holy father.

And least you should think y^ only scholars and not Bishops, were of this
opinion: the prelates of France not past 7. years before this appeal, in a
counsel at Tours, gave their full resolution to Lodouike the 12. that it was
lawful for him to forsake the Popes obedience, Cronicon. Massaei, in anno 1510.

The French Bishops resolve their king that the Pope might be forsaken and his
censures neglected.


and to despise the Popes curses. An. 1510. the French king gathered a council
at Tours, where he proposed these questions: whether it were lawful for the
Pope to wage war with a Prince for no cause: and whether such a Prince
defending his own, might invade the beginner, and withdraw himself from his
obedience. The council answered, the Pope might not: and the Prince might do
that which was demanded, and that also the Pragmatical sanction was to be kept
throughout the Realm of France: neither need the king to care for [the Popes]
unjust ce^sures, if he cast out his thu^derbolts. This answer of the council
the king sent to Julius, who when Peter's keys would not prevail, drew out
Paul's sword, and with the shedding of much christian blood, sought an unchristian
revenge. The French me^, says Erasmus, which with their blood gate Julius so
many notable triu^phs, Adagiorum Chiliadis 2. ce^turia 5. adag. 10.
by his means, with the spilling of a great deal more blood, were thrust out of
Italy, and as though that were too little, followed with all kind of reproaches:
and if death had not prevented Julius, we had seen that most flourishing
kingdom utterly overthrown.


Phi. They gat nothing, you see, by withstanding the Popes keys.


Theo. Christendom has gotten less by wtstanding the Turk, and yet that does
not make his cause good: but Lodouike the 12. did herein no more than Philip ye
fair king of France also did before him, and put the Pope to the worse.


Phi. What did he?


Theo. He not only contemned the Popes Bulls and curses, King Philip of France
used the Pope in his kind. Laziardus historiae vniuersalis epitom. ca. 247.
but clapped his Legate by ye heels, sequestered himself and his whole realm from
his obedience, and at length caught ye Popes own person, and kept him in prison
til he died.


Phi. Durst he be so bold with his holiness?


Theo. How bold ye king of France was, a friar, as you be, shall tell you.
Bonifacius the 8. minding to send an army to Jerusalem, and hoping to get
Philip [of France] to further the matter, sent the Bishop of Apamea to the king:
who, when he perceived he could do no good, began to threaten king Philip that
he should be deprived of his crown, if he did not satisfy the Popes request;
and was therefore by the commandment of the king cast in prison. Which done,
Bonifacius a man above measure arroga^t, pretending that Philip had violated
the law of nations would needs be reue^ged, and sending the Archdeacon of
Narbon into France, forbids Philip to take any more of the church revenues,
whereas before, the king (and that Bonifacius could suffer) had one years fruit
of every vaca^t church which we call the kings due: farther he denou^ceth that
the crown of France is deuolued to the church of Rome by Philips co^tumacy, The
Pope claimed to be the depriuer of Princes.
adding that if Philip refused this, he would pronounce both him and those that
favored him heretics: moreover he appointed the bishops and certain Abbats
with the divines and Canonists a day to appear before him at Rome, and withal
declares the charters and gra^ts bestowed on the French by the bishop of Rome
to be void. This message done by the Archdeaco^ with pride enough, Philip set
the Bishop, which was kept in ward for his lewd words, at liberty; and
charged him with speed to depart the Realm; and the next spring the Prince
gathered an assembly at Paris, and rehearsing the injuries that he had received
at Bonifacius hands, asked first the Bishops of who^ they held their lands and
revenues; The king refuteth the Popes claim
then turning himself to the Nobles, and you my Lords, says he, whom do you
take for your king and ruler? (both) answering without stay, that they held
and inioyed all those things by his Princely laws: but, says the king,
Bonifacius so deals, as if you and the whole Realm of France were subject
to his See. For the Empire of the Almanes, which he thrice denied Albert, has
he now given him and also the kingdom of France. The French king promises to
defend the liberty of his land against the Pope.
But we thanking you for your fidelity and good will, and trusting to your
help, do promise to defend the liberty of our Land. The Council risen the
king by open Proclamation forbad all men to carry gold, silver, or any other
thing out of his Realm, a pain set for the breakers of this Edict; and
besides watch and ward was appointed at every passage and port to apprehend
those that came in, or went out of his Country. And not long after a (second)
Council of Bishops and Nobles were assembled at Paris, where they discussed
Bonifacius claim to the kingdom of France, the Fathers affirming that
Bonifacius was unworthy to be Bishop, for that he was an homicide, and an
heretic, whereof they had witnesses present. Therefore with one consent, they
concluded that Bonifacius ought not to be obeyed, The Realm of France conclude
the Pope ought not to obeyed.
unless he first cleared himself of that he was charged with: After this king
Philip taking the pride of Bonifacius in very ill part sent some to intimate
his appeal against the injuries of Bonifacius, who (belike meaning to gratify
the king) caught the Pope in his fathers house at Anagnia, whence the proud
Prelate was led to Rome, and cast in prison, where within four and twenty
days he ended his life, either by violence, or else for grief of heart. Thus
died Bonifacius like a dog, that went about to strike a terror into
Emperors, Kings, Princes, Countries and Commonwealthes rather than any
religion; and which assaied to give kingdoms and take them away, to advance men
and pull them down at his pleasure. Wherefore it was truly said of him, he
entered like a Fox [craftily] lived like a Lion [furiously] and died like a
dog [shamefully.] Thomas Walsingham in Edwardo 1. anno 2304.

The French king would suffer none of his land to go or send to Rome.

Sabell. Enneadis 9. lib. 7. Platina in Bonifacio 8.





Phi. This is but one man's judgment.


Theo. Yet a man of your own side: and if our English Monks do not deceive
us, it was the prophecy of Caelestinus his predecessor, who said to him, Thou
have entered like a Fox, thou will reign like a Lion, and shall die like a
dog: but the truth of the story is it that I seek for, and that in effect,
a few circumstances altered, is confessed by the best of your writers: and this
they add, which I would have you mark; that the king not only withdrew his
obedience from the Pope, but also restrained his subjects from sending or
going to Rome. So Sabellicus; Philip offended with Bonifacius, by open Edict
forbad all French men to go to Rome, or to send any money thither. So Platina;
The king meaning in part to revenge the wro^gs which the Pope had done him,
made a law, that none of his Realm should go to Rome, AEmylius in Philippo 4.
or send money thither. So Paulus AEmylius; The Bishops and prelates of France
were commanded by Bonifacius to appear at Rome by a certain day. The king
suffered no man to depart out of France: which you think much her Majesty
should at this present in a far better cause command within her dominions.


Phi. One Swallow makes no summer.


Theo. One such Summer is able to mar the Popes harvest: but herein the king of
France is not alone, the kings of England have done the like.


Phi. Which of them?


Theo. I could easily name them, but I need not. The ancient Laws and
Liberties of this Realm permit no man to go out of this land, nor appeal to
Rome without the kings consent.


Phi. Uery ancient I promise you: The ancient laws of this Realm are against
resorting and appealing to Rome.

Math. Paris in Guilielmo 2. anno 1094. 500. years ago no Bishop of this
Land subject to the Pope.

Ibidem.


those laws were first made by king Henry the 8. about fifty years since.
Is not that great antiquity?


Theo. The laws that I speak of are 500 years old, and were in full force
under William Rufus, and Henry the 1. the Sons of William the Conqueror.


Phi. Did they restrain their subjects from going to Rome?


Theo. Whether they did or no, judge you.

When Anselmus Archbishop of Canterbury asked leave of William Rufus to go to
Rome; the king replied, that no Archbishop nor Bishop of his realm should be
subject to the Pope or court of Rome, especially since he had all those
liberties in his kingdom, which the Emperor had in the Empire. And for this
cause was Anselmus conuented by the king as an offendour against the State. And
to this accusation did the most of the Bishops except the Bishop of Rochester
give their consentes. And for that he ventered over the Seas to Rome without
leave, All his goods and cattels were seized to the kings use, all his acts
and proceedings in the Church of England reuersed, and himself constrained to
live in banishment during the life of king William. Which Anselmus in his
Epistle to Pope Paschalis complains of in this sort.

The king requires of me, Anselm. Epist. 36. ad Paschalem.

Was this Land then think you, subject to the Pope?


that under pretense of right, I should yield to his pleasures, which are
repugnant to the law and will of God. For he would not have the Pope received,
nor appealed unto, in his Land, without his commandment; neither that I
should write to him, or receive answer from him; or that I should obey his
decrees. In all these things and such like, if I demanded advise, all the
Bishops of his Realm denied to give me any, but according to the kings
pleasure. After that I asked license of him to go to Rome, unto the Sea
Apostolic, the king answered, that I offended against him for the only asking
of leave: and offered me, that either I should satisfy him for the same, as a
trespass; by assuring him never to ask this leave any more, nor to appeal to
the Pope at anytime hereafter; or else that I should speedily depart out of
his Land.

And after in the time of king Henry the 1. Math. Paris in Henrico 1. anno 1104.
when the said Archbishop was returning home from Rome, the kings Attorney in
his masters name forbadde him to enter the Land, unless he would faithfully
promise him to keep all the customs both of [William conqueror] his father,
and [William Rufus] his brother. And K. Henry as soon as he perceived the Pope
and the Archbishop to continue their former opinion [against his liberties]
presently seized the Bishoprike into his hands, The two Archbishops banished
for resorting to the Pope.

Idem anno 1119.


and arested all Anselmus goods.

The like success had Thurstane Elect of York, who gate leave of K. Henry the
1. to go to the council of Rhemes, giving his faith that he would not receive
consecration from the Pope: and coming to the Synod, by his liberal gifts as
the fashion is, wan the Romans favor, and by their means obtained to be
consecrated at the Popes hands: which as soon as the king of England knew he
forbad him to come within his dominion.

To this and other such liberties of the crown, K. He^r. the 2. not long after
made al his Bishops and Nobles to be sworn, Mat. Paris in Henrico 2. anno 1164.

The laws stood in full force an 100. years after the conquest.


in a general assembly at Claredon. In the year of our Lord 1164. K. Henry
being at Claredon in the presence of the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors,
Earls, Barons and great men of the realm, there was made a rehearsal or
acknowledgeme^t of some part of the Customs and liberties of his Ancestors, to
wit of K. Henry his grandfather and others, which ought to be kept in his
realm and observed of all, to avoid the dissension and discord that often
happened between the clergy and the kings Justices and nobles of the realm.
Amongst the which custams being 16. in number these were two. Ibidem.

The Jesuits departing this Realm is against the ancient laws of the same.

Appeals to Rome prohibited by the old Laws of this Realm. An oath taken to
observe the same.

Ibidem.


No Archbishop, Bishop, nor any other person of the realm may go out of the
land without the kings leave. For appeals, if any be made, they shall come from
the Archdeaco^ to the bishop, and from the Bishop, to the Archbishop; and if
the Archbishop fail in doing justice, it shall be lawful to come last of al to
the king, that by his commandment the matter may be ended in the Archbishops
court, so that no man shall proceed to appeal any farther, without the kings
consent. This acknowledging and recording of the customs and liberties of the
crown, the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors [yea] the clergy with the
Earls, Barons and all the Nobles swear, and by word of mouth faithfully
promised should be kept and observed to the king and his heirs for ever simply
without fraud.


Phi. The selfsame writer, that you bring, dispraiseth those customs, and
calls them wicked and detestable.


Theo. His report is the stronger against you, in that he was a Monk and a
misliker of those laws; and his judgment against us, the weaker. For these
princely dignities had prevailed from the Conquest til that time, and were in
that age, yielded and sworn unto by the Bishops and clergy of his realm: and
are in themselves, if you list to discuss them, agreeable both to the sacred
scriptures and ancient councels, notwithstanding some Friars and favorers of
the Romish See did then and do now to their power withstand them.


Ph. Thomas of Canterbury made a saint for resisting his Prince.
S. Thomas of Canterbury withstood them unto death, and chose rather to lose his
life, than to yield to any such customs.


The. Do you make him a Saint for resisting his prince, or else for saving
certain lewd priests from the due punishment of the princes laws?


Ph. I count him a martyr for spending his blood in defense of the church
liberties.


The. Their rage that slew him I do not commend, because it was done by private
violence not by public authority: but his stout standing in a peevish quarrel
against his oath, against his prince to purchase impunity for homicides and
other heinous offenders against the common course of law and justice, I think
in these days you dare not openly defend, for fear least the world cry shame
on you.


Ph. You charge him with more tha^ you can prove.


The. I charge him with no more than your friends and his are forced to
confess.


Th. Archbishop of Canter. when he had granted these [16.] laws, (which this
superstitious monk calls) wicked and detestable, Mat. Paris Ibidem.

Thomas Becket the first that impugned the liberty of this realm.


and promised with an oath to keep them: examining diligently that which he had
rashly done, afflicted himself grievously, and sent straightway messengers to
the court of Rome to signify the grief of the church and his own, and asked
absolution from the band which he had unwisely entered into, which also he
obtained. The same year K.H. meaning as he said, to punish with due severity
the disorders of al sorts, affirmed it to be against reason that he should
deliver to the bishop such clergy men unpunished, as were convicted before his
Justices of any public and heinous crime. And therefore he decreed that who^
the Bishops sound guilty in the presence of the kings justice, they should
degrade and deliver to the kings court to be punished. The Archbishop stands
against the king in defense of thieves and murderers.
The Archbishop held on the contrary, that they ought not to be punished by
layme^ after they were degraded by the Bishop, lest they should be twice
punished for one thing. The occasion of this strife was given by one Philip de
Broc, a cano^ of Bedford, which being indicted of murder, spoke reprochfully to
the Judge: which when he could not deny before the Archbishop, he was deprived
of his prebend, and exiled the land for 2. years. The Archbishop seeing the
liberties of the Church now trodden under foot: without the kings knowledge,
took ship, and intended to go to Rome, but the wind being against him, he was
driven back to the shore. And immediately upon that when he was called to
account for the whole receipts, that came to his hands whiles he was Chauncelor
of England, least he should unjustly be condemned, he appealed to the Sea of
Rome, and under pain of excommunication forbad as well the Bishops as all the
nobles to give sentence against him, The fine shift of a rebel to save
himself. The Monk favors the rebellion of the Bishop.
that was there both their father and their Judge. The Nobles and Bishops, that
were called by the king for this purpose, without conviction or confession of
his gave judgment against him [alleaging and] protesting the privilege of
himself, and his church. The Archbishop driven to this extremity and forsaken
of all the rest of the Bishops, hoysed the cross which he held in his hand
aloft: and marched away from the kings court in the eyes of the^ al, and the
next night stale from the place, and gate him over to Flanders, and so to ye
Pope. He brake the oath which he took, for the keeping of the foresaid laws and
liberties of the crown: The dutifulness of Thomas Becket.
he claimed a freedom for thieves and murderers y^ they should not be subject
to the princes power: he refused ye kings court, and appealed to the pope for a
matter of debt, lest he should render an account of his temporal office whiles
he was Cha^celor; which of these three points ca^ you now with learning or
honesty defend?


Phi. The liberty of ye holy Church is a just and good quarrel for a man to die
in.


Theo. If you mean thereby an impunitie for mutherers and such like offenders,
then is it a most wicked and irreligious part for a Bishop to open his mouth
for such liberty; much more to resist his Prince for that quarrel.


Phi. His quarrel was better than so.


Theo. Neubrigensis a man of that age, and one that honored the person, and
praised the zeal of


Th. Becket, reports thus of the quarrel between the king and him. Gulielm.
Neubrigensis rerum Ang. lib. 2. cap. 16.

This is the liberty of the^ church, which Becket striued for with the king.


The king, says he, was advertised by his Judges, that many crimes were
committed by clergy me^ against the laws of his Realm, as thefts, roberies
and murders. In so much that in his audience, it was, they say, declared; that
more than an hundred murders were done in England by clergy men in the time of
his reign. Wherefore the king very much kindled in a vehement spirit made
laws against malefactors of the clergy: which he thought to make the
stronger by the consent of the Bishops. Calling therefore the Bishops
together he so plied them, (what with fair means, what with foul) that they
al save one, thought it best to yield and obey the kings will, and set their
seals to those new statutes. I say all save one; for the Archbishop of
Canterbury would not bow, but stood immovable. Whereupon the king began to be
greatly offended with him, and seeking all occasions to resist him, called him
to account for those things which he had done before as Chancellor of the
Realm. Now must you show that by Gods laws thieves and homicides, if they be
clerks, may not be punished by the princes sword; or if you dare not plead that
in these days for very shame, then must you grant that your Canterbury saint
resisting his Prince where he should not, was an Archrebell against God and the
Magistrate: Mat. Paris in Henri. 2. eodem anno.

King Henry the second against the Pope.

Appeals to Rome again prohibited. In quadrilogo. Treason to bring an
interdict from Rome.

Mat. Paris vt supra.

Not lawful to depart the Realm without the kings letters.

Banishment to regard the Popes Bull interdicting this Land.


one of these twain you must needs choose.


Phi. We shall digress too far, if we discuss these things in this place.


Theo. Your stomach, I see, does not serve you at this present, and we shall
have some other opportunity to debate the same: in the mean time learn what
laws king He^rie the 2. enacted and executed, in spite of your holy father and
his devout chaplin.

The king at the return of his Legates, perceiving his request [for the
confirmation of his ancient liberties] to be repelled by the Pope, not a little
offended therewith, wrote letters to all his Shirifes and Lieutenants in
England on this wise: I command you that if any clergy man or lay men in your
cou^tie, appeal to the court of Rome, you attach him, and hold him in fast
ward till our pleasure be known. And to his Judges in this sort: If any man be
found to bring letters or mandate from the Pope, or from Thomas the Archbishop,
interdicting the Realm of England, let him be taken and kept in prison, till I
send word what shall be done with him. The four that wrate the life and extol ye
facts of


Th. Becket ad to this law: Let him be streightway apprehended for a traitor,
and execution done upon him. Also let no clerk, monk, canon, or other religious
person go over the Seas without letters of pasport from us of our officer; if
any venture otherwise, let him be taken and cast into prison. Let no man
appeal to the Pope, or to Th. the Archbishop, neither let any suite surcease
at their commandment. If any Bishop, Abbot, Clerk or lay man shall observe
[their] sentence, interdicting our [Land,] presently let him be banished the
Realm, and all his kindred with him; and their goods and lands confiscated.
Let the Bishops of London and Norwich be summoned to appear before our
Justices, and there to answer for interdicting the Land, and excommunicating
the person of Earl Hugh contrary to the Statutes of our Realm. Thus far the
valiant and worthy Prince went in defending his Laws and liberties against
the Bishop of Rome, and how far he would have gone, but that the time was not
yet come, when God would deliver his Church from ye yoke of Antichrist,
appears by an Epistle of his written to the Archbishop of Cullain in these
words.

I have long desired to find a just occasion to depart from Pope Alexander and
his persidious cardinals, Mat. Paris in Henrico 2. anno 1167.

The Pope 400 years ago abetted traitors against the king.


which presume to maintain my traitor Thomas of Canterbury against me;
whereupon by the advice of my Barons and clergy, I mean to send the
Archbishop of York, the bishop of London, the Archdeacon of Poictiers, (etc.)
to Rome, which shall publicly denounce, and plainly propose this on my
behalf, and all the Dominions I have, to Pope Alexander and his cardinals:
that they maintain my traitor no longer, but rid me of him, that I with the advice of my clergy may set an other in the church of Canterbury. They shall
also require them to frustrate all that Becket had done, and exact an oath of
the Pope, that he and his successors, as much as in them lies, shall keep and
conserve, inviolable to me and all mine for ever, The king voweth openly to
impugn the Pope and all his.
the Royal customs of king Henry my grandfather. If they refuse any of these
my demands, neither I nor my Barons, nor my clergy will yield them any kind
of obedience any longer: yea rather we will openly impugn the Pope, and all
his, and whosoever in my Land shall be found hereafter to stick to the Pope,
shall be banished my Realm.


Phi. The king made amends for all, when the Archbishop was slain, renou^cing
the liberties which he striued for so long, and honoring him as a Martyr whom
before he pursued as a traitor.


Theo. The manifold devises and practices of the late Bishops of Rome, (God so
punishing the dullness, and discord of Princes, neglecting his truth, and
envying one an other) have weakened and wearied very many both kings and
Emperors, partly with a false persuasion of religion, partly with a number of
feigned miracles, but chiefly by drawing their subjects from them, and setting
other nations upon them; yea by stirring and arming their own blood and bowels
against them. And therefore no marvel if king Henry relented somewhat of his
former stoutnesse, when the king of France, Math. Paris i^ anno 1173.

This was one of the Popes common practices.


the Earl of Flaunders, the king of Scots, the young king his son, and two
other of his children, the Duke of Aquitane and Earl of Britain, co^spired
against him; but it is evident, that from the conquest till ye time these laws
and liberties stood in their full force and were publicly received and used in
this Realm.


Phi. Did the Pope procure him these enemies?


Theo. What packing there was between the French king and the Pope, though the
stories in this place do not confess, yet we may soon conjecture by the
general drift of your holy Father and his blessed adherents in those days,
and specially by the example of king John the son of the said king Henry,
Math. Paris in vita Iohannis anno 1212. Anno 1213.
whom (for refusing the disordered election of Stephen Langton to the church of
Canterbury) Innocentius the 3. so terrified with open invasion of enemies, and
secret defection of subjects, that for safeguard of himself he was driven to
resign his kingdom, and take it again at the Popes hands in fee farm under
the yearly rent of a thousand marks: binding himself and his heirs for ever to
do the like homage and fealty to the Bishops of Rome for the crown of
England. The barons of this realm pursued the king in co^te^pt of the Pope

Anno 1216.


Which shameful servitude of the Prince, and utter ruin of the Realm so much
displeased the barons and bishops, that before took ye Popes part against the
king, that in plain contempt of the Popes keys and curses, they chose them an
other king, and chased king John, the Popes farmour, from place to place in
despite of al y his new Landlord could do or devise. But this I omit because
the quarrel touched the right and title to the crown; I meddle only with those
resistances, which the kings of England made for men and matters ecclesiastical.


Phi. Be not these two laws ancient that be as old as the conquest?
I trust they were not many.


Theo. For the first hundred years next the conquest, it is clear the kings of
this Realm would never allow their subjects to run to Rome, nor suffer appeals
to be made to the Pope without their express consent: now shall you see, what
they which came after, did.

When king Edw. the 3. revived the statute of Praemunire (made by king Edw. the
1. in the 35. year of his reign) against such as sought to Rome to provide the^
of benefices and other ecclesiastical promotions wtin this realm, enacting the
same penalty for those that by process from thence impugned any judgment
given in ye kings courts, or brought from Rome any Bull, writing or instrument
to those and other like effects; Polydorus Virgilius in Eduar. 3.

The Pope would feign have prevailed against the statute of praemunire, and
could not.

Ibidem.


Gregory the 11. then Bishop of Rome, understanding thereof, was very earnest
against it, (protesting) this was nothing else but to make a schism in the
church of Christ, to abolish religion, to subvert right and reason, and
infringe al councils; and speedily dealt with king Edw. to abrogate this law. A
schism rising not long after (in the church of Rome) there was not a Pope that
had any care of this, til at length Martin the 5. wrote more vehement letters
to K. H. the 6. But these two bishops of Rome received one and the same answer;
which was that an act of Parliament could not be repealed without the authority
of a Parliament, and that shortly one should be called to that end, which never
after was performed. Yea the king that came after did not only cause that law
to be kept and put in ure, but increased the terror of it with a rigorous
punishment, which is, that the party so offending shall forfeit his goods and
himself be condemned to perpetual imprisonment. This writer an Italian born,
and a man wedded to the Sea of Rome, confesses the Popes authority was abated
and restrained by the laws of this Realm, in the time of king Edward the 3.
and so continued ever after; and that not only the Popes letters were twice
refused, but the sharpness of the punishment increased to strengthen the
Statute that pared their power, and limited his jurisdiction within this Realm.


Phi. Perhaps they wtstood him for temporal matters.


Theo. The matters were such as your own church accou^teth spiritual; to wit,
electio^s of Bishops, gifts of benefices and procedings in other causes;
tending, as ye co^mplaint of Gregory teaches you, In loco supra citato.
to the division of the church, extirpation of religion, and subversion of al
councels, which you may not think to be temporal matters. And this resistance
which the Bishop of Rome so much repined at, in the days of king Edward the 3.
never ceased till king Henry the 8. of famous memory banished the Popes usurped
power clean out of this Land.


Phi. So did none of his progenitors before him.


Theo. It may be they went not so far as he did; Polydor. in Richard. 2. anno.
1391.
but as Polydor writes, R. Rich. ye 2. went fairly toward it. In a Parliament
held ye 14. year of his reign the king and his princes were of opinion that
it would be very good for the realm of England, if some part of the Popes
dominion were determined with the Sea (that is excluded out of this la^d) for
that many were daily vexed for causes, which they thought could not so easily be
ended at Rome. Wherefore they made a law that no man ever after should deal
with the Bishops of Rome, No person might procure or execute any censure from
Rome
that any person in England should by his authority for any cause be
excommunicated, and that none should execute any such precept if it were sent
him. If any man brake this law, the pain appointed was, he should lose al he
had, and ly in prison during his life. And where the pope travailed by all means
to overthrow ye statute of provision and praemunire, ye parliament held in ye
13. year of Rich. ye 2. for ye better establishing and surer executing of ye
law, made it death for any man to bring or send Bull, or other process from Rome
to impugn ye same. These be the words: Ite^ it is ordained and established that
if any man bring or send within this realm or the kings power any su^mo^s, Ex
Richardo 2. anno 13.
sentence or exco^municatio^ against any person of what co^ditio^ that he be,
for the cause of making motion, assent or execution of the said statute of
Prouisors (or praemunire) he shall be taken, Richard the 2. made it death to bring
any summons or sentence from Rome.

Princes may resist the pope in their Parliaments as well as Bishops in their
Synods.


arested, put in prison and forfeit al his lands and tenements, goods and catle
for ever: and moreover incur the pain of life and member. So ye kingdoms and
co^monwelths, as well as councels: and of al others France and England have from
time to time resisted your holy father in the midst of his terror and tyrany.


P. You show they did it: but you do not show they did well in it.


Th. I need not, you must show they did il. The prince by gods ordinance
bears ye sword, and not ye pope; therefore ye presumption lies for ye prince
against ye pope, til you prove ye contrary: besides if bishops in a synod may
lawfully resist him, why may not princes in their parliame^ts do ye like?
Thirdly since ye Roman Emperors were wo^t to command him, what reason ca^ you
bring why christian princes should not now restrain him? And last of al, if you
forget not your self, my promise was to show, yt not in ye primative Church
only, when there was no question of his obedience to religious princes; but in
latter times, when the Bishop of Rome presumed to be Lord over all, he was
controled and resisted by those Councels and Commonwealths, which your own
Church never durst reject as schismatic and heretical. They resisted him
for the regiment of their Realm, not for the faith of christ.



Phi. In some things they withstood him, but not in all things as you do.


Theo. That shift is little worth. If resista^ce be lawful in part, why not in all, when just cause requires?


Phi. In matters of faith they never resisted.


Theo. That makes our resista^ce the more lawful. They withstood him for an
earthly policy, we for Christ's glory; they for external discipline, we for
Apostolical doctrine. Therefore if they might lawfully resist, much more may
we. But my demand is, only whether you see, that as the Bishop of Rome
withstood others in the regiment of the Church, so many Councels and Countries,
Princes and Prelates withstood him, as the places, which I bring, convince?


Phi. What if they did?


Theo. First did they that which I speak or no?


Phi. Grant they did.


Theo. Then your examples conclude nothing against us. For as he resisted
others in causes Ecclesiastical, so did others resist him: and our examples
infer against you that your own Church never obeyed that supreme power and
infallible judgment, which he now claims, and you now yield, to flatter him
with.


Phi. They took him for Christ's Uicar and Peter's successor.


Theo. How they took him in latter ages, it greatly skilleth not; the learned
and ancient Fathers call him Peter's successor, Christ's Uicar they never call
him. And grant he be Peter's successor, that imports no supremacy.


Phi. Does it not? Many things to be proved (which are stark false) before the
supremacy will follow.



Theo. No mary does it not. You must first prove that Peter was supreme
governor of all the Church: which you shall never do. Next you must prove,
that this dignity was not proper to Peter's person, but common to Peter's
successor, which we deny. For Peter's primacie was given him in respect of the
confession which he made, not in respect of the place which he should enjoy.
Lastly you must show which of Peter's chayres must have Peter's privilege; that
is, why Rome rather than Antioch. These three points when you justly prove, we
will say more to your vain pretenses and glorious titles: in the mean time,
till occasion serve to make farther trial, you may go forward with the rest
of your Apology; which if it be like this, it will do your friends little
good, and your foes less hurt.


Phi. You disgrace that which you can not disprove.


Theo. We need no better disproofe, than the sober reading of your insolent
and impertinent discourses purposely made to commend and advance your selves
and your adherentes above the skies. They must flatter the Pope, that live of
his alms, as you do.



Phi. Where do we so?


Theo. Almost in every leaf. For example, this whole chapter is spent in
flattering your holy Father, and praising his devout city. The next has
nothing else, but the commendation of your selves and your Seminaries; as if
the proclaiming of his and your virtues, were the chiefest point of his and
your faith.


Phi. You say not well, we do not so.


Theo. Read the places, you shall find them full of these and such like
flowers. To Rome Whatsoever is learned, Apolog. Cap. 2.
wise, virtuous, of all the most famous Universities, Monasteries, Societies
and Celleges through the world, is recuiled as to a continual mar^ of all
kind of doctrine and prudence. Ibidem.
And again: These and such other high experiments with innumerable examples of
virtue and devotion shall this Roman institution give to our Countrymen, under
the famousest teachers and governors of youth in our age, or some worlds
before: Who otherwise would admire their pety masters at home, the cause of al
error and ignorance. Are your not liberal in praising your selves? Belike you
think with your only looks to dau^t all the Divines and preachers of England,
as if not a few wandering friars and craking Jesuits, but some new Cyprians,
or famous Augustins were lately arrived at your Romish Seminary. But let pass
your follies and come to your autorities. To what end aleage you S. Hiero^?


Phi. S. Hierom calls [Rome] the place of greatest faith and devotion.
Praefat. lib. 2. in episto. ad Gal. Esa. 1.

Nahum. 3. Rome is not that it was.





Theo. What then? Jerusalem was first a faithful City, and yet in time became
a shameless strumpet. Niniueth was spared for her true repentance, and
afterward plagued for her robberies and lies. What Rome was then, does no way
prove what Rome is now. You must send us better reasons from Rome and for Rome
before you shall persuade us, that there is at Rome such store of learning and
virtue as you vaunt of. If Rome be changed since Hierom wrate, your conclusion
halteth, though his words go right.


Phi. That change you must prove.


Theo. Alas good Sirs, begin you now to doubt whether Rome be changed? Rome
chainged.

Mantuanus Syluarum lib. 1.


Read your own Friars, Monks and Abbots, and you shall soon be resolved in
that doubt. Friar Mantuan says shortly, but truly: Viuere qui sancte cupitis,
discedite Roma,
Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse bonum.


You that wish to live godly, depart from Rome; al things are there suffered
save godliness. Matthew Paris a Monk of S. Albons, every where touches ye
virtues of the church of Rome, and says they were known to the very
miscreants. For when y^ Souldan of Iconium desired to be baptized from Rome,
Math. Paris in Henrico 2. sub anno 1169.
his nobles by reason of so many vices abounding at Rome, said, How can there
come sweet and salt water from the same fountain? whence Christians should fet
the water of righteousness, Idem in Henry 3. anno 1241.
there they find a poisoned pudle. And in the year of our Lord 1241 he says:
The insatiable greedines of the Church of Rome so increased, confounding right
and wrong, that without shame as a common and impudent harlot, she lay open for
money to every man, counting usury for a small fault, and Symonie for none.

But no man more lively describes the manners and dispositions of the latter
Romans than Bernard Abbot of Clareuallis, Bernardes report of the Romans in
his time.

Bernardus de. consideratione ad Eugenium lib. 4.


and that not privily behind their backs, but openly to their faces:
forewarning Eugenius the pope what to look for at their hands: Quid tam notum
seculis, quam proteruia and fastus Romanorum? Gens insueta paci, tumultui
assueta. Gens immitis and intractabilis, vsque ad huc subdi nescia, nisi cum
non valet resistere. Experire paucis, nouerim ne and ego gentis mores. Ante
omnia sapientes sunt vt faciant mala, bonum autem facere nesciunt. Impij in
deum, temerarij in sancta, seditiosi in inuicem, emuli in vicinos, inhumani in
extraneos. Hij sunt qui subesse non sustine^t, praeesse non norunt,
superioribus infideles, inferioribus importabiles, inuericundi ad petendum, ad
negandum frontosi. Importuni vt accipiant, inquieti donec accipiant, ingrati
vbi acceperint. Docuerunt linguam suam grandia loqui, cum operentur exigua,
largissimi promissores, and parcissimi exhibitores, blandissimi adulatores, and
mordacissimi detractores, simplicissimi dissimulatores, and malignissimi
proditores. What has been so famous for many years, What examples of virtue
and devotion the Roman institution has given.
as the frowardnes and hautines of the Romans? A nation not acquainted with
peace, accustomed to tumults. A nation fierce and intractable, to this day not
able to be ruled, but when it cannot resist. Listen a while whether I know the
manners of that people or no. [The Romanes] are wise to do evil, good they
know not how to do. Irreligious toward God, presumpteous against holy things,
seditious among themselves, envious to their neighbors, discourteous to
strangers. They will neither obey, nor can tell how to rule; unfaithful to their
superiors, intolerable to their inferiors: shameless to ask, and bold to
deny. Importune to have, unquiet til they have, and unthankful when they have:
great speakers and little doers. If we should say as Bernard does I deem you
would be angry.
Most liberal to promise, most loath to perform: most sweet to flatter, most
bitter to backbite; most curious disse^blers, most mischievous traitors. Lupi
sunt, etc. They be wolves, not sheep: of such art thou shepherd: If I durst
speak all, they be rather pastures of devils than sheep.


Phi. If this be true, they be changed in deed.


Theo. The truth thereof you may not well doubt, unless you will now return him
for a liar, whom Alexander ye 3. 400. years since did canonize for a saint: but
will you stand to his judgment whose name you pretend?


Phi. What else?


Theo. The^ gain you little for the commendation of Rome. S. Hieroms report of
the madness of Rome.

Hieron. praefat. lib. 2. in Episto. ad Gala^as. Idem in Esaiae Cap. 2.

Idem ad Princip. Mar^elle Epitaph. Idem aduersus I^^ianum li. 2. Idem praefat.
in lib. Dydimi despiri^^ sancto.


For Hierom does attribute no more to the Romans than Paul does to ye Jews,
which is to be naturally zealous. And this as in true religion we count it
praise worthy, so when error prevails nothing is more pestilent. Again, this
one virtue of theirs is by and by requited in ye very same place with two
shrewd vices. Rursus facilitatis and superbiae arguuntur. Paul notes the
Romans, says he, to be proud of nature, and easily seduced. What else he found
in the^, and what he thought of the^, you shall soon perceive, if you list to
believe him. Narrant historiae tam gracae qua^latinae, nihil Iudaeoru^ and
Romanoru^ gente esse auarius. The stories both greek and Latin confess, none
to be more covetous than the Jews and the Romans. Difficile est in maledica
ciuitate non aliqua^ sinistri rumoris fabula^ contrahere. It is an hard matter
in this slanderous city [of Rome] to be free from il tongues. Nullane fuit
alia in toto orb prouincia, quae reciperet praeconiu^ voluptatis, nisi quam
Petri doctrina super Petra^fu^dauerat Christu^? Was there never an other place
in all the world to receive this voluptuous doctrine, but that which Peter's
preaching had built on the rock christ? Cum babilone versarer, and purpuratae
meretricis esse colonus and iure Quiritu^ viuere^, ecce olla illa, quae in
Hieremia cernitur, a facie Aquilonis cepit ardere, and Pharisaeoru^ conclamauit
Senatus, and omnis quasi indicto sibi praelio doctrinaru^ aduersu^ me
imperitiae faction coniurauit. Whiles I stayed at Babylon, and was an
inhabitant of that purple whore, and lived amongst the Romans, behold the pot
which was seen in Hieremie from the North began to sees, and the Senate of
Pharisees made an uproar, and the whole faction of rude and ignorant, as it
were in defiance of learning, conspired against me. He y^ says the Romans be
zealous, adds also yt they be covetous, envious luxurious and proud pharisees.
Lay your one virtue to these four vices which Hierom saw growing, and Bernarde
found ripe at Rome, Cyprian and Augustine forced by the Jesuits to make for
Rome.

Cypri. epist. 55. vel li. 1. epist. 3.


and tell us what you get by this account.

With as great discretion you cite the words of S. August. and S. Cypria^ for
the praise of the sea of Rome, drawing S. Augustins words from their true
meaning, and corrupting in Cyprian both the saying and the sense. For S. Aug.
says, Heretics bark in vain, at the church, not of Rome, but of Christ. And
Cyprian means himself, not yt bishop of Rome, when he says: Ob hoc ecclesiae
praepositu persequitur, vt gubernatore sublato atrocius atque violentius circa
ecclesiae naufragia grassetur. The adversary for this cause persueth the
bishop of the church, that the governor being made out of the way, the
shipwreck of the church may follow with the greater mischief and violence.
Other words in y^ epistle which you quote there be none: and these differ much
from the words which you allege. Apolog. Cap. 1.
They baul against the Pastor, the sooner to sease upon the flock, as Cypria^
speaks. And so with three maimed and miswrested authorities you close up the
loosenes of your second chapter.


Phi. S. Aug. surely means ye see of Rome when he says, August. de vtilitate
Credendi Cap. 17.

From the Apostles See, is from the time the Apostles sat or taught in the
church.


Quae ab Apostolica sedeper successiones Episcoporu^ frustra circu^latrantibus
haerelicis culmen autoritatis obtinuit: Which from the Apostolik See, by
successio^s of bishops, (heretics barking round about in vain,) has obtained
the highest authority.


Theo. Mean what you will by Apostolic See: ye word ( frustra haereticis
circumlatrantibus, heretics barking on every side in vain) must be referred
either to the chiefest, or else to ye nearest substa^tiue in ye sentence, and
Seeds apostolica is neither. The chiefest substa^tiue is the [catholike]
church; the nearest is, the successio^s of bishops on one side, the height of
authority on ye other side. August. de vtilitate credendi Cap. 17.
For thus says Aust. Shall we dout to commit our selves to the bosom of that
[catholike] church, which by the confession of al me^, from the Apostles seat
[or time] by [many] successio^s of bishops, heretics barking on every side in
vain, has gotten the chiefest credit or authority? By this assertion
heretics did bark in vain either at ye catholic church it self, or at the
successio^s of bishops, or at ye credit and authority which the Church of
Christ had by ye confession of al me^. But yt they did bark in vain at ye see
of Rome, I find no such thing in these words of Aust.


Phi. The church received her authority from ye Apostolik See, which is Rome.


Theo. The phrase ab ipsa Petri sede, from Peter's seat, which is usual in S.
Aust. and more effectual the^ this, does not signify from Rome, but from
Peter's seat. As Numerate sacerdotes vel ab ipsa Petri sede. Number the priests
(not from Rome, August. in Psalmo contrae partem Donati.
but) from Peter's seat; that is, from Peter's time. And again, Tenet me ab ipsa
Petri sede successio sacerdotu^: The succession of priests from Peter's time
staieth me in the church. And likewise in this place, Ab apostolica sede, Idem
contrae epistolam quam vocant Fundamenti, Cap. 4. From, not in the Apostles
seat.
from the apostles seat, is, ever since ye apostle sat: and yt the words
following confirm. For in Rome you can reckon but one succession of bishops:
and Auste^ says, Ab apostolica sede per successiones Episcoporu^, by many
successions of bishops even from the apostles time. So yt neither the words
which you allege, should be referred to Seeds Apostolica, the apostolic
seat, nor if they were does y^ phrase infer y^ the church had al her credit
from Rome, but y^ by the confession of al men, the [catholike] Church had been
in greatest credit ever since the time that Peter sat, through the
successions of [her] bishops, heretics barking [against her] in vain.


Phi. You said there was nothing in our second chapter worth answering: it has
cost you more pains the^ you thought.


Theo. Your general and dissolute discourses I told you were to little purpose.
For grant yt some godly men resorted to Rome, whiles the bishop there was equal
with his brethren and obedient to the magistrate, which is all that you prove;
what does this help you, to conclude that you may now run to Rome, the Pope
clayming and usurping a new found power repugnant to the scriptures,
injurious to the Church of Christ, and pernicious to the Prince, whom God has
anointed over you.


Phi. In our days the Pope claims a new found power over the church and
Prince.

Apolog. Cap. 2.


The Pope claymeth no such power as you speak of.


Theo. What power he claims and uses over princes, is too well known for you
to deny. The world has had long experience of it, this Realm has had late.
What authority he chalengeth over the Church of Christ, if he did keep
secret, you do not. You make him the rock of refuge in doubtful days and
doctrines, the chief pastor and Bishop of your souls in earth. The vicar
general of Christ: and he that takes these titles to himself without
alowance from God, is an enemy to Christ, and oppresses his Church.


Phi. God has allowed the Bishop of Rome that power which he claymeth.


Theo. That if you could prove, the matter were answered; and that til you do
prove, your popular persuasions are, as I said, but lip-labor, and no way
concern the cause.


Phi. That is and shall be proved.


Theo. Never feed us with shales, you never were, nor ever shall be able to
prove it.


Phi. Suspend your judgment till you see the end.


Theo. I am content to hear all, mary in the mean time you may not presume
that which is but lightly touched by you, to be clearly proved.


Phi. We will not.


Theo. By that which you have done I guess what you will do. We have discussed
two chapters of your Apology: where we found nothing but words. And therefore
unless you draw to some matter, I see no reason why I should stand refelling
your phrases.


Phi. The third chapter goes nearer.


Theo. The intent of the Popes Seminaries.
In your third chapter what shall we find?


Phi. The meaning and purpose why both our Seminaries were erected.


Theo. Your own purposes you can best tell.


Phi. First to draw diverse youth who for their conscience lived in the low
Countries, from sole, several and voluntary study, to a more exact method
and course of common conference and public exercise to be pursued by their
superiors appointment rather than their own choice. Secondly doubting the time
of our chastisement might be so long as to wear out either by age,
imprisonment, or other miseries, the elder sort of the learned Catholics both
at home and abroad, it was thought a necessary duty for the posterity to
provide for a perpetual seed and supply of Catholics, namely of the Clergy.
Thirdly their purpose was, to draw unto this College the best wits out of
England, that were either Catholikely bent, or desirous of more exact educatio^
than is in these days in either of the universities (where through the
delicacie of that sect, there is no Art holy or profane thoroughly studied, and
some not touched at al) or that had scruple of conscience to take the oath of
the Queens supremacy in causes ecclesiastical, or that misliked to be forced
to the Ministry, as the use is in diverse Colleges: a calling contemptible
even in their own conceit, and very damnable in the judgment of others, or
that were doutful whether of the two religions were true, which has driven
diverse over to their great satisfaction, and admiration of the evidence of our
part. These were the chief respects that led his holiness to found our two
Seminaries, the fruits whereof we have seen to our great comfort.


Theo. And this I see, you keep your old wont. You affirm what you list upon
your own credit; and disdaining your adversaries as profane and unlearned,
you commend your selves for the only minions of the world: set this aside, and
what one thing is there in your third chapter worth the speaking to.


Phi. You mislike that Seminaries were appointed for English Students beyond
the seas. We now prove the first erection of them to be needful and healthful
for this realm.


Theo. Sir, your liege Lady misliked and had good cause so to do, that her
subjects were ^locked from her and encouraged against her by your practices and
promises, and that her open and sworn enemy kept them in couerts, which you
call Seminaries, and trained them up at his charges to be fit instruments for
his secret devises and purposes. Of this you speak not a word, but arrogantly
defacing both Uniuersities with loosenes of life and slackenes of study, you
come in with your exact education, and holy conversation, as if the report of
your own virtues from your own mouths were enough to avoid and prevent al
objections.


Phi. That answer might serve, where nothing was proved, but only surmised
against us.


Theo. You forget that a Prince did object it, to whom you were bound with all
reverence and duty to make your full and sufficient answer.


Phi. So have we done.


Theo. Mary that you have in deed.

The things misliked were these. What things were misliked in the Seminaries.
First, that by your means young boys were provoked and allured to forsake
their parents, unstable wits their Studies, subjects their Prince without
asking leave, no tyranny nor torment inflicted or offered to cause them to
fly. Next, that your seminaries, as well for their direction as provision, do
wholly depend on his pleasure and favor, that has ever since the beginning
professed and showed himself a mortal enemy to your sovereign; deposing her
Person, inuading her land, and pulling her subjects from her obedience.
Thirdly, that your teachers and learners in either of your colleges, do not
only nourish this traiterous position in their own breasts, that her highness
neither is, nor ought to be taken for lawful Queen of England longer than
the Pope shall permit: but also labor to poison her people with that devilish
persuasion, under color of religion. These points your Patron cunningly
skippeth, and falls to the commending and preferring the manners, orders, and
virtues of your two Colleges before our two universities, which comparison is
neither seemly to be published, nor easy to be credited.


Phi. Concerning his holiness intentions, Apolog. cap. 3.
if they be any other in the institution and entertainment of those
Seminaries, than ours are, they by unknown to us, none being so presumptuous
to search further into his secrets than stands with his good pleasure and
wisdom to utter of himself, nor any having just cause to deem worse or
otherwise of his doings, than is agreeable to his high calling, approved good
affection to our Country, his great virtue, and the evidence of the thing.


Theo. The Jesuits know not the Popes intention, and yet they take part with
him against their Prince.
In truth we seek for your founders intentions, not for yours: and therefore
this only sentence in all your third chapter makes toward the matter in
question, which you conclude with an ignoramus, protesting his holiness
intentions to be unknown to you.


Phi. Uerily so are they.


Theo. You may wink at noone days and say you see nothing: yet this you know,
that subjects should not leave their prince upon every dislike and flee the
Country, much less link and join themselves with the Princes foes: least of
all take the crown from the Princes head, at the Popes beck. His secrets
though you search not, these doings you may soon discern.


Phi. We be far from any such dealings.


Theo. As far as water from the Tems.

Do none flee the realm to come to your Seminaries?


Phi. They may flee that be persecuted.


Theo. Does the prince persecute children in Grammar schools?


Phi. Apol. Cap. 3. Jesuits drawers of children from their Parents, and
subjects from their Prince. Apolog. Cap. 3.
That in conscience were too much.


Theo. Yet you confess, Grammar scholars from al parts of the realm have
yielded you many youths, and many (gentlemen's sons specially) adventure over
to you without their parents consent, and sometimes much against their wills.
And think you this lawful to entice children from their parents, and subjects
from their Prince, to be infected by you before they can judge of you?


Phi. We do not entice them to come, but instruct them when they come.


Theo. Remember you not, your third purpose was to draw into these Colleges the
best wits out of England? So that your own words convince you to be
drawers, which is all one with enticers of boys from their schools, of
children from their parents, and this I win, you can hardly defend to be
Catholic. Besides, your purpose was to draw (for this is your term) those
that were desirous of exact education, Apolog. Cap. 3.
or had scruple of conscience to take the oath of the Queens supremacy, or
that misliked to be forced to the ministry, or that were doubtful whether of
the two religions were true. So that your Seminaries be not only receipts for
such as be lightly touched by the laws of this Realm, but harbors for all
that be desirous, scrupulous, dislykers or doubters: that is in effect, baits
for all men's appetites, and marts for all men's purposes, that be any way
grieved with the State, or affect novelties.

What is it to be the slaves of men if this be not? Campion in his 2. article.
Next that you be fed and clothed at the Popes expenses, and in such thraldom
to the Popes agent, your superior as you call him, that you will and must
accept his voice, as a warrant from heaven and an oracle of Christ, since you
proclaim it, we need not prove it. And this is to be right of the Popes fold
and family, whose hatred and hostility to the Prince and this Realm how
deadly and daily it has been and is, England, Ireland, yea Rome it self can
witness; and if you would dissemble never so deeply, you neither are nor can be
ignorant.

Campion and Parsons did ask leave of the Pope to agnise her majesty for
lawful Queen, until the Bull might be put in execution: Or if these be not
sufficient, the late defense will serve for all. In his 40. motive.
Lastly what you think and teach of her Majesty's right to the Crown since
Pius the fifth gave forth his Bull to deprive her of the same, if Sanders
monarchy, Bristoes motives, Campions and Parsons dispensation did not fully
convince, the answer of your fellows upon their examinacions and at their
araignements, your refusal to speak when you be required, and ambiguous manner
of speaking when you be thereto pressed, do plainly show you that you think
that which you dare not utter, and teach more than you would have known. Or if
that which is past be not proof enough, for your better discharge let us have
your answer at this present: Is her Maistie right and lawful Queen of this
Realm notwithstanding the Pope did or do depose her?


Phi. You now digress from our purpose.


Theo. Then belike obedience to ye magistrate does not stand with your purpose.


Phi. Your question is very dangerous.


Theo. No danger at all if you be good subjects.


Phi. As good subjects as you for your lives.


Theo. And, as Bristowe says, better; save that crakes be common with
Jesuits. But this is a shrewd sign of an ill subject, to refuse to confess
your rightful Prince.


Phi. We be not Judges between the Pope and the Queen.


Theo. So said Campion at the kings bench, but til you make us some directer
answer, give us leave to take your seminaries, if not for schools of treason,
yet at least for nourceries of disobedience. Your opinion in this point if it
be good, why do you not confess it? If it be naught, why do you not revoke
it? Your Apology should have either defied it as no part of your meaning, And
that your defense of English Catholics expressly does.
or else defended it as honest and lawful. You do neither in this place; but
flattering the Pope you believe it, and fearing the Prince you conceal it. And
least your dissembling should be suspected, you fill this chapter with
needless vagaries, from your selves to your adversaries, from doctrine to
manners, from England to Scotland, auouching what you list, defaming whom you
can, presuming all that you dream to be true without care, without cause;
without shame, without sense.


Phi. You rail Theophilus. Apol. Cap. 3.



Theo. And what do you Philander; when you say, The fruits of the Protestants
doctrine, their profane life and manners, their restless contentions,
debates, and dissentions among themselves, their scandals mo in those few
days of their felicity, than was given of the true Clergy in a thousand
years before, though all the adversaries slanderous reports of them were
Gospel, as many of them be more false than Esops Fables. Apolo. chap. 3.
And again of Scotland you say, The Caluinists horrible infamous murdering of
his highness father, and more than barbarous vilany and misuse of his dearest
mother whiles she was among them, and the sundry detestable treasons co^triued
against his Roial person when he was yet in his mothers womb, as often since,
as well otherwise by wonted treacheries, as by infecting his tender age both
with their damnable heresy, and with ill affection toward his dearest
parents. What call you this, if it be not railing? What libell could be more
lewd and infamous than this? Happy men are you that may thus disdain,
reproach, belie and revile others and not be counted railers.

Touching our lives, we will say little, we refer the judgment thereof to such
as be sober; neither do we deny, but that among so great a number as this
realm yields, it is easy to find some that serve not God but their bellies,
and seek not Christ but their own. And yet I see no cause why you should
ouerlash so much in excusing your selves and accusing others, as if our
scandals (so it pleases you to speak) were mo in these few days,
Experiments of Popes and their clergy out of the reports of their own friends.
than yours in a thousand years before. For if those things be true, which not
our favorers, but your own fellows have reported and lamented in no worse
than the fountains of your faith, and heads of your Church; I will not say the
refues of England, but even the Priests of Baal and Bacchus, were Saints in
comparison of so lewd and intolerable monsters.

Stephanus the sixth, Martin. Polo. in an. 898.907. Platina in Stepha. 6. and
Sergio 3.

Luitpr and* Ticinensis li 6. ca. 6. and 7.


and Sergius the third pulled Formosus their predecessor out of his grave, the
one cutting off his fingers, the other his head, and cast his carkas into
Tybris. John the twelfth gave orders in a stable amongst his horses, abused his
fathers concubine, made his palace a stues, put out his Ghostly fathers eyes,
gelded one of his Cardinals, ran about in arms to set howses on fiar, drank
to the devil, and at dise called for help of Jupiter and Venus.

Martin. Polon. in anno 986. Platina in Bonifacio 7. Platina in Syluestro 2.
Boniface the seventh getting the Popedom by il means, robbed Saint Peter's
church of all the Jewels and precious things he could find, and ran his ways;
and returning not long after, caught one of his Cardinals and put out his eyes.

Syluester the second, leaving his Monastery, betook himself wholly to the
devil, by whose help he gate to be Pope; on this condition, that after his
death he should be the devils both body and soul. Benedict the ninth sold his
Popedom to Gregory the sixth, Platina in Benedicto 9.
and was therefore worthily blamed of all men, and by Gods judgment condemned.
For it is certain that after his death he appeared in an ougly shape, Martin.
Polon. in anno 1042.
(with the head and tail of an ass, and the body of a bear) and being asked
what that horrible sight meant, because, says he, whiles I was Pope, I lived
like a beast, without law, without reason, defiling the Chair of Peter with all
kind of lewdnes.

Beno Cardinalis de vita and gestis Hildebra^d.
Of Gregory the seventh and his adherents Beno ye cardinal writes thus: Let
these hypocrites hold their peace, that have disgraced and almost drouned the
name of blessed Peter, by cloking the flames of their malice, under a color of
Catholicisme and pretense of justice. Let these false prophets be astonished
that are courteous in show, scorpio^s in sting, wolves under lambs skins,
killing the bodies and devouring the souls of men with the sword of their
mouth, whose religion sauoureth nothing but of traiterousnes and covetousness,
entering the houses of widows, they lead women captives that be laden with
sins; and by reason of our troublesome times give ear to spirits of error
and doctrines of devils, which Hildebrand their captain learned of his masters
Benedict the ninth, and Gregory the sixth.

Abbas vrspergensis in anno 1228.
Gregory ye ninth, as Vrspergensis co^plaineth, taking occasion by the
Emperors absence (that was fighting against the Turk,) sent a great army
into Apulia, and invaded and subdued the Emperors dominions being the^ in the
service of Christ; a fact most heinous: and did his best both in Apulia and
Lumbardie to hinder such as were going that viage from passing the Sea (seeking
thereby to betray the Christian Emperor and his army to the Turk: Ibidem.
) Yea the men of Verona and Millan would suffer none to pass by their coasts,
spoiling the very soldiers that were sent to fight against the Turk, and that
by the commandment of the Pope as they affirmed: which alas is horrible to be
spoken. Who rightly considering, will not lament and detest these things, as
portending and foreshewing the ruin of the Church?

Math. Paris in anno 1213.
Mathewe Paris gives Innocentius the 3. this commendation. King John, says
he, knew and by often experience had tried, that the Pope above al mortal men
was ambitious and proud, an insatiable thirster after money, and easy to be
drawn and induced to all wickedness by gifts or promises.

Sixtus the fourth, made his playfelow Cardinal, who was wont to wear cloth of
gold at home in his house, Baptist. fulgo. lib. 9.

Agrippa de Le^^^inio and orat. ad Lou^nienses.


to ease nature in stools of silver, and to deck his harlot Tiresia with shoes
covered with pearl: as Agrippa reports, he built a sumpteous stews in Rome,
appointing it to be both masculine and feminine, and making a gain of that
beastly trade: As Vuesselus Gronnigensis says, he gave the whole family of
the Cardinal of S. Luce, Vuesselu^ Gro^nigensis tract. de Indulgen^ijs.
free leave in June, Iulie, and August, to use that which nature abhors, and
God in Sodom revenged with fire and brimstone. One of your own side
perceiving the lothsomnes of his life, makes the devil give him this
entertaynment in hell: At tu implume caput, cui tanta licentia quondam,
Baptist. Mant. Alphon. lib. 4.

Femineos fuit in coitus; tua furta putabas
Hic quoque praetextu mitrae impunita relinqui?
Sic meruit tua faeda venus, sic prodigia in omnem
Nequitiam, ad virtutis opus tua auara libido.


But thou, thou bauld pate, which have so licentiously defiled thy self with
women, did thou think thy secret sins by reason of thy myter should here
go unpunished? Receive the reward of thy filthy pastimes, so has thine
outrageous lust to all lewdnes, and void of all goodness, deserved.

It is too shameful that Johannes Iouianus Pontanus writes of Lucretia the
daughter of Alexander the sixth. Pontan. tumulorum lib. 2. in tumulo Lucretiae
Alexan. 6. filiae.
Hoc tumulo dormit Lucretia nomine, sedre
Thais, Alexandri filia, sponsa, nurus.


Here lies Lucretia in name, in deed a shameless whore; the daughter of
[Pope] Alexander, her fathers and brothers harlot. The fact so horrible, that
it were not credible, Acti Sannazar. epigram. lib. 1. and 2.
if others did not confirm the same.

I will trouble chaste ears no longer with this unsavory repetition. These
disorders of Popes if you weigh them well be more than scandalous, and give you
small cause to vaunt of your virtues.


Phi. These be the things that we told you, were more false than Esops fables.


Theo. It were reason you should prove them false, before you reject them as
fables: men of your own sect and side laying the^ down for truths in their
writings, you may not now take upon you to pronounce them fables, lest your
credit be called in question, and your selves reputed to be worse than liars.
These things, be they true, be they false, we report them as we find them in
your own stories; not your adversaries but your welwillers were the first
autors of them. And unless we see some surer ground than your bare denial,
we may better charge you with open flattery, than you may them with wilful
forgerie.


Phi. The number is not great though y^ matters were true.


Theo. The rest of their outrages if I would reckon; namely their schisms,
co^tentions and tumults for the Popedom, their ambition, presumption,
oppression; briberie, perjury, tyranny; pride, craft, hypocrisy; to conclude
their garboyles, battles and bloodshed; an whole volume would not suffice.

And where you make your Clergy so free from scandals, hear what men of
former times and of your own side have spoken and written of your Bishops,
Priests, Monks and others. Bernard of his age. Bernard. supra Cant. sermon. 33.
The Jesuits promise high experiments of their Roman institution; the
patterns whereof if any man will see, let him ^ead these complaints of their
own fellows.
Behold, says he, these times very much defiled with the work that walks in
darkness. Woe be to this generation because of the leaven of Pharisees, which is
hypocrisy; If it may be called hypocrisy, which is now so rife, that it can
not; and so shameless, that it seeks not to be kept secret. A rotten
contagion creeps at this day through the whole body of the Church, the wyder
the desperater; the more inward, the more deadly. All friends, and al enemies:
al familiar; and none peacemakers; they be the ministers of Christ, and serve
Antichrist. Thence is it, as thou may daily see, that they be trimmed like
whoores, attired like plaiers, served like Princes. Thence is it, that they
wear gold in their bridles, sadles and spurs; yea their spurs shine brighter,
than the Altars: thence are their bankets and drunkenness; thence their music
and instruments; thence their wine presses running over, and stoarehouses
stuffed with all variety; thence their barrels of ointments to paint
themselves; thence their bags and bugets full. For these things are they, and
seek they to be rulers of churches, Deanes, Archdeacons, Bishops, Archbishops.
The wound of the Church is inward and incurable. Rest from infidels, rest from
heretics, but not from children. They have despised and defiled [her] with
their filthy life, with their filthy gain, with their filthy trade. Sermo.
ad Clerum in council. Rh^mensi congregatum inter opera Bernardi.
Ye be called Pastors, when in deed ye be spoylers, and would God the milk
and fleese did suffice ye, ye thirst for blood. The Archpriest visits his
charge to fill his purse; he betraieth innocent blood, he sells murders,
adultries, incests, fornications, ^acrileges, periuries, and fills his pouch
to the brim. And as for the ornament of chastity, how keep they that, which
being delivered into a reprobate sense, do that which is not fit? It is a shame
to name those things, which the bishops do in secret. But why should I be
ashamed to speak that, which they are not ashamed to do? Yea the Apostle is not
ashamed to write, me^ upon me^ work filthiness, receiving the reward of their
error. With the patrimony of the cross of Christ you feed whores in your
chambers, Idem sermo. ad Pastores in Synodo congregatos.
you fat your flesh, you furnish your horses with pectorals and headstals of
gold. For this you claw Princes and Powers of darkness, both men and devils.
He that list to read more of your scandals, may in that place whence this is
taken, have enough.

Albert. in Ioh. Cap. 10.
Albertus Magnus of his time gives this testimony: Those which now rule in
the Church, be for the most part thieves and murderers, rather oppressors than
feeders, rather spoilers than tutors, rather killers than keepers, rather
peruerters than teachers, rather seducers than leaders. These be the messengers
of Antichrist, and underminers of the flock of Christ.

Opusculi tripartiti part 3. Cap. 7. reperitur in tomo conciliorum 2.
The tripartite work that stands next to the Council of Lateran under
Innocentius the 3. long since complained of your Clergy in this sort: So great
is the notorious uncleanness of lechery in many parts of the world, not in
clerks only, but in Priests also, and that (which is horrible to hear) in the
prelates themselves. Again, they spend the goods of the Church so badly, in
vanities, superfluities, setting up and advancing their kinsmen, and in many
other riots and sins; yea there is such a number, and those no small ones,
that do no good in the church, but spend their days in pleasures by reason of
the wealth of the church, that it is much to be feared, least God for these and
other heinous offenses [of the clergie] passing great, very many, and now
inueterate; do overthrow, or cause the ecclesiastical state to be
overthrown, as it came to pass in the Jews first exalted by God, and after
destroyed for ever.

Holcot 20. years since. The Priests of our age, says he, be like the Priests
of Baal: Holcot in lib. Sapientiae lectio. 182.

Platina in vita Marcellini.


they are wicked Angels: they resemble the Priests of Dagon: they are Priests
of Priapus and Angels of hell.

And lest you should dream that nearer our time your Clergy began to be
better reformed, Platina says, What shall we think will become of our age,
wherein our vices are grown to that height, that they skant have left us
place with God for mercy? How great the covetousness of priests is, and
especially of the rulers among the^, how great their lechery of al sorts, how
great their ambition and pomp, how great their pride and sloth, how gross
their ignorance both of themselves and of christian doctrine, how small their
devotion, and that rather fained than true, how corrupt their manners, I need
not speak.

Friar Mantuan not long after him, Mantua. Calaemitatum lib. 3.
in that point agrees with him. Petrique domus polluta fluenti
Marcescit luxu, nulla hic arcana reuelo,
Non ignota loquor: liceat vulgata refer.
Sic vrbes populique ferunt, ea fama per omnem
Iam vetus Europam mores extirpat honest^s.
Sanctus ager scurris, venerabilis ara Cynedis
Seruit, honorandae diuum Ganimedibus edes.
Quid miramur opes recidiuaque surgere tecta?
Venalia nobis
Templa, sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, coronae,
Ignes, thura, preces, celum est venale deusque.


The house of Peter defiled with excessive riote is quite decayed; I reveal
here no secrets, neither speak I things unknown: I may utter that which is in
every man's mouth. Cities and Countries talk of it, and the very brute thereof
scatered long since over al Europe has quenched al care of virtue. The church
lands are given to common Iesters: the sacred altar allotted to wantons: the
temples of saints to boys provided for filthy lust. Why wonder we to see
wealth flow, and houses that were fallen to be stately built? We sell temples,
Priests, Altars, sacrifices, garlands, fire, frankensense, prayers, we sell
heaven and God himself. Of your Priests he says, Ibidem.
Inuisi superis faedaque libidine olentes
Heu frustra incestis iterant sacra orgia dextris.
Irritant, irasque mouent, non numina flectunt.
Nil adiutoribus istis
Auxilij sperate, nouis date templa ministris;
Sacrilegum genus ex adytis templisque Deorum
Pellite, nec longos scelera haec vertantur in vsus.


Hateful to heaven, and loathsome with unclean lust, alas in vain attempt they
sacred rites with incestuous hands. They rather kindle and provoke God, than
appease him: never hope for help as long as such pray for you: give the
Churches to new ministers, and chase this sacriligious generation from the
divine places; neither let their heinous sins grow to a custom. By him we
may learn what fruits to look for of your Romish Seminary. Mantuan. ec^oga 5.
Heu Romae nunc sola pecunia regnat,
Exilium virtus patitur.
Idem factorum lib. 2. de carnispriuij consuetud.
Vrbs est iam tota lupanar.
Idem Syluarum, lib. 1.
Roma quid insanis toties? quid sanguine gaudes?
Quid geris imbelli spicula tanta manu?
Si foris arma tacent, tu bella domestica tentas,
Nec feritas requiem far superba potest.
Tu fratres in bella vocas, in pignora patres,
Et scelus omne audes, and paris omne nefas.
Fas and iura negas, homines and numina fallis,
Nec Iouis imperium, nec Phlegethonta times.


Alas at Rome now nothing but money does reign, virtue is quite banished: the
whole City is a stews. Rome why art thou so often mad? why delightest thou in
blood? Why with weak hands do thou assay so mighty weapons? If peace be
abroad, thou make war at home; neither can thy fierce pride away with rest.
Thou set brother against brother, father against son, thou venterest on
al mischief and hatchest al vilany: thou regardest neither right nor law: thou
beguilest both God and man: thou fea^est neither heaven nor hell.

Auentinus annalium Bolorum lib. 6. praefat.
Auentinus a man likewise of your side and not long since alive complains not
without cause. Since [the Bishop of Rome] has so great power, why does he not
use it? since the harvest is so great, why does he not reap? why does he not
feed when he sees so many sheep die for hunger? Why does he set over the
flock, goats, wolves, libidinous, adulterous persons, abusers of virgins and
Nuns, cooks, Mulettors, thieves, banckers, usurers drones, hunters after
gain, luxurious, perfidious, forsworn, ignorant asses? I speak not by
hearesay; I write that I see with these eyes. Why does he commit sheep to
wolves? why does he suffer his flock to be in subjection to most pernicious
hypocrites, providing only for their own bellies? nay why does he let boys
and wantons rule his lambs? I am ashamed to say what manner of Bishops we
have. With the revenues of the poor they feed hounds, horses; I need not say
whores; they quaffe, they make love, and flee all learning as infection. Such
is the misery of these times, we may not speak that we think, nor think that
we speak. As for the sheep committed to their charge; to sheere them, strip
them, and kill them, as every man list, under a pretense of devotion, is now an
ancient custom.

If one witness be not sufficient, you shall have more, and those of your not our
religion, to confess the same. Palingenius an Italian suppliant to the Church
of Rome describes at large the monsterous corruption of your Roman Clergy.
Marcel. Palin. Zodiaci vitae lib. 5. in Leone.
Sed tua praecipue non intret limina quisquam
Frater vel Monachus, vel quauis lege sacerdos.
Hos fuge, pestis enim nulla hac immanior. Hi sunt
Faex hominum, fons stultitiae, sentina malorum.
Agnorum sub pelle lupi, mercede colentes,
Non p^etate Deum: falsa sub imagine recti
Decipiunt stolidos, ac relligionis in vmbra,
Mill actus vetitos, and mill piacula condunt.
Raptores, moechi, puerorum corruptores
Luxuriae atque gulae famuli celestia vendunt.
Hos impostores igitur, vulpesque dolosas
Pelle procul.
Mystae vafrique cuculli Idem lib. 6. in Virgin.

Quos castos decet esse, palam cum pellicibus vel
Furtim cum pueris, matronis, virginibusque
Nocte dieque subant: sunt qui consanguiniarum
Inguinibus gaudent: ineunt pecudes quoque multi:
Pro pudor, hos tolerare potest ecclesia porcos Idem lib. 9. in Sagittario.

Duntaxat ventri, veneri somnoque vacantes?


Let no Friar, Monk or any Priest come within thy doors. Take heed of them;
no greater mischief. These are the dregs of men, the fountains of folly,
the sinckes of sin, wolves under lambs skins, s^ruing God for reward, not
devotion; deceiving the simple with a false show of honesty; and under the
shadow of religion hyding a thousand unlawful acts, a thousand heinous
offenses: committers of rapes, fornicators, abusers of boys, slaves of
gluttony and luxury, they sell heavenly things. These imposters and crafty
foxes chase far from thee. The Priests and Monks that should be chaste,
spend night and day either openly with whoores or closely with boys, matrones
and maids. Some spare neither blood, nor beast. O shame! Can the Church endure
such hogs given only to feed their bellies, satisfy their lusts, and take
their ease?

Cornelius one of the bishops that were present at your late council of Trent
in the midst of your assembly does acknowledge that to be true which Auentinus
and Palingenius before complained of. Oration Cornelij Epi. Bitonti. 3. Dominica
aduent. in council. Triden habit^.
With what monsters of filthiness, says he, with what canel of uncleanness, with
what pestiferous contagion are not both people and priests defiled and
corrupted in the holy church of God? I make your selves Judges, and begin at
the sanctuary of God; if there were any shamefastnes, any chastity, any hope
or help of honest conversation left: if there were not lust unbridled and
untamed, singular boldness, and incredible wickedness. For those two
bloodsuckers, which always cry bring, bring; one the mother, the other the
nource of all evil; I mean covetousness and ambition, either a secret and
subtle mischief, poison, plague, and monster of the world (whiles learning
and virtue are despised, and in their places ignorance and vice highly advanced
by those whom we should take for quick and living laws) have brought to pass
that edification is changed to destruction, examples to offenses, custom to
corruption, regard of laws to contempt thereof, Experiments confessed in the
late Counc^l of Trent.
severity to slacknes, mercy to impunitie, piety to hypocrisy, preaching to
contention, solemn days to filthy Mar^es, and that which is most unhappy,
the savor of life to the savor of death. Would god they were not fallen with
one consent from religion to superstition, from faith to infidelity, from
Christ to Antichrist, yea from God to Epicurisme, saying with their wicked
hearts and shameless faces, there is no God. The Turks proud with the
victories, and rich with the spoils that they have gotten from Christians;
grew not by their own strength, but by our corrupt manners; they were not so
much enemies, as scourges from God; their weapons assaulted us, but our sins
prevailed against us; they showed their fiercenes, we suffered for our
iniquities. And would God we alone had suffered, and that the sacred and
admirable name of Christ Jesus had not bin a jest and fable among the faithless
Jews and Gentiles by reason of us, whose slouthfulnes and wickedness is bruted
over all the world with a most shameful report.


Phi. You need not reproach us so bitterly, your selves be not free from all
faults.


Theo. I never said we were. I know these be the later times, when iniquity
shall abound, Mat. 24. 2. Tim. 3.
and the charity of many wax cold, yea when men shall be lovers of
themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers, ungrateful, unholy,
unkind, unfaithful slaunderers, intemperate, fierce, headie, high minded,
preferring their pleasures before God, as the holy Ghost foretold us they
should. Of this soil many no doubt on either side, yours and ours, have a taste
at this day: but in unshamefastness you pass all others; that the wide world
crying shame on the manifold corruption of your clergy and that City, you
only step forth without any blushing to deny that which your nearest friends
have confessed, Apolo. chap. 2.
and with insole^t words to promise this land high experime^ts and innumerable
examples of virtue and devotion, as if that sink of sin were lately become a
fountain of grace, or ye famous whore of Babilo^ newly changed into chaste
Jerusalem.

The main drift of their Apology was to flatter the Pope, to magnify
themselves, and to dissemble their wickedness against the Prince with colorable
pretenses and speeches, which they have fully performed.
But you must be borne with; your purpose was to lift and extol Gregory the
13. above the skies, thereby to kindle his love and devotion toward your
Colleges, as very zealous for his highness and holiness, which you could not well
do but by deiecting and disgracing those that utterly refused him, as lewd and
light persons. And this makes you so falsely without al truth, so boldly
without al shame, so desperately without all fear to belie both England and
Scotland, as if our disorders in twenty years were mo than yours in a
thousand: and the Apol. Cap. 3. The Jesuits have a commission to belly whom
they list without controleme^t.
treacheries, treasons, murders, and vilanies done in Scotland, were ye
protestants doings: which virulent and impudent reproaches uttered against two
Christian Commonweals without any manner or color of truth, show what liquor
boyleth in your hearts, and what humor reigns in your heads.


Phi. And what salt seasoneth your mouth when you rail at Rome so fast as you
do?


Theo. If I report any thing of Rome which your own fellows do not witness,
let it go for a slander: but what proof bring you, that in Scotland the
professors of the Gospel murdered the kings father, or sought to destroy
their Prince when he was yet in his mothers womb?


Phi. Sure it is, the kings father was horribly murdered amongst them.


Theo. Can you tell by whom?


Phi. I can not tell: but he lost his life.


Theo. No doubt of that, but who did the deed?


Phi. It was secretly done in the night season, we know not by whom; of
likelihood by enemies.


Theo. It could be no friendship to murder him in his bed: never heard you,
Mat. 10.
A man's enemies shall be they of his own household? But since you know not the
doer, is it not mere malice in you to charge your enemies, and not his with it;
especially those, that did hazard their lives to revenge his death?


Phi. A fair revenge, to displace their Queen for other men's faults.


Theo. If y^ Nobles of Scotland did any thing against their Queen, which the
laws of that land did not warrant, we defend them not: you were best object
it to them, they can answer for themselves. Yet are you not ignorant whom they
deeply charge with the death of that Earl: but I will not meddle with other
men's matters: I return to this land, Apolog. Cap. 3.
where you say you have wrought great alteration of minds throughout the whole
Realm, and wonderful increase of courage in all sorts, not only to think
well in heart, but openly and boldly to prosesse their faith and religion, and
refuse all acts contrary to the same.


Phi. And this have we done only by the power of priesthood in spiritual,
Apolog. Cap. 3.
silent and peaceable manner, and not with riots, tumults or warlike concourse:
we have done it as the Apostles and other holy me^ did in the primative church,
by travels, watchings, fastings, perils at the Ports, perils in the Sea,
perils on the Land, perils of open enemies, perils of false brethren, fears of
the laws, fears of hurting our frinds, fears for scandalising the weak: by
contumelies, disgraces, pouerties, prisonme^ts, fetters, dungeons, racks,
deaths. And this the omnipotent God, because it is his own work, enterprised
by order and authority of his chief Minister in earth, has prospered
exceedingly: though it seemed at the beginning a thing hard or impossible, you
having so many years, the laws, the sword, the pulpits, and al humane helps
for you.


Theo. Never vaunt of your victories, An ignorant boy with a whispering report
mig soon work this conversion.
unless they were greater. Papists that before dissembled are now by your
means encouraged to profess your religion against a day: this was no such
conquest. The privy report of a foreign power to be landed in this realm was
enough to turn them al. For they which twenty years together perished their
consciences to save their goods, would they now rather hazard their lands and
life, which you threatened; and hinder that action, which they long desired;
than show themselves? The rest of your conuerts be fearful women, Such
teachers such conuerts.
hungry craftesmen, idle prentices, seely wenches, and peevish boys, for the
most part void of all reason and sense, desirous of novelties by nature, and
soon enticed to any thing: and all the religion you have taught them, is to
name the catholic church as parats, and to pretend their co^scie^ces when they
lack al understanding of god and godliness. Such in some places for want of
good order, have bin of late inueigled by you, to mislike those with who^ they
live, and to fancy that they never saw: which was no masterie, considering ye
mildenes of our discipline, ye manner of your whispering, and ye rudenes of
those simple souls whom you perverted.


Phi. We did nothing but in spiritual, silent and peaceable manner, as the
Apostles and other holy men did in the primative Church.


Theo. We know you can commend your selves: but a man may soon discern ye
fierbrands of Rome, from the disciples of Christ. Throckmorto^s kale^der was ye
chiefest end of your running over, which was to sound, See Throckmortons
confession.
whether your pretended catholics would not back any such force as should be
sent, to invade the land. This no Apostle nor any other holy man in the
primative Church did: they never made religion a cloak for rebellion.


Phi. God is our witness we knew no such thing when we were sent over.


Theo. But they which sent you, knew what they did.


Phi. That was counsel to us: (...) own (...) they (...) superior (...) voice
(...) oracle (...) heaven (...) them.
we are bound to obey our superior that sent us.


Theo. To rebel against your Prince, and to procure others to do the like, if
the Pope command you?


Phi. We say not so.


Theo. But you must do so.


Phi. Can you prove that?


Theo. We need no plainer proof than your silence. For how say you, will you
take her majesty for lawful and rightful Queen of this Realm,
notwithstanding the Pope deprive her?


Phi. You still ask me that question.


Theo. We must still ask it till you answer it. One word of your mouth
would suffice us and discharge you from all suspicion: which you would never
refrain if it were not against you.


Phi. Remove the danger of your laws, and I will quickly tell you what I
think.


Theo. That speech is enough to bewray your affection. Our Laws be not
dangerous unless you say the Pope may take the crown from the Princes head,
These two (...) they (...).
and license her subjects to rebel against her, which is the treason we charge
you with.


Phi. Is that so traiterous a position that Popes may depose Princes?


Theo. That point you should either freely defend or flatly deny. By that we
shall see what the bent and drift was of your late persuading and reconciling
so many to the Church of Rome. For if this be your doctrine, that such as will
be Catholics must obey the Pope deposing the prince, then is it evident, that
you sow religion, but intend to reap treason; and make your first entrance
with preaching, that afterward you may prepare the people to rebelling. ^



Phi. This is your false surmise, not our meaning.


Theo. Then answer me, What if the Pope publish a Bull to deprive the Queen,
which part will you teach the people to follow? The Popes or the Queens?


Phi. We will tell you that, when the Pope does attempt it.


Theo. Well said Philander, you play sure to muscer no men till your captain
be ready, least you loose your labor as the Rebels of the North did. Is this
the faith and allegiance your Sovereign Lady shall look for at your hands,
when strangers invade, then to resolve which side you will take? Go to masters;
if this be subjection, I marvel what is rebellion.


Phi. His holiness does the like things, for almost every other Nation in
distress, and none so ill, ^
so suspicious, or so ungrateful as to mistrust his benefits to be their
destruction, not the Germans, not the Hungarians, not the Greeks, not any
other Provinces, for all which his holiness has erected Colleges even as for our
Country, of which though all take not so much good as they might do, yet none
fear hurt nor make laws against his holy and charitable actions but we.


Theo. ^
Offer that wrong to other Princes even of your own religion, which your h^^ly
father has done to her majesty, and see which of them will doubt to make
sharper and sorer laws against you than her highness has yet made. Pronounce
them no Princes, invade their lands, convert hostilities abroad and at ^^^ne
to thrust them from their thrones, and then tell us how they will reward you.
These wicked and devilish attempts against your Sovereign you call holy and
charitable actions, and such is your madness, that you blame the State for
preventing and repressing this heinous injury with wholesome laws.


Phi. Call you that preventing of injury to put innoce^ts to death? The
Jesuits wil^e innocents though they teach it to be lawful for subjects to
resist and murder their Princes.

The dispensation of Campion and Fa^io^s has those express words.





Theo. You refuse to confess that her Highness is rightful Queen of this
Realm, and yet would be counted innocents?


Phi. You say not well. We confess her Majesty to be true Queen of this
Realm.


Theo. And ought to be so taken of al her Subjects, though the Pope depose her?


Phi. Why do you pose us with the Popes authority? That which we spoke was
plain enough.


Theo. Not so. You be licenced from Rome to agnise her Grace for true Queen of
England for a time, until the Bull of Pius the 5. may be put in public
execution, that is, until she may by force of arms be violently driven from
the Crown.


Phi. Is it not strange that you report these things of us, and can not prove
them?


Theo. Is it not stranger that you know these things to be true, and yet deny
them?


Phi. I protest for my part, I know them not.


Theo. We will reason farther thereof in an other place. I hasten now to your
fourth chapter.


Phi. Will you leave S. Hierom unanswered?


Theo. This whole chapter has neither Scripture nor Father with you, nor
against us, but only one poor allegation, and therefore we may not skip that
in any case; but what says S. Hierom? Epist. 8. ad Deme^riadem.



Phi. This one thing I think good of charitable piety and affection to
forewarn thee, that thou hold fast the faith of holy Innocentius who is
successor and son of the Apostolic chair, and of the forenamed Anastasius,
and that thou receive not a strange doctrine, though thou seem to thy self
never so wise and subtle.


Theo. This proves that Innocentius and Anastasius in the days of S. Hierom
held the true Christian faith; and that the Romans, (for Demetriades, to whom
S. Hierom gave this counsel, dwelt in Rome) should rather follow the Bishop of
their own City teaching sound and Apostolic doctrine, than embrace strange
errors upon presumption of wit: What does this help you?


Phi. Gregory the 13. that lately lived was their successor and son in Seat
and belief.


Theo. Does S. Hierom say so?


Phi. Nay we say so.


Theo. Prove that, and set up your Mass.


Phi. In Seat you grant.


Theo. Skant enough.


Phi. What not in Seat?


Theo. No not in Seat.


Phi. Why so?


Theo. First, Atheists, heretics, sorcerers, and women have been Popes, and
that interrupteth your succession. Their succession interrupted.
Next, the plenty of Popes during the two and twenty schisms in the Church
of Rome, whereof the last dured 40. years, and was so doubtful, that the best
learned and most religious of your side, could not tell which to cleave to. I
say, this plurality of Popes at one time confounds your reckoning. Thirdly,
discontinuance shakes your seat in pieces; as when Peter's chair was empty
threeskore and fourteen years, six Popes sitting one after an other, not at
Rome but in Auinion in France. Last of all, the most part of your Popes for
these 600. years entered not by lawful and Canonical election, neither
expected the consent of the Roman Prince and people, as they should and were
wont to do; but by violence, sedition, corruption and bribery invaded the Seat
of Peter. Which fault was so common, that your best friends could not choose,
but find it. The Popedom, says Platina, Platina in Syluestro 3.
was come to that pass, (500. years ago) that he which could do most with
ambition and briberie, he only obtained the Papal dignity, good men oppressed
and rejected: which manner would God our times had not kept: but this is
nothing; we shall see worse, if God prevent it not. In the days of Damasus the
2. he says, This fashion was now so ri^e, that every ambitious Merchant
might catch up Peter's seat. Idem in Damaso 2. Idem in Benedicto 4.
And an hundred years before that in the time of Benedict the fourth, As soon
as the Church, says he, was endued with riches, and waxed lascivious; the
worshippers of God turning from severity to wantonness; the great impunity of
sin, no Prince then repressing the lewdness of men, bred us these monsters
and mischiefs, who by corruption and ambition rather invaded than possessed the
most holy Seat of Peter. Ide^ in Joan. 10.
And for a conclusion he says, The Popes were clean departed from Peter's
steps.


Phi. These be trifles, they bar not succession.


Theo. They be just and true exceptions, but for this present I say with S.
Hierom, They be not the sons of the Saints, Distinct. 40. c. Non est facile.
that occupy their places, but that exercise their works. If Gregory the 13.
taught Peter's faith, let him be Peter's successor: if he did set forth any other
doctrine, he succeeded S. Peter at Rome, no more than the Turk does S. James
at Jerusalem, or the Scribes and Pharisees did Moses, in whose chair they
sat, when they crucified the Son of God. But we spend time, which might be
better employed.


Phi. Then go to the fourth chapter which I looked for all this while, that
the sight of our proofs and sound of our places, which here we bring against
the Princes supremacy, might even discredit and confound your new doctrine.


Theo. The impertinent vagaries and plausible colors of your Apology do but
hinder the seriousness of the matter, and fullness of the proof that in this
case were requisite; since therefore we be come to the maine foundation of al
your doings, omit your flourishing, and fall to a stricter and exacter kind of
reasoning.


Phil. Agreed.


THE SECOND PART PROVES THE PRINCES SVPREME POWER TO command for truth within
her Realm: and the Pope to have been a duetifull Subject to the Roman
Emperors Ecclesiastical Laws for 800. years and upward: answers the
Jesuits authorities and absurdities heaped against the Princes regiment:
searches the safest way for the Princes direction in matters of Religion, and
concludes the Pope in doubts of doctrine to be no sufficient nor superior
Judge.
Phi. FIRST then whereas in the Proclamation we be charged to live contrary to
the laws of God and the Realm, Apoc. cap. 4. sect. 1.
etc. We answer that if the laws of God and the laws of the Realm did
always consent and concur in deed, as in this clause and other common writings
and speeches proceeding from authority, they be lightly in words couched
together against us: hardly could we defend our doctrines and doings from
error and vnduetifulnes toward our prince. But seeing the laws of kings and
Countries are not ever consonant but may be contrary to Gods commandments, we
may justly mislike the one without disloyalty to the other. When Emperors
(says Augustine) be in error, Aug. Epist. 166.
they make laws for their error against the truth, by which just men are
tried and crowned, for not doing that which they command, because God
forbids it.


Theo. That some princes have made laws against God and his truth is a case so
clear that it needed no proof; as also that we must rather obey God than
men, when their laws do swerve from his: and again on the other side that
princes have made laws for the true service and worship of God, and did
rightly judge it to be a part of their charge: and yt all they which resist
those laws, shall be grievously punished at Gods hands: though you craftily
dissemble, you can not deny: S. Austen in this very place, which you bring for
your defense, and the very next words will tell you so much. Quando aute^
Imperatores veritatem tenent, pro ipsa veritate contra errore^ iubent, Aug.
epist. 166.
quod quisquis contempserit, ipse sibi iudicium acquirit. When Emperors hold
the truth they command for truth against error, which [co^ma^dement] whosoever
despises he purchases to himself judgment. Princes commanding for truth
must be obeyed.
For he shall be punished by me^, and have no part with God, for not doing that,
which truth it self by the kings heart commanded him. These words you did well
to cut off, they were enough to mar your market.


Phi. Not ours.


The. Will you the^ confess that princes may command for truth and against
error, and that whosoever despises their commandment in those cases shall
incur judgment. So says S. Austen in plain words.


Phi. They may command, mary the Church must appoint them what they shall
command. The Jesuits play with the name of the church.



Theo. What mean you by the Church?


Phi. What should I mean by the Church, but the church?


Theo* You love to play with words. Mean you laimen or priests, or both?


Phi. Ever heard you ye church taken for laimen?


The. When S. Paul sent for the elders of Ephesus, and willed them to take heed
to themselves and the whole slocke, over which the holy Ghost had placed them
to rule, Act. 20. The Church of God is the people of God.
or feed the Church of God, what meant he by the Church; the Priests to whom
he spoke, or the people?


Phi. There you see the Priests are to rule the Church.


Theo. There also you may see, the Church is not to rule the Prince.


Phi. How does that follow?


Theo. The Church is there taken for the people, which must not rule, but obey
the Prince.


Phi. By the Church in my first answer I meant the Priests and not the people.


Theo. Can you show where the Church in all the Scriptures is taken for the
Priests without the people?


Phi. We call them only Churchmen.


Theo. We respect not your abuse, The Church never taken in the Scriptures for
the Priest alone.
but the right use of the word. The Church is never taken in the new nor old
Testament for the Priests alone, but generally for the whole congregation of
the faithful. And therefore when you say the Prince must be ruled by the
Church, you dally with a doubtful word, and put a fair color upon a foul
cause; but you must distinctly tell us what persons you mean, when you say the
Church must appoint, what the Prince shall command.


Phi. I mean Churchmen, that is, Priests, and Bishops.


Theo. And what if Churchmen do not agree which is truth, The Jesuits steals
from the Church to Churchme^ and from the^ to the Pope.
as in our days they do not; may Princes make their choice what Churchmen they
will follow?


Phi. No: the chief ruler of the Church and head Bishop on earth must appoint
them, what faith they shall embrace.


Theo. That chief ruler of the Church you take to be the Pope.


Phi. We do.


Theo. We like you well for your plainness. Then Princes may command that
which the Church, By the Jesuits divinity the Prince shall command what
pleases the Pope.
you mean Churchmen; or if they agree not, the chief Churchman, which is the
Pope, shall appoint. This is your assertion, is it not?


Phi. It is.


Theo. What you say Princes must do for the Pope, we say princes may do for
Christ: that is, they may plant and establish the Christian faith in their
Realms by their Princely power though the Pope say nay. This is our doctrine,
can you reprove it?


Phi. Who shall be judge, which is the true Christian faith?


Theo. You slip now to an other question. They be two distinct questions who
shall command for truth, and who shall direct unto truth.
It is one thing, who may command for truth, and another who shall direct unto
truth. We say, Princes may command for truth and punish the refusers; this no
Bishop may challenge, but only the Prince that bears the sword. This is the
first part of our question: And touching the second, which is the safest way
for princes to be guided unto the truth, though we differ about the means: you
reserving it as a special privilege to the Pope, we referring it as a common
duty to the Preacher; yet this is evident that Princes must be directed unto
truth the same way that al other Christians are, to wit, by persuasion and not
by coaction. For no Prelate, nor Pope has authority from Christ to compel
private men, much less princes to the profession of faith, but only to teach
and instruct them. These be the two points we stand on, disprove them if you
can.


Phi. This is not al. You would have Our faith and salvation so to hang on the
Princes will and Laws, The Jesuits would make men believe that we teach the
Princes will to be the rule of faith. Never man of our side affirmed any such
thing.
that there could be imagined no nearer way to religion, than to believe what
our temporal Lord and Master list.


Theo. It is a cunning, when you can not confute your adversaries, at least to
beelie them, that you may seem to say somewhat against them. In deed your
fourth chapter is wholly spent in refelling this position, which we detest more
than you.


Phi. You begin to shrink from your former teaching.


Theo. You will never shrink from your former facing. Did ever any man on our
side affirm the princes will to be the rule of faith? Have we not earnestly
written, and openly taught that Religion must not depend upon the pleasures of
men? Have not thowsandes of us here in England and elsewhere given our lives
for the witness and confession of Gods truth, against princes laws and Popes
decrees? In Spain, If the world can witness thus much for us, then is this a
cold cavil of the Jesuits.
France, Italy, and other places at this day, do we not endure all the
torments you can devise, because we will not believe what temporal Lords
and Masters list? Your own conscience knows it is true that we say. Why
then do you charge us with this wicked assertion, from the which we be
farther off than you? For you hold opinion of Popes, that they cannot err, we
do not of Princes. Why do you father your own fancies upon us? Why dee you
purposely pervert the question, heaping absurdities, and alleging authorities
against that which we do not defend?


Phi. The oath, Mark how the Jesuits play with the oath.
which you take your selves and exact of others, induces us thus to think of
you. For there you make Princes the only supreme Governors of all persons, in
all causes, as well spiritual as temporal: utterly renouncing all foreign
jurisdictions, superiorities and authorities. Upon which words mark what an
horrible confusion of all faith and Religion insueth. If Princes be the only
Governors in Ecclesiastical matters, The right extract of the Jesuits
absurdities. Apolog. cap. 4. Apolog. chap. 4. Apolog. cap. 4.
then in vain did the holy Ghost appoint Pastors and Bishops to govern the
Church. If they be supreme, then are they superior to Christ himself, and in
effect Christ's Masters. If in all things and causes spiritual, then they may
prescribe to the priests and Bishops what to preach, which way to worship and
serve God, how and in what form to minister the Sacraments, and generally
how men shall be governed in soul. If all foreign jurisdiction must be
renounced, then Christ and his Apostles (because they were and are forreners)
have no jurisdiction nor authority over England. A thousand other absurdities
are consequent to this oath which anon you shall hear.


Theo. Wake you or dream you Philander, Their absurdities are no way
consequent to our doctrine.
that in matters of no less weight than your duty to God and the Prince, you
fall to these childish and pelting sophismes? What kind of concluding call you
this? Princes only bear the sword to command and punish, ergo Bishops may
not teach and exhort. Princes be not subject to the Pope, ergo superiors to
Christ. They may by their laws establish those things that Christ has
commanded, ergo they may change both Scriptures and Sacraments. No forrainer
at this day has any jurisdiction over this Land, ergo Christ and his Apostles
fifteen hundred years ago might not preach the Gospel.


Phi. We make no such fond reasons.


Theo. The former propositions are the true contens of the oath, which we take;
the later are those very absurdities which you infer upon us for taking that
oath.


Phi. You would slip from your words which we know, to your meaning which we
know not; This is the right supposal of their Apology.
but that you shall not. We grounded our absurdities upon the words of your oath.
For if princes be supreme governors in all spiritual things and causes, ergo
they be supreme judges of faith, deciders of controversies, interpreters of
scriptures, deuisers of ceremonies, appointers of sacraments, and what not?


The. You might even as well have concluded: princes be supreme governors in all
temporal things and causes; ergo they be supreme guiders of gra^mer, moderators
of Logik, directors of Rhetorik, appointers of Music, prescribers of
Medicines, resoluers of al doubts, and judges of al matters incident any way
to reason, art, or actio^. If this be lewd and irreuere^t jesting, yours is no
better.


Ph. I promise you we jest not.


The. The more shame for you, if you be in earnest, to conclude so loosely.


Phi. Princes be supreme governors of the persons, not of the things in the
church
Do you make princes supreme governors of al spiritual things?


Theo. You reason as if we did; but our words, since you will needs rest upon
words, are not so.


Phi. What are they then?


The. We confess them to be supreme governors of their Realms and Dominions.


Phi. And that in all spriritual things and causes.


The. Not of al spiritual things and causes.


Ph. What difference between those two speeches?


Theo. Just as much as excludes your wrangling. We make them not governors of
the things themselves, The words of the oath.
but of all their subjects, which I trust you dare not withstand.


Phi. I grant they be governors of their subjects, but not in Ecclesiastical
things or causes. The Jesuits lack neither crakes nor words.
They must leave those matters for Bishops, who^ Christ has appointed to be y^
rulers of his church. And therefore your oath yielding that power to princes,
which is proper to Bishops; is repugnant to the laws of God, the church and
nature: Yea it is an evident error reproueable by all humane and divine
learning, that the souerainty or supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical is by
nature or by christian laws implied in the right and title of a temporal king,
Apolog. cap. 4.
or that it ever was due, or can be due, to any temporal governor, heathen or
christian in the world. And if you will but give ear, you shall hear what a
number of absurdities we will fasten upon you.


The. This oath is a great eye sore with you, and I remember I promised to
discuss the same in this chapter. I will therefore first examine the chief
parts of it, and after you shall object against it what you can.

Where we profess that her Highness is the only governor of this Realm, the
word governor does sever the magistrate from the minister, The parts of the
oath examined.
and shows a manifest difference between their office. For Bishops be no
governors of countries; princes be: that is, Bishops bear not the sword to
reward and revenge; princes do: Bishops have no power to command and punish;
princes have. This appears by the words of our Savior expressly forbidding
his Apostles to be rulers of nations, What is meant by Governor
and leaving it to princes. The kings of nations rule over [their people] and
they that be great ones, exercise authority. With you it shall not be so: that
is, you shall neither bear rule, Matthew. 20. and Mark. 10. Christ by that word
distinguishes the minister from the magistrate.
nor exercise authority over your brethren.


Phi. The word is (...): they ouerrule their subjects with injustice and
violence; you shall not do so.


Theo. So your new translation over rules the word: howbeit Christ in that
place does not traduce the power of princes as unjust or outrageous, but
distinguishes y^ calling of his Apostles from the manner of regiment which God
has allowed the magistrate. Christ ^aith not, princes be tyrants, you shall
deal more courteously than they do; Luke 22.
but he says, Princes be Lords and rulers over their people, Luke 22.
by Gods ordinance you shall not be so. Again the word which S. Luke has is
(...) without any composition. They be Lords and masters; and S. Paul
confesses of himself and other Apostles, (...), 2. Corinthians. 1.
Not that we be Lords or Masters of your faith: yea the compound (...) is with
power and force to rule me^ whether they will or no, not with wrong and injury
to oppress them; and therefore the conclusion is inevitable, that princes may
lawfully compel and punish their subjects which Bishops may not. Publik
gouern^ment is by correction and compulsion. Romans 13. Matthew. 26. 1. Tim. 3. and
Tit. 1. Matthew. 24. 2. Tim. 2. Bishops forbidden to use violence. 2. Timoth. 3.
and 4.


This distinction between them is evident by their several co^missions which
God has signed. The prince, not the priest, bears the sword; ergo the
prince, not the priest is Gods minister to revenge male factors. Peter himself
was sharply rebuked by Christ for using the sword, and in Peter all Pastors and
Bishops are straightly charged not to meddle with it. All that take the sword
shall perish with the sword. And of al men a Bishop must be no striker. For if
he that should feed his masters household fall to striking, he shall have his
portion with hypocrites. The servants of God must be gentle toward all,
instructing those that resist, with mildnes, not co^pelling any with sharpnes.
Their function is limited to the preaching of the word and dispensing the
sacraments, which have no kind of co^pulsion in the^, but inuit men only by
sober persuasions to believe and embrace the promises of God. To conclude,
pastors may teach, exhort, and reprove, not force, command or revenge: only
princes be governors that is publik magistrates to prescribe by their laws,
and punish with the sword such as resist them within their dominions, which
Bishops may not do: speak we truth or no?


Phi. We grant Bishops be no magistrates, Bishops no Magistrates to bear the
sword but only charged with cure of souls, which the sword can not touch.
neither have they to do with the bodies or goods of me^, which god has
permitted to the princes power; but yet they be governors of souls which
princes be not.


Theo. No better reason, to warrant our opinion. The Bishops charge concerns
the souls of me^, but the soul of man can neither be forced, nor punished by
man; ergo Bishops be no commanders nor punishers, but only directors and
instructors of the flock of Christ.


Phi. That we know.


The. The^ since by governors we mean rulers, such as God has authorized to
bear the sword, why do you fondly cauil that the princes power to command and
punish, excludes the Bishops vocation to teach and exhort, which is nothing so?


Phi. You say princes may command and punish as well Bishops as others.


Theo. If they be subjects no less than others, why should they not obey the
prince or abide the sword as well as others? Princes may command and punish as
well bishops as others. Romans 13. Romans 13. Bern. ad Senonensum archiepiscopum
epist. 42.



Phi. Do you make them mere subjects?


Theo. Not I, but he that said, You must be subject, not only for [feare of]
wrath, but also for conscience sake.


Phi. Does he speak that of clergyme^?


Theo. He y^ speaks of al, exempteth none. Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers, etc. In these words clergymen be not excepted, ergo comprised.

Out of this place Bernard reasons thus with an archbishop of France: Let every
soul be subject. If every, the^ yours. Who does except you (y^ be bishops) from
this general speech? He that brings an exception, uses but a delusion. For
these things, Chrysostom. homil. 23. in Epist. ad Romanos.
says Chrysostom, are commanded to all, as well Priests and Monks as secular
men: which appears by the first sentence, Let every soul be subject to the
superior powers; yea though thou be an Apostle, an Evangelist, a Prophet, or
what soever thou be. So Theodorete. Whether he be Priest, Theo. in cap. 13
epist. ad Romanos.
Bishop or Monk, let them be subject to Magistrates. This doctrine dured in the
Church a thousand years before your exemption of Clerks from secular powers,
as you call them, was known. Paul teaches every soul, Theo. in cap. 13. ad
Romanos. Oecumen. in Epist. ad Romans Greg. Epistol. lib. 3. cap. 100.
says Theophilact, whether he be Priest, Monk, or Apostle, to be subject and
obey Princes. He teaches every soul, says Oecumenius, whether he be Priest,
Monk, or Apostle, to submit themselves to Magistrates. Gregory the first,
perceived and yielded this exposition to be true. Power, says he, over all men
is given to my Lord [the Emperour] from heaven. And least you should think
priests exempted, in the person of Christ he speaks thus to Mauritius the
Emperor, Ibidem.
Sacerdotes meos tuae manui commisi, I have put my Priests into thy hands,
and do thou withhold thy soldiers from my service? And elsewhere writing of
the same prince, Greg. Epistol. lib. 3. cap. 103.
Christ has granted him to be ruler, not over soldiers only but over Priests
also.

This is evident by the whole course of the Scripture. Whom did our Savior
charge to give to Caesar that which was Caesar's? Not Scribes and high Priests,
Luke 20.
as well as others? Christ himself was a priest and a prophet, and yet he not
only submitted himself to the Roman Magistrate, but confessed the preside^ts
power over him to be from heaven. John. 19. Act. 25. Jude Epist.
S. Paul appealed unto Caesar and appeared before Caesar as his lawful
governor. S. Jude detested the^ for false prophets that despised government or
spoke evil of rulers. It is no Religion, it is rebellion against God and his
word for clergy men to exempt themselves from the princes power. The
commandment is general: Let every soul be subiect^ the punishment is
eternal, Whosoever resists power resists the ordinance of God, Romans 13.
and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation.


Phi. Yet reason the clergy be favored above the Laity.


Theo. Tush, we talk not what favor princes may do well to show, but whether
Clergy men by Gods law may challenge an exemption from earthly powers or no?


Phi. Not, except princes command against God. And if they do so, whom must
lay men obey? God or man?


Phi. No doubt God.


Theo. Then the prince commanding against God, all men are bound, be they lay
men or clerks, to prefer the will of God before the princes laws: but when
the prince joins with God, The Clergy must be to the people an example of
obedience to Princes.
and commands for truth, may the clergy resist the prince more than the
people may?


Phi. They may not.


Theo. You say well. Of the twain they must rather obey, that they may be
teachers of obedience, not in words only, but in deeds also. For if they
must admonish others to be subject to principalities and obedient to
Magistrates, then must they not hinder their doctrine by their doings, nor
lead the rest by their example to contemn or resist powers, which they should
reverence and obey.


Phi. By no means.


Theo. And in case the prince be repugnant to God, may priests or people be
violent withstanders, or must they rather be patient indurers of the sword?


Phi. They must not resist, but in patience possess their souls: Luke 21.
Romans 13.
They that resist shall receive judgment.


Theo. Ergo whether princes be with God or against God, Priests and Bishops
must with gladness obey, He that must suffer is a subject, as well as he that
must obey.

Princes governors of all persons.


or with meekenes abide the sword.


Phi. They must.


Theo. And he that suffers is a subject as well as he that obeys. For if
they be rulers that command and punish; certainly they be subjects that must
obey the commandment, or abide the punishment.


Phi. I think so.


Theo. Then monks, Prists and Bishops by Gods law be subjects as well as
others, and consequently Princes be Governors of all persons within their
dominions, be they Prelates, Prophets, Apostles, or whatsoever they be.


Phi. In temporal things we grant, but not in spiritual.


Theo. Where Princes may lawfully command, all subjects of dewtie must obey.


Phi. True: but in Ecclesiastical causes Princes may not meddle.


Theo. So say you: but if I prove that the Princes power and charge, by Gods
law reaches as well unto matters of religion as other things, will you bethink
your selves better, and acknowledge your error?


Phi. When you prove that we may do this, which will never be.


Theo. Mark first what we reath, and next what we prove, that you be not
deceived.

We teach that God in delivering the sword to Princes, And that in causes
Ecclesiastical as well as in temporal.
has given them this direct charge to provide that as well true religion be
maintained in their Realms, as civil justice ministered: and has to this end
allowed Princes full power to forbid, prevent, and punish in all their subjects,
be they laymen, Clercks, or Bishops, not only murders, thefts, adulteries,
periuries, and such like breaches of the second table; but also schisms,
heresies, Idolatries, and all other offenses against the first table pertaining
only to the service of God and matters of religion. The Prince charged with
both tables.
We do not imagine this of our own heads, we find it annexed to the crown
by God himself: who when he first gave the children of Israel leave to choose
them a king, withal appointed, that the Law truly copied out of the Levites
original (which was kept in the tabernacle) should be delivered the king
sitting on his royal seat with this charge: Deuteronomy. 17.
That book shall remain with the king, he shall read in it all the days of
his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and observe all the
words of the law [there written] and these statutes to do them. This was not
done till he was placed in his throne, so says the text: therefore this
touched not the kings private conversation as a man; but his Princely function
as a magistrate; which will you, nill you, stood in co^mau^ding others, not in
guiding his own person. For no man is a king in respect of himself, but in
ruling his subjects. Aug. Epist. 50.
As a man he served God one way, says Austen, as a king an other way. As a man
by faithful living, as a king in setting forth laws to command that which is
good and remove the contrary. So that kings, as kings, serve God in doing that
for his service, which none but kings can do. Then if the whole Law were
committed to the king, as a king, at his coronation; that is, to command it
others; which none but kings could do within their Realms; ergo the
publishing, preserving and executing of the first table touching the sincere
worship of God, was the chiefest part of the Princes charge.

To make my conclusion ye stronger, let us see what ye godly kings of Israel
and Judah did in matters of religion, having no farther nor other commission
from God, than this which I last repeated. How the godly kings of Judah did
interpret their charge.
The dilligent execution of their office will serve for an evident exposition,
what God required at their ha^nds. We ca^ look for no plainer declaration of
Gods meaning in this point, tha^ Gods own co^mendatio^ of their acts in this
case. The lawmaker is ye best interpreter: if they by their princly power
removed idols, 2. Kings 23. 2. Kings 18. 2. Chro. 34. and 35.
razed hilalters, slew false prophets, purged the land from al abominations,
not sparing the brazen serpent (made by Moses) when they saw it abused: if
again by ye same power they caused the temple to be cleansed, the law to be
read, the covenant to be renewed with God, the passover to be kept, the Leuits
to minister in their courses inverted by David: 1. Kings 2.
if to conclude, the prince deposed the chief bishop placing a fitter in his
steed, and forced al [prophets, priests and people] that were found in Israel
(sincerely) to serve the Lord their God; if I say they did all this (as the
scripture bears record they did) and their zealous proceedings in these cases
were liked, accepted, and praised by Gods own mouth: who besides Jesuits is
either so blind that he sees not, or so froward that he confesses not, that
princes were charged by God himself to plant and establish his true service in
their dominions, and with their Princely power to prohibit and punish all
offenses and abuses, be they temporal or spiritual, against the second or first
part of this heavenly law?


Phi. This charge concerned none but ye kings of Israel and Judah.


The. That refuge does rather manifest your folly, The same charge exte^deth to
the kings of the new testament.
tha^ satisfy my reason: did, I pray you Sir, ye coming of Christ abolish the
vocation of princes? I tro not. The^ their office remaining as before, per
co^sequent, both ye same precept of God to them still dureth, and also ye like
power to force their subjects to serve God and Christ his son, stands in as
full strength under the gospel as ever it did under ye law. For princes in ye
new testament be Gods ministers to revenge malefactors, as they were in ye old,
and ye greater ye wickedness, Romans 13.

They be gods ministers to revenge all evil.

Romans 15.

How kings must serve the Lord and Christ his son.

Psalm. 2. Aug. contra literas Petilia. lib. 2. cap. 92.


y^ rather to be punished, ergo ye greatest (as heresies, idolatries and
blasphemies) are sonest of al other vices to be repressed by christian
magistrates: whose zeal for Christ's glory, must not decrease, Christ's care for
their scepters being increased; and those monuments of former kings left
written for their instruction.

Were not this sufficient, as in truth it is to refute your evasion: yet king
David forseeing in spirit ye heathen kings would ba^d themselves and assemble
together against ye Lord and his Christ, exte^deth ye same charge to ye
gentiles which the kings of Jury received before, and warns the^ al at once,
Be wife ye kings, understand ye judges of the world: serve the Lord. Upon which
words S. Aug. infers thus: Al men ought to serve God: in one sort, by common
condition as me^; in an other sort, by several gifts (and offices) by the which
some do this, some that. No private person could command idols to be banished
clean from among men, which was so long before prophesied. Therefore kings
(besides their duty, to serve God common with all other men) have, Idem contra
Cresconium lib. ^. cap. 51.
in that they be kings, how to serve the Lord in such sort, as none can do
which are not kings. For in this kings (in respect they be kings) serve the
Lord (as God by David enioyneth them) if in their kingdoms they command that
which is good, and prohibit that which is il, not in civil affairs only, but
in matters also concerning divine religion.

With this endeavor of christian princes, God comforts his church by ye mouth
of Esaias. The church shall suck the breasts of kings.
Thou shall suck the breasts of princes, kings shall be thy foster fathers, and
Queens thy nurcing mothers. What Esaias says princes shall do, that I conclude
princes must do, because God would not promise they should vsurp an other ma^s
office but discharge their own. The^ if you from Rhemes, or your brethren from
Rome tell us y^ the nurcing of christ's church is no part of the princes duty, we
detest your insole^t negative: God is truth, who says it, and you be liars. If
you take ye milk of princes for temporal honors, lands and goods (which your
church in deed has greedily swallowed) the very children will laugh you to
skorne. The milk of princes is not temporal wealth.
The church of Christ is no wa^ton, she lusts for no worldly wealth, which is
rather hurtful poison, than holsom food: Gods provision for her, is spiritual,
not carnal; her delights are not outward in flesh, but inward in grace: the
prophet, good man, had no leisure to think on your farms, demeans and
revenues: This promise must be common to the faithful, not private to your
cloisterers, which in earthly things plied the bottle so fast, that they sucked
their nurces dry. No remedy, you must needs yield us, that christian princes in
respect of their office, not of their riches, have received an express
commandment from God to show themselves nurces to his church. Now nurces by
nature must provide food for their infants, and defend them from danger, ergo
kings and queens in ye new testament are bound to tender ye church of Christ,
and by their princely power and publik laws to defend the same from infection
of heresies, invasion of schisms, and all other apparent corruptions of faith
and good manners.

Who, August. epi. 50.
says S. Aug. being in his right wits, will say to (christian) kings, take you
no care who defe^deth or impugneth in your realms the church of (christ) your
master? Let it not pertain to you, who lift to be religious, or sacrilegious
within your kingdo^s? And left he should seem ska^t resolved in this opinion,
he bids open defia^ce to the Donatists in these words: Idem contra 2.
Gaudenij epist. lib. 2. cap. 11. Idem contrae Epist. Parmen. lib. 1. cap. 7.
The Prince charged to punish false and corrupt religion.
Cry thus if you dare, let murders be punished, let adulteries be punished, let
other degrees of lust and sin be punished; only sacrileges (that is co^te^pt
of God his truth, or his church) we will not have punished by princes laws. And
again, Will (the Donatists) though they were co^uinced of a sacrilegious
schism, say that it belongs not to the princes power to correct or punish
such things? Is it because such powers do not stretch to corrupt and false
religion? But (christian) emperors persecute the Paga^s: does that displease
the^? The works of the flesh Paul nu^breth these; fornication, uncleanness,
strife, dissentio^, heresy, drunke^nes and such other. What think these me^,
may the crime of idolatry be justly reue^ged by the magistrate? well, if that
like them not, why confess they that witches be rightly punished by the rigor
of (princes) laws, and will not agnise that heretics and schismatikes may be
repressed by the same, seeing Paul does rehearse them together with other
fruits of iniquity? Will they reply that earthly powers are not to meddle with
such matters (of religion?) To what end then bears he the sword, which is
called Gods minister, serving to punish malefactors? Certainly Princes, Read on
the place, contra epist. Parmen. lib. 1. cap. 7.
etc.

Compel them to come in; spoken to the magistrates.
If this learned father can not fray you from reviving the frantic error of ye
Donatists against the Princes power in matters of religion, I trust you will
somewhat reverence the precept which our Savior in his Gospel gave the
magistrate, when he had the first sort of ghestes to be brought to the great
supper, the second to be forced: Luke 14. Aug. contra 2. Gaudent. Epist. lib.
2. cap. 17. Mat. 21. 1. Corinthians. 10.
Go, says he, forth into the ways and hedges: Compel the^ to come in, that
mine house may be filled. We take ways, says Austen, for heresies, hedges
for schisms; because ways in this place signify the diuersenes, and hedges
the peruersenes of opinions. House, God has none, but his house of prayer,
neither table beside the Lords table. So that this servant is expressly
charged to Compel them from heresies, and schisms to the confession of truth,
consent of prayer, and communion of the Lords table. To perform this, Christ
has left no servant but the minister or the magistrate: no means save the word
or the sword. To compel heretics and schismatiks, neither is it possible for
the preacher if he would, nor lawful if he could: he lacks both means and
leave to constrain them. His calling is with patience to teach, 2. Tim. 2.
Mat. 24. Tit. 1. Mat. 20. 2. Pet. 5.
not with violence to force; to feed, not to stryke; to reprove with tongue,
not to subdue with hand. Only the Prince bears the sword, which can and may
compel recusants: and therefore Bishops since they be flatly forbidden to
Rain, must not meddle with the material sword being the chiefest part and
strength of an earthly kingdom: neither ought any to draw ye sword, but he that
holds it in Gods stead to reward and revenge. Ergo, these words, Luke 14.
Compel them to come in, that mine house may be filled, were spoken to
Christian Princes, and are to them both a warrant and a charge to repress
schisms and heresies with their Princely power, which they received from
above; chiefly to maintain Gods glory, by causing the bands of unity to be
preserved in the Church, and the rules of faith observed.

August. Ep. 50.
To the same purpose S. Austen in many places alleges this parable. The Lord
himself, says he, willed the ghests first to be brought, then to be forced.
What means he by this, Compel them to come, when as he said of the first,
bring them? If he meant they should be compelled by terror of miracles, then
might the first sort of ghests which saw many divine wonders be rather thought
to be forced: (but) if by the power, which the Church received at Gods hand in
due time through the religion and faith of kings, those that are found in high
ways and hedges, that is in heresies and schisms (must) be compelled to come,
let them not mislike that they be forced. This commanding by Princely power
occasioneth many to be saved, Idem contra 2. Gaundentij epist. lib. 2. cap. 17.
which though they be violently brought to the feast of the great householder,
and compelled to come, yet being within they find cause to rejoice that they
did enter: for both [sorts of comers as well violently forced, as willingly
brought] the Lord fortold and has fulfilled. Idem Epist. 48. Idem Epist. 50.
Idem Epist. 48.
Therefore let earthly princes serve Christ, in making Laws for Christ, whereby
me^ [may] be forced to come to the (great and) holy banquet, yea by banishments
and other losses let [their subiects] begin to weigh with themselves what and
why they suffer, and learn to prefer the Scriptures which they read, before
the reports and cauils of me^.

I think it superfluous to stay longer in confirming so manifest a truth. He
that is of God, hears the words of God: he that impugneth them, quarreleth
not with Princes, which yet is no small offense, but with him by whom Princes
reign, The Princes charge, as the scriptures do express it.
whose wisdom may not easily be neglected, nor will resisted. If you deny that
this is the Princes charge to see the law of God fully executed, his Son
rightly served, his spouse safely nourced, his house timely filled, his enemies
duly punished, you must counteruaile that which Moses prescribed, David
required, Esaias prophesied, Paul witnessed, and Christ commanded with some
better and sounder authority than theirs is: If you grant so much, we will ask
no more: the Princes duty to God once confessed, the rest shall quickly be
concluded.


Phi. In a sense, it is true that you say.


Theo. It is simply true that I say: for in your own judgment may the
Christian faith be freely permitted, and publicly received in kingdoms and
common wealths?


Phi. No doubt.


Theo. May godly discipline be likewise planted and preserved amongst men, Al
these things must be done in every christian commonwealth; and who shall do
them but the Prince?
and the disturbers and neglecters of it repressed and ordered?


Phi. It may.


Theo. Should corrupt and false Religion be displaced and banished, and the
spredders of it dispersed and skattered?


Phi. In any case.


Theo. Ought malefactors against God, as heretics, blasphemers, sorcerers,
idolaters and such other transgressors of the first table, to be revenged and
punished, as well as offenders against men, and the breakers of the second
table?


Phi. What else?


Theo. Can any man freely permit, safely defend, generally restrain and
externally punish, within a realm, but only the Prince?


Phi. None.


Theo. Then if these things needfully must and lawfully may be done for Christ
and his Church, and none can do them but Magistrates, it is evident that the
Princes power and charge does stretch unto things and causes that be
spiritual as well as temporal. August. contra Cresconium lib. 3. cap. 51.
Or if S. Austens words do better please you, that Princes may command that
which is good, and prohibit that which is evil within their kingdoms, not in
civil affairs only, but in matters also that concern divine Religion.


Phi. Did the Christian Princes in the primative Church since the coming of
Christ command and punish in matters Ecclesiastical? Christian Princes from
the beginning have dealt in causes ecclesiastical.



Theo. If their examples do not concur with my former proofs, good leave have
you to believe neither: if they do, take heed you withstand not a manifest
truth. And here you shall choose whether you will have a short report or a large
rehearsal of their doings. Socrates touching them all, says: Socrat. in
prooemio lib. 5.
We therefore make mention of Emperors throughout this history, for that since
they became Christians, Ecclesiastical matters depend on them, and the greatest
Synods have been, and are yet called by their appointment. And Alciat a man of
your own side: Nemim dubiu^ est, Alciatus incodicem rubric. de sacrosanct.
ecclesijs tomo 3. page 198.
quin in primatiua ecclesia de rebus and personis ecclesiast. etc. THERE CAN BE
NO DOUBT says he, but in the primative Church Emperors had the jurisdiction
(that is the ruling and governing) of persons and causes Ecclesiastical.

Ius dicere referred to Princes, is not to decide matters in question by law,
for so did Judges and not Princes, but to make laws: and between lawmakers
and governors you can find little difference: for by public laws comma^ding
good and punishing evil princes do chiefly govern. Then if christian Monarks
in the primative church guided ecclesiastical matters and persons by their
imperial laws, as this learned and famous lawier puts us out of doubt they
did; you must show when and how they forfeited this power. If it were the^
lawful and usual, how can it be now strange and usurped? If there be no doubt
of this, with what conscience do you, not doubt, but deny this? Perhaps you
disdain the witness. Alciat in every respect was well learned, and in his
faculty, which was law, deserves more credit than the best of you: yet least I
should seem to press you with names and not with proofs, let us view the
proceedings of some Christian Emperors, and judge you whether they be not both
ancient and evident.

Constantines example. Eusebius. hist. lib. 10. cap. 5.
What power Constantine claimed and used in causes ecclesiastical, the four
books of Eusebius and other church stories describing the laws, letters and
acts of Constantine, bear witness sufficient. First, he gave the christians
free liberty to profess their religion, built them places of prayer at his own
charges, and entreated their bishops with all possible favor and honor. Next he
prohibited the gentiles their ancient and usual idolatries, diuinatio^s,
oracles, images and sacrifices. Heretics he debarred not only churches and
secret conuents, but excluded them also from the privileges which himself had
provided for Catholic persons. If Constantines example deserve to be praised
and followed, which no man, except he be void of common sense, will gainsay,
then may christian Princes in the right of their scepter and sword, I mean
their public vocation and charge, without seeking any farther warrant from
Rome, forbid wicked and idolatrous superstition, admit and assist to the best
of their power the preaching of the truth, sequester heretics from the
dignities and liberties granted to good and religious subjects: for so did
Constantine, whose godly virtues and happy pains all nations then embraced,
all ages since confessed, all Princes now should imitate.

Besides this he did many things both for spredding the faith and guiding the
church of Christ worthy great commendation. Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 2.
cap. 28. Socrat. lib. 10. cap. 34.
By my ministry (says this good Emperor) mankind is brought to the keeping
and observing of the most sacred law: by the service which I perform to God, al
things every where (directly speaking of things ecclesiastical) are settled in
order, yea the barbarous nations, which til this time knew not the truth, now
praise the name of God sincerely, whom they reverence for dread of us. Eusebius.
de vita Constant. lib. 1. cap. 37.
Toward the church of Christ he showed an excellent and special care: calling
councils of bishops when any dissension sprang, as a common bishop and ouerseer
appointed by God, not disdaining to be present and confer with them (the
rather) to keep the^ al in christian peace. Ibidem lib. 3. cap. 13.
For his manner was in their synods not to sit idle, but to mark advisedly what
every man said, to help their either side disputing, to te^per such as kindled
too fast, to reason mildly with each part, and undertake jointly with the^ to
search out the truth: confirming their decrees with his seal, least other
(temporal) judges and rulers should infringe them. When occasion served him not
to gather a counsel, Ibidem lib. 3. cap. 22.
he did by writing advertise the parties dissenting of his opinion and
judgment, interposing himself as an arbiter in their controversies: sometimes
Prescribing the bishops what was profitable for the church of God, Ibidem. lib.
3. cap. 23.
sometimes the people: to which end he wrote many letters, emitting neither
rebukes nor threats, when need so required. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 28.
When ye counsel of Tyrus was gathered by his edict, he comanded the^ first to
discuss the truth of such crimes, as were pretended against Athan. who was
loath to come before the^, save that he feared the thretning letters of Constable.
written to this effect. Eusebius. de vita Constan. lib. 4. cap. 42.
If any, which I think not, in contempt of our ma^date, fail to come before
you, we will send a warrant from our roial authority, that he shall be banished, to
teach him, what it is (for bishops and clerks) to withstand the precept of the
chief ruler defending the truth. Athan. and ye bishops of his part appeared;
but finding the counsel very partial, protested against the^ and appealed from
the^ in these words: Athanas. Apol. 2. cap. Quum multas.

Athanasius and his side appeal from the council to the prince.


Because we see many things spitefully co^triued against us, and much wrong
offered the catholic church under our names, we be forced to request, that the
debating of our matters may be kept for the princes most excellent person: we
can not bear the drifts and injuries of our enemies, and therefore require the
cause to be referred to the most religious and devout emperor, before who^ we
shall be sufferd to stand in our own defe^ces, and plead the right of the church.
Yet to prevent the worst Athan. himself fled to Constant. beseeching him to
send for the bishops and examine their acts. Upon whose complaint ye good
prince wrote this to the whole council: Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 34.
Your synod has decreed, I know not what in a tumult and uproar, whiles you
seek to pervert truth by your pestilent disorder, for hatred against your
fellow (bishops:) but the divine providence will (I doubt not) scatter the
mischief of your contention and make it plain in our sight, whether your
co^uent had any regard of truth or no. You must therefore al of you resort
hither to show the reason of your doings: for so does it seem good and
expedient to me: The Council of Tyrus commanded to come before the Prince and
give account of their doings.

What Constantine did in Athanasius his cause.


to which end I willed this rescript to be sent you, that as many of you, as
were present at the council of Tyrus, without delay repair to the place of our
abode, there to give account, how sincerely, and soundly you have judged: and
that before me, whom your selves shall not deny to be the sincere minister of
God (in these cases.) The prince summoned, ye counsel prescribed the^ what they
should handle, gave charge to ye parties accused to come before the^, sharply
rebuked ye bishops assembled in this synod, comanded the^ to come cora^ nobis,
and render a reason of their tumultuous judgment, assured the^ yt he would in
his own person examine their doings whether they were good and substa^tial or
no. This power he chale^ged over churchme^ and churchmatters, not as a violent
usurper, but as gods minister ordained to y^ intent: which ye catholic bishops,
yt took part with Athan. confessed to be true by their appeal, ye rest y^ deposed
him, neither did nor durst deny. So ye Constable. was both an orderly refuge for
Athan. and a lawful co^troler of ye counsel of Tyrus, notwtsta^ding ye crimes
objected there to Macarius and Atha. were spiritual, to wit, Socrat. lib. 1.
cap. 27.
the striking of a priest overthrowing the Lords table, dashing in pieces the
mystical cup, burning the sacred books, using a dead ma^s hand to sorcery, with
many such heinous offenses leudly devised by their accusers, not any way proved
against them, yet taken by their adversaries, then judges, for just matter to
condemn them.

In restoring Arius, The restoring of Arius.
the mildness of Constantine was somewhat abused by the crafty dissembling of
heretics: yet thereby may well appear what authority this Prince claimed to
command Bishops and release the rigor of their ecclesiastical ce^sures. Thus
stood the case. The Princes was often told that Arius held no such opinion as
the world misdouted in him. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 25.
If Arius, says he, consent to the Nicene counsel, I will admit him to my
sight, and send him home with honor. Arius and his adherents accepting the
condition, were willed to put their faith in writing; and with their wily
submission so pleased Constantine (very glad to see them yield to the Nicene
creed) that he sent the^ with his letters toward Alexandria to be received. At
their coming Athanasius the Bishop of those parts refused to communicate with
them, aduertising his Majesty by writing, ye heretics once deposed might not be
restored to their former estate. Constantine took this exception in such il
part, that he fell to commanding Athanasius in short and sharp terms. Socrat.
lib. 1. cap. 27.

Constantine threatens Athanasius for not receiving Arius.


Knowing our pleasure, WE CHARGE YOU, that you suffer freely those that will,
to return to the church. For if I learn, that you forbid, or exclude such as
would gladly be partakers of the church, I WILL PRESENTLY SEND ONE, THAT SHALL
BY COMMISSION from me DEPOSE YOU.

This, says Socrates, he wrote minding to profit the church, and end al
disse^tion: but it fell out otherwise: for the citizens of Alexandria were so
troubled with the boldness of Arius, and lack of Athanasius then banished, that
Constantine doubting the perverse mind of Arius sent for him, Socrat. lib. 1.
cap. 37. and 31.
and asked him whether he would subscribe to the Nicene faith: which he did
there in presence very readily, but slily. The Prince musing at it, exacted an
oath: that he took likewise. Ibidem lib. 1. cap. 38.
Then the christian Emperor finding no cause to suspect him farther, COMMANDED
ALEXANDER BISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE TO RECEIVE HIM (the next day) TO THE
COMMUNION, The Prince commands the Patriarch to receive Arius to the
communion.
which God prevented with a sudden and shameful death in detestation both of
his heresy so long defended, and perjury then freshly committed. Now chose
whether you will affirm, yt Constantine was over presumptuous and imperious in
the church of Christ against al reason and good order: or else agnise that
Princes had then authority to require the subscriptions and oaths of such as
they suspected in religion, to restore those that were deposed, to their
ancient places upon their submission, and command the chief Bishops (for so
were both these, the first of Alexandria, the second of Constantinople) to
receive such as had purged themselves, in the Princes judgment and presence,
to the communion.


Phi. Uengea^ce from heaven, decided the case with Athanasius against Arius.


Th. No doubt Arius was worthly plagued for his false swearing, and wicked
meaning to trouble the church of God worse with his secret dissembling, than he
did before with his open rebelling: but what is this to Constantine, whose
zeal to preserve truth was never doubted, whose care to procure concord in the
church can not be blamed, whose diligence to sift Arius with an oath could not
be bettered? We propose not the lewed fact of Arius blaspheming God, and
iugling with man, we detest that mo^ster as much as you: but we lay forth the
steps of Co^sta^tine seeking and hoping his reformation, and to ye end
commanding the very Patriarks themselves, and threatening due punishment if his
princely will were not obeyed.

Justinian in his Code repeateth the laws of former Emperors not only
touching the Christian faith, Codi. lib. 1. tit. 1.6.2.3. Tit. 5.7.9.11.
baptism, Churches and bishops, but also, touching heretics, Apostataes,
Jews, and Infidels. In his Authentikes he makes many new co^stitutions in
which he disposes OF SACRAMENTS, Nouel. constitut. 57.37. and 42.123. Nouel.
constit. 123.131. Nouel. constit. 5. and 131.3.67.79. Nouel. constit. 123.133.
Nouel. constable. 6. and 123. Nouel. constitutione, 123.
in what places, by what persons, with what lowdnes of voice they shall be
ministered: OF SYNODS, when they shall be kept, what things shall be reformed in
them according to the sacred Canons, and his Princely laws; also what Canons
of Councels shall stand in ye same strength with his Laws: OF CHVRCHES AND
ABBAIES, guiding the manner of their erection, the number of their Clerks,
their expenses, suites and privileges: OF MONKS, who shall elect their Abbate
what time shall suffice for their trial; what rules they shall keep for
prayer, diet, rest, and such like duties of life; to whom the correction and
oversight of them shall belong: OF PRIESTS, DEACONS, AND OTHER SERVITORS in the
Church, limiting their age, condition, learning and good report before they
shall be received to this charge; their dilligent, sober and chaste behavior
afterward: OF BISHOPS, how they shall be chosen, in what sort their soundnes
in faith, skill in common prayer, and clearnes from all just accusations,
prohibited by the sacred rules, or laws imperial, shall be thoroughly sifted,
before they may be confirmed; what causes they shall meddle with in their
Consistories, what superior judges they themselves shall have, from whom they
shall not appeal; what punishment they shall endure for Simonie, non residence,
wrongful excommunication, playing at tables, resorting to spectacles, ordering
any Clerk without diligent examination, or contrary to the Princes
ecclesiastical laws: in which cases Justinian commands them to be
SVSPENDED, EXCOMMVNICATED, DEPOSED, as the fault meriteth, and his edict
appoints.

It was then no news for a Prince to say: Nouel. constit. 123.

The prince receaueth information and commands correction.

Novel. constitutione 6.

The doctrine and discipline of the church must be the Princes cheifest care.

The Bishops and Patriarks of every diocese commanded and threatened.


Diverse complaints have been brought us against Clerks, Monks and many
Bishops, that some lead not their lives according to the sacred Canons, others
can not the public prayers which should be said at the sacred oblation and
baptism: we therefore recounting the judgment of God with our selves, HAVE
COMMAVNDED THAT IN EVERY MATTER THVS DETECTED, LAWFVLL INQVISITION AND
CORRECTION PROCEED, comprising in this edict those things that were before
skattered in sundry constitutions touching the most religious Bishops, Clerks
and Monks, with such punishments added, as we rhought expedient. And again,
OUR CHIEFEST CARE IS FOR THE TRVETH OF GODS DOCTRINE, AND SEEMLY CONVERSATION
OF THE CLERGY. THE THINGS THEN WHICH WE HAVE DECREED AND MAKE FOR THE
PRESERVATION OF THE SACRED ORDER AND STATE, CONSONANT TO THE TENOR OF HOLY
RVLES, LET THE MOST GODLY PATRIARCHS OF EVERY DIOCESE, THE METROPOLITANES AND
RIGHT REVEREND BISHOPS AND CLERKS KEEP FOR EVER HEREAFTER INVYOLABLE: THE
BREAKER OF THEM SHALL BE SVRE TO BE SEQVESTRED UTTERLY FROM GOD AND EXCLVDED FROM
HIS PRIESTLY FVNCTION: Licencing all men, of what sort or calling soever they
be, that perceive the least point of these our Laws transgressed, to denounce
and infourme the same to our highness, that we, which following the sacred
rules and Apostolic tradition have commanded these things, may revenge such
offenders as they well deserve.

Nouel. Constitut. 5.
Farther he says, Our purpose in this present Law is next after those matters
which we have disposed of the most holy Bishops and reverend Clerks to set
a good order in monastical discipline: for so much as there is no kind of
thing exempted from the Princes inquisition, Nouel. Constitut. 133. The Prince
sovereign over all men, and that in things concerning God which must be
preserved from corruption by the prelates, but most of all by the Prince.
which has received from God a common regiment, and soueraintie over all men:
and these things which concern God must be preserved from corruption by the
sacred Prelates and [ciuill] Magistrates, but most of all by our Majesty,
which use not to neglect any divine causes, but labor by all means, that our
common wealth (by the favor of the great God, and our Savior Christ toward
men) may reap the fruit of that pureness and integrity, which Clerks, Monks
and Bishops from the highest to the lowest, shall show forth in keeping the
sacred Canons, and our laws provided in that behalf: which constitutions, by
this our decree, we strengthen a fresh and ratify. Put on your spectakles,
and see whether Justinian do not take upon him to govern the doctrine and
discipline of the Church, the conversation of Clerks, Monks and Priests: and
to command Prelates and Patriarchs in the celebration of sacraments,
convocation of Synodes, election and confirmation of Bishops, ordering of
Clerks, and such like functions (except our eyesight fail us) wholly
spiritual, and in the judgment of your nearest friends acknowledged for
causes ecclesiastical.

I will omit what Justinian enacted touching marriages, divorces, legacies,
funerals, incests, adulteries, and such like: The things were then in the
Princes charge which the Pope now tieth to spiritual courts.
then pertinent to the Princes power and sword, now claymed by your holy
father for a surplussage to causes ecclesiastical; and with that seely shift
conveyed out of Princes hands, who first upon favor and opinion of holiness
and wisdom in Bishops, gave them leave to meddle with such matters: I will
omit, I say, that; and descend to the Laws of Charles the great, Emperor
of the West parts, eight hundredth years after Christ, which Ansegisus
gathered together within thirteen years of the death of the said Charles. In
his preface of those Laws thus speaks that wise Prince.

Careli praefa. in leges Franciae. The preface of Charles to his laws
directing commissioners to reform the Church in his name and by virtue of his
authority.
Considering the passing goodness of Christ our Lord toward us and our people,
and how needful it is, not only to give thanks to God incessantly with
heart and mouth, but also with good endeavors continually to set forth his
(honor and) praise etc. Therefore (O you Pastors of Christ's Church, and
teachers of his flock,) Have we directed Commissioners unto you that shall
join with you to redress those things, which need reformation, in our name
and by virtue of our authority: and (to this end) we have here annexed
certain brief chapters of Canonical (or ecclesiastical) institutions, such
as we thought meetest. Let no man judge this our admonition to godliness to be
presumptuous, Whereby we seek to correct things amiss, to cut off
superfluities and lead men to that which is right, but rather receive it with
a charitable mind. For in the book of kings we read what pains godly
Josias took to bring the kingdom given him of GOD to the true worship of the
(same) God, by visiting, correcting and instructing them; not that we compare
our selves with his sanctity, but that we should always imitate such examples
of the godly. We see the reason why these Laws were published, and
commissioners sent from the Prince to put them in execution: now let us examine
the Laws themselves, and mark what causes they chiefly concern. Peruse the
book: you will (on my word) expect no farther proof, that Princes had then
to do with persons and causes ecclesiastical. If your leisure serve you not,
by these few, which I will report, you may conjecture the rest. The first
seven and fifty Canons are borrowed out of such general, and provincial
Councels as Charles best liked: for example.

That no man excommunicated in one place shall be taken to the communion in an
other place: Legu^ Franciae li. 1. Cap. 1.2.3.
That when any Clerk is ordered, his faith and life be first exactly tried:
That no strange Clerk be received or ordered without letters of commendation,
and license from his own Bishop: Cap. 23.
That no servant be made Clerk or Moncke without his masters consent: Chap.
49.25.
That no man be made Priest under thirty years of age: neither then at
randon, but appointed and fastened to a certain cure: Cap. 11.
That no Bishop meddle with giving orders in an other man's diocese: Cap. 57.45.
That no Bishop veele any widoes at all, Cap. 13.
nor maidens under the age of twenty and five: That the Bishop of each
Province, and the Metropolitan meet yearly twice in Council, for causes of
the Church: Cap. 6.
That Priests when they say their masses shall also communicate: Cap. 20.
That only the books canonical shall be read in the Church: Cap. 41.
That the false names of Martyrs and uncertain memories of Saints be not
observed: Cap. 15.
That Sunday be kept from evening on (Saturday) till evening (the next day:)
with other such constitutions prescribing a direct order to Bishops,
Priests, and Monks, for ecclesiastical causes.


Phi. These be Canons of former Councels.


Theo. True, but selected and delivered by Charles to those visitours which he
sent with his authority to refourme the Church: and the rest that follow, to
the number of an hundred and five chapters, did Charles frame by conference
with learned and godly men at his discretion. Which yet concern the regiment
of the Church no less than these do. You must bear with the length of them,
they be matters profitable to be known (I speak for the most part of them)
and greatly pertinent to this question. You shall thereby resolve your self
how far Princes then lawfully might, and carefully did meddle with guiding
and ruling the Church of God: and see both a worthy memorial and a right
president of a Princes visitation and reformation of all states, as well in
matters of faith, as good order and discipline.


These be the Laws.
Cap. 160. Chap. 76.
The Priests, every man in his calling, shall preach, and teach the people
committed to their charge: The Bishops shall not suffer any man under them, to
propose to the people new fangled opinions, or not Canonical, of their own
devising, not agreeable to the scriptures: but shall themselves preach
fruitful and good doctrine, tending to life everlasting, and instruct others
to do the like. And first they shall teach all men generally to beeleeue the
father, the son and the holy Ghost to be one omnipotent, eternal and
invisible God, creator of heaven and earth and all things in them, and that
there is but one Godhead, substance and majesty in these three persons, the
father, the son and the holy ghost.

Cap. 76.
ITEM they shall preach, that the son of God, through the working of the holy
spirit, took flesh of Marie (she remaining still a virgin) for the salvation
and redemption of mankind, his death, burial, rising the third day from the
dead, his ascending into heaven, and how he shall come again in divine glory
to judge all men according to their deserts, the wicked (for their
unrighteousness) to be cast into perpetual flames of fire with the Devil: the
just to be taken to Christ and his elect angels into [blessed] life for ever.

Ibidem.
ITEM they shall diligently set forth the resurrection of the dead, that men
may know and believe they shall have their reward [good or euill] in the same
bodies which they now bear about them.

Ibidem.
ITEM they shall admonish all men with all industry, for what offenses they
shall be condemned to pains everlasting: Paul telling us, that the works of the
flesh are manifest, which are, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, hatred,
debate, emulation, wrath strife, sedition, heresy, sects, spite, murder,
drunkenness, gluttony, and such other, of which I warn you now, as I did
before, that they which commit these things shall not inherit the kingdom of
God: these things therefore, which the great Preacher of the Church of God
reckons by name, let them be with all care prohibited, remembering how
terrible that saying is, They which do these things, shall never come to the
kingdom of God.

Ibidem.
BESIDES, you shall earnestly teach them the love of God, and their neighbor,
faith and hope in God, humility and patience, charity and continency,
liberality and mercy, to give alms, to acknowledge their sins, and forgive
such as trespass against them according to the Lords prayer: assuring them
that they, which follow these things, shall enter the kingdom of God. THIS
WE CHARGE AND ENIOINE YOU THE MORE PRECISELY, BECAUSE WE KNOW, THAT FALSE
TEACHERS SHALL COME IN THE LATER DAYS, as the Lord in the Gospel foretold, and
his Apostle Paul to Timothy witnesses.

Cap. 66.
ITEM the Bishops shall diligently discuss in every parish the faith of the
Priests, their manner of baptizing, and saying mass: that their faith may be
sound, their baptism Catholic, and themselves well conceive the prayers of
their mass, and sing the psalms by the distinction of verses. They must well
understand the Lords prayer themselves, and teach that all others must
understand the same [to this end] that every man may know what he asks at
gods hand. This verse, Glory be to the father and the son (etc.) shall be
song of all with great devotion: and the Priests together with the people shall
sing with one voice, holy, holy, holy (Lord God of hosts) and all the
faithful shall communicate, and provide at the time of mass so to do, Cap.
132.
without any other calling or warning. No Priest shall admit an other man's
parishioner to the mass, Cap. 147.
except he be a wayfaring man, or one that is tied there with some matter in
law.

ITEM that false and suspected legends or such as be repugnant to the
Catholic faith (as that vile and erroneous epistle, which some deceived
themselves, Cap. 73.
and deceiving others, pretended a year past to fall from heaven) be neither
believed, nor read, but burnt, lest the people be seduced by such Pamphlets:
and only the canonical books, Catholic treaties, and sentences of holy
writers be read, and taught.

ITEM the Priests shall have always in readiness the sacred Eucharist, Cap.
155.
that when any falls sick, or an infant be in danger of death, he may
minister the communion to him, least he die without a communion.

ITEM we decree, that as God has commanded, Cap. 75.
no servile work to be taken in hand on the Lords day, as also the Prince my
father of blessed memory gave charge by his Synodal Edict, to wit, no kind of
husbandry, neither cutting of vines, nor tilling the ground, neither reaping,
nor mowing, nor hedging, neither rooting or felling of trees, nor digging in
rocks, nor building, nor gardening, no not keeping of courts, or hunting [the
women likewise to forbear all kind of manual works] but that all people
resort to the Church and praise God for all his blessings. Cap. 139.
On the Sunday shall no market nor fair be kept in any place.

ITEM the holy days, that shall be kept throughout the year, are these: Cap. 158.
the birth of Christ, S. Steeuens, S. John's, the Innoce^ts day, the octaues of
our Lord, the Epiphanie and octaues thereof, the purification of the virgin
Marie, eight days of Easter, the time of [the solemn procession or] greater
Letanie, the Assension of the Lord, Whitsontide, S. John Baptist, S. Peter and
Paul, S. Martine, S. Andrew. The assumption of our Lady I leave in doubt.

ITEM the Moncks shall perfectly learn the manner of the Roman tunes like as
our father king Pipine decreed they should, Cap. 74.
when he did abrogate the french kind of singing.

ITEM that Bishops be chosen by the consent of the clergy and people out of
the same dioces, Cap. 78.
according to the Canons, without respect of persons, or rewards: and that they
train up their Priests in sobriety and chastity: Cap. 103.
and see them have the books of their masses and lessons well corrected: and
that they repair their Churches decayed to their ability, and instruct the
(Church) widoes how they should be conversant after the Apostolic precept, and
root out the superstitions that are in many places about the exequies of the
dead, and wholly bend themselves to do their duties in all things concerning the
Church of God: and this that they may the more freely do, we will be ready
to assist them by all means possible.

Cap. 129. Cap. 128. Cap. 130. Cap. 131. Cap. 141. Cap. 136. Cap. 86. Cap. 67.
ITEM that in one City be not two Bishops, nor one province divided between
two Metropolitanes: and that the confirming of Bishops be not long differed,
neither any Bishop remove from his diocese, without the decree of other
Bishops. That no lay man presume to place or displace Clerks, but by the
Bishops Consent. That excommunications be not over rife and for trifeling
causes. That every Church have a Priest as soon as the Bishop can provide.
Item the Bishop shall look that the Church of God have due honor: no secular
business, nor vain iangling shall be suffered in the Church, because the house of
God is the house of prayer, but that al men have their minds attentively bent
to God, when they come to mass, and not depart before the Priest have ended
his blessing.

Cap. 79.
Because Canonical profession partly for ignorance, partly for sloth, was very
much defaced, we took pains at our sacred session to gather as it were
certain sweet flowers out of the monuments of blessed writers, and proportion
a rule both for women and men of Canonical conversation: which the whole
assembly so well liked of, that they thought it worthy to be kept without
alteration: and therefore we decree, that all of that sort hold it without
failing, and in any case hereafter observe the same.

Cap. 81.
How we have disposed touching Monckes, and given them leave to chose an Abbat
of themselves, and ordered their purpose of life, we have caused to be drawn
in an other schedule, and confirmed it, Cap. 110.
that it might stand good and inviolable with (the Princes) our successors,
(Provided always) that laymen be neither overseers of Moncks, nor Archdeacons.

Cap. 71.
We hear say that certain Abbesses, against the manner of the Church of God,
give blessing with laieng their hands, and making the sign of the Cross on
the heads of men. Know you, sacred fathers, that this must be utterly forbidden
in your diocese.

Cap. 62.
We have a precept in Deuteronomie, No man shall consult a southsaier, observe
dreams or respect diuinations: there shall be no sorcerer, no inchaunter, no
coniurer. Therefore we command that none calculate, practice charms, or take
upon them to Prophecy what weather shall come: but wheresoever such be
found, either to be reformed or condemned. Likewise for trees, rocks,
springs, where some fools make their observations, we give strait charge
that this wicked use, detected of GOD, be banished every where and destroyed.

Cap. 163.
Of marriage your demand, whether a man may take to wife a maid that is
espoused to an other. In any case we forbid it: because that blessing, which
the Priest gives her that is betrothed, is to the faithful in manner of a
sacrilege if it any way be violated.

Cap. 116. The Prince visits and commands for ecclesiastical rules and
discipline.
THAT our visitours look diligently in every City, Monastery, and Nunrie,
how the buildinges and ornaments of the Church be kept, and make diligent
inquiry for the conversation of all persons there, and how that which we
commanded, is reformed in their reading, singing, and other disciplines
pertaining to the rules of eccelsiasticall order.

Certain Chapters, Cap. 104.

The Prince promises by the advice of his faithful determination for such
ecclesiastical matters as were not expressed in his chapters.


as of incestuous marriages, Churches that lack their right honor or have
been lately spoiled, and if there be any other ecclesiastical, or common
wealth matters worthy to be redressed, which for shortness of time we could
not now finish, we think good to differ them, until by Gods help, and
the advice of our faithful [Counsellers,] opportunity serve us to determine
the same.

There be six score chapters besides these, recorded by the same writer of
the laws, that Charles made touching ecclesiastical Persons and causes, which
I for brevity sake omit, leaving you to consider of them when you see your
time.

Charles, Charles by his laws rectified al ecclesiastical things and causes.
by these public laws, appointed what doctrine should be preached, what
abuses in the Lords supper amended, what parts of divine service pronounced by
the Priest and people together with one voice, what books should be read in
the Church, what holy days observed, what memories of Saints abolished, what
works on Sunday prohibited: he prescribed the Bishops their duties, the
Priests their charge, the Monks their rules: he directed thee keeping of
Synodes, electing and translating of Bishops, ordering and placing of
Clerks, paying and employing of Tithes: decided what should become of their
marriages that were taken away by force, or affianced before to others: forbad
the burying of dead corses in the Church, banished Sorcerie, Simonie, Usurie,
Perjury: last of all undertook, that if any thing were wanting, which needed
reformation in causes ecclesiastical, it should be supplied of him at his
leisure. If Charles had the regiment of monastical profession, episcopal
jurisdiction, canonical conversation: if he did, I say, meddle with redressing
errors in faith, abuses in sacraments, disorders in divine service,
superstition in funerals, oaths, charms, and such other matters, as by the
purport of these chapters it is evident he did, what causes can you devise more
spiritual than these? Will you permit these things of most importance to
the Princes power, and except other of less moment? That were notorious
folly. You must either inuest them with all, or exclude them first from the
weightiest. For if they be governors of the greatest ecclesiastical affairs,
much more does their authority stretch to the smalest.

Again, these Laws of Charles, which amount to the number of eight skore and
three, If any wanted he promised at his leisure to supply that defect.
what do they lack of a full direction for all matters needing reformation in
the Church of God? Any thing or nothing? If nothing, then this prince governed
and ordered al ecclesiastical causes. If any thing, yt Charles him self
assures us he would determine, when occasion served. Choose whether you will,
Charles either way showed ye lawful power of Princes to direct and establish
all things requisite to the faith and Church of Christ. For what he promised
advisedly to do; no doubt, he meant it should, and thought it might, be
justly performed.

His son and his nephew followed his steps and executed his laws.
So did Ludouike his son, and Lotharius his nephew the next Emperors after
him, whose proceedings declare what account they made of these chapters, and
with what diligence they put them in execution. The monuments of so good
Princes I may not ouerslip with silence, their deeds did then profit the Church
of God, their words will now profit us. Thus did Ludouike, and Lotharius his
son write to the Bishops and magistrates of their Empire.

Legion franciae lib. 2. Cap. 1.
You have all I doubt not either seen or heard, that our father and our
progenitors, after they were chosen by God to this place, MADE THIS THEIR
PRINCIPAL STVDIE, Cap. 2.
how the honor of Gods holy Church, and the state of their kingdom might be
decently kept: and we for our part, following their example, since it has
pleased God to appoint us that we should have the care of his holy church, and
this Realm, are very desirous, so long as we live, to labor earnestly for
three special points, I mean to defend, exalt and honor Gods holy Church
and his ministers in such sort as is fit, to preserve peace, and do justice
among the people.

Cap. 3.

The chief of this ministry consists in the princes person to whom the
Bishops are coadiutors.

Cap. 12. Cap. 11.

The Prince wills all without exception to observe his commandments in all
things as well ecclesiastical as temporal.

Cap. 26.

Bishops to be reformed by the Kings visitours.

Cap. 27.

The kings decrees touching all things and causes to be observed of all men.


AND THOUGH THE CHIEF OF THIS MINISTRY CONSIST IN OUR PERSON, yet by Gods
and man's ordinance it is so divided, that every one of you in his order and
calling has a part of our charge, in so much that I should be your
admonisher, and you all my coadiutors. For which respect our intent is by other
good means, and by commissioners appointed for this purpose, to learn and
try how well our lieutenants favor and execute justice, and how religiously
our Bishops live and preach: WILLING TOV ALL VVITHOVT EXCEPTION TO OBSERVE OUR
COMMANDMENT IN ALL THINGS AND HONOR SVCH AS WE SEND FOR ANY OCCASION OR
BVSINES EITHER ECCLESIASTICAL OR TEMPORAL, AND IN RESPECT OF OUR AVTHORITIE
NOT TO FAIL BUT PERFORM THOSE THINGS WHICH WE HAVE ENJOINED YOU BY THEM.

Now the charge that we give our visitours is this. First they shall indict
assemblies in two or three places, whither all within the limittes of their
commission shall resort, and there make it known to all men what is the sum
and effect of their message, to wit, that we have appointed them for this
cause, that IF ANY BISHOP or Lieutenant can not do his duty by reason of any
impediment, he should have recourse to them, and by their help discharge his
duty: and if the matter be such as by their industry can not be redressed,
then shall it be brought by them to our knowledge: and again, IF ANY BISHOP
or Lieutenant BE FOUND NEGLIGENT IN HIS OFFICE, by their monition he shall be
reformed.

We charge them likewise to make known to all men the Chapters or Laws, QVAE
GENERALITER DE QVIBVSCVNQVE CAVSIS STATVIMVS, WHICH WE HAVE DECREED GENERALLY
CONCERNING ALL MANNER OF CAUSES, and do their best to see them thoroughly kept of
all men. And if any of the things which we have ordained and commanded be
found imperfect by some defect happily which they can not amend, then shall
they with speed make relation thereof to us that we may correct that which
they cannot.

And because the last year our expectation was not satisfied in such sort as we
looked for, Chap. 28.
we will that this present (year) our visitours whom we have allotted to this
service, have (better) respect and care how every man that we have preferred to
the governance of our people in his calling discharges his dewtie to Gods
pleasure, our honor, and the benefit of our subjects: and this shall be the
very course of their inquiry, whether the things contained in our Capitular,
which we delivered them this year past, be kept and observed according to Gods
will and our commandment. Therefore about the midst of May next shall they
assemble, I mean our visitours every man in his division with all the
Bishops, Abbats, Lieuetenants, our fee men and aduocats (the Abbesses and such
as cannot come to send their proxies the liuetenant to bring with him his under
officers and hundreders) and in that convent shall they first confer touching
Christian religion and ecclesiastical order, The first part of the Princes
commission concerned religion and ecclesiastical order.
next they shall inquire of our officers how they do their duties, last of our
people in what concord and peace they live. And this inquisition shall they
make so diligently and exactly, that we may be trewly certified by the^ of al
these points. And if any such cause be brought before the^ which needs their
help according to the condition of the causes specified in the short rehearsal
of our laws, then our will is they shall go to the place and redress it by the
warrant of our authority.

You can neither be so simple but you may see, Legu^ Franciae Cap. 12.
nor so partial but you must grant that Ludouike and Lotharius behaved
themselves as rightful superuisours of the Bishops in their Empire, Cap. 26.
how they lived and preached: ayding those that were hindered, correcting those
that were negligent in their ministeries: Cap. 28.
and sent visitours to inquire and redress by their Princely power any cause
that needed reformation in Christian religion or ecclesiastical order: Cap. 11.

What lacks this of governing al men in all matters both ecclesiastical and
civil?


commanding all men generally to reverence and obey them as well in
ecclesiastical as common wealth matters in respect of their royal authority.
What more than this does that oath impart, which you so much declaime against?
Or what less than this did Ludouike and Lotharius execute? Can their
proceedings please you, and our words expressing the selfsame right offend
you? You must either reject both or admit both: they be so near linked, you
can not disseuer them.

I now make your self judge, whether these Christian and Catholic Princes
were not commanders and punishers (those we call governors) of Bishops,
Priests, and Moncks, in matters and causes ecclesiastical.

Phi. I see they were, but yet not supreme, which is the cheifest thing that we
mislike in your oath.


Theo. I believe you well; for by that word we deny Princes to be subject to
the Popes consistory, which is the chiefest thing you respect.


Phi. That word makes them superiors to God himself: for supreme is
superior to all, neither Christ's own person, nor his Church excepted.


Theo. Can you make such merriments when you be disposed?


Phi. Does not the word infer superior to all, or at least subject to none?


Theo. Was it in question, when this oath was made, whether God should be
superior to man, or whether Princes should be subject to the Pope? Supreme is
not superior to Christ, but not subject to the Pope.



Phi. It skilleth not what was then in question, these be now your words.


Theo. By this cunning you may conclude all that ever wrate with pen or spoke
with tongue to be wicked blasphemers.


Phi. Why so?


Theo. Where the superlatiue is used, by your rule, God himself is not
excepted. And so these phrases, a most wise teacher, a most holy Bishop, a
most mighty prince, and ten thousand such like, which we find in all men's
books and speeches, be mere impieties. For they import that many be wiser,
holyer, and mightier than Christ himself, or at lest as wise, holy and mighty
as he, which is open and inexcusable blasphemy. Name me what father or writer
you will, and see by this art of yours whether I prove him not a blasphemer.


Phi. The superlatiue includes not God, because God with man is not compared.
That is no right understanding but a foolish carping at men's words. For when
we give these titles to men, sanctissimus, potentissimus, beatissimus, the most
holy father, the most puissant king, the most blessed Martyr, we mean amongst
men; we compare them not with God.


Theo. And since all men even your selves speak so, why do you take that
foolish advantage at the word supreme, which we use; as if we meant not amongst
men, but exalted Princes above God?


Phi. But the Church of Christ is not excepted, and that consists of men.


Theo. If by the Church of Christ you mean the faithful living on earth,
certainly Princes be not subject, but superiors to all Christian men. Peter
spoke to the chosen and elect of God when he said, 1. Pet. 2. Tit. 3. Romans 1.
Cap. and 13. Cap.
Be subject to the king as to the chief; Paul willed Titus to warn not the
miscreants but the believers in Creta, to be subject to principalities and
powers: and wrate himself to all the Saints at Rome, You must be subject for
conscience sake. If the Saints must be subject to Princes, ergo the Church;
for the Church on earth is nothing else but the collection of Saints. And if
every soul, that is every man, must be subject, The saints on earth are
subject to the Princes sword the graces of God are not.
how can the Church consisting of men be exempted? But if by the Church you
mean the precepts and promises, gifts and graces of God preached in the
Church and poured on the Church, Princes must humbly obey them and reverently
receive them as well as other private men. So that Prophets, Apostles,
Evangelists and all other buylders of Christ's Church, as touching their
Persons, be subject to the Princes power; mary the word of truth in their
mouths, and the Seals of grace in their hands, because they are of God, not
of themselves, they be far above the Princes calling and regiment, and in
those cases, kings and Queens, if they will be saved, must submit themselves
to Gods everlasting truth and testament, as well as the meanest of their
people: but this neither abateth the power which God has given them over all
men, nor makes them thrall to the Popes judicial process to be forced and
punished at his pleasure: and therefore, this notwithstanding, Princes be
supreme, that is superior to all, and subject to none but only to God.


Phi. Who ever taught before you that Princes were subject only to God? The
Church confessed princes to be subject to none but to God. Tertul. ad Scapulam.
Idem in Apologetico.

Contra Parmenian. lib. 3. Ad Populu^ antioch homil. 2.





Theo. The Church of Christ from the beginning, Colimus Imperatorem, vt hominem
a Deo secundum, and solo Deo minorem: We reverence the Emperor, says
Tertullian, as a man next unto God, and inferior only to God. Again, Deum
esse solum in cuius solius potestate sunt, a quo sunt secundi, post quem primi,
ante omnes and super omnes Deos and hommes: It is only God in whose power
alone (Princes) are: in comparison with him they be second, and after him
first, before all and over all both Gods and men. So likewise Optatus: Super
Imperatorem non (est) nisi solus Deus qui fecit Imperatorem: Above the
Empe-rour is none but only GOD, who made the Emperor. And Chrysostom: Parem
vllum super terram non habet: (The Emperor) has no peer on earth, much less
any superior.

And that Princes are above all, Superior to al, is subject to none.

Ad popu Ant. homil. 2.

Nouel. constable. 133.

De obitu Theodosij. Greg. epist. li. 3. ca. 100. and cap. 103.


Saint Paul is clear. Let every soul be subject to the Superior powers. All
must be subject to them, ergo they be superior to all; and superior to all,
is supreme. Chrysostom calls the Emperor, The highest and head of all men
upon earth. Justinian, says the Emperor, has received a common government
and Principality over all men. Ambrose says of Theodosius, that he had power
over all men. And Gregory, as you heard, affirms that Power is given to
Princes from heaven over all men, not only Soldiers but also Priests. And
since I before concluded and you confessed all men, were they Monks, Priests,
Bishops, or whatsoever, to be subject to the Princes power and authority
both in causes ecclesiastical and temporal, why should that now be revoked
or doubted?


Phi. I never did nor will confess Princes to be supreme. For he that judges
on earth in Christ's stead is above them all.


Theo. You come now to the quick. The word supreme was added to set Princes
at liberty from the Pope, and that is it that so much offe^deth the Jesuits.
This very claim was the cause why the word supreme was added to the oath:
for that the Bishop of Rome takes upon him to command and depose Princes
as their lawful and superior judge. To exclude this wicked presumption, we
teach that Princes be supreme rulers, we mean, subject to no superior judge
to give a reason of their doings but only to God.


Phi. This you teach, but this you can not prove.


Theo. It forces not what we can do. The burden in this case to prove is
yours and not ours. You say Princes be subject to the Popes Consistory, we
say they be not. Must we prove the negative, or must you rather make good
your affirmative? Again Saint Paul avouches with us that every soul is
subject to their power: You contradict those words, and say the Pope is not
subject but Superior to Princes. The general in precise terms concludes
for us; you except the Pope: must you not prove your exception?


Phi. You be loath to prove; They must prove Princes to be subject to the Pope:
we need not prove them to be free.
you know the weakness of your side.


Theo. You cross the plain words of the holy Ghost, and would put us to
refute your fancies.


Phi. We say Christ's Uicar is not included in those words.


Theo. We say the general includes every particular.


Phi. How could Paul make Peter a subject to Princes, when Peter was none?


Theo. Why should not Peter be subject to Princes, when God himself
pronounced by the mouth of Paul that every soul was subject to them?


Phi. Who ever constred S. Paul's words so, besides you?


Theo. The Church of Christ never constred them otherwise. Peter and the
Bishops of Rome for the first three hundred years, did they not patiently
submit themselves as subjects to those punishments and torments which heathen
Princes inflicted on other Christians?


Phi. In deed they were martyred for the most part by the rage of Infidels,
that knew them not.


Theo. And the Christians that knew them, never took arms to defend the^
against the rage of Infidels, but thought them subject to higher powers by
force of S. Paul's words, as well as all other Bishops were.


Phi. They might not resist though they were wrongfully vexed.


Theo. And why might they not, but because they were subject by Gods ordinance
to the Princes power? Unlawful violence might well be resisted.


Phi. The Bishops of Rome for 300. years endured heathen Princes.
Christian Princes were never superiors to the Bishops of Rome.


Theo. Sir, your courage is more than your cunning. The Bishops of Rome for
eight hundred and fifty years after Christ, that we can directly prove, were
duetifull and obedient subjects to Christian Emperors.


Phi. Are you not ashamed to tell such a tale?


Theo. Will you be ashamed of your error, if I prove it a truth?


Phi. Show me that, and I will yield the rest.


Theo. The rest is already proved, Martin. Polon. in Iulio and Liberio.
Platina in Bonifacio I. Martin. Polon. in Silver. Vigil. and Martino I. Cause.
2. quaest. 7. Cap. Nossi.

The popes submission to the Emperor.


and this shall be presently showed. I might allege that after the Roman
Emperors began to profess the name of Christ, Julius and Liberius were
banished by Constantius; Bonifacius the first by Honorius; Syluerius and
Vigilius by Justinian; Martyne the first by Constantine the third; and diverse
other Popes by sundry Princes, but that I will skippe, and come to the
submission of Leo the fourth made to Ludouike the West Emperor with these
words: If we have done any thing otherwise than well, and not dealt uprightly
with those that are under us, we will amend all that is amiss by the
judgment of your highness, beseeching your excellency to send, for the better
trial of these surmises, such as in the fear of God may narrowly sift not
only the matters infourmed, but all (our doings) great and small, as well as if
your Majesty were present: so that by lawful examination all may be
finished, and nothing left undiscussed or undetermined. In all things, great
and small, the Pope submits himself to the Princes commissioners, and
offers to amend all that is amiss by the princes judgment. This lowly
submission imports an evident subjection. Ibidem Cap. Perrus. A lewd elusio^
of Gratian.



Phi. It was a dispensation of the Popes humility, not any part of his bounden
duty thus to do.


Theo. So Gratian the compiler of your decrees falueth the matter; which is as
much as if you said, the Pope by right might have commanded the Prince, but
in a merry mood, for once, to make sport, he would needs be judged and
ordered by the Prince. Is not this a proper kind of divinity, when the Pope
protests his obedience to the Princes power and laws, to say the Pope
speaks in jest, his words are but a trick of voluntary, which he may
recall or refuse when he will? If such unlearned, irreligious, and unsavory
shifts may serve for good answers, you may soon defend what religion you
lift. It is a very short and easy method to be rid of all examples and
histories, to say they did so: but it was more than needed or should have been
done.


Phi. In temporal matters it might be the Pope was subject to the Princes
power, The Prince superior to the Pope eue^ in causes ecclesiastical.
but not in spiritual.


Theo. No man can be both a subject and a superior to the Princes power. A
subject is always a subject, that is at al times to be commanded and
punished by the magistrate: never to command or punish the Magistrate. Again
Leo refers him self in all things both great and small to the Princes
pleasure and censure: now a subject in all things, is superior in nothing:
yet left you should cavil, that ecclesiastical causes are not expresty
mentioned in this place, you shall see that the Bishops of Rome for eight
hundred years and above, were suppliants and servants not of courtesy but of
duty to Christian Emperors, and obeyed their ecclesiastical Laws and
edicts, and were commanded and ouerruled by them in the regiment of the
Church, as the stories that follow shall plainly declare.

Donatus and his fellows pretending that Cecilianus could not be Bishop of
Carthage for many crimes falsely surmised, The quarrel between Donatus and
Cecilian.
and specially for that Felix, which laid hands on him had (as they said)
betrayed or burnt the scriptures: not only refused his communion, and procured
his condemnation in a Provincial Synod by lxx. Africane Bishops, but in a
tumult erected an other Bishop besides him, divided the people from him, and
offering a bill of complaint against him to the Proconsull of Afric, made a
request to Constantine, that he would give them judges to decide the matter.
The Prince careful to keep the Church in peace, did authorize Meltiades
Bishop of Rome, Marcus a Clergieman of the same City, but as then no Bishop,
Rheticius, Maternus, and Maximus three Bishops of France to consider their
allegations and determine the strife: Where sentence passing with Cecilianus,
the contrary part appealed from the commissioners to the Prince. This appeal
Constantine might have justly rejected as made from his own delegates; but
seeking all means to pacify the schism, commanded a greater number of their
Bishops to meet together at Arle in France, there to sit in Council a fresh
about the hearing and ending of this quarrel: from whom, for that they
likewise concluded Cecilianus to be right Bishop of Carthage, the Donatists
appealed as they had done from the first: adding now, that if Cecilianus
himself were clear, yet so long as Felix was guilty, which ordered and
confirmed him, his election must needs be void. The patient and mild
Emperor seeing them twice convicted and not contented, but still murmuring
against the Bishops as partial, and daily molesting his ears with
importunate suite, never troubled Bishop or Council with the clearing of
Felix, but appointed Aelianus a civil Magistrate to search out the truth of
these later accusations in a temporal Court, where Felix after diligent
examination was iudicially discharged and acquitted from all suspicion of that
sacrilegious abusing the word of God. Then were both sides called before
Constantine to receive judgment at his hands without appeal, who taking
pains in his own Person to sit judge between them, and exactly weighing what
either part could say, gave sentence with Cecilianus, against Donatus, making
therewithal a most sharp Law to punish the Donatists (if they persisted in
their wilfulnes) as dissentious schismatikes, from the Church of Christ: which
rigor the Christian Emperors that followed, did rather increase than
diminish. This I thought good to report out of Eusebius, Lib. 10. Cap. 5. Lib.
1. contra Parmenianum epist. 162.166. and alibi. This quarrel was forthings and
causes spiritual.
Optatus and Austen somewhat the larger, that the circumstaunces being fully
known, the conclusion might the better be perceived.

I trust you will not deny but the strife between Cecilianus and Donatus
consisted both of persons and causes ecclesiastical. The parties accused and
accusing were Bishops; the faults objected, were just impediments of
episcopal dignity; the matters in doubt were the committing and partaking of
sacrilege, the right election of Bishops, the lawful deposing of them by
Synodes, the needful communion with them, or schismatic dissension from
them. No causes can possiblely touch the regiment of Christ's Church nearer
than these: well then in these causes who was supreme, Meltiades or Constantine?
Constantine superior to Meltiades.
The bishop of Rome or the Emperor? The prince sent commission to the Pope,
joined other colleagues with him, received an appeal from him, gave second
judges after him, and in his own person pronounced final sentence without
him: the least of these facts proves the prince superior to the Pope; and all
these did that famous Emperor, and his doings in this case were very well
lyked and accepted in the Church of Christ.

Which of these things will you now encounter? Did not Constantine authorize
Meltiades? Eusebius. lib. 10. Cap. 5. The Pope with others were authorized by the
Prince to hear this cause. August. epist. 162.
His commission is yet extant to Meltiades Bishop of Rome and Marcus with
these words: My pleasure is, that Cecilianus with ten Bishops of his accusers
and other ten of his favorers come to Rome, there to be heard before you
both, joining with you Rheticius, Maternus, and Marinus your colleagues, whom
purposely for this matter I have willed with speed to repair unto you. S.
Austen debating with the Donatists what just exceptions they could take to so
many sentences given against them, moves this doubt and makes this answer,
Should not (think you) Meltiades Bishop of Rome with his colleagues have
usurped that judgment, which lxx. Africane Bishops had ended? What, that he
did not usurp? For the Emperor upon motion made (by you) sent Bishops to sit
with him as judges, and to rule that matter in every point as justice should
lead them. This we prove by the Donatists supplication and the Princes own
words. If S. Austen defend the Bishop of Rome from usurping in this case, by
producing and urging a commission from the prince, then appare^tly, both the
pope was authorized by y^ princes power to give judgment in a matter
ecclesiastical, and had bin, but for that warrant, an usurper.


Phi. S. Austen says that Constantine durst not be judge of a Bishops cause.
Epist. 166.



Theo. At the first he was loath to sit judge in his own person, for that he
was not acquainted with the Church Canons which were then brought in question:
Constantine himself would not at first fit judge in the cause for want of skill.
but at length when he saw no remedy, himself sat in judgment both after the
Pope and after the Council, and heard the whole matter, and ended it for ever.
This infers that at the first when he refused he wanted not power to
command, but skill to discern; more requisite in a judge than the former: Yea
at the first when he durst not sit judge himself for lack of experience, he
showed his soueraintie by making delegates to hear and order the cause. So
says S. Austen the very next words. August. epist. 166.
For that Constantine durst not be judge himself of a Bishops cause, eam
discutiendam at que finiendam Episcopis delegauit: he made delegates of the
Bishops to discuss and determine the same. And again, causam Ceciliani
iniunxit eis audiendam, he gave forth a precept (to the Bishop of Rome and
others) for hearing of Cecilianus his matter. Cellatio. 3. dici cum Donatistis
Now to delegate the Bishop of Rome with others, and to give fresh judges
after them, is an argument of greater authority, than if the Prince in Person
had been judge in the cause.

Did not Constantine receive that appeal which the Donatists made from
Meltiades, The Prince received an appeal from the Pope. Eusebius. li. 10. Cap. 5.
and assign them other judges? His Epistle to Chrestus Bishop of Siracusas
in Sicile, whom he willed to be present at the Council of Arle for the ending
of the same matter, is an evident proof that he did. At the first, says
Constantine, when this schism began, I wrate my letters and took this
order: that certain Bishops coming from France, and the parties in strife
called for out of Afric, the Bishop of Rome being also there, in their
presence this quarrel should be thoroughly considered and pacified. Mary for so
much as they will not agree to the sentence there given, but go forward in
their outrageous dissension, I must take care that (the strife) which should
have caulmed of it self at the first decision, at least may now be composed
by the meeting of many. Having therefore charged a great number of Bishops out
of diverse coasts to assemble by the kalends of August at Arle, I thought it
not amiss by letters to require you, that you fail not to be with them at the
time and place appointed: that by your vprightnes with the good advise and full
consent of the rest, which shall then and there meet you, upon diligent
hearing what either side can say (whom we have commanded to be likewise
present) they may be reduced from the schism yet during, to religion, faith,
and brotherly concord, as in duty they be bound.

When Meltiades and his colleagues (says Austen to the Donatists) had August.
epist. 166.
pronounced Cecilianus innocent and condemned Donatus as author of the schism
raised at Carthage, your side came back to the Emperor, and complained of the
judgment of the Bishops against them. The most patient and mild Emperor the
second time gave them other judges (namely) the Bishops (that met) at Arle in
France. And gave the^ other Judges after the Pope.
Certes the taking of an appeal made from the Bishop of Rome and appointing
other judges after him, and besides him, strongly concludes the Princes
authority to be far above the Popes, even in causes ecclesiastical, or as
you term them spiritual.

August. epist. 166.

The Prince sat himself in judgment both after the Pope and after the
Council.

Idem epist. 162.

Idem contra Crescon. lib. 3 Cap. 17.


Will you lastly say that Constantine sat not judge himself in this matter, as
well after Meltiades, as after the Council of Arle? S. Austen is flat against
you. Your men, says he, speaking to the Donatists, appealed (from the
Bishops at Arle) to the Princes own person, and never left till the Emperor
himself took the hearing of the cause between them both, and pronounced
Cicilianus innocent, and those (his accusers) to be malicious wranglers. And
again: the Donatists appealed from ecclesiastical judgment that Constantine
might hear the cause. Whither when they came, both parts standing before him,
Cecilianus was adjudged to be innocent, and the Donatists overthrown. To
prove this, I will bring you (says Austen) the very words of Constantine
taken out of his letters where he witnesses that upon judicial hearing of
both sides, he found Cecilianus to be clear. For first declaring how the
parties were brought to his judgment, after two judgments of Bishops
(already past,) there (says Constantine) I fully perceived, that Cecilianus
was a man most innocent, observing the duties of his religion, and following
the same: neither could any crime be fastened on him as his adversaries had
in his absence suggested.

August. epist. 166.

The Prince made a penal law to confirm his final decision.

Ibidem.


And showing what followed upon this judgment: Then did Constantine says he,
first make a most sharp law to punish the Donatists. His sons continued the
same: read what Valentinian; read, when you will, what Gratian and Theodosius
decreed against you. Why wonder you then at the children of Theodosius, as if
they should have followed any other president in this cause than the judgment
of Constantine which so many Christian Emperors have kept inviolable? Though
Constantine be dead, yet the judgment of Constantine given against you
lives. For when Emperors command that which is good, it is Christ and no
man else that commands by them.

The Prince in these four facts superior to the Pope.
Lay these things together, and mark the consequent. First the Bishop of
Rome and his assessours were appointed by the Prince to meddle with this matter
as his delegates. Next upon complaint of their partial dealing the Prince
commanded others (leaving out the Bishop of Rome) to sit in France to
conclude the same cause. Thirdly the Donatistes still appealing, the Prince
called for both sides, heard them in his own person, gave small judgment
with Cecilianus, and discharged him as innocent, and therewith made a penal
edict against the Donatists. Fourthly these princely proceedinges of
Constantine, the Church of God received with honor, and used with gladness;
the Christian Emperors embraced as virtuous, and confirmed as religious; S.
Austen alleges them as substantial proofs for the Catholics, and
effectual judgments against the Donatistes: Now speak uprightly, whether in
this case the Prince were not superior to the Pope, yea supreme governor of
Ecclesiastical persons and causes.

To Theodosius the elder Damasus, The Prince wills Flauianus to keep his
Church after four Popes had repelled him for no Bishop.

Theodor. lib. 5. cap. 23.

Sozom. lib. 8. cap. 28.

Arcadius denied the Pope a Council, and punished the Bishops that kept his
communion.

Niceph. lib. 13. cap. 30.


Siricius, and Anastasius, as I showed before, made grievous complaints one
after an other, against Flauianus for entering and possessing the Sea of Antioch
contrary to the Canons of the church. The prince sending for Flauianus, heard
his answer, and admiring the courage and wisdom of the man, willed him to
return to his country, and feed the flock committed to his charge,
notwithstanding the Bishops of Rome for the space of seventeen years before
would neither acknowledge him for a Bishop, nor communicate with him.

Of Arcadius his son, Innocentius the Bishop of Rome requested a Council for
the trial of Chrysostoms cause: but his petition was denied, his messengers
sent away with reproach as troublers of the West Empire, Chrysostom banished
farther off, and this edict given forth by Arcadius the East Emperor against
those that taking part with Innocentius, and favoring Chrysostom, refused to
communicate with Theophilus his deposer and Atticus his successor. If any
Bishop will not communicate with Theophilus and Atticus, let him be deprived of
his church and his goods: if they be laymen they shall forfeite, the
magistrates their dignities, the soldiers their girdle, the common sort let
them be fined and exiled.

By Honorius an other of his sons, ruling the West parts, Ex libro pontif.
in vita Bonifacij.

Epist. Bonifacij ad Honorium Augustum.

Rescript. Honor. ad Bonifac. tom. con. 1.


Bonifacius and Eulalius, chosen Bishops of Rome in a tumult, were both
commanded to depart the City: and Bonifacius, after he was restored, put up
The Pope makes a supplication to the Prince for a law to punish ambition in
getting the Popedom.
a supplication to the prince for a decree that no man by suite or other
unlawful means might be made Bishop of Rome: to whom Honorius sent back this
rescript, By the mouth of your holiness we hill have this known to al Clergy
men, that when you shall forgo this life, which we wish not, they may learn to
surcease from ambition. For if two striving be chosen, neither of them shall
continue Bishop, but he only shall remain in the Sea Apostolic, whom the
divine judgment and general consent shall elect a fresh out of the clergy.
This must therefore be kept, that all may put on quiet and contented minds by
our gentle admonition, and not attempt any thing by seditious packing, since we
be resolved that neither faction shall prevail.

It was no strange thing in those days for the Bishop of Rome to be supplia^t
and subject in church matters to christian Princes. When Eutiches first broched
his error, Leo epist. 9.

The Pope makes supplication to the Prince for a Council, and missed his suit.


that the flesh of Christ in substance was not like this of ours: Leo the^
Bishop of Rome made this suit to Theodosius the younger: If it please (your
Highness) to grant my supplication, and to command a Council of Bishops to
be kept in Italy, speedily by Gods help might all things be redressed, which
now trouble the whole Church: but he did not obtain so much. For Theodosius
appointed their meeting at Ephesus, and for have prefixed so short a time, that
the Bishops of Italy could not be provided for the iourneie: Leo. Epist.
12. Idem Epist. 13. Idem Epist. 17.
Yet Leo sending his Deputies excuses his absence by writing in these words:
Although to be present at the day which your godliness prescribed for the
Council no possible means do permit, neither by former examples (is my
presence required,) and urgent occasions at this time suffer me not to forsake
this City, specially considering the point of faith (which Eutiches
infringeth) is so clear that a Council might well have been spared: yet have
I done my best, to obeie your graces precept in this, by dispatching thither
such of my brethren as may suffice for this matter and shall supply mine
absence.

When this Council by the violent threatening and mischievous packing of Diosco
us Bishop of Alexandria, there president, had allowed the cursed opinion of r
Eutiches, and deposed Flauianus Bishop of Constantinople for proceeding against
him: Leo becomes a fresh suter to Theodosius in most earnest and humble
manner. Idem Epist. 24. The Pope with sighs and tears, sueth for a general
Council to the Prince, and was repelled.
For so much as the Council of Bishops, which you commanded to be kept at
Ephesus, concerning the matter of Flauianus, has (in sight) hurt the faith,
and wounded all churches: all the churches of these parts about us, all the
Priests make supplication to your Majesty with sighs and tears, that it
might please you to command a general council to be held within Italy:
behold most christian and reverent Emperor, I with the rest of my fellow
Bishops beseech you to command that all things may stand in the same state, in
which they were before any of these judgments, until a greater number of
Bishops may be gathered out of the whole world.

Leo Epist. 26. The Pope desires a gentle woman to further his suit to the
Prince.
This request of his he besought the Princess Pulcheria to commend unto
Theodosius her brother. I have written to the most glorious and christian
Prince; that for the calling of a council within Italy, time might be set,
and and place appointed; all quarrels and judgments past on either side (for
the mean while) suspended: which thing that we may the rather obtain (I
beseech you) let your accustomed devotion, which never failed the church in her
troubles, further our supplication with his Majesty.

Idem Epist. 23. The Pope prays others to help him with putting up a
supplication to the Prince for a Council.
The same Leo desires the clergy, Nobles, and citizens of Constantinop. where
Theodosius lay, to join with him, for the better prevailing in his suite: Put
up an humble supplication (I pray you) with good advise, that the most gracious
Emperor will vouchsafe to grant our petition which we make for a general
council to be summoned: yet all the prayers and means that Leo could use
notwithstanding, Theodosius persuaded to the contrary by Chrysaphius master of
his palace (who was present at the said council of Ephesus and greatly
favored the faction of Dioscorus) would never incline to grant him any thing,
but always refused his request.

If the Bishop of Rome might then have commanded, why did he entreat with
tears, and yet miss his purpose?
If the Bishop of Rome might have commanded thus much against the Princes will,
and without the Princes power, what needed such lowly supplications? Why did
he make so great friends, fet so deep sighs, shed so many tears, and all in
vain? What folly was it to wast so much labor and time to no purpose, when
the least word of his mouth, as you pretend, might have commanded both
Emperor and Council? But if, for restitution of the parties grieved on either
side to their first estates, for suspension of all acts and proceedings past
in three Synodes, for indiction of a general Council to debate their cause;
the Pope were to sue, the Prince to grant; as appears by the plain
confession and humble submission of Leo: then you see that in the Primative
Church of Christ the Pope was wont to come to the Prince with a supplicamus for
matters Ecclesiastical, and not only besought him as his superior with all
humility, but obeyed him in such cases as his Lord and Sovereign with all
duty.

After Theodosius succeeded Martian, who by the persuasion of the virtuous
Lady Pulcheria joint Empress with him, was content to call a general
Council: but as touching the time which Leo requested, and the place which he
desired, Epist. 43. The Pope a fresh suter to the next Emperor.

Idem Epist. 50.


the prince refused the Popes petition in them both. I besought your Grace
(says Leo) that the council which we made suit for, and you judged needful
to pacify the East church, might by your commandment be differred till some
better opportunity: but because you led with a devout respect prefer Gods
matters before man's, I labor not against that, which your Highness has
disposed: yea rather I did with so great gladness embrace your Majesty's travel
to call a Synod for reducing the church to concord, that although my self
were a suter to have it kept within Italy, and a fitter time to be chosen that
more store of Bishops might be sent for from the farthest parts; yet so soon
as your Graces writ was delivered me, forthwith I directed (some) to supply
my room.

When this Council was assembled, Leo began to make farther suit to Martian in
this wise: Epist. 43. The Pope beseeches the Prince by his royal decree, to
void the Council of Ephesus; and to command the Council of Chalcedon not to
depart from the Nicene faith.
[The second council of Ephesus] can not rightly be called a council, which
apparently subverted the faith, and which your Highness for very love to truth
will make void, by your decree, to the contrary, most glorious Emperor. I
therefore earnestly request and beseech your Majesty by the Lord Jesus Christ
the founder and guider of your kingdom, that in this council (of Chalcedon)
which is presently to be kept, you will not suffer the faith to be called in
question, which our blessed Fathers held, delivered them from the Apostles,
neither permit such (errors) as have been long since condemned by them, to
be now revived again: but that you will rather command the faith concluded
in the first Nicene Council to stand in full force, removing all the (latter)
devises of Heretics. Which request Martian accomplished, entering the Council
in his own person, and there by word of mouth absolutely forbidding the
Bishops to defend or avouch any thing of the flesh and birth of our Savior
otherwise tha^ the Nicene creed did contain. Council. Chalced. actio. 1.


To this council of Chalcedon Leo willed by Martia^ to subscribe returned his
answer in this suppliant and duetifull order: Leo ^pist. 59. The Pope must
obey the Princes will in subscribing to the decrees of the Council.
Because I must by all means obey your sacred and religious will I have set
down my consent (in writing) to those Synodall constitutions which for the
confirmation of the catholic faith, and condemnation of heretics pleased me
very well. What better witness can we produce, that in causes Ecclesiastical
the Prince was the Popes superior than this, that for repealing the Council
of Ephesus, for summoning the Council o^ Chalcedon, for charging those 600.
and 30. fathers not to decline from the Nicene faith, and requiring the Bishop
of Rome to subscribe to their acts, Martian commands with authority, Leo
with all readiness obeys: yea that Leo beseeches Martian to command, and
protests that for his part, he did and must obey the Princes will in those
cases?

Novel. constit. 123.

Iustinia^ commands the Patriarchs and namely the Bishop of Rome for
Ecclesiastical affairs.


We COMMAVND (says Justinian) the blessed ARCHBISHOPS of Rome, Constantinople,
Alexandria, Theopolis, and Jerusalem, to receive for ordering and instauling of
Bishops only that which this present Law does allow. And taxing the
charges of every Bishop according to the yearly value of his Church: Ibidem.
If any man (says he) presume to take for installations or other duties above
the rate which we prefixe, we command that he repay thrice so much of his own
to the church or bishop in that sort grieved. Neither does he limit the Popes
receites only, but also binds him with the rest by this general
constitution: If any man be made Bishop contrary to the form which this law
prescribes, Ibidem.
the party confirmed shall loose his Bishopric, and the confirmer stand
suspended from his Ecclesiastical function one whole year, and besides forfeit
all his goods to the use of his own church: mary when a bishop is accused of
any thing that does by the (sacred) canons or (our) laws hinder his
consecration; if any man order him before diligent examination had, The Prince
inflicteth deprivation for the breach of his Ecclesiastical laws.
as well he that did order him, as he that is ordered, shall for ever be
deprived. Thus could ancient Princes command in causes, and correct for
offenses Ecclesiastical, even the chiefest Patriarchs, and namely the Bishop
of Rome, who now takes on him to depose Princes, and dispose kingdoms at his
pleasure.

This illation is more than evident by the words of Gregory the first, who
writing to the Emperor Mauritius, Gregory's submission to Mauritius in causes
Ecclesiastical.
uses every where this style: My Lord, my most gracious Lord, I your servant,
and subject to your commandment; and that not in temporal causes, but in
things concerning the rules and orders of Christ's church, as by the special
circumstances will appear. Mauritius, perceiving that many coueted to be
Clergi-men and Monks, some to prevent the danger of their accomptes, others
to decline the burden of warfare, made this decree, that no soldier, nor
officer accountant to the Prince for any sums of money, should be received to
sacred orders, or Monastical profession: charging the Bishop of Rome, to give
notice thereof to the rest of his Province. Gregory though very much amassed
and grieved at the strangeness of this law, yet durst not resist or refuse the
same, but first with all diligence put the commandment of Mauritius in
execution, and afterward fell to beseeching him to relent somewhat from the
rigor of this hard and severe prohibition.

My Lord has given forth this edict, says he, that no man entangled with
service for the common weal should enter any ecclesiastical function, Greg.
Epi. lib. 2. cap. 100.
which I greatly praised; knowing that he which on the sudden steppeth from a
secular trade to a spiritual charge, does not mean to leave, but exchange the
world. Where it is added that none such should be suffered in any Monastery;
Ecclesiastical Laws made by the Prince without the Popes knowledge and
against his liking.

How far was this man from deposing Princes?

The Pope subject to the Princes commandment sends the princes precept
throughout his province.

The Pope of duty yields obedience to his Prince. The Pope the Princes
servant by public right.

He confesses the Prince to be Lord over all.

Idem Epist. lib. 4. cap. 74.

The Prince commanded the Bishop of Rome to be at peace with the Bishop of
Constantinople.


this I maruailed at, seeing the place does not hinder the making of his
accounts, nor the payment of his debts. It follows in the same law; That no
man once mustered as a soldier should convert (from that calling and become a
Monk.) Which constitution, I confess to my Lord, did even astonish me:
because the way to heaven is thereby shut up from many men, and that now
prohibited as unlawful which has hitherto bin (frankly) permitted. And what
am I that speak to my Lord but dust and a very worm? Yet for that this Edict
tends against God the creator of all things, I can not conceal so much from
my Lord. I therefore beseech you by the dreadful judge, that your holiness will
either mitigate or abrogate this rigorus proclamation. I for my part as subject
to your commandment, have sent your precept into sundry coasts: yet because
your Law does not stand with Gods glory, Lo by letters I have acquainted my
most glorious Lord there-withall. So that I have either way done my duty,
which have both yielded obedience to my Prince, and in Gods behalf disburdened
my conscience. I your unworthy suppliant wax not thus bold, either in respect
I am a Bishop, or in that I am your servant by public right, but resting on
your (special) and private favor, for that most gracious Sovereign, you were
my Lord (and master) when as yet you were not Lord (and chief) over all. If it
be possible for a subject to show more submission and duty to the Princes
commandment, than the Bishop of Rome does to Mauritius, restraining all
Bishops by his princely power from admission of such Monks, and election of
such Clerks as he disabled; let your Apology be had in some credit: but if
greater obedience than these words import, neither Gods law does exact, nor
Princes can expect; I trust Gregory's own confession shall be taken without
exception.

The like submission upon like occasion is extant in other his Epistles: as
when Mauritius willed him to grow to some concord with John Bishop of
Constantinople, to whom or from whom Gregory would in no wise send or accept
letters of communion and society, because the said John entitled him
universal Patriarch. I have, says he, received letters from my virtuous
Lord, that I should be at peace with my brother and fellow Bishop John. In deed
it well beseems a religious Prince to command Bishops in such things: mary
this was heavy to me, that my Sovereign Lord did not rebuke him for his
pride, but endeavor to bow me from my purpose, which in this cause stand with
humility and sincerity to defend the Gospel and Canons. Idem Epist. lib. 4.
cap. 76.
He rather is worthy to be threatened with your Majesty's commandment which
refuses to be subject to the Canons: he to be repressed, which offers a
wrong to the universal Church. Let my Lord (I beseech him) somewhat respect me
being his own, whom he has always favored above others, which am also very
desirous to yield him obedience, and yet am I loath to be convicted in that last
and fearful judgment of (over much) negligence. Let my Soueraign Lord
voutsafe to sit judge in this matter himself, or else to make him to surcease
his intent. I as obedient to my Lords precepts have gentlely written to my said
fellow Bishop, and humbly warned him to forgo that vain title. The Pope ready
to obey the Princes commandment.
As much as in me lies I am ready to obey the commandment of your Majesty:
yet for that the cause is not mine, but Gods, and not I alone, but the whole
church is troubled, let my gracious Lord lance the right place where the wound
is, and subdue the patie^t that resists him with the strength of his
imperial power.

Again when Maximus was ordered Bishop of Salona within Gregory's Province,
yet without Gregory's knowledge, thus he co^planeth of him to Constantia then
Empress. Idem Epist. lib. 4. cap. 78.
The Bishop of Salona was ordered, neither I, nor my respo^sarie witting
thereof, which thing was never attempted under any of the Princes your
predecessors. As Soon as I understood thereof I sent him word, that he should
not presume to celebrate divine service (that he means by the name of Mass)
until I heard from my Sovereign Lords, that it was their pleasure it should
be so: The Pope submitting himself to the Princes pleasure in causes
ecclesiastical.
but he setting naught thereby and despising me (goes on still) and will not
resort unto me according as my Lords commanded him. Yet I obeying their graces
precept did from my heart remit unto the said Maximus this his presumption as
freely as if he had been ordered Bishop by my consent. Only other offenses of
his, as fleshly wantonness, entrance by Simony, ministering the Lords supper
after he was put from the communion, these things I can not skip unexamined for
my duties sake to God: and before these things could be tried, The Pope
ouerruled in his consistory with the princes precept.
my soueraign Lord preventing me with his precept commanded that I should
receive (the said Maximus) at his coming with all honor. This is a pitiful
case that a man accused of so great crimes should be honored, before he be
cleared: and if the faults of those Bishops which be committed to my charge be
born out with my gracious Lords (in this sort) by secret favorers, unhappy man
that I am, what make I here in this church? Well, that mine own Bishops contemn
me, and have a refuge against me to secular judges, I can not but thank God,
and impute it to my sins.

If the Bishop of Rome despised and ouerruled in his Episcopal jurisdiction,
neither plead his own supremacy, nor once kick at the Princes authority, but
rather submit himself as a servant and subject of duty to the princes
pleasure, so far as he might, with a safe conscience to Godward: and besides
the man so religious, the matter so serious, that in this case jesting were not
excusable, lying intolerable, then may you be fully resolved that the
primative church never heard of this lewd and arrogant presumption, which the
Pope now claims and usurps, I mean to be master and deposer of Princes,
but that contrariewise the Bishops of Rome themselves, even in causes
Ecclesiastical, kept the laws and obeyed the precepts of Christian Emperors,
as of their liege Lords and sovereign rulers. The words of Gregory be so
vehement and evident to this effect, that no face ca^ deny them, no cunning
avoid them. You must needs seek farther for a new distinction: Your first is
foolish, your second is false, neither of them coherent with the sacred
Scriptures, or ancient histories.

Neither was Gregory the last Bishop of Rome that yielded obedience to the
princes power in causes ecclesiastical. Agatho Bishop of that See 680. years
after Christ, when Constantine the 1. sent for certain learned and skilful men
of the West parts to treat and confer with the Grecians in the sixth general
council about the truth of religion, returned this dutiful and effectual
answer: Most gracious Lord (says he to Constantine, Sextae Synod. act. 4.
joining with him Heraclius and Tiberius his brethren) your sacred letters
encouraging us to show forth effectually our prompt and diligent service for
perfourming that which your edict commanded, and for discharge of our duty, to
choose the fittest that could be found in this decayed age, and wretched
province; we have directed these our fellow servants according to the most
godly precept of your Majesty in regard of obedience which we did ow, not for
presumption of their knowledge, The Popes obedience to the Emperor was no
courtesy but duty. Sext. Synod. act. 4. Agathonis Epist. 2.

All the Bishops of the North and West parts servants to the Emperor as well
as they of the East.


for we waxed not bold upon their cunning, but your princely favor mildly
commanding (so much) did incite us, and our baseness has obediently fulfilled
that which was (by you) commanded.

And in his second epistle to the same Princess, he says: All the Bishops of
the North and West parts, servants of your christian Empire, give thanks to
God for this your religious intent. The calling of general Councels to debate
matters of faith, is a point that precisely concerns the regiment of Christ's
church: and in that case, we see, the Bishop of Rome confesses himself a
servant, and shows himself obedient to the princes precept: assuring us by
plain words and ag^eeable deeds that this humility proceeded not from any
jesting humor or fained submission, but from the singlenes of his heart, and in
respect of his bounden duty: which auerreth our assertion and clearly
conuinceth that the Princes authority was then superior to the Popes, even in
causes Ecclesiastical, which you defend to be no way pertinent to the civil
magistrate.

I will end with Leo the 4. the selfsame that first submitted himself to Lodouik
the father, Distinct. 10. ca. de capitulis. The Pope professes 850. years
after Christ that he will inuiolably keep the Princes ecclesiastical chapters
and laws.
and after confirmed his obedience to Lotharius the son in these words: As
touching the chapters and imperial preceps of your Highness and the Princes
your predecessors irrefragablely to be kept and obeyed, as much as in us did or
dothly; we by all means profess that we will by Christ's help now and for ever
observe the same: and if any man has or shall inform otherwise, your Majesty
may right well assure your self it is an untrue tale. The chapters of Charles,
Lodouike, and Lotharius, for persons and causes Ecclesiastical I repeated
before: to those the Bishop of Rome eight hundred and fifty years after
Christ promises and swears not only present but also perpetual obedience
to the utmost of his power without all contradiction. It is easy to see which
of these twain was superior: he that had power to make Laws, not he that
was bound to keep them: he that might command, not he that must obey:
Lotharius, not Leo.

Can you look for stronger proofs or plainer words that the Prince was the
Popes superior in causes Ecclesiastical? If the Bishop of Rome were a SERVANT
to christian Emperors, How far the Pope was the^ from the superiority which
he now claims over Princes.
then was he not their ruler: If a SVBIECT under them, then no superior over
them: If SVPPLIANT to their persons, and OBEDIENT to their laws, then no
deposer of Princes, nor reseruer of their edicts: to be short, if they were
correctors and judges of his demainour and doings, then his claim to punish
and deprive them of their kingdoms is usurped and wicked: and so Princes
having no superior but only God, are consequently supreme governors over all
their subjects, be they laie-men or Clerks, to August. contra Cresconium,
lib. 3. cap. 51.
command that which is good, and prohibit that which is evil, not in civil
affairs only, but in matters also concerning divine Religion.


Phi. The Jesuits cauils against the Princes sovereignty.
I confess places somewhat move me, neither can I upon the sudden answer
them; yet are there many both authorities and reasons that make with us for the
contrary.


Theo. Show me but one Scripture, Father or Council all this while that
proves the Pope to be the Princes superior, and I will ask no further
answer.


Phi. God says to Jeremy, I have appointed thee this day over nations and
kingdoms to pull up, to beat down, to disperse, to overthrow, to build and
plant.


Theo. Ieremies words conclude nothing for the Pope.
Was Jeremy ever Pope?


Phi. I do not say, he was.


Theo. Then that which God spoke to Jeremy concludes nothing for the Pope.


Phi. If a mean Prophet had that power to plant and remove kingdoms, how much
more he, that is head of the universal church, and judge over the whole earth?


Theo. Your antecedent is false, and your consequent foolish. For Jeremy had
no such power as you dream of: he was appointed a Prophet to denounce the
wrath of God against nations and Countries, not a Prince, to displace Rulers
and translate kingdoms. It is a gross perverting of the Scriptures to wrest
them to that sense. Next your consequent supposes that the Pope is head of the
universal Church and judge over the whole earth; which vain presumption, is
no good illation; you must bring us better conclusions before they will be
current.


Phi. The text is plain: I have appointed thee over nations and kingdoms.


Theo. Jeremy appointed a Prophet over nations.

Ierem. 1.


I have appointed thee over them; not a Prince to subdue them, but a Prophet to
warn them.


Phi. How prove you that exposition?


Theo. The text it self says so. Prophetam Gentibus dedite: I have made thee
a Prophet over nations. And the very next words before yours are these, Ecce
posui verba mea in ore tuo; ecce constitui te hodie super gentes and super
regna, etc. Ierem. 1.
Behold I have put my words in thy mouth, behold I have appointed thee over
nations and kingdoms: that is a Prophet with my words in thy mouth, not a
magistrate with the material sword in thine hand. This we likewise prove by
the execution of his office. For he prophesied the captivity of the Jews, the
taking of the king and the city, the destruction of the Egyptians,
Philistines, Moabites, Ammonites, Idumeans, Persians, Damascus, Babylon and
other kingdoms and nations; but he never deposed king, nor altered state: ergo
his commission was to foreshew the ruins, ouerthrows, decaies and changes of
kingdoms, nations and commonwealths, not to practice them: he was the man
that foretold them, he was not he means to work them.

Theodorete says of these words: I have appointed thee over nations and
kingdoms, to pull up, Theodor. in 1. cap. Ierem.
beat down, disperse, overthrow, build and plant:] for he prophesied not only
the Jews captivity, but their deliverance by Cyrus. He prophesied also to many
other nations al kinds of calamities. And likewise Bernard, Bernard.
considerat. lib. 2.
Rusticani sudoris quodam schemate labor spiritualis expressus est. Disce
sarculo, non sceptro tibi opus esse, vt facias opus Prophetae. By a certain
resemblance of the husbandma^s pains the spiritual labor (of the Preacher) is
expressed. Learn that thou must have an hook to weed, not a scepter (to rule)
if thou will do the work of a Prophet. Nicolaus de Lyra 1300. years after
Christ could hit ye right sense of this place. Lyra in 1. cap. Ierem.
I have appointed thee to root vp] that is, to denou^ce the inahbitants shall be
removed out of the la^d: to built and pla^t] that is, to denou^ce that the
Jews shall be builded and planted again in their own country.

This I take to be the right meaning of the text: if that please you not, but
you will have the Prophet himself to be the workman, then Jeremy was sent not
to plant and pull up Pri^^es, not to build and beat down kingdoms, but as
your own gloze says, to root up vices, to beat down heresies, to build up
virtues. Lyra in 1. cap. Ierem.

Hieron. in 1. ca. Ierem.


Every plant, says Hierom upon those words, which the heavenly father has not
planted, shall be rooted up; and the building which has not his foundation on
the rock but in the sand, is undermined and ouerthrown by the word of God. And
Gregory: The Prophet is first willed to destroy, and after to build; Grego.
Pastoral. part. 3. admonitio 35.

Hieron. in 1. cap. Ierem.


first to root up, and after to plant; because the foundation of truth is
never well laid, except the frame of error be first subverted. Yea Many, says
Hiero^, understand this place of the person of Christ, which destroyed the
kingdom of the devil. Take which of these senses you like best, so you bestow
not that on Jeremy which is proper to Christ, 1. Tim. 6. Revel. 19.
to be king of kings and Lord of lords, nor allow him the liberty that God
reserueth to himself, to bear rule over the kingdom of men, and to give it to
whom he will; which no Prophet before Christ, no Apostle since Christ, no
mortal creature ever claimed or used, Dan. 4. Revel. 17. Esai. 6.

Esaie makes not the prince subject to the Pope.

Hieron. in 60. cap. Esai.


but only the whore of Babylon that reigns over the kings of the earth.


Phi. The nations and kings, says God by Esaie, that will not serve thee, shall
perish.


Theo. Whose translation is that?


Phi. The Septuagintes.


Theo. But the Hebrew is: That nation and kingdom which will not serve thee,
shall perish. And so does S. Hierom translate.


Phi. There is no great difference betwixt them.


Theo. As much as is between the Prince and the people.


Phi. Both Prince and people must serve the church, or else they shall perish.


Theo. We reason not what they must do, but what Esaie says: and he says,
the kingdom must serve, the king must nurce the church, which is a word of
more dignity than service is. Esai. 60. Esai. 49.
Thou shall suck the breasts of kings. And again: Kings shall be thy
foster fathers, and Queens thy nurcing mothers: but I stick not on this.


Phi. You need not: for in plain words it is said a little before: Esai. 60.
Reges eorum ministrabunt tibi: Their kings shall serve thee.


Theo. Their kings shall attend thee, or minister unto thee. The word (...)
signifies him that is next about a man to attend on his person.


Phi. And they be servants as well as others.


Theo. It may be so: neither do I deny that Princes must serve, but whom?


Phi. The church: so says S. Hierom: The nations and kings, that will not
serve the church, Hieron. in Esai. cap. 60.
shall perish with that destruction which is prepared for the wicked.


Theo. You should show that Princes, which will not serve the Pope must loose
their crowns.


Phi. Grant that Princes must serve the church, and for the rest we will do
well enough.


Theo. First, grant you that Popes were subjects and servants to christian
Princes 850. years after Christ, which I have proved and you have not
answered, and for service to be done by Princes to the church of Christ, I will
not long dissent.


Phi. How can they serve the church, and not serve the Pope, which is head of
the church?


Theo. To whom were these words spoken, The kingdom that will not serve thee,
Every member of Christ's church has as good interest in Esaies words as the
Pope.
shall perish?


Phi. To the church.


Theo. To the whole church, or to some special members of the church?


Phi. To the whole.


Theo. Then may the poorest member of Christ's church, and every Parish Priest
challenge to be the master of Princes and to be served at their hands as well as
the Pope. That which is spoken to all must be common to all. Again, your own
answer overthrows your own assertion, for this was spoken, you say, to the
church: but the Pope is not the church, ergo this was not spoken to the Pope.


Phi. Princes shall serve thee, that is every part of thee, or the noblest
part of thee: neither of which makes for the Pope.
You go too far. It was spoken to the whole but not meant of the whole.


Theo. Of whom then was it me^t?


Phi. Of the head, which is a part of the whole. The members of Christ's church
are not bound to serve one an other, but all to serve the head. In respect of
their head they be servants, in respect of themselves they be brethren.


Theo. Is the head a part of the body?


Phi. Though the head can not properly be called a member of the body, but the
head; yet in the whole are contained both the head and the members: as in an
Army sometimes the Captain and Soldiers; and a kingdom compriseth both the
king and his subjects.


Theo. Then where Esaie says to Jerusalem, kingdoms shall serve thee; that is,
not every member of thee, but the chiefest and noblest part of thee, which is
the head, that all the members serve.


Phi. And that head is the Pope. Princes may serve none but Christ.



Theo. When you prove the Pope to be head of the church, then call for Princes
to do him service: In the mean time let Princes hear what David says: Be
wise ye kings, serve the Lord: and what our Savior alleges, Psalm. 2.
Matthew. 4. Philip. 2.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God and him only shall thou serve. At the
name of Jesus every knee shall bow, of things in heaven, and of things on
earth: Yea, Heb. 1. Colos. 1.
let (not only Princes, but) all the Angels of God worship him: he is the
head to the church which is his body. Your holy father must stay for his
service, till his headship may be found in some better records than in your
bare supposals.


Phi. You infer this upon my confession, which I may change upon better
aduisement. The nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish. No
doubt these words bind Princes to do service to the church if not to the Pope.


Theo. You bound them before to serve the head, and not the body: now you will
have them serve the body, and not the head. Well since there is no more hold
in your word, I will take surer hold of Esaies words. The text which you bring
is allegorical, An allegorical text yields no literal conclusion. Esai. 60.
as the whole chap. besides is: and therefore you may draw no literal
conclusion from these words, no more than from walls, gates, brass, iron, gold,
silver, Sun, Moon, milk, teats, camels, rams, fur trees, and pine-trees,
which also be reckned and promised to Jerusalem in this place.


Phi. Run you to allegories?


Theo. You cannot run from them, unless you run from this chapter: read it
over and see whether I feign or no.


Phi. Shall then the promises of God be frustrate, because the speeches be
figurative?


Theo. Did I say they should? No, they be greater and richer than man's tongue
can express. But if you press the letter, they be false and absurd. Esai.
60.
For example: All the sheep of Kedar shall be gathered unto thee, the rams
of Nabaioth shall serve thee. For brass will I bring gold, and for iron
silver; for wood brass, and for stones iron: Thou shall have no more Sun to
shine by day, neither shall the brightness of the Moon shine unto thee:
These things be not literally true.


Phi. I know they be not.


Theo. The whole chapter goes after the same sort, expressing by temporal and
terrestrial things, the blessings of God upon his church which be celestial and
eternal.


Phi. I mislike not this.


Theo. Even so the service which kings must do to the church, is not corporal
nor external, such as seruing-men yield to their masters, or subjects to their
superiors; but an inward devotion and an humble submission to the graces and
mercies of God, proposed and offered in his church. What it is for Princes to
serve and submit themselves to the church.
In effect kings must become religious and faithful members of the church to
serve God in holiness and righteousness all the days of their life. To believe
the word that is preached, to frequent the sacraments that be ministered, to
fear the Lord that is honored in all and above al: this is the service which the
church of Christ heartily wishes and earnestly seeks at al men's hands: other
solemnities with cap and knee she neither likes nor looks for.


Phi. Kings in respect of their calling must serve the church, I mean with
their princely power.


Theo. You say somewhat. In deed kings in that they be kings have to serve the
Lord: Aug. contr. lit. Petilian. lib. 2. cap. 92.

Idem. contr. 2. Gauden. Epist. lib. 2. cap. 26.


so as none ca^ do which are not kings. For their power ought so to serve the
Lord, that by their power they which refuse to be subject to the will of God
should be punished: but this service you will not have the^ to busy with, and if
happily they command against your liking, you not only discharge the^ of their
service, but of their kingdoms also.


Phi. Not if they serve the church as Esaie says they should.


Theo. The service that is done to Christ the church imbraceth as done to her
self, because she requires no more but that Christ her Lord and master be
served: and yet the service which I now speak of namely to preserve subjects
in godliness and quietness, and with wholesome laws to fraie men from vices and
heresies, is done to Christ not in respect of himself, but of his church; and
concerns the profit and welfare of the whole church and every member thereof.


Phi. This is not to serve, but to rule the church.


Theo. Kings as kings, that is as public Magistrates, can not serve the
church, but by defending her members, and repressing her enemies, and this is
better service to God and his church, than that which your holy father has
taught kings and Emperors, to wait on his trencher, to hold his stirrup, and
kiss his feet.


Phi. We would have Princes to serve, that is to obey the church, and so S.
Paul wills them. Heb. 13. Obey your rulers as well all, as one.
Obey your rulers and be subject to them, for they watch as being to give
account for your souls. This is spoken as well to Princes as to private men.


Theo. You leap from one thing to an other, and never resolve certainly any
thing. Can you show where S. Paul or Esaie, or any other Prophet or Apostle
teaches Princes to be the Popes Bedels and Bailifs to execute his pleasure?
The question betwixt us is not whether princes as well as others must be guided
and directed by religious and godly Pastors the way to eternal life, which is
S. Paul's meaning in this place, but whether the Pope clothing himself with
the name of the church, may command the swords of Princes, and if he like not
their doings, take their kingdoms from the^. Do the places which you bring
prove this that I mention? say yea or no.


Phi. Not expressly, but only because the Pope is Christ's Uicar on earth, and
head of the church.


Theo. Will you never understand how weak your proofs, and how wide they be
from your intention?

The Jesuits windlace to bring the Prince in subjection to the Pope.
First, you still presume and we still deny that your holy father is the head of
the church, and Christ's Uicar general upon the face of the earth. On that false
fou^datio^, what God promises to the church in respect of her head which is
Christ, you closely convey to the Bishop of Rome, as heir apparent to that
honor and excellency which Christ has in his church; a frivolous but a
blasphemous imagination. Next, what submission and obedience God requires at
al men's, even at Princes hands, for the reuerencing of his word and observing
of his law, that you wittingly confound with the temporal jurisdiction and
dominion, that the church of Rome claims over Princes to command their
scepters, and if they resist, to depose their persons, which is a wicked and
wilful error. If you love truth deal plainly, let this cunning go.


Phi. I seek for truth, let truth prevail.


Theo. Would God you were so minded.


Phi. I am.


Theo. That shall we see by your proceeding.


Phi. What say you by the words of S. Paul, Obey your rulers.


Theo Heb. 13.
I say the word (...) signifies leaders as well as rulers, and in this place
stands rather for leaders than rulers, because S. Paul in this very chap.
using the same word (...) Remember your leaders; adds Beholding the end of
their conversation, Heb. 13. The words of S. Paul, obey your rulers, make
nothing for the Pope. Heb. 13.
imitate their faith, that is, follow their steps. If we must mark them
and imitate them, then surely must they be leaders to direct us and not rulers
to master us. Secondly by (...) whether it be leaders or rulers, are meant not
the Pope and his Cardinals, but all that be christian and godly Preachers; this
is S. Paul's own construction. Remember your leaders, which have spoken to you
the word of God. We be not bound to their fancies or pleasures, but only to the
word of truth proceeding from their mouths. Lastly obedience here required is
no corporal subjection to their persons, but an inward liking and embracing of
their doctrine. For as touching their persons, whom it pleases you to call
rulers in this place, S. Paul makes servants in other places. 2. Cor. 4.
We preach not our selves, says he, but Christ Jesus (to be) the Lord; and our
selves your servants. And again, 2. Corin. 1.
Not that we have dominion (or rule) over your faith, but we are helpers of
your joy. And that was our Saviors charge to them al. Kings of nations rule:
Mark. 10.
with you it shall not be so, but whosoever will be chief among you, shall be the
servant of all. Their function is, as you see, TO SERVE, not to rule their
brethren; I mean to feed, not to master the flock of Christ.


Phi. The Apostle says, God has placed the^ To rule the Church. Attend to
your self and to your whole flock over which the holy Ghost has put you to
rule the church. Act. 20. Bishops are set in the Church by the holy ghost to
feed, not to rule.



Theo (...) is not, To rule the church, but to feed the church: (...) be no
rulers, but Sheepheards. Are you not very desirous of rule, when you thus wrest
the Scriptures to make your selves rulers?


Phi. S. Hieroms translation has Regere ecclesiam, to rule the church. That we
follow.


The. You follow the old corrupt translation where it makes for you, and where
you list you leave it. S. Hierom upon the first chapter to Tite, says, In quo
posuit vos spiritus sanctus Episcopos, pascere ecclesiam Dei, not regere: And
yet regere is to lead and guide with counsel, as well as to rule or force with
authority, as you may perceive by dirigere the compound, which is to direct
any man what way he shall go, Regere applied to Bishops is to rule ang govern
with advise and counsel, not with power and dominion.
what things he shall do, what words he shall speak, and yet these be no rulers,
nor have any judicial power over the parties so directed. The english word
that you abuse has the same sense. In many matters men are ruled by their
friends, in sickness they are ruled by their Physician, in traueling they be
ruled by their guides; and yet neither friends, Physicians nor guides have any
jurisdiction over the persons that are ruled by them. Why then do you trouble
the world with such ambiguities and perplexities of words? why speak you not
distinctly? why conclude you not directly?

The Bishops of Ephesus were set by the holy Ghost to attend their flock, and
feed the church. S. Paul's words have no relation to the Popes person, nor to
that kind of rule which he claims.
If by this you collect that they were placed by God to teach and instruct the
faithful how to walk in his ways, that we grant and that we know to be most
true so long as they do their message from God sincerely, without adding,
altering or diminishing: but if by color of those words to rule the church,
you seek to give the Pope judicial power to compel and punish Princes as a
Superior judge, which is the point we strive for, see what shameful violence
you offerre the Scriptures. First you falsify the Text by putting ruling for
feeding the church: Next you dawe the word ruling from instructing and
exhorting, which is Apostolic; to commanding and forcing, which our Savior
forbids all his Disciples: thirdly that which was spoken to the Elders of
Ephesus and is common to all Pastors, you present the Bishop of Rome with, as
his peculiar charge, though he neither feed, nor lead the flock. And so
where S. Paul meant the Bishops of Ephesus were set to teach and instruct their
brethren, you conclude, the Pope must overrule Princes, and take their crowns
from them, if they yield not the sooner.


Phi. You mistake me, I do not bring these places to that end.


Theo. To that end you should bring them; for that is the doubt betwixt us, and
that was my demand. I required you to show Scripture, Father, or Council for
800. years that proves the Pope superior to the Prince. Bring somewhat to
that end, They pretend the Church when they mean the Pope.
or else say you can not, and I am answered.


Phi.. I prove the church superior to the Prince, which is enough to confute
the supreme power that you give to Princes.


Theo. And what for the Pope? Shall he be superior to Princes or no?


Phi. We will talk of that an other time, we be now reasoning of the church;
which I trust you will grant to be superior to Princes. God said to the
Church, The nation and kingdom, that will not serve thee shall perish. And,
Esai. 60. Ibidem.
kings shall serve thee.


Theo. This is right the trade of your Apology, to pretend the church, and
mean the Pope. You saw you were never able to prove the Popes usurped power
over Princes, and therefore you thought it best to put a visarde of the Church
upon the Popes face, and to bring him in that sort disguised to the stage; to
deceive the simple with the sound and show of the Church. The cunning of
their Apology.

Apolog. cap. 4.


And for that cause your fourth chapter never names the Pope, but still urges
The regiment of the church, The judgment of the church, The churches
tribunal, converted kingdoms must serve the church; and every where the
church, the church; and when the Church is confessed to be superior to
Princes, you set up the Pope as head of the Church to take from her all the
superiority, power and authority, which before you claymed for her: and so
you make the Church but a cloke-bagge to carry the Popes titles after him: but
stay your wisdoms, the Church may be superior, and yet the Pope subject to
Princes; Kings may serve the Church, and yet command your holy father and
his gymmoes, the parish Priests of Rome, for their turning and winding every
way, justly called Cardinals.


Phi. The Prince is supreme, though the Church be superior.
Can Princes be supreme and the church their superior?


Theo. Why not?


Phi. If any thing be superior, Princes be not supreme.


Theo. That I deny. The Scriptures be superior to Princes, and yet they
supreme; the Sacraments be likewise above them, and yet that hinders not
their supremacy. Truth, Grace, Faith, Prayer and other Ghostly virtues be
higher than all earthly states, and all this notwithstanding Princes may be
supreme governors of their kingdoms and Countries.


Phi. You cavil now, you should compare persons with persons, and not
things with persons; there may be things above Princes, and yet they
supreme; but if any persons be superior, then can they not be supreme.


Theo. No? The Saints in heaven and Angels of God be persons superior to
Princes, and yet may Princes be supreme.


Phi. Why Theophilus, these be wrangling quiddities, for shame leave them. The
Saints be superior in perfection and dignity, but not in external
vocation and authority. How the Church is superior to the Prince.



Theo. I like that you say: but if you look back you shall see Philander
that you give judgment against your self.


Phi. Against my self? Why so?


Theo. The Church is superior to Princes for those very respects, which I
now repeated. First, because the Saints in heaven, which are part of the
church, in happiness, perfection and dignity be many degrees above worldely
states. Secondly, though the members of the Church be subject and obedient to
Princes, yet the things contained in the Church and bestowed on the Church by
God himself, I mean, the light of his word, the working of his Sacraments,
the gifts of his grace and fruits of his spirit be far superior to all
Princes. Now view your consequent. The Church in respect of her members in
heaven, and graces on earth, is above the Prince, ergo the Prince is not
supreme but subject to the Pope. This is worse than wrangling. You confound
things and persons, heaven and earth, God and man, to bear out the Popes pride.


Phi. You stretch the name of the church whither you list.


Theo. I may better stretch it to these things which I specify, than you
restrain it to one only man as you do: The Saints in heaven be part of
the church.
But why do I stretch the church farther than I should? The Saints in heaven
be they not members of the church?


Phi. They be membees of the church, which is in heaven.


Theo. And the church in heaven is it an other church from this on earth, or
the same with it?


Phi. I think it be the same.


Theo. You must not go by thoughts. Saint Paul says, Ephe. 2. Galat. 4.
Aug. de ciuit. Dei lib. 10. cap. 7.
You are of the same city with the Saints, and Jerusalem which is above, (is
no stranger to us but) the mother of us all. Cum ipsis (Angelis) sumus vna
ciuitas Dei, cuius pars in nobis, peregrinatur, pars in illis opitulatur. We,
says Austen, are one and the same city of God with the (Angels) whereof part
wandereth (on earth) in us, part in them assisteth us. And again, Aug. in
Psalm. 149.
The true Sion and true Jerusalem is everlasting in heaven, which is the mother
of us all. She has begotten us, she has nurced us, in part a stranger (on
earth) in a greater part remaining in heaven. Idem de ciuit. Dei lib. 20. cap.
9.

1. Cor. 10.


For the souls of the godly that be dead be not severed from the church which
even now is the kingdom of Christ. Certaynely Christ has but one body which
is his church, and of that body since the Saints be the greater and worthier
part, they must be counted of the same Church with us.


Phi. I stick not at that so much as at the next, where you make the word and
Sacraments together with their effects and fruits to be parts of the church.


Theo. In the name of the Church are many things contained.
I do not say they be members of the Church, but things required in the church,
without the which we can neither become, nor continue the members of Christ. In
a natural body the spirits and faculties be no members, and yet without them
the members have neither life, motion, sense nor action. So in the mystical
body of Christ, the members be men, but the means and helps, to make us and
keep us the members of Christ, are the word and Sacraments, without the which
we can neither be planted, quickened, nor nourished in Christ. For the members
be dead if they live not by faith, if they grow not by grace, if they cleave
not by love to their head, and move at his will by obedience. And therefore
these things though they be not members, yet they be joints and sinews,
veins and vessels that give life, groeth, strength, and state to the body of
Christ, which is his church, and may justly be called the principal powers or
parts of his body.


Phi. Powers if you will, but not parts.


Theo. As though the powers of the soul were not parts of the soul.


Phi. Not properly parts, but powers and faculties.


Theo. What call you parts?


Phi. Whereof the whole consists.


Theo. And since without these there can be no Church, ergo these be parts of
the church.


Phi. You take parts very largely.


Theo. No larger than I should. The foundation of the house, is it not a part
of the house? Ambros. de incarnat. Domin. sacra. cap. 5.

August. quaest. super Leuit. lib. 3. cap. 57.

Idem de catechizan. rudibus cap. 3.

Persons are not the church without other things annexed to them.





Phi. Yes a chief part.


Theo. Faith is the foundation of the church, why then should not faith be a
part of the church?


Phi. The Church consists of persons, not of things. Men are the church
says S. Augustine. Again, The church, that is, the people of God throughout
all nations.


Theo. I do not deny the church to be many times taken for the faithful on
earth, but I add that the graces, mysteries, and word of God be contained in
the Church, and without them the Persons are no Church. Our bodies and souls
do not make us members of Christ, but our faith and obedience. By Baptism,
not by birth do we Galat. 3. Hebre 13. Romans 8. Romans 8.
Put on Christ, and grace not meats establish our hearts. They be the sons
of God that he led by the spirit of God. And if any man have not the spirit of
Christ, the same is no member of his.


Phi. All this is true.


Theo. The church then consists not of men, but of faithful men; and they
be the Church not in respect of flesh and blood, which came from earth, but of
truth and grace which came from heaven.


Phi. I grant.


Theo. Ergo the perfection of Gods gifts, the communion of his graces and
direction of his word are the very life and soul of his Church, and so within
the compass of the church are comprised not only the persons that be
earthly, but also the things that be heavenly: Ambro. Epist. lib. 5. oration
contra Auxentium.
whereby God gathers, preserves, and sanctifies his Church.


Phi. What does this help you?


Theo. That when we say with S. Ambrose, Imperator bonus intra Ecclesiam, non
supra Ecclesiam est: A good Emperor is within the Church, not above the
Church, you can conclude nothing out of these words against us.


Phi. Can we not? If good Princes be not above the church, ergo they be not
above the prelates and pillours of the church.


Theo. That is no consequent.


Phi. Why not? August epist. 157.

The Church is sometimes taken for the place.

Idem quaest. sup. Leuit^ ^^.3. cap 57.

Idem in psalm. 137.

Sometimes for the persons.

Idem in Euchivid. Cap. 56.

The Church of all the chosen men and Angels.

Ibidem. August. de Catechiz. vudibus, Cap. 3.

Idem in Psalm. 62.

The Church is the number of the faithful that ever were, a^e, or shall be.





Theo. By the Church are meant sometimes the places, sometimes the persons,
sometime the things, that be cheefely required in the Church. Of the place S.
Austen says, We call the Church the temple; where the people, which are trewly
called the Church are contained, that by the name of the Church, I mean, the
people which is contained; we may signify the place which conteyneth. And
again, The Church is the place where the Church is assembled, for men are the
Church.

The Church as it is taken for persons has a triple distinction. First the
Church of glorious and elect Angels and men. Ecclesia deorsum, ecclesia sursum.
Ecclesia deorsum in omnibus fidelibus, ecclesia sursum in omnibus Angelis.
There is a Church beneath, there is a Church above. The Church beneath in all
the faithful: the Church above in all the Angels. And again, The right order
of confession required that (in our creed) next to the (three persons in)
Trinity should stand the Church; as next to the owner his house, to God his
temple, to the builder his city: which must here be taken for the whole; not
only that part which is a pilgrim on earth, but also for that part which
abiding in heaven has ever since it was created, cleauen unto God. This part
in the holy Angels persisteth in blessedness, and helps as it ought, her other
part wandering in earth. The temple of God therefore is the holy Church, I mean,
the universal in heaven and earth.

Secondly the Church is the people of God through out all nations, joining and
reckning all the Saints, which before his coming lived in this world. The Idem
in Psalm. 90. concio. 2. The church is the number of particular men in several
times and places.

August. de vnitate eccles. cap. 11.

Idem in Psalm. 64 and 121.


whole Church every where diffused is the body (of Christ) and he is the head
of it. Not only the faithful which are now, but also they that were before us,
and they that shall be after us to the end of the world, they al pertain to
his body. The Church is the body (of Christ) not the church which is here or
there, but that which is here and every where throughout the world: neither
that Church which is at this time, but from Abel unto those which shall
hereafter be borne and believe in Christ even till the end, the whole company
of saints belonging to one City, which is the body of Christ, and whereof he
is the head.

Thirdly the Church may be limited by time and place, as the particular
Churches of Rome, Corinth, Ephesus and such like. Behold, says Austen, in the
Church there be Churches, which be members of that one Church, dispersed
throughout the world. There be many Churches and yet one Church, and in that
sort many that there is but one.

Sometimes the church imports, besides the persons, y^ things in which those
persons must communicate before they can be members of the Church; as when the
church is called the kingdom, city and house of God: whereby we learn that
it is furnished not only with persons, but with all things needful for the
servants, citizens and people of God, to the converting and saving of their
souls. Romans 14.
In that sense says S. Paul, The kingdom of God is righteousness, peace and
joy in the holy Ghost, meaning these be fruits and effects of Gods kingdom:
which our Savior threatened to take from the Jews. The kingdom of God shall
be taken from you and given to a nation that shall bring forth the fruits
thereof; Mat. 21.
showing, that when the word of truth and seals of grace are taken from us,
we cease to be the people and Church of God. Christ reigns in his Church by
his word and spirit, without these men are not the Church. An earthly city
must have unity, society, regiment, and sufficiency for an earthly state:
the number of men does not make a city if these things want. How much more
must the city of God have abundance of al things profiting to eternal life?
1. Tim. 3. August. de verbis Apostoli sermo. 22.
S. Austen says of the house of God, which is the Church, It is founded by
believing, erected by hoping, perfected by loving: noting these three to be
the maine parts in the building of Gods house.

That which enters the definition must needs be contained in the appellation
of the Church.
It is playner than that longer proof shall need. If we would define the
Church we must comprehend not only men, but other things also which may
sever the Church from those that are not the Church, and those things that are
required to the explication, are we say contained in the appellation of the
Church. The Church is not simply a number of men; for Infidels, heretics and
hypocrites are not the Church, but of men regenerate by the word and
Sacraments, truly serving God according to the Gospel of his son, and
sealed by the spirit of grace against the day of redemption. Men thus
qualified are the Church, and the gifts and graces of GOD that so qualify
them, be not only the jewels and ornaments wherewith the spouse of Christ is
decked, but even the seed and milk, whereby like a mother she conceyueth and
nourceth her children.

August. epist. 38.

Idem de baptis. lib. 1. cap. 10.

Idem in Psalm. 57. and 30.

Idem epist. 203. Ambros. in psalm. 118. sermo. 15.

Idem in psalm. 36.

1. Tim. 3.


The church our mother, says Austen, conceived us of Christ, and nourished yea
nourishes us with the milk of faith. She conceiueth by the Sacraments as by
the seed of her husband. Thou wast conceived, in that thou receiuedst the
name of Christ; and the Lord to make his wisdom milk for us, came clothed
with flesh unto us. She is a most true mother which opens her bosom to all
nations when they shall be new borne, and offers her teates when they are
new borne. The teeth, cheeks, and lips of (this) spouse we understand,
says Ambrose, to be the virtues of the soul. Yea the Church is life, and as
Paul says, the Pillour of truth. These speeches and others that might be
alleged show the Church to be resembled to a woman, and truth, says, life,
grace and such like gifts of God^ be counted not only the garments, but even
the bowels and parts of the Church. And therefore the name of the Church
sometimes imployeth as well the things that be in the Church as the persons
that be of the Church, which was the third point that I noted.


Phi. These speeches be figurative.


Theo. I did not seek for the propriety, but the use of the word; and yet in
proper speech persons without these things are not the Church, and in the very
definition of the Church, as well things as persons be comprised.


Phi. In deed persons enduen with those gifts and graces of God, that be
needful for eternal life; are properly the Church: but things without
Persons are not the Church.


Theo. I do not exclude Persons, but include those things which cause the
Persons to be members of the Church.


Phi. I will not much impugn that.


Theo. Return then to the words of Ambrose, which occasioned me to make this
distinction.

A good Emperor is not above the church. Ambros. oration contra Auxent. The
Prince not above the Church, though superior to al persons in the Church.
Not above the Church universal, for that consists of men and Angels, above
whom princes be not. Neither above the Church militant in earth, for that
contains all the faithful of all ages and Countries, over whom there can be
no Prince but only Christ.


Phi. And what? For the Church dispersed through the Roman Empire in the time
of S. Ambrose, was the Prince above it, or no?


Theo. You must here distinguish the things proposed in the Church, from the
Persons that were members of the Church. The Persons both Laymen and Clerks by
Gods law were the Princes subjects: the things comprised in the Church, and
by God himself committed to the Church, because they were Gods, could be
subject to the power and will of no mortal creature, Pope nor Prince.


Phi. Say that again.


Theo. In shorter terms the Prince was above the Persons in the Church, but
not above the things in the Church.


Phi. Above the Persons but not above the things in the Church? What things
mean you?


Theo. Those things which God commands in his Church, and requires of his
Church.


Phi. I understand you not.


Theo. Understande you our savior when he says, Mat. 22.
Give unto God the things which be Gods?


Phi. He means as I take it, faith, devotion, holiness, What things Princes
have neither right to command nor power to rule.
repentance, patience, obedience, and such like christian duties and virtues.


Theo. You say well: these be things which Princes have no right to claim,
nor power to rule. They belong only to God. To these I add the means,
whereby God works these things in his church; to wit, the word and
Sacraments; over these things we grant Princes have no power.


Phi. S. Ambrose says, not over the Church.


Theo. That is, not over the things which God has settled in his church, but
over the Persons, Princes have power.


Phi. What a shift of descant that is?


Theo. Call you that a shift which I before confirmed, and you confessed to be
true?


Phi. What did you confirm?


Theo. That Princes have power by Gods appointment over al men. I brought you
Tertullian, Chrysostom, See fol. 147.
Justinian, Gregory and Ambrose himself witnessing that Princes had power over
al men. S. Paul avouches the same, Let every soul be subject to their power.
It is no shift, it is truth that our savior says, kings of nations bear
rule over them, Mat. 20.
that is, over their subjects. You must either take the names of Princes and
Governors from them, or else yield them Countries and people to be subject
under them.


Phi. I do so.


Theo. Then Princes have power over all men, that is over all Persons.


Phi. Over all persons, but not over the Church. Princes are above al persons,
but not above the Church, Ergo the Church is taken for more than for persons.
Ambros. lib. 5. Cap. 33.



Theo. What do you now but make the same distinction your self, which before
you refused at my hands? Over all persons they have power; over the Church
they have not; ergo the Church is not here taken for persons. And it must
needs be taken either for the persons, or things: for the persons it is not,
ergo for the things; and so by your confession mine answer stands good,
that Princes have power over the persons, but not over the things in the Church.

And so says S. Ambrose, Ea quae diuina, imperatoriae potestati non esse
subiecta; The things that be Gods be not subject to the Emperors power,
though the Emperor had power over all Persons, as Ambrose himself affirms.


Phi. Ambros. de obitu Theodosij.
Shall S. Ambrose strike the stroke in this case?


Theo. The stroke is already given by the sacred scriptures, by the public
Laws, and ancient stories of the primative Church: Apolog. Cap. 4. sect. 30.
and yet in this point we reject not the judgment of S. Ambrose,


Phi. S. Ambrose is clean against your opinion that Princes should be
governors in causes ecclesiastical. To the younger Valentinian the Emperor,
Epist. 33. ad Sororem.
thus he answers: Vex not thy self so far, O Emperor, to think that thy
Imperial right perteyneth to divine things, exalt not thy self above thy
measure. For it is written, Give to Caesar that which is Cesars, and to God that
which belongs unto God. The Palace for the Emperor, but the Churches are for
the Priest. Ibidem.
Again the same holy Doctor, When did thou ever hear, most clement Prince,
that Lay men have judged Bishops? Shall we bend by flattery so far, that
forgetting the right of our Priesthood we should yield up to others that
which God has commended unto us? And recounting the whole course of holy
scriptures and all times past, who can deny but that in the cause of faith, in
the cause of faith I say, Bishops have judged of Emperors and not Emperors
of Bishops?


Theo. Omit the circumstances and causes that moved Ambrose thus to write,
which be the words you take most hold of?


Phi. These, Thy Imperial right pertayneth not to divine things. The Palace
for the Emperor, but the Churches are for the Priest. In a cause of faith
Bishops have judged of Emperors, and not Emperors of Bishops.


Theo. The Jesuits nippe saint Ambroses words.
You help the matter forward with false translating and nypping the words, and
yet they prove nothing against us. In steed of vt putes te in ea quae diuina
sunt, imperiale aliquod ius habere; Do not think thy self, to have an
Imperial right over those things which be Gods, (or over divine things) you
say cunningly, Do not think thy Imperial right pertayneth to divine things.
For, Noli te extollere, sed esto Deo subditus, exalt not thy self, but be
subject to God, you say, Exalt not thy self above thy measure, and suppress
the rest which should declare when a Prince exalts himself above his
measure; to wit, when he is not subject to God. The next words which you
bring, When did thou ever hear most, clement Prince, that Lay men have
judged Bishops? are not found Ibidem as you quote them, that is Epistola 33 ad
sororem, but Epistola 32 ad Valentinianum Imperatorem. And In causa fider, In a
matter of faith, which Ambrose adds, you leave out in the first sentence,
though you double it at y^ latter end. These scapes I will wink at and come to
the words themselves.

Think not thy self to have any Emperial right over divine things. Neither do
we say Princes have, for an emperial right is to command, alter and abrogate
what they think good; which is lawful neither for men, nor Angels in divine
matters.

Palaces are for Princes and Churches for Priests, this was truly said, and
if you know not the reason, Churches were first appointed for public prayer
and preaching; which belong to the Priests and not to the Princes function. And
for that cause Bishops were to teach Princes which was the right faith, Princes
were not to teach the Bishops, much less to profess themselves judges of
truth, as Valentinian did, when he said, Ego debeo iudicare, I ought to be
judge, Ambros. lib. 1. epist 32.
whether Christ be God or no; for that was the question between the Arrians and
Ambrose, and that was the word which S. Ambrose stoutly but wisely refused.
When we say that Princes be judges of faith, bring S. Ambrose against us and
spare not: but we be farther off from that impiety to make men judges over
God, than you be.

Do you not make the Prince judge of faith?


Theo. You know we do not.


Phi. Produce not us for witnesses, we know no such thing.


Theo. Your own acts shall depose for us if your mouths will not. If we make
Princes to be judges of faith, why were so many of us consumed not long since
in England with fire and faggot for disliking that which the Prince and the Pope
affirmed to be faith? Why at this day do you kill and murder elsewhere so many
thousands of us for rejecting that as false religion, which the kings and
princes of your side profess for true? We make no Prince judge of faith.
If we make Princes judges, why do we rather loose our lives than stand to
their judgments? Your stakes that yet be warm, your swords that yet be
bloody, do witness for us and against you that in matters of faith we make
neither Prince nor Pope to be judge. God is not subject to the judgment of
man, no more is his truth.


Phi. What power then do you give to Princes?


Theo. What power so ever we give them, we give them no power to pronounce
which is truth.


Phi. What do you then?


Theo. Never ask that you know. Have we spent so many words, and you now to
seek what we defend? But you see S. Ambrose makes nothing for you. And
therefore you pick a quarrel to the question.


Phi. S. Ambrose would not yield Valentinian the Emperor so much as a Church
in Millan: Wherein Saint Ambrose withstood Valentinian.
and when he was willed to appear before the Emperor in his consistory or
else depart the City, he would do neither.


Theo. You care not, to fit your purpose, though you make S. Ambrose a sturdie
rebel. You would feign find a president to color your headynes against the
Prince; but in Ambrose you can not, his answer to Valentinian was stout, but
lawful; constant, but Christian; as the circumstances of the facts will
declare.

Valentinian a young Prince incensed by Iustina his mother and other Eunuchs
about him, willed Ambrose to come and dispute with Auxentius the Arrian in his
consistory before him, and he would be judge whether of their two religions
were truest and which of them twain should be Bishop of Millan, Auxentius or
Ambrose, otherwise to depart whither he would. To this Ambrose made a sober and
duetifull answer in defense of himself and his cause, and gave it in writing
to Valentinian, The reasons why S. Ambr. refused Valentinians judgment as
neither fit nor indifferent.
showing him amongst other things that he was young in years, a nouice in faith
not yet baptized, and rather to learn, than to judge of bishops: that the
consistory was no fit place for a priest to dispute in, where the hearers
should be Jews on gentiles and so scoff at Christ, and the Emperor himself
partial as appeared by his Law published before that time to impugn the truth.
As for departing, if he were forced, he would not resist; but with his consent
he could not relinquish his church to save his life, without great sin.

And because Auxentius and his companions urged this, that the Emperor ought
to be judge in matters of faith, Saint Ambrose follows and refelleth that
word as repugnant not only to the divine Scriptures, but also to the Roman
laws. Conclusus vndique ad versutiam patrum suorum confugit, de Imperatore
vult inuidiam commouere, Ambros. lib. 5. orat. contra Auxentium.
dicens iudicare debere adolescente^, catechumenu^, sacrae lectionis ignarum,
and in consistorio iudicare. Auxentius driven to his shifts has recourse to
the craft of his forefathers, seeking to procure us envy by the Emperors
name, and says the Prince ought to be judge, though he be young, not yet
baptized and ignorant of the Scriptures, and that in the Consistory. Idem lib.
5. epist. 32.
And to the Emperor himself, Your father, a man of riper years said; It is
not for me to be judge between Bishops, does your clemency now (at
these years) say, I ought to be judge? And he baptized in Christ, thought
himself unable for the weight of so great a judgment: does your clemency,
that has not yet obtained to the Sacrament of baptism, challenge the judgment
of faith, whereas yet you know not the mysteries of faith? No man should
think me stubburne, when I stand on this, which your father of famous memory
not only pronounced in words, but also confirmed by his Laws that in a
cause of faith or ecclesiastical order he should be judge, that was both
like in function, and ruled by the same kind of right. For those be the words
of the Rescript: his meaning was he would have Priests to be judges of
Priests. Ibidem.
Then follow the words which you cite. When ever did thou hear most clement
Emperor, in a cause of faith that Laymen judged of bishops? Shall we so bend
for flattery, that we should forget the right (or duty) of Priests; and what
God has bequeathed to me, I should commit to others? If a Bishop must be
taught by a Layman what to follow, let a Lay man then dispute (or speak in the
Church,) and a Bishop be an auditor, let the Bishop learn of a Layman. But
surely if we survey the course of the divine Scriptures or ancient times, who
is there, that can deny, but in a cause of faith, in a cause I say of faith
Bishops are wont to judge of Christian Emperors, not Emperors of Bishops?

And where Valentinian required Ambrose to yield his Church, Ambros. lib. 5.
epist. 33.

Ambrose would not yield his consent to let the Arrians have his Church.

Idem orat. contra Auxent. Ibidem. Ibide^. epist. 32. Ibidem orat. contra
Auxent.

Ambrose resisted not the Prince but denied his consent to part stakes with the
Arrians.

Ibide^ epist. 33. He submitted himself to the punishment, for that he could
not with a good conscience obey the commandment.

Ibide^. epist. 32. Ambrose meant to obey the Prince but not to fly for fear
thereby to save his life. Ibidem oration. contra Auxentium.

Ibide^ epist. 33. Ibidem oration. Contra Auxen.


and depart whither he would; for yielding his Church, his answer was, Nec
mihi fas est tradere, nec tibi accipere Imperator expedit. Domum priuati nullo
potes iure temerare; domum dei existimas auferendam? Allegatur, imperatori
licere omnia, ipsius esse vniuersa. Respondeo. It is neither lawful for me to
yield it, nor expedient for you, O Emperor, to take it. The house of a private
man you can not by right invade: do you think you may take away the house of
God by violence? It is alleged, the Emperor may do what he will, all things
are his. I answer: Do not burden your self O Emperor to think, you have
any Imperial right over those things, which be Gods. Exalt not your self
(so high) but if you will reign long, be subject to God. Palaces pertayne to
Emperors, Churches to Priests. The Church is Gods, it ought not to be yielded
(by me) to Caesar. The temple of God can not be Cesars right. I can not
deliver that which I received to keep (in Gods behalf, to heretics.) Would
God it were apparent to me that my church should not be delivered to the
Arrians, I would willingly offer my self to the judgment of your highness.
Would God it were decreed that no (Arrian) should trouble (my) Churches, and of
my Person pronounce what sentence you will.

With my consent I will never forgo my right, if I be compelled I have no way
to resist. I can sorrow, I can weep, I can sigh, tears are my weapons; Priests
have (only) those defenses, by other means I neither ought, nor can resist.
Flee and forsake my church I use not, lest any think it done to avoid some
sorer punishment. If my goods be sought for, take them; if my body, I will be
ready. Will you put me in Irons, or lead me to death? You shall do me a
pleasure, I will not guard my self with multitudes of people, I will not flee to
the altar to entreat for life, but will gladly be sacrificed for the altars (of
god.)

Depart Ambrose would not, thereby to save himself and leave his Church to
Arians; the Emperor should banish him, or else he would not forsake his flock.
I could wish you had not sent me word to go whither I would. I came every day
abroad, I had no guard about me. You should have appointed me, whither you
would. Now the rest of the Priests say to me, there is no difference, whether
thou be content to relinquish, or thy self yield up the altar of Christ; for
when thou do forsake it thou do deliver it. If a strong hand remove me
from my Church, my flesh may be carried thence, my mind shall not. Betray my
Church I cannot, but fight I ought not. These answers be full of humility
and as I think full of that affection (and reverence) which a Bishop should
bear to a prince. We see the grounds that Ambrose stood on, resolved rather
to suffer any death, than by his consent or departure to betray the Church of
Christ into the hands of Auxentius the Arrian. His meaning was not with
violence to resist, or with pride to despise the young prince, but either to die
with his flock, or at least to be removed from his flock by the princes
power without his own consent, because it were sin in him to resign or leave
the house of God as a pray for heretics, unless he were thereunto compelled,
and forced against his will.


Phi. I thereby gather that Princes may not meddle with Churches without the
Bishops assent.


Theo. You may thereby well collect that Bishops were better to give their
lives, than yield their churches for Christ to be blasphemed in, except they
be constrained.


Phi. The Bishop refused, though the Prince commanded.


Theo. He refused to put his consent to the Princes will; but he resisted not
the Princes power.


Phi. No thanks in that he could not.


Theo. Yes great thanks in that he would not, when all the citizens of Millan
took part with him, and the soldiers denied to wait on the Emperor, to any
other church but only to that where he was; and greater obedience in that he
confessed he should not. Aliter nec debeo, nec possum resistere, otherwise
(than by tears and sighs) I neither ought, Ibidem orat. contra Auxent. Ibidem
epist. 33.
nor can resist: and likewise he commended the people for saying, Regamus
Auguste, non pugnamus; we make request O Sovereign, we make no tumult. So
that Ambrose in these words which you bring does not generally dislike that
Princes should meddle with religion or make Laws for Christ, but first
affirms, which we confess, that Princes be no judges of faith; and next
avouches that his refusal to deliver his Church to the hands of Arrians was
no stubburnnes against the Prince, but obedience to God, whose house it was;
and, that he could not consent to betray the same to Gods enemies but he
should highly displease and offend God in so doing. By this you may prove, that
we must obey God before man, and that al Pastors ought rather to give their
lives than their consents, that heretics should invade their flocks; but
against the Princes authority to command for truth and punish error by the
words or deeds of Ambrose, for ought that I see, you can conclude nothing.


Phi. He reports and commends the words of Valentinian the elder, the
father of this young Valentinian. Ibidem epist. 32.
Non est meum iudicare inter episcopos, It is not for me to judge among Bishops.


Theo. He gave the young Prince to understand what a weighty matter it was, Why
Valentinian would not judge between the Bishops of diverse faiths.
To sit judge between Bishops in cases of faith, and not among Bishops as
you translate it; in that his father a man of ripe years, great wisdom, and
good experience refused this as a burden too heavy for him. And what if the
question betwixt the christians and Arrians were so intricate that Valentinian
durst not take upon him to discuss or determine the same, is that any reason
to prove that princes may not establish truth and abolish falsehood by their
public Laws?


Phi. Was that the matter wherein Valentinian refused to be judge between the
Bishops?


Theo. Even that, if you dare believe the story of the Church. For, Sozom.
lib. 6. Cap. 7.
The Bishops of Hellespontus and Bithinia, says Sozomene, and as many as
professed the son of God to be of the same substance with his father, sent
Hypatianus in a legacy to Valentinian the Emperor to request him that he
would permit them to meet (in a Council) to correct the Doctrine (which
trobled the Church.) When Hypatianus came to him, and declared the petition of
the Bishops, Valentinian aswered: For me that am a Lay man I think it not
lawful to search curiously such (deep) matters: let the priests that have
charge of these things, meet where they like best among themselves.

This fearefulnes of Valentinian, Valentinian distrusting his judgment
suffered the Arrians to do what they would.

Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 6.

Socrat. lib. 4. Cap. 1.

Sozom. lib. 6. Cap. 21.


whiles he could not so much as look into the contention betwixt the
Christians and the Arrians, did the Church no good. For though Valentinian were
for his own person well persuaded in religion, yet he suffered the Arrians to
do what they would, as Sozome confesses. Valentinian being himself of the
Nicene faith, made much of those that were of the same opinion with him, but
molested not any that were of the contrary. And that note Socrates gives him.
Valentinian honored those that were of his faith, but in the mean time he let
the Arrians do what they would. And though himself very religiously embraced
the Godhead of Christ, yet would he command nothing to the Bishops (in that
behalf) neither thought he good to change other ecclesiastical laws into
better or worse. For he took them to be above his reach, though he were
(otherwise) a very good Emperor and fit to rule, as appeared by his doings.


Phi. Mislike you this in Valentinian?


Theo. Do you like that he suffered Arrians to have their forth and neither
molested nor resisted them?


Phi. We like not that.


Theo. Then you mislike the timerousnes or remissenes, call it what you will,
in the church affairs as well as we do: for what commendation could it be for
him neither to meddle nor make with ecclesiastical matters, but to permit all
sorts and sects to follow their appetites?


Phi. The stories commend him as excelling in wisdom, Theodoret. li. 4. Cap.
5.

Sozom. lib. 6. Cap. 6.

Valentinian married two wives and gave al men leave to do the like.

Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 31.


moderation and justice.


Theo. The best men have their faults and are sometimes led with private
fancies. Valentinian was a good man and worthy the Empire, and yet he made a
Law that every man that would, might have two wives, and himself gave the
first example in taking two.


Phi. What he did not?


Theo. Meaning to Marry Iustina for report of her beauty, he made a law and
published the same in every city, that it should be lawful for all men to have
two wives at once. And after the law so made he took Iustina to wife, by whom
he had Valentinian the younger and three daughters, not diuorcing Seuera the
mother of Gratiaen (his elder son) whom he a little before had created
Emperor.


Phi. That was a fault in deed.


Theo. And this was an other, Socra. lib. 4. Cap 29.
that he gave himself to quietness, and molested no sect of heretics: upon
this opinion that it passed his capasitie to judge between ye Bishops in
matters of faith.


Phi. But Ambrose does commend it.


Theo. Ambrose does allege it to stay the young prince from rashly presuming to
judge of their matters, before he knew the first principles of religion,
because his father when he was aged, Inhabilem se ponderi tanti putabat esse
iudicij, Ambros. lib. 5. epist. 32.
thought himself unable to judge in so weighty a cause, but farther he does
not commend it: and yet he might commend that in Valentinian and not hurt us.
For we do not encourage Princes to profess themselves judges of faith, which
Valentinian thought too great a burden, but only we wish them to discern
betwixt truth and error, which every private man must do that will be a
Christian.

Theodosius discerned between the Bishops though Vale^tinian would not or
could not.

Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 10.


And though Valentinian distrusted his own judgment in matters of faith, yet
that did not fray Theodosius a Prince highly commended by Ambrose him self,
from looking into the strife between the Homousians and Arrians and appointing
by a solemn edict which of them should be counted Catholics, which heretics:
and taking their Churches from them without their consents. For he, not long
after he was called to the Empire by Valentinians eldest son, willed every
sect to put their faith in writing. At the day prefixed the Bishops of every
religion, being sent for, came to the Court, Nectarius and Agelius for the
Homousians (or Catholics) Demophilus ^or the Arrians, Eunomius himself for
his followers, and for the Macedonians Eleusius. When they were come the Prince
admitted them to his presence, and taking the Paper of each man's opinion
heartily besought God to help him in choosing the truth. Then reading their
confessions written he rejected all the rest, as dividing and seuering the
sacred Trinity and tare them in pieces, and only liked and embraced the
Homousian faith; and therewithal made a Law, that such as followed that faith
should be counted Christian Catholics, the rest infamous heretics. Codic.
li. 1. tit. 1. de summa trinitate and side Catholica Cunctos.

The true faith in Theodosius time was kept at Rome; and that was the same
which we profess at this day.


All people subject to our Empire we will have continue in that religion,
which S. Peter the Apostle delivered to the Romans as the faith kept from his
time to this day does declare, and the which it is evident Bishop Damasus, and
Peter Bishop of Alexandria, a man of Apostolic sanctity do profess: to
wit, that according to the Apostolic and Euangelike Doctrine, we believe
one Godhead of the father, son and holy Ghost of like Majesty in sacred
Trinity. The obseruers of this Law we command to be taken for Christian
Catholics, the rest, as mad and frantike we adiudge to bear the reproach of
heretics: which must look to feel first the vengeance of God, and next such
penalties as the motion of our heart directed from above shall appoint.

Princes commanded such as were here^^^es to be (...) of the^ Churches.

Sozom. lib. 7. Cap. 9.

Codic. lib. 1. tit. 1. nulius.


As this religious Prince published by his Laws which opinion should be counted
truth and which heresy, so did he by the same authority command the
Churches throughout his Empire to be presently taken from the Arrians and
delivered into the hands and possession of such as were of a right faith. So
says Sozomene, The Emperor (Theodosius) made a Law, that the Nicene faith
should be authentike, and all Churches to be delivered to them which
professed the same Godhead of the father, son and holy Ghost in three persons
of equal honor and like power. The Law it self is extant. The rule of the
Nicene faith received from our fathers and confirmed by the witness and
assertion of divine religion, let it stand good for ever. And he shall be
counted a follower of the Nicene faith, and a true professor of the Catholic
religion, that holds the undivided substance of the incorrupt Trinity, which
by a Greek word is called (...) of right believers. They which be not of
this faith, let them cease by cunning devises to shroud the^ selves under the
name of true religion which they profess not, and be plainly noted by their
heresies, and utterly removed and expelled from all Churches, that throughout
the world the Churches may be delivered to the Bishops which hold the Nicene
faith.

So Gratian the son of Valentinian, after the Empire came entirely to his
hands, Theodoret. li. 5. Cap. 2.
commanded the preachers of the Arrian blasphemy, as wild and cruel beasts to
be driven from their Churches, and the same to be restored to good Pastors, and
the execution of this law he committed to Sapores a most famous captain of
that time. Euagrius lib. 1. Cap. 12.
The like did Theodosius the younger decree that they which followed the wicked
faith of Nestorius, or cleaued to his unlawful doctrine, if they were Bishops
or Clerks should be cast out of their churches, if they were Laymen they should
be accursed. So did Justinian appoint deprivation for the breach almost of
every of his ecclesiastical laws.

Apolog. Cap. 4. sect. 28.

Epist. ad solitar. vitam degentes.


By this it is evident that the christian Emperors did and might dispose both
of Bishops and Churches, and therefore Ambrose could not be of that mind that
princes by their laws might not put Bishops from their Churches without their
consents: but he brought this as a reason, why the Prince at his pleasure
without law might not command, and himself, though the Prince commanded,
might not consent.


Phi. You shift off S. Ambrose, but Athanasius, Osius, Leontius and Hilarious
will not be so shifted. Of Constantius the Arrian Emperor, S. Athanasius says,
What has he left for Antichrist? for yet again in place of Ecclesiastical
cognition he has appointed his palace the judicial seat of such causes, and
made him self the chief judge and arbiter of our controversies. And who
seeing him to make him self the ruler of Bishops, and president of spiritual
judgments, would not justly deem him to be that very abomination of
desolation foretold by Daniel? And in an other place of the same work: When was
it ever heard since the beginning, that the Churches judgment did depend of
the Emperors authority? Or who ever accepted that for lawful judgment? The
renoumed Osius writes to the same Emperor: Apolog. Cap. 4. sect. 29.

Cited of S. Athanas. in the epistle aforesaid.

Suidas in verbo Leontius.

Lib. imperfect. 2. ad Constant.


Meddle not O Emperor in causes ecclesiastical, nor do thou command us in this
kind, but leave such things to us rather: God has given thee the Empire, but
to us the church. At the same time, and to the same Emperor, thus says
Leontius the Martyr: I marvel that thy vocation being for other things, thou
medlest with these matters. Thy charge is of civil and Martial affairs only,
and yet thou will needs be president of ccclesiastical causes. S. Hilarie also
to the same Emperor writes thus, We beseech thy clemency to provide* that
charge to be given to all judges of Provinces, that hereafter they presume not,
nor usurp the hearing of Ecclesiastical causes.


Theo. You do well to put them together; Constantius reproved for his tyrannous
and injurious oppressing the Church.
they all spoke of one man and meant one matter: reproving Constantius the Arian
Emperor and that worthily for his tyrannous and violent oppressing the Church
of Christ against al truth and reason.


Phi. You would feign give these fathers the slip, as though Constantius were
reproved by them not for intermedling with causes ecclesiastical; but for his
injurious and outrageous ouerruling those matters; what a mockery that were?


Theo. Mock not your selves, and of our answer let the world judge.


Phi. What is it?


Theo. We say these fathers did not reprove that in Constantius, which the
whole Church of Christ before them and after them for eight hundred years and
upward obeyed, embraced and honored in her Christian and Catholic princes,
namely Constantine, Gratian, Theodosius, Honorius, Martian, Justinian, Charles,
Lodouike, Lotharius, and others.


Phi. Who says they did?


Theo. Do you grant they did not?


Phi. What if we do?


Theo. Speak expressly whether you grant it or no.


Phi. We grant they did not.


Theo. Ergo these places of Athanasius, Osius, Leontius, and Hilarious, do not
impugn that which we defend, but only traduce Constantius for his wilful and
headie subuerting the faith, and infringing the Canons, without all regard of
truth or equity. They refute not his authority to command for truth and
punish error, which other Princes had and used with the contentation and
commendation of all good men, but they dissuade him from the tyranny which he
showed in confounding both the doctrine and discipline of the church to serve
his humor and wrecke his anger on those that would not yield to his heresy.


Phi. You may not escape so, we must have a direct answer to the words which we
bring.


Theo. I need not answer them, till you urge them.


Phi. As for urging, that shall not want.


Theo. If I fail in answering, take you the advantage.


Phi. Be sure, I will. First then Constantius was reproved by S. Athanasius for
appointing his Palace to be the tribunal seat of ecclesiastical causes, and
making himself the chief judge and arbiter of those controversies. Apolog.
cap. 4.

Athanasius words discussed.

Apolog. Cap. 4.





Theo. We do not make Princes chief judges and arbiters of ecclesiastical
controversies, Ergo these words of Athanasius disprove not our assertion.


Phi. Do you not make them Rulers of Bishops and presidents of spiritual
judgments, which is that very abomination of desolation foretold by Daniel?


Theo. Do not you purposely clippe the text, to draw the words from their
right meaning to your malicious intent, which is a ready way to deface the
truth and vphould the kingdom of Antichrist? Athanas. epist. ad solitar.
vita^ agentes.
For where the words are, Quis videns eum in decerne^do Principe^ se facere
Episcoporu^, and praesidere iudicijs ecclesiasticis, non merito dicat, etc. who
seeing him to make himself the ruler of Bishops, and the ringleader of
ecclesiastical judgments (in decernendo) what they shall determine, may not
justly pronounce him to be that abomination of desolation which Daniel
foretold; The Iesuitical madness of citing the fathers to bear out that which
should expound the rest.

Hilar. de trinit. lib. 4.


you strike out clean, in decernendo, In iudgeing or determining, and would
have it a note of Antichrist to be a ruler of Bishops. Again, where The
understanding of that which spoken must be fet from the causes that moved
(me^) to speak as Hilarie well admonishes, you let pass all that Athanasius
has said in that long epistle for the confirmation of this sentence and
explication of himself, and ^^ll out a word or two that may be diversely
taken, and think with a phrase of speech both doubtful and general to
surprise a settled and certain truth.

Princes should not be rulers of Bishops: if by this you mean that Princes
should not be superior magistrates to command Bishops that which is good
and forbid them that which is evil, How Princes may rule Bishops, and how not.
yea to punish them as well for ecclesiastical as cyuill disorders, Athanasius
was never of that mind; his own words expounding S. Paul's Epistle to the
Romans (if those be his works that carry his name) are clear to the
contrary. Comment. sub nomine Athanas. in 13. Romans
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers.] He teaches al men, says
Athanasius, whether it be Priest, Monk or Apostle, to submit themselves to
princes (or rulers.) And speaking of himself when he was commanded to
confer with Arius, not the first and famous heretic, but an other of that
name and time concerning matters of faith, Disputa. Atha. cum Arrio Laodicee
habitae
Who, says he, is so besides his wits that he dare refuse the Princes
precept? His deeds are as manifest; for when the Council of Tyrus would have
proceeded against him for his crimes and causes ecclesiastical, the Cotholike
Bishops of Egypt that took part with him made their appeal to the Prince,
as I showed you before, Sorat. lib. 1. Cap. 33.

Idem li. 1. ca. 33.


and Athanasius in person fled to Constantine and desired the Synod to be
sent for, and his cause to be heard before the Emperor. What Athanasius
liked in himself, he might not mislike in others; what he thought to be
lawful in the father, he could not think unlawful in the son; he does
not now refell that in words, which he before approved in deeds: you must
so conster his sayings as they may stand with his doings, or else you make a
mad construction. But if you mean that Princes should not rule Bishops in
ecclesiastical causes and judgments, that is, not work them, nor force them
against the witness of their hearts and consciences to follow the wills and
appetites of Princes as Constantius did by the report of Athanasius in this
place: then the words which you bring be very true, but nothing pertinent to
this question.

The ruling then of Bishops and sitting as president of ecclesiastical
judgments which Constantius used and Athanasius reproved was nothing elss but
a wilful contempt in himself of the faith and Canons of the Church, Princes
may not rule Bishops, that is not force them, nor frame them to their fancies.
and a furious compulsion of others to make them determine what he listed, and
condemn whom him pleased without respect of truth, and against all order of
common justice.


Phi. This is your gloze, which we do not believe.


Theo. Your own witnesses say the same, whom you may not well discredit.


Phi. Which of them?


Theo. Athanasius and Hilarie.


Phi. Where say they so?


Theo. Not far from the places which your self allege. The whole Epistle of
Athanasius which you quote, is a large repetition of y^ tirannous words and
deeds of Constantius touching causes ecclesiastical. The first book of
Hilarie against Constantius (the first I mean, as they now stand in order,
though the last in time as they were written) does handle the same argument.
Read either of them, you can not choose amiss.

Let pass the horrible persecution raised by Constantius, wherein the Pagans
were set to invade the Churches of Christians and to beat the people with
staves and stones: Vide Athanas. epist. ad solitar. vitam agentes.
the Bishops, Priests and Monks were bound with chains and scourged with
rods; the women were haled by the hair to the judgment seat; (...) may
play the tira^ts in temporal things, much more in spiritual if they pass
christian moderation and sobriety. Ibidem.
the virgins were tosted by the fire, and whipped with Prickles, others were
banished, strangled, trampled to death under feet, and their limbs and
joints even torn and rent asunder after they were dead, in so much that
Athanasius is feign to cry out, who was not amazed at these things? who would
give them the name of Ethnicks, much less of christians? who will think them
to have the conditions of men and not rather of beasts? who perceived not the
Arrians to be crueller than beasts? The strangers standing by, yea the
Ethnicks detested the Arians as Antichrists, and butchers of men. O new found
heresy, which in villainies and impieties have put on the fulness of the Devil,
how great so ever he be: let pass I say these things, and come to his
behavior in matters and causes ecclesiastical.

Ibidem.
Paulinus, Lucifer and other Bishops being called before him, the Emperor
commanded them to subscribe against Athanasius and to communicate with the
Arrians: they marueiling at this strange endeavor and answering that the
ecclesiastical Canons would not suffer them so to do, he straightway replied:
Constantius would have his will to be the Canon of the church.
AT QVOD EGO VOLO, PRO CANONE SIT: ita me loquentem Syriae episcopi sustinent,
aut ergo obte^perate, aut vos quoque exules esrote. LET MY WILL BE TAKEN OF YOU
FOR A CANON: the Bishops of Syria content themselves with this speech of
mine. Therefore do as I will you, or depart into banishment. And when the
Bishops held up their hands to God and with great liberty proposed their
reasons, showing him that the kingdom was not his, but Gods, of whom he
received it; and that it was to be feared, lest he that gave it would
speedyly take it from him: also setting before him the day of judgment, and
aduising him not to subvert ecclesiastical order, nor to mingle the Roman
Empire with the constitutions of the Church, nor to bring the Arrian heresy
into the Church of God: he would neither hear them, nor permit them to
speak: but grievously bending his brows for that they had spoken, and shaking
his sword, willed (them) to be carried away. This was Constantius manner in
conuenting Bishops, and thus he perverted the faith and good order of
Christ's Church upon a self will, subiecting all Laws both divine and humane
to his eger and erroneous fancy. And who seeing him (thus) to make himself
the ruler of Bishops, and president of ecclesiastical judgments, would not
justly deem him to be that desolation of abomination foretold by Daniel?


Phi. You put (thus) to the text which Athanasius has not.


Theo. But the right meaning of Athanasius words must be gathered hy that
which goes before and follows after. Hilar. de trin. lib. 9.

The words of (...) (...) ^o that which ^s antecedent and consequent in the
same epistle.


Intelligentia dictorum, says Hilarie, ex praecedentibus and consequentibus
expectetur: The understanding of any speech must be taken from the precedents
and consequents. The conclusion is not proved but by the premises, and
therefore must be measured by the premises. Athanasius brings many
particulars to show in what sort Constantius ouer-ruled the Bishops and
preferred his own will before all constitutions and Canons of the Church, and
then infers, Who seeing him to make himself the ruler of Bishops and
president of ecclesiastical judgments (in that ^ort as he does) would not
pronounce him to be Antichrist? Now in what sort he did it, the whole Epistle
besides does declare; thither must you repair if you will see how
Constantius behaved himself in ecclesiastical causes, and consequently what
things Athanasius and the rest misliked in him.


Phi. How did Constantius behave himself, say you?


Theo. That is worth the searching. By that you shall see what cause Athanasius,
Osius, Leontius and Hilarious had to reprove him.


Phi. Say no more than you justly prove.


Theo. No more shall be said than your own witnesses report. I hope you will
take them for direct and true deponents.


Phi. I do not mistrust them.


Theo. Then hear them. There were five principal points wherein Constantius
dealt very intemperately and wickedly as the writings of Athanasius and Hilarie
do testify. Five things misliked in Constantius as tyrannical.
The often altering of the faith, the wresting from Synodes what he would, the
banishing of Bishops upon false accusations, the intruding of others in their
places against all order, and the forcing of all sorts to communicate with the
Arrians.

Of his altering the faith Hilarie thus complayneth: Hilar. lib. 3. ad Constant.

Often chainging his faith.


Faith is come now to depend rather on the time than on the Gospel. Our state
is dangerous and miserable that we have now as many fayths as wills, and as
many doctrines as manners, whiles faiths are either so written as we list, or
so understood as we will. We make every year and every month a faith, Ibidem.
Hilar. lib. 1. contra Constantium defunct.
and still we seek a faith as if there were no faith. This O Constantius
would I feign know of thee, what faith at length thou beleeuest. Thou have
changed so often that now I know not thy faith. That is happened unto thee which
is wont to follow unskillful buylders, ever disliking their own doings, that
thou still pullest down that which thou art still setting up. Thou subuertest
the old with new, and the new thou rentest in sunder with a newer
correction; and that which was once corrected thou condemnest with a second
correction. O thou wicked one, what a mockery do thou make of the Church?
Ibidem. Constantius was dead and so no Prince, when Hilarie was so bold with
him in his terms.
Only dogs return to their vomit, and thou compellest the Priests of
Christ to sup up those things which they had spitte forth, and do thou
command them in their confessions to allow that which before they condemned?
What Bishops hand have thou left innocent? whose tongue have thou not forced to
falsehood? whose heart have thou not brought to the condemning of his former
opinion? Substrauisti voluntati tuae sed and violentiae. Thou have subjected
(all) to thy will, nay to thy violence.

His violent oppressing of Bishops in their Synodes and wresting from them what
he would, is witnessed by the^ both. Hilar. lib. 1. contra Constan. Forcing
Synods to his fancy.
Synodos contrahis, conclusos vrbe vna minis terres, fame debilitas, hyeme
con^icis, dissimulatione deprauas: Thou gatherest Synods, says Hilarie to him,
and when they be closed in one city, thou terrifiest them with threats, thou
pynest them with hunger, thou lamest them with cold, Athanaes. ad Solitar.
vitam agentes.
thou deprauest them with dissembling. He pretends, says Athanasius, a
judgment (or Synod) of Bishops for a show, but in the mean time he does
whatsoever he list himself. What liberty of persuasion, what place for
advise is there, when he that contradicts, shall for his labor loose his
life or his Country? By that means has the Emperor gathered so great a
number of Bishops partly terrified with threats, partly enticed with
promises to grant they would no longer communicate with Athanasius.

The order of such tyrannical Synodes, the Bishops of Egypt, Libia,
Pentapolis, and Thebais do lively report in defense of Athanasius, whereby we
shall see how far they be from the moderation and regiment of Godly
Princes. With what face dare they call this convent a Synod, where the
Lieutenant was president? Athans. Apolo. 2. in epis. Synod. Alexand.
where the tormentour stood ready? where the Iaylour in steed of the Deacons
of the Church, brought in those that were called for? where the Lieutenant
spoke, the rest that were present kept silence, or rather yielded their service
to him? where that which the Bishops by common consent liked, was rejected by
the Lieutenant? He sat and commanded, we were led by soldiers, yea the
Lieutenant him self did whatsoever the Eusebians (our adversaries) bid him. To
be short, what show of a Synod was there, where death or banishment, if
Caesar said the word, was decreed?

This violence Liberius touches in his answer to Constantius messenger. If
the Emperor seek in deed to interpose his care for the peace of the Church,
Athanas. ad Solitar. vitam agentes.
or if he command those things which we have decreed for Athanasius to be
reuersed, let those things also that are decreed against him be reuersed, and
after let an ecclesiastical Synod be called far from the Palace, where the
Emperor is not present, nor the Lieutenant intermedleth, nor the judge
threatens (as Constantius does in his Synodes) but only the fear of God and
institution of the Apostles suffice for all things. And this dissimulation the
Bishops were brought to by the Emperors means, as your own author confesses,
Suidas in Leontio Tripolis Episco.
that Constantines sitting president among the Bishops and prescribing rules
for (their) churches, the most part of the^ received with applause and
admiration whatsoever he said, affirming it to be divinely spoken.

What marvel then if Athanasius reproved Constantius for sitting among the
bishops in their Synods, as president of (their) judgments and ringleader or
ruler of the bishops in their determinations, when as he oppressed the
freedom of their voices with terror, corrupted the secrets of their hearts with
promises, and hindered the vprightnes of their proceedings with his presence?
Or if Leontius brake out into these words: Apud Suidam ibidem.
I wonder that having charge of other things thou enterest into these matters,
and that being governor of the camp and commonwealth thou prescribest those
things to Bishops which pertain only to Bishops.

Touching accusations of Bishops his tyranny was greater. Admitting false
accusations against Bishops, and not suffering them to speak for themselves.
He made his Palace the Consistory for such causes and himself judge of them,
where if any Arrian accused an other Bishop, were the complaint never so false,
the proof never so slender, the man never so giltlesse, the party accused
should not clear himself, no not so much as speak for himself, but was sure,
though he were absent and innocent, to die the death or suffer banishment.


Phi. You imagine this of your own head to make Constantius seem a very tyrant.


Theo. The words which you brought do fully prove so much, but that you cut
them off from the rest, to make them sound for your purpose. Put the words
that follow to the^, and see whether they do not import that which I said.
Athan. ad Solit. vitam agentes.
Now again in steed of Ecclesiastical cognition, (that is, the trial of
Bishops by their Synodes when they are accused) he has appointed his palace
the judgment seat of those causes, and himself the chief judge and arbitrer
of those contentions (or accusations:) and that which you would wonder at, if
at any time he perceive the accusers to stagger or fail in their proofs,
This was plain tyranny repugnant to the laws of God and man.
he himself plaieth the accuser, so as the party conuented is suffered to
reply nothing by reason of his violence. Which he plainly showed in Athanasius
cause. For in that matter hearing the free speech of Paulinus, Lucifer,
Eusebius and Dionysius (all four Bishops) proving by the recantation of
Vrsacius and Valens that the crimes objected to Athanasius were false, and the
sayings of Vrsacius and Valens, which they themselves had revoked, ought not to
be credited, Constantius straightway rising up said, I am Athanasius accuser,
on my word believe those things (that are objected to him.) Here the Bishops
answering again, how can you accuse (Athanasius) in his absence? Grant you
would accuse him, the absence of the party accused is a let that you can not
proceed to judgment. The judgment is not of any commonwealth matter, that
you should be believed as Emperor; but a Bishop is accused, and in this case
he that will accuse and he that is accused must be dealt withal in like
condition. How can you accuse him that could not be present for the distance of
place? If you have those things which you object, by hearesay, reason is you
also believe that which Athanasius shall bring in defense of himself. For if
you believe these (his accusers) and believe not him, it may be thought they
say these things and accuse Athanasius to content and please you. This when
the Emperor heard, expounding their honest allegations for his reproaches, he
banished them: and waxing the sharper against Athanasius, gave forth a
terrible edict that he should be punished, and his churches delivered to the
Arrians, and his adversaries have leave to do what they would.

Hereby the Arians waxed so confident that they spared no man. Whom have they
not touched, says Athanasius, with their false accusations? Athan. ad solis.
vitam agentes.
Whom have they not intrapped? Whom has not Constantius banished that was
accused by them? When did he not give them both audience and allowance? Whom
ever did he admit to say any thing against them? Or what did he not admit
which they said against others? He ever does that which the Arrians would
have, and they again say that which he likes.

And whereas the Bishops in those days were wont to be lawfully chosen by the
people of the place, and sufficiently examined and allowed by other Bishops
adjoining and openly created in the church; Constantius in steed of the church
would have his palace succeed, and for the multitude of people, and right of
assemblies (to elect) he commanded three Eunuchs to be present, Athan. in
ead^ Epist.

Disordered electing of Bishops.


and three of his spies (or prolers) for you can not call them Bishops, that
they (six) in his palace might create one Felix a Bishop. And noting what
manner of Bishops the Emperor and his Eunuchs made, he says, In illorum
locum iuuenes, libidinosos, Ethnicos, ne catechismo quidem imbutos, necnon and
digamos and de maximis criminibus male audientes modo aurum darent, Athan.
ibidem.
veluti emptores e foro ad Episcopatus summisere: They sent in their places
(that were banished) young men, leacherous persons, Ethnickes, not so much as
taught the first principles of faith, having two wifes, and spotted with
enormous crimes, so they would give money, as cheepe-men out of a market.

The furious violence that was used in the time of Constantius to drive men to
participate with Arrians, not only by imprisonmentes and banishmentes, but by
chaining, Tyrannous persecuting.
whipping, scalding with fire, trampling under feet, stoning, choking, and
secret murdering such as refused, without all respect of vocation, age or sex,
was so lamentable, that no christian heart can read it without tears, and it is
so largely described and pithily disproued by Hilarie and Athanasius, that no
man except he be blinder than a bitle, can doubt whether Constantius were a
wilful tyrant in the church of God, or no. Peruse the places and you shall
find proofs enough of that which I say.

I proclaim, says Hilarie, that to thee, Constantius, which I would to Nero,
Decius, and Maximinian; thou fightest against God, thou ragest against the
Church, Hilar. lib. 1. contra Constan. defunct.
thou do persecute the Saints, thou hate the Preachers of Christ, and
ouerthrowest Religion, a tyrant not in humane, but in divine things; a new
kind of enemy to Christ, the forerunner of Antichrist. I repeat nothing
rather than thy doings in the Church, because I would open no other tyranny,
but that (which thou use) against God.

Athan. ad so^it. vitam agentes.
And Athanasius showing the reasons why he calls Constantius Antichrist; Who
seeing or hearing, says he, these things, who considering the rage of these
wicked ones and so great injustice, would not deeply sigh at it? Who
hereafter will dare to call Constantius a Christian and not rather the image of
Antichrist? For which of Antichrists marks does he lack? Or what cause is
there why Constantius should not in every respect be counted Antichrist? Have
not the Arrians and Ethnickes as it were by his precept, used their sacrifices
and blasphemies against Christ in the great church at Caesarium (in Egypt?) As
a Giant he exalts himself against the most high and has invented ways to
change the^ Law (of God) breaking the ordinances of Christ and his Apostles,
and inuerting the customs of the church. And since he is clothed with
Christianity and enters into holy places, there standing and wasting the
churches, Abrogating the Canons, and by force compelling that his pleasure may
prevail, who at any time will affirm that these days are peaceable to
christians? and not rather, that this is a persecution, and such a persecution
as was never before, and no man after shall make the like, except that son of
perdition, (which is the true Antichrist?)

How think you, did not these Fathers reprove Constantius for changeing the
faith, oppressing Synods, corrupting judgments, infringing the Canons,
barbarons enforcing the christians, and shortly, for subiecting all to his will
and violence?


Phi. I know they make mention of these things, These fathers reproved
Co^stantius for that he did. Now what he did, their own words do witness.
but yet they reprove him generally for intermedling with Ecclesiastical
causes.


Theo. I hope they reproved him for that he did.


Phi. The case is clear, they could not reprove him for that he did not.


Theo. These things which I last rehearsed, Constantius did; as I prove by
their witness that chiefly rebuked him; ergo Constantius was reproved of
Athanasius, Osius, Leontius, and Hilarious for these things, that is for
playing the tyrant in divine matters, or as you call them in causes
Ecclesiastical.


Phi. But Osius says, Meddle not O Emperor in causes Ecclesiastical, nor do
thou command us in that kind, Osius words examined.
but leave such things to us rather.


Theo. You were answered before, but that you will never be satisfied. Osius
dissuadeth Constantius from using his absolute power and obstinate will in those
things that were then in question betwixt the Christians and Arians. He saw the
manifold and excessive disorders of Constantius in forcing Synodes of Bishops
by terror and violence to bow at his beck, in making his palace a consistory
for their causes, and there judging what his Eunuchs would, in dissoluing the
ordinances of Christ and his Apostles, and doing all things against the Rules
of the church, Athan. ad solit. vitam agentes.
and therefore had good cause to say: Ne te misceas ecclesiasticis neque nobis
in hoc genere praecipe, sed potius ea a nobis disce: Enterpose not thy self
(as thou do) O Emperor in Ecclesiastical matters, neither command us in
this kind, but learn such things rather of us, and not as you say (leave such
things rather to us.) God has committed the Empire to thee, to us the things
of the church: and as he that enuieth thine Empire contradicts the ordinance
of God, so take thou heed, least drawing unto thy self the things of the
church thou be guilty of great sin. It is neither lawful for a Bishop to
hold a kingdom: nor for a Prince to take a Bishops function on him.
It is written, Give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, and unto God that which
is Gods. It is therefore neither lawful for us to hold a kingdom on earth,
neither have thou power, O Prince, over sacrifices and sacred things. These
words put a difference between the function of Priests and Princes, and show
that neither may intrude with each others charge, which we confess with a good
will. But as Priests must teach truth and convict error, that is their office,
so princes must command for truth, and punish error, because public
authority to command and punish is not the Priests, but the Princes right,
wherewith Priests must not meddle.


Phi. Yet the Prince must learn at the Priests hand, which is truth and
which error.


Theo. If the Priest teach truth and the Prince reject it, the Prince shall
answer to God for the contempt of truth: but if the priest teach error in
steed of truth, a godly prince has lawful power to banish the doctrine, and
punish the teacher.


Phi. And if the Prince say that truth is error and error is truth, shall
truth be banished and the Priest punished upon the Princes saying?


Theo. And what if the Priest say that light is darkness and darkness
light, The Priest shall not excuse the Prince before God: and therefore the the
Prince can not be bound to the Priests mouth
shall Princes be excused before God for displacing the truth and maintaining
falsehood upon the Priests warrant?


Phi. Let Princes join themselves to the Church, and they can not mistake.


Theo. Shall they trust every sect that claims to be the church, or must they
learn to know the true church of Christ from the counterfeit?


Phi. The Church is soon known.


Theo. Not so soon as you think. But we slip from our matter; How Princes
must be directed to light on truth is an other, and the next question: we be
now discussing their authority to command for truth, not their ability to
discern the truth; and as far as I conjecture by your speeches, you be loath to
grant that Princes may defend or assist the truth, were it never so well
known, to be the undoubted truth of Christ's church.


Phi. Yes we grant they should defend the faith and assist the church, but we
would have them not go beyond their calling.


Theo. No more would we: but the words of Osius as you press them infer
that Princes may not so much as meddle with defending the faith, or assisting
the church of Christ, by their Princely power, which euerteth as well your
opinion, as ours.

If you will have these words, Meddle not in causes Ecclesiastical, to be
taken as they lie without restriction, The limiting of Osius words.
ergo Princes must not meddle neither in word nor deed with the defending nor
impugning the faith or church of Christ. And this, you see, were no sober
persuasion but a frantic conclusion wrested out of Osius words against his
meaning, against all truth and your own confession. Who in his right wits
will say to kings, take you no care who defends or impugneth the church (of
Christ) in your realms; Aug. epist. 50.
let it not pertain to you who list to be religious or sacriligious in your
kingdoms? The acts of Constantine, the Laws of Justinian, the chapters of
Charles, the stories of the church, the Scriptures themselves, do clearly
convince that the best and most famous Princes have meddled in Ecclesiastical
matters: the office and oath of a Prince, as anon you shall hear, require the
same: your own assertion is that Princes ought to defend the faith and assist
the church, and that they can not do without meddling in Ecclesiastical
matters. Now choose whether you will thwart the whole church of God and
disprove your own doctrine, or else limit the words of Osius as we do by the
particulars that moved him to reprove Constantius for his immoderate
presumption.

The general is absurd and refuteth your intention as well as ours; The words
of Osius must be limited, and the limitation whatsoever it be cannot hurt us.
for you would have Princes meddle with the publishing, assisting and executing
of your pleasures and judgments, and we would have them yield that service
to Christ and his truth, which you challenge to your selves: the limitation, let
it be what it will agreeable to the circumstances, can not hurt us. Meddle not
in causes Ecclesiastical (in such sort as thou do) which rebukes his
tyranny; meddle not, neither appoint us what we shall do, that is, meddle not
(with appointing and directing us) in these things, but learn them rather of
us, which represseth his insolency: Ne te misceas ecclesiasticis, thrust not
thy self into those things (which belong to the Priests and not to the
Princes charge) which is Osius own distinction: or else: ne te misceas,
interpose not thy self, that is, (thy resolute will and power to command and
compel us) to subscribe against Athanasius an innocent, and to communicate
with Arians condemned heretics, which were the two points that Constantius
exacted of Osius. All these constructions import that Constantius meddled in
that sort, and with those things, that he should not; but they do not exclude
Princes from establishing the truth and punishing sacrileges, schisms and
heresies, which is meddling with matters ecclesiastical.


Phi. Leontius is as earnest against him as Osius. I marvel, says he to
Constantius, thy vocation being for other things, thou medlest with these
matters. Thy charge is of civil and martial affairs only, and yet thou will
needs be president of Ecclesiastical causes.


Theo. I marvel that professing to seek a truth, you be not ashamed to temper
and alter your witnesses in this sort. You cut off the first part that would
expound the whole, and the latter you wilfully corrupt to force it to your
purpose. The place of Suidas is this. Constantius at a time sitting chief
among the Bishops, and going about to set them orders for their churches,
Suidas in Leon. Tripolis Epis^.
the most part received with applause and admiration whatsoever he said,
affirming it to be most excellently spoken. Leontius held his peace: whom
when the Emperor asked, Princes may not do what they list in the church of God.

Leontius wilfully corrupted by the Jesuits.


why do thou only of all the rest keep silence? I marvel, says Leontius,
that having charge for other things thou entrest into these matters, and that
being appointed over the camp and commonwealth thou prescribes to the
Bishops those things which belong only to Bishops. In steed of (...), you
say, (Thy charge is of civil and martial affairs only) that word only is
your own and not your Authors, and so be the rest that follow. Thou will
needs be president of Ecclesiastical causes: Leontius said: (...); Thou
prescribest unto Bishops those things which belong only to Bishops. This is
no good dealing with Fathers, to forge them and frame them to your fancies.

Leontius had some reason to say as he did, Constantius was sitting chief
among the Bishops and prescribing them rules and orders for their churches,
This was above Consta^tius ^each and without his vocation to teach bishops in
his own person.
in things that were both beyond his cunning and besides his calling. What
things those were the story does not express, but says, such things as
belonged only to Bishops. Now why should not Leontius think that Princes in
some things had no skill to direct Bishops, neither might prescribe what rules
and orders they listed, for the churches of God? And yet your author is not
ancient that reports this. Suidas lived twelve hundred years after Christ, a
man learned, Suidas a late writer.
but of very late time and far from the credit of antiquity. Leontius
himself, if all be true that Suidas writes of him, had no more discretion
than needed. For when the Empress sent to speak with him, he returned this
answer: If thou will have me come to thee, let me have the reverence due to
Bishops, Suidas in eode^ Leont.
that when I come in, thou by and by descend from thy throne and reverently
meet me, and submit thy head under my hands to receive (my) blessing,
Leontius a man of no great judgment.
and then will I sit, and thou shall stand manerly by, and not offer to sit
till I bid thee. If these couenantes please thee, I will come. A high point of
divinity that a subject will not come to his Prince but on these saue^ie
conditions. Such fables you seek to further your cause, and yet all will not
help.


Phi. I trust you will make more account of Hilarie, whose words are these, We
beseech thy clemency to provide that charge be given to al judges of
provinces, that hereafter they presume not, nor vsurp the hearing of
Ecclesiastical causes. Hilarie would not have men forced to religion with
tortures.



Theo. Proofs go very low with you when you fall from Princes to inferior
judges, and yet mistake your text. For Hilarie beseeches nothing of
Co^stantius in that place, but that the judges of every Province should
forbear meddling in matters of religion (with tortures and violence.) The whole
book, the words before the next part of the same sentence joined to this which
you bring with a conjunction copulative confirm that to be the true meaning
of Hilarie. This is the right order of the place: Hilar. lib. 2. ad Constant.
We beseech not only with words but also with tears, that the catholic
churches be no longer oppressed with grievous injuries and sustain intolerable
persecutions and co^tumelies, and that which is shameful, eue^ of our brethren.
Let your clemency provide and appoint that all judges every where, to whom
provinces are committed, which ought to take care and charge of commonwealth
matters only, refrain from meddling with religion. Neither let them presume and
vsurp and think they may enter into clergymens causes and force and vex
innocent men with diverse afflictions, threats, violence and terrors. Your
singular and admirable wisdom perceives it is not seemly, it ought not to
be, that men should be forced and compelled against their wills and hearts to
yield and addict themselves through violent oppression to such as cease not to
sow the corrupt seeds of false doctrine. Temporal Judges had their charge by
the Remane laws limited unto temporal (...).


This was the meddling with clergy men's causes that Hilarie meant, and which he
would have temporal judges restrained from: and yet were his meaning never so
general, he required nothing but that which Constantine the father of
Constantius had by his public laws ordained, and al christian Princes have
since observed, to wit, that Ecclesiastical persons should be conuented before
ecclesiastical judges. Niceph. lib. 7. cap. 46.

Ambros. lib. 5.

Epist. 32.

Nouel. Constit. 83.


For so Constantine decreed, Committing judgment and jurisdiction over clearks
to Bishops; and Valentinian the elder would have priests to judge of priests:
Yea Justinian excludes all secular judges from hearing the causes of clergy
men, except it were for civil offenses. If the crime be ecclesiastical,
needing ecclesiastical reformation and punishment, let the Bishop determine
the same, the judges of the Province no way intermedling, for we will not have
temporal judges enter into such matters where as such faults must be examined
ecclesiastically by the sacred and divine rules (and Canons) which our laws
take no scorn to follow.

And though he bar civil judges from the hearing of such causes, Clergiemen
exempted from temporal laws, but not from the Princes laws. Ibidem.
yet does not exempt clergy men, Bishops nor others from the obedience of his
ecclesiastical laws, as the words import that be next to these; Omnibus quae
iam a nobis sancita sunt, sieve super sanctiss. ecclesus, sieve super Deo
amabilibus Episcopis sieve super clericis, sieve super monachis propriam virtutem
habentibus: All things which we have already decreed concerning the most holy
churches, and blessed Bishops, and touching clerks and monks standing in their
full force. He quiteth clergy men from temporal bars, but he binds both
them and their judges to the tenor of his ecclesiastical laws as well in
their Synods as in their Consistories, as appears at large by his 123.
constitution; so that this place of Hilarie might well have been spared save
only to make up your tale.


Phi. Is this your opinion that Princes themselves may lawfully meddle with
Ecclesiastical causes and persons though their inferior judges may not?


Theo. We say princes exempted clergy men from secular judges but not from
themselves: And that Princes from the beginning have meddled with persons and
causes Ecclesiastical, Princes have ever meddled with ecclesiastical matters,
we bring you, not only five authorities that shall be neither maimed nor
wrested as yours be, but five hundred acts, examples, laws and edictes that
shall be strong and effectual proofs for this purpose.


Phi. You talk of cost, when you say five hundred.


Theo. We could far pass that number if the number would move you to leave
folly, but I will go an other way to work with you. What good king can you
name before or after Christ for 1000. years, but such as meddled with
Ecclesiastical matters?


Phi. Nay, what good king can you name that did?


Theo. They be sooner named than answered.

Nabuchodonosor in making a law that every people, Nabuchodonosor. Daniel. 3.
nation and language, which spoke any blasphemy against the God of Sidrac,
Misac and Ab^dnago should be drawn in pieces and their houses made priuies,
did he not meddle with matters of Religion?


Phi. Nabuchodonosor was a tyrant?


The. But being corrected by the divine miracle, Aug. Epist. 50.
he made, says Augustine, a religious and commendable law for the truth, that
who so blasphemed the God of Sidrac, Misac, and Abednago should with his house
perish utterly.

Darius upon the sight of an other miracle wrote to all people, nations and
languages that dwelt in the world with these words: Darius. Daniel. 6.
I make a decree, that in all the dominion of my kingdom men tremble and fear
before the God of Daniell.

The king of Niniueth, hearing of that which Jonas threatened from God,
proclaimed a fast, Jonas 3. The king of Niniueth.
and charged all men to put on sackcloth and cry mightily to God and to
turn from (their) evil ways and the wickedness that was in their hands. I
trust you dare not condemn the king of Niniueth for an intruder upon
ecclesiastical causes, whose service so well pleased God, that he spared the
king and his subjects from destruction hanging over their heads: and yet
fasting, prayer and repentance be causes mere spiritual, in which the king
interposed his royal authority by the council of his Nobles, Jonas 3.
and not of Jonas who departed the city grieved and angry with God for
pardoning the Ninevites upon their conversion.

The factes of these three kings I allege the rather because S. Augustine
grounded himself upon them, August. Epi. 50. S. Austen proposes their
examples to be followed of christian kings.
as proofs that christian kings may meddle with matters of Religion, and as
patterns for them to follow. Ye kings understand, be wise ye that judge the
earth, serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice before him with trembling. How do
kings serve the Lord in fear, but by forbidding and punishing with a religious
severity, those things which are done against the precepts of God? As the
king of Niniueth served by compelling the whole city to appease the Lord. As
Darius served by giving the Idol into Daniels power to be broken, and casting
his enemies to the Lions. As Nabuchodonosor served by restraining all that were
in his kingdom from blaspheming God, with a terrible law. And again, When
Emperors profess the truth they command for truth against error. Aug.
Epist. 166.
As Nabuchodonosor proposed an edict for truth against error, that whosoever
blasphemed the God of Sidrach, Misaach, and Abednago should be destroyed and
his house dispersed. And you (Donatistes) will not that christian Emperors
command any such thing against you. If the commandments of kings have
nothing to do with the publishing of religion and prohibiting of sacrileges,
The commandementes of kings may lawfully reach to the publish*
why then do you sign your selves at king (Nabuchodosors) edict commanding
such things? For when you hear it, do you not answer Amen, and saying so
with a loud voice, do you not sign your selves in the holy solemnity at the
kings edict?

What Moses, Joshua, David, Solomon, Asa, Iehosaphat, Ezechias, Manasses,
Josias, Kings and rulers commanded by the holy Ghost for meddling with
religion. ing of religion.
Nehemias did for the planting, preserving and purging of true religion, and
how they commanded, reproved and punished as well Priests as others for
spiritual crimes and causes, the places are infinite, and witnessed in no
worse records than the Scriptures themselves: I will not touch them all but
only show that every one of these in their times and reigns meddled with
Ecclesiastical men and matters, which is the point that you would impugn by
your allegations.

Moses the civil Magistrate reproved Aaron the high Priest, for making the
golden calfe, Moses. Exodus 32.
and stamping it to powder cast it into the water that Israel might drink it,
and in one day put three thousand of them for that idolatry to the sword.
And after the rebellion of Corah, when the residue were plagued for murmuring
against Moses and Aaron, Numbers 16.
Moses commanded Aaron to take the censer and stand between the living and
the dead to make atonement for the people. And as during life Moses guided and
ruled them in all things both spiritual and temporal, so, ready to depart, he
carefully warned, and finally blessed the twelve tribes of Israel. Deuteronomy. 32.33.


Joshua that succeeded him, Joshua. Joshua. 1.
a Prince not a Priest was charged by God to meditate in the book of the law
day and night, that thou may observe, says God, and do according to all
that is written therein, and the people received him with this submission,
Joshua. 1.
As we obeyed Moses in all things so will we obey thee. Whosoever shall rebel
against thy commandment, and will not obey thy words in all that thou
command him, let him be put to death.

And least you should think that he commanded in nothing but temporal
matters, Joshua. 5^ 8. Joshua. 8.
he circumcised the sons of Israel, erected an Altar of stone for their
offerings, read the whole law to them, there was not a word of all that Moses
commanded, which Joshua read not before all the congregation; searched and
punished the concealer of things dedicated to idols, Joshua. 7. Joshua. 24.
and not long before he died, in his own person renewed the covenant between
God and the people, and caused them to put away the strange Gods that were
among them, Joshua. 24.
insomuch that by his diligent care and good regiment, Israel served the Lord
all the days of Joshua.

How far king David meddled with matters of religion, David. 1. Chron. 16.1.
Chron. 23.24 25.26.
if the Psalms which he made for Asaph and his brethren to sing in assemblies,
and order which he set for the whole service of the Temple, appointing the
Priests, Levites, Singers and other Seruitours of the church their dignities,
courses and offices, did not declare; the charge which he gave to king Solomon
his son, and the praise which he gate at Gods hands for the faithful
execution and religious observation of his law given by Moses in all things
and causes both spiritual and temporal are sufficient evidence. Take heed to
the charge of the Lord thy God, 3. King. 2.
says David to Solomon, to walk in his ways and keep his statutes, and his
commandments, and his judgments and his testimonies, as it is written in
the law of Moses: This God himself repeated to Salomo^, proposing David his
father for a pattern unto him: If thou will walk before me, 3. King. 9.
(as David thy father walked in pureness of heart and vprightnes) to do
according to all that I have commanded thee, and keep my statutes and my
judgments, I will establish the throne of thy kingdom upon Israel for ever.


Phi. Do these words prove that David did or Solomon might meddle with
Ecclesiastical matters? The Magistrate charged with all the words of Moses
law.



Theo. These places and such like do fully prove that the Kings and
Governors of Israel and Judah were appointed by God himself to have the
custody, charge and oversight of all things mentioned and expressed in Moses
law. Here you see the words are, to do according to all that I have commanded
thee and keep my statutes and judgments: 3. Kings 9.
To Joshua God said; that thou may observe and do according to all that is
written ( in the book of the Law; Joshua 1.
) and likewise of the king in general, Deuteronomy. 17.
The book of the Law shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days
of his life, that he may learn, to keep all the words of this Law and these
ordinances to fulfill them. The king was charged with all the words and
ordinances of Moses Law: the law of Moses contained al things which God
required of Priests or people both spiritual and temporal, ergo the king was
charged by God himself as well with all Ecclesiastical things and causes as
with Temporal. And consequently David and all other kings that discharged
their duties to God in such sort, as he enjoined them, They which discharged
their duties to God meddled with all things as well Ecclesiastical as civil.
meddled with all things and causes Ecclesiastical and Temporal.


Phi. Frame your argument shorter.


Theo. They were charged with all, ergo they should meddle with all: and some
discharged their duties to God, for example, such as were commended and
favored by God, whom I before named; ergo some did meddle with all the precepts
of God both Ecclesiastical and Temporal.


Phi. They were charged to observe the whole Law as all other men were.


Theo. They were charged for their own persons as all private men were, but as
kings they were charged for others in such manner as no subject could be
charged, Kings be charged with Gods law in respect of commanding it to others.
namely to see the law of God to be publicly received and fully observed
within their Realms, and all other sorts of Religion and policy to be
clean forbidden and banished.


Phi. This is your surmise.


Theo. It is S. Augustines maine collection in sundry places, fet from the
very Principles of reason and nature; and confirmed by the warrant of the
sacred Scriptures. The king serves God, says Saint Augustine, August. Epi. 50.
As a man one way, as a king an other way. As a man by living faithfully, as a
king by making Laws with convenient vigor to command that which is right and
forbid the contrary. Idem contra lit. Petiliani, lib. 2. cap. 92.

Idem. contra Cres. lib. 3. cap. 51.

Idem. Epist. 50.


And again, Kings even in that they be kings have to serve the Lord, in such
sort as none can do which are not kings. For kings (in respect as they be
kings) serve the Lord, if in their kingdoms they command that which is good,
and forbid that which is evil. How then, says he, do kings serve the Lord,
but by forbidding and punishing with a religious severity those things that
are done against the commandments of the Lord? Idem. in Psalm. 44.

No man is a king in respect of himself but of his people.

Keeping and observing referred to magistrates, is nothing else but to command
and see the law of God kept and observed by others.


And thus much the very deriuation of the name does infer. Rex a regendo
dicitur, a king is he that rules (others) and the relation of the word does
teach us there can be no king but in respect of his subjects, and his duty
toward them is to direct and correct, that is to command and punish in all
things needful.


Phi. What conclude you of all this?


Theo. That where God charge the king to keep and observe all the words of
the law, keeping and observing are not there referred to his private actions
as a man, but to his public function as a king: and therefore the king in
these words received the charge and oversight of the whole law, that is an
express commandment from God to see the law kept, and every part thereof
observed of all men within his Dominions, and the breakers of it, Prophets,
Priests and People to be duly punished. Now the Law contained all things
that any way touched the true service and worship of God, ergo the king had
one and the selfsame power and charge to command and punish as well for the
precepts of piety as other points of policy, neither did God favor or
prosper any of the kings of Israel or Judah but such as chiefly respected and
carefully maintained the ordinances of Religion prescribed unto them in Moses
law. Aug. Epist. 50.
In the times of the Prophets, says S. Augustine, all the kings which in the
people of God did not forbid and overthrow those things which were brought in
against the commandementes of God, are blamed: and they that did prohibit and
subvert such things, are praised above the rest.

God blessed Solomon with wisdom, Solomon.
honor, riches and peace so long as he walked in the steps of David his
father: during the which time Solomon did dedicate the Temple in his own
person, 3. Kings 8. 3. Kings 2.
and cast out Abiathar from being Priest unto the Lord, and set Zadocke in his
room: but when his heart once turned from God to build places also for Idols
and to suffer his outlandish wives to burn incense and offeringes to their
Gods, 3. Kings 11.
then the Lord was angry with Solomon and stirred up adversaries against
him and threatened to rent his kingdom from him, and to give it to his servant.

Asa took away the Altars of the strange Gods, Asa. 2. Chron. 14.
and the high places, and brake down the images, and cut down the groves, and
commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their fathers, and took away out of
all the cities of Judah the high places and images, therefore the kingdom was
quiet before him. And he took an oath of all Judah and Benjamin, that
Whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel should be slain, 2. Chro.
15.
whether he were small or great, man or woman, and he deposed Maachah his
mother from her regencie, because she had made an idol: and Asa brake down
her idol and stamped it and burnt it, and the Lord gave him rest round about.

Iehosaphat his son walked in the first ways of David and sought the Lord
God of his father, Iehosaphat. 2. Chro. 17. Verse. 3. Verse. 4. Verse. 5. Verse. 7.
Verse. 8. 2. Chro. 19. Verse. 4. Verse. 8. Verse. 9. Verse. 10. Verse. 11.
and walked in his commandments, and therefore the Lord established the
kingdom in his hands, so that he had riches and honor in abundance. In the
third year of his reign he sent his Princes that they should teach in the
cities of Judah, and with them Levites and Pristes, and him self went through
the people from Beer-sheba to Mount-Ephraim, and brought them again to the
Lord God of their fathers. In Jerusalem he sent of the Levites and of the
Priests and of the chief of the families of Israel for the judgment and
cause of the Lord. And he charged them saying, Thus shall ye do in the fear of
the Lord faithfully and with a perfect heart. Verse. 10. Verse. 11.
Thus shall ye do and trespass not. And behold Amariah the Priest shall be the
chief among you for all the matters of the Lord, and Zebadiah for all the
kings affairs, and the Levites shall be helpers unto you. 2. Chron. 20. Verse.
3. Verse. 5. Verse. 6.
Be strong and do it. And when the Moabites and Ammonites came against him, he
proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah and stood in the congregation of Judah
and Jerusalem in the house of the Lord and prayed in his own person for all
the people.

Ezechiah. 2. Chron. 29. Verse. 2. Verse. 3.4. Verse. 5. Verse. 10. Verse. 15. Verse.
20. Verse. 21. Verse. 27. Verse. 21. Verse. 29.
Ezechiah did uprightly in the sight of the Lord according to all that David
his father had done. He opened the doors of the house of the Lord, and
brought in the Priests and the Levites, and said unto them; hear me ye
Levites, sanctify your selves and sanctify the house of the Lord God of your
fathers. I purpose to make a covenant with the Lord God of Israel: And they
sanctified themselves according to the commandment of the king. And the king
rose early and gathered the Princes of the city and went up to the house of
the Lord. And they brought (sinne-offeringes) and Ezechiah commanded to offer
the burnt offering upon the Altar, yea he commanded the Priests the sons
of Aaron to offer them. Verse. 30.
And when they had made an end of offering, Ezechiah the king and the Princes
commanded the Levites to praise the Lord with the words of David and Asaph
the Seer. 2. Chron. 30. Verse. 1.
And Ezechiah sent to all Israel and Judah and also wrote letters to Ephraim
and Manasses that they should come to the house of the Lord at Jerusalem to
keep the Passover. Verse. 6.
So the Posts went with letters by the commission of the king and his Princes
throughout all Israel and Judah, and with the commandment of the king, saying:
Ye children of Israel, turn again unto the Lord God of Abraham, Isaac and
Israel. Verse. 12. 2. Chron. 31. Verse. 2.
And the hand of God was in Judah, so that he gave them one heart to do the
commandment of the King. And Ezechiah appointed the courses of the Priests
and Levites by their turns, every man according to his office for the burnt
offeringes and peace offeringes, to minister and give thanks to praise in the
gates of the tents of the Lord. Verse. 21.
And in all the works that he began for the service of the house of God,
he did it with all his heart and prospered. 4. Kings. 18.
He took away the high places and brake the Images and cut down the groves
and brake in pieces the brazen Serpent which Moses had made, for in those days
the children of Israel did burn incense to it.

Manasses. 2. Chron. 33. Verse. 3.
Manasses at the first went back and built the high places which Ezechiah his
father had broken down, and set up altars for Baalim, and made groves and
worshipped all the host of heaven and served them, but after he was taken by
the king of Babylon and put in fetters, Verse. 11. Verse. 12. Verse. 13.
and bound in chains, he humbled himself greatly before the God of his
fathers; and God was entreated of him, and heard his prayer, and brought him
again to Jerusalem into his kingdom. Then he took away the strange Gods,
and the image out of the house of the Lord, Verse. 15.
and all the Altars that he had built in the mount of the Lords house and in
Jerusalem, Verse. 16.
and cast them out of the city. Also he repaired the Altar of the Lord, and
sacrificed thereon peace-offeringes and of thanks, and commanded Judah to
serve the Lord God of Israel.

Josiah, Josiah. 2. Chron. 34. verse. 3.
in the eight year of his reign, when he was yet a child (of sixeteene
years) began to seek after the God of David his father, and in the twelfth
year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from the high places and the groves
and the carved and molten Images. Verse. 4.
And they brake down in his sight the Altars of Baalim, and he caused to cut
down the images that were on them: he brake also the groves, and the karued
and molten images, and stamped them to powder and strewed it upon the graves of
them that had sacrificed on them; Verse. 5. Verse. 7.
Also he burnt the bones of the Priests upon their Altars, and purged Judah
and Jerusalem. And when he had destroyed the Altars, and cut down all the
idols throughout the land of Israel, he returned to Jerusalem. Verse. 29.
Verse. 30.
Then the king sent and gathered all the Elders of Judah and Jerusalem. And the
king went up to the house of the Lord, and all the men of Judah and
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the Priests and the Levites, and all the people
from the greatest to the smallest, and he read in their ears, all the words
of the book of the covenant, that was found in the house of the Lord. Verse. 31.
And the king stood by his Pillar, and made a covenant before the Lord to walk
after the Lord and to keep his commandementes, and his statutes with all his
heart, and with all his soul, and that he would accomplish the words of the
covenant written in that book. And he caused all that were found in Jerusalem
and Benjamin to stand to (the covenant.) Verse. 32. Verse 33.
So Josias took away all the abominations out of all the countries that
pertained to the children of Israel, and compelled all that were found in
Israel to serve the Lord their God: and al his days they turned not back
from the Lord God of their fathers.

Moreover Josiah kept a Passover unto the Lord in Jerusalem and he appointed
the Priests to their charges and said to the Levites, 2. Chron. 35. verse. 1.
Verse. 2. Verse. 3. Verse. 4. Verse. 5. Verse. 6.
Serve now the Lord your God and his people Israel, and prepare your selves by
the houses of your fathers according to your courses, as David the king of
Israel has written, and according to the writing of Solomon his son. And
stand in the sanctuary, according to the division of the families of your
brethren: Kill the Passover and sanctify your selves and prepare your
brethren, that they may do according to the word of the Lord by the hand of
Moses. Thus the service was prepared, Verse. 10.
and the Priests stood in their places, also the Levites in their orders
according to the kings commandment. So all the service of the Lord was
prepared the same day to keep the Passover and to offer burnt offeringes upon
the Altar of the Lord according to the commandment of king Josiah. Verse. 16.


Nehemias though he were no king but a captain sent from king Artaxerxes,
Nehemias. Nehem. 6. Nehe. 10. verse. 1.
yet he discerned and resisted the Prophets, that would have put (him) in
fear, and was the first that sealed the covenant between God and the people
with an oath to walk in the law of God, Verse. 29.
and to observe all the commandments of the Lord. And he displaced Tobiah an
Ammonite whom Eliashib the high Priest had received and lodged within the court
of the house of God, Nehem. 13. Verse. 7. Verse. 8. Verse. 9. Verse. 11. Verse. 17.
Verse. 10. and 11. Verse. 22. Verse. 23. Verse. 25. Verse. 28.
and cast out all the vessels of the house of Tobiah, and commanded them to
cleanse the chambers for the vessels of the house of God: And reproved the
rulers for that the house of God was forsaken, and the Sabbath day broken:
assembling the Levites and singers: and setting them their places; and charging
the Levites to cleanse themselves and to sanctify the Sabbath day. And when
he saw Jews that married (strange) wives, he rebuked them and cursed them and
smote certain of them and took an oath of them by God, that they should not
mary with strangers. And one of the sons of Ioiadah the son of Eliashib the
high Priest married the daughter of Sanballat the Horonite, but Nehemiah chased
him away; Ver. 30.
and cleansed (the Priests and Levites) from all strangers, and appointed them
their courses every one in his office.

The illation upon the former examples
There needs no great skill to set this together. To remove idols, and all
abominations out of the land, to enter a covenant with God, and to walk in his
ways, to proclaim fastes, an d make public prayers, to sanctify the Temple,
and celebrate the Passover, to seek and serve God according to his law; be
matters ecclesiastical, not temporal; and yet in the same cases the godly
kings of Judah commanded and compelled all that were found in Judah, Priest
and Prophet, man and woman, to stand to that order, which they took for the
better accomplishing of those their interprises. Acknowledge that right and
power in Christian Princes at this day, to meddle with matters of Religion,
which the Scriptures report and commend in kings of religious and famous
memory, we press you no farther: If you stick to grant so much, others will
not stick to distrust the soundness of your doctrine, notwithstanding the
smoothness of your tongues and loftynesse of your spirits, wherewith you
think to compass and quail kingdoms.


Phi. The kings decreed and commanded those things though happily the
Prophets did advise them and persuade them.
The kings of Judah did that which they did at the motion of the Prophets and
direction of the Priests.


Theo. You shun that, which you shall not avoid. We reason not, who moved and
advised, but who decreed and commanded these things to be done; Priests or
Princes? The Scriptures in plain terms say, that Princes DECREED, APPOINTED,
COMMANDED them to be done. Contradict the words if you dare. Take from Asa,
Iehosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, the king of Niniueth and others the Princely
power which they showed, and due praise which they merited in meddling with
these matters, and impugn the words whereby God expresses and approves their
doings, To be directed and advised by others does not hinder the Princes
authority.
and see whether the consciences of all good men will not detest and abhor your
wilful impiety.


Phi. The Scripture says in deed, they commanded, appointed, decreed these
things, but no doubt they were directed by Prophets and other spiritual
Pastors what they should do.


Theo. What if they were? Does that hinder their authority? Princes in civil
affairs are guided and directed by learned and wise Counselors; do they
therefore not command in temporal matters neither? Or find you no difference
between counselling and commanding?


Phi. Again these Princes were before the coming of Christ, The high Priest
among the Jews had his commission from Gods own mouth, the Pope has not.
Deuteronomy. 17.
when as yet there was no supreme Pastor over the whole Church.


Theo. There was an high Priest over the twelve Tribes with surer and better
authority than your holy father can show for himself. All Israel by Gods
own mouth were referred to the judgment of the Priests and Levites, and not
to decline from the thing which they speak: and The man, says God, that will
do presumptuouslie not harkning unto the Priest (that stands before the Lord
to minister) that man shall die. This was their commission, and yet this
notwithstanding the kings of Judah commanded both Prist and people for matters
of religion.

And so did the Christian Emperors after the coming of Christ, The best
christian Princes have followed the steps of the kings of Judah.
for eight hundred years that we show, command both Bishops and others,
yea the Bishop of Rome no less than others in causes as well Ecclesiastical
as Temporal. The particulars I noted before. The Laws were public, the time
long, the Princes wise; the factes known, the Church of Christ honored and
obeyed those decrees: It is no doubtful question, but a manifest truth that
the best Princes before Christ, and after Christ for many years, meddled with
the reformation of the Church, and prescribed laws both Ecclesiastical and
Temporal.

S. Augustine accompteth them not usurpers, God himself speaks and
commands by the hearts and laws of Princes.
as you do, but happy Princes that employed their authority to delate and
spread the true worship of God as much as they could, and avouches
plainly that God himself speaks and commands by the mouths and hearts
of Princes when they command in matters of Religion that which is good, and
whosoever resists their Ecclesiastical Laws made for truth shall be
grieuouslie plagued at Gods hands. August. de ciui. Dei li. 5. cap. 24.
(Imperatores) felices dicimus, si suam potestatem ad DEI cultum maxim
dilatandum maiestatis eius famulam faciunt. We count (Princes) blessed, if
they bend their power to do God service, for the spreading of his (true)
worship, as much as they can. Idem. Epi. 166.
Hoc iubent imperatores quod iubet and Christus: quia cum bonum iubent, per
illos non iubet nisi Christus. Emperors command the selfsame that Christ
does: because when they command that which is good, it is Christ himself
that commands by them. And ^ little after: Ibidem.
Attendite qua manifestissima veritate per cor regis quod in manu Dei est ipse
Deus dixerat inista ipsa lege quam contra vos prolatam dicitis: Mark ye with
how manifest truth by the Kings heart, which is in Gods hand, GOD himself
spoke in that very Law, which you say was made against you. And therefore
he concludes: Quicunque legibus Imp^ratorum, quae pro Dei veritate feruntur,
Aug. Epist. 50.
obtemporare non vult, grande acquirit supplicium: Whosoever will not obey the
laws of Princes which are made for the truth of God, is sure to bear an
heavy judgment.

Religion the chiefest care that Princes ought to have Cod. lib. 1. tit. 17 de
veter. iure enucleando, Deo authore. Authen. constit. 6.

Codic. Theodos. lib. 16. tit. 4. de religione, Ea quae.

Legum novel. Theodos. tit. 2. de Iudeis and Samaritanis, Inter caeteras.


The Princes themselves will teach you that by their power they may, by their
charge they should meddle with matters Ecclesiastical. The authority of (our)
laws, says Justinian, disposes divine and humane things. Thence is it that
we take greatest care for the true religion of God, and honest conversation of
Priests. So likewise Theodosius and Valentinian: Ea quae circa Catholicam
fidem vel ordinauit antiquit as, vel parentum nostrorum authoritas religiosa
constituit, vel nostra Serenitas roborauit, nouella superstitione remota,
integra and inuiolata custodire praecipimus. Those things which ancient
(Princes) have ordained, or the religious authority of our Progenitors
decreed, or our highness established concerning the catholic faith, we
command you to keep them firm and inviolable, all latter superstition
removed. And this they reckon to be the first part of their Princely charge.
Inter caeteras sollicitudines, quas amor publicus peruigili nobis cogitatione
indixit, praecipuam Imperatoriae, maiestatis curam esse praecipimus verae
religionis indaginem. Among the rest of those duties which the commonwealth
exacteth at our hands, we perceive the inquiry of true religion should be the
chiefest care of our Princely calling.

Valentinian the elder, though at first he refused to deal with profound
questions of religion, yet after he was content to enterpose his authority
with others, Valentinian himself was content at length to command for truth.

Theodoret. lib. 4. cap. 8.

Codic. lib. 1. tit. 6. Nesacru^ Baptisma iteratur.


and to command that the faith of the Trinity should be rightly preached, and
the Sacrament of Baptism by no means doubled. The blessed Bishops, says he
with Valens and Gratian, have made demonstration that the Father, the Son and
the holy Ghost be a Trinity coessentiall; and nostra potentia eandem
praedicari mandauit, and our power has commanded the same (truth) to be
preached. And again: The bishop which shall reiterate holy Baptism, we count
unworthy of his place. For we condemn their error, which treading the
Apostolic precepts under their feet, do not cleanse but rather defile those
with a second washing that are once already baptized.

Zeno seeking to reconcile the Bishops, Clerks, Monks and people of Egypt and
Alexandria to the Nicene faith, Euagrius lib. 3. cap. 14.

The right faith is the only strength of an earthly kingdom.


begins with these words, For so much as we know that only faith, which
is right and sincere, to be the ground, stay, strength and invincible
defense of our Empire, we have always employed our desires, endeavors and
laws, that thereby we might multiply the holy Catholic and Apostolic
church, the perpetual and undefiled mother of our Scepter. And Justinius
nephewe to Justinian writing a public Edict to all Christians concerning many
points of true Religion makes his conclusion with these words: Omnes eos qui
contraria hijsce vel sentiunt vel sensuri sunt, Anathemate damnamus, Idem lib.
5. cap. 4.
and alienos a sancta Dei Catholica and Apostolica Ecclesia iudicamus: We
condemn them all as accursed that presently do or hereafter shall think
contrary to these things, and we adiudge to have no part in the holy Catholic
and Apostolic Church of God.

This care to provide, and power to command for matters of religion, Princes
as well in this realm as else where continued a thousand years after Christ.
The Bishop of Rome himself 850 years after Christ promises all kind of
obedience to the chapters and laws ecclesiastical of Lotharius and his
ancestors. In Greece the Emperors lost not their authority to call Councels
and establish truth till they lost Empire and all. More than thirtine hundred
years after Christ, Nicephorus highly commends a Greek Emperor for his
labors and endeavors in the Church affairs. Niceph. dedicatio operis.

In Greece the Emperors kept this power 1300. years after Christ.


You have, says he to the Prince, restored the Catholic and universal Church
to her ancient state that was troubled with novelties: impure and unsound
doctrine you have banished from her; you have purged the temple from heretics
that were corrupters and deprauers of heavenly doctrine, not so much with a
three corded whippe as with the word of truth. You have established the
faith, and made constitutions for it: you have walled about true godliness with
mighty defenses, you have repaired that, which was ruinous. Priestly unction
decayed, you have made purer than gold, and by laws and letters taught them
sobriety of life and contempt of money. Wherefore their order is now sacred in
the common wealth which in former times was degenerated and infected with
corruption of discipline and manners. Ibidem paulo ante.
Yea, when you saw our true religion brought in danger by false and absurd
doctrines, you did most zealously and most wisely undertake the defense of it.
And knowing very well that piety of it self and the diligent care of Gods
causes, Diligent care of Gods causes the surest proppe of a Princes seat.
are the surest proppes of an Empire, you took a divine and passing wise
course. For by meddling with these matters (of religion) you wanne great thanks
of God, and gave him just cause to be favorable to your prayers, to direct al
your doings and confirm and setle the Empire in your hands.

Canutus a King of this land not full 32 years before the conquest apparently
proves that Princes kept their authority to command for matters of religion
more than a thousand years after Christ. A king of this land making laws for
religion a 1000 years after Christ.
His laws made by a Council of his sages at Winchester, are yet extant. Hear
some of them, and then tell us whether he did meddle with ecclesiastical causes
or no.

First he commands all men to love one God for ever above all things, Lege.
1.
and one rule of Christian religion well and advisedly to hold.

Item he wills al men to discharge their functions, Lege. 6.
specially the servants of god, Bishops, Abbots, Moncks, Canons, and Nonnes to
do their duties, to live according to their rules, to make their prayers night
and day for all Christian folk.

Item he bids and on Gods behalf forbids that any Christian man take to
wife a kinsewoman within six degrees, Lege. 7.
or his wives kinswoman or his Godmother at the font, or a professed Nonne, or
a divorced woman, or keep harlots, or have mo wives than one, and that in
lawful marriage.

Item that holy days, and fasting days be kept, Lege. 14 and 15.
and Sunday be kept holy from saturday noone till monday morning. Fayres,
Courts, huntings and worldly works on that day to be forborne.

Lege. 16.
Item that all fasts which be bidden, ember days and Lent be kept, and the
feasts of our Lady and the Apostles to be fasted, save Philip and Jacob: every
friday to be fasted, except it be holy day: and no man to fast from Easter to
Whitsuntide, or from Christmas to the Octaues of the Epiphanie, unless he
will or it be enjoined him.

Lege. 19 and 21.
Item that every Christian prepare himself for the communion thrice a year:
And truly keep his oath and promise, and love God with an inward reverence,
and hear diligently heavenly teachers, and often and many times search and look
on Gods Law and his dictrine.

Lege. 22.
Item that every Christian man learn so much, that he can the true faith and
the true understanding thereof, namely, the Lords prayer and the Creed: Or
else not to have Christian burial, neither to be admitted whiles he lives to
the Lords table nor to undertake for others at the font or before the Bishop.

Lege. 26. ^iter politica i^ra erusilem. Lege. 4 and 6.
Item that Bishops be preachers, and teachers of Gods Law, and careful
followers of goodwoorkes.

Item that Witches, sorcerers, Idolaters, periures, strumpets, breakers of
order and wedlock be banished the realm: with other Laws for tithes,
temples, Church rightes, trial of Clergy men accused, and such like duties
and offenses ecclesiastical.


Phi. You press me with a number of places, that prove nothing against us
directly.


Theo. Take the weakest of them, and see whether it will not infer that
Princes meddled with causes ecclesiastical. The weakest of these places prove
that Princes meddle with ecclesiastical causes, which they would seem to ^ray
them from by Osi^s words.



Phi. We know they meddled with them, but not as supreme Governors of them.


Theo. I brought these places to refell that general objection which you
framed out of Osius, Leontius and others, that Princes should not meddle with
causes ecclesiastical. If you grant they did* and might lawfully meddle with
such matters, as the places which I bring do prove, then by your own
confession Constantius was not reproved for meddling with religion, for so did
other godly Princes that were not reproved but highly commended and honored in
the Church of Christ: but rather he was reproved, as I answered you at the
first, for his insolent and tyrannous kind of meddling with these matters, which
was, as I showed, you for that in his own person, having no skill nor
experience in such cases, he would needs end and determine all things
according to his own fancy without respect of right or truth, and execute
the same with terrible force and rigor exceeding the bounds of all Christian
humanity.

And consequently their sword stretches unto spiritual things as well as unto
temporal.
Again these later examples as well as the former import that Princes had all
this while full power to plant and establish the Christian faith in their
realms and to punish ecclesiastical transgressions and disorders in all sorts
of subjects, Lay men and Clerks, which is all that we seek for and all that
we mean when we make them Governors of their dominions in all causes both
ecclesiastical and temporal; and since you can neither deny the laws, Edicts
nor acts of Princes, which we produce to this purpose, nor possibly shift
them, why do you wickedly slander and maliciously pervert that doctrine which
you shall never soberly confute?


Phi. You will have Princes to be supreme Governors in these cases; When
papists be posed with these places and cannot avoid them, they slip to an
other question and cavil about the direction of Princes unto truth.
this is it that we most impugn.


Theo. Well then let us go by degrees. Do you grant them to be Governors
in those cases?


Phi. What mean you by Governors?


Theo. Such as have lawful authority from God to command for truth and
punish error.


Phi. Do you make them Judges and Deciders of truth?


Theo. No, but receivers and establishers of it.


Phi. Yea but who shall tell them which is truth?


Theo. That is not this question. When we reason whether Princes may command
for truth and punish error, you must not cavil about the means to know
truth from error, but suppose that truth were confessed and agreed on: and in
that case what may Princes do for truth.


Phi. Mary Sir if truth were not in strife the doubt were not so great.


Theo. If I should ask you whether Princes may revenge murders and punish
theftes, were this an answer to say, but how shall they know what murder is,
and who be thieves? No more, when we demand what duty Princes owe to God
and his truth, should you stand quarelling what truth is or how truth may
be known? The Princes duty to God is one question which we now handle;
the way to discern truth from error is an other, which anon shall ensue when
once this is ended; but first let us have your direct answer whether Princes
may command for truth or no?


Phi. For truth they may: but if they take quid pro quo they both hazard them
selves and their whole Realms, and for that cause we say they must be
directed by Bishops.


Theo. You slide to the second question again before the first be finished.
Stay for that till this be tried. Princes may command for all points of
truth as well as for one.
You grant that Princes may command for truth, Do you not?


Phi. We do.


Theo. When you say they may command for truth, you do not mean this or
that point of truth, but indefinitely for truth, that is for all parts of
truth alike, without the which God can not rightly be served.


Phi. They may command for all as well as for part, if the Bishops need
their help in all.


Theo. And commanding is not only the free permitting of those that will, He
that may command for truth may justly punish for truth.
but the moderate punishing of those that will not. For punishment is the due
desert of him that neglects the commandment which he should obey. So that
he which may justly command, may justly punish; and he that may lawfully
punish may certainly command. How say you then, may Princes punish for
matters of religion?


Phi. No doubt they may, but when and where the Priest must guide.


Theo. Who bears the sword? The Priest or the Prince?


Phi. The Prince, not the Priest.


Theo. And that sword, which the Prince bears, As lawful for the Prince to
punish Idolaters and heretics, as thieves and murderers.
must do the deed, must it not?


Phi. It must.


Theo. And the fact is as lawful in Princes when they punish schismatikes,
heretics and Idolaters as when they punish adulterers, thieves and murderers?


Phi. What else?


Theo. And if they leave such impieties against God unpunished they do not that
duty which God requires of them.


Phi. All this we grant.


Theo. Will you not recall it when we come to the push?


Phi. Recall it? As though this could hurt us?


Theo. Since you promise not to recall it, I will trust you for this once and
will come to the true difference betwixt your opinion and ours.

Both sides grant that Princes must punish as well spiritual as temporal
offenses.
You flatly confess, and the general practice of your Church is, that Princes
of duty should and lawfully may punish all spiritual and ecclesiastical
offenses, namely, Apostasy, Idolatry, sorcerie, sacrilege, schism, heresy
and such like impieties against God and his Church, as well as civil disorders
and injuries against our neighbors: Can you deny this?


Phi. I can not.


Theo. We confess the same. Let it stand irreuocable for both sides.


Phi. Agreed. But remember they be punishers not determiners, of those things.


Theo. I said punishers if you look to my words.


Phi. I grant that doctrine to be good and sound.


Theo. He that will punish must first prohibit.
Then forth. What you say Princes may punish, we say Princes may prohibit.
Prohibiting is less than punishing, and a mean to make subjects do their
duties without punishing, which every Christian Magistrate should rather
embrace. Princes by common justice must open their mouths to speak, before
they lift up their hands to strike; their laws must be known, before their
sword must be drawn to revenge disobedience. Nothing can be justly punished
except it be first prohibited. So that princes may punish those things, ergo
they may prohibit them.


Phi. Great reason Princes should warn their subjects as well as punish them.
Prohibiting is but forewarning what things they must avoid lest they fall
into the pains prescribed.


Theo. If Princes may punish and prohibit that which is evil in matters of
religion, ergo they may command and establish that which is good in the same
causes. August. epist. 50.

Idem contra Cresconium lib. 3. cap. 51.


If they may punish and prohibit that which is evil, ergo they may command
and establish that which is good in matters of religion. How like you the
sequel?


Phi. You think it holds by reason of the contrariety that is between both
parts.


Theo. All learning will tell you that contraries be consequent to contraries.
If they may forbid and abolish that which is evil, ergo they may bid and
establish that which is good. And so S. Augustine coupleth them. You heard the
places before. As a king he serves God by making Laws commanding just
things and prohibiting the contrary. And again, Kings as they be kings,
serve God as they be willed by God, if in their kingdoms they command that
which is good and prohibit that which is evil, not in civil affairs only
but in matters also touching divine religion. They serve not God by prohibiting
evil except they likewise command that which is good in divine religion. By
duty they must, by consequent they do both. How think you, say we not truth?


Phi. I see your meaning. You would have Princes command in matters of
religion.


Theo. We would have them in those things to command that which is good as
well as prohibites that which is evil. Papists grant princes may punish for
religion but not command: and yet punishing is a very forcible kind of
commanding.
You grant the later, why should you stick at the former?


Phi. Commanding is a word of too great authority.


Theo. Whether think you the greater, with words to command, or with deeds
to compel?


Phi. Compelling is more than commanding.


Theo. And he that punishes, apparently compels. Since then by your own
confession Princes may compel men by punishments from that which is evil to
that which is good in matters of religion, ergo they may much more command them
that which is good.


Phi. You snare me with words.


Theo. Do I snare you with words when I say that Princes may command that
which is good in matters of religion as well as punish that which is evil, or
do you rather harden your faces and whet your tongues against the Scriptures,
against the fathers, against the laws and Edicts of all godly Princes in all
ages and Countries? Nothing clearer than that Princes may command for matters
of religion
Look no farther than to the places which I have brought you as well out of
the holy scriptures as ancient stories and laws, and you shall find where
princes commanded in causes ecclesiastical (I mean the very word) above
three skore times: If that be not sufficient you shall have three hundred when
you will. So that you make a bad march if you stand on this point with us, that
Princes may not command that which is good in matters of religion.


Phi. You shall have no such advantage at us. August. epist. 166. Ibidem. The
word commanding which they most avoid is most usual in the sacred scriptures
and ancient laws of Christian Princes. Epist. 66.
We know S. Augustine says, When Emperors take part with truth, they
command for truth against error; which whosoever contemns, he purchases
to himself judgment. And again, Emperors command the self same that
Christ does, for when they command that which is good, no man commands by
them but Christ.


Theo. You did well to pull your fingers out of the fire; you saw it was too
hot for you. S. Austen in that epistle which you quote uses that very word
twelve times to show that Kings and Princes did and might COMMAVND in matters
of religion. Read the Nouel, constitut.
3.5.6.16.37.42.57.58.59.67.77.79.83.109.117.131.132.133.141.144.146. If princes
at all may meddle with matters of religion they must needs command.
twenty constitutions wherein Justinian disposes of crimes and causes
ecclesiastical, and see whether every sentence be not a commandment. Or if
that be too much, ouerrun the 123 entitled of diverse ecclesiastical Chapters,
and tell us whether in that one constitution you do not find above fourteen
score imperative and prohibitiue verbs, whereby the Prince WILLS,
PRESCRIBES, APPOINTS, COMMAVNDETH, DISPOSES, of persons and causes
ecclesiastical.

And this you can not choose but perceive except you be void of common sense,
that Princes use not to persuade and entreat, but require and command their
subjects. And therefore they must either not meddle with matters of religion at
all, or else of necessity they must command, and afterward punish if their
commandment be despised.


Phi. Let it be so, since you will needs have it so; but yet this does not
prove that Princes be supreme Rulers and masters of the faith and Church of
Christ.


Theo. You leap before you come to the style. Anon you shall hear what this
does prove: but first, Do you grant that Princes may command that which is
good, and prohibit that which is evil in matters of religion?


Phi. What gain you by that if I grant it?


Theo. Take you no care for our gains. Do you grant it or no?


Phi. What if I do?


Theo. What if, does not answer my question; speak off or on to that which I
demand. Why be you so dainty to grant that which you dare not deny?


Phi. Take your pleasure in that point, and yet you shall miss your purpose.


Theo. My purpose is truth, which neither your high words nor indirect shifts
shall disappoint. You spend time with delays, we might otherwise sooner end.


Phi. Will you answer, as briefly when I ask you the like?


Theo. If I do not, charge me with mine own words.


Phi. Or if the Jesuits will not grant so much, let them look to the places
that went before and presently follow.
Then I grant that Princes may command that which is good, and prohibit that
which is evil in matters of religion.


Theo. You grant it as an evident truth confirmed by the Scriptures,
confessed by the fathers, reported by the Stories of the Church, and infinitely
repeated in the laws and edicts of religious and ancient Emperors made for
persons and causes ecclesiastical: Or if you doubt any part of this division,
have recourse to the textes and places before produced, and if every part be
not fully proved, refuse the whole.


Phi. They would none of this if they could chose, because they hold that
Bishops in these cases must command Princes.
I see they did, and therefore I resolve my self they might command in those
cases.


Theo. As well Bishops as others.


Phi. God forbid Princes should command Bishops in matters of religion. Have
you forgotten what Osius said to Constantius, Do not command us in this kind?


Theo. Osius and others were commanded by Constantius to condemn Athanasius
against all order of equity, and their certain knowledge of his innocence.
For Osius was present and president in the Council of Sardica where the cause
of Athanasius was fully debated by the consent of both Emperors East and West,
and his accusers proved to be wicked slaunderers; and in that case, he might
justly say to Constantius, Command us not in this kind (or in these things)
but learn (the truth of) them rather at our hands that were by, What Osius
meant by saying Co^mand^ us not, in this kind.
when these matters were narowly sifted and Athanasius clearly discharged from
all that could be said against him.

And what if Osius had not limited his words to these particular respects, as
in sight he does; shall one poor place, think you, bear down all the
proofs, examples and authorities that I have showed you to the contrary,
where religious and ancient Emperors appointed, prescribed, commanded Bishops
yea the chiefest Bishops in matters of doctrine and discipline?

Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 3. cap. 23. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 28. Eusebius. de
vita Constant. lib. 4. cap. 42. Socra. lib. 1. ca. 4.
Constantine prescribed the bishops what was profitable for the Church, and
commanded the Council of Tyrus to discuss the crimes objected to Athanasius,
and threatened to banish him if he failed to present himself before the
Synod, to teach him what it was to withstand the precept of the chief ruler
defending the truth. And upon complaint made by Athanasius against them he
sent for the whole Council with this commandment: You must all of you resort
hither to show the reason of your doings, and to give account how sincerely
and soundly you have judged and that before me, whom you shall not deny to
be Gods sincere minister: and when Arius should be restored, this was the
style that he used to Athanasius, knowing our pleasure, We charge you to suffer
such as will to return to the Church, and after commanded Alexander Bishop
of Constantinople to receive (Arius) to the communion. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 27.
Idem. lib. 1. cap. 38. Theodoret. li. 4. cap. 8.


Valentinian the elder rehearsing the Nicene faith in his Edict added, Our
power has commanded the same to be preached. And when the people of Millan
cried to have Ambrose for their Bishop though he were not yet baptized, the
same prince commanded he should be presently baptized and consecrated, Idem.
lib. 4. cap. 7.
notwithstanding the Canons were strong against it and S. Paul seems not
willing that a nouice should be a Bishop. 1. Tim. 3.


Gratian commanded the Arrian Bishops to be thrust from their Churches, Cod.
lib. 1. tit. 6.

Ne sanct. bapt. i^eretur.


and by vigor of his Princely Laws deprived the Bishop, that rebaptized, of
his Priestly function.

Theodosius the elder commanded the followers of his Edict, Cod. lib. 1. tit. 1.
Bishops and others, to be counted Christian Catholics, and for the rest that
believed otherwise, Ibidem. nullus
he said Propelli iubemus, we commanded them to be driven from their
Churches; and when Demophilus a Bishop refused to embrace the Nicene faith,
the Emperor in his own person replied, Socrat. lib. 5. ca. 7.
then I command thee to forgo thy Churches.

It well be seemed a religious Prince, Gregor. epist. li. 4. ca. 78. Legu^
Franciae lib. 1. ca. 76.
says Gregory, to command Bishops in such things. And Charles appointing
the Bishops what doctrine they should teach, says, This we charge and
enjoin you the more precisely because we know that false teachers shall come
in the later days. And for the reformation of certain abuses in the Church
he keeps this tenor of speech, Ibidem, cap. 71.
Know ye sacred fathers this must be forbidden in your Diocesses.

The rest of the Laws, Edicts and precepts of Godly Princes for causes
ecclesiastical, which I before alleged in no small number, do they not either
comprehend al men, and by consequent Bishops, or else directly and expressly
commanded Bishops by name? If those be not sufficient you may and shall
have more.

Theodosius the younger sent his letters to the Patriarch of Alexandria for the
second Council of Ephesus with these words: Chalced. Council. actio. epist.
Theodosii and Valentiniani ad Dioscorum.
We decree that the most holy Bishops meeting together, this vain doubt may
be discussed, and the true Catholic faith confirmed. Therefore Your holiness
bringing with you ten of the most reverend Metropolitanes that be within
your province, and ten other holy Bishops well accounted of for their
learning and conversation, shall hasten with all speed to meet (the rest) at
Ephesus by the first of August next: The Prince appoints what Bishops shall be
present at the Council.
no Bishop besides the foresaid troubling the sacred Synod. If any Bishop
fail to come to the place prefixed at the time appointed, he shall have no
excuse neither with GOD nor with us. As for Bishop Theodorete, whom we
command to attend at home on his own Church, we determine that he shall be
none of your assembly, unless the whole council think good to have him one.
But if any dissent, We command that the Synod sit without him, and dispatch
those things which we have appointed them.

Ibidem Imperatoris epist. ad eund^ Diosco. reuerendo.

The Prince makes the president of the Council. The Prince limiteth who shall
have voices in the Council.

Ibidem Imperatoris commonitorium ad Elpidum.


And in his second letters to the same Bishop, Because we suspect that some
of Nestorius favorers will do their best to be present at this Council,
therefore we think needful to advertise you and the whole Synod that not
only in respect of Theodorete, but of all others which have ought to do in
your Council, we give you the preeminence and chief authority. And those
that add or diminish any thing to or from the Nicene fathers and the fathers
since that assembled at Ephesus, We suffer them not to presume any thing in
this sacred Synod, but will have them subjected to your judgment, because we
have appointed this Synod for that purpose.

In the very same council he likewise commanded, that those Bishops which
not long before sat in judgment upon Eutiches should be present but silent
and give no voices (with the rest) as judges, but expect the common
determination of all the rest of the sacred fathers. And also commanded that
they should neither say neither do any thing in the sacred Council, until the
(right) faith were concluded.

Ibidem oration. Martiani ad Synodum.
Martian charged the 630. Bishops in the great Council of Chalcedon, that None
of them should dare dispute of the nativity of our Lord and Savior Christ
otherwise than the 318. fathers of Nice delivered.

Ibidem epist. Eusebius. ad Imperator.
Eusebius Bishop of Dorilaeum at the same time put up a supplication to
Martian and Valentinian the third against Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria
with these words, In most humble wise we beseech your Majesty's that you will
command the reverend Bishop Dioscorus to answer to those things that we lay to
his charge, for confirming a wicked heresy and deposing us unjustly directing
your sacred precept to ecumenical council of Bishops to hear the matter
between us and the said Dioscorus, and certify your Majesty's of the whole
cause, that you may do therein what shall please your Graces.

Nouel. Constit. 6. Maxima quidem.

These commaundeme^ts of Justinian bound the Bishop of Rome no less than other
Bishops.

Ibidem and hanc non pecunijs.


Justinian in his sixth Constitution prescribing what persons he will have made
Bishops, and how they shall be qualified and examined, before they be admitted,
threatens in sharp manner: He that does any thing besides this (which we have
appointed) both he that (is ordered) shall be deprived of his function, and he
that did order him, shall loose his Bishopric for offending this law.

The like punishment he sets down for Simonie. Though, says Justinian, he
have all other things that we before required, yet, if he procure a
Bishopric by money or money worth, Let him know that he shall be turned out
of his Bishoprike, and do his orderer this pleasure, that he also shall be
removed from his office and from the Clergy.

So for ordering and not examining that was objected against the Person: If one
come to be made a Bishop, and any man contradict and offer to lay somewhat to
his charge, Ibidem ^ quis aute^ talis.
Let him not be ordered, before such complaints be discussed. And if he that
should make him, hasten to consecration, after such contradiction without
examining the matter, Let him know that which he does shall be utterly void,
and also he that goes against our law shall be deprived of his Priestly
function, and he that ordered him without trial, shall likewise be removed
from his Episcopal dignity

So for absence from his church after he is Bishop. Ibidem and illud etiam
definimus.
This also we define, that no Bishop be so hardy as to absent himself from
his Church above one whole year. If he be away longer than a year, let the
Patriarch of that region cite him orderly to return: If he continue
disobedient, let him be clean expelled from the sacred number of Bishops.

And generally for all matters comprised in that constitution; Ibidem sed neque
effusas.

The prince commands the whole clergy, Patriarks, Metropolitanes, Bishops
and the rest whatsoever, to observe his ecclesiastical laws.


The things which we have decreed for the preservation of ecclesiastical order
and state agreeable to the tenor and prescript of the sacred rules, let the
most holy Patriarchs of every Province, the Metropolitanes and the rest of the
most reverend Bishops and Clerks see that they keep for ever hereafter sure
and inviolable; the punishment to him that transgresses these things, shall be
to be severed quite from God, and excluded from his Priestly degree.

In his sixteen constitution, commanding Clerks to be removed from one Church
to an other till the just number which he decreed were supplied in every
Church, he writes to the Patriarch of Constantinople in this wise. Nouel.
constit. 16. ad finem.
Your blessedness shall endeavor to put in execution the things which we have
thought decent for the profit of the sacred and holy Churches. And if any
thing be attempted to the contrary, let him assure himself, that durst enter
orders against this our law, that it do him no good.

In his 57 Constitution prohibiting the sacred mysteries to be celebrated in
private Chapels; Constit. 57.
these things, says he, we command to the most holy Archbishop and universal
Patriarch of this City.

In his 123 Constitution you shall find examples enough, of his Princely
prohibitions and commandments to Bishops for matters concerning the regiment
of the Church.

For first appointing how Bishops shall be chosen, and that the Person
elected shall before his admission deliver a confession of the true faith
subscribed with his own hand, and recite the prayers used in the sacred
communion and holy Baptism, and swear that he neither has given nor
promised, nor will give any thing to those that elected him, nor to him that
orders him, nor to any other the rather to attain his ordering, he adds;
Constit. 123. exigatur autem prius.

These laws. exte^ded to all provinces and patriarchs.

Ibidem, prae omnibus autem illud.


If any be made Bishope against this observation, as well he shall be cast out
of his Bishoprike as the other that presumed to create him against this form
shall be severed one year from the sacred ministry and shall forfeit all his
goods to the Church where he is Bishop. But if any man consecrate one that is
accused before he examine the matter, both he that is made and he that did
make him shall be deprived of their episcopal functions. Above al things This
we decree to be kept that no man be made a Bishop by rewards. And therefore as
well he that gives, as he that takes, and he that would be the means to
work it, shall be degraded.

Ibidem interdicimus autem. Ibidem quis a vero.
And so going on with Diverse ecclesiastical Chapters he says, We forbid the
Bishops to leave their Churches, and to travel into other coasts. And we
command that in every Province there be yearly kept a Synod, where causes of
faith and doubts concerning the Canons and administration of ecclesiastical
things, Synodes called for ecclesiastical causes were tied to the Laws
imperial.

Ibidem C. ad haec iubemus.

All Bishops commanded by the Prince. Ibidem Insuper interdicimus.

Eadem constit. omnibus vero epis.

Unjust excommunication punished by the Princes laws.

Eadem constit. praeterea si qui.

The Courts and consistories of all Bishops, Archbishops and patriarks limited
as well to the Princes laws as to the Canons.


as also touching Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and other Clerks and Rulers of
Monasteries and Moncks either for their lives or other things needing
reformation shall be handled; and in convenient manner examined and corrected
according to the sacred Canons and OUR (imperial) LAWS.

Besides we command that all Bishops and Priests do celebrate the sacred
oblation and prayers in the holy Baptism, not secretly but with a loud voice,
so as the faithful people may hear: the religious Priests (and Bishops)
knowing that if they neglect any of these things they shall answer for it in
the dreadful judgment of the great GOD and our Savior Christ, neither will
we understanding thereof pass it over or leave it unpunished.

We also forbid the most religious Bishops, Priests, and all other Clerks to
play at tables or to company with such gamsters or to be present at
spectacles. If any of them offend in this point, we command that he be
suspended from his function for three years.

Likewise we forbid all Bishops and Priests to separate any man from the
communion til a cause be showed for which the Canons will it to be done. If any
man separate an other from the communion against this law, the party that is
grieved unjustly shall be absolved and received to the communion by an higher
Priest: And he that durst excommunicate unjustly shall be put from the
communion by the Bishop that is (next) above him as long as it seems good to
(that superior).

Moreover if the Bishops of the same Synod have any controversy between them
touching either ecclesiastical right or causes, first their Metropolitan with
two other Bishops of the same Synod shall determine the matter. And if either
part find fault with that judgment, then shall the Patriarch of that Province
hear the cause and define that which is consonant to the canons ecclesiastical
and our laws, neither part having leave to co^tradict his sentence. If a
Clerk or any other of what cause soever, appeal from a Bishop, first the
Metropolitan shall judge the matter according to the sacred canons and our
laws. If either side mislike, the cause shall deuolue to the Patriarch of the
Province, No appeal from the Patriark.
and he shall end it by the direction of the Canons and our laws.

Clerks we permit none to be made except they be lettered, of a right faith
and honest conversation; Eadem constit. Clericos aute^.
and have neither Concubine nor bastardes; but such as either be single men or
had or have one lawful wife and her the first, no widow, nor divorced woman,
nor otherwise interdicted by the laws or Canons. A Priest we will not have
made under the age of five and thirty, neither a Deacon or Subdeacon under the
age of five and twenty, neither a Reader under eighteen: A woman shall not
be admitted to serve the Church that is under forty, or has been twice
married.

Many skore precepts besides these that I reckon shall you find in that
constitution touching persons and causes ecclesiastical with these words,
Volumus, sancimus, iubemus: We will, decree, command, and other verbes
equivalent, prescribing directly to Bishops what order and course they shall
keep for the seemly regiment of Christ's Church.

By the commandment of Justinius uncle to Justinian the Council of Chalcedon
was preached (and established) through the most holy Churches: Euagrius. lib.
4. cap. 9.

Idem li. 5. ca. 6.


And by the commandment of (an other) Justinius (his nephew) was Gregory
called from Mount Sina to be chief Bishop (of Antioch) next after Anastasius
whom the Prince removed from his seat for wasting the Church treasures. Idem
lib. 5. ca. 5.


Leo the successor and Anthemius that married the daughter of Martian gave forth
this commandment: Cod. lib. 1. tit. 3. de epist. and cleri, C. si quenquam.
Let no man be made a Bishop for entreaty or for money. If any man be detected
to have gotten the seat of a bishop by rewards or to have taken any thing for
the electing or ordering of others, let him be accused as for a public crime
and an offense committed against the state, and repelled from his priestly
degree. And we adiudge him not only to be deprived for ever of that honor, but
also to be condemned to perpetual infamy.

And the same princes by their Edict more general, Cod. lib. 1. tit. 2. de
sacrosactis ecclesiis C. decernimus.
We decree, say they, that those things which were in sort done against the
Lord himself of true religion, being abrogated and utterly abolished, al
things be restoared again to their former condition and order in which they
were established before our times, as well touching the points of christian
faith, as touching the state of the most sacred churches, and Martyrs chapels;
Al innouations in the time of this tyranny against the holy churches, and
their reverend bishops concerning the right of their Episcopal creations, the
deposing of any Bishop during those times, their prerogative to sit before
others within Council or without the privileges of Metropolitanes and
Patriarks (al such innouations we say) repealed, Let the grants and
CONSTITVTIONS of the godly Princes before us, and likewise ours touching
churches, chapels of Martyrs, Bishops, Clerks, and Monks be kept inviolable.

Much more might be said, but this shall suffice. You bring us one seely
mistaken authority where Constantius commanding against right and truth in a
Bishops cause was reproved; we bring you, if you view the precedents well,
an hundred express places and above, that ancient and religious princes
commanded Bishops and Councels in matters of doctrine and discipline, and
were not reproved, but honored and obeyed in the Church of God. Now choose
whether you will show your selves so void of al religion and reason, Osius
words if they were not diversely answered by us, may not control the perpetual
practice of Christ's Church.
that you will prefer a single and solitary text, and the same so many ways
answered by us, before the public and perpetual practice of the primative
Church; or else acknowledge with us that Princes for truth did and might
command Bishops and prevent and punish in them as well errors in faith as
other ecclesiastical crimes and disorders.


Phi. All this I may grant, and yet your supremacy will not follow.


Theo. Never tell us what you may do, but what you will do. Deny the
premises if you dare: or the consequent, if you can.


Phi. I grant Princes may command Bishops, but not what they list; which
is your opinion.


Theo. The cunning of the papists in this point is either to belie our
doctrine, or to slip themselves from the question.
If you may be the reporter of our doctrines we shall defend many mad
positions, leave your malicious and odious slanders, we maintain no such
opinion.


Phi. What do you then?


Theo. If you did not range thus besides all order and truth, you should
perceive what we do: but when we come to conclude, you slide from the matter
and fall to your wonted outfacing and wrangling.


Phi. Do I not answer directly to that which you ask?


Theo. For a while you do, but when we come to touch the quick, you start
aside and busy the reader with other quarrels. Forbear that till we come to
the sifting of your absurdities, and then take your fill. In the mean time
suffer us to say what we defend, and to know what you assent unto, that the
difference betwixt our opinions may be rightly conceived, and the proofs of
either part duly considered.


Phi. With a good will.


Theo. The sum and effect of the former allegations and authorities for the
Princes power.
Do you then (...) for a matter fully proved that ancient kings and Christian
Emperors (...) ^^^maund for truth, as well Priest as people; and that they
chiefly did, and iu^^ly might enterpose their royal power and care for the
reformation and correction of errors in faith, abuses in discipline, disorders
in life, and all other ecclesiastical enormities, as appears plainly by the
public laws and acts of Constantine, Theodosius, Justinian, Charles,
Lodouike, Lotharius and other no less Godly than worthy Governors? If the
places which I have brought import not so much, refell the particulars, I will
be of your mind: if they do, why stand you so doubtful as loathe to confess,
and yet not able to gainesay the proofs?


Phi. For truth I know Princes have commanded as well Bishops, as others,
and vy their Princely power established and preserved the faith and Canons of
Christ's Church.


Theo. And this the sacred Scriptures, the learned fathers, the stories
ecclesiastical, the laws and monuments of Catholic Princes in the primative
church of Christ for eight hundred and fifty years do fairly warrant. Or if
they do not, disprove them.



Phi. They do.


Theo. And the places that prove this, are both innumerable and inexpugnable?


Phi. The proofs for this point be pregnant euough.


Theo. And this is no way repugnant to probability, possibility, reason or
nature?


Phi. It is not.


Theo. You will not eat these words when you come to the purpose?


Phi. I will not.


Theo. And if you were to be sworn on a book, do you believe in your
conscience this which you say to be true?


Phi. I do.


Theo. Then here I will stay.


Phi. Have I not answered directly to your questions?


Theo. You have; and we urge you no farther.


Phi. What are you the nearer?


Theo. That shall you now see. You make shameful outcries at the power which
we give to Princes to be supreme Governors of their Realms in all things and
causes, as well ecclesiastical as temporal, Apolog. cap. 1.
as A thing improbable, unreasonable, unnatural, impossible, reproueable by
all divine and humane learning, which never king, much less Queen Christian
nor heathen, Catholic nor heretic in this Realm, or in all the world
besides, before our age did challenge, or accept: You heap authorities and
absurdities, The Jesuits in their Apology, for all their vaunts never come
near the princes power which we defend.
and terrify the simple with words and crakes of the largest life, as if the
doctrine were so barbarous and monsterous that heathen and profane men would
abhor it; and when the bottom of your skill is seen and the pride of your
tongues spent, notwithstanding your often and ioyly profers, you never so much
as come near the question.


Phi. Will you make us believe that?


Theo. Mark the points that we teach, and see how wide you be from refuting
that which we defend. We say Princes only be Governors, that is, higher
powers ordained of God and bearing the sword with lawful and public authority
to command for truth; The Princes authority as we defend it.
to prohibit and with the sword punish errors and al other ecclesiastical
disorders as well as temporal, within their Realms. This we prove, this you
grant to be good and sound doctrine. Of this then there is no question
betwixt us.

Secondly, we teach, that as all their subjects, Bishops and others must
obey them commanding that which is good in matters of religion, and endure them
with patience when they take part with error, so they, their Scepters and
swords be not subject to the Popes tribunal, neither has he by the law of
God, The Princes supremacy as we maintain it.
or by the Canons of the Church any power or preeminence to reuerse their
doings and depose their persons, but this is a wicked and arrogant usurpation
lately crept into the West parts of Europe since the Bishops of Rome exalted
themselves above all that is called God; and for this cause we confess Princes
within their own regiments to be SVPREME, that is not under the Popes
jurisdiction, neither to be commanded, nor displaced at his pleasure, but to
be reserved to the righteous and Sovereign judgment of God, who will
syncerely judge and severely punish both Popes and Princes if they bolster or
suffer any kind of Impiety within their dominions.

This is the very point that is in question betwixt us, Neither of these points
touched in the Apolog.
of which in your whole Apology you speak not one word, but cunningly shift
your hands of it, knowing your selves not able to justify your wicked
assertion. And lest the reader should distrust your silence in that behalf,
you follow the word supreme with huy and cry, as if God were highly
dishonored and the Church of Christ robbed of her right and inheritance,
because the Pope may not set his feet in Princes necks and be Lord Paramount
of all earthly states and kingdoms.


Phi. Do we mistake your meaning, or do you rather pull in your horns, when
you see your selves compassed round with so many grolie and sensible
absurdities? The absurdities which the Jesuits muster against the Princes
supremacy.

Apolog. cap. 4. sect. 21.

1. Cor. 14. 1. Tim. 2.





Theo. What one inconvenience can you fasten on us for teaching this doctrine?


Phi. A thousand.


Theo. You be better at craking than concluding. Prove but one and spare the
rest.


Phi. This Sovereignty gives power to the Queen to confer that to others
(as to the Priests and Bishops, to preach, minister Sacraments, have cure of
souls, and such like) which she neither has, nor can have nor do, her
self. It gives her that may neither preach nor speak in public of matters
of religion, to do that which is much more, even to prescribe by her self or
her deputies or Laws authorized only by her, to the preachers what to preach,
which way to worship and serve God, how and in what form to minister the
Sacraments, to punish and deprive, teach and correct them, and generally to
prescribe and appoint which way she will be governed in soul.

Sect. 22.
It makes the body above the soul, the temporal regiment above the
spiritual, the earthly kingdom^ above Christ's body mystical. It makes the
sheep above the Pastor: It gives her power to command them, whom and wherein
she is bound to obey: It gives power to the subject to be judge of the Judges,
yea and of God himself, as S. Cyprian speaks: Epist. 55.
It makes her free from Ecclesiastical discipline, from which no true child
of Gods family is exempted.

Sect. 23.
It derogateth from Christ's Priesthood, which both in his own person, and in
the Church, is above his kingly dignity. It divides (which is a matter of
much importance) the state of the Catholic Church and the holy communion or
society of all Christian men in the same, August. contra Gaudentij epist. lib.
2. Cap. 25.
into as many parts not communicant one with on other, nor holding one of an
other, as there be worldly kingdoms differing by customs, Laws and manners,
each from other, which is of most pernicious sequel, and against the very
native quality of the most perfect conjunction, society, unity, and
intercourse of the whole Church and every Province and person thereof together.
It opens the gappe to all kind of divisions, schisms, sects and disorders.

Sect. 24.
It makes all Christian Bishops, Priests, and what other soever borne out of
the Realm, forainers and usurpers in all jurisdiction Ecclesiastical toward
us: and there can be no jurisdiction over English men's souls, but prooceeding
and depending of her sovereign right therein. Which is directly against
Christ's express commandment and commission given to Peter first, and then
to all the Apostles of preaching, baptizing, remitting, retayning, binding and
loosing, over all the world, without difference of temporal state, or
dependence of any mortal Prince therein.

Sect. 25.
It keeps the Realm from obedience to general Councels, which have been or
shall be gathered in foreign Countries. It takes away al convenient means of
gathering, holding, or executing any (...) Councels and their decrees, as
appeared by refusing to come to the late Council of Trent, notwithstanding the
Popes messengers, and letters of other great Princes, which requested and
invited them to the same. When a Realm or Prince is in error, it takes away
all means of reducing them to the truth again: no subjection being
acknowledged to Councels or Tribunals abroad, all other Bishops, Patriarchs,
Apostles, Christ and all (because they were and be forrainers) not having
jurisdiction nor sufficient authority to define against English Sectaries and
errors. Finally if this jurisdiction spiritual be always of right a sequel
of the Crown and scepter of all Kings, assuredly Christ nor none of his
Apostles could otherwise enter to convert Countries, preach, and exercise
jurisdiction spiritual, without Caesar's and others the Kings of the Countries
license and delegation.


Theo. Upon what part of our doctrine infer you these absurdities?


Phi. Upon the supremacy wherewith you flatter Princes. For all these things
be consequent to the princes ecclesiastical sovereignty.


Theo. You must tell us how. Their absurdities be grounded on their own
dreams, not on our doctrine.



Phi. See you not that?


Theo. Surely not I. There be two parts of our assertion as I showed you
before: the first auouching that Princes may command for truth and abolish
error: the next that Princes be supreme, that is, not subject to the Popes
judicial process to be cited, suspended, deposed at his beck: Upon one of
these twain, if you reason against us, must your absurdities be grounded.

The first you can not impugn, To this that Princes may command for truth,
no absurdity can be consequent.
but you must therewith impugn the Scriptures, the best and most famous
Princes of Christendom, the Church of God it self, which for eight hundred
years and upward embraced and obeyed the Laws and Edicts of religious
Princes commanding for truth. And if you think you may say and unsay with a
breath, and refell that now as absurd which I before proved and you yielded to
be sound and good doctrine, take either of our positions rightly understood
for your antecedent, and mark how ioyntlesse and senseless the sequeles be,
that you set down for inevitable consequents.

When Princes command for truth, When Princes command that which is good it
is Christ and no man else that commands by their mouths.

Epist. 166. Ibidem.


it is evident they command the self same thing that God commands, or
rather as S. Augustine plainly declares God himself commands by their
hearts, that are in his hands, the things which no man should refuse.
Emperors, says he, command the self same thing that Christ commands:
for when they command that which is good, it is Christ and no man else that
commands by them. Again, Mark, says he, with how manifest truth God
himself speaks by the Princes heart which is in his hand, even in this
law, which you complain to be made against you. And therefore he
concludes, Ibidem.
when Princes command for truth, Whosoever neglects (their commandment)
shall have no part with God for not doing that which TRVETH BY THE KINGS HEART
COMMAVNDED HIM TO DO.

If you build your absurdities upon the first part of our doctrine, then must
you thus conclude. When God commands by the Princes heart, that which is good
in matters of religion, The body is above the soul, the sheep above the
Pastor, the subject is judge of the Judges, yea of God himself, and
consequently, Neither Christ, neither any of his Apostles could enter to
convert Countries, preach and exercise jurisdiction spiritual without Caesar's
license and delegation. Well, your Rhetorike may beguile fools, sure your
Logike will never enforce wise men to regard your conclusions.


Phi. We make no such arguments.


Theo. You must make these or worse. The first part of our assertion is that
Princes be Gods servants and ministers appointed to bear the sword with full
commission to command what God commands, and to prohibit what God
prohibiteth as well in matters pertaining to religion as Civil justice. Their
absurdities must be inferred upon our assertion, if they bring them against us.
You infer upon us that we make The body above the soul, the temporal
regiment above the spiritual, the earthly kingdom above Christ's body
mystical, the sheep above the Pastor, the subject to be judge of the Judges,
yea of God himself, with many like childish and frivolous consequents. Let
your own favorers be judges in this case, whether we be absurd in affirming
that we do, or you more absurd in refelling us as you do.

May not Christ appoint as well as the Pope what Princes shall command.
If it be no absurdity with you for princes to command that which the Pope
appoints them, as your selves defend, that is your opinion; what
inconvenience can it be for Princes to command that which Christ the
Sovereign Lord and head of the Church commands: which is all the power
that we give to Princes, notwithstanding your feigned and false reports in this
slanderous libell of yours to the contrary?


Phi. To command that which God commands is piety and no absurdity.
We never denied but Princes might command that which God commands; and in
so doing they be rather to be commended for their piety than to be charged
with any absurdity.


Theo. And we never affirmed that Princes might command that which God
forbids, or prohibit that which God commands. And therefore you must
seek out some others whom you may pursue with your absurdities, they touch no
part of our doctrine.


Phi. They show what an absurd thing it is for temporal Princes to challenge
supreme power over Christ's Church in causes of religion.


Theo. If you take the word supreme, as it ever was and is defended by us, to
make Princes free from the wrongful and usurped jurisdiction which the Pope
claims over them, Supreme, as we profess it, has no absurdity consequent
to it.
your illations have as little strength and truth as the former: for what fond
and untoward reasons be these? If the Pope may not depose Princes and
discharge their subjects from all obedience, ergo we give Power to the Queen
to prescribe to the Preachers what to preach, which way to worship and serve
God, how and in what form to minister the Sacraments, to punish and deprive,
teach and correct them, and generally to prescribe and appoint which way she
will be governed in soul: ergo, we make her free from ecclesiastical
discipline, we derogate from Christ's Priesthood, and open the gap to all
kind of divisions, schisms, sects and disorders: ergo, there can be no
jurisdiction over English men's souls but proceeding and depending of her: we
keep the Realm from obedience to general Councels, and take away all means
of reducing the Realm and Prince, when they be in error, to the truth
again, with many such loose and unsavory sequences.


Phi. If the Prince be supreme, This misconstering of supreme is the ground of
all their absurdities.
she may do what she list in all matters of religion and Ecclesiastical
regiment, and so these absurdities follow very directly upon that assertion of
yours.


Theo. That Princes may do what they list in matters of religion and the
regiment of the Church, is neither coherent nor consequent to our opinion, but
a wicked and wily pretense of yours, to cause men that can not so well discern
of your sophismes to distrust our doctrine as false and absurd, and in the
mean time to convey your selves away as it were in a mist unespied. And as
for the words supreme governor, which you wring and wrest to that purpose,
take the true construction of them, as the oath imports and we profess them,
and infer duly but one of your absurdities upon them, we yield you the rest.


Phi. What, not one?


Theo. No, not one, descend to the specialties when you will.


Phi. It gives power to the Queen to confer that to others, Apol. cap. 4.
Sect. 21.
which she neither has, nor can have, nor do her self, as to the Priests
and Bishops to preach, minister the Sacraments, have cure of souls, and such
like.


Theo. It gives no such power to the Queen as you speak of. Bishops have
their authority to preach and minister the Sacraments, not from the Prince,
but from Christ himself. Mat. 28.
Go teach all nations, baptising them, and so forth; only the Prince gives
them public liberty without let or disturbance to do that which Christ
commands. If you see no difference between the commission which Christ
gives unto Bishops, Princes give no commission but a permission and free
liberty without let to the ministers of the word and Sacraments.
and the permission whereby Princes suffer and incite them with peace and
praise to do their duties, your learning is not so great as you would make the
world believe it is. For what a foolish collection is this, The Prince
permits those that are sent of Christ to preach and administer the
Sacraments, ergo the Prince conferreth that power or function to them? You
might as well conclude, The Prince permits men to live and breath, ergo the
Prince conferreth life and breath to the^. Or, the Prince permits her
Subjects to believe in God and relieve each others, ergo the Prince conferreth
faith and charity to them.


Phi. It gives her to do that which is more, even to prescribe by her self,
or her deputies, Apolog. cap. 4. Sect. 21.
or laws authorized only by her self, which way to worship and serve God,
how and in what form to minister the Sacraments, to punish and deprive, teach
and correct them, and generally to prescribe and appoint which way she will be
governed in soul. God has already by his law prescribed which way he will be
served: that Princes may and must command in their realms though the Pope say
nay.



Theo. That Princes may prescribe what faith they list, what service of God
they please, what form of administering the Sacraments they think best, is no
part of our thought, nor point of our doctrine: And yet that Princes may by
their laws prescribe the christian faith to be preached, the right service of
God in spirit and truth to be used, the Sacraments to be ministered according to
the Lords institution, this is no absurdity in us to defend, but impiety
rather in you to withstand. And that Princes may punish both Bishops and
others for heresy, dissension and all kind of iniquity, by banishing and
commanding them to be removed from their Churches, which you call depriving,
ca^ not now be counted absurd, unless you reject ye stories of the church and
laws of christian Princes, which I before cited, as absurd. For there shall
you find that Emperors by their Laws and Edictes have commanded Bishops to
be iudicially deprived by other bishops and actually displaced by their
temporal Magistrates, as well for erroneous teaching as vicious living.


Phi. Princes be not supreme to do what they list in religion, but only free
from the Popes jurisdiction.

The fear of God and not the practices of Popes must keep Princes from doing
evil.


When you give princes supreme power in matters of religion, you give the^ leave
to do what they lift.


The. If you affirm that of us, your report is utterly untrue: if you infer it
upon us, your reason is very ridiculous. For what a fond illation is this?
Princes be supreme, that is not subject to the Popes jurisdiction, ergo princes
may lawfully do what they will.


Phi. We say not lawfully, but if there be none to co^trole the^, none can let
the^ to do what they list.


The. The dreadful judgments of God, not the lewd practices of Popes must
bridle Princes from doing evil; If they fear not a revenger in heaven, whom
they can not escape; they will never regard a conspirator in earth, whom they
may soon prevent: and yet we dispute not what tyra^ts de facto will do, but
what godly Princes of duty should, of right may do. This is it that we seek
for, and therefore you must conclude this or nothing.


Phi. You give the^ authority to make laws and punish for religion without
any mention of truth or error. The other touches our duty to the Prince,
and not the Princes duty unto God.



The. The oath expresses not their duty to God, but ours to the^, and as they
must be obeyed when they ioin with truth, so must they be endured when they fall
into error, which side soever they take, either obedience to their wills, or
submissio^ to their swords is their due by Gods law, and that is al which our
oath exacteth. And yet when we profess the^ to be governors, that word
restraineeh the^ from their own lusts, and refers the^ to Gods ordinance.
For they which resist God, impugn the truth, oppress the righteous, assist
error and favor impiety, be no governors under God as all princes oughtto be,
but tyrants against God; not bearers but wilful abusers of the sword which God
has appointed for the punishment of evil doers and for the praise of them
that do well.

And this, though it be not expressed, yet is it ever employed in the very
scepters, swords and thrones of princes. For dominion, power and majesty belong
of right to god alone and are by him imparted to Princes, The Prince bears
the sword under and not above God.
with this condition and to this end that they should reign under him not over
him, command for him not against him, be honored and obeyed after him not
before him; and therefore this quarrel sauoreth not of ignorance but of
malice, when you say we give Princes power to do what they will in matters
pertaining to God and his service. We reject and detest that sinful assertion
more than you do. In deed we say that the Pope may not pull Princes crowns
from their heads, nor seek to master them with contriuing rebellions and
treasons against them, whiles he pretends to depose them. In this only
sense we defend them to be supreme, that is not at liberty to do what they
lift, without regard of truth or right, but without superior on earth to
repress them with violent means and to take their kingdoms from them.


Phi. Apolog. cap. 4. Sect. 22.
It makes the body above the soul, the temporal regiment above the
spiritual, the earthly kingdom above Christ's mystical body. It makes the
sheep above the Pastor; it gives her power to command them, whom and
wherein she is bound to obey. It gives power to the subject to be judge of the
judges, yea and of God himself, as S. Cyprian speaks. Epist. 55.



Theo. I am loath to bring you out of love with your own conceits, otherwise I
never saw more boldness and less soundnes in any man. If we did prefer
earthly things before heavenly, you might justly charge us that we set the body
above the soul: but between Princes and Priests that comparison is foolish,
except you think Priests to be without bodies, and Princes without souls,
which were a merry devise.

The spiritual regiment which Christ has over the faithful in his Church is
infinitely before the temporal regiment of Princes over their subjects. The
spiritual regiment of the soul is properly Christ's and not the piests.
But if by this you would infer that good Princes may not punish evil
Priests, you deface godliness and truth in Princes as temporal, and exact
wickedness and error in Priests as spiritual, which is more than absurd.

As for the right functions of Preachers and Princes, The Preachers function
excels the Princes in perfection and comfort, but not in power to command
or means to compel.
if that be the matter you speak of, for you speak so doubtfully that we
can gather no certainty what you mean, know you that as in spiritual
perfection and consolation the Preacher excels the Prince by many decrees,
God having appointed Preachers not Princes to be the sowers of his seed,
messenges of his grace, stewardes of his mysteries: so for external power and
authority to compel and punish, which is the point that we stand on, God
has preferred the Prince before the Priest, so long as the Prince commands
that which God allows. The same god forces by the Princes sword that
teaches by the preachers mouth.
And in this case, we make not temporal above spiritual, as you trick it
with terms: but avouch that the same God, who teaches the simple and leads
the willing by the Preachers mouth; drives the negligent, and forces the
froward by the Princes sword, which himself, that is a John. 3.
spirit and Heb. 12. The kingdom is not above the Church though the Prince
punish wicked priests.
the father of spirits, has ordained to that end.

The mystical body of Christ which is his church, contains not only Prists
and bishops but all the faithful, and in heavenly graces and inward virtues
far exceeds all earthly kingdoms, and yet has God himself authorized the
sword on earth in Princes hands to be keepers of his truth and clensers of his
Church, that is with lawful force to remove such as impugn the faith, and
with publik authorit^ to punish those that defile the Church of God with their
shameless manners, be they Priests or People; and this does not place earthly
kingdoms above the Church, but prepare them as aids and defenses for the
Church, which is the right end of all earthly States, and was the first cause
why God erected them.

Though the sheep may not rule their sheepeheards, The true sheepeheard is
only Christ^ the rest are his servants and not the owners of the sheep.
yet give them leave to discern strangers and fly from thieves and murderers,
and give the great and 1. Pet. 5.
Archpastor that is in heaven leave to guard his flock not only with watchmen
but also with armed men, that if the greediness and hardiness of the wolves
be such that they fear not the clamours of Preachers, at least they may
shrink for the terrors of Princes. And this is no such absurdity as you make
it, Princes in their vocation be shepherds and bear the staff to compel
where the voice will not serve.

1. Chron. 11. Psalm. 78.


that Princes should serve the true sheepeheard, Christ Jesus, by turning their
swords against those raueners and spoylers which under the color and show of
feeding would kill the fattest, and gorge themselves with the fairest of
Christ's flock: Yea Princes in their sort be sheepeheardes as well as Bishops;
in that they bear the sword under God, to compel and punish such as the
gentle persuasion of the Preacher can not move; and for that cause God said to
David, Thou shall feed my people Israel: and David makes this report of
himself, So he fed them according to the simplicity of his heart, and guided
them by the discretion of his hands.

The Prince is bound to obey the preachers word, if he speak truth and so is
the Preacher bound to obey the Princes Laws, if they be good.

1. These. 4.


As Princes are bound to hear preachers directing them unto truth because the
words of God are in their mouths, and he that despises those things
despises not man but God: so likewise are Preachers bound to obey Princes
commanding for truth, and who so neglects (that commandment of theirs) shall
have no part with God, for not doing that which truth by the kings heart
commanded him. And the Princes obedience to be due not to Preachers persons or
pleasures, but their message delivered them by God the Lord and Ruler of all
Princes, appears by this, that Princes may lawfully punish the preachers if
they falsify the word of truth, or shame their calling with their disordered
living.

Aug. Epist 166.

Princes be no judges of Religion.


That Princes be judges of Religion we never said it nor thought it, much less
that they be judges of God himself; this argues rather your impudency in
reporting than our ignorance in not affirming it. Gods name be blessed we know
what difference there is and ought to be between God and man as well as you:
but such is the badnesse of your cause, and blindness of your hearts, that you
must and will rather childishly quarrel and wittingly belie the truth, than
come to a fair and even trial.

S. Cyprians words alleged without his meaning.

Cypr. lib. 1. Ep. 3


S. Cyprian has some such words, but no such meaning as you allege. He says
when a Bishop is orderly chosen in any Church, he that After the divine
(allowance or) judgment, after the suffrages of the people, after the consent
(and liking) of other Bishops, erecteth a second in the same Church against
him, makes himself now the Controler and Judge not of the Bishop, but of God,
which we believe to be very true; but how does this prove that Christian
magistrates may not displace wicked and unworthy Bishops for their iustes
deserts, which is our question?

And as Cyprian in his sense is not against us, so Cyprian in our case is
clear against you. Cyprian allowed the people to reject their Bishop, if he
were unworthy.

Lib. 1. Epist. 4.


For when as yet there were no Princes Christened, that with public authority
might remove ungodly Bishops, Cyprian assures us that the people might
lawfully sever themselves from a wicked Bishop and elect an other. His words
be these: Therefore the (flock or) people obeying the Lords precepts, and
fearing God, ought to separate themselves from a sinful Bishop, and not to
participate with the sacrifices of a sacrilegious Priest, whereas they chiefly
have power to chose worthy Bishops, and to reject unworthy, persuading and
encouraging the people to go forward in that their attempt, notwithstanding
the Bishop of Rome took stitch with the party deposed, and wrote letters for
his restitution; of the which Cyprian makes no great account, as you may see
by his words that follow. Cypr. lib. 1. ep. 4. Though the Bishop of Rome took
his part.

Apolog. cap. 4. Sect. 22.

The Prince not free from Christ's Precepts.

Princes must hear the word and receive the Sacraments in such sort as God has
appointed.

The Preacher is prescribed how he shall minister the Sacraments, not how he
shall depose Princes.

We deny this argument.


Neither is (the Bishop of Rome) so much to be blamed that was deceived through
negligence, as this man to be detested that fraudulently deceived him. And
though Basilides could circumuent men, yet can he not beguile God.


Phi. It makes her free from Ecclesiastical discipline, from which no true
child of Gods family is exempted.


Theo. It makes her free from the Popes Bulls and decretals, but not from the
Laws and Precepts of Christ, which is the true discipline of Gods children.
Touching the regiment of their own persons and lives Princes owe the very
same reverence and obedience to the word and Sacraments that every private man
does: and if any Prince would be baptized, or approach to the Lords table with
manifest show of unbelief or irrepentance, the minister is bound freely to
speak, and rather to lay down his life at the Princes feet, than to let the
king of Kings be provoked, the mysteries defiled, his own soul and the
Princes endangered, for lack of often and earnest admonition.


Phi. I am glad you grant that Princes may be excommunicated: for that proves
Priests to be their superiors and overthrows quite their supremacy.


Theo. You reason very profoundly. The servants of God may not receive any
mortal man to the divine mysteries except he bring with him a right faith in
God and an inward sorrow for his former sins, ergo the Pope may depose
Princes, and set their subjects in open field against them to thrust them
from their thrones.


Phi. We reason not so, but we say, Priests may excommunicate Princes, ergo
they be superiors to Princes.


Theo. I speak of not admitting Princes to the Sacraments, but with those
conditions that God requires of all Christian men without respect of States or
persons, and you by and by leap to excommunication, Excommunication made a
wrest to lift Princes out of their seats.
which word you egerly sease on, not for any meaning you have to guide Princes
right lest they provoke the wrath of God to their everlasting destruction by
the contempt of his graces, but for a cunning to defeat them of their crowns
by your indirect and ungodly devises. For first you will excommunicate them;
that is you will have no communion with them in any thing spiritual or
temporal; next you descend from not communicating with the^, to not obeying
them; and lastly from not obeying, to open rebelling against them, and placing
others in their steedes. And thus when Princes displease you, you never leave
them till with this wreath of excommunication, you wring their Scepters out of
their hands. But if you look better about you, you shall find great
difference between not delivering them the sacred mysteries of God except they
repent and believe the Gospel, and your devilish conspiracy to deny them all
obedience, and with armed violence to take their swords from them: but thereof
more hereafter.

In the mean time your argument is very foolish: Priests must not deliver the
Sacraments but on such conditions as God has limited, ergo Priests be
superior to Princes. You might have concluded, ergo God is superior to them
both, in that he prescribes how the one shall deliver and the other take the
Seals of his grace: but for the Priest no such illation can be made. For were
you Porter in any Princes palace, and commanded that no man Noble nor other
should enter the Court with weapon, would you thence conclude your self
superior to all the Nobles and counselors of the Land, The servant must not
think himself superior to all that his master may command.
because you might not suffer the^ to come within the gates, except they first
lay their swords aside; or would you rather excuse your self, that the Princes
precept being streit and you a servant, you could not choose but do your
duty, and put them in mind of your Lord and masters pleasure.


Phi. Our case is not like.


The. You say truth. You have not so much reason to make Priests superior to
Princes, as this Officer has to prefer himself before all other persons.
Princes have soueraign power over the goods, lives and bodies of Priests,
Nobles have not over the meanest attendant in the Princes Court: Princes must
be obeyed or endured with meekness and reverence offer they never so hard
dealing to their Preachers and Pastors: In vain seek they reasons to make
the Priest superior to the Prince, whom God himself has made subject to the
Prince.
That submission no man owes to any subject be he never so Noble. And
therefore every servant in the Princes house, has better cause to advance
himself before all the Nobles of the Realm, than you have to set the Priest
above the Prince whom God himself has pronounced superior to the Priests,
and to whom he will have every soul, be they Monks, Priests, or Bishops,
to be subject with all submission and duty: Much less is this a warrant for
you to depose Princes, and to pursue them with arms against the precepts of
God, against the general and continual obedience and order of Christ's Church,
as you shall perceive in place where: for this present go on with your absurd
lies, I should have said absurdities.


Phi. It derogateth from Christ's Priesthood which both in his own person, and
in the Church is above his kingly dignity. Apol. cap. 4. Sect. 23.



Theo. Call you this a derogation from Christ's Priesthood, They harp on
Christ's priesthood, as if they were Christ's own fellows in his priestly
dignity.
if the Pope may not tread Princes under his feet? Your Seminaries must needs
be famous that coin us such conclusions.


Phi. Never mock at our Seminaries, you shall find them too well furnished
for your stoare.


Theo. So we think, your learning is so strange, it passes our intelligence.
We fools conceive not how these things hang together.

For first what mean you by this; The Priesthood of Christ in his own person,
is above his kingly dignity? Christ has no higher title than the king of
glory, and Prince of the world to come
He is king of glory in that he is the son of God; can you name any thing in
Christ that is above his divine dignity? Your doctrine is very curious if it
be not dangerous. The glory of the son of God, as he is owner and ruler of
all things in heaven and earth, has no title nor name above it. As a Priest
he purged our sins in humility: as a king he now does and ever shall
reign in the highest degree of celestial and everlasting glory. His
Priesthood washed our uncleanness in this life. His kingdom places and
preserves men and Angels in perfect and eternal bliss.

If you speak this in respect of us, that the Priesthood of Christ which
washes our sins, and saves us from the wrath to come; is more comfortable
and accceptable to our weak consciences, by reason of our guiltiness and
daily transgressions, than the power wherewith he subdueth his enemies,
besides the strangeness of your speech that his Priestood should be above
his kingly dignity in his own person: note the losenesse of your argument.
The Priesthood of Christ in favor and mercy to us ward is above his power,
ergo the Prince must be subject to the Pope. May not we much rather conclude;
Christ co^pelleth and punishes as a king, not as a Priest, ergo power to
command and punish belongs to the kingdom and not to the Priesthood, that is
to the Magistrate, not to the minister.


Phi. It divides (which is a matter of much importance) the state of the
Catholic Church and the holy communion or society of all Christian men in
the same, Apolog. cap. 4. Sect. 23.
into as many parts not communicant one with an other nor holding one of an
other, as there be worldly kingdoms differing by Customs, Laws and manners,
each from other: which is of much pernicious sequel, and against the very
native quality of the most perfect conjunction, society, unity and intercourse
of the whole Church and every Province and Person thereof together.


Theo. It is a most pernicious fancy to think the communion of Christ's
Church depends upon the Popes person or regiment, The communion of Saints
consists not in obedience to the Pope.
and that diverse nations and countries differing by customs, laws and manners
(so they hold one and the same rule of faith in the band of peace) can not be
parts of the Catholic Church communicant one with an other, and perfectly
united in spirit and truth each to other: And fie on your follies that rack
your Creed and rob Christ of his honor and the Church of all her comfort and
security whiles you make the unity and society of Christ's members to
consist in obedience to the Bishop of Rome and not in coherence with the son
of God.

The communion of Saints, and near dependaunce of the Godly each of other and
all of their head stands not of external rites, Nor in external rites and
ceremonies.
customs and manners, as you would fashion out a Church observing the Popes
Canons and deserving his pardones as his deuote and zealous children: but in
believing the same truth, The true communion of the church.
tasting of the same grace, resting on the same hope, calling on the same God,
rejoicing in the same spirit, whereby they be sealed, sanctified and
preserved against the day of redemption. And why may not Christians in all
kingdoms and countries have this communion and fellowshippe though they lack
your holy fathers beads, The communion of the Church not dissolved by the
variety of rites.
blessings and such like bables?

To what end you allege S. Augustine in that place which you quote, we
cannot so much as conjecture; you must speak plainly what you would have, we
be not bound to make search for your meaning. As for the communion of the
Catholic Church, it is not broken by the variety and diversity of rites,
customs, Laws and fashions, which many places and Countries have different
each from others, except they be repugnant to faith or good manners, as S.
Augustine largely debateth in his epistle to Ianuarius; Epist. 118.
and Irineus, when the bishop of Rome would have cut the East Churches from the
communion of the West, for observing Easter after an other manner and order than
their brethren did, sharply reproved him and showed him, that Polycarpus and
Anicetus dissenting in the same case Communionem inter se habuerunt, were, this
notwithstanding, joined in communion; Eusebius. lib. 5. c^. 26.
and pacem in vniuersa Ecclesia tum servants tum non servants retinuerunt,
Ibidem.
and both sides kept the band of peace in the Catholic Church.

For the discrepant observation of fasting before Easter he says the like:
Eusebius. lib. 5. ca. 23.
Alij vnum sibi diem ieiunandum esse putant, alij duos, alij plures, alij
quadraginta horas. Nihilo minus tamen omnes illi pacem inter se retinuerunt and
retinemus etiamnu^, and dissonantia ieiunij fidei concordiam commendat. Some
fast one day, some two days, some more, some forty hours: and yet all
these continued in peace among themselves, and to this day we continue the
same, and our difference in fas^^^g commends our concord in faith.

The Church from the beginning had diversity of rites.
Socrates has a whole chapter purposely made to show what diversity there was
in the Church of Christ about Lent, the Lords Supper, marying, baptizing,
praying, fasting and such like Ecclesiastical obseruances, and yet all those
places and countries parts of the Catholic Church and communicant one with an
other in Christian peace and unity. Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 22.
Operosum and molestum fuerit imo impossible, omnes ecclesiarum quae per
civitates and regiones sunt ritus conscribere. It were an hard and laborious
thing, says he, yea an impossible, to write al (the different customs and)
manners of the Churches in every city and country. Qui eiusdem sunt fidei de
ritibus inter se dissentiunt. Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 22.
They that are of the same faith, differ in their rites. So that this is no
breach of the Christian and Catholic communion which all the faithful ought
to keep among themselves and with their head, the author and finisher of their
faith. Heb. 12.



Phi. Apolog. cap. 4. Sect. 23.
It opens the gappe to all kind of divisions, schisms, sects and
disorders.


Theo. Why so? Because your holy father can not merchandise the souls and empt
the purses of men as he was wont to do? What Sects, Schisms, disorders or
heresies can there arise if we defend it lawful for Princes to command for
truth within their own Realms? Nay rather has not the subiecting of Princes
to the Popes pride wrought the utter ruin and decaie of the West Church? The
Popes pride first decayed the West Churches.
Where Rulers be many it is easy to find some good, and they will resist that
which is evil, and reform that which is amiss: where one rules al, if he
fall as he quickly may, he draws the whole Church into the same danger and
error with him.


Phi. But the successor of Peter can not err, and therefore the Church is
safest when it is ruled by him, for whose faith Christ prayed that it might not
fail.


Theo. Prove that the Pope can not err, and we will grant not only this but
all your religion besides to be true.


Phi. What, you will not?


Theo. The word is spoken, accept the condition when you list. Till you do we
prefer Cyprians judgment before yours: Cyprian. lib. 3. Epist. 13.

A number of watchmen in the Church better than one.


Therefore dear brother, says he writing to Stephanus Bishop of Rome, is
there a plentiful number of Priests (in the church) joined together with the
knot of mutual concord and band of peace, that if any of our company make a
breach, and rent and wast the the flock of Christ, the rest should help, and
as profitable and pitiful Pastors reduce the Lords sheep to the flock
again. The number of Rulers in his opinon is no cause of sects and
dissentions, but rather a remedy provided in the Church against disorder and
heresy.


Phi. It makes all Christian Bishops, Apol. chap. 4. sect. 24.
Priests and whatsoever borne out of the Realm forrainers and usurpers in all
jurisdiction Ecclesiastical toward us, and that there can be no jurisdiction
over English-mens souls, but proceeding and depending of her sovereign right
therein.


Theo. Your force is almost spent, when you come to these frozen and wooden
objections. We call those that were borne and live out of the Realm
forrainers. What else should we call them? And such as pretend Peter's keys to
dispose crowns and remove Princes from their seats, joining rebellion with
remission of sins, we think them usurpers and abusers of Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction. Usurpers and forrainers.
A marvelous oversight in deed. We might have spared you some sharper and
quicker terms; but by these we thought good to manifest to the world, your
injurious and irreligious drift to be masters of earthly kingdoms, by winding
and turning Peter's keys at your pleasure.


Phi. Your words exclude Christ and his Apostles, (in as much as they were and
be forrainers) from having any jurisdiction over England.


Theo. It is pity you can not cauil. The Jesuits cavil at the word Forrainer.
We strive for judicial authority to deprive Princes, you urge us with
Apostolic power to preach the Gospel and remit sins: We speak of that
which is at this present, you tell us what was fifteen hundred years since:
We reason of States in earth, you run to Saints in heaven: We reject the Bishop
of Rome, you wrangle with us as though we refused the son of God. Does not
matter fail you, when you fly for help to such unsavory toies?


Phi. Your oath is so absurdly conceived, that though you meant not to exclude
Christ and his Apostles, yet in words you do. For if No foreign person,
Prelat, State, nor Potentate has nor ought to have any jurisdiction, power,
superiority, preeminence, or authority ecclesiastical or spiritual within this
Realm of England, surely neither Christ nor his Apostles ( because they were
and be forrainers) have or ought to have any.


Theo. Not our speaking, but your wresting and wrenching of our words is far
fet and most absurd. For first where you avouch Christ himself to be a
forrainer who^ we acknowledge to be the right inheritor and owner of the whole
world, yea the mighty Lord and king of heaven and earth; God is no forrainer
to men.
in gibing at us, you jest on his birth; as if Christ were a forrainer to the
Gentiles because he took flesh among the Jews. And though you might have
taken some advantage at his cradle, yet you should have remembered, that the
Creator is no forrainer to the work of his hands, as likewise the head is
not to the members, nor God incarnate to the sons of men.

Souls in heaven be no forrainers.
As for his Apostles in deed whiles they lived on earth, they were forrainers:
but that their spirits now present with God and reigning in bliss with Christ,
be forrainers, is a mad speech of yours, no meaning of ours. You must send us
word from Rhemes how souls can be French, Spanish, Scottish, or English: These
with us be distinctions of countries not of souls, and after death til your new
doctrine came we took them to cease: With a little help I think you will
make us some men souls and some women souls, you be so skillful in these
conceits.

Souls in heaven exercise no jurisdiction ecclesiastical nor spiritual on
earth.
Again, might the souls in heaven be called or counted forrainers, you must
tell us what ecclesiastical power and authority they now exercise on earth.
We do not affirm that forrainers never had any such power in England, the
Apostles had their commission from Christ to teach and baptize all nations
without exception, but we say none has at this present, nor ought to have any
such power within the Realm: and unless you will defend that souls in
heaven do now preach the Gospel and minister the Sacraments, we see not how
the Apostles have any actual function or ecclesiastical power on earth, here
or elsewhere.

These quarrels full of spite and void of al truth and common reason, do
more than you think, impair the credit of your religion and learning: but so
great is your malice that it shuts your senses and kindles your cholor
whiles you would say somewhat, to say you care not what, be it never so untrue
or vntidy.


Phi. Apol. Cap. 4. sect. 24.
The Princes sovereignty is directly against the commandment and commission
given to Peter first, and then to all the Apostles, of preaching, baptising,
remitting, retaining, binding, loosing over all the world without difference of
temporal state, or dependence of any mortal Prince therein.


Theo. That commandment and promise of our Savior to his Apostles is no way
prejudicial to our doctrine, nor beneficial to yours, as also the charge which
the preachers and bishops of England have over their flocks proceeds neither
from Prince nor Pope, nor depends upon the will or word of any earthly
creature: and therefore you do us the more wrong, so confidently to say what you
list of us, as if your envious reports were authentik oracles.


Phi. Princes bear the sword in these causes to see that permitted and
defended in their realms which Christ commanded.
You make the Prince supreme governor in all spiritual and ecclesiastical
things and causes; preaching, baptising, binding, loosing, and such like be
spiritual things and causes, ergo you make the Princes supreme governor even in
these things. And here you may see that we justly charge you with all the
former absurdities, though to shift the^ and us off, you say we do nothing but
slander and cauil.


Theo. And here you may see the truth of our speech and vniustnes of your
charge, and that as you began, so you continue with spite full pe^^erting and
deprauing our words. For by GOVERNORS we do not mean moderators, perscribers,
directors, inuentors, or authors of these things, as you misconster us, but
rulers and magistrates bearing the sword to permit and defend that which
Christ himself first appointed and ordained, and with lawful force to
disturb the despisers of his will and testament. Now what inconvenience is this
if we say that Princes as public Magistrates may give freedom, None but
Princes can give freedom and protection to these spiritual functions and
actions.

Apolog. Cap. 4. Sect. 25.


protection and assistance to the preaching of the word, ministering of the
Sacraments, and right using of the keys, and not fet license from Rome? Is
that against Christ's commandment or commission given to Peter and the rest? or
does that prove all ecclesiastical power and cure of souls to proceed and
depend of the Princes right?


Phi. It keeps the realm from obedience to general Councels which have bin
or shall be gathered in foreign countries: It takes away al convenient means
of gathering, holding or executing any such Councels and their Decrees, as
appeared by refusing to come to the late Council of Trent, notwithstanding the
Popes messengers and letters of other great Princes, which requested and
invited them to the same.


Theo. Princes ought to hear and obey the truth proposed by private persons
and Preachers, General councils were wo^t to be assista^ts unto Princes, not
tribunals above princes

A general council must have the consent of al christian countries.


much more to reverence the same declared by a number of faithful and godly
Bishops meeting in a general council: But the pleasures and orders of other
princes and prelates, be their assembly never so great, the rulers of this
realm are not bound to respect unless their consents be first required and
obtained.

Particular councels you may call without us, and as we are not acquainted with
them, so are we not obstricted to them: General Councels you can not call,
without the liking and warning of all Christian Princes and commonwealthes; and
if you neglect or skippe any, they may lawfully refuse and despise that which
you shall then and there decree: For that which pertains to all can not be
good, without the knowledge and consents of all.


Phi. To the Council of Trent you were requested and invited by messengers from
the Pope, The late council of Trent a mere faction of the Popes, sworn to take
his part and content to refer all things to his power.
and letters of other great Princes.


Theo. To your Chapter at Trent we came not for many good and sufficient
reasons. The Pope took upon him to call that Council which he had no right
to do: None might have voices in the Council, but such as were his creatures
and sworn to be true and trusty to his triple crown: The conclusion and
resolution of all things was ever reserved to him or his Legates: This Realm
and others were invited to come but as suppliants to your Synod, and to stand
at your courtesies, and to suffer your selves to be judges in your own cause,
and yet you think much that we refused to come. Let a christian council be
agreed on by all their consentes that have to do with it, let both sides have
like interest in the council: Council. Triden. Sess. 25. decres. de
reformatione cap. 21.

Item. Sess. 7.


Let your Salua semper in omnibus Apostolicae sedis authoritate, Forprising in
all things the Popes power and pleasure be rejected, and the Scriptures
inspired from God be laid in the midst as the balance and touchstone of
truth, which was the wont of former councels. Let both parts be sworn to
respect nothing, but in the fear of God to examine the faith, and seek out
the ancient canons of Christ's church, and if we fail to meet you, declaime
against us on Gods name, as hinderers of peace and despisers of general
councels: Otherwise no duty binds us to resort, much less to be subject to
your unlawful routes, void of al christian authority, liberty, truth and
indifferency.


Phi. Was the Council of Trent unlawfully called?


Theo. Prove it the Popes right to call general Councels; and that none must
sit there but his feed and sworn men; and lastly that he must rule and reign
as he does in all assemblies, and be judge against al law and reason in his
own cause, though he be chief in resisting the truth and oppressing the
church, and then will we grant your conuenticle at Tre^t was orderly called:
Such wrongs were never offered in the Council of ancient times.
But if these things be repugnant to christian equity and the sincere canons
of Gods Church, whereby the Catholic Councels of former ages were directed, as
apparently they be, then had your Tridentine chapter neither the calling,
keeping, concluding, nor meaning of a general Council.


Phi. Who should call Councels, if not the Pope?


Theo. The Prince for 1200. years called general Councels, and not the Pope.
Show what one general Council the Pope called, for the space of twelve
hundred years after Christ, and then ask us who should call them but he; if
you can not, learn that usurpation is no right and that general Councels were
called by Princes and not by Popes, and therefore the Popes power to summon
general Councels, if it be any, grew very lately and is not yet old enough
to be current or Catholic.


Phi. The poor Friars were 18 years disputing, whether the Pope and his
Cardinals were conspiring against the godly.
To the Council of Trent other Princes consented.


Theo. Certain Friars were set there to wast day light and weary the walls
with declaiming against the Gospel of Christ whiles your holy father and his
Cardinals were eighteen years provoking and working the Princes and States
adherent to them, to spill christian blood and to make havoc of al places and
persons that were not ^^^dient to the Bishop of Rome; and yet you count it some
great absurdity for us to reject this Council as not general.


Phi. Apolog. cap. 4. Sect. 25.
You acknowledge no subjection to Councels or Tribunals abroad, all other
Bishops, Patriarchs, Apostles, Christ and all (because they were and be
forrainers) not having jurisdiction or sufficient authority to define against
English Sectaries or Errors. And this, when a Realm or Prince is in error,
takes away all means of reducing the^ to the truth again.


Theo. To Christ and his Apostles we acknowledge more subjection than you do.
We yield more subjection to Christ and his Apostles than they do.
We honor and adore him as the true son of God equal with his father in
authority and majesty. We make him no forrainer to this Realm as you do, but
profess him to be the only master, redeemer, and ruler of his church as well in
this as in all other Nations: To whom Princes and Preachers are but servants;
the preachers to propose, the Princes to execute his will and commandments:
and whom all that will be saved must believe and obey above and against all
Councels and Tribunals, The Apostles we reverence and obey as the messengers of
Christ.
be they regal or papal, if they dissent from his word.

The preachings and writings of the Apostles we receive with greater reverence
and exacter obedience, than you do. We give no man leave to dispense against
the^ which your law witnesses of the Pope. Distinct. 34. Lector. and cause. 15.
q. 6.. autoritate in gloss. Pig. Hierar. lib. 1. cap. 2.

1. These. 2.

1. These. 2.

R^m. 1.


Papa co^tra Apostolu^ dispensat, The Pope dispe^seth against the Apostle: We
never said as Pigghius says, The Apostles wrote certain things, not that
their writings should be above our faith and religion, but rather under. We
confess, The Apostles were men allowed of God, to whom the Gospel should be
committed, and therefore we receive the word from the^, not as the word of man,
but, as it is in deed, the word of God, assuring our selves, it is the power of
God to save all that believe, and detesting your erroneous and heinous
presumptions, that take upon you to add, alter, diminish, and dispense with
that which the spirit of Christ spoke as well by the pens as mouths of the
Apostles.

To Councels, We owe communion not subjection unto Councels.

Reuelat. 22.


such as the Church of Christ was wont by the help of her religious Princes to
call, we owe communion and brotherly concord so long as they make no breach in
faith, nor in christian charity: subjection and servitude we owe them none:
the blessed Angels profess themselves to be fellow servants with the
Saints on earth, what are you then that with your Tribunals and jurisdictions
would be Lords and Rulers over Christ's inheritance?

Peter, says Cyprian, Cypr. ad Quirinum.

Peter claimed no subjection to his tribunal.


whom the Lord made first choice of and on whom he built his church, when Paul
after strove (with him) for Circumcision did not take upon him, nor challenge
any thing insolentlie or arrogantly, nor advance himself as Primate and one
to whom the nouices and puinees should be subject. And as it were in open
defiance of your Tribunals and jurisdictions which Stephen the Bishop of Rome
began then to exercise, he directs the Bishops assembled in a Council at
Carthage on this wise: It rests that of this matter we speak every one of
us what we think, In sententijs Concilij Cartha.
judging no man nor removing any man from the communion, though he be not of
our mind. For none of us makes himself Bishop of Bishops, The Popes councels
are tyrannical.
or by terror like a tyrant, forces his colleagues to yield him obedience
whether they will or no, considering every Bishop by reason of his (Episcopal)
power and freedom, has the rule of his own judgment as one that can not be
judged of an other, nor he himself judge an other but let us al expect the
(tribunal or) judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ, which only and solely has
power to set us in the government of his Church and to judge of our acts.

And because you be so earnest with us for subjection to Tribunals abroad to
be plain with you it is boys play, before you name them, or prove that we
owe them any subjection, to skore it up as an absurdity that we acknowledge
none unto them; Many before us have refused foreign tribunal.

Cypr. in sententijs Council. Car.


and yet least you should think us the first that refused Tribunals abroad,
you shall see that ancient and worthy fathers have done the like before us.

What Tribunals abroad did Cyprian and the 80. Bishops at Carthage with him
acknowledge, when he said as you heard? Christus vnus and solus habet
potestatem de actu nostro iudicandi, Christ only and none else has authority
to judge of our act. And agai^e, Ibidem.
Episcopus ab al^o iudicari non potest, cum non ipse nec alterum iudicare: A
Bishop may not be judged of others, nor judge others. Ibidem.
Expectemus vniuersi iudicium Christi; Let us all (both abroad and at home)
expect the judgment of Christ.

What Tribunals abroad did Polycrates and the Bishops of Asia with him
acknowledge when he replied to the Bishop of Rome, Polycrates.
threatening to excommunicate him and the rest? Non turbaborijs, quae terrendi
gratia obijciuntur, I pass not for these threats that are offered to terrify
me. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 25.

Augustine.

Council. African. cap. 29.

Council. African. cap. 105.




What Tribunals abroad did S. Aug. and the 216. African Bishops acknowledge
when they decreed that none Appealing over the Sea (to Tribunals abroad) should
be received to the communion within Africa? And when they repelled the Bishop
of Rome, laboring to place his Legates a latere within their Province and
willed him not to bring Fumosum seculi Typhum, That smoky pride of the world
into the Church of Christ?

The Britons. Ga^frid. Monemutens. lib. 8. ca. 4.
What Tribunals abroad did the Bishop of the Britons acknowledge, when they
proved to August. the Moncke that was sent from Rome, that they ought him no
subjection.

Lib. 7. indict. 1. Epist. 30.

This Bishop of Rome claimed no Tribunal over other countries


Nay what Tribunal abroad did Greg. the Bishop of Rome challenge, when he wrote
thus to Eulogius Bishop of Alexandria: Vestra beatitudo mihi loquitur dice^s,
sicut iussistis, quod verbu^ iussionis peto a meo auditu remouete: quia scio
quis sum, qui estis. Loco enim mihi fratres estis, moribus patres. No^ ergo
iussi, sed quae vtilia visa sunt iudicare curau^. Your blessedness (in your
letters) says to me as you comanded, which word of co^ma^ding I beseech you
remove from mine ears, because I know who I am, and what you are. In calling
you are brethren to me; in behauior fathers. I did not the^ command you but
advertise you what seemed best to me. Greg. Lib. 4. Epist. 38.
The same Greg. teaches you what it is for any one man to require universal
subjection of the whole church, as your holy father now does. If Paul, says
he, would not have the members of the Lords body to be subject to any heads but
to Christ, No Tribunal over the whole church, but only Christ.
no not to the Apostles themselves; what will thou answer to Christ the head
of the universal church in the last day of judgment which go about to
have all his members in subjection to thee by the title of universal? Whom
do thou imitate in so perverse a name, but (Lucifer) that despising* legions
of Angels his fellows, would needs aspire to be singular and alone to be over
all?

To let one man have all the members of Christ in subjection under him, is not
the mean to reduce Princes and their people to truth, as you falsely suppose,
but the high way to wrappe them and the whole church in blindness and error.
Gregor. lib. 6. Epist. 24.
Ecclesia vniuersa corruit, si vnus vniuersus cadit; If he that is universal
fall, the whole church falls with him.

The Popes Tribunal made him first forget both God and man.
Yea this very subjection of all kingdoms and countries to the Popes beck, made
him first forget his duty to God and man, whiles his clawbacks advanced him
to the height of heaven, and gave him all power both in heaven and earth, and
so quailed and disabled all others that they neither might reprove nor durst
resist his wicked and wilful fancies were they never so pernicious to the
faith or opprobrious to the church. For you made it Sacrilege to dispute of his
fact, A Tribunal fit for the devil him self.
Heresy to doubt of his power, Paganism to disobey him, Blasphemy against
the holy Ghost to do or speak against his decrees and canons; and that which
is most horrible, you made it Presumption not to go to the devil after him
without any grudging. O shameful and sinful subjection, such as Lucifer
himself never offered the bondslaues of hell!


Phi. Nay rather, O shameful and sinful report: Distict. 40. Non nos glos.
ibide^ quis enim. Cause. 17. quaest. 4. Si quis.
does he require any such subjection?


Theo. If your law do not avouch as much as I report, let me bear the
shame. Sacrilegij instar esset, disputare de facto (Papae) It were no less
than sacrilege to dispute of the Popes fact. And the Capital Register of your
decrees, Commit tunt sacrilegium, qui contra diuinae legis sanctitatem, aut
nesciendo committunt, Sacrilege to doubt of the Popes fact, or dispute of his
judgment.

Distinct. 19. Sic omnes.


aut negligendo offendunt. Similiter de iudicio summi Pontificis alicus
disputare non licet. They commit sacrilege which of ignorance transgress, or
of negligence break the Law of God. Under the like pain (of sacrilege) it is
unlawful for any man to dispute of the Popes judgment. For all the sanctions
of the Apostolic See (of Rome) are to be received as confirmed with the divine
voice of Peter himself.

He, Distinct. 22. Omnes.

Heresy to mutter against the Popes pride.


says Pope Nicolaus, that defraudeth any church of her right does unjustly,
but he that indeuoureth to take from the church of Rome her privilege, hic
procul dubio in haeresin labitur and est dicendus haereticus, he out of all
doubt slideth into heresy and is to be counted an heretic. Upon the warrant
of this and such like textes your Glozer as it were falling on his knees and
holding up his hands to that Idol exalting himself in the Temple of God,
pronounces distinctly and leasurably: Extrau. Johan, 22. cum inter nonnullos;
glos. ibide^. declaramus.

Extra. Johan. 22 quia quonda^. glos. non vt Papa.

Extrau. communium, de maioritate and obedient.. Vnam sanctam.


Credere Dominum Deum nostrum Papam non potuisse statuere prout statuit,
haereticum censeretur: To think that our Lord God the Pope could not decree
as he has decreed, must be counted heretical. For as Pope he might do
many things, and not only declare, but also bring in a new article of faith.

Bonifacius the eight would needs have it to be Manicheisme, and that he
found by the first book of Moses: Whosoever, says he, resists (the Popes)
power resists the ordinance of God, unless with Manicheus he dream of mo
beginninges (than one) which we adiudge to be false and heretical, because, as
Moses says in the beginning God made heaven and earth, not in the beginnings.
Therefore we declare, affirm, define, pronounce, that it is a necessary point
to salvation, for every humane creature to be subject to the Bishop of Rome.
Gregory the seventh produces Samuel to prove that it is idolatry and
infidelity to disobey the Pope. Manicheisme and Paganism not to obey the Popes
word.

Distinct. 81. Si qui sunt.

What said Samuel more of God, than the Pope here applies to himself?

Cause. 25. quaest. 1.. violateres. Ibidem glos. Blasphe^a^e.


He that will not obey this most wholesome precept of ours (forbidding Priests
their wives under the color of fornication.) incurreth the sin of Idolatry
as Samuel witnesses; Not to obey is the sin of witchcraft, and not to be
content is the wickedness of idolatry. Therefore he falls into Paganism,
whosoever obeieth not the Apostolic See (of Rome.)

They may be well said to blaspheme the holy Ghost, says Pope Damasus, which
willingly or frowardly do or dare speak against the holy canons. For this
presumption is plainly one kind of blasphemy against the holy Ghost. And as
though this were too little the gloze adds Blasphemy, nay ipso facto he is
accursed, and an heretic.


Phi. You wrest that to the Popes decrees which was spoken of the canons of
councels.


Theo. I wrest it not, the same place will tell you, the word compriseth as
well the Popes decrees as canons of councels. Cans. 25. quaest. 1. ideo
permittente.

Ibidem.

No canons but what the Pope makes or allows.

Ibidem.


Sancta Romana Ecclesiaius and authoritatem sacris Canonibus impertitur, habet
enim ius condendi Canones. The holy Roman church gives strength and
authority to the sacred canons, for she has right to make canons. And
again, Sic summae sedis Pontifices Canonibus sieve a se, sieve ab alijs sua
authoritate conditis reuerentia^ exhibent: So the Bishops of the supreme See,
do reverence the canons which themselves make or others by their authority.
And lastly, speaking of the Bishops of Rome, Ipsi soli Canones valent
interpretari qui ius condendi eos habent: Popes only may interpret the
canons, which have right to make canons.

Or if you think Popes would not account it blasphemy to break their
decrees, read the words of Pope Adrian in the same section. Cause. 25. quaest.
1. generali.

A breach of the faith to violate the popes decrees


Generali decreto censemus and constituimus vt execrandum anathema sit, and
velut praeuaricator fidei Catholicae semper apud Deum reus existat, quicunque
Regum, Episcoporum, vel Potentum deinceps Romanorum Pontificum Decretorum
censuram in quoqua crediderit vel permiserit violandam: By a general decree we
order and determine that he shall be execrably accursed and guilty for ever
before God, as a transgressor of the catholic faith, whatsoever king, Bishop
or Noble man hereafter shall believe the censure of the Popes decretals may be
broken in any thing or shall permit the same. That horrible curse which the
Apostle pronouceth, If any man love not the Lord Jesus, 1. Corinthians. 16.
this Apostata thundreth on them that do but doubt of his decretals.

This is bad enough, and yet this is not the worst. For Bonifacius a Martyr as
you make him requires al men to follow the Bishop of Rome to the devil of hell
without making any words. Distinct. 40. ^i Papa.
Si Papa suae and fraternae salutis negligens deprehenditur, inutilis and
remissus in suis operibus, and insuper a bono taciturnus qui magis officit sibi
and omnibus, nihilominus innumerabiles populos cateruatim secum ducit primo
mancipio gehennae: huius culpas istic redarguere praesumit mortalium nullus.
Your forgeries be as gross as they be wicked, the latin is so good that I can
skant english it; yet thus it is, or should be: No man must find fault with
the Pope for leading men to hell by heaps.
If the Pope be found to neglect the salvation of himself and his brethren,
unprofitable and slack in his office, silent in that which is good, hurtful
to himself and all others, yea though he lead with him innumerable souls by
heaps to the devil of hell, yet let no mortal man presume to find fault with
him, or reprove him for his doings.

This is the subjection which your holy father would have, and which you count
us absurd for not acknowledging: But may we not justly say to you as S. August.
said to the Donatistes? Contra 2. Gaudentij Epist. lib. ^. cap. 25.
This which you affirm, that all the world must be subject to one man as to
Christ's Uicar, Did God or man tell it you? If God, read it unto us out of the
law, the Prophets, the Psalms, the Apostolical or Evangelical writings. Read
it if you can, which (hitherto) you ueuer could. But if men have said it (or
rather no men but your selves) behold the devise of men, behold what you
worship, behold what you serve, behold wherefore you rebel, you rage, you wax
mad.


Phi. If you will not be subject to the Pope, The Pope not Patriark over
England.
as Christ's Uicar and head of the Church, which no doubt he is, yet have you
no color to withstand his authority, as he is and ever was Patriarch of the
West.


Theo. His vicarshippe to Christ and headshippe over the Church be things
that you speak much of, but show small proof for: It were good you would
either prove them, or not presume them as you do: they be matters of greater
weight than that you may carry them away with your fair looks.

Patriarch of the West we grant he was, which is a foul fall from head of
the Church and Uicar general to Christ himself, and yet this way you come too
short of your reckoning.

For first, Patriarks not erected by Christ but by consent of Bishops.
the title and authority of Archbishoppes and Patriarchs was not ordained by
the commandment of Christ or his Apostles, but the Bishops long after, when
the Church began to be troubled with dissentions, were content to lincke
themselves together, and in every Province to suffer one (whom they preferred
for the worthiness of his City and called their Metropolitan, that is Bishop
of the chief or mother City) to have this prerogative in all doubts of
Doctrine and discipline to assemble the rest of his brethren or consult them
absent by letters, and see that observed, which the most part of them
determined.

Before there began schisms in religion the Churches, Hiero. in epist. ad
Tit. cap. 1. Ibidem.
says S. Hierom, were governed by the common Council of the Seniors. And
therefore Episcopi nouerint, se magis consuetudine quam dominicae dispositionis
veritate Presbyteris esse maiores: Let the Bishops understand that they be
greater than (ministers or) elders, rather by Custom, than by any truth of
the Lords appointment, and that they ought to govern the Church in common.
And in his Epistle to Euagrius having fully proved by the Scriptures that the
Apostles called themselves but Presbyteros, Hiero. Euag^ tom. epist. 2.
Elders or Seniors, he adds Quod aute^ postea vnus electus est qui ceteris
praeponereter, in schismatis remedium factum est ne vnusquisque ad se trahens
Christiecclesia^ rumperet: That after their times, one was chosen in every
Church and preferred before the rest to have the dignity of a Bishop this
was provided for a remedy against schisms, Ibidem.
lest every man drawing some unto him should rent the Church of Christ in
pieces. For what does a Bishop, except ordering of others, which an Elder may
not do?

And lest you should think he speaks not as well of the chief as of the
meaner Bishops, he compares three of the greatest Patriarchs with three of
the poorest Bishops he could name. Hierom. Ibide^.
Vbicunque fuerit Episcopus, sieve Romae, sieve Eugubij, sieve Constantinopoli,
sieve Rhegij, sieve Alexandriae, sieve Tains, eiusdem meriti, eiusdem est and
Sacerdotij. Potentia diuitiarum and paupertatis humilitas vel sublimiorem vel
inferiorem Episcopum non facit: ceterum omnes Apostolorum successores sunt. A
Bishop of what place soever he be, either of Rome, or of Eugubium, or of
Constantinople, or of Rhegium, or of Alexandria, or of Tains has the same
merit and the same (function or) Priesthood. Abundance of riches or baseness of
poverty does not make a Bishop higher or lower, for they all be successors
to the Apostles. So that the Bishop of Rome by commission from Christ and
succession from the Apostles is no higher than the meanest Bishop in the world.

The Patriarks grew by consent and custom. Council. Nicen. Cap. 6.
The superiority which he and others had as Metropolitanes in their own
Provinces came by custom, as the great Council of Nice witnesses, not by
Christ's institution. Let the old use continue in Egypt, Lybia, and
Pentapolis, that the Bishop of Alexandria be chief over all those places,
for so much as the Bishop of Rome has the like custom. Likewise at Antioch
and in other Provinces, let the Churches keep their prerogatives.

Council. Ephesians. 1. Decretum postqua^ Cypr. episc. accessissent ad council.
The general Council of Ephesus confesses the same. It seems good to this
sacred and oecumenicall Synod to conserve to every province, their right
privileges whole and untouched, which they have had of old according to the
custom that now long has prevailed.

Patriarks always subject to Princes and their ecclesiastical laws.
Next their authority was subject not only to the discretion and moderation of
their brethren assembled in Council, but also to the laws and Edicts of
Christian Princes, to be granted, extended, limited and ordered as they saw
cause.

For example the first Council of Constantinople advanced the Bishop of
that City to be the next Patriarch to the Bishop of Rome, which before he
was not. And the Council of Chalcedon made him equal in ecclesiastical
honors with the Bishop of Rome, Council. Chalced. actio. 16.
and assigned him a larger Province than before he had.

So Justinian gave to the City in Africa that he called after his own name,
the Sea of an Archbishop. Nouel. constit. 131.

Princes gave Bishops their prerogatives over others.


Archiepiscopale munus, quod Episcopo Iustinianeae Carthaginis Africanae
Dioeceseos dedimus, conseruari iubemus. Sed and aliae civitates atque horum
Episcopi, quibus passim in diuersis locis ius Metropoliticum concessum est, in
perpetuum hoc priuilegio perfruuntor. The Archiepiscopal dignity which we
gave to the Bishop of Iustinianea within the Province of Africa, we command
to continue still. And likewise let other Cities and their Bishops to whom in
diverse places and Countries the right of Metropolitanes has been granted,
enjoy that privilege for ever.

Constit. 123. The Prince commanded the Patriarks by name.
The same Prince as you heard before commanded the Archbishops and Patriarchs of
Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Theopolis and Jerusalem, and generally
subiecteth them in ecclesiastical causes and judgments to the sacred Canons
and his (Imperial) Laws, as appears expressly in his public Edicts made
to that end.

This Realm not in the Popes ancient Province. Inter August. epist. 95. Ibide^
epist. 96.
Thirdly by the right and ancient division of provinces this Realm was not
under the Bishop of Rome. For when the Bishops of Africa prayed Innocentius
either to send for Pelagius the Britan or to deal with him by letters to show
the meaning of his lewd speeches tending to the derogation of Gods grace, the
Bishop of Rome made answer; Quando se nostro iudicio, quibusuis acceptis
literis, cum sciat damnandum esse, committet? Qui si accersendus esset, ab ijs
melius fieret quimagis proximi and non longo terrarum spacio videntur esse
ds^iuncti. When will he commit himself to our judgment, write I what letters
I will, whereas he knows he shall be condemned? And if he were to be sent
for, they may better do it that are nearer (to him) and not so far distant
(from him as I am.) Innocentius 400. years after Christ confesses he had not
sufficient authority to call one poor Briton out of this Realm. And two
hundred years after that the Bishops of Britannie would yield no
subjection to him that was sent from Rome, nor accept him for their
Archbishop. Beda. hist. gentis Angler. lib. 2. C^. 2.
And even their manner of baptizing, observing Easter, and other
ecclesiastical institutions contrary to the rites and customs of the Church
of Rome, as Augustine the Monk then objected unto them, make manifest proof
that they were never under the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome.

Fourthly the Pope coveting and affecting to be that he was not, The Pope
affecting to be Christ's vicar neglected his Patria^kdom.
disdayned and refused ever since the conquest to be that he was: and so by
his own fact has extinguished his own right, if any he gate in the time of
the Saxons, who to settle themselves in the possession of this Realm, after
the chasing out of the Britons, were soon entreated to receive the Bishop of
Rome for their Patriarch. And seeing the headshippe of the Church, which he
violently and wrongfully enforced upon the Normans, by Gods Law is not his, no
reason he should now claim by his Patriarkshippe, which himself aspiring to
higher tytles so many hundred years disused and contemned.

Lastly the Kings of England for the most part of them from the Conqueror to
this day, The Kings of this land resisted the Popes power in whole or in part
ever since the conquest.
in the right of their Crown have either resisted or rebated the jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical which the Pope claymed in this Land. Wherefore he was never
any long time in full and quiet possession of his pretensed power in this
Realm: And her Majesty's Father and brother excluding him both from that
authority which he would have over this Island, as unlawful and repugnant to
the word of God, and also from that which for these five hundred years and
upward himself neglected and omitted, had Gods Laws and man's Laws for the
warrant of their doings, and for their leaving him no kind of power or
preeminence within this Realm.

So that his Uicarshippe to Christ must be proved by stronger and playner
evidence than yet you have showed, This Land subject to him neither as Christ's
vicar, nor as Patriarch of the west.
before we may grant it: And as for his Patriarkeshippe, which you would
now take hold of, by Gods Law he has none, in this Realm for six hundred
years after Christ he had none, for the last six hundred, as looking to
greater matters, he would have none: above or against the sword which God
has ordained, he can have none; to the subversion of the faith and oppression
of his brethren in reason, right and equity he should have none: You must
seek farther for subjection to his Tribunal, this Land owes him non^.


Phi. Apol Cap. 4. sect. 25.
Finally if this jurisdiction spiritual be always of right a sequel of the
crown and Scepter of all kings, assuredly Christ nor none of his Apostles
could otherwise enter to convert Countries preach and exercise jurisdiction
spiritual, without Caesar's and others the kings of the countries license and
delegation.


Theo. Finally, if this be all you can say, you may wipe your bill and go to
rest. You were told before that Princes have no right to call or confirm
Preachers, but to receive such as be sent of God, and give them liberty for
their preaching, Bishops may preach wihout Cesars leave if they submit
themselves to Cesars sword as the Apostles did.
and security for their persons; and if Princes refuse so to do, Gods
laborers must go forward with that which is commanded them from heaven, not
by disturbing Princes from their thrones nor inuading their Realms, as your
holy father does and defends he may do, but by myldly submitting themselves
to the powers on earth, and meekely suffering for defense of the truth what
they shall inflict.

How you gather out of this or any words of ours, that Christ and his
Apostles might not preach the Gospel without Cesars delegation, and license
from others the kings of the Countries, whither they went, I see not, except
you take the word supreme for superior to Christ, and all which, as I have
often signified unto you, stands neither with our assertion nor intention,
but is a very pestilent and impudent sophistication of yours, which you still
repeat, though we still refute.


Phi. The word supreme is such a Laberinth that we know not what to make of
it.


Theo. You know well enough, but you will not acknowledge the true meaning of
the word, lest you should discover your selves and discredit your cause. The
Jesuits cunning in playeng with the word Supreme as they do.
For then either you must show which you are no way able to do, that the Pope
as a superior judge may lawfully command, punish and displace Princes if
they withstand him: or else with us confess Princes to be supreme, which
your stomachs will not abide. And therefore finding your proofs too slender
to bear up the height of his pride and the load of your folly, you thought
best to skippe it over, and in all your Apology not so much as to offer us one
half word for the confirmation of the superiority which the Pope claymeth
over Princes, that being the right construction of the word supreme, and the
first occasion why princes were so called, but to braule rather with us about
some words of ours, and therefore to make such monsterous and impious
imaginations, that the simple should be afraid at the very sound of the^, as
though we made the prince supreme, that is, What the Jesuits imagine of the
word Supreme.
superior to Christ himself, and Christ's master, and gave her absolute and
infinite power to do what she listed in all ecclesiastical matters, and taught
that truth and faith, Scriptures and Sacraments, vocation of ministers,
remission of sins, preaching, baptising and serving God must proceed from her
Sovereign right and depend on her only will, and in this vain you run on
with a jolly persuasion of your selves, that you work woonders, when indeed
you do nothing but leudly pervert our words and falsely charge us with your
own fictions.


Phi. Never burden us with the perverting of your words, The words of the oath
be sound e^ough if they cease perverting them.

Ruler and Prince, be as doubtful as governor, if men be disposed to cavil.

Bishops be called Rulers, Princes, Kings and Queens.

Heb. 13. Act. 20. In. 1. Cap. epist. ad Titum. Idem in 3. Ca. 1. ad Tim. Lib.
4. Cap. 33. Morali. in Job. In 49. ca. Esaiae.

Every of the faithful is a King and a Priest.

Reuelat. 1. 1. Peter. 2. Lib. Cap. 37. Idem. lib. 4. Cap. 24. Ibidem.

Princes are Bishops and Priests.

Euagrie, tom. epist. 2. Idem Oceano eodem tom. Exodus 24. Joshua. 24. Judges. 8.
Iud^th. 6.


we take them as we find them; and as you said before to us, we be not bound
to search for your meaning; if there be any generality or ambiguitie in your
words, which you meant not, the blame is yours that made choice of such.


Theo. Cease you to wrest them against the grounds of faith and rules of speech
received and used on both sides, we ask you no favor, our words be sound and
good.

We call her highness the Governor of this Realm, that is the public magistrate
bearing the sword, which God has ordained to command good things and punish
evil as well in religion as civil policy: How else should we call her?


Phi. Not Governor, but Prince or ruler. For Bishops be Governors in their
kind as well as Princes.


Theo. As though these words were not subject to the same cauils with the
former. Bishops be Princes and Rulers in their kind as well as governors. Your
selves prove them to be rulers by S. Paul, Obey your Rulers: and again, The
holy Ghost has set you to rule the Church. And where you say Rulers in S.
Paul, S. Hierom says, Parete Principibus vestris: Obey you Princes. And
elsewhere; A Bishop must be irreproueable, or he shall be no Prince of the
Church. Yea Gregory doubts not to call them Kings. The holy preachers of the
Church, says he, be Kings. And S. Hierom ventereth to call them Queens. The
Kings and Queens, that nource the Church be plainly the Apostles and
Apostolic men.

So that if we were disposed to play with words, as you be, we could drive
you to seek new names not only for Kings and Princes, but also for Priests
and Bishops. S. John says of himself and of all the faithful (Christ has)
made us Kings and Priests unto god his father: and S. Peter confirms the
same, You are a Royal Priesthood. Eusebius writes of Constantine, that He
called the servants of God to Synods as a common Bishop appointed by God: and
sat among them, and made himself partaker of their consultations; and that in
his hearing the Prince Named himself a Bishop with these words, You are
Bishops of things within the Church, I am appointed by God a Bishop of those
things that are without the Church. And this he might well do. For (...), a
Bishop, is in Greek nothing else but an ouerseer, or a superintendent, which
word Hierom uses; and (...), whence our English word Priest seems to be
derived, he says, is nomen aetatis, a name of age, and signifies an Elder,
and nothing in the Scriptures more common than to call Princes and rulers (...)
Elders: as the seventy Elders, all the tribes of Israel and their Elders,
Princes and judges: the Princes and Elders of Sucoth: the Elders of Bethulia;
and infinite other places; where the word (...) is used of the Septuagint.


Phi. We know you may confound all things if you list to dally with
equiuocatio^s, The ground of al their absurdities is the cauilling at (...)
words.
but S. Paul has expressly prohibited al good teachers strife of words,


Theo. You say well, and since al your absurdities have none other ground but
the carping at our words, or rather the manifest abusing and per^erting of the
same, what are your labors, to requite you with Saint Paul, but vain brables
of men corrupted in mind and deprived of truth.

The government of Princes and Pr^ests are distinct.
If the word governor were common to Bishops with Princes as you would have it,
yet are their offices and regiments many ways distinguished. The government of
Princes is public, of Bishops is private; of Princes is compulsiue, of Bishops
is persuasiue; of Princes is Lordly with Rule, of Bishops is brotherly with
service; of Princes is external and orders the actions of the body, of
Bishops is internal, and guides the motions of the mind; to be short,
Princes have the sword with lawful authority from GOD, in his name to
command and prohibit, reward and revenge that which he prescribes and
appoints: Bishops have the word and Sacraments committed to their charge
with fidelity and sincerity to divide and dispense the same in his Church
according to his will. And therefore though Bishops may be called Governors
in respect of the soul, Governors of this realm none is but only the Prince.
yet only Princes be Governors of Realms: Pastors have flocks and
Bishops have Diocesses; Realms, Dominions, and Countries none have but
Princes and Magistrates, and so the style Governor of this Realm, belongs
only to the Prince and not to the Priest, and imports a public and Princely
regiment with the sword, which no Bishop by Gods Law may claim or use.


Phi. We could grant you with a good will that the Prince is the only
Governor of this Realm, but you add, as well in all spiritual or
ecclesiastical things or causes, as temporal: which is most absurd and
direct against your own distinction. For if the Prince be the only Governor
of all spiritual things and causes, This is the profound Logike of Rhemes.
Ergo Bishops be no Governors of the word nor Sacraments, rites nor
ceremonies, prayers nor preachings of the Church, but all must be as please
the Prince: and so you fall into that shameful error again from the which you
seek to clear your selves.


Theo. A right Friar that will never be answered, though the Sophisme be never
so gross.
Is it for weakness of wit, that you cannot, or for rustines of heart that you
will not see the defect of your argument?


Phi. The reason to my thinking is very sure. For if only Princes be Governors
in those cases, Ergo not Priests.


Theo. A childish sophisme. Your antecedent has a special acception of the
word Governor, and your conclusion a general. Princes only be Governors in
things and causes ecclesiastical, that is with the sword. For so their vocation
infers, and your assertion witnesses, and so must you limite your
antecedent before it will be good or agreeable to the Doctrine, which we
teach, and oath which we take. Then if you conclude, Ergo Bishops be no
governors in those things with the sword, your illation is sound and
sufficient: for in all things and causes ecclesiastical and spiritual Princes
bear the sword, and not Bishops. But if you infer, Ergo Bishops be no
Governors in those things, meaning thereby no dispencers, guiders nor
directors, of those things, your conclusion is larger than your antecedent,
which never makes good consequent.


Phi. I see your meaning: you will have Princes only to be Governors of their
Realms and dominions, that is to bear the sword within their Realms and
dominions in all things as well spiritual as temporal.


Theo. You see what we say, Only Princes bear the sword within their own
dominions.
pervert it no more, but confute it if you can.


Phi. That Princes and none else should bear the sword within their Dominions
I mean not to confute, I confess it as well as you: But what has the
temporal sword to do, with ecclesiastical things and causes? Princes should
meddle with common wealth matters, and not busy themselves with Church causes.


Theo. Run you back again to this issue, that Princes may not meddle with
causes ecclesiastical? Have you forgotten how largely that is proved before;
and sealed with your own consent as irreuocable?


Phi. Meddle they may with some spiritual things and causes, but when and as
they shall be required by the Priest.


Theo. We are not at this present to hear what you can imagine, but to see
what you can impugn in our oath as absurd. And thus far you agree with us,
that Princes be the only Governors of their Realms and dominions, taking
Governors for Magistrates which bear the sword in Gods behalf with public
power to compel or punish. If only Princes bear the sword, they bear it in all things as well spiritual as te^porall where the sword is required.



Phi. And what of this?


Theo. Thus much, that if only Princes bear the sword and no man else by
Gods appointment, ergo they bear it in all things, where the sword must or
may be used, as well spiritual as temporal.


Phi. No doubt where the sword must or may be borne, they bear it: but how
prove you that in spiritual things and causes the temporal sword must or may
be used?


Theo. Pitch that for the question, and try how well you shall speed with it.


Phi. We never denied but in some sort the temporal sword might be used for
spiritual things and causes, as namely to defend the faith and Canons of the
Church, and to put them in execution. This Princes may do and must do with
their royal power, but they may not command what they list in ecclesiastical
causes as you would have them.


Theo. You snarle still when you see your self brought to the wall. What we
would have Princes to do, shall soon appear, if you cease from slaundering,
and keep to the matter. Our tongues ache with telling you that we hold no such
opinion, and yet you never leave grating at us as if we did.

The point, The sword must be used in spiritual things and causes as well as
temporal.
that now we stand at, is this, whether in a Christian common wealth the
temporal sword, as you call it, that is the public authority of the
Magistrate must be used to receive, establish and defend the true faith of
Christ and wholesome discipline of his Church, and to prohibit, displace and
punish the contrary: say nay if you dare.


Phi. We never meant it.


Theo. Then in all spiritual things and causes Princes only bear the sword,
that is have public authority to receive, establish and defend all points
and parts of Christian Doctrine and Discipline within their Realms, and
without their help, though the faith and Canons of Christ's Church may be
pryuately professed and observed of such as be willing, yet can they not be
generally planted and settled in any kingdom, nor urged by public Laws and
external punishments on such as refuse, but by their consents that bear the
sword. This is it that we say, refell it if you can.


Phi. Princes cannot be defenders of the faith and officers of the Church but
by means of the sword.
This is not your opinion but ours. We confess Princes to be defenders of the
faith, and assisters of the Church with their secular might and power: you
auouche them to be supreme moderatours and directours of all spiritual
things and causes without restraint.


Theo. We auouche you to be Supreme liars, and that which is worse, you
think with facing in time to get some credit to your fabling. You find no
such thing in our words nor deeds as you report of us. We confess Princes to
be supreme governors, that is as we have often told you, supreme bearers of
the sword, which was first ordained from above to defend and preserve as well
goodlines and honesty, 1. Tim. 2. The sword ordained chiefly to preserve
godliness and honesty among men.
as peace and tranquillity amongst men. We give Princes no power to devise or
invent new religions, to alter or change Sacraments, to decide or debate
doubts of faith, to disturb or infringe the canons of the church. The public
power and outward means, which God has united and annexed to their swords, as
namely to command by their Edicts, and dispose the goods and bodies of such as
resist them, this power and means, we say, must be converted and used first
to the service and glory of God, next to the profit and welfare of their
Realms, that is as much or rather more for things spiritual than temporal.


Phi. If you give Princes no judicial nor spiritual power in matters of
religion but an external and temporal power to permit and establish that
which God commands, The sword of Princes is supreme in that it is not
subject to the Pope, and must be obeyed of al in things that be good.
how can they be supreme?


Theo. Supreme they be for that by Gods Law they be not under the Popes
check and correction, though to lead on the simple sort with a better show,
you conceal that superiority which the Pope chalengeth over Princes, and enter
your whole action for the Church; which word you knew was more gracious, and
will in no case be brought to take our meaning right, lest you should be
driven either to prove your assertion, which you can not; or to confess ours,
which you will not. And therefore you wrest the word supreme against the very
grounds of our common faith and rules of your private speech, to make it seem
false and absurd; and then as valiant Captains you wrestle with the fancies
which your selves have devised, and fighting thus with your own shadows you
think your Seminaries the only lights and lanternes of Christendom; but you
must go more syncerely to work, before you can win the cause.


Phi. Supreme is superior to all and subject to none.


Theo. And so be Princes superior to all men within their Realms, and
subject to no man without their Realms.


Phi. What, superior to Christ, the Church and all?


Theo. Have you never done with that idle and eluish objection? We compare not
man with God, These be right Jesuitical conceits.
nor bodies on earth with spirits in heaven; but we confer mortal men with
their like, bearing flesh about them which the sword may touch: and in
comparison of them we say Princes are superior to all men within their
dominions, Bishops and others, and subject to no man without their dominions,
Prelate nor Pope, to be commanded, corrected and deposed by their tribunals.
The true supremacy of Princes.
This is the supremacy which we attribute to Princes, that all men within
their Territories should obey their Laws or abide their pleasures, and that
no man on earth has authority to take their swords from them by judicial
sentence or martial violence: Leave wrangling and rouing and speak directly
to this question.


Phi. I will, if you first grant that your meaning is not so large as your
words be.


Theo. You would feign seem with your eloquent nifles to work some
masteries: but it will not be. Our words are no larger than our meaning, and
both be true.


Phi. Why? supreme is superior to al none excepted, no not Christ himself.


The. And what are these phrases, The Papists in every style which they give
the Pope make him supreme.
ye most holy, the most mighty, the most blessed, which you apply to the
Pope; do they except Christ or no?


Phi. If nothing else be added, they do not by rigor of comparison, but common
use of speech understands them of earthly men, and always excepteth first
God with whom there can be none compared, and next his Saints which be far
from us in an other and better life.


Theo. I cry you mercy. You may salute your Romish Pharaoh when you will,
Cause. 25. quaest. 1. Nulli fas. Acclamationes in fine Council. Triden. Sess. 25.
with the most mighty Priest, the most blessed father, the chief Pastor, and
many such lofty styles, and we must come after with salt and spoones and
conceive that Christ is excepted though he be not, because your flatteries be
common: and if we to signify that Princes by Gods law be not under the
Popes yoke, defend them to be superior to all men at home and subject to no
man's Courts or Consistories abroad and therefore call them supreme Governors
of their own people and Countries, you sound alarm against us as if we went
about to defeat Christ of his kingdom and disseism the Church of her
inheritance when your selves every day if that speech be not tolerable commit
blasphemies innumerable.

If other examples do not stay your wisdoms, Supreme governor does not
touch Christ so nere as Supreme Bishop does, which is the Popes usual style.

1. Pet. 5. 1. Pet. 2.

My Kingdom is not of this world: Ioh. 18.

Who made me Judge over you: Luke 12.


remember your usual style for the Pope, is summus Pontifex, Supreme Bishop;
summus and supremus being all one I mean not in sense only but in speech
also. For they both be superlatiues from the same comparatiue Superior, and
summus is nothing else but the very contraction of the word Supremus. So that
if Supreme Bishop with you do not spoil Christ of his Priesthood, how can
supreme Governor with us lift him out of his kingdom; he clayming expressly
to be chief Pastor and Bishop of our souls and renouncing in words, and
refusing in deeds to be an earthly Prince and judge in temporal things as
the Scripture plainly records? And therefore first confess and correct your
own oversight, if not error, which takes from Christ or at lest divides with
him his special and peculiar title: and then if we prove not that all men have
written and spoken in like sort as we do, you shall find us ready, if that
be your fear to retract every syllable that is prejudicial to the son of
GOD, and to give him as much honor as you can wish, or we devise: which when
it is most, is no more than he well deserves.


Phi. You content us somewhat if you stand to this which you say, that you give
Princes no Power against the faith nor Canons of the Church, and that the
government which you acknowledge in them for spiritual things and causes is
nothing else but their temporal and external might and means to see the Rules
and precepts of Christ and his Church received and settled in their Realms,
and to punish the neglecters and resisters of the same. And yet your terms
were so large that your own friends reproved them as well as we.


Theo. Princes must be endured whatsoever they command, but not obeyed against
the faith or canons of the church. In temporal things Princes may not
frustrate the laws of their progenitors, nor the liberties of the people.
Neither misplace nor mistake my words: Against the precepts of Christ or
Canons of his Church we give Princes no power: most true, we do not; mary by
the Canons of the Church we do not mean the Popes Bulls or decrees, nor the
partial judgments of such Councels as he has assembled for his faction and
framed to his fancies: These be late, violent and wicked intrusions, but the
ancient and Godly Rules of Christ's Church generally received of all good
Christians and generally confirmed of all good Princes, these be the Canons
which Princes in duty should not, in equity may not subvert, if they will be
taken for faithful defenders and not ^or wilful oppressors of Christ's
church. For if in temporal things Princes may not dissolve the Laws of their
Progenitors, nor frustrate the liberties of their people against reason and
Justice, how much less ought they to violate the true Canons and euacuate the
good orders and discipline of the Church, concluded by so many Godly Fathers,
confirmed by so many worthy Princes, and settled in so many sundry places and
ages?

Lib. 4. cap. 27.
Constantine, says Eusebius, confirmed with his authority the Canons which
the Bishops had agreed on in their Synodes, lest the Rulers of (his) Provinces
should infringe them. Constit. 131. de Eccle. Canon.

Al godly princes have admitted the Canons of the Church.

Constit. 6. Athanas. ad solitar. vita^ agentes.


We decree, says Justinian, that the sacred ecclesiastical Canons concluded
and confirmed in the four (first general) Councels, have equal force with
(our) laws. For, we keep the Canons of the foresaid Councels as laws. And
again, It has been rightly said of Emperors before us and of us also, that
the sacred Canons ought to take place as laws. Athanasius objected this to
Constantius as a note of a tyrant, that he did abrogate the Canons with
violence, and ordered all things against the Canons. And Gregory, when it was
written to him that the Emperor commanded an other to be chosen for the Bishop
of Iustiniana within his province, by reason of the sickness which the said
Bishop was troubled with in his head, made this answer: The Canons do no where
command that a Bishop should loose his office for sickness. Gregor. lib. 9.
epist. 41.
And therefore it is against justice, if a Bishop fall sick, that he should be
deprived of his honor. If the said reverend Bishop for his own ease do require
to be discharged of his Episcopal function, when he delivers that petition
in writing, it must be granted. Otherwise I dare not do it, for fear of
almighty God. Whatseeuer the Emperor commands, is in his own power. Let
him provide as he sees cause: The Pope obeyed the Princes laws not against
the Canons.
only let him not cause me to be partaker of this man's deposition. That
which he does, if it be according to the Canons, we follow it; if it be
against the Canons, we bear it (with silence) so long as we may without sin
on our parts.


Phi. Where have you this place?


Theo. Why do you ask?


Phi. Because we find the former words in our Decrees but not the later.


Theo. In deed you say truth, they were not for your diet; they show that
the Bishop of Rome was obedient to the Emperor in ecclesiastical causes, so
long as the Prince did join with the Canons, and that he was silent when the
Prince went besides the Canons so far forth as he might without sin in
himself. The Popes name put in steed of the Princes.

Cause. 7. quaest. 1. Scripsit.


And therefore the Collector of your Decrees, left out the last words and
changed the first by putting the Popes person in steed of the Princes. For
where Gregory begins, Scripsit mihi tua dilectio pijssimum Dominum nostrum
reuerentissimo fratri meo Ioanni primae Iustinianae Episcopo, pro egritudine
capitis quam patitur praecipere succedi: Your Louingnes wrate unto me that our
most religious Lord commands an other to be chosen in the place of our
reverend brother John Bishop of Iustmiana, because of the grief of his
head: Your Law reports it thus, Scripsit mihitua dilectio, me reuerentissimo
fratri Do. etc. Your Louingnes wrate unto me that I commanded an other to be
chosen, etc. which is a detestable and inexcusable forgerie: but my purpose is
to show that good Princes observed and esteemed the Canons of the Church no
less than their own Laws, and took them for paternes to guide their Edicts
in causes ecclesiastical, Nouel. co^st. 83. Item constable. 6.
as says Justinian: Our Laws do not disdain to follow the sacred Rules (or
Canons.)


Phi. It abateth the supreme power of Princes very much to be bound to the
Canons of the Church. To be tied to the says and canons of the Church does not
diminish their supremacy.



Theo. No more than it does in civil regiment to be tied to the grounds of
nature, reason and equity, from which no wise nor sober Prince would wish to
be loosed. And Princes be Supreme not in respect that all things be subject
to their wills, which were plain tyranny, not Christian authority; but that
all Persons within their Realms are bound to obey their Laws, or abide their
pains, and themselves not depriueable by the Pope but reserved to the
righteous and terrible judge, if they abuse their swords to the maintaining of
error and oppressing of innocents.


Phi. Yet this is clear that the sword which Princes bear is temporal and
therefore the power which Princes have is not spiritual. The Princes sword is
not spiritual.



Theo. We never said that Princes had any spiritual power, it is a false
collection of yours, it is no part of our confession, and the sword which they
bear we never called but external and temporal. For the true spiritual and
eternal sword is the word of God. Ephesians. 6.
The sword of the spirit, says S. Paul, which is the word of God; and S.
John describing the son of God, says, Reuelat. 1.
Out of his mouth went a sharp two edged sword. The word of GOD, as S. Paul
writes, Hebr. 4.

The word of god is the spiritual sword.


is more percing than any two edged sword, and enters through even to the
parting in sunder of the soul and spirit. And as for both these causes it is
spiritual, so it indureth for ever and is eternal.

The magistrates sword compared with this is but corporal and temporal.
Corporal in respect it touches the body, The magistrates sword is corporal.
Mat. 10. Mat. 10. And temporal.
but not the soul. Our savior for warning his Disciples that they should be
brought before Governors and Kings for his sake, adds to encourage the^,
Fear not those which kill the body, but cannot kill the soul. Temporal it is
in respect either of Gods ordinance which lasts no longer than the time of
this world, or of man's vengeance which cease by death and rages no farther,
or if you will for that it orders the things of this life and praises or
punishes the senssible and external actions of the body which be temporal. 2.
Cor. 4.
The things which be seen are temporal, says S. Paul, but the things which
are not seen are eternal.


Phi. You take temporal for that which dureth for a season and is not eternal;
and we take temporal as it is opposite to spiritual. And in that sense because
the sword has to do with temporal men and matters only, we call it the
temporal sword: and have good reason to defend that temporal Princes should
not meddle with spiritual Persons or causes.


Theo. How the Papists abuse the word spiritual in extending it to men and
matters that they should not.
The distinction of spiritual and temporal Persons, things and causes as you
limite them sprang first from your selves without all authority, or rather in
deed against the authority of the holy scriptures: and was nothing else but a
mere devise of yours to increase your Courts and to wind the sword by little and
little out of other men's fingers and hang it at your own girdles. For when you
saw that the things which be truly spiritual, as faith, hope and charity with
other virtues and fruits of the spirit, belonged only to GOD and not to man,
and therefore by the resolution of our Savior must be given to God and not to
Caesar, first you would needs be termed spiritual men, taking the name which is
common to all the sons of GOD, as proper to your selves and your servants,
and by that color exempt not only Priests but also door keepers, torche
bearers, bell ringers, Church sweepers, and all your retinue from subjection to
temporal magistrates.

They be spiritual which have the spirit of God.

1. Cor. 3. 1. Cor. 2. Gal. 6.


But S. Paul calls them spiritual men which have the spirit of GOD, as all
his children have, and the rest carnal or natural men. I could not speak to you
brethren as unto spiritual men but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in
Christ. For where as there is yet among you enuieng, strife and dissension, are
you not carnal? And again, The natural man sauoureth not the things of the
spirit of God, but the spiritual man discerns al things. And so, Brethren, if
a man be fallen into any fault, you that be spiritual restore such a one with
the spirit of meekness. Jude epist.
As also S. Jude: These be fleshly men, having no spirit. And likewise Saint
Peter: 1. Pet. 2.
Be you made as lively stones, a spiritual house. What wrong then you do the
faithful when you name them temporal, as if the hope of their calling reached
no farther than this life, let the wise and Godly judge. That reproach of
temporal, and pride of spiritual men, no learned nor ancient father ever
used. Hieron. ad Julian. tomo epist. 1.
Secular S. Hierom calls them, Laymen and Clerks that were not Monks.
Temporal no man ever called the people of God besides your selves.

Next, that your lands and livings might speed no worse than your selves,
Their lands and livings must be spiritual though Saint Paul call the^ carnal.

1. Cor. 9. Romans 15.


for gain was the mother of your early and daily devotion, you took order to
have them go for spiritual things also, notwithstanding Saint Paul
expressly called them carnal. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is
it a great matter if we reap your carnal things? And speaking of the poor
Saints at Jerusalem, If the Gentiles be made partakers of their spiritual
things, their duty is also to minister unto them in carnal things. And where
the Lord himself willed the Scribes and high Priests to give unto Caesar the
things that were Caesar's, Mat. 22.
and unto God the things that were Gods, you, as if that grant had been too
liberal, thought it expedient upon some wiser consideration belike, to set
the image and superscription of God and his Church upon your corruptible and
earthly Mammon, and by that cunning to keep it from Caesar. Ambros. epist.
lib. 5. orat. co^tra Auxent.
Far better S. Ambrose: If the Emperor ask for tribute, we deny it not. The
lands of the Church pay tribute. If he affect the lands themselves, he has
power to take them, no man amongst us is any let unto him. The alms of the
people is enough for the poor. Let them never procure us envy for (our)
Lands, let them take them, if they please. I do not give them to the
Emperor; but I do not deny them.

Thirdly to enlarge your kingdom and stretch your wings over all men and
matters as far as you needed or listed, The Romish calendar of spiritual
things.
you took the punishment of incest, adultery, fornication, drunkenness,
usury, perjury, simonie, sorcerie, blasphemy, witchcraft, Apostacy, and
such like gross and fleshly vices out of the Magistrates hands under the
color of spiritual things, and fastened them to your consistories: And not
therewith content, you caught hold of tithes, testaments, legacies,
intestates, patronages, marriages, divorces, dowries, espousals, funerals,
affinity, consanguinitie, bastardie, bondage as of spiritual causes and
questions: and if the matter concerned the goods and Lands of Churches or
Church men, you made no bones to venture on gifts, See the tytles of their
Decretals.
sales, exchaunges, possession, alienation, restitution, conuentions,
conditions, exactions, sureties, pledges, payments, damages, injuries,
forgeries, hyring, lending, farming, and a thousand such, as if all actions,
causes and contracts that any way touched your gain or ease must by and by go
for spiritual, and the magistrate by that poor shift be secluded from
ordering and entermedling with those things, which were wont to be wholly
guided by the Princes Laws.


Phi. Mislike you that Priests should punish sin, or that Bishops should
deal in those cases which be incident to the Laws of GOD and Canons of the
Church?


Theo. Malefactors of al sorts should openly repent before they be received
to the Sacraments.
I do not mislike that malefactors of all kinds, not only drunkards,
raylers, periurers, adulterers, usurers and such like, but also thieves,
robbers, rauishers, murderers, plagiaries, incendiaries, tr^ytours and all
other heinous offenders, when their lives be spared by Prin^es, should be
driven to earnest and open repentance before they be ^eceiued into the
Church, or admitted to the divine mysteries: yea rather I th^nke it very
needful in a Christian commonwealth that God be pleased and the Church
preserved from all fellowship with these monsterous impieties as well as the
Scepter is entreated for their lives; but that you should exempt or save the
workers of wickedness from the Princes sword and their just deserts by your
privileges or penances in steed of punishments, that is quite repugnant to
the sacred Scriptures. Saint Paul says, the Prince is Gods minister to revenge
him that does evil, Romans 13.
and not the Priest. You may not revenge malefactors, you may separate your
selves from them, and have no communion with them: the Prince must punish them.
It passes your Commission to bear the sword, and without the power of the
sword your corporal correcting and afflicting of them is unlawful and
wrongful violence.

The goods, lands, and livings of Clergy men be Cesars right.
And so for tithes, testaments, administrations, servitude, legitimations and
such like, you went beyond your bounds, when you restrained them to your
Courts, and without Caesar, made Laws for things that belonged unto Caesar.
The goods, Lands, Livings, States and families of Lay men and Clerks are
Caesar's charge, not yours; and therefore your decrees, judgments and
executions in those cases, if you claim them from Christ as things
spiritual, What things Christian Princes first committed to Bishops for their
learning and integrity, the Pope afterward took the^ up as his own. Bishops
the fittest men to deal in these causes, but by the Princes power and laws.
not from Caesar as matters committed of trust to you by Christian Princes, are
nothing else but open and wilful invasions of other men's rightes, you
changing the names, and calling those things spiritual and ecclesiastical,
which in deed be civil and temporal, and shouldering Princes from their
cusshins, who first suffered Bishops to sit judges in those causes, of
Honor to their Persons and favor to their functions, which on your part is
but a bad requital of their Princely graces and benefits.


Phi. Affinity, consanguinitie, contractes, marriages, divorces and a number of
those which you reckon, are things that depend upon the laws of GOD, and
have often times such questions incident to them as none but Bishops are fit
to resolve.


Theo. All virtues and vices, all the parts of man's life both private and
public, as namely the duties of Princes, Counselors, Captains, Judges,
Parents, Husbands, Masters, Subjects, Soldiers, Children, Wives, and
Servants, yea the words, thoughts and actions of all men depend in this
respect upon the word of God, whether they shall be followed as lawful or
avoided as unlawful, and have often times in them such questions, as none but
divines are ^it to resolve: will you therefore infer that all crimes, causes
and consultations domestical, Political and martial are within the limittes
of your spiritual jurisdiction, to be guided, ordered and ended, as it
seems good to your Ghostly fathers?


Phi. Bishops have power to bind and loose as well in all sins as in some.


Theo. Bishops are to teach and instruct men what the will of GOD is in all
private, Bishops by their function may deny the sacraments to such as will not
repent, but they may not compel or punish any man without commission from the
Prince.

Compulsion and correction in all things is the Princes right.


public, spiritual, temporal, yea civil and warlike affairs, but their
authority goes no farther than to denounce the word and dispense the
Sacraments in such sort as GOD has prescribed them: It passes their power to
make Laws and appoint external and corporal punishments for any sin: that
is proper to the sword, which GOD has ordained of purpose to compel and
punish for the better execution of his will and observation of his Law, which
^ee things of all other most spiritual. And therefore as Preachers by their
office have instruction and direction in all things both temporal and
spiritual, to compare them and pronounce them consonant or dissonant with the
Law of GOD, so Princes have compulsion and correction annexed to their swords
as well for spiritual causes as temporal, or rather of the twain to see
Godliness and honesty preserved amongst men, than food and raiment provided.


Phi. This were a Paradoxe in deed that the Princes sword was first ordained
by God rather for spiritual things and causes than for temporal.


Theo. None at all, The sword ordained chiefly for things spiritual.

Romans 7. Ibidem.


if you mark it well. To buyld and plant, sow and reap, eat and drink
there needed no sword on earth; but to preserve the Rules of piety, charity,
sobriety and equity amongst men, for this cause were Magistrates first
ordained by God, and these be things precisely and properly called spiritual
in the sacred Scriptures. The law is spiritual, says the Apostle, and the
commandment (both the whole and every part of it) is holy, just and good,
which be the right notes of spiritual virtues. If then the sword were first
erected by GOD to defend and execute the parts and branches of his Law, and
the contents of his Law be spiritual, ergo the Princes power was first
ordained of God for things spiritual and not only for temporal, as you
fondly dream and are foully deceived.

And this is the meaning of Saint Paul when he says that Princes are not to
be feared for good works but for evil. Romans 13. 1. Pet. 2. Mark. 10.

Worldly things be neither good nor evil: for which two causes Princes bear
the word.


With whom Saint Peter agrees calling the king preeminent for the punishment
of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well. Now good and evil are to
be measured by Gods law, not by man's: for as no man is good but only God, so
no man's Law is the rule of good and evil but only Gods. And temporal
things be neither good nor evil, but altogether indifferent, ergo Princes
were not ordained of God for temporal things, but the goods, bodies, and lives
of their subjects were committed to their hands for spiritual respects, that
is, for the preservation of faith and good manners, which shall go for
spiritual things and causes, when your tithes and testaments shall stand
back for temporal.


Phi. Understand you what temporal is?


Theo. It should seem you do not by your dividing temporal against
spiritual. The spiritual things which the Pope claims are te^porall.
Repugnant to spiritual is carnal, corporal and natural, not temporal, as
you counter set them; and opposite to temporal is not spiritual, but
eternal. And here you may see the falsenes and absurdnes of your division. The
spiritual things which your Courts discuss be temporal not eternal: for
after this life there be no such questions nor actions. The keys and
Sacraments in which consists your spiritual power be not eternal but
temporal, they serve for the Church in earth, 1. Cor. 13.
not in heaven. Saint Paul will teach you that Prophesyings, tongues and
knowledge, notwithstanding they be gifts of the spirit, 1. Cor. 14.
and namely rehearsed among spiritual things by the holy Ghost, yet shall
they cease and be abolished. So that all the spiritual things which we strive
for, are but temporal, and things eternal be neither under the Priests
power nor the Princes, but reserved only to God and expected only from God.


Phi. Eternal they be not, but spiritual they be.


Theo. Then may the selfsame things be both spiritual and temporal, which
euerteth clean your loose division of Temporal against spiritual.


Phi. Princes were not ordained to cloa^^ the back and feed the bel^^.

^. Tim. 6.


Temporal we call those things that serve to maintain this temporal life.


Theo. The necessities of this life are nourishment and raiment, the rest are
superfl^ities. When we have food and apparel, says the Apostle, let us be
therewith content, whatsoever is above is needless and noisome. Our Savior
willing his not to be careful for their life, expresses all things that be
needful for this present life. Take no thought saying what shall we eat?
Mat. 6.
what shall we drink? or wherewith shall we be clothed? Your heavenly
Father knows that you have need of these things. These things we need,
and therefore are they promised: other things are not promised, and therefore
we need them not. If Princes were first ordained of God for those things
only which are needful to maintain this temporal life (for things
superfluous are besides the promise and without the protection of GOD,) the
power and charge of Princes should consist in meats, drinks and apparel,
and Princes have no farther care of their people than they have of their
hounds and Horses, to see them well fed and smoothe kept, which is a very
wicked and brutish opinion.


Phi. They are besides to maintain peace and quietness among their subjects.


Theo. You might have joined godliness and honesty therewithal, as S. Paul
does, 1. Tim. 2.
and then had you done well. I exhort, says he, that prayers and
supplications be made for Kings and for all that are in authority, that we may
lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. Godliness and
honesty the chiefest causes why Princes were ordained.
Prayers must be made for kings, that they may discharge their duties
according to Gods ordinance, which is, that their subjects by their help and
means, may lead an honest, godly and quiet life, godliness and honesty
being the chiefest ends of our prayers and effects of their powers. For God
has not put the goods, lands, bodies and lives of men into Princes hands to
cloth their backs and fill their bellies, but with praise to provoke those
that be willing, and to drive those that be not willing, with punishments, to
embrace piety toward God, sobriety toward themselves, and charity
toward their neighbors.

This you may learn by the regiment of every private family, The Prince has
the same charge in the commonwealth that every private man has in his family.

Ephesians. 6.

The parents charge toward their children.

Psalm. 34. Deuteronomy. 4. Deuteronomy. 4.


which is both a part and a pattern of the commonwealth. Al parents and
masters have a farther charge over their children and servants than to see
them defended from hunger and cold. A wicked father is he that feeds and
cloatheth; and nour^ereth not his children. Ye fathers, says S. Paul, bring up
your children in the instruction and information of the Lord. Come children,
says David, harken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord. Moses
admonishing the whole people of the Jews and as it were speaking to every
particular man: Take heed, says he, to thy self that thou forget not the
things which thine eyes have seen, and that they depart not out of thine
heart all the days of thy life: but teach them thy sons and thy sons
sons: and so God himself said to Moses, Gather me the people together, and
I will cause them to hear my words, that they may learn to fear me all the
days that they shall live upon the earth, and that they may teach their
children. This diligence God commended and rewarded in Abraham as the best part
of a fathers duty: Genes. 18.
I know him, says God, that he will command his sons and his household
after him that they keep the way of the Lord, to do righteousness and
judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that (good) which he has
spoken unto him. If private men be bound to train up their families in the
fear of God and love of virtue, much more are Princes (the public fathers of
their countries and exalted to far greater and higher authority by Gods
ordinance than fathers or masters) I say much more are they in conscience
charged and by calling licenced to frame their subjects to the true service of
God and right obedience of his law, which be things not temporal but spiritual.

This king David protests and promises unto God he will do in his kingdom.
Him, Psalm. 101.

David's charge in his kingdom.


that privily slaundereth his neighbor, will I destroy. Mine eyes shall be to
the faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with me, he that walks in a
perfect way, he shall serve me. There shall no deceitful (or proud) person
dwell within mine house, he that tells lies shall not remain in my sight.
Betimes will I destroy all the wicked of the Land that I may cut off all the
workers of iniquity from the city of the Lord.

This christian Princes, Religion the Princes chiefest charge.

Nouel. Consti. 6.


as you heard before, made not only a part but the chiefest part of their
duty. The true religion of God and honest conversation (even) of Priests
(themselves) is our chiefest care, says Justinian. And so Valentinian and
Theodosius: Legum Theod. Nouel. tit. 2. de Iudaeis and Samaritanis. Aug. epist.
162.

The sifting and examining of a Bishop did most pertain to the princes charge
by S. Aug. judgment


The search of true religion we find to be the chiefest care of the Imperial
Majesty. With whom S. Austen agrees defending Felix a catholic Bishop
against the Donatists for that he was cleared at a temporal bar by the Princes
commandment of such crimes as were objected to him notwithstanding they were
ecclesiastical. One (of you) says a Bishop ought not to be cleared at the
Proconsuls bar, as though he sought it and not rather the Emperor commanded
that kind of trial to be had, to whose charge that matter did most pertain,
and whereof the Prince was to render an account to God.

Of this mind were the Bishops of Rome themselves in former ages. Eleutherius
not long after Christ wrote to Lucius king of this realm amongst other things
in this wise: Epist. ad Luciu^ inter leges Edward. cap. 17.

Eleutherius opinion of the Princes charge.

Inter leges Edward. Reg. cap. 17.

Pope John's opinion of the Princes charge.


You are Gods Vicar in that kingdom. The nations and people of Britanny are
yours; whom you ought to gather and bring unto concord and peace, unto the
faith and law of Christ, and unto his (holy) Church, and to nourish, maintain,
protect and rule, and always to defend from injuries, mischiefs and from
enemies. A king you shall be, whiles you rule well, which except you do you shall be
unworthy the name of a king and loose it, which God forbid. So Pope John made
answer to Pipin and Charles. Illos decet vocari Reges, qui vigila^ter
defendunt and regunt ecclesiam Dei and populum eius imitati Regem Psalmographum
dicentem, non habitabit in medio domus meae, qui facit superbiam, etc. We must
call those kings, which do carefully defend and rule the church of God and his
people, after the example of king David in his Psalms, a proud man shall not
dwell in mine house.

Beda hist. gentis Anglor. cap. 32. Gregory's confession of the Princes charge.
This Gregory the great earnestly exhorted Edelberth unto, the first that was
christened of the Saxon kings in this Land. For this cause the almighty God
brings good Princes to the regiment of his people, that by them he may
bestow the gifts of his mercy upon all that are under the^. Therefore glorious
son, the grace which you have obtained at Gods hands keep with a careful
mind, and hasten to extend the faith of Christ in the nations under you.
Increase the zeal of your vprightnes to their conversion, subvert the worship
of idols, overthrow their temples, edify the manners of your subjects by
exhorting, threatening, fair entreating, correcting, and showing examples of
well doing, that you may find him a rewarder in heaven, whose name and knowledge
you have dilated in earth. For so Constantine a most religious Emperor,
reuoking the Roman Empire from the perverse service of idols subdued the same
with himself to the almighty God, our Lord Jesus Christ, and turned him self
together with the people under him to God with all his heart. And now let your
excellency labor to pour the knowledge of one God the father, the son and the
holy Ghost into the Princes and people that are subject to you, that he may
make you partaker of his kingdom, whose faith you cause to be received and
observed in your kingdom.

This the kings of England before and since the conquest were taught to be
their duty and sworn to execute faithfully as the laws of king Edward the good
make proof, The king of Englands oath expressing his charge.

Inter leges Edward. cap. 17. de Regis off^cio.


which William the Conqueror received and confirmed: where the office and
charge of a king are thus expressed: A king, because he is the Lieutenant of
the most high king, was appointed to this end that he should regard and govern
the earthly kingdom and the people of God, and above all things his holy
Church, and defend her from wrongs, and root out male factors from her, yea
scatter and destroy them. Which except he do he can not justly be called a
king. A king ought to fear God, and above all things to love him and to
establish his commandments throughout his kingdom. He ought also to keep,
Ibidem.
nourish, maintain, and govern the holy Church of his kingdom with all
integrity and liberty according to the constitutions of (his) fathers and
predecessors, and to defend it against enemies, so as God may be honored
above all, and ever had in mind. He ought to establish good laws and approved
customs, and abolish evil (laws and customs) and remove them all out of his
Realm. He ought to do right judgment in his kingdom, and execute justice by
the counsel of his Nobles. All these things ought the king to swear in his
own person before he be crowned.

The very Heathen perceived and confessed this to be true. Aristotle a
profane Philosopher writing of the first institution of kings, The very
heathen were of the same opinion.
shows how many things they were by office to meddle with (...), A king (in
old time) was the leader in wars, pronouncer in judgments, and ouerseer of
religion. Politic. lib. 3. cap. 11. Ibidem, cap. 5.
And again, (...), Divine things were committed to Princes (as part of their
charge.) Al Monarchies, kingdoms and commonwealths, Assyrians, Persians,
Medes, Graecians, Romans, In all kingdoms and commonwealths since the
foundation of the earth religion has been settled and defended by the
Magistrates sword.
Jews, Gentiles, Pagans, Christians, have ever kept this for a general rule,
that religion should be settled and establissed by public laws, and
maintained by the Magistrates sword. So that if you take the defense of piety,
the reward of honesty, and balance of equity from the Princes charge, you run
headlong against God and man to feed your own appetites, and see not that
which reason and nature taught the heathen to confess, that as every private
man is bound to seek and serve God above all things, so every society of
men, be it family, city or country, is likewise bound to have a special and
principal care of his service, which can not be done, unless it be planted
and preserved by public laws: and of these laws as of all other amongst men,
only Magistrates be the makers, keepers and reuengers.


Phi. Princes be charged after a sort with godliness, and honesty.


Theo Your delays do not answer our proofs. We show the chiefest part of
their charge to be godliness and honesty, which be things spiritual, not
temporal.


Phi. What if that be granted?


Theo. If their duty stretch so far, their authority must stretch as far.
Their authority must stretch as far as their duty.
Their charge cease where their power ends. God never requires princes to
do that which he permits the^ not to do: but rather his commanding them to
care for those things is a full authorizing of them to meddle with those
things. If then godliness and honesty be the chiefest part of their charge,
ergo they be likewise the chiefest end of their power, and consequently Princes
bear the sword chiefly for spiritual things and causes, and not, as you
defend, only for temporal.


Phi. You put all things temporal, spiritual and ecclesiastical into their
hands.


Theo. In all these things and other things whatsoever, we say, they bear the
sword, God has given Princes the sword in those things which himself
commands.
and why should that displease you? God has given them the sword even in
those things which himself commands and prescribes, as namely faith and
good manners, which be the chief contents of his law and respects of our
life, and do you think it much that they bear the sword in those indifferent
matters which Bishops have agreed on for seemelinesse and good order to be kept
in the church, no way comparable to those things which God has put them in
trust with, and made them defenders and auengers of?

The Priest in no cause may bear the sword.
And if Princes shall not bear the sword in things and causes
ecclesiastical, you must tell us who shall. The Priest or the Prince of force
must do it; and since by Gods law the Priest may not meddle with the sword, the
conseque^t is inevitable, that Princes alone are Gods ministers, bearing the
sword to reward and revenge good and evil in all things and causes, be they
temporal, spiritual or ecclesiastical, unless you think that disorders and
abuses ecclesiastical should be freely permitted and neither prevented nor
punished by public authority, which in these froward ages, would breed a
plain contempt of all ecclesiastical order and discipline, and hasten the
subversion of those kingdoms and commonwealths where such confusion is
suffered.


Phi. The Rites and Ceremonies of the Church are not in the Princes power. The
confirming of Rites and Ceremonies needs the sword.



Theo. To devise new Rites and Ceremonies for the Church, is not the Princes
vocation, but to receive and allow such as the Scriptures and Canons commend
and such as the Bishops and Pastors of the place shall advise, not infringing
the Scriptures or Canons. And so for all other ecclesiastical things and
causes, Princes be neither the deuisers nor directors of them, but the
confirmers and establishers of that which is good, and displacers and reuengers
of that which is evil, which power we say they have in all things and causes,
be they spiritual, ecclesiastical or temporal.


Phi. And what for excommunications and absolutions, be they in the Princes
power also? The abuse or contempt of excommunication revenged by the sword.

The sword committed to the Prince.

Romans 13.

His Apostles forbidden the sword.

Mat. 26.





Theo. The abuse of excommunication in the Priest, and contempt of it in the
people, Princes may punish; excommunicate they may not, for so much as the
keys are no part of their charge. But these particulars if we severally
discuss we shall never end: the general rules on which our assertion is
grounded, may be sooner proposed and resolved.

First, to whom has God committed the sword, to the Priest or the Prince?


Phi. To whom say you?


Theo. S. Paul expressly writes of the Prince that He bears the sword not
without cause, and is Gods minister to revenge him that does evil. And our
Savior severely forbids Peter and the rest of his Apostles to meddle with
the sword: All that take the sword shall perish by the sword; and to them all,
You know that kings of Nations reign over the^, and they that be great
exercise authority, with you it shall not be so. Mat. 20.
The sword is but the sign of public and Princely power, and where the thing
is not lawful, the sign is unlawful. Since then the Lord interdicteth his
Apostles and messengers all princely power, it is evident, the sword which is
but a sign thereof, is likewise interdicted them.

Thus much Bernard sticks not to tell Pope Eugenius to his face. Bernard de
considerat. lib. 2.
It is the Lords voice in the Gospel: Kings of Nations are Lords over them,
and they that have power on them are called gracious, and the Lord infers,
you shall not be so. It is a clear case, the Apostles are forbidden dominion.
Go thou then, Dominion interdicted the Pope himself.
says Bernard to the Pope, and usurp if thou dare, either an Apostleship if
thou be a Prince, or dominion if thou be Apostolik. Thou art expressly
forbidden one of them. If thou will have both, thou shall loose both. The
pattern of an Apostle is this, dominion is interdicted, service is enjoined.
Gird thy self with thy sword, the sword of the spirit, which is the word of
God. And this Pope Nicholas fairly confesses. Cause. 33. quaest. 2. Inter haec.
The church of God has no sword but the spiritual, wherewith she quickens,
she kills not.

Your own law says: Ca^s. 33. quaest. 8. De Episc.

No clergimen may use the sword no not by the Popes authority.


It is easily proved of Bishops and other clergimen whatsoever, that they may
not either by their own authority, or by the authority of the Bishop of
Rome, take weapon in hand (and exercise the material sword) and adds this
reason, For every man besides him and his authority which has lawful power
and which, as the Apostle says, bears the sword not without cause, to whom
every soul ought to be subject, every man, I say, that without this
authority takes the sword, shall perish with the sword.

He that bears the sword may lawfully put malefactors to death, and wage
war with his enemies when need so requires, which Bishops may not do. The
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, 2. Cor. 10.
says S. Paul. Quid Episcopis cum bello? What have Bishops to do with batle,
Ad solitar. vita^ agentes. Ambros. lib. 5. Epist. 33.
says Athanasius; and Ambrose, Pugnare non debeo: I ought not to fight. If
they may not fight much less kill, if they may do neither, they can not bear
the sword, which is appointed by God, and received of men to do both.

The words of our Savior are clear with us for the negative. My kingdom, says
he, The servants of Christ may have no earthly kingdom, since their master had
none.

John. 8. Matthew. 10. 2. Tim. 2.


is not of this world. If then your Priests, Prelates and Popes will be the
servants of Christ, they must challenge no worldly kingdom as from him or in his
name. The servant is not above his master. If the master with his own mouth
have denied it, the servants may not affirm it, or vsurp it. The soldiers of
Christ must not entangle themselves with secular affairs, much less make
themselves Lords and judges of earthly matters, which office properly belongs
to the sword and must be sustained of all those that bear the sword.

The Popes themselves before their power and pride grew so great, were of this
opinion with us. Distinct. 96. Cum. ad verum.
When the truth (which is Christ) was once come, after that, says Pope
Nicolas, neither did the Emperor take upon him the Bishops right, A Bishop
may not vsurp an Emperors name, much less his sword
nor the Bishop usurp the Emperors name, because the same mediator of God
and man, the man Christ Jesus, distinguishes the offices of each power with
proper actions and different dignities, to this end that (the Bishop) which is
a soldier unto God should not entangle and snare himself with wordly
affairs, and again (the Prince) which is occupied in earthly matters should
not be Ruler of divine things.

Distinct. 10. Quoniam ide^. Cyprian writes to Julian an 100. years before
Julian was borne.

The Disciples of Christ straightly charged not to meddle with Princely swords.


The very same text, word for word, your Decrees make Cyprian write to Julian
the Emperor, if those be Cyprians words, and not rather an impudent forgerie
in his name. For how could Cyprian that died under Valerian 260. after Christ,
write to Julian that began his reign 360. after Christ? But such proppes are
fittest to bolster up your kingdom of darkness and error.

Sure it is, which the words of our Savior apparently prove, that all the
Disciples and Apostles of Christ are straightly charged not to meddle with
princely Scepters and swords, and therefore out of all question only Princes
bear the sword within their own Realms and dominions, for so much as that
honor and power is expressly prohibited and interdicted by the Lord himself
to all Preachers and Bishops.


Phi. This we would have granted you with half these words.


Theo. And this we would have depend not on your grant, which is fickle, but
on such proofs as we might make just account of.


Phi. How then?


Theo. As the first is apparent, that only Princes have the sword committed to
their charge by Gods appointment, so the next is as evident that the sword I
mean the public authority of Magistrates in Christian commonwealths, The
sword has been, may be, and should be used for that which is good in all
spiritual things and causes.
has been, may be, and should be used for the receiving, establishing and
de^ending of that which is good, and prohibiting, abolishing and punishing of
that which is evil in all spiritual and ecclesiastical things and causes,
as well as in temporal: which the sacred Scriptures, the ancient Fathers, the
Church Stories, the laws and examples of al ages and countries do sufficiently
prove, as you saw before.


Phi. This is not it that we stand on.


Theo. This is that we affirm, stand you on what you lift.


Phi. If this be granted, what will you conclude?


Theo. If this be proved, you shall see what we conclude. If it be not, show
where the defect is.


Phi. That only Princes bear the sword within their own realms, which may be
and should be used for the receiving, establishing, and defending of the faith
and Cannons of the church and all things incident or pertinent to the same,
and for prohibiting and punishing whatsoever is repugnant to either, in this we
find no defect; Let us therefore see what you will infer.


The. First then the words of our oath, that Her Highness is the only governor of
this realm (bearing the sword) as well in all spiritual, The oath cleared.
or ecclesiastical things and causes as temporal, be not only tolerable and
reasonable, but such by your own confession as we may truly defend, and you can
not justly confute. Their absurdities returned on their own heads.
Next the absurdities which you bring against us, as if we derived the
spiritual power of preaching, baptizing, binding, loosing, imposing hands and
offering prayers to God, from the Princes Sovereign right and title, which we
do not: all these absurdities I say be mere follies, grounded upon the
careless mistaking, if not spiteful perverting of our words. Thirdly, your
defacing and im^^ouing the Princes sword, The Popes power over Princes usurped.
and aduauncing and defending against all Princes one that shall command them
and depose them at his pleasure, what else is this but a resisting of the
powers which God has ordained, and ^recting and (...) in the Church of Christ
without authority, that under the covert of binding and feeding shall make
himself Lord of all kingdoms and countries?


Phi. Supreme is the word that we most impugn.


Theo. And Supreme is the word which you shall never overthrow, being a plain
and manifest deduction out of the words of S. Paul. Let every soul, Romans 13.

Supreme is a manifest deduction out of S. Paul.


says he, be subject to the superior Powers. If all men must be subject to
them, ergo they be superior to all, and superior to all is supreme. Consult
both your Seminaries, and refell this one sequel if you can: marie cavil not
as your Apology does, that Supreme brings Christ and his Saints in
subjection to Princes. The Apostle speaks of mortal men, and so do we: And
in comparison, with them if Saint Paul's words be true that every soul must be
subject to Princes as unto Superiors; our consequent is irrefutable, that
Princes be supreme.


Phi. S. Paul makes them superiors over all persons but not over all things.
Supreme over Persons, not over things.



Theo. That distinction is ours, not yours: we did ever interpret supreme for
superior to all men within their dominions.


Phi. And so we grant them to be, but not in all things. For in temporal
things they be superiors to all men, in spiritual they be not.


Theo. That restraint comes too late. We may not limit where we will obey the
sword, and where not.
The holy Ghost charging you to be subject to them simply without addition, it
passes your reach to limit in what things you will, and in what things you
will not be subject.

Again we have inuinciblie proved and you have clearly confessed that
Princes may command for truth, Where they may command, we must obey.

We may not resist them, but with reverence endure them, though they command
against God and his truth. Heathen Tyraunts had power of the sword over Christ
and his Apostles.


and that they bear the sword for the perfect observation and execution of
Gods law, and public defense of the faith and Cannons of the Church, which
be things not temporal but spiritual; and out of all question, where they
may by Gods law command, all men must obey them, not only for fear of wrath;
but also for conscience sake.

Lastly what better proof can you wish that in all things they be superiors
to all men, than that their sword may not be resisted for any temporal or
spiritual cause, but must be rather endured with meekenes and reverence,
though they persecute truth, and show themselves enemies to God and his church?
For so the Lord in his own person taught us, and his Apostles after him, in
their writings and sufferings followed the same course.


Phi. Had Heathen tyrants lawful power over Christ and his Apostles in
spiritual things?


Theo. Lawful power of the sword to reward and punish, they had over Christ
and his Apostles in things and causes spiritual. Christ submitted himself to
the Magistrate.
The Lord of grace and life being delivered by the Priests to the Magistrate
for blasphemy which is a spiritual crime, refused not the judge, but
submitting himself to the Princes Deputy, confessed Pilates power over him
to be from heaven, notwithstanding Pilates sentence against him was wrongful
and wicked. So Paul and Peter both did and taught.
S. Paul imprisoned for preaching the Gospel required to be sent to Caesar and
to make answer before Caesar concerning his doctrine and doings. S. Peter
patiently endured Neroes sword even unto death for teaching the truth, and
warned all Christians to do the like. Let none of you suffer (public
punishment) as a murderer, 1. Pet. 4.
or as a thief, or a malefactor, or as a medler with other men's matters: but
if (any man suffer) as a Christian (that is for religion) let him not be
ashamed but glorify God in this respect. Romans 13.
They that resist (especially when they be punished for religion) shall receive
to themselves judgment) and damnation; for God is then most dishonored when
we make religion a buckler for rebellion. If none must resist that suffer as
christians, ergo by Gods ordinance, al men be subject to the Princes sword,
even in spiritual causes as well as in temporal.


Phi. Whom we must endure in that which is evil, those must we obey in that
which is good.

Aug. Epist. 50. Idem Epist. 166.


To suffer, but not to obey.


Theo. Suffering is as sure a sign of subjection as obeying. And yet whom you
must endure commanding that which is evil in matters of religion, those you
must obey when they command that which is good in the self same causes:
which you heard concluded out of S. Augustine before. Whosoever will not obey
the laws of Emperors which are made for the truth of God, incurreth a grievous
judgment. And again, When Emperors hold truth they command for truth, which
whosoever despises purchases to himself judgment. So that all men are bound
to be subject to the sword in all things be they temporal or spiritual, not
only by suffering, but also by obeying; mary with this caution, that in things
which be good and agreeable to the law of God, the sword must be obeyed: in
things that be otherwise, it must be endured.

The sum of the doctrine which we teach concerning the Princes supremacy.
This then is the supreme power of Princes which we soberly teach and you so
bitterly detest; that they be Gods ministers in their own dominions, bearing
the sword, freely to permit, and publicly to defend that which God commands
in faith and good manners, and in ecclesiastical discipline to receive and
establish such rules and orders as the Scriptures and Canons shall decide to be
needful and healthful for the Church of God in their kingdoms. And as they
may lawfully command that which is good in all things and causes, be they
temporal, spiritual, or ecclesiastical, so may they with just force remove
whatsoever is erroneous, vicious, or superstitious within their Lands, and
with external losses and corporal pains repress the brochers and abetters
of heresies and all impieties: from which subjection unto Princes, no man
within their Realms, Monk, Priest, Preacher, nor Prelate is exempted; and
without their Realms no mortal man has any power from Christ iudicially to
depose them, much less to invade them in open field, least of al to warrant
their subjects to rebel against them.

These be the things which we contend for, The Jesuits iestes wherewith they
mock the Reader.
and not whether Princes be Christ's masters, or the functions to preach,
baptize, impose hands and forgive sins must be derived from the Princes power
and laws, or the Apostles might enter to convert countries without Caesar's
delagations, those be iestes and shifts of yours, no branches nor sequeles
of our opinion. You see the parts and proofs of our doctrine, neither draw
back, nor dally, but go to the matter: and say what fault you find with our
assertion.


Phi. The former branches of your assertion might be received, if it were
agreed, by whom the sword should be directed. THE DIRECTION of PRINCES UNTO
TRVETH.
We our selves confess that the Princes sword should permit, defend and
execute that which is good in all spiritual and ecclesiastical things,
causes and judgments, and repel and punish the contrary. But least Princes
should wade too far or tread awry, we would have their swords guided, and if
need be restrained by such as have greater experience and better intelligence
in those affairs. For ecclesiastical rules and Canons be not incident to the
Princes vocation, and therefore no marvel if Princes be raw in those things
wherewith they be not acquainted. And since the danger is great if they command
for error, and their skill not so great but that they may soon miss the truth,
why should you be loath that others of deeper judgment and exacter knowledge,
whom God has placed to teach both private men and Princes their duties in
those cases, should direct and moderate the swords of Princes for fear least
they should be missed to the ruin of themselves, and many thowsandes with them?


Theo. We be not loath they should be directed, but rather exhort all Princes to
take great care, Princes must take good care to come by faithful direction.
and spare no pains to come by faithful and true direction in those things
that pertain to God. For if in temporal matters where the losses are but
temporal, they do nothing without the mature and sound advise of their grave
and trusty Counselors, how inexcusable is their negligence, if in heavenly
things where the bodies and souls of themselves and their subjects may be
lost for ever, they serve their affections and seek not his will that set them
in place, and gave them power to maintain his truth, and safeguard his Church?


Phi. We then agree on both sides, The right directors unto truth must be
discerned by their doctrine not by their dignity.
that Princes must be directed.


Theo. We do.


Phi. If they must be directed, ergo by Bishops.


Theo. Bishops for their calling and learning are the likeliest men to direct
them right, but yet your ergo does not hold. It is not enough for them to be
Bishops, they must also be teachers of truth, before they may claim to be
directours of Princes.


Phi. Who be more likely to teach truth than Bishops?


Theo. I said before they were likely, but your conclusion inforceth a
necessity which you can not prove. Many Bishops have taught lies and seduced
Princes in the church of God, and therefore not their dignity, but their
doctrine is it that Princes must regard: for neither Prince, nor people stand
bound to the persons of men, but unto the truth of God, and unto their teachers
so long as they swerve not from truth.


Phi. And who shall be judge of truth?


Theo. Absolute judge of truth, No mortal man may
neither Prince nor Priest may challenge to be.


Phi. Why so?


Theo. God is truth, and of God I trust no man may be judge. The son of God
says of himself, I am truth: John. 14.
and S. John gives this record of the spirit of God, The spirit is truth. Ye
can therefore be no judges of truth unless ye will be judges of God. 1. John. 5.



Phi. Who shall then be judge of truth?


The. Who but Christ?


Phi. He shall be judge at the last day.


Theo. He shall then give general and final judgment of all men, but in the
mean time he only is the sovereign and supreme judge of truth. The Father
has committed all judgment to the son, and John. 5. and 8. De Nuptijs ad
Valentin. lib. 2. ^ap. 33.
my judgment, says Christ, is just. This strife, says Augustine, requires a
judge. Iudicet ergo Christus: Let Christ be therefore judge. In earth, says
Optatus, of this matter there can be no judgment, Optat. lib. 5. ad
^ermenianum.
we must seek for a judge from heaven. But why knock we at heaven, when as
we have his will here in the Gospel?


Phi. They mean that Christ speaks in his church at this day by his word, and
so judges. John. 17.

Bishops no judges of the word of God.

The church is not judge of the Scriptures

John. 10.





Theo. And we mean that his word is truth, and therefore your Bishops can not
be judges of the word of Christ, but they must be judges of Christ himself,
that speaks by his word, which is no small presumption.


Phi. Shall not the Church be judge of the Scriptures?


Theo. My sheep, says Christ, hear my voice, they be no judges of his voice.
A judge of the law is no James 4.

Aust. in Psalm. 2.


obseruer of the law, as S. James avouches: and since the whole church is
bound to obey the law of God, they be no judges of the law. Inferius est nobis
quicquid iudicamus. It is inferior to us whatsoever we be judges of: Idem de
vera religione, ca. 31.
Eternam igitur legem mundis animis fas est cognoscere, iudicare non fas est.
The eternal law of (God) therefore, it is lawful for clean hearts to know, it
is not lawful for them to judge. We Idem confess. lib. 13. cap. 23.
must not, says Augustine to God, judge of so high authority, neither of the
book which is thine, because we submit our understanding to it. And again: To
the canons of the Scriptures pertain Contra Cresc. lib. 2. cap. 31.
certain books of the Prophets and Apostles, quos omnino iudicare non
audeamus, the which in any case we may not dare to judge. And this is the
reason, there may be no judge of truth, where no danger of error is: And of
the Scriptures S. Austine says, Idem Epist. 19. ad Hieronym.
Quod omni errore careant dubitare nefarium est, It is a wickedness to make a
doubt whether there be any error in them or no: therefore there may be no
judges of them: but the whole church must be subject to them, and with all
humility believe them.


Phi. The Bishops be no judges of the Scriptures whether they be true or no;
that as you prove is no doubt, and therefore needs no judge: But in this they
be judges, whether the Scriptures be mistaken of others or no.


Theo. Then be they no judges of truth, which is the thing that I first
affirmed, but of them selves and others which be subject to error and
ignorance.


Phi. Yet they be judges of error, Judging taken for discerning
though not of truth.


Theo. If you take judging for discerning, as the word does often signify,
they can not be teachers of truth, Only God must limit what is truth, and
what error.
unless they can discern truth from error: But only God is to limit and
appoint by his word, what shall stand for truth and what for error. With that
Bishops have nothing to do, they must hear and believe the voice of the great
Sheepeheard Christ Jesus, as well as the meanest sheep in his fould.


Phi. We grant you that, so you grant us this, that only Bishops be
discerners of truth.


Theo. A liberal offer: You will grant us a known truth upon condition that
we shall grant you a manifest untruth. Make earth and ashes, if you dare, to
be judges of their Lord and master which is in heaven, or deny Bishops when
they be at the highest, to be the servants of Christ; yea happy be they if
they be so much: In these things we neither stand at your alms, nor ask your
consents, we be right sure and dare not deny them, and therefore our assertion
is without contradiction: yours is utterly false, that only Bishops be
discerners of truth. To discern truth belongs to all. God wills all men to
try spirits.

1. John. 4.


For as Bishops ought to discern which is truth before they teach, so must the
people discern who teaches right before they believe.


Phi. Shall the people judge their Pastors? you be so new fangled that you say
you know not what.


Theo. We have the words and warrant of the holy Ghost for that which we say.
Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they be of god: for many
false prophets are gone out into the world. Prophets be teachers, and if they
must be tried before they be trusted, ergo Pastors must be discerned before
they be believed, and by whom trow you; but by those that should believe them,
that is by their hearers? The same precept our Savior gave to the multitudes
that followed him. Matthew. 7.

And to discern false teachers.


Beware of false Prophets (or teachers) which come to you in sheep clothing,
but inwardly they be ravening wolves. By their fruits you shall know them. If
all must beware them, and are taught how to know them, ergo they may lawfully
try them, before they believe them. This wisdom the Lord himself commends
in his sheep. John. 10.
My sheep hear my voice, and they follow me. A stranger they will not follow
but fly from him.


Phi. Yet they be no Judges of Doctrine. The people must discern teachers by
their doctrine

1. Corinthians. 10. 1. Corinthians. 11.





Theo. If you take iudgeing for discerning, as it is often used, the people
must be discerners and judges of that which is taught: S. Paul himself
allows them that leave. I speak as unto them that have understanding; judge
ye what I say. And again, Judge with your selves, is it seemly that a woman
pray unto God uncovered? And to that end belongs this exhortation of the Lord
which is often found in the scriptures: Matthew. 24. Colos. 8. Ephesians. 5. 1. John
3.
Look that no man seduce you. For the people of God should have their senses
Heb. 5. 1. Corinthians. 14.

Orig in Je^ ^^ Naue. hom. 2.

The Fathers referred them selves to the judgment of the hearers.


exercised in the word of truth, to discern both good and bad, and in that
respect the Apostle sticks not to say: Let the Prophets speak two or three
and let the rest judge.

Orige^ in teaching the people, submits himself to the Apostles R^le in
these words: Vos facite quod scriptu^ est, vt vno dicente, omnes examinent. Me
ergo dicente quod sentio, vos discernite and examinate si quid rectu^ est, aut
minus rectu^. Do you that which is written; one speaking, al (the rest)
examine. Whiles the^ I say what I think, try and judge you what is right and
what is not. Ambrose when Auxen. offered to dispute before some that were
heathen men and not christened, thus traduceth him to the people of Milla^.
Ambros. Epi. li. 5. orat. in Aux.
Auxentius knowing you not to be ignorant of the faith, has shunned your
judgment and chosen four or five heathen men. Then in that he has chosen
infidels, he is worthy to be condemned (of christians) because he has rejected
the Apostles precept, where he says, Dare any of you having ought against
another, be judged under the unjust and not rather under the Saints? You see
then that which he has offered is against the Apostles authority. But what
speak I of the Apostle, when the Lord him self proclaims by his Prophet,
Hear me my people that know (what belongs to) judgment, in whose heart my
law is? God says, hear me my people that know judgment: Auxentius says, You
know not how to judge: you see that he contemns God in you, which refuteth
the sense of (this) heavenly oracle. For the people, in whose heart the law of
God is does judge. Who then does you wrong, he that refuses or he that
refers himself to your audience?


Phi. The people must depend on their teachers mouths and not be judges over
them. He that hears you, hears me, says our savior to his Apostles and
their successors, Luke. 10.
and he that despises you, despises me. And whosoever shall not receive you,
nor hear your words going forth out of the house or city, shake off the dust
from your feet. Amen, I say to you, it shall be more tolerable for the land of
the Sodomits and Gomorrhea^s in the day of judgment than for that city. Matt.
10.



Theo. As the Pastors have authority from Christ to preach the truth, and woe be
to them that resist the Preachers of truth; The people have liberty to
discern, and charge to beware seducers.
so have all hearers both liberty to discern and a charge to beware seducers,
given them by the same Lord, and woe be to them that do it not. Take heed,
says our Savior, that no man seduce you. For many shall come in my name,
saying: I am Christ, and shall deceive many. Then if any shall say to you, Matthew.
24.
Lo here is Christ, or there, believe it not. For there shall arise false
Christ's and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders. Behold I
have told you before. Wherefore if they shall say unto you, behold he is in the
desert, go not forth: behold he is in the secret places, believe it not. He
that requires al men to receive such as he sends, charge al men to avoid
such as pretend his name when they are not sent: and how can the people do
either if they have not skill and leave to discern them both?


Phi. Our Lord gave that honor to his very enemies, that the people should
obey them, Matthew. 23.
in regard of Moses chair. Upon the chair of Moses have fitten the Scribes
and the Pharisees. All things therefore, whatsoever they shall say to you,
observe ye and do ye, but according to their works do ye not for they say and
do not.


Theo. Think you that Christ commanded the people to believe the Pharisees,
The people not bound to believe the Pharisees doctrine, except it accorded to
the law of God.
whatsoever they taught, or that he affirmed the Pharisees could not teach
amiss, because they sat in Moses chair?


Phi. He willed the people to believe the^ for that they succeeded Moses.


The. Though the pharisees were wicked hipocrits, yet because it was their
function to teach ye people in their Synagogues, he wills the^ to be obeyed
so long as they said nothing but yt which the hearers knew to be agreeable to
the law of God, but if they speak any thing of their own besides the law, that
the people were to reject and detest. And so S. Aust. expounds the place,
Aug. in Johan. tractat. 46.
Sua vero si velint docere, nolite audire, nolite facere: But if they will
teach their own (devises besides the law,) neither hear (them) nor do (as
they did you.) Which is plainly commanded by Christ himself in the Gospel,
Matthew. 16.

Ibidem verse. 11^


Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Saduces, that is (as
the holy Ghost does interpret in the same chapter) of the doctrine of the
Pharisees and Saduces.

This then is evident. The law of God the people were to receive and obey at
the Pharisees mouths, though they were hypocrites, because they were appointed
by God for the time to be teachers: But the leaven of the Pharisees, that is
their mixtures wherewith they tempered and infected the law of God, the people
were to beware and avoid: Ergo the people were required to discern between
the law of God and the leaven of the Pharisees, and charged to follow the first
and forsake the last.

And why impugn you that which the holy Ghost so often commands and
therefore permits? 1. John. 4.
Try the spirits whether they be of God, as you heard before. 1. These. 5.
Try all things and hold fast that which is good. Be not unwise but
understand what the will of the Lord is. Be renewed in your mind that you may
discern what the good and acceptable and perfect will of God is. Romans 12.
Philip. 1. 1. Corinthians. 2.

The whole Scriptures give the people leave to discern the truth and require
them so to do.


This I pray that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and in
all judgment, that you may discern the things which are best. He that is
spiritual discerns all things. You may have a thousand like both places and
proofs that the faithful should look and take heed that they be not
seduced. And except you will excuse the people before God, if you misleade
them, why should you bar them al trial and understanding whether they follow
faith unto salvation, or withdraw themselves unto perdition? When the blind
leads the blind and they fall both into the pit of destruction, is not he
that follows as sure to perish as he that leads?


Phi. We be content they shall be discerners but no judges of their Pastors.


Theo. And Bishops themselves be no judges but discerners of truth. Princes
have the same liberty to discern and try spirits that private men have.

The former precepts comprise the Prince as well as the people.

Heb. 13.





Phi. We be from the matter that we began with: we were speaking of Princes.


The. We be right enough. Princes have the same charge to obey the truth and
beware false Prophets that private men have; ergo they must have the same
freedom to discern spirits, and refuse strange doctrines, that all the
faithful have. Christ has not appointed one way for Princes and an other for
their people to come by the knowledge of his will, but the same way for both:
Ergo the precepts, which I last alleged and also the former, pertain to
Magistrates as well as to subjects; and to make the rule more general, in
discerning, believing and obeying the truth, there is no distinctions of
persons with God.


Phi. We receive your rule, and infer upon it, that these words of S. Paul,
Obey your rulers, Verse. 7.

No man bound to the Preacher farther than he speaks truth.


bind as well Princes as private men to be subject to Bishops.


The. Take with you this limitation, (which have spoken to you the word of God)
which S. Paul gives even in the same chap. and infer what you can. To Bishops
speaking the word of God, Princes as well as others must yield obedience: but
if Bishops pass their commission and speak besides the word of God, what
they list, both Prince and people may despise them.

With this limitation our Savior sent his Apostles into the world: Go, teach
all Nations: The Apostles tied to that condition.
but what? To observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. And this the
Apostles themselves do not conceal in doing their message. The word of the
Lord, says Peter, indureth for ever, and this is the word which is preached
among you. 1. Pet. 1.
That which we have seen, says John, and heard, that declare we to you, that
ye may have felloship with us. Let a 1. John. 1. 1. Corinthians. 4.
man, says Paul, so think of us as of the ministers of Christ and stewards of
the mysteries of God. And as for the rest it is requisite in stewardes that
every man be found faithful. And to the Galat. Galat. 1.

The Angels themselves limited to that rule.


Though we (our selves) or an Angel from heaven preach unto you otherwise than
that we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Preach I now man or God? I
certify you, brethren, that the Gospel which was preached of me, was not after
man: for I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it (by man) but by
the revelation of Jesus Christ. And this makes him so diligently distinguish
the precepts of Christ from his own counsels, 1. Corinthians. 7.
To the married I command, not I, but the Lord: to the rest I speak, and not
the Lord: Yea he requires of them no more but that they follow him, so far
forth as he follows Christ: Be ye followers of me, eue^ as I am of Christ, 1. Corinthians. 17.
that is no longer nor farther than I ^ollow Christ.

Chrysostom alleging the words of S. Paul, Obey your ouerseeers, does thus
limit them, Chrysostom. in 1. cap. 2. Epist. ad Timoth. hom. 2.
Si quidem fidei dogma peruertat, etiamsi Angelus sit, obedire noli: But if he
pervert any point of faith, though he be an Angel, obey him not. And straight
after, Ne Paulo quidem obedire oportet si quid dixerit proprium, si quid
hymanu^, sed Apostolo Christu^ in se loquente^ circumferenti We must not obey
Paul himself, if he speak any thing of his own, or as a man, but (we must obey)
the Apostle bearing Christ about that speaks in him. Tertul. de praescript.
advers. haeretic^s.
Nobis nihil ex nostro arbitrio indulgere licet: It is not lawful for us, says
Tertullia^, to devise any thing of our selves nor to follow that which others
have devised. We have the Apostles of the Lord for our authors who devised
nothing of their own heads, but delivered faithfully to the nations, the
doctrine which they received of Christ. Therefore though an Angel from heaven
should preach otherwise, we should count him accursed. Chrysostom. operis
imperfect. hom. 20. in 7. ca. Mat.

Much more teachers that are but servants of the law: and therefore bound unto
the law.


Every teacher is a servant of the law, because he may neither ad of his own
sense unto the law, nor according to his own conceit take any thing from the
law, but preach that only which is found in the law. If Apostles and Angels
be tied to this condition, much more others, and our first addition (which
speak unto you the word of God) is euerywhere intended in the Bishops
function though it be not expressed.


Phi. If Bishops then speak the word of God, Princes must obey them.


The. If princes resist the word of truth in the Preachers mouth they resist
not the messenger, but the master that sent him.


Phi. Hence we conclude that Bishops be superior to Princes.


Theo. By what Logic?


Phi. Princes must obey Bishops speaking the word of God, ergo Bishops be
superior to Princes.


Theo. If Bishops spoke to Princes in their own names, Princes must obey
Bishops because they speak in Gods name and not in their own.
your argument were somewhat; but since they speak to them as servants in their
masters name, which is Lord of all and over all, your consequent is very
foolish. For let any Prince send his servant in a message to the Nobles of his
Realm: will you reason thus? The servant speaking in the princes name that which
is commanded him, must be obeyed of the Nobles, ergo the servant is superior
to the Nobles. I think you will not, or if you do, you reason very loosely.


Phi. If the servant have commission from the Prince though he be never so
mean and the Nobles have none, well they may excel him in Nobility, but sure
he excels them in authority.


Theo. He does in those things which his Commission reaches unto.


Phi. But Bishops have commission from God to rule y^ church, ergo they be
superior to princes in the regiment of the church. Our assumptio^ we prove by
S. Paul: Take heed to your selves and to the whole flock, wherein the holy Ghost
has placed you Bishops to rule the church of God. Act. 20.



Theo. Your luck is evil to light on such imperfect proofs. Bishops have
commission to feed, not to rule their flocks.

1. Pet. 5.


I told you before, (...) did signify to feed the church or flock of Christ,
and not to rule, You now catch hold of the same corruption again, and make it
the ground of your conclusion. If you trust not us, your selves in your Rhemish
Testament have so translated the word in S. Peter. Feed the flock of God which
is among you, which is in the Greek, (...). The very children know that these
three words (...), A sheepeheard, (his) flock, and to feed, have one and the
same deriuation, and therefore one and the same signification. John. 21.
The holy Ghost himself uses (...) as Synonima, that is words of the same
power and force. For when Christ repeated this charge, feed my sheep, thrise^
to Peter in the Gospel of S. John, his words are the second time (...): and the
third time, (...). Now draw your assumptio^ from S. Paul's words rightly
translated and what conclude you? Bishops have commission from God to feed the
Church (or flock of Christ) which Princes have not, ergo Bishops by their
calling may preach and Princes may not. This is al you can infer, and this is
nothing against us.


Phi. They be superiors to Princes in feeding the flock of Christ: ergo they be
their superiors. They be superior in teaching, not in power to command and
punish.

Their function is more perfect and excellent because God works by their
hands and mouths.





Theo. That sequel is not good. In building Masons be superior to Princes, in
sailing Mariners, in fighting, Soldiers; be these men ergo simply superior
to Princes? I trow not.


Phi. Preaching the word, dispensing the Sacraments and pardoning the sins or
men, which are the Bishops charge, be things far greater and higher than any
that Princes have.


Theo. The perfection and operation of these things which you name, depend not
on the wills of men, but on the power of God, and therefore the honor and
estimation of them must serve for the praise of Gods glory and not for the
increase of man's pride: The Ghostly work is Gods, the bodily service is the
Priests: wherein Judas the thief, Simon the sorcerer, and Demas the renegate
may challenge as much as James the just, Peter the zealous and John the
faithful, the three pillars of Christ's church.

Per ministros dispares Dei munu^ equale est, quia non illorum, sed eius est.
Aug. contra Crescon. lib. 4. cap. 6.
By ministers (far) unlike, the gift of God, says Augustine, is the same,
because it is not theirs but his. Aug. in. Psa. 10
Christ sent him that betrayed him, with the rest of his Disciples to preach
the kingdom of heaven, to show that the gifts and (graces) of God are bestowed
on the^, which receive the same with faith, though he that delivers them be
as bad as Judas. The things which God gives, says Chrysostom, In 1. cap. 2.
epist. ad. Tim. hom. 2.
ca^ not be made perfect by the holiness of the Priest: for all is done by his
heavenly grace. Only the Priests office is to open his mouth, but it is God
that works all the Priest does only accomplish the (external sign or act.)
Men, says Ambrose, De spiritu san. lib. 3. cap. 19.
in the remission of sins ministerium suum exhibe^t, non ius alicuius
potestatis exercent, do their service, but exercise no right of authority. They
pray, God gives; the service is by man, the gift is from the heavenly power.

Preaching the word, is a worthier part of Apostolic dignity, tha^ ministering
the sacraments, by the witness of S. Paul himself saying, 1. Corin. 1.
Christ sent me not to baptize, but, to preach the gospel. And yet of preachers
the scripture says, 1. Corin. 3
Neither he that planteth is any thing nor he that waters, but God that
gives the increase. So that neither in the word, nor sacraments, you may
challenge any thing to man, but only the corporal service which is common to the
godly with heretics and hypocrites: the rest is proper to God, and may not be
ascribed to men, without injury to him that is the true author of them and
mighty worker in the^. And therefore the reason which you draw from the
perfection of Gods graces in the Church, The word and sacraments serve not to
advance the Preachers person.
to the preferring and aduauncing of the Bishops person before the Princes, is
very vicious, because the subjection and revenge due to the sword is imparted
to the Princes person, the dignity and virtue of the word and sacraments is
not to the Bishops.


Phi. The Priests commission is higher than the Princes, and why should not the
priests person be above the Princes?


The. The priest has his commission as a servant to call for subjection and
obedience, The Preachers call for subjection and reverence to their master, not
to themselves.
not unto himself but unto his Lord and Master that sent him. And this
subjection, because it is given to God, infinitely exceeds that which Princes
may look for. But what is this to the Priests person, who must preach himself
to be The 2. Corinthians. 4.
servant of meaner men tha^ Princes, and make himself The Mark. 10. ^. Corint.
9.
servant of al men, if he note well the words of his commission, and not strive
with Princes for superiority?


Phi. For their persons I will not greatly stand with you, but certainly their
power is above ye princes.


The. You ^un so fast that you forget where you should be. We were debating who
should direct princes in matters of faith: you be slipped from yt, and entering a
new question who shall correct the^, where the former is yet unfinished.


Phi. You did confess that princes must obey Bishops so long as they speak
truth.


The. And you would not deny but princes might refuse bishops if they swarued
from faith.


Phi. But who shall be judge whether they swerve from faith or no?


Theo. That is the question which I said was not yet resolved. If Bishops teach
truth, surely princes must obey the^, I mean the word of truth in their
mouths. If they go from truth, the^ princes must avoid the^. To this we both
consent, but the doubt is whether truth be tied to some certain Persons or
places where Princes may find it and whence Princes must fet it; The truth of
God is tied to no certain persons nor places.
or else whether Princes as all others must use the best means they can to
discern true Preachers from false, and so be directed by such as they think
to be sent from God.


Phi. You would have Princes and others lean to their own judgments and
follow their own fancies. We would have them stick to the Church, and look
to those Pastors whose faith can not fail.


Theo. Such Pastors be worth the following if you can point us to them.


Phi. Peter's faith can not fail: follow that faith and you can not miss the
truth. Peter's faith is truth in deed, but that must be taken out of his own
writings, not other men's reports.



Theo. He that keeps Peter's faith in deed can not want the truth, because
Peter believed the truth: but we be nothing the nearer for this. Paul's faith
was likewise truth, and so was the faith of Matthew, James, John, Jude, and
others: but who must be credited what faith Peter and the rest preached? Shall
we take that at your hands by report, or at their own mouths by writing?


Phi. If their writings were not dark or might not be wrested, the Scriptures
were the best witnesses of their doctrine: No successor may be trusted against
or besides the Apostles writings.
but now their successors must rather be trusted than every man suffered to
take what faith he list out of their writings.


Theo. Rather so than worse, does not answer my question, but must we trust
their successors in matters of faith against or besides their writings?


Phi. Against their writings we must not, besides their writings we must. For
many things are believed which are not expressed in the scriptures.


The. With you, but not with the Church of God.


Phi. The church we say believes many things which she received by tradition
and not by writing.


Theo. Your Church I know does, but the Church of Christ I say never did, not
does.


Phi. Had the Church of Christ no traditions that were not written?


Theo. Rites and ceremonies she had, but no points of faith that were not
written.


Phi. This is the ground of all your errors: upon this pretense you reject the
unwritten verities of the church.


Theo. If this be an error S. Paul himself was the first author of it, No
point of faith unwritten.
and all the fathers of Christ's Church with one consent avouch the same.


Phi. Never tell us that tale.


Theo. Yeas we will tell it and prove it to you.


Phi. You can not.


Theo. We can and will.

S. Paul is short but sure. Romans 10.
Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God: Whence we collect, ergo
faith is by the word of God and not without it nor bes^des it. You heard S.
Basils opinion before, Basil. in sermon de fide.
It is an evident slyding from the faith and a point of the greatest pride
(that may be) either to depart from that which is written, or to receive that
which is not written. To that you may join this conclusion of his, Idem in
Ethici^ defini^. 8.
If every thing that is not of faith be sin, as S. Paul affirms, and faith
come by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, ergo whatsoever is without
(or besides) the divine Scriptures, because it is not of faith, it is sin.
Seek thou for faith Emperor? says Hilarie to Constantius. Hilar. ad
Constantium August.
Hear it not out of the late scroles, but out of Gods books. Hear I beseech
thee that which is written of Christ, lest under pretense thereof of, things not
written be preached. And in an other place pressing his adversary, Thou, Idem
de Trinit. lib. 9.
says he, which denyest things written, what remains but that thou believe
things unwritten: counting that for a passing absurdity which you now would
establish as the surest way to discern the truth.

Even so does Hierom against Heluidius. As we deny not those things that are
written, Hieron. aduersus Helnidium. Ide^ in Psalm. 86.
so we reject utterly those things which are not written. For Our Lord and
savior speaks to us in the Scriptures of his Princes: that is of his
Apostles and Evangelists which were, not which are (in the church) to this end
that his Apostles excepted whatsoever thing besides should afterward be said,
might be cut off and not have authority. Tertullian speaking in the person of
all christians, Tertul. de praescript. aduers. haeretico^.
We need no farther search after the Gospel. When once we believe we desire
nothing else to believe: for this we first believe that there is nothing,
besides (the Gospel) which we ought to believe. Idem aduersus Hermogene^.
And refelling ye heretic Hermogenes, I adore, says he, the fulness of the
scriptures. Let Hermogenes show me where this (that he teaches) is written. If
it be not written, let him fear the curse provided for adders and diminishers.
Yea says Ambrose, Ambros. de virginibus, li. 3.
We justly co^demn al new things which Christ did not teach, because to the
faithful Christ is the way. So then if Christ did not teach that which we
teach, eue^ we our selves do judge it to be detestable.

Ireneus, lib. 3. cap. 1.
The rest are of the same mind. The disposition of our salvation, says Irineus,
we knew by none other, than by those, by whom the Gospel came unto us: the
which at first they preached by mouth, but afterward by Gods appointment they
did deliver it to us in writing, that it should be the foundation and pillour
of our faith. Cyril. de recta fide ad Reginas lib. 2.

August. de Pastoribus, cap. 11. Idem contra literas Petiliani lib. 3. cap. 6.
Cause. 11. quaest. 3. si is qui preaest.


It is necessary for us, says Cyril, to follow the divine Scriptures, and in
nothing to go from their prescription. The mountains of Israel, (whereon God
promised to feed his flock) are, says Augustine, the writers of the divine
Scriptures. Feeding there you feed safely: whatsoever you learn thence, count
it sauorie, whatsoever is besides the^ refuse it. Therefore whether it be
touching Christ or his Church, or any matters else which concerns our faith
and life, I say not if we, but as follows (in Paul) if an angel from heaven
teach any thing besides that which you have received in the Scriptures of the
Law and the Gospel, hold him accursed. Isidorus, as your own Law produces
him, No person nor place may be trusted in matters of faith besides and without
the scriptures. The best direction for Princes is the word of God.

Psalm. 118.


says, A Prelate, if he teach or bid any thing besides that which is evidently
commanded in the holy scriptures, let him be taken for a false witness to God
and a co^mitter of sacrilege. Neither Prelate, Pope, Council nor Angel, may be
received or trusted in matters of faith, I say, not against the Scriptures, but
not without or besides the scriptures. If therefore you seek to lead Princes
unto truth you must guide them thereto by the word of truth, otherwise you
do but deceive them, you do not direct them.

King David will teach you, by what means himself was, and all other godly
Princes ought to be directed. Thy word is a lantern to my feet and a light
unto my paths. I have sworn and will perform it, that I will keep thy
righteous judgments. And God by Moses appointing his law to be the direction
of Princes, commands a copy thereof to be delivered unto the king sitting
on his throne, Deuteronomy. 17.
that he should read therein all the days of his life and learn to fear the
Lord his God and to keep all the words of that law. This charge which God
gives binds princes as well as others. Deuteronomy. 12.
Whatsoever I command, that shall you do; thou shall put nothing thereto, nor
take ought there from. And Esaias speaks not of private persons only but of
commonwealths also, when he says, Esai. 8.
Should not a people consult their God? And showing immediately which way they
might consult and ask counsel of God, from the living, says he, to the dead?
to the law (rather) and the testimony: and if they speak not according to this
word (it is) because there is no light in them. Luke 16.
They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them, is the surest way to
save Prince and people from the place of torment, and consequently the best
direction for the^ both.


Phi. The word of God is, we doubt not, the best direction for Princes and
private men, Hieron. Cap. 1. in epist. ad Galatas. Tertullian. de
praescriptionib.
if it be rightly understood, but Al heresies patch thence the pillowes which
they lay under the elbowes of all flesh, as S. Hierom says, and They talk of
scriptures and persuade by Scriptures as Tertullian notes: And therefore the
Scriptures being but dumble records that may be diversely construed and easily
wrested, there must needs be some judge on earth that may be personally,
pronounce which is the true meaning and right sense of the Scriptures before
Princes may trust that direction. Otherwise men may brech what blasphemies they
will and pretend Scripture when they have done as the Arrians, Sabellians,
Macedonians and al other heretics did and do.


Theo. That heretics covet a show of scriptures is a case so clear that it
needs no words. Tertullian. v^ supra. Heretics therefore covet a show of
scriptures because they be the grounds of all truth. No tribunal on earth to
the which truth is fastened. Where truth is in doubt the Church is in more
doubt.
For how could they treat of matters of faith, except it were out of the
books of faith, or who would trust them in divine causes without some color
of divine Scriptures? But what means the Lord has left his sheep to
distinguish true shepherds from wolves dissembling their habit, and thieves
pretending his name, this is the question that now we be in.


Phi. It is. And there must, we say, be some certain Tribunal on earth,
where truth may be found at all times and of all men that be willing to seek
for it; otherwise there should be no stay for religion nor end of contention,
every man pretending his faith to be truth, and no man having authority to
decide which is truth; which were most absurd.


Theo. A Tribunal in earth to decide which is truth? Whose Tribunal shall that
be?


Phi. The Churches.


Theo. We be now as near as we were before. If the truth be douted of, the
church must needs be much more doubted of, because the church is the number of
men professing the truth. And how can the professors of truth be severed
from others so long as the truth by which they should be known, is in
question? You do but wast your breath, if you go not more directly to work.


Phi. You would feign call the Church in question but that you can not.


Theo. Away with these follies. Where faith fails, the church fails; and
he that affirms your doctrine to be false, denies your assemblies and
multitudes to be the Church. The supposing your selves to be the Church when
your faith should be tried, is a fond and vain delay. Shall that be truth
which you profess, though Christ say nay?


Phi. We say not so.


Theo. Then suffer those to be his sheep, that hear his voice, and claim
not his fold, until you be his sheep.


Phi. We do not.


Theo. The shepherds voice is not known by the sheep, but the sheep by
hearing the sheepheards voice.
We must be first resolved which is his voice before we can agree who are his
sheep.


Phi. I know that: and yet which is the sheepheards voice the sheep must
judge, and not the wolves.


The. In deed our savior says, John 10.
The sheep follow (the shepherd) for they know his voice. A stranger they
will not follow but flee from him, for they knew not the voice of strangers:
and applying this to himself, My sheep, says he, hear my voice and follow me.
The reason went before, for they know the voice of their shepherd. So that by
the position of our Savior his sheep must be able to discern his voice from
a strangers.


Phi. What else?


Theo. His voice is his word, his sheep are the faithful, his fold is his
church. If the Lord himself refer his sheep to their exact knowledge of
his voice, for their perfect direction, why would you force the flock of
Christ to the court of Rome, there to learn at your hands and upon your only
credit the voice of their shepherd?


Phi. We would have them follow the direction of Christ's church in discerning
the sound of Christ's voice.


Theo. And the church of Christ never directed any man by prescribing certain
places or persons where truth could not fail but only by the general and
constant profession of the same faith from the Apostles downe-ward in all ages
and countries.


Phi. The church commends succession, councels, and Apostolical Seats, as
good helps to hit the right sense of the Scriptures.


Theo. But never as infallible notes to discern the truth.


Phi. Apolog. Cap. 4. sect. 28. Succession is no sure direction unto truth.
Ireneus, lib. 4. Cap. 43.
The Bishops of the universal Church have (as S. Ireneus says) received with
their Episcopal succession the grace and gift of understanding the truth.


Theo. You do that ancient father wrong in the place which you bring. Ireneus
limiteth succession after the same manner that we do, noting succession to be
nothing worth unless sound doctrine and holy conversation be thereunto joined.
His words be: We must therefore obey those Priests which are in the Church, I
mean those which have their succession from the Apostles, which together with
their succession in office, have received charisma veritatis certum, the sure
(doctrine or) gift of truth. The rest we must suspect either as heretics or
as authors of schisms and pleasers of themselves, or else as hypocrites vain
glorious and covetous. Cap. 44.
From all such we must abstain and cleave to them as I said which keep the
doctrine of the Apostles and with the order of their priestly calling yield
wholesome doctrine and conversation without offense. And showing what he
means by charisma, Cap. 45.
he says, Vbi igitur charismata Domini posita sunt, ibi dicere oportet
veritatem: Where (these) blessings and gifts of God are, there must we learn
the truth, with whom is that succession of the Church which is from the
Apostles, and also sound and irreproueable Doctrine. So that orderly
succession, sound doctrine, and conversation without blame, are the gifts and
graces of God which he means, and the one he will not have to be regarded
or trusted without the other.


Phi. Make you no more account of succession?


Theo. We commend succession to exclude ambition and dissension in the Church
of Christ, and in that respect we detest such as invade the Pastoral function
without lawful vocation and election, but that succession in place should be
taken for a warrant of true Doctrine is an error of yours and so palpable that
every Child can refell it. For who knows not that an infinite number of
bishops and those orderly succeeding, if you look to their dignity and not to
their doctrine, have been heretics? And that S. Paul thus forewarned the
Bishops of Ephesus, Act. 20.
Out of your selves shall rise men speaking perverse things to draw disciples
after them. And the Lord when he says, Mat. 7.
Beware of false prophets, notes, there shall be prophets by their calling,
which shall be found false in their teaching; as S. Peter also witnesses, 2.
Pet. 2.
There were false prophets among the people (of the Jews) even as there shall
be false teachers amongst you, distinguished from Godly teachers not by office
but by Doctrine. 2. Cor. 11.
S. Paul grants many to be the ministers of Christ in outward profession and
show which in works and deeds be the ministers of Satan. 2. Cor. 11.
Such false Apostles, says he, are deceitful workers and transform them
selves into the Apostles of Christ. The Prince of darkness that can conuaie
his agents to be Teachers, Prophets and Apostles, in the Church of Christ, can
place them in Bishoprikes at his pleasure, and therefore the chair is no sure
defense against error.


Phi. We know some Bishops have been heretics, but not all.


Theo. Neither do we say that all were: God forbid. But by this that some were;
we prove succession to be no sure direction unto truth. Bishops have been
heretics.
If Berillus, Paulus, Samosatenus, Photinus, Nestorius, Dioscorus, Petrus,
Apameus, Sergius, Cyrus, Theodorus, Macarius, and infinite others canonically
succeeding in Seats and Churches of no small account fell afterward into
pestilent heresies; that which was often and easy then, is contingent and
possible still, and succession which saved not them from erring, can not defend
others from the like danger.


Phi. Succession alone is not sufficient to keep men in the right faith.


Theo. If you join truth and holiness with it as Ireneus does, no doubt they
be marks of faithful and Godly Pastors, but succession of it self, does
neither privilege the Teachers from error, nor conduct their hearers unto
truth, because there have been thousands in the Church whose opinions you may
not allow, though you cannot disprove their elections.


Phi. Admit that, Bishops assembled may err as well as Bishops severed.

Mat. 18.


and how then?


Theo. If Bishops singled may err; why not Bishops assembled, which you call
Councels? What assurance has their meeting to keep them from erring?


Phi. The promise of our Lord where there be two or three gathered in my name,
there am I in the midst of them.


Theo. Does our Savior speak only of Bishops and Councels, or else of all
faithful persons and resorts gathered to prayer, preaching or any other good
intent?


Phi. The words be general and therefore belong as well to councels as other
conuents.


Theo. Indeed the words be general and therefore belong no more to Councels
than to any other Christian Conuents. And did they specially pertain to
Councels, as they do not, a Council of two or three by the purport of the very
words has as much assurance of truth as a Council of three hundred. Two or
three have the same promise of assistance that two or three hundred have.
It is not the number but the name in which they be gathered, that guydeth and
directs them unto truth.


Phi. If our Lord have promised to assist three gathered in his name, how much
more will he assist three hundred?


Theo. And yet three may see the truth, when three hundred may miss it. Which
I speak not to deface religious and Godly Councels, but to stay the multitude
from presuming their fancies to be true religion when they be nothing near.


Phi. Councels may err.
May Councels err?


Theo. Why not?


Phi. What Councels?


Theo. Yea Councels. Rebaptising of heretics was defended by Cyprian and a
Council of Bishops with him, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 5.
and as Eusebius reports out of Dionysius decreed In maximis Episcoporum
Synodis, in very great Councels of Bishops. The Arrians in twenty six years
gathered and framed sundry Councels for their purpose at Tyrus, Jerusalem,
Philippi, Sirmium, Ariminum, Seleucia, Constantinople, and two at Antioch. In
the Council of Millan Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 9.
Above three hundred of the west Bishops consented that Athanasius should be
thrust from his Bishoprike, and only five said nay. To the wicked edict of
Basiliscus against the Council of Chalcedon subscribed Euag. li. 3. ca. 4.
five hundred Bishops. Gregory Nazianzene was so out of love with the Councels
of his time, Epist. 55 ad Proropium.
that when he was sent for, he prayed Proropius to have excused to the Emperor
for sickness, and adds, I, to write you the truth, am determined to forbear
all Councels of Bishops, because I have not seen any good event of any
Council, but rather an increase than a redress of (our) evils. So that a
number of badde Bishops may do much hurt even in Councels, and the better part
is not always sure to be the greater.


Phi. A general Council does not differ from a particular but only in number
of persons and places.

Vide distinct. 16 sexta primo.


Particular Councels have erred, but never general.


Theo. If particular councels may err, why may not general? what difference
find you between Provincial and general Councels but only the number of
Persons that be called, and places whence they be called? Now what warrant I
pray you have three hundred Bishops more than two hundred, or the Bishops of
some countries more than the Bishops of other Countries, that they cannot err?
If truth go by tale, particular Councels have often matched and passed many
general for number of Bishops. The second and sixth general Councels, had
present at either but one hundred fifty Bishops, the third had but one
hundred, as Beda writes, and as it appears by their Tomo council. primo.
subscriptions, not above one hundred fifty, whereas the Council of Sardica
had Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 2.
three hundred, and so had the council of Millan, and the fourth and sixth
Councels of Carthage had above two hundred Bishops in either of them. Idem li.
2. c. 36. Tomo concilior. primo.
If it go by countries, then show us which Countries have this privilege,
that their Bishops can not err, and which have it not: For as yet we see no
cause why truth should be tied to some numbers or nations and not to others;
and before we may grant them that progatiue, we must see great cause and good
proof.


Phi. We do not hold that general Councels are defended from error by reason
of any number or nations there gathered, but it is we say more likely, that
many men assembled out of diverse nations should light on truth, than a few
out of one.


Theo. You come with likelyhoodes when we seek for certaineties. Can you show
forth any grant from God that general Councels shall not err?


Phi. If general Councels might err, A general Council erring the Church
does not err.
the church might err, which is not possible.


Theo. As though none were of or in the Church but only Bishope? or all the
Bishops of Christendom without exception were ever present at any Council? or
the greater part of those that are present might not strike ye stroke without
the rest? When 300. are assembled in Council, and 149. take one part, and 151.
the other, is this your profound learning that the odd voices which make up
the greater part can never err? or does the whole Church err, when falsehood
has for her self ten or twelve Bishops more than truth has?


Phi. If a Council once give judgment in matters of faith, who can reuerse it?


Theo. The rest present or absent may lawfully contradict the Council if it
wade besides truth or against the faith. A Council may be reuersed by the
rest that be present or absent.

Sozo. li. 1. ca. 23.


When the fathers in the great Council of Nice were about to decree that
Bishops, Priests and Deacons should not use their wives, Paphnutius alone rose
up in the midst of their Council and freely contradicted it. The same
Paphnutius, when secret enemies labored in the Council of Tyrus wrongfully to
depose Athanasius caught Maximus the Bishop of Jerusalem by the hand, and
willed him to rise and forsake that conuenticle of evil men. Sozo. li. 2. ca.
25.
In the Council of Millan when 300. had consented to the deposition of
Athanasius, Dionysius, Eusebius, Paulinus, Lucifer and Rhodamus ( but five
against fifteen skore) openly and plainly withstood it. Sozo. li. 4. ca. 9.
The second Council of Ephesus was rejected by many godly Bishops that were
not present as injurious and wicked, and Leo himself writes of the famous and
general council of Chalcedon, Leo epist. 52. ad Anatholium.
Tanquam refutari nequeat quod illicite voluerit multitudo; as though that
might not be refused, which a multitude has unlawfully decreed. And making
there no more account of their number, though there were above six hundred
fathers in that Council, Ibidem.
he says, Nulla sibimet de multiplicatione congregationis Concilia
blandiantur. Let no councels flatter themselves with the great number of
persons assembled.


Phi. You are the first that ever were of this opinion that general Councels
might err.


Theo. Your own fellows have been of that opinion before us. Panormitane the
best of your canonists, Their own fellows have consessed that general councels
might er.

Panor. de elect. and electi potestate significasti.


and Proctour for Pope Eugenius against the Council of Basil, affirms
plainly, Concilium potest errare, sicut alias errauit super matrimonium
contrahendum inter raptorem and raptam, and dictum Hieronymi melius sentientis
postea fuit praelatum statuto Concilij. A Council may err, as otherwise a
Council has erred about marriage to be contracted between the rauisher and
the ravished, and the saying of Hierom as being of the sounder opinion was
after preferred before the statute of the Council. And your argument, that the
church should fail in faith if councels should err; Panorm. Ibide^.
he rejects as frivolous. Nec obstat si dicatur quod Concilium non potest
errare quia Christus orauit pro ecclesia sua vt non deficeret. It hinders us
little, if it be said that a Council can not err, because Christ prayed for
his Church that it should not fail. For though a general Council represent
the whole universal Church, A general council is not the Church.
yet to speak truth the universal Church is not there precisely, but by
representation; because the universal Church consists of all the faithful.
And this is the Church which can not err. Whereby it is not impossible but the
true faith of Christ may continue in only one person. Therefore, (the Church)
is not said to fail nor to err, if the true faith remain in any one. If you
would be farther taught that a general council is neither the universal
church, nor represents the universal church, and that it has erred and may
err, we can send you to a merchant of the same stamp that your selves are of,
where you shall see as much as I say, debated and commended with no small
bravery.

Pigh. hierarch. ecclesiast. lib. 6. cap. 5 and 4.

Pighius is earnest that general Councils have erred in decisio^ of faithes.

Lib. 6. Cap. 7.


Certum est Concilia non esse vniuersalem Ecclesiam. In nullo vniuersalium
Conciliorum omnium hoc sibi praesumpsisse Patres inuenient vt dicerent
Catholicam se repraesentare ecclesiam praeterquam in hijs quae nunc impugnamus,
Constantiensi and Basiliensi nouissimis. It is certain that Councels are not
the universal Church. In none of all the general Councels shall you find the
fathers to have arrogated thus much to themselves as to say they represented
the catholic church besides these two last councels of Constance and Basil
which we now impugn. And that general councels may err no man more resolute
than Pighius. Neque enim haec sola quae nunc impugnamus, Concilia, turpiter
grauiterque errasse certum est, sed and alia plurima: It is certain that not
only these Councels (of Constance and Basil) which we now disprove have
shamefully and absurdly erred but also many others. Lib. 6. Cap. 13.
And again, In fidei definitionibus errasse, etiam vniuersalia etiam sanctorum
Patrum Concilia comperimus. Testimonio sunt de vniuersalibus Concilijs,
inprimus Ariminense, universal haud dubie: etc. Insuper Ephesanum secundum and
ipsum universal, etc. testimonio inquam haec sunt errare posse etiam
vniuersalia Concilia, etiam legitime congregata. We find that general councels
even of holy fathers have erred in decrees of faith. For example of general
Councels, the Council of Ariminum, universal no doubt, and also the second
council of Ephesus, and that likewise universal, these I say are witnesses
that even general Councels and those lawfully gathered may err.

August. de baptist. lib. 2 cap. 3.

S. Augustine confesses that councels may err.


If Panormitane and Pighius might happily be ouerseen in empayring the credit
of councels: S. Augustine was not when he said, Who can be ignorant that
Provincial and National Councels yield without any stay to the authority of
general Councels gathered out of the whole Christian world, and that general
Councels themselves are often amended the former by the later, with Catholic
peace and Christian charity.


Phi. He says, Plenary councels are amended but not from errors.


Theo. What needs amending where no fault is? The condition which S.
Augustine repeateth in the first, Ibidem.
indureth to the last Si quid forte a veritate deuiatum est, If in ought they
swerve from truth. And except that be understood, he answers not the thing
which was objected by the Donatists. They opposed Cyprians letters, Cyprians
judgment, Cyprians Council in a matter of Doctrine not of Discipline. S.
Augustine replieth, Bishops might be deceived and so might Councels. In what
now but in matters of Doctrine?


Phi. Can you name us any general counsel that erred in matters of doctrine?


Theo. Your own fellow names the Council of Ariminum and of Ephesus the
second, The second Council of Ephesus was general.
besides the Councels of Constance and Basil.


Phi. I doubt not whether that of Ephesus were a wicked Council, but whether
it were general or no.


Theo. The Patriarks of Rome, Antioch, Alexandria, Jerusalem, and
Constantinople were called unto it and present at it, with the Bishops of
diverse and sundry Provinces, as their subscriptions declare, which are extant
in the Council of Chalcedon: The Astio. 1.
Bishop of Rome by his Legates as his wont was in other Councels, the Euagrius
li. 1. Cap. 10.

Reperitur chalcedonens. council. actio. 1.


rest in person, and therefore out of question it was no Provincial Council.
Again the Emperor that called the Council in his epistle to the same says,
We thinking it not safe that this question of faith should be handled without
your sacred Synod and the Bishops of the holy Churches of all places, thought
it needful that your sanctities should assemble.


Phi. The Bishops that were present at Ephesus complained after in the Council
of Chalcedon that they were threatened and forced. Chalced. council. actio. 1.



Theo. The greater ye disorder that was committed in the Council, the stronger
is our argument, that Councels may be miscarried; if Bishops may be forced,
they may likewise be circumuented, as they were in the Council of Ariminum,
or deceived in opinion as they were in the Councels of Carthage, Constance and
Basil, by the confession of your dearest friends. If all these ways they may
be perverted when they are assembled, ergo they may make both an erroneous and
injurious conclusion.

And for this cause S. Augustine teaches that ecclesiastical Judges may be
deceived, Ecclesiastical judges are often deceived.

Contra Crescon. lib. 2. cap. 21.


in that they be but men, and calls their councels Humane judgments which
may be circumuented and beguiled. His words be, Non igitur debet ecclesia se
Christo praeponere: cum ille semper veraciter iudicet, ecclesiastici aute^
iudices sicut homines plerumque falluntur. The Church may not prefere herself
before Christ, for so much as he always judges rightly, and ecclesiastical
judges as being but men are often deceived. And rehearsing two Episcopal
judgments that passed against the Donatists in the Councels at Rome and Arle,
he adds, August. epist. 167.
Sed haec humana iudicia deputentur, and circumuenire, ac falli, vel etiam
corrumpi potuisse dicantur. But let these be counted the judgments of men,
and let it be said they might either deceive or be deceived; and perhaps
corrupted.

August. contra Maximinum lib. 3. cap. 14.
The like he says of the Council of Ariminum. This is that which the
Catholic fathers in the Council of Nice had established against the Arrian
heretics by authority of the truth, and which afterward in the Council of
Ariminum, heretical impiety under an heretical Emperor assaied to
overthrow, multis paucorum fraud deceptis, the multitude (there) being
deceived by the subtlety of a few. Ibidem lib. 3 cap. 14.

The Arrians not bound to the authority of the Nicene council.


And therefore he concludes, Sed nunc ne^ ego Nicenum nec tu debes Ariminense
tanquam praeiudicaturus proferre Concilium: nec ego huius authoritate, nec tu
illius detineris. But now (since there be contrary Councels) neither ought I
to produce the Council of Nice, nor you the Council of Ariminum for a
prejudice (to either part:) for neither am I bound to the authority of this
(later Council of Ariminum) nor you to the authority of that (former Nicene
Council:) Confessing not only that councels might err, but that his
adversary was not tied to the authority of the great Nicene council,
comparable to the which, no Council ever was or shall be in the Church of
Christ.


Phi. There was great difference between the Council of Ariminum and the
Council of Nice.


Theo. In the sincere profession of the true faith there was difference betwixt
them, but in the manner of calling those Councels and number of the persons
present Saint Augustine found no great advantage for his side. The Arrians had
a council as great and as general for that which they refused as the
Catholics had for that which they professed, and therefore this learned
father saw no remedy but he must yield up the Nicene Council as no
sufficient conviction of their heresy.


Phi. The Council of Ariminum was general.
The council of Ariminum was not general.


Theo. The council was far greater, as it should seem, than the council of
Nice, though the Story of the church do not lay down the certain number of
the Bishops that met.


Phi. What reason leads you to think it was greater?


Theo. It is evident by the Story that the Emperor assembled all the
Bishops both of the East and of the West church, of purpose if it were
possible, to bring them to some concord: and the Bishops of either church, no
doubt, far exceeded the number of three hundred.


Phi. They were not all at Ariminum.


Theo. The number was so great and the journey so long that the Emperor made
them sit in two several places, the East Bishops at Nicomedia, the West at
Ariminum: but that all the Bishops of both Churches were gathered in these
two places Socrates does witness.

Socrat. lib. 2. Cap. 37.
(Imperator) universal Concilium congregare voluit vt cunctos Orientis
Episcopos in Occidentem accersitos, concordes, si posset, redderet. The
Emperor intended to gather an universal Council, that all the Bishops of
the East coming into the West parts, he might get the^ to agree, if it might
be. And when the length of the journey appeared over tedious, he commanded the
council to be divided, and willed the west to assemble at Ariminum, the East to
resort at Nicomedia. What a company there were of the west bishops, their own
words to Constantius will declare. Ariminu^ ex cunctis Occidentis Ciuitatibus
omnes Episcopi conuenimus. Ibidem epistol^ Synodi Arimin. ad Constant.
We assembled at Ariminum even all the Bishops out of all the west Cities. S.
Hierom writing of this very Council says, Illo tempore nihil tam pium, nihil
tam conueniens seruo Dei videbatur quam vnitatem sequi, and a totius mundi
communione non scindi. Hierom. aduers. Luciferanos.
At that time nothing seemed so religious, nothing so convenient for the
servant of God as to follow unity and not to cut himself from the Communion
of the whole world. The communion of the whole world was in the Council of
Ariminum: In the Council of Ariminum was the communion of the whole world.
no Council therefore could be more general than that was. And this no doubt
Saint Augustine saw when he gave over the Council of Nice, as no greater
prejudice to his adversaries than the Council of Ariminum was to himself and
the faith which he defended.


Phi. The Council of Ariminum condemned the error of Arius, The Council of
Ariminum erred.
as their Epistle to Constantius declares.


Theo. The Bishops assembled at Ariminum were religious and Catholic, but
not sounding the drift of some crafty heretics amongst them, and led with
a color of concord and peace which the Emperor urged, they relented from the
Nicene creed upon pretense made that the word (...) was new and offensive,
and consented the word should be abolished, Hioron. aduers. Luciferanos.
and subscribed to an other Creed that professed the son of GOD to be like
to his father, according to the Scriptures.


Phi. Wherein then did that Council err?


Theo. Not in decreeing any falsehood, but in exacting less to be believed
than the Christian faith required, and rejecting that word, which the Nicene
Council had established for the righter expressing of the christian faith. In
this Council says Saint Hierom, Hieron. aduers. Luciferano^
Nomine vnitatis and fidei infidelitas scripta est, In the name of unity and
faith infidelity was (decreed and) written: and upon the conclusion of the
Council, Ibidem.
Ingemuit totus orbis, and Arrianum se esse miratus est, The whole world
groned and wondered to see it self in Arrianisme.


Phi. The fathers made more account of Councels than you do.


Theo. No father ever said that Councels could not err.


Phi. S. Augustine says, Epist. 118.
their authority is most wholesome in the Church.


Theo. But he never said they were free from all error. That is the perfection
and reverence which S. Augustine reserueth to the Scriptures only, to be
without all suspicion of error. Epist. 119.
Solis eis Scripturarum libris qui iam Canonici appellantur didici hunc timorem
honoremque defer, Only the scriptures ca^ not err.
vt nullum eorum authorem scribendo aliquid errasse firmissime credam. I have
learned to yield this fear and honor to the Canonical Scriptures only that I
firmly believe none of the Authors of them to have any thing erred in penning
them. If this honor to be free from error, be due to the Canonical Scriptures
only, then may you not impart it either to succession, Councels or Sees
Apostolic. It must stand for a perpetual difference between the precepts of
God and decrees of men that God is true and all men liars. Rom 3. Epist. 112.
ad Paulin.
If (ought) says Austen, be proved by the manifest authority of the divine
Scriptures which in the Church are called Canonical, it must be believed
without any doubting: Other witnesses or testimonies, thou may believe or not
believe, according as thou shall see cause to trust the^.

And distinguishing the Canon of the Scriptures from the writings and
resolutions of all that followed; were they fathers, Councels or whatsoever,
he says, August. contra Faustum Manicheum, li. 11. cap. 5.
In that Canonical preeminence of the sacred Scriptures if it appear that but
one Prophet, Apostle or Evangelist set down any thing in his writings, it is
not lawful to doubt of the truth of it. In the works of those that came after
them, comprised in books that be infinite, in which soever of them the same
truth is sound, yet the authority is far inferior. Therefore in the^, if
happily some things be thought to dissent from truth because they be not
understood as they were spoken, In all other writings the reader is free and
not bound to believe them. August. de natura and gratia contra Pelag. cap. 61.
Ibidem.
tamen liberum ibi habet lector auditorue iudicium, quo vel approbet quod
placuerit, vel improbet quod offenderit, yet has the reader or hearer in those
writings his judgment free to allow what he likes, and reject what he
misliketh: So that in all such except they be fortified by evident reason, or
by that Canonical authority, if a man mislike or will not believe he is not
reproved. Which liberty S. Augustine elsewhere chalengeth unto himself In
quorumlibet hominum scriptis, in the writings of al me^ whatsoever, and adds
this reason, Quia solis Canonicis debeo sine vlla recusatione consensum,
because I owe consent without any stay to the Canonical Scriptures only.

We may judge freely of Councels.

Contra Faustu^ lib. 11. cap. 5.


The authority to be believed without any refusing is proper only to the
Scriptures, because the certainetie, not to err, is annexed only to them and
to no writings else. The rest must be read, as S. Augustine teaches, non cum
credendi necessitate, sed cum iudicandi liberate, not with a necessity to
believe them, but a liberty to judge of them, and must be distinguished from
the authority of the Canon, for that epist. 48.
the authority of the sacred Scriptures can neither deceive nor be deceived,
and by De pecca. meritis and remiss. lib. 1. Cap. 22.
those books, de ceteris literis fideliu^ vel infidelium libere iudicemus, we
may freely judge of (all) other writings both of Christians and Infidels.
Contra Cresco. lib. 2. Cap. 3.3.
If we must judge, then they may err. Where no danger of error is, there is
no freedom of judgment left us to receive what we see cause, and reject what
we think good. The Scriptures we may not judge of, because they can not err:
All other writings we must examine before we believe, Ergo they be not free
from erring.

S. Augustine refused councels both with him and against him.

De vnitate ecclesiae, Cap. 16.


This made S. Augustine disputing with the Donatists to reject the Councels that
were against him and resign the Councels that were with him as he did before
refuting the Arrians and to tie both himself and his adversaries to the
Scriptures. Let (the Donatists) if they can, says he, show their Church, not
in rumors and speeches of the men of Africa, not in the councils of their
Bishops, not in the discourses of any writers whosoever, not in signs and
miracles that may be forged; but in the prescript of the law, in the
predictions of the Prophets in the verses of the Psalms, in the voices of the
shepherd himself, in the preachings and works of the Evangelists, that is in
all the canonical authorities of the sacred Scriptures. And binding himself to
the same condition, he says, Ibidem.
Quia nec nos propterea dicimus nobis credi oportere quod in ecclesia Christi
sumus etc. Because we our selves do not say we must therefore be believed, for
that we are in the Church of Christ, or else for that Optatus, Ambrose and
infinite other Bishops of our communion have commended the church, which we
hold, or because our church has bin published in the Councels of our
Colleagues. Hilar. contra Auxentium and Arrianos.
S. Hilarie was nothing afraid to be condemned in many Councels. Now let him
gather what Councels he will against me, says he, and openly proscribe me for
an heretic, as he has often done.


Phi. By whom then shall princes be directed if neither by bishops nor councels?
Princes are not bound to Councels.



Theo. I do not say that princes should not be directed by them, but only that
princes and others are not bound unto them with like subjection, as they be to
the word of God. For that can not err, and may command, because God is the
author of it. Councels may err, and can not command, because they consist of
men, which be not always assured of truth, and owe subjection to the princes
sword.


Phi. Were this exception good against councels, Christ has a vicar on earth
that ca^ not er, which is the holy Ghost.
against Christ's Uicar it is not good. He may command, as Christ might if he
were present, and has a promise that his faith shall not fail.


Theo. In deed Christ has a Uicar on earth that may command, and can direct
unto truth, but I think you mean not him.


Phi. I mean the Uicar general which Christ left behind him to guide the
church after his ascending.


Theo. And so do I, and yet I doubt we be of two mynds.


Phi. What Uicar has Christ left but Peter and his successors in the Roman
See, which can not err, and may command as well Princes as others?


Theo. His holy Spirit, which has better right to command and skill to
direct than either Peter or Peter's successors.


Phi. Call you the holy Ghost his Uicar?


Theo. Why should I not? Tertullian did so before me. The rule of faith is,
says he, Tertul. de praescriptio. aduers. haereticos.

Idem de virginibus velandis.


that Christ was taken up into heaven, and sat down at the right hand of his
father and sent, Vicarian vim spiritus sancti qui credentes agat, the power of
the holy Ghost to be his Vicar and to lead the faithful. And in an other
place he gives him the same title. Vicarius Domini Spiritus sanctus, the holy
Ghost the Lords Vicar: But what ancient father ever called the Bishop of
Rome Christ's Uicar? The Pope never called Christ's vicar but by his own
flatterers.



Phi. If Peter were, no doubt he is.


Theo. We ask not now for ifs, show one that ever called him so.


Phi. What if that very word be not found in them?


Theo. Then forbear it till you find it, and go on with some other name.


Phi. Call him as you list, but this we be sure that he can not err, and
may command both Prince and people. The Pope may err and can command
neither Prince nor people.



Theo. He never biteth that barketh much, you make your self sure of these
things, which when we come to trial will be most unsure. How prove you
either of these points which you affirm?


Phi. The Gospel proves the first, The Rhemish Testament upon the 22. of Luke.
I prayed for thee that thy faith fail not: and thou once converted, confirm
thy brethren, which is to say, that Peter is that man, whom he would make
Superior over them and the whole Church.


Theo. Which is to say, that you belie the words of the Gospel. For who but
Jesuits would make this collection, Confirm thy brethren, that is, be
Superior over them and the whole Church?


Phi. None may confirm but a Superior.


Theo. One brother may confirm an other.
Why so good Sir? May not one brother comfort and encourage an other?


Phi. Yeas, but Peter must confirm his brethren.


Theo. And what was confirming in this place but recalling them from the fear
they were in, when they fled from their master, and leading them by his example
to be more constant?


Phi. It was his charge so to do.


Theo. So is it every Christian man's, in the like case to do no less. David
after the defiling of Berseba and murdering of Vriah promises to do that which
Peter is here appointed to do. Psalm. 51.
Restore me to the joy of thy salvation, and establish me with thy free
Spirit; then will I teach thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners shall be
couerted unto thee. Will you therefore infer that David was supreme Pastor
over all the wicked? Are you not profound men, of a christian duty and common
charity prescribed to Peter in respect of them that were fallen into the same
temptation with him, to conclude a singularity and superiority for him over
his fellow disciples and over the whole church besides?


Phi. The Rhemish Testament upon the 22. of S. Luke. Christ prayed for Peter
not that he should not err, but that he should not utterly perish. Chrysostom. in
Ioh. homil. 72. Idem in Mat. homil. 83.
By this, We learn that it was thought fit in the providence of God, that he
who should be the head of the church, should have a special privilege by Christ's
prayer and promise never to fail in faith, and that none other either Apostle,
Bishop or Priest may challenge any such singular or special prerogative either
of her office or person otherwise than by joining with Peter and by holding of
him.


Theo. By this we learn that you abuse both the providence of God and the
promise of our Savior to serve your wicked fancies. For Christ did not promise
that Peter's judgment should never err, but that in this tentation now at
hand, his faith shall not utterly fail. Ego pro te oraui ne deficeret fides
tua: Hoc est ne in fine pereas. I have prayed for thee, that thy faith shall
not fail, that is, says Chrysostom, that thou finally perish not. And
again, Non dixit quippe, non negabis, sed vt non deficiat fides tua. Cura enim
ipsius and fauore factum est ne omnino Petri fides euanesceret. (Christ) did
not say, thou shall not deny me, but thy faith shall not (wholly) fail. For by
his care and favor it came to pass that Peter's faith should not utterly be
extinguished. And so Bid, Beda in cap. ^2. Luce.
Our Savior prayed for Peter, not that he should not be tempted, but that
his faith should not fail, that is, that after he was fallen by denying him,
he might rise again by repentance to his former state. Now frame your reason,
as in deed you must, and mark your illation how absurd it is. I have prayed
for thee, that thy faith shall not utterly vanish, though thou shall thrice
deny me and shamefully forswear me; Ergo neither Peter neither his
successors can err in any matter of Religion. I ask not what boy, but what
bedlem would thus dispute?


Phi. Peter denied not the faith but the person of Christ.


Theo. And he that denies the Person of Christ, denies not a part, but the
whole faith of Christ. To deny Christ is worse than to be deceived in some
point of says.
It is a sorer and a more dangerous fall to deny the Lord himself, than to be
deceived in opinion of faith, even by the very confession of Peter. For thus he
places them in the second Epistle, 2. Peter 2.
There shall be false teachers amongst you, which shall privily bring in damnable
sects, yea, denying the Lord that has bought them. Our Savior in his
admonition to the seven Churches of Asia, Reuelat. 2.
shows that he which denies his name denies his faith. Thou hold fast
my name, says he, and have not denied my faith. Wherefore not to hold fast
the name of Christ is to deny the faith of Christ. And how can you doubt of
this, since the missing of any point of faith, is but heresy, and the denying
of Christ's name which Peter fell into, is Apostasy, far worse than the
former? See then how lewdly you pervert the words of our Savior. Where Peter
is forewarned of his fall, you make the words a warrant that he shall not
fall. And where the Lord promised him repentance, you turn the text as if
Peter weree free from all such offenses.


Phi. He offended, but not in faith.


Theo. Could he deny Christ and not deny his faith and hope in Christ? Or can
there be greater infidelity than to deny the son of God? And yet Peter not
only denied him thrice, but with an oath and a curse ratified his denial.


Phi. Peter denied that he knew him.


Theo. And he that knows not Christ, what faith or hope has he in Christ?
Peter lost his faith when he denied christ.
S. Ambrose giving the cause why Peter did not speak but weep after his fall,
says, Ambros. sermo. 46.
Petrus iam non vtitur sermon quo fefellerat, quo peccauerat, quo fidem
amiserat. Peter now does not use speech by the which he had lied, by the
which he had sinned, by the which he had lost his faith. And again, Idem.
sermo. 47.
Fidelior factus est post quam fidem se perdidisse defleuit. Peter became more
faithful, after he bewailed the loss of his faith.


Phi. The danger (says S. Leo) was common to all the Apostles, but our Lord
took special care of Peter, The Rhemish Testament upon the 22. of S. Luke.
that the state of all the rest might be the more sure, if the head were
invincible.


Theo. Leo may be borne with in showing himself somewhat favorable to Peter,
the founder of his Church; but what reason we should bear with you when you
corrupt and falsify that which Leo says? His words are, Leo. sermo. 3. in
anniuersari^ die assumptionis ad Pontificatum.

Leo corrupted by the Rhemists.


Pro fide Petri proprie supplicatur tanquam aliorum status certior sit futurus,
simens Principis victa non fuerit. Prayer is made particularly for Peter's
faith, as though the state of others would be the surer, if the mind of the
chief were not conquered. For aliorum, you say (all the rest;) for men's
Principis, you say (the head;) for victa non fuerit, you say (were invincible;)
that is at no time after able to be conquered. These be your forgeries, they
be not Leoes words. He speaks somewhat partially for Peter, but nothing
hurtful unto us. That Peter was the chief of the Apostles in order, in age,
in zeal, in courage, and such like virtues and dignities, and that the rest
are weakened when the chief is conquered, which is all that Leo says, we can
admit: But yet S. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in Mat. homil. 83.

Why Christ prayed for Peter by name.

Ibidem paulo ante.


by your leave, gives a truer cause way Christ did mention Peter and not the
rest. If (Satan) desired (to resist) them all, why did not (Christ) pray for
all? It is evident, as I said before, that to touch him the more deeply and to
show his fall to be far more grievous than any of the rest, Christ turns
his speech to him in particular. And so he said before, I prayed for thee
(particularly) that thy faith should not fail. This (Christ) spoke to touch
(Peter) the more vehemently, signifying that his fall would be much fouler
than the fall of his fellows, and therefore that he needed the more help.

Christ prayed for all.

August. quaest. ex nouo Testame^to, quaest. 75.


S. Augustine makes it a plain case that in praying for Peter he prayed for
all. Quid ambigitur? Pro Petro rogabat, and pro Iacobo and Iohanne non rogabat,
vt ceteros taceam? Manifestum est in Petro omnes contineri, quia and in alio
loco dicit, Ego pro hijs rogo quos mihi dedisti Pater. Why doubt we of it? Did
he pray for Peter, and did he not pray for James and John, to say nothing of
the rest? It is manifest that in Peter all are contained, because in an other
place he says: I pray for them whom thou have given me, O father. The words
Pro Iacobo and Iohanne non rogabat, must be interrogatiue, unless you will
have S. Augustine to contradict that which he goes about to prove; though the
Print or the Scribe have made there two points, yet your own fellows the
Louanists in their late Plantine edition have mended the points, and made the^
interrogatiue for very shame. But how so ever you set the points, certain it
is the Lord prayed jointly for them all, and that at this very supper as the
17. of S. John witnesses, and in as ample manner for all as for one. John 17.
I pray for them, I pray not for the world. Holy father preserve them in thy
name who^ thou have given me; keep them from evil and sanctify them in thy
truth.

It is a greater grace to be kept from evil and to be sanctified in the
truth, which Christ requested for all, than to have their faith not fail and
to be converted, which he promised unto Peter. You do therefore very
wickedly to teach the people that None other Apostle might challenge any such
special prerogative either of his office or Person, The Rhemish Testament upon
the 22. of Luke.
as to be steadfast in truth without error. The prayer was general for them
all by the judgment of S. Augustine, and were it not, the prayer which our
Savior made for them all, and the promise which he made unto them all even
the same night that he spoke this, are more effectual than this. The prayer
you have heard: the promise is, John. 16.

Christ's promise to al his Apostles.


If I depart not, the comforter shall not come unto you: but if I depart, I
will send him unto you. And when that Spirit of truth comes he shall lead
you into all truth. To be led into all truth is a better assurance against
error, than to fall first and after to be converted, which is all that is
promised unto Peter in this place.


Phi. The Rhemish Testament in the 22. of Luke.

Lib. q. noui Testa. quaest. 75. tomo 4.


Saint Augustine also: Christ praying for Peter, prayed for the rest, because
in the Pastor and Prelate the people is corrected or commended. Saint Ambrose
writes that Peter after his tentation was made Pastor of the Church, because
it was said to him, thou being converted confirm thy brethren.


Theo. You might have spared these authorities, but that you must needs have
the Fathers names in your mouths, though they make nothing for you. The words
of S. Augustine, which you cite, are not found in the old Printes nor in their
copies, The words are enclosed with two lines in Erasmus edition, and not
found in the old printes.
but crept into some written books by the negligence and unskillfulness of
scribes; and yet were they S. Augustines, I see not what you gain by them.
Peter is there called Praepositus, Praepositus and Praelatus common names to
all Bishops.
that is, preferred before the rest, as also Praelatus does signify, both
which words in the Fathers be commonly applied to all Bishops, and import no
singular prerogative that Peter should claim, but the common charge which all
Pastors have. And though the words which you quote be neither many nor
material, yet you mistake them. For you say the people is corrected or
commended, where the Latin is Semper in praeposito populus aut corripitur aut
laudatur, the people is always reproved or praised in their (leader or)
Prelate.

S. Ambrose says no more but that, Ambros. in Psalm. 43.
Petrus Ecclesiae praeponitur, post quam a Diabolo tentatus est, Peter
receives charge of the church, after he was tempted of the Devil. And by
these words, thou being converted confirm thy brethren, he says, Ibidem.
The Lord does signify what it means that he did after chose him to be
sheepehearde of the Lords flock: to wit, that he and all other sheepeheardes
by his example, should learn to bear with their weak brethren and use that
kindinesse and patience in restoring and confirming others, which their Lord
and master first showed in suffering and converting them. And this Saint
Ambrose did well to make the chiefest point of a christian sheepeheard.


Phi. But S. Ambrose says in the singular number, Petrus ecclesiae
praeponitur: and eum elegit Pastorem Dominici gregis. Peter is set over the
Church, and Christ chose him to be Pastor of his flock. Sure you be singular
men to quote such places and make such conclusions. Peter was set over the
Church, or made Pastor of the Lords flock, ergo none but Peter. Even so you
may reason: 1. Tim. 1.
The Gospel of the glory of the blessed God is committed to me, says Paul,
ergo to none but to Paul. And again, 1. Tim. 2.
I am the teacher of the Gentiles in faith and truth, ergo none but he. Or when
he says to the Philippians, Philip. 1.
It is given unto you, not only to believe in (Christ) but also to suffer for
(Christ): ergo it is given to none but to them. If you play thus with
Scriptures and fathers you may make mad work in them both.


Phi. Peter was made Pastor of the flock.


Theo. And so were others as you heard out of Ambrose before: Ambros. de dig.
Sacer. cap. 2.
The (Lords) flock not only Peter received, but we al with him.


Phi. He was set over the church.


The. And so are al Pastors. Our Savior says of teachers in general: Mat. 24.
Who then is a faithful servant and wise, whom his master has set over his
household to give them meat in season? S. Cyprian speaking of himself says,
Lib. 1. Epist. 3.
Ob hoc ecclesiae praepositum persequitur: For this he persueth the ruler or
ouerseer of the church. S. Augustine says, Aug. de ciuit. Dei lib. 20. ca. 9
Praepositi intelligendi sunt per quos ecclesia nunc gubernatur. They must be
taken for overseers (of the church) by whom the church is now governed. Idem
in Johan. tract. 46.
And again, Sunt quidam Ecclesiae praepositi, de quibus Paulus dicit. sua
quaerentes, There are some overseers of the church of whom Paul says, they
seek their own. So that Praepositus and Pastor Ecclesiae be not titles
proper to Peter but styles common to all Bishops, and therefore by them you can
infer nothing.

But where all this while are your proofs, that Peter could not err, which is
the frame that you would fasten on these words? This is the Rhemists common
use in their Testament tothwack in a number of Fathers names to no purpose.
Why prove you things superfluous, and skip that which is most in question
betwixt us? What father ever said that these words of our Savior made Peter
free from falling or erring? From desperation and irrepentance, the Lords
prayer saved him, and recovered him when he was ready to perish: from falling
or erring he was defended no more than the rest, nay not so much. They fled
and forsook their master, he presuming farther, sped worse, as the Lord
fortold him, and the Gospel reports of him.

And were that proved, which you neither offer nor are able to prove, yet does
it not belong to the Bishop of Rome, which is it that we stick at. For
touching Peter's person and office we can soon be entreated to think and
speak the best. And though we do not say as you do, that truth was tied to his
sleeue only: yet are we of opinion, that he and his fellow Disciples were
guided into all truth as by whom the church was first to be planted, and from
whom the faithful were to receive the word of truth and the foundation of
their faith. And therefore we nothing doubt but as the writings of Peter, Paul,
James, John, Jude and Matthew be canonical Scriptures, so the preaching not of
Peter only but of all the rest after they were endued with the power of the
holy Ghost from above, We confess the preachinges and writings of Peter and
all the rest after the receiving of the holy Ghost, were free from error: will
they claim that for the Pope?
was assured truth and void of all error: the same spirit ruling their tongues
that guided their pens: But this privilege to teach and write truth without
error was annexed to Peter's person, not conveyed along to his successors no
more tha^ their writings are canonical because his were.


Phi. This was not the privilege of S. Peter's person but of his office, that he
should not fail in faith. The Rhemish Test. 22. Lucae.



The. If you meant that other Apostles which were of the same office with him,
were to have the same privilege as well as he, you said right: for the
churches of Christ in all places where Peter never preached needed the same
assurance of faith and the same direction unto truth that the churches did
which were planted by Peter: But you will have this privilege remain to some
successor after Peter's death, and for that you show us no authority besides
your own, which God knows is very simple.


Phi. The Rhemish Test. 22. Lucae.
All the fathers apply this privilege of not failing in faith to the Roman
church and Peter's successors in the same.


Theo. You belie all the Fathers with one breath; and but that you have a
privilege to say what you list, A noble lie of the Rhemists forced on all the
Fathers with one breath.
in other men this were an arrogant and an impudent lie. What fathers, I pray
you, apply this promise of not failing in faith to the Roman Church? You say
al: for discharge of your credit let us hear some.


Phi. Epist. 190.
S. Barnard writing to Pope Innocentius says, To what other See was it ever
said, I have prayed for thee Peter that thy faith do not fail?


Theo. Could you find no father for the space of 1100. years that ever applied
these words to the church of Rome before Bernard? To be plain with you
masters, They say all the fathers applied this to the Pope, and produce none
but poor Bernard.
Bernard is too yo^g to carry the name of antiquity, and too single to have the
credit of all the fathers: But with the^ that have no mo, one must go for all.
Indeed all the fathers that ever applied this privilege to the church of Rome
are poor Bernard more than a 1000. years after Christ, in the midst of
corruption: but in this case we require some grauer and elder father than
Bernard.


Phi. To the which (says S. Cyprian) infidelity or false says can not come.
Cyprian foully wrested to make for the Pope.



Theo. To which what? church or successors?


Phi. Which you will. And where you require fathers that the church of Rome can
not er, Cypria^s words be very plain. Post ista nauigare audent and ad Petri
cathedram atque ecclesiam Principalem, The Rhemish Test. 22. Lucae. Cyp. Epi.
55.
vnde vmtas Sacerdotalis exorta est a schismaticis and profanis literas far
nec cogitare eos esse Romanos, quoru^ fides Apostolo praedicante laudata est,
ad quos persidia habere non possit accessum. After all this they dare sail and
carry letters from schismatiks and profane persons to the chair of Peter and
the principal church, whence priestly unity had her beginning, and do not
remember the Romans to be those whose faith was praised by the Apostles mouth,
to whom infidelity ca^ not come.


Theo. You do well to repeat the place at large, it will ease me of some pains.
What conclude you of these words?


Phi. That the Bishop of Rome can not er.


Theo. How fet you that about?


Phi. To Peter's chair infidelity can not come.


Theo. Those be not Cypria^s words.


Phi. To the Romans, The Romans import the people, and not the Pope.
he says, infidelity ca^ not come.


Theo. He adds somewhat more, whose faith was praised by the Apostles mouth.


Phi. All the better. For if S. Paul praised their faith, it was the truer.


Theo. But whose faith did Paul praise? the Bishops or the peoples?


Phi. Why ask you that?


Theo. Because that directs the sense of Cyprians words.


Phi. Whose say you?


Theo. I ask you and you return it to me: Well then let S. Paul speak for us
both.

I thank my God, through Jesus Christ for you all, because your faith is
renoumed throughout the whole world. Romans 1.
You al contains as well the people that received the faith, Cypria^ spoke of
all the Romans, and not of the Bishop of Rome.
as the Preachers that taught it: and of the twain rather the people than the
Preachers, because the preaching of the faith was as true elsewhere, as in
Rome: but either the zeal and devotion of the people in receiving the faith
was greater at Rome than elsewhere as S. Hierom notes, and that S. Paul
commends; or else because their city was imperial, the fame of their
receiving ye gospel was bruted farther abroad tha^ of other smaler cities, and
did encourage others to go forward with the more boldness, for the which Paul
tha^keth God. Take which you will, the peoples faith is it that S. Paul
praises, as his own words witness, Romans 1.
To you all that are at Rome: I thank my God for you all, because your faith
is made manifest to all the world. Now if Cyprian say that infidelity can not
come to the Romans whose says was praised by the Apostles mouth, then can
none of the people of Rome err because the faith of them all was praised by
the Apostles mouth.


Phi. The church of Rome can not err, nor the people neither so long as they
follow the faith of that church.


Theo. But if you build this on Cyprians words you must say, that the church of
Rome can not err so long as she follows the people of Rome, for their faith
was praised by the Apostle. And therefore choose whether you will impart this
privilege to every Citizen and Artisant in Rome, that they can not err, as
well as to the Pope, that he can not err; or else seek for an other meaning
of Cyprians saying.


Phi. What other meaning should we seek for? be not the words plain enough?


Theo. You neither translate them right, nor apply them right. The true
meaning of Cyprian.
For Cyprian does not discourse in that epistle whether the Romans themselves
may fall from the faith, but whether wicked persons rejected in other places
from the communion should have any refuge or find any favor at Rome: and that
he largely dissuadeth, bringing this amongst others for a reason, that where
the Apostle praised the people of Rome in his time for their zealous embracing
the faith of Christ: and encouraging others to do the like, it would now be
a great shame, if wicked disturbers of the faith should be succored by them:
which he thought good to express in these words, Cypr. lib. 1. Ep. 3

May not, or ought not have access.


Neither do they remember the Romans to be those whose faith was praised by
the Apostles mouth, to whom (wickedness or) unfaithfulness may not have access.


Phi. Out upon you: what a gloze have you brought us here?


Theo. None but such as the whole Epistle shall justify.


Phi. You translate, non possit may not. What non po^est does signify.



Theo. A foul oversight I assure you; as though the very children in Grammar
schools did not learn that posse does signify to may or can, or your law it
self did not allow us that exposition when it says, De regulis iuris 68. In
glossa.
Id dicimur posse quod de iure possumus, we can do that which by right we can?
And Cyprian himself did not use the word in that sense when he said of a
Bishop, In senten. Conc. Carth. sentent. 1. Cyprianus.
Iudicari ab alio non possit, cum nec ipse possit alterum iudicare, he may not
be judged of an other, since himself may not judge an other? And even in his
Epistle, Lib. 1. Epist. 3.
Nequ^ potest illis esse frons ad nos accedendi. They can not have the face to
come unto us.


Phi. You may thus shift out any thing.


Theo. It is no shift to tell you that non potest does not ever signify an
absolute impossibility. Nothing is more usual neither in sacred or profane
writers, no nor in common speech than that construction of the word which we
bring you. De orat. ad At.
Non possum quin exclamem: I can not but cry out says Cicero: and facere non
possum vt nihil ad te them literarum: I can not but write unto you. Where is no
simple necessity in either, but an urgent occasion only.

The Scriptures every where use the word in like sort. God says, Non potero
celare Abraham quae gesturus sum. Genesis 18.
Can I hide from Abraham that which I am about to do? Genesis 34.
Jacobs sons answer Sichem and his father, No^ possumus facere quod petitis:
Genesis 37.
We may not do that which you request. Of Iosephes brethren the text says, Nec
poterant ei quicqua^ pacifice loqui: they could not give him a fair word. Genesis
44.
Judas speaking of his brother Benjamin, Non potest puer relinquere patrem
suum: and after, Non possum redire adpatrem absente puero: The lad can not
leave his father: I can not return to my father without him. So Iephta said
to his daughter: Iudic. 11.
I have opened my mouth to the Lord, and aliud facere non potero, and I can not
otherwise do. When Asaell persued Abner and would not leave him, Abner said,
2. Reg. 2.
depart least I be driven to kill thee, and then can not show my face to Ioab
thy brother. 3. Reg. 2.
Adonias to Bethsaba the mother of Solomon, Speak I pray thee to king Solomon,
neque enim negare tibi quicquam potest, for he can deny thee nothing. The man
of Judah said to the Prophet that dwelt in Bethell, 3. Reg. 13.
Non possum reuerti, I can not go back with thee, though presently he did it.

Infinite are the places both of the old and new Testament where the word is
so used. In the Gospel he that was in his bed when his friend spoke to him,
said, Luke. 11.
Non possum surgere, I can not rise, and yet he did. The gh^st that married a
wife answered, Luke 14.
Non possum venire: I can not come: and yet he might. The master said to his
servant, Luke 16.
Thou can be steward no longer, when he meant he should not. The Jews said of
Christ: This Joan. 6.
is an hard speech, who can endure it: which yet his Apostles did. And Christ
himself said to his kinsmen, Non Joan. 7.
potest mundus odisse vos, The world can not hate you: meaning it has no cause
to hate you: Non 1. Corinthians. 12.
potest oculus dicere manui, The eye can not say to the hand I have no need of
thee; S. Paul means if the eye will say truth. So himself says, Non 2. Corinthians. 13.
possumus aliquid aduersus veritatem, We can do nothing against the truth, that
is we may or will not: So said the Son of God to the church of Ephesus, Scio
Revel. 2.
quia non potes sustinere malos: I know thou can not abide them that are
evil. A thowsande like there are in every part of the Scripture, but these are
enough to persuade any sober mind, that we bring no new nor strange
interpretation of Cyprians words but such as is familiar and frequent in the
books of God and mouths of men.


Phi. The words perhaps may be so taken if that were proved to be Cyprians
meaning in this place.


Theo. The words standing indifferent to both constructions, yours and ours;
we shall quickly see, which of them comes nearest to Cyprians meaning. The
sense, which you make, besides that it is absurd in it self, it neither
serves the word, nor matcheth the circumstances of this Epistle, nor agrees
with the maine judgment of Cyprian in his other writings, and that which is
most of all, it flatly dissenteth from S. Paul, who would neither warn the
Romans to fear without cause, nor threaten the^ with things impossible.


Phi. Prove this, and expound the place how you list.


Theo. Both Cypria^ and Paul name generally the Romans, Cyprians words have
no agreement with the Jesuits sense.
and not severally the Bishop of Rome from the rest. Next, habere accessum
notes not any corruption springing, or not springing within themselves, but
only resort of others unto the^. Thirdly Cyprian complains that this was
done, and touches the unshamefastness of heretics for doing it, which you
would press as impossible to be done. Fourthly the thing which those
perfidious persons sought at Rome was not any mutation of the faith, but
letters of fellowshippe and communion, which the Bishops of Africa denied them
for their sundry disorders. Last of al, repeating and commending the warines of
the Romans in shunning the poison of heretics, he shuts up his letter with
words very like the former and declares the true meaning of that he spoke
before.

Cyp. lib. 1. Epi. 3.
Let our most beloved brethren hereafter stoutly decline and forbear (all)
speech and talk with such men. Though I know our brotherhood there (at Rome)
guarded with your foresight, These be plainer words for the people than the
former be for the Pope.
and watchful enough of themselves, nec capi haereticorum venenis posse nec
decipi, can neither be taken, nor deceived with the venomous devises of
heretics. The right cause then why the Romans in Cyprians time could not be
caught with the baits of heretics, was not Peter's privilege, or
impossibility to er, as you fondly dream, but the wisdom of Cornelius
directing them, and the peoples care neither to speak nor eat with any such
men: And this diligence remaining, it was not possible that the impiety or
infidelity of others should have access unto them.

Cyprian affirms of the Bishop of Rome, that he did err.
Other opinion of the Romans Cyprian never had, and as for the Bishop of Rome,
that he might and did err, if the words of Cyprian to Pompeius against the
letters of Stephanus Bishop of Rome be not plain enough in the judgment of
any reasonable man, we yield you the whole. In reading the letters (of the
Bishop of Rome) you may more and more perceive, says Cyprian, Cypr. ad Pom.
contr. Epi. Steph Ibidem.
his error, which defends the cause of heretics against the church of God.
And so likewise he says of Stephanus, haeresin contra Ecclesia^ vindicat, he
bolstereth heresy against the church: Sua praua and falsa defendit, defends
his evil and false assertion. I respect not which of the twain had the better
side, Stephanus or Cyprian, but only whether Cyprian had that opinion of
Stephanus and other Bishops of Rome that they could not err; and if you have
but common sense you must say no. Much less did Cyprian ever mean to say
that the people of Rome could not err, which your selves dare not say, and
yet you would wring it out of Cyprians words. But God be thanked, Saint Paul
has prevented your wicked interprise.

Writing to the whole church of Rome, and giving them their due praise for
their devotion and zeal, S. Paul assures the Roman church that it might err.

Romans 11.


and entering at last into the reiection of the Jews for their unbelief, he
warns expressly the Romans in these words: Boast not thy self against the
branches: and if thou boast thy self thou bear not the root but the root
thee. Thou will say the branches are broken off, that I might be graft in.
Well, through infidelity they are broken off, and thou stand by faith: Be
not high minded but fear. For, if God spared not the natural branches, (take
heed) lest he spare not thee. Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God:
toward them which have fallen, severity; but toward thee, goodness, if thou
continue in his goodness, otherwise thou also shall be cut off.

Whether the Apostle spoke generally to the Gentiles, and inclusiuely to the
Romans: or namely to the Romans and proportionablie to the rest, it is all
one to us: Origin. lib. 8. in cap. 11. ad Romans
one of the twain, he must needs. Origin says upon these words of Paul, I
say to you Gentiles: Now he plainly turns his speech to the Gentiles, but
chiefly to those of the city of Rome, that believed. S. Paul speaking to the
Romans, no man may except the Romans; and they being included, his admonition
to them, fear and beware least, was utterly superfluous if there could be no
danger in them of swaruing from the faith; and the condition implied,
otherwise (if thou continue not) and the commination annexed, thou also shall
be cut off: were both ridiculous and odious if it were not possible for them to
fall or to be cut off. Fight not therefore against the holy Ghost with broken
reeds caught here and there out of the Fathers works: The Apostle threatens
not things impossible.
Look rather in time to this watchword which the apostle gives you, fear and
take heed, otherwise thou also shall be cut off. And mark his reason, If the
natural branches may be broken off, much more the wild which were planted but
in their steedes.


Phi. If that had been the Apostles meaning, do you think the Fathers would
have gainesaide it? Hierom wrested by the Jesuits as Cyprian was before.

The Rhemish Testament up on the 1. to the Romans.





Theo. I think they would not, and I see they do not: and that makes me to
interpret Cyprian in such sort as he may agree with himself, and not
confront S. Paul.


Phi. His words do surely lean on our side.


Theo. They fit your humor, and in that respect you be eger on them: Otherwise
I have cleared Cyprian both of that speech and of that intent. And were you not
unshamefast wranglers you would perceive that the ordinary use of the phrase
both in divine and humane writings does acquit him of that opinion, which you
enforce upon him: But such is your profession you must go on as you have begun.


Phi. If one alone had said it, we would not urge it so often; but S. Hierom
has likewise testified the same. Know you that the Roman faith commended by
the Apostles mouth will receive no such deceites, nor can be possibly changed,
though an Angel from heaven taught otherwise being fensed by S. Paul's
authority. Tom. 2. Apolog. aduers. Ruff. lib. 3. cap. 4.


Theo. If S. Hierom say the same that Cyprian did, he must be taken and
understood as Cyprian was; and so you ease me of that labor.


Phi. He says the same in effect, but his words are more forcible.


Theo. That is, your wilfulness in perverting and racking the words of S.
Hierom is more sensible. For S. Hierom speaks not one word of the persons,
that they shall never fall from the faith, but avouches only that the doctrine
which was first preached at Rome, and then continued, was so exact and perfect
that an Angel from heaven might not be heard against it. And to this end he
said, Hieron. Apo^^^ aduers. Ruff. 3.
Scito Romanam fidem, Apostolica voce laudatam istiusmodi praestigias non
recipere: etiamsi Angelus de coelo a^^ter annunciet quam semel praedicatum est
Pauli authoritate munita^, no^ posse mutari. Know you that the Roman faith
commended by the Apostles voice receives no such delusions, and that being
armed with Paul's authority it may not be changed, if an Angel from haven do
preach otherwise, than once was preached.


Phi. You run again to your former interpretation: Non posse mutari, it may
not be changed, in steed of it can not be changed.


Theo. Use which you will, so you grant, which I fully proved before, that non
posse does usually signify as well that which is unlawful, as that which is
impossible.


Phi. I know non possum, is used diuersely, but how does that answer S. Hierom?


Theo. You take h^lde of a word in Hierom, which in all men's speech and
writings has diverse and sundry significations by your own confession, and
then you marvel why we do not receive the vntruest and unlikeliest of them
all for your pleasures without any farther proof. Non possum does import that
which is either impossible, unlawful, inconvenient or any way impugnant to
the full persuasion and determination of our minds, The places of Scripture
before alleged if you weigh them, prove al these significations.
as the places before alleged do manfestly declare, and in all those
accidents, our common speech is and may be non possum, I can not. You would
now by a text of Hieroms, where he says, Romanam fidem non posse mutari, etiam
si Angelus de caelo, etc. The Roman faith may not, or can not be charged
though an Angel (came) from heaven, infer that the Romans until the worlds
end can not possibly choose but abide in the same faith which was first
delivered them; and that do what they will to the contrary, they must be
preserved in Christ's truth. This is we say a shameful violence offered to
Hieroms words against all learning, against his meaning, and against the
spirit of God speaking in S. Paul.

First the words non posse mutari, receive both constructions a like, that is
either a change of the faith can never happen in the Romans, which is your
sense, or else their faith can not possibly be changed without incurring
infidelity, The true intent of Hieroms words.
which is ours. For it cease to be faith when once it is changed. Next S.
Hierom speaks not of the persons but of the thing: he does not say the
Romans can not change their minds, but the faith which was delivered them, in
no wise may be changed. And why? Because it is the truth of God which never
changes. Again the authority of Paul writing to the Galathians which Hierom
cites, does not warrant that the Romans shall not fall, but only that the
faith once preached may not be changed though an Angel from heaven should
attempt it, especially since the Apostle commended the doctrine which they
reserved to be the true christian faith. What reason then have you besides your
parcial affection to the Sea of Rome, to draw these words from their native
sense, which is good and religious, to your private conceit, which sauoreth
altogether of mere vanity and open flattery?


Phi. What S. Hierom meant, God does know, you do not.


Theo. No more do you; but y^ he meant not this which you would father on him,
we have his own witness which you must believe unless you can show better.
Thus he complains of the Romans both Pristes and people in the epitaph of
Marcella. Haeretica in hijs Prouincijs exorta tempestas, nauemplenam
blasphemiarum Romano intulit portu^, Hiero. ad Principiam Marc. Epitapha. tom.
1.
etc. and Romanae fidei purissimum fontem caeno lutosa permiscuere vestigia.
Tunc sancta Marcella postquam sensit fidem Apostolico ore laudatam in plerisque
violari, ita vt sacerdotes quoque ac nonnullos Monachorum maximeque seculi
homines in assensum sui traheret, ac simplicitati illuderet episcopi, public
restitit. An heretical tempest rising in these Countries (of the East) carried
full sail into the haven of Rome; etc. and unclean feet did trouble with mud
the most pure fountain of the Roman faith. Then holy Marcella, when she saw
the faith praised by the Apostles mouth violated in most things, so that (this
heresy) drew the Priests and some Monks and specially laimen into the
consent of it self, and deluded the simplicity of the Bishop (of Rome, That
come to pass in Hieroms time which the Jesuits would prove to be impossible.
) she began to resist openly. Note Sir that come to pass in Hieroms age and
knowledge, which you would prove by Hieroms words to be in all ages impossible.
The fountain of the Roman faith defiled with mud, the faith praised by the
Apostles violated in most things, the Priests, the people drawn into the same
consent, and the seely Bishop of Rome abused by them, and the first that openly
resisted a poor widow.

Go then and blaze to the world, The Rhemish. Testament is an heap of Fathers
abused and wrested to deprave the text of the holy Ghost.
as you have done, in your magistrall annotations or rather deprauations of the
new Testament (which as you have dressed it with your devises and glozes, is
now nothing less than the Testament of Christ) proclaim I say that infidelity
can not come to the Romans, nor their faith be possibly changed, and that upon
the credits of Cyprian and Hierom, when they themselves did see, and say the
contrary.


Phi. We take no such care for the people of Rome, whether they may straie from
the faith or no: Peter's successor is he that our eyes are and ought to be
rather bent on; and touching his holiness, we be resolved that he can not err
in faith.


Theo. His holiness has very good luck then and better than all his
neighbors besides: The Jesuits reasons to make the Pope free from error.

The Rhemish Test. 22. Lucae.


but how shall we know that he can not err? Your word is too weak to be
taken for a matter of such weight: fathers you bring none, Scriptures you have
none, which way will you make it appear that his holiness can not be stained
with error?


Phi. No marvel that our Master would have his vicars Consistory and seat
infallible, seeing even in the old law, the high Priesthood and chair of
Moses wanted not great privilege in this case, though nothing like the churches
and Peter's prerogative.


Theo. But we marvel where you find that Christ would have any vicar, or that
his vicars Seat is infallible, or that the Bishop is that vicar which you
speak of, and we most marvel that you avouch all this upon your single report
without script or scrole to confirm the same.

The chair of Moses had no such privilege as you challenge. Moses chair had no
such privilege that it could not err.
The people were to learn the law of God at the Priests hands, and he that
presumptuouslie despised the Priest or Magistrate giving judgment according to
the tenor of Gods law, died the death. But this does not prove that either the
Priest or the Magistrate could not err: or that the Prophets did not justly
reprove the Priests when they sat to judge according to the law, Deuteronomy. 17.
for their manifest contempts and breaches of the Law. God by the mouth o^
Malachy both describes what the Priests should do, and declares what the
Priests had done. The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, Malach. 2.
and they should seek the law at his mouth, for he is the messenger of the
Lord of hosts. But ye are gone out of the way ( O ye Priests, Moses chair
did err.
) ye have caused many to fall by the law: ye have broken the covenant of Leui,
says the Lord of hosts.

This proud privilege which you mention, was claimed by the wicked Priests in
Ieremies time. Come, say they, let us imagine some devise against Jeremy:
Ierem. 18.
for the law shall not perish from the Priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor
the word from the Prophet. But God assures them by his Prophet for this their
arrogant presumption, that the law should perish from the Priest, Ezech. 7. 4.
Kings 16.
and counsel from the ancient. What gross idolatry Vriah the Priest
committed to please king Ahaz, the Scripture will tell you. And were there no
special examples, the serious inuectiues of the Prophets against them and the
whole land as well for false religion, as corrupt manners, are evident
testimonies that Priests from the lowest to the highest might err. Esaie
says, Esai. 28. Would you have clearer words that Moses chair did err?
Matthew. 16. Matthew. 15. Mark. 7.
The Priest and the Prophet have erred, they have gone away, they fail in
vision, they stumble in judgment. Our Savior charged his Disciples, to beware
of the doctrine of the Pharisees and Sadduces, which needed not unless it were
erroneous. And think you these were no errors which the Son of God reproved
in the Pharisees? You have made the commandment of God of no authority by
your tradition: and many such like things you do: teaching (for) doctrines the
commandments of men. The Sadduces error denying both the resurrection of the
body and immortality of the soul, Matthew. 22.
is often mentioned in the Scriptures, and openly refuted by our Savior. And
yet the high Priests were often Sadduces, and in the chief councels and
consistories of Jerusalem, where the greatest causes of religion and matters of
weight were determined, sat Act. 23.
half Sadduces, half Pharisees, and sometimes Act. 5.
only Sadduces which were plain Atheis^s and wicked heretics.


Phi. That overthrows not Peter's privilege.


Theo. Much less does it establish Peter's privilege, for the which cause you
allege it; but if Moses successor might err, why not Peter's?


Phi. Our assertion is they can not err: you say they can. Reason is that you
prove your affirmative.


Theo. The Scripture proves the general, Romans 3.

It is presumption against God to make any man free from error without
sufficient proof. Christ's promise to Peter pertains not to the Pope: and if
it did, it makes him not free from error.


that God is true and all men liars, you except the Bishop of Rome as not
subject to error and ignorance: reason is you prove your exception and that
strongly, least you be convicted of insolent presumption to fasten the spirit
of truth to the Popes chair without great and good assurance from him that is
the fountain of truth and the giver of the holy Ghost.


Phi. We hold by Christ's promise.


Theo. Show that and you be discharged.


Phi. Thy faith shall not fail.


Theo. Prove that to be spoken to the Bishop of Rome.


Phi. It was spoken to Peter.


Theo. But not to the Pope.


Phi. That which Peter had, his successor must have.


Theo. The charge which Christ gave Peter to feed his sheep is common to all
Pastors: But with the mercy which Christ showed him in converting him and
restoring him after his fall, what have his successors to do? Christ promised
Peter repentance: will you therefore infer that all Popes have the like
promises? Or had they, as they have not, does this let but they may forswear
their master and loose their faith, as Peter did, notwithstanding this prayer,
and promise of Christ made unto him?


Phi. But they shall also repent as Peter did.


Theo. If you could prove that promise to pertain unto them, as you can not,
yet might their error be public and their conversion secret as Peter's was;
and since they be subject to Peter's fall, namely to deny both their faith and
their master, though they were promised repentance with him, as they be not;
yet how can you know what things proceeded from the Popes mouth erring and
which from the Popes heart repenting? Which unless you do, you may err with
him, to your eternal confusion, and not repent with him, for that you have not
the like promise.


Phi. I will be with you to the worlds end says Christ, Matthew. 28.

Christ is with every of the faithful to the worlds end, and yet the
faithful may err.


and he forsakes those that err. So that if the church should err, this
promise of his were not kept, which God forbid.


Theo. You show the goodness of your cause when you reele thus from the Pope
to the church and from the church to the Pope, and yet find nothing to fit
you. Christ is with every one of his, and not only with the Pope, as you would
have the place to sound; and yet I think you will not affirm that no christian
can err. Many good men have erred, even in matters of faith, and yet not been
forsaken of Christ. The longer you reason, the farther you be from proving
that the Pope can not err. For this promise concerns him no more than it
does any other christian, and perhaps not so much; or if it did, yet does it
not free him from error.


Phi. The promise which is general to every member of the church, They ever
dream and never prove that the Pope is head of the church.
concerns him chiefly that is head of the church.


Theo. Keep this head of yours till the body need it; the church of Christ
has a surer and better head tha^ the Pope, or else it were ill with her.


Phi. Christ we know is the head of his church and the only head in such
sovereign and principal manner as no earthly man is or can be, yet the Pope
may be the ministerial head.


Theo. When you prove it, then say it; in the mean while abuse not the word of
God to serve your follies. Ephesians. 3.
Christ dwells in the hearts (of all that be his) by faith; with them he
remains until the worlds end. What is this to the Pope, or how does this
fense him from error?


Phi. If he be Christ's he can not err.


Theo. This text does not prove him to be one of Christ's: but if he be, then
Christ is with him as he is with all other his members.


Phi. And they can not err with whom Christ is.


Theo. Be these your demonstrations that the Pope can not err, to show for
him no better, nor other privilege, than that which is common to him with women
and children, if they be members of Christ? And were he a member of Christ,
which as yet for ought that I see you can hardly prove, he might be deceived
in some cases of religion, as well as Lactantius, Irineus, Cyprian and others,
men of great learning and good account in the church of God.


Phi. Our Savior says it is not possible that the elect should be seduced.
The elect may err, but not perish in their error.



Theo. Not possible they should be seduced to fall from God as the wicked are:
Yet as they may sin but not unto death, even so may they err but not unto
destruction. Their error shall either be not final, or not mortal.


Phi. May they that err, be saved?


Theo. If they hold fast the foundation which is Christ, and err not of
wilful obstinacy, but of humane frailty, why may they not be saved? S.
Cyprian said of those that were before him: Cyp. lib. 2. Ep. 3.
If any of our predecessors either ignorantly or simply did not observe and
keep that which the Lord by his example and authority willed, his simplicity
may be pardoned by the goodness of God. And S. Augustine said of him, Aug.
Epist. 48.
when an error of his was alleged by the Donatistes for their defense:
Cyprian either was not all of this opinion, or he after corrected it by the
rule of truth, or this blemish in his most beautiful breast he covered with the
teates of charity. And farther alleges and allows this saying of Cyprians:
De Baptis. lib. 4. cap. 5.
Ignosci potest simpliciter erranti, he that erreth of simplicity may be
pardoned.

Of himself and all others S. Augustine says: Aug. de Baptis. lib. 2. cap. 5.
Homines sumus vnde aliquid aliter sapere quam se res habet humana tentatio
est. In nullo autem aliter sapere qua^ se res habet Angelica perfectio est. All
men may err.
We are men, and therefore to think otherwise than the truth is, is (humane
infirmity or) a tentation common to man. To be deceived in nothing is
Angelical perfection. And therefore writing to S. Hierom, and of S. Hierom, he
says: Aug. Epist. 19.
Prorsus non te arbitror sic legi libros tuos velle tanquam Prophetarum aut
Apostolorum, de quorum scriptis quod omni errore careant, dubitare nefarium.
Absit hoc a pia humilitate and veraci de temetipso cogitatione. I am fully of
opinion that you would not have your books to be read in such sort as we do
the Prophets and Apostles, of whose writings to doubt whether they be free
from all error is wickedness. Be this far from godly humility and the true
persuasion of your self. So that set the Apostles aside and their writings,
It is ungodly pride to think any man free from error.
no man ought to think of himself that he can not err, neither can you have
that opinion of any man without a proud and false persuasion above man's state
and against Gods truth.


Phi. What shall we then say to the promise which our Lord made to his?
John. 16.
When he, the spirit of truth comes, he shall teach you all truth.


Theo. If it be referred to the Apostles then present with him, Ibidem.

The Apostles were guided by a special gift of Gods spirit, that in preaching
and writing they should not err.


as the words next before do specify, I have yet many things to say unto
you, but you can not bear them now; we grant those witnesses chosen by
Christ to teach all Nations, were to be furnished with all truth and to be
established in the same; but if it be extended to all the faithful, they also
shall be led into all truth needful and requisite to salvation, I mean
the substantial grounds of faith, though in some questions of Religion
happily they shall not all be like minded.


Phi. And what for the Church, shall she have no part in this promise?


Theoph. If the faithful have, the Church, which is the number and collection
of the faithful, must needs have: But that the greater part of those which
profess christianity or some special places or persons must for ever be
directed unto all truth and preserved from all error, this can not be concluded
by these words.


Phi. To teach all truth and preserve in truth and from error the holy Ghost
is promised and performed only to the church and the chief governor and
general councels thereof. The Rhemish Test. 16. John.



Theo. In deed you take upon you like Governors to appoint what the son of God
shall mean and who must have the holy Ghost, How handsomely the Jesuits play
with Scriptures.
as if the matter were in your hands and not in his.


Phi. Do we take upon us to limit the holy Ghost?


Theo. What else do you when of your own heads you restrain the words of our
Savior as you li^t?


Phi. As we list?


Theo. Our Saviors words are, When that spirit of truth comes he shall teach
you al truth. John. 16.
This say you is promised and performed only to the church, and the chief
Governor (the Pope) and general Councels thereof. As if You in S. John's Gospel
did signify none but the Pope, the chief Governor, and such Bishops as the
Pope will admit to his conferences, which you call the general councels of the
church; and what is this else but to divide the holy Ghost as you think good?


Phi. The rulers of the church must needs have the holy Ghost.


Theo. Mean you all or some?


Phi. The most part of them.


Theo. How prove you that to be Christ's meaning, that the most part of them
which can procure themselves miters, A miter is no buckler against error.
or rather catch up Bishoprics shall be sure of the holy Ghost in such
measure that they shall never mistake the says, nor any part thereof?


Phi. If they should err, the church should err.


Theo. You run from bad to worse. Your own law will show you the falsenes and
perverseness of your Rhemish observations and expositions: Cause. 24. quaest. 1..
A recta in gloss. Nouitaetibus.
Quaero de qua Ecclesia intelligas quod hic dicitur quod non possit errare.
Side ipso Papa, certum est quod Papa errare potest. Respondeo, Ipsa congregatio
fidelium hic dicitur Ecclesia, and talis Ecclesia non potest non esse. I
demand of what church it is meant when it is said, as here, that the church
can not err. What church can not err.
If of the Pope himself, it is certain that the Pope may err. I answer the
congregation of the faithful is here called the church, and that church can
not chose but continue. The spirit of truth is not promised to the Pope, nor to
his councels, but to the faithful whether they be severed or assembled, and
they shall not err, that is they shall not perish in error as the wicked do;
but shall either be recovered from their error, or find mercy for their
ignorance.


Phi. May the whole church err?


Theo. If we should grant you that the whole church can not err, That the
whole church can not err, is no help for the Pope and his Cardinales.
to wit that all the faithful on the earth at one time can not be deceived in
any necessary point of faith, but that Christ for his promise sake will
preserve truth amongst them, what is this to the Pope, or his Cardinals, or
Conuenticles, to whom you convey the holy Ghost by inheritance?


Phi. Never delude us with ifs, but tell us whether you think the whole church
may err or no.


Theo. In matters of faith we think it can not.


Phi. If the church can not er, the Governors of the church can not.


The. Leave trifling and fall to reasoning: The whole church can not err; ergo
what?


Phi. Ergo the Pastors, and Preachers can not err.


Theo. Conclude you all or none?


Phi. To say no Pastor can err, were apparent madness.


Theo. And ye next which is, all Pastors can not err, does you no pleasure.
For the Bishop of Rome may err and so may the rest of his mitred and twiforked
creatures; and yet many good Pastors and Preachers keep fast to the faith.
Howbeit this conclusion does not follow upon my confession. Councels and Popes
may err though the whole church do not err.
The whole church (I grant) can not er, that, is all and every the faithful
can not er, therefore all Pastors can not er, this is no kind of conseque^t.
For some of the faithful may be directed unto truth, and they no pastors nor
preachers; and many preachers may be preserved from error, and they no
Bishops; and many Bishops may be kept in the faith, and they not assembled; and
a great number of those that be assembled may be rightly affected, and yet not
the most part of them; and the greater side may be well disposed, and yet not
the Bishop of Rome, whom you make to be the moderator and guider of all
councels: And therefore your argument is very childish: The whole church can
not err, ergo general councels can not err, and specially the Pope: which
later part your best friends have not only refuted as false, but also
detested for incredible and shameful flattery.


Phi. So say you.


Theo. So say they. Alfonsus that wrote bitterly against Luther, Alfon. aduers.
haereses lib. 1. cap. 4.
when he came to this point, dealt plainly in these words. Non credo aliquem
esse adeo impudentem Papae assentatorem, vt ei tribuere ho^ velit vt nec errare
possit: I can not think any man to be so impudent a flatterer of the Pope, as
to attribute this unto him that he can not er. The wiser sort of Papists
condemn them for flatterers that say the Pope can not err.



Phi. Alfonsus has no such words.


Theo. You say truth, Alfonsus now has not, but Alfonsus had those words in
his former editions. And this commends your cunning that you can curtaile the
writings of your fellows and leave out what you list when you new print them.


Phi. It was his own correcting in his second edition.


Theo. Whether it was his doing or yours we care not: Sub prel^ Ascensiano,
anno Dom. 1534.
the words remain in the old Printes to the manifest condemnation of your
folly and flattery in this behalf: And in his new copies though he qualify
his terms, he holds flatly the same opinion. Omnis homo errare potest in
fide, etiam sipapa sit. Every man may err in faith, Alfon. li. 1. ca. 4.
Ca^s. 24. quaest. 1.. A recta. in gloss.
even the Pope himself. And so you heard your own gloze before affirm, It is
certain, the Pope may err.

The same is confessed by the best of your side both canonistes and divines.
Panormitane says, De electio. significasti.
Concilium potest condemnare Papam de haeresi, vt in cap. Si Papa. Distinct.
40. vbi dicitur quod Papa potest esse haereticus and de haeresi iudicari. A
council may condemn the Pope of heresy, as appears in the 40. Distinct.
cap. Si Papa. Where it is said that the Pope may be an heretik, and judged of
heresy. Lyra says, Lyra in ca. 16. Matthew.
Multi summi Pontifices inuenti sunt apostatasse a side: Many Popes have proved
apostataes. Augustinus de Ancona: Aug. de Anco. de potestat. Ecclesiast.
quaest. 1.
Papa est deponendus pro haeresi: ad Co^ciliu^ spectat Papa^ in haeresi
deprehensum conde^nare, vel deponere. The Pope may be deposed for heresy: A
counsel may condemn or depose the Pope deprehended in heresy. Antonius
Archbishop of Florence, Anton. part. 3. tit. 22. cap. 3. 3
Pro haeresi (Papa) congrue ipso facto deponitur. For heresy the Pope is ipso
facto deposed, and no inconvenience. And to that end he alleges Petrus de
Palude, saying, In lib. de Potestat. Papae citatur ab Anton.
Papa quando labitur in haeresin tunc ^o ipso est praecisus ab Ecclesia, and
desinit esse caput. The Pope when he falls into an heresy, is presently
cut off from the Church and cease to be the head of it. So Gerson the
Chancellor of Paris: Gerson in trac. An liceat in ca^s. fidei a Po^tifice
appellare.
Tam Papa quam Episcopus deuiabiles a fide. The Pope may swerve from the faith
as well as an other Bishop.

The general council of Basil says, Council. Basilien. epist. Synodalis 3.
de authoritate Council. supra Papam.
Saepe experti sumus and legimus Papam errasse. We have often both found out
by experience and read that the Pope has erred. And again, Cum certum sit
Papam errare posse. For so much as it is certain the Pope may err. Aeneas
Syluius afterward Pius the second inueying against them that would not have
councels gathered without the Popes consent, says: Aen. Sylu. de gestis Conc.
Basil. lib. 1.
What remedy shall there be if a sinful Pope trouble the Church, if he
destroy souls, if he pervert the people with his evil example? Si denique
contraria fidei praedicet, haereticisque dogmatibus imbuat subditos: If he
teach against the faith and infect those that be under him with heretical
opinions.

Cardinal Caietane and Pope Innocentius the fourth though they had good cause
to favor the Sea of Rome, Caiet. de authoritate Papae and Conc. cap. 26. and
27.
yet were they clearly resolved, the Pope might err, and so were all the
writers of your own religion before this our age that ever I heard of, and
even at this day the sincerest of them dislike the unshamefastness of your
assertion. Alfon. lib. 1. ca. 2.
Papa in fide errare potest, vt melius sentientes tenent, etiam ex hijs qui
Papatui plurimum fauent. Inter quos est Innocentius eius nominis quartus
Pontifex in cap. 1. De summa Trinitate. The Pope may err in faith as the truer
opinion is even of them that favor the popedom very much. Amongst whom is
Innocentius the fourth of that name Bishop of Rome, Theosoph. lib. 4. cap. 32.
writing upon the first chapter De summa Trinitate. Arboreus a Doctor of Paris
and one of your chief Sorbonistes: Papa in fide errare Potest. Et tota mihi
aberrare via videtur qui aliter sentit. Assentantur sane Romano Pontifici qui
faciunt cum immunem a lapsu haereseos and schismatis. The Pope may err in
faith. Then surely masters you do but flatter when you make the Pope free from
error.
And he seems to me to be in foul error that thinks otherwise. Surely
they do but flatter the Bishop of Rome, that make him free from falling into
heresy and schism.

Erasmus pithily impugneth your inconsiderate folly, Erasmus annot. in 1. Cor.
ex cap. 7.
If it be true which some say, that the Bishop of Rome can never err
iudicially, what need general councels? Why are men skilled in the laws and
learned in divinity sent for to councels, if he pronouncing can not err? To
what purpose are so many Universities troubled with handling questions of
faith, when truth may be had from his mouth? Nay how comes it to pass that
the decrees of one Pope are repugnant to the decrees of an other? This
persuasion of yours must needs be naught which so many of your own side have
condemned before our days, and the sobrest of your selves that have written
since our time do utterly disclaim. And therefore advise you, whether you
will faierly resign this fancy, or be convinced by the verdict of your
fellows, for men-pleasers and flatterers. It is far from a Catholic
position which your own church in the midst of darkness would never
acknowledge, and at this day none defend, And yet the Jesuits make it an
high point of their faith.

The Jesuits re^use Councels and Fathers, because they will not acknowledge
the Pope has erred. Clements erroneous decree.

Cause. 12. quaest. 1. lectissimus.


but such hungry ghestes as you be that gape for thanks, and seek to please.


Phi. You falsely charge us with dishonest respects.


Theo. It is not my judgment of you, but theirs that otherwise have no cause
to think evil of you.


Phi. The reason that moves us so to say is for that we find no Pope that
ever erred.


Theo. You refuse Councels, Fathers, Stories and all that come in your way,
because you will not find it.


Phi. We refuse not that is ancient or indifferent: but only such as we think
partial.


Theo. Then if there be no cause why they should be partial; you will admit
them for credible.


Phi. We will.


Theo. We expect no more.

What say you then to Clemens the first of that name as you make your account,
though we think it a leude forgerie in his name? Do not your own Decrees
report out of his decretall epistles, that amongst christians al things ought
to be common, even wives and all? Communis vita omnibus fratres necessaria est:
Communis enim vsus omnium, quae sunt in hoc mundo omnibus esse hominibus
debuit. In omnibus autem sunt sine dubio and coniuges. A common life is
necessary for all men, brethren: the use of all things that are in this world
ought to be common to all men. And in all things no doubt are wives contained.


Phi. He means not the carnal use of women, but their domestical service
ought to be common.


Theo. So your gloze would make up the breach, but all in vain. For Socrates
in Platoes common wealth (whom your Clemens in this place cites and calls
Graecorum sapientissimum, the wisest of the Graecians) rehearsing the proverb
which Clemens here uses, Plato dialog. 4. de Repub.
infers that the conjunction of men and women, and procreation of children
ought to be common, That althings ought to be common among christians is a
gross error.
which is a monstrous and heinous error. And were that excused, the the rest
is a shameful absurdity that all other things ought of necessity to be
common amongst christians. For the Scriptures do not exact that no man should
possess any thing, but only that charity should gladly distribute and supply
the wantes of such as need.


Phi. Your self think this to be forged in Clementes name.


Theo. We do, but you do not, and therefore against you the instance is good.

The next is Tertullians testimony who says of the Bishop of Rome that he
agnised the prophesies of Montanus and sent (letters of communion) and peace to
the churches in Asia and Phrygia that were of that sect. The Bishop of Rome a
Montanist.



Phi. But he revoked those letters, and ceased from that purpose, as
Tertullian also confesses.


Theo. He revoked them after they were sent, and ceased from that which he
first acknowledged. Episcopum Romanum tunc agnoscentem prophetias Montani,
Tertul. aduer. Praxeam.
and ex ea cognitione pacem Ecclesiis Asia and Phrygiae inferentem, falsa de
ipsis prophetis adseuerando coegit, and literas pacis reuocare tam emissas, and
a proposito recipiendorum schismatum concessare: ( Praxeas the heretic) forced
the Bishop of Rome then agnising the Prophesies of Montanus, and upon good
liking (of them) giving peace to their Churches in Asia and Phrygia to revoke
his letters of communion when they were sent, and to cease from his purpose of
embracing their doctrine.


Phi. Tertullian was of that sect himself, and therefore no indifferent witness.


Theo. Indifferent enough to report the fact, though not to judge of the cause:
and we bring Tertullian not to commend Montanus error, but to show what the
Bishop of Rome did.


Phi. He began to like them, but it took not effect.


Theo. He wrate letters of peace to the Montanists, and sent them away, which
is enough to convince that he erred, though he after relented from his former
enterprise.

How Mercellinus Bishop of Rome sacrificed unto Idols and denied it when it
was objected to him, The Bishop of Rome an Idolater.

Marcellini Papae condemnatio tomo council. 1.


and was after reproved by sufficient witness and condemned for it, the Synod
extant in your first book of councels does declare, and Damasus writing the
lives of his predecessors does testify the same.


Phi. He fell in persecution, but he repented after and suffered for Christ,
as Peter did.


Theo. And therefore the Bishop of Rome may fall from the faith, for so did
Peter and Marcellinus: but whether he shall be renewed by repentance as they
were, that is neither known to you, nor believed of us.


Phi. We care not if they fall, so they rise again.


Theo. We prove they may fall: Prove you they shall not choose but rise again.


Phi. They have all done so that yet are mentioned, The Bishop of Rome an
Arrian.
and so did Liberius who^ I know you will name next; although we may worthily
doubt, whether ever he fell or no.


Theo. You and your fellows make a doubt of it, but I see no reason why you
should. For it is confirmed by many sound and sufficient witnesses, who both
for the time when, and place where they lived, did and might best know the
truth of that matter.


Phi. Ruffinus doubts of it, Theodoretus denies it, and Socrates inclines
rather to us, Ruff. li. 1. ca. 27. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 37.

Theodoret. lib. 2 cap. 17.


than otherwise.


Theo. Ruffinus says, whether it were so or no pro certo compertum non habeo,
I know not for a certainty. Socrates makes neither with it, nor against it:
but passes it over with silence. And so does Theodorete, only he says the
Emperor at the supplication of the Gentlewomen of Rome, Flecti se passus
iussit optimum quidem Liberium de exilio reuocari. Suffering him self to be
entreated, commanded the good bishop Liberius to be called from banishment.
But this excludes not his subscription before he received his place, which
Sozomene writes.

The Emperor at the intercession of the West Bishops recalleth Liberius from
Beroea (whither he was banished) and assembling the Bishops that were in his
tents compels him to confess the son (of God) not to be of the same
substance with his father. Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 17.
Basilius, Eustathius, and Eleusius induced Liberius to consent by this means
that some under the color of (...), did labor secretly to confirm heresy.
When this was done the Emperor gave him leave to go to his Bishopric.


Phi. Will you believe Sozomene before the rest that report no such thing?


Theo. Their silence does not prejudice his Story. And yet Sozomene is not the
first author of this report. Athanasius who lived in the same age with
Liberius, and for whose cause Liberius was banished and therefore would say no
more than truth by him, witnesses no less. Athanas. epist. ad solitar. vita^
agentes.
Liberius post exactum in exilio biennium inflexus est, minisque mortis ad
subscriptionem inductus est. Liberius after two years spent in banishment
inclined, and by fear of death was induced to subscribe. Damasus that was
Bishop of Rome, next after Liberius, and therefore could not be ignorant of
the truth, and would not belie his own See, says of him, Ingressus Liberius
in vrbem Roman^ 4. nonas Augusti consensit Constantio haeretico. Ex pontificali
Damasi in vita Liberij.
Non tamen rebaptizatus est, sed consensum praebuit. Liberius entering the
city of Rome the 4. of the nones of August consented to Constantius the
heretic. He was not rebaptized, but he gave his consent. Hierom brought up at
Rome in the time of Liberius and after so near Damasus that he was his right
hand in answering all Synodal consultations, and in that respect had often and
easy access to the Records and monuments of the Church of Rome, writes of
Fortunatianus Bishop of Aquileia. Hieron. de ecclesiast script. in
Fortunatiano.

The Jesuits neglect all this to save the Pope from error.

Hieron. ad chronicon Euse. adiectio.


In hoc habetur detestabilis quod Liberium Romanae vrbis Episcopum pro fide ad
exilium pergente^ primus solicitauit ac fregit, and ad subscriptionem hareseos
compulit: In this he is counted detestable, that he first attempted Liberius
the Bishop of Rome going into banishment for the faith, and prevailed with
him and gate him to subscribe to the (Arrian) heresy. In his addition to
Eusebius Chronicle he says as much: Liberius taedi^ victus exilij and in
haereticam prauitatem subscribens Roman quasi victor intrauerat. Liberius
wearied with his banishment and subscribing to heretical prauitie had entered
Rome as a conqueror.

We ask not what authority you have to counteruaile these; we know you have
none: but what reason have you to resist these?


Phi. The rest agree not with them. Omission in one writer is no disproofe in
an other.



Theo. Omission in one writer is no good argument against an other: four
affirm it, and every one of the^ elder and likelier to come by ye truth than
Theodorete: and yet Theodorete does not gainsay, but only ouerskip ye fact. If
therefore to claw the Bishop of Rome, you refuse the consent of Athanasius,
Hierom, Damasus and Sozomene, you do but discover your folly to the wiser
sort, and hazard your credit with the simple: If you receive their testimony
touching this fact, then is there no doubt, but the Bishop of Rome subscribed
unto Arianisme: and whether he repented or no, we may worthily doubt, since
your own Stories avouch the contrary.


Phi. Martin. Polon. in Liberi^. Vincentius specul. histor. lib. 15. Cap. 11.
and 12.
Which of our Stories?


Theo. Martinus Polonus, Vincentius and others. Martinus says, Constantius
recalled Liberius from banishment, because he had agreed to him and to the
Arians, and placed him again in his Seat, and so unhappy Liberius held the
Church of Peter six years by violence: then was the persecution great in the
city, in so much that the Clergy men which were against Liberius, were
Martyred: then also Eusebius a Priest suffered death, for declaring Liberius to
be an heretic. And Damasus when he came to the Bishop of Rome next after
Liberius, Ide^ in Damaso. Believe none but your self, and then you may be sure
the Pope shall not err.
with open voice condemned Liberius and all his acts.


Phi. I believe neither Vincentius nor Martinus in this case.


Theo. Your not believing them shows your self to be partial, not their
report to be false.


Phi. Liberius surely continued not an Arrian.


Theo. That he subscribed to the Arrians we prove: that he recanted his
subscription you can not prove.


Phi. No doubt he did it, though it be not written.


Theo. So you presume, though you want all proof for it.


Phi. Never Bishop of Rome died an heretic.


Theo. What did Honorius, Honorius died an heretic.
whom the sixth general Council condemned, and accursed after his death for
heresy?


Phi. That Council is shamefully corrupted by the Grecians.


Theo. If the Grecians copies did differ from yours, you had some reason to
charge the^ with corruption: but since your copies confess the same, how
could the Grecians invade your libraries without your knowledge and raze the
Records that lay at Rome in your own keeping, and the thing not spied?


Phi. A name is soon thrust in.


Theo. But whole sentences and whole leaves can not be thrust in, without
stealing away the original and laying a counterfeit in place thereof, which was
easy to be discerned. 6. Synod. actio. ti^. 12.13.16.17.18.
Honorius cause is mentioned and discussed in 26 several places of ye council,
and two of his epistles repeated at large, one of Actio. 12.
9. skore and 12. lines, the other of Actio. 13.
threeskore and sixteen lines, which argue the whole council to be forged, or
these branches concerning Honorius to be as sincere as the rest.


Phi. One Council is soon corrupted.


Theo. But may you reject your own Records as forged, and bring neither
reason, suspicion, nor probability, when, by whom or how this was or could be
done? Give us leave to do the like to the rest of your Romish Records where
good cause leads us, and see what will become of your Religion. And for no
cause but ^or that it conde^neth the pope as an heretic.



Phi. In deed this one we think to be forged.


Theo. A general Council repeating the matter which you stick at more than
twenty times, and lying safe in your own custody, you suspect to be forged
and upon no ground but only because it condemns a Bishop of Rome for an
heretic, and yet you can not deny that but you must deny more. Leo the
second 6. Synod. actio. 18. habet haec epist. Leon. 2. ad Constant. Augustum.
accursed Honorius his predecessor for the same heresy. The second Council
of Nice which you greatly reverence and call the seventh general Council,
Nicen. Synod. 2. Actio. 3.
confesses Honorius was condemned in the sixth general Council, and Nice.
Synod. 2. actio. 7.
themselves reject him by name for an heretic, whereto the Legates of Adrian
then Bishop of Rome there present consented and subscribed. Adrian the
second in a Council at Rome confessed that Honorius once Bishop of Rome was
accused of heresy and condemned after his death by the consent of the Roman
See; and this his confession was read and allowed in the eight general
Council of Constantinople. 8. Synod. acti. 7.
If al these be forged, and that at Rome, where your selves were the keepers,
how good cause have we to suspect the rest of your evidence, which tend chiefly
to uphold ye Popes pride and to increase his gain, and agree neither with
themselves, nor with ye state of those times wherein they should be written,
nor with the best and approved stories of the Church.


Phi. If you would forge against your selves, how much more for your selves?
Since three general Councels reckon Honorius as condemned of heresy, and
specially the Decretall of Leo the second, which the Bishops of Rome would
soon have disclaimed, if it had been suspected, I dare not say that all these
are forged, for fear lest I overthrow the credit of all Roman Records: and
therefore I think rather the Council that first condemned him, mistook his
meaning, or that the letters which they saw, were written in his name by some
evil willers of his, both which cases are possible.


Theo. You mend this gappe, and make a bigger. You save the Roman Libraries
from corrupt Records, and vpbrayde a general council with rash judgment, and
lack of understanding; for if they condemned Honorius not only their brother,
but also their better as you take him, and the head of the Church for an
heretic, and that after his death, and either conceived not the sense of his
words, or took not heed to the seal and subscription of his letters, that
those were Authentike, they deseru^d not to be counted Christians, much less
to go for a lawful and general Council: And the Bishops of Rome that came
after and confirmed the same, when they might and should have reproved the
Council of indiscretion or malice, and defended the innocence of Honorius,
were not successors to him but conspiratours against him: and so none of your
shifts are either sound or likely.

Though Honorius were innocent, yet three general Councels confess the Pope
might err.
Howsoever you wrangle with the fact, yet this is evident and without
contradiction, that three general Councels, each after other were of opinion
the Pope might live and die an heritike, and Agatho, Leo, Adrian the first and
second, all Bishops of Rome confessed thus much by their Decretals, and
yielded thereto by their subscriptions: Which if you grant, condemn or
acquit Honorius of heresy at your pleasures. We have the full consent of the
East and West Churches that the Bishop of Rome may err, which you at this
present so stiffly deny.


Phi. If one did er, others may.
If one did err, the number is not so great.


Theo. If one did, others may, yet I have named three that were condemned for
heresy and Apostasy, Marcellinus, Liberius, Honorius: and more I might that
erred in like manner, as Vigilius, Anastatius, Celestinus and others: but I see
you are determined to believe none that make against you in this point: and
therefore I were as good save my labor as spend longer time with one that is
past all sense.


Phi. If you prove they erred, I will not defend them.


Theo. What reason we should believe late Papists speaking in favor of the
Pope against the ancient stories*
But in reporting their sayings and doings, you give credit to none, be they
never so indifferent and ancient.


Phi. We credit them, if a greater number of writers do not contradict them.


Theo. If certain late favorers of the Pope without truth or shame do
gainesay the Stories that went before them, think you the partial and corrupt
writings of such men worthy to be taken against others that be both elder
and syncerer?


Phi. I ever go with antiquity and universality.


Theo. But when you come to the push, How Papists esteem antiquity and
universality when the Pope is touched.
you care neither for fathers nor Councels Provincial nor general if they
cross your affections, or touch the Popes ambition. There ancient writers
living in the same time with Liberius affirm that he subscribed to the
Arrians, and Sozomene that wrate within 40. years of the deed doing says no
less: you believe neither them nor your own stories which with one consent
followed that report, till some in our age, to make the Popes Tribunal
infallible, began not only to doubt but also to deny Liberius fact. Two general
Councels condemn Honorius for an heretic, and the third auou^heth him to have
been condemned not without the knowledge of his successors, the bishops of
Rome that came after him. You regard neither Popes nor Synods, where they say
that Honorius erred; in other things where you think they make with you, they
shall be sacred and ancient fathers and Councels, as though you were not bound
to yield unto truth, but that only were truth which liked you.


Phi. Liberius was forced and Honorius deceived with a likelihood of truth;
this is all you can get of these sacred and ancient fathers and Councels,


Theo. We need no more. No man falls from the faith but he is either forced
or deceived; and yet this we get besides, which we most esteem, that these
fathers and Councels were of opinion, and saw by experience the Bishop of Rome
did and might err: Yield to this, and we remit you the rest.


Phi. Not till I see what else you will bring. You talk of Vigilius and
Anastasius, but I think more than you can prove.


Theo. Of Vigillius, Vigilius an heretic.
that he secretly favored such as were condemned heretics, and refused the
faith established in the great council of Chalcedon, Liberatus who lived in ye
same time with him, bears manifest record. Liberati breuiarium, cap. 22.
Vigilius implens promissione^ suam quam Aug^stae fecerat, tale^ scripsit
epistolam etc. Eam fide^ quam tenetis, and tenuiss^ and tenere significo.
Oportet vt haec quae scribo vobis nullus agnoscat, sed magis tanquam suspectum
hic me ante alios sapientia vestra existimet habere, quo facilius possum haec,
quae caepi, operari and perficere. Haec Vigilius scribens ad haereticos occulte
permansit sedens. Vigilius fulfilling his promise which he had made to the
Empress (which was to write to Seuerus and Anthemius, and by his letters to
confirm their faith) wrate this epistle etc. I signify to you that I have
held and do hold the very same faith which you also do hold. No man must know
that I write these things unto you, but your wisdom must think it best, to
have me in suspicion before all others, that I may with more ease work and
bring that to pass which I have begun. This Vigilius wrate privily to
heretics, and continued Bishop (of Rome).


Phi. The Pontifical faith that he promised so to do: Ex libro Pontificali in
vi^^ Vigilij.
but after when it was exacted at his hands, he answered: Absit hoc a me domina
Augusta. Prius locutus sum male and incipienter, modo autem nullo modo tibi
consentio vt reuocem homine^ haereticum and anathematizatum. Be this far from
me Lady and Empress. I spoke at first not well and like a fool. I can now by
no means consent to restore a man that is an heretic and condemned.


Theo. Your Pontifical in this place would feign cover Vigilius leudnes with
some remorse of conscience. He falsely accused Syluerius his predecessor, and
not only thrust him from his seat but also famished him in exile. Vigilius a
lewd Pope.
He promised the Empress to restore Anthemius and others that were condemned
and deposed, and gave it under his hand. He slew his Notarie and likewise his
Nephew. The people cast stones at him and cursed him when he was sent for to
the Emperor. All this your Pontifical confesses of him. Now to leave some good
thing in him it makes him repent the wicked promise which he gave the Empress
for joining with those heretics, but Liberatus denies that, and so does
Syluerius his predecessor in his decretall Epistle or rather excommunication
against him, where he charge him not only with murder, ambition, and Symonie,
but also with heresy. Epist. Syluerij Papae ad vigil. ^omo Council. 2.
Nouum scelus erroris in Apostolica Sede rursus niteris inducere. Thou
labourest to bring into the Apostolic See a new wickedness of error. Whether
now think you reason we believe your Pontifical, a collection of Popes lives
we know not by whom, or Liberatus a writer of that time alleging his own
epistle, and his predecessor Syluerius affirming the same?


Phi. Pontificale in vita Vigilij. Vigilius drawn by the neck round about
Constantinople.
It seems by his punishment that he never consented to accomplish the
Emperors desire. For the Prince very cruelly caused him to be drawn by the
neck round about the City of Constantinople and cast into prison where he was
fed with bread and water.


Theo. He well deserved that and more: and it may be the Empress when she
saw he would not stand to his word, did help forward the matter, and assisted
the Romans in their complaint to the Emperor against him, and by that means
he came to suffer his deserts; but this is no reason to refell that which
Liberatus and Syluerius report of him.


Phi. His heresy was not open but secret, and therefore it hurt himself and
not others.


Theo. He concealed his heresy till he saw opportunity. This does not
diminish but rather aggrauate his error. For our question is not whether the
Pope may infect others, but whether he himself may err in faith; so did
Vigilius, though for fear to loose his Popedom he dissembled a season that he
might do the more mischief.

Distinct. 19. Anastasius.
And so did Anastasius the second, whom many of the Clergy forsook, because he
did communicate with heretics and went about privily to restore Acatius
already condemned by some of his predecessors for heresy.


Phi. This was a fault, but no error.


Theo. He that joins with an heretik, as if he were a Catholic, does he not
account heresy for truth? And call you that no error? Your own gloss giving
ye cause why his clergy might forsake him says, Inciderat in haere sim iam
damnata^, Ibidem glossa abegerunt. Did. 19. Anastasius. Ibidem glossa diuino.
he was fallen into an heresy already condemned.


Phi. The book says, Voluit, and non potuit, he would have done it, but he
could not. For he was stricken by the hand of God as Arius was, and so never
brought it to pass.


Theo. Then may the Bishop of Rome die an heretic as Arius did, and the
likeness of their plagues notes the lothsomnes of both their errors.


Phi. But the Sea of Rome did not err all this while.


Theo. That is most true. The Sea never erreth, The Sea was not free from
error, when the men did err, that sat in the Sea.
it is made of timber or metal, which is void of sense and free from error:
but the men have erred that were the lawful occupiers of that See.


Phi. You jest at your speech, but you shall find it true, that the Sea of Rome
never erred.


Theo. I may jest at it well enough, except you give us some better
understanding what you mean by the Sea of Rome.


Phi. I mean the Pope never erred.


Theo. Of whom spoke we all this while but of the men that were Popes? And
they have erred, as I have showed.


Phi. They did err but not as Popes.


Theo. No more does any Christian man or woman. They err not as Christians,
but as they forsake the faith, and in that point are not christians, or at
least shrink from the christian faith so far forth as they be entangled with
error. These be childish toys, you were best take surer handfast, you may
chance else to mar all.


Phi. Let me first hear what you can say, and I will answer it all with a
word.


Theo. That were quick work, but I read it your best way first to disburden
your self of these examples, and after you shall sooner pass through the rest.


Phi. Liberius in persecution might yield; The Rhemish Testament 22. Luke.
Marcellinus for fear might commit Idolatry; Honorius might fall to heresy,
and more then all this, some Judas might creep into the office, and yet all
this without prejudice of the office and Seat.


Theo. Uery well. If they might fall to heresy and idolatry, Ergo others may
do the like.


Phi. They may, but without prejudice to the office and Seat.


Theo. Who doubts that? The office i^ not the worse though the man be naught
The office and scepter of Princes is not the worse though some be Tyrants: The
art and use of Phisike is not dispraised though some do kill and not recover
their Pacients: The vices and ouersights of men are incident to all degrees,
States and professions, and yet no man so mad to mislike the one for the
other. Why then should the loose life or false doctrine of some Bishops
prejudice others either in the same office with them, or in the same place
before and after them, since the things be needful, though the men be
sin^ull? The chair is not the worse though the Bishop may err: But you
stand in contention with us that the Bishop of Rome can not err: and now
you say he may err without prejudice to his office and Seat: which we
grant. For his charge to teach, and power to bind common to him with all
Bishops, is not abolished nor abated, though some did or hereafter should
abuse it.

In the mean time this shakes the Popes Tribunal which you give him over the
whole Church. He that may err cannot be supreme judge over the whole Church.
For if he may err in faith, which you confess, then can he not be supreme
judge of all others in matters of faith: lest the whole church should be bound
to forsake her faith, which she may not, upon one erroneous judgment of his,
which is possible, and east to happen.


Phi. Not possible. The Rhemish Testament upon the 22. of S. Luke.
Popes may err personally but not iudicially, that is, they may err in
person, understanding, private doctrine or writings, but they neither can, nor
ever shall iudicially conclude or give definitive sentence for falshoode or
heresy against the Catholic faith, in their Consistories, Courts, Councels,
Decrees, Deliberations or consultations kept for decision and determination of
such controversies, douts or questions of faith as shall be proposed unto
them, because Christ's prayer and promise protecteth them therein for
confirmation of their brethren.


Theo. What prayer or promise of Christ is it that you speak of?


Phi. I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not.


Theo. Are you in your five wits to make such constructions of Christ's
words?


Phi. Why so?


Theo. Where lies faith? in a man's heart, mouth or hands?


Phi. What a wise question that is; ask it not for very shame.


Theo. Nay answer it with shame enough. Or if you will not, S. Paul will: Romans
10.
Cord creditur, we believe with the heart, says he, and confess with the
mouth. So that if faith be not in our lips, much less in our fingers.


Phi. Who ever doubted of that?


Theo. Then is there no doubt but your deprauing the prayer and promise of
Christ will soon be perceived of al men. For if Christ prayed for Peter, and
as you rack it for his successors, Faith fails where the heart erreth.
that their faith should not fail: Ergo, the true faith of Christ must
always be kept in their hearts, though their mouths fail as Peter's did when
he denied his master with his lips, whom in heart he knew to be the son
of the living God. Now you turn it clean contrary. You grant the Popes
heart may fall from faith to infidelity and heresy, but his mouth you defend
shall be kept from pronouncing it, as if Christ had prayed not for Peter's heart
where his faith remained, but for Peter's mouth which failed thrice before the
cock crewe, notwithstanding his masters prayer and promise that very night.

The Pope may err with heart and mouth: but his Court, the Jesuits say can not
err. Luke. 22. Oraui pro te: what place does te signify?
This is absurd enough, and yet the rest is more absurd when you grant the Pope
may err in person, that is both with heart and mouth: but if he once get on
his robes and ascend his Tribunal, he can not err. As if Christ had prayed
not for the men but for the walls, neither for the Persons but for the Places,
which is direct against ye words of our savior. For he says not, I have
prayed for thy Tribunals, Courts, and Consistories, that they shall not err,
but I have prayed for thee, noting his person, that thy faith, that is the
persuasion of thine heart believing and trusting in me, shall not utterly
fail, but the sparkles of my grace remaining in thee shall renew thee by
repentance. Christ prayed for the person and not for the place. How then can
you say that the Person may err, This is rather a plague upon Peter and his
successors, than a prayer for them.
but not the place?


Phi. The Person shall be stricken with fear as was Vigilius, or prevented by
death as was Anastasius, that he shall not be able to accomplish his wicked
intent in open place.


Theo. Call you that the prayer of Christ for the Popes faith, or the plague of
God upon him for his infidelity?


Phi. Call it what you will. God will not suffer him to give definitive sentence
for heresy against the faith.


Theo. Show us the warrant that God will not suffer it, and we are answered.


Phi. The promise of our savior that Peter's faith should not fa^le.


Theo. Then this you make to be the effect of Christ's words, How the
Jesuits const^r Christ's words.
I have prayed for thee that thy faith shall not fail, that is,
notwithstanding my prayer for thee, thy successors may be heretics,
idolaters, Apostataes and ru^negates from me, but I will strike them with fear
or pervert them with death, that they shall not in open Court by definitive
sentence iniect ^y Church. Are you not religious interpreters of the
Scriptures, when you delude them and interlace them with such commentaries?


Phi. Caiphas by privilege of his office prophesied right of Christ, The
Rhemish Testament upon the 22. of S. Luke.
though according to his own knowledge and faith he knew not Christ. And why
may not the Pope have the like privilege?


Theo. Balaams Ass reproved the madness of his master: Why should not the Popes
Ass have the like privilege?


Phi. You scoff at our reasons, you refell them not.


Theo. They need no better refutation. For out of a particular fact, Of a
particular and extraordinary fact, no general rule can be gathered.
that is rare and uncertain, you conclude a general and constant Rule. God
used the mouth of Caiphas the high Priest without his meaning to declare the
necessity and utility of Christ's death. Hence you would infer that no high
Priest could err in judgment, and consequently not the Pope as being belike
successor to Caiphas that put Christ to death. By the same cunning you may
conclude, God used Balaams mouth against Balaams will, to bless Israel,
therefore no false Prophet can have a lying spirit in his mouth: Or God stirred
up the spirit of Daniel when he was a very child to convince the two judges of
their unrighteous proceeding against Susanna; therefore children cannot want
the spirit of direction in judgment: Or Pilats wife perceived by her dreams
that Christ was innocent, therefore weomens dreams are always true.


Phi. These illations be very foolish.


Theo. Yours is scant so good. For in your example, God ruled Caiphas mouth
against his heart.
God ouerruled the hie-Priests mouth in such sort that in giving the Jews
wicked and heinous counsel to kill the son of God, his words received a
double sense. One cruel and bloody persuading them to murder the author of
that new doctrine for fear least the Romans should take it as an occasion to
destroy the whole nation; which was Caiphas mind and purpose: The other
confessing that his death should save the people from destruction; which
declares the virtue and force of his Passion. Which he neither meant, nor knew;
but God so tempered his tongue that in writing his furious malice against
Christ, his words stood indifferent for both constructions. Thus S. Cyril
largely shows, Cyril in Johan. lib. 8. cap. 3.
In the proposition of Caiphas there is contained a double sense, one which
Caiphas himself meant, that it was expedient Christ should die by the hands of
the Jews, lest the whole Nation should be destroyed by the Romans: This was
a false and wicked meaning, coming from the lewd intention of Caiphas. An
other sense of the same proposition was intended by the holy Ghost, that it was
needful that only Christ should die, for the salvation of the whole world.
This Caiphas neither understood nor meant, yet his words were such as might
fitly serve this sense of the holy Ghost. Ibide^ li. 8. ca. 2.
For Caiphas himself as crueller, readier to wickedness, and bloodier than the
rest, encourages others staggering at it, by saying, you perceive nothing,
neither understand you that it is expedient the life of one man should be
neglected for the whole country. The devil possessed Caiphas heart, but God
ordered his words.



Phi. He spoke this by the holy Ghost.


Theo. The devil possessed his heart, but the power of God restrained and
ordered his speech.


Phi. Had he not the Spirit of Prophecy?


Theo. No more than Saul the bloudsucker had when he prayed for David whom he
sought to kill: 1. Kings. 24. Mat. 27.
than Judas the traitor had, when he justified his master and hanged himself:
yea than the Dyuell had, when he confessed and entreated the Son of God not
to torment him before his time.


Phi. Luke. 8. ^. John. 11.
Why then does S. John give this note of him that he was hie Priest for that
year?


Theo. S. John notes this that it pleased God so to temper the hie Priests
words, that where he spoke to hasten the death of our Savior, his words
sounded, that the people should utterly perish without the death of Christ,
which was most true, but not his meaning.


Phi. His tongue spoke truth, though his heart did err.


Theo. Satan poisoned his heart, but GOD bridled his mouth.


Phi. Can not God do the like to the Bishop of Rome?


Theo. No doubt he can: but you must prove that he will.


Phi. If he did so to Caiphas, much more will he do it to the head of his
Church. God can do the like when he will.



Theo. How hangs this gear together? He did once so to Caiphas, ergo he
will always do the like, where you list to have it.


Phi. Not where we list, but where he will.


Theo. That helps you little. God can do the like where and when he will. What
is that to the Bishop of Rome? We doubt not of Gods power; but smile at your
folly which conclude this to be ordinary in the Pope, which was extraordinary
in Caiphas.


Phi. It was ordinary in Caiphas by reason of his office, and so says S. John.


The. S. John does not say it was ordinary either in all hie priests, or in
Caiphas; for Caiphas himself the very same year, Caiphas condemned our Savior
for a blasphemer. Matthew. 26.
as S. Matt. witnesses, iudicially pronounced our Savior to be a blasphemer,
which I hope you will not say came from the direction of the holy Ghost. The
hie Priest therefore did err, and that most hainously in judgment: and if
this be al your hold, the Pope may do the like.


Phi. What may be, is hard to determine: But this we know, the Pope did never
yet err sitting in his Tribunal to give judgment.


Theo. As though the place and not the Pope had assurance of truth annexed
unto it? What holiness has the Consistory to safeguard the judge from error?
The promise of Christ was made to the person and not to the place.


Phi. To the person but sitting in judgment.


Theo. Did Peter sit in judgment at that time when he denied his master?
Christ's promise was not made to peter sitting in judgment.



Phi. We say not so.


Theo But that night was the promise made unto him, and that night performed in
him, when Peter poor man stood warming himself amongst the many, and durst
not answer the first interrogatorie that a silly wenche proposed to him. And
therefore Christ never spoke of your Courts nor Consistories: but promised
Peter to pardon his fault and to strengthen his faith, lest he should
persevere in that his Apostasy.


Phi. Had we no warrant for the Bishop of Rome that his faith shall not fail,
yet experience proves this which we say to be true: that he never erred
iudicially, that is sitting in his Consistory.


Theo. What need we care where he sat so long as we be sure he did err? What
wrangling is this to ask for the place where; and the time when the Pope spoke
the words? He that may err at home, may likewise err abroad; If the Pope
be an heretic in his chamber, he can be no Catholic in his Consistory.


Phi. Definitive sentence he never gave any against the faith.


Theo. What are his decretals but definitive sentences? And in those he has
erred. Erroneous Decretals.



Phi. Never.


Theo. The Decretal of Clemens which I before alleged is altogether erroneous.
They were two Decretall Epistles, for the which Honorius was condemned. The
decretal of Vigilius, which Liberatus remembers, is expressly against the
faith. Celestinus erred iudicially as your own friends confess, but you have
pared that Decretall as you have done many others, and left out the later part,
lest we should spy the fault. The decretals of Celestinus lately pared and his
error left out.



Phi. Who told you so?


Theo. They that had no cause to belie you.

Alfonsus a great Patron of your side says, Alfons. aduers. haereses, li. ^.
cap. 4.
It is a thing manifest to al men that Pope Celestinus erred touching the
marriage of the faithful when either part falls into heresy. Neither was this
error of Celestinus such as ought to be imputed only to negligence, so that we
may say he erred as a private person, and not as Pope, because this decision of
Celestinus was in the ancient Decratals which I my self have seen and read.
Decretal. lib. 4. de diuortiis quanto.Ibidem praedecessor.
Innocentius the third when he decided the case, confessed that one of his
predecessors had decreed otherwise, which says the gloze was Celestinus:
whose resolution was in the old Decretals and it was evil that Celestinus said.

Alexander the 3. in a matter of great importance said, Decretal. lib. 4. de
sponsa duoru^ licet praeter. To decide of marriage against the truth is an
error in faith. Sixti Decretae. lib. 5. tit. 12. exijt.

Extrauag. Ioh. 22. tit. 14. cu^ inter no^nullos. Ibidem.

He should have told us what right they might have besides the propriety.
Christ and his Apostles renounced the propriety and reserved the use:

Is not this good diuinitie^


Quamuis aliter a quibusdam praedecessoribus nostris sit aliquando iudicatum,
though some of our predecessors have heretofore otherwise given judgment.


Phi. These were matters of marriage, and not of faith.


Theo. As though the seuering of those, whom God has joined, did not touch the
faith; and so did some of these Popes and that iudicially, by their contrary
Decrees.

Again Nicolas the fourth says in his Decretal that To renounce the
propriety of all things not in special only but in common also is meritorious
and holy, which Christ taught by word and confirmed by example, and the first
fou^ders of the militant church derived to others by the pattern of their
doctrine and life. John the 22. says it is heretical to affirm that Christ
and his Apostles had nothing in special nor in common.


Phi. The next extrauagant reconcileth them both.


Theo. The Pope labors for life to shift off the matter, and at last comes
with a very jest, De sola abdicatione proprietatis, non iuris alterius in
praefata declaratione mentio habetur. In the said declaration (of Pope Nicolas)
there is mention made of renouncing the propriety only but none other right.
And so Ius aliud a proprietate habuisse potuerunt; they might have some other
right besides the propriety.


Phi. So they might.


Theo. As if Christ and his Apostles had been cunning in the civil Laws to
renounce the propriety for a fashion, and yet to reserve an interest in those
things which they seemed to renounce, so that they might both keep and use
them at their wills. This exposition that Christ taught men to renounce the
propriety of their goods and reserve the use, is as false and heretical as
the former assertion of Pope Nicolas, that Christ and his Apostles renounced
their right in all earthly things both in special and common, Extra. cum inter
nonnullos gloss. declaramus.
and taught others to do the like. Your gloze tumbleth a long while in the mire
after he has confessed the one to be Express contrarium in^uit.
expressly contrary to the other, and at length submits himself to the
Church of Rome though he see not how to loose the knot.

De consec. did. 2. Ego Beren.
Nicolaus the second in a Council of 114. Bishops appointed Berengarius to
confess that The very body of Christ is in truth and sensually broken and
bruised in pieces with the teeth of the faithful; and this confession the Pope
received, allowed and sent to the Bishops of Italy, Germany and France as
catholic, Ibidem dentibus.
which your own gloze says is a greater heresy than ever Berengarius held.


Phi. He says it is, unless you understand it soberly.


Lheo. And that sober understanding he grants must be clean against the
text. A sober understanding to expound the words clean contrary to the text.
For where the text affirms this of y^ very body of Christ, and excludes the
outward sacrament as the words declare, your gloze says that unless you
understand this of the outward forms of bread and wine and not of the body of
Christ, it is a greater heresy than that of Berengarius; and so is it in deed
a very palpable and a brutish error, and can no way be salued, except you take
the words clean contrary to themselves, which conuinceth the Pope and his
whole Council of a monsterous error.


Phi. This was Berengarius fault in his confession, but not the Popes judgment
or resolution.


Theo. You would feign wind out if the text it self did not hold you fast;
Ibide^ qua^ Dominus Nicolaus and haec sexta Synodus tene^da^ tradidit, mihique
firmauit.
but there it is said that Pope Nicolas and the Synod delivered this faith
and assured it to be Apostolic and Euangelike. And therefore if Berengarius
erred in subscribing this form of confession, the Pope and his Council erred
in prescribing the same.


Phi. You take nice advantages of words, which men may soon miss.


Theo. The heresy of Arius differed but one letter from the truth, and yet his
doctrine wa^ very blasphemous. One word may contain a whole kingdom of
impiety.


Phi. They print no more than they list and mind to defend, and then they ask
us what errors we find in the Popes decres. You might as well say: the Pope may
er in his shoes, but not in his slippers: or in the shade, but not in the
sunshine.
The best is, you find not many such ouersightes in the Popes decrees.


Theo. You print and publish none but such as you think your selves able to
defend, suppressing the rest that might be challenged, and then you ask us
how we prove that ever the Bishop of Rome gave definitive sentence against
the faith, in open Court or Council; which refuge of yours is very ridiculous.
For what has Christ's prayer for Peter to do with definitive sentences and
open Consistories? If the Pope may believe, defend and preach an error, what
need we care whether his sentence be conclusiue, or perswasiue, definitive
or interlocutorie? And so for the place what skilleth it where and in whose
presence the words be written or spoken if they be certainly his?

And where you think it makes much for the Bishop of Rome, that we can not
prove these errors of Popes to have been definitiuely pronounced in their
public Consistories, if that were true, as it is not, you show your selves to
be but wranglers. For we can name an infinite number of Bishops and
Churches, that never erred in this special and precise manner which you
propose. How prove you that ever the Bishops of York or Durham in England,
We ca^ propose the^ a thousand Sees, which they shall never prove to have erred
in open Consistories by definitive sentence. Heretics ever condemned for their
writings and preachings, not for their definitive sentences.
of Poycters or Lions in France, of Valeria or Carduba in Spain, of Rauennas
or Rhegium in Italy, of Corinth or Athens in Greece, of Miletus or Sardis in
Asia, gave definitive sentence against the faith in their public consistories?
A thousand others I could object on whom that thing shall never be fastened,
which you crake can not be proved by the Bishop of Rome. Heretics have been
ever convinced by their confessions and writings, not by their definitive
sentences, or judicial proceedings. And therefore if Popes have erred in
writing and teaching, they were as right heretics as ever were Arius,
Sabellius, Nestorius, Eutiches and such like which never gave definitive
sentence against the faith in Courts and Consistories, but only taught or
wrate against the truth.


Phi. Though one or two Bishops of Rome were deceived, they erred not so often
there as in other places.


Theo. Set Constantinople aside, and in no one See did the bishops err oftener
than in Rome, but this is not our mark. If one or two have erred, why may not
others? Though no Pope had erred, yet they may err, and so long they can be no
judges of faith.
Yea though none of them had erred heretofore, yet that which is possible may
happen hereafter, and so long they can be no absolute judges of truth.


Phi. If they might err, they were no fit judges of faith; but because their
Tribunal is the highest, that is in the Church, they must therefore be free
from error.


Theo. You ever prove that which we doubt of, by y^ which is more doubtful. We
deny the Popes Tribunal to be the highest, that is in the church. Provincial
and general Councels by the Canons are above him. And in matters of faith the
highest Court that is in earth may miss: The highest court in earth may miss
the truth.
and therefore no man is bound to Pastor, Prelate or council farther than their
decrees be cohere^t and agreeable with the faith. For against God we owe
neither audience nor obedience unto the persuasions or precepts of any men.


Phi. No question we must as well in faith as in manners obey rather God than
man; and therefore if the judgments of bishops and conclusions of Councels
might be repugnant to the word of God, duty binds us to prefer the
precepts of God before the pleasures of men; but it is not possible that God
should leave his Church without direction, and directed she can not be but by
judgment, and in giving judgment the head must be highest and so the
soundest, left that pervert the rest, and endanger the whole body.


Theo. The church of Christ never was nor ever shall be without direction: but
that direction proceeds from the word and spirit of Christ, The Church is
directed by the word and spirit of christ not by the Popes consistory.
not from the courts and Consistories of Popes. Assemblees of learned Bishops
void of pride and strife, are good helps to try the faith and moderate the
discipline of the Church, and the greater, the better: yet the direction of
Gods holy Spirit, and infallible determination of truth is not annexed to any
certain places, Persons or numbers; neither can you of a promise which is
common to all, establish a private Tribunal for one man from the which the
spirit of truth shall not depart, as you profess of the Popes Consistory.


Phi. If he may err how can he be judge of al others?


Theo. You say well: and since by the consent and confession of your own church
fourteen hundred years after Christ he may err, we conclude he can not be
supreme judge of faith; nor Sovereign directer of Princes in those cases.


Phi. Their own Church 1400. years after Christ stoutly avouches the Pope
might err.
Was our whole Church of that opinion so lately?


Theo. Show ever any learned man of your side, that said or held otherwise.


Phi. Nay show you they held so.


Theo. I have already showed so much.


Phi. You have named some private men that wrate so.


Theo. The strongest pillours of your Church.


Phi. But you say this opinion was general.


Theo. If you consider how earnestly and openly this was asserted by the best,
and never contradicted by any, no not by those that took upon them to be the
chief Proctours and Patrones for the Pope, your self will say it was
general, and confessed on all sides.

Distinct. 40. Si Papa.
Your own Decrees that will not have the Pope reproved for any fault, add
this exception, Nisi deprehendatur a fide deuius, unless he be found to
swerve from the faith. The Bishops of France and Germany gathered at Brixia
and Mogunce against Gregory the seventh, Abba^ Vrsperge^s. anno 1080.
condemned him as, The ancient disciple of the heretic Berengarius, and a
vera fide exorbitantem, and swaruing from the true faith. His own Cardinals
and Bishops that were at Rome made this profession against him. Fasciculus
reru^ sciendarum in vita and gestis Hildebrandi.

Ibidem.


Ad destruendas haereses nouiter ab Hildebrando inuentas consedimus. We
assembled to destroy the heresies lately devised by (Pope) Hildebrand. And in
special words, Hoc est decretum Hildebrandi in quo a Doctrina and fide
Catholica aberrauit. This is Hildebrands decree, in which he erred from the
Catholic doctrine and faith.

Robert Grosseteste Bishop of Lincoln reverenced of your Church for a Saint,
lying on his death proved the Pope not only might be, but was an heretic by
sundry reasons, and by the very definition of heresy, and for the possibility
of the matter alleges the Popes own testimony. Matthew. Paris. in Henrico 3.
sub anno 1253.
Item dicit Decretalis quod super tali vitio, videlicet haeresi, potest and
debet Papa accusari. The Decretall says that for heresy the Pope may and
ought to be accused.

Massei Chronic. in anno 1409.
But what speak I of one Bishop? Six hundred Prelates, an hundred four and
twenty Divines, and almost three hundred Lawyers, with the whole College of
Cardinals in your general Council of Pisa deposed two Popes, Gregory the
twelfth and Benedict the thirteenth, as Naucler. Chronograph. generatio. 47.
anno 1409.
schismatikes and heretics. Your Council of Constance, where as you say were
Gen^brard. li. 2 Chronograph. anno 1414.
4. Patriarchs, 29. Cardinals, 47. Archbishoppes, 270. Bishops, 564. Abbats and
Doctors, in all above nine hundred deposed the same Benedict, (persisting in
his Popedom notwithstanding the former sentence) as being Council. Co^stan.
sessio. 37.
schismaticum and haereticum, ac a fide deuium, and articuli fidei Vnam sanctam
Catholicam Ecclesiam, violatorem pertinacem, notorium and manifestum; a
schismatike and an heretic, swaruing from the faith, and a wilful, notorious
and manifest subuerter of the Article of (our) faith, one holy Catholic
Church. Council. Constan. sessio. 11.
And in the same Council it was objected to John the 23. Quod dictus Johannes
Papa 23. saepe and saepius coram diuersis Prelatis and alijs honestis and
probis viris, pertinaciter Diabolo suadente, dixit, asseruit, dogmatizauit and
astruxit, vitam eternam non esse, quin imo dixit and pertinaciter credidit
animam hominis cum corpore humano mori and extingui ad instar animalium
brutorum, dixit que mortuum semel, esse in nouissimo die minime resurrecturum,
contra articulum de resurrectione mortuorum. That often and very often before
diverse Prelates and other honest and approved men, he said, avouched, uttered
as his judgment and egerly defended, that there is no life everlasting: yea
moreover he said and resolutely believed that the soul of man dies and
perishes with the body after the manner of other beasts, and that he which
was once dead should not rise in the last day; contrary to the article of the
resurrection of the dead.

Your general council of Basil, which Germany, France, England, the
Dukedom of Millan and many other Countries so greatly esteemed gave the like
judgment not yet seven skore and seven years ago against Eugenius the 4. and
iudicially pronounced him to be, Council. Basil. sessio. 34. anno 1439.

Articuli Parisienses.


schismaticum, a fide deuium pertinacem haereticum, a schismatike, erring from
the faith, and a stubburne heretic* Lastly your divines of Paris but last day
resolved that Peter erred in faith when Paul reproved him; and if Peter did,
there can be no question but his successors may, since they claim from him,
and not before him. If this be not the general consent of your own Church, I
know not what is: If it be, then by the full and clear confession of your
selves for 1400. years the Pope might stray from the faith and become an
heretic.


Phi. There is not one of your examples but may be replied to.


Theo. Grant they might, yet this is most sure which I conclude, that they
were al of this opinion, the Pope could err.


Phi. What if that opinion were not true?


Theo. That must you prove. It is enough for me to show that not only the
church of Christ in former ages, but your own Church even until our age, held
this opinion of Popes that they could err. What reason you have, or can have
to impugn their opinion, let the world judge. We think you within the
compass of Alfonsus censure; if ye be not worse.


Phi. What if we should grant the Pope may err, as al men may? A Judge must
have skill to discern and power to command.
That does not diminish his power.


Theo. A judge must have two things before he be competent: namely skill to
discern, that he miss not the truth; and power to command, that his
judgment may take place. If he want either, he is no fit judge.


Phi. You say right, and both these the Pope has in most ample manner.


Theo. He has neither. The Pope has neither.


Err he may: Err he may.
and therefore no man is bound to his judgment farther than it stands with
the word of truth, and so far the greatest Princes in the world are bound to
the meanest man that God does send. For God is truth, and they that resist the
truth, resist God; and the end of them all that resist, is damnation, which
Princes shall not avoid, unless they submit themselves to the hearing,
embracing and obeying of the truth.

And as he may err, so has he no power to command Princes or others, Power
to command or compel he has none.
but only to propose the commandments of God unto them, as every Bishop must
and may by virtue of his vocation. Farther authority, by violence to compel, or
by corporal and external means to punish, no Prelate, nor Pope has by the
law of God, since that belongs to the sword which the Prince and not the
Priest bears in Gods behalf to force refusers, and chasti^e malefactors, as
I before at large have proved. And so by consequent Princes are neither bound
to the Popes hest for direction, nor in danger of the Popes court for
correction; but that they may by the advice and instruction of such as be
learned and godly pastors about them, use their swords for the receiving and
settling of truth, and perfect establishing of Christ's will and testament,
within their own realms, without expect^ng or regarding what the bishops of
Rome and his adherentes like or allow.


Phi. But all this while you resolve not, who shall be judge which is the true
will and Testament of Christ.


Theo. He that will be judge of truth must prove his claim.
Let him that makes the claim, undertake the proof. We find no place nor
person to whom the son of God has referred us for the right understanding of
his will but only to himself.


Phi. You bind the people to follow the Prince; which of all others is the
worst way to come by truth.


Theo. We bind no man to prince, nor Pope for matters of faith. Only we say
subjects must endure their princes with patience, All that we give unto princes
is either to be obeyed or endured.
when they command for error, and obey them with diligence when they maintain
the truth. Farther or other servitude in causes of conscience we lay on no
man: and that burden the church of Christ never refused neither under
heretics, Apostataes nor infidels; til the Pope growing great by the ruin of
the Empire and increasing as fast in pride as he did in wealth, would needs
give the adventure to rule kingdoms and depose Princes though by Gods law he
have no more power nor jurisdiction over them than any other Bishop has: which
is so far from that he claims and usurps, that he, as well as other
Bishops, should be subject to the sword, and obedient to the laws of the
Roman Emperor: and so was he as I have plainly showed, to the time that
forsaking the Grecians and reuolting from the Germans he learned to change
Lords so often that at length, what with sedition of subjects, dissension of
princes, and superstition of al sorts, the mystery of iniquity working, he
made himself Lord and master of all.


Phi. You be loathe I see to yield the bishop of Rome any right to force
princes to their duties.


Theo. And you be as willing he should not only take their crowns, but tread
on their necks, though he have no right to superuise their doings or censure
their persons.


Phi. If it be not his right we ask it not.


Theo. If it be his right we resist it not.


Phi. Will you admit it, if we prove it?


Theo. Will you not claim it, except you prove it?


Phi. We will not.


Theo. Then say what you will or can for the confirmation of it.


THE THIRD PART REFELLETH THE IESVITES REASONS AND authorities for the Popes
depriving of Princes and the bearing of arms by subjects against their
Sovereigns upon his censures: declares the tyrannies and injuries of
Antichrist seeking to exalt himself above kings and Princes; and conuinceth
that no deposition was offered by the Pope for a thowsande years after Christ,
and none agnised by any Christian Prince until this present day.
Phi. THE Pope may reprove Princes, excommunicate them, and if need be depose
them, which other Bishops can not do.


Theo. Sever these things which you join together, and the truth will the
sooner appear. Reprove them he may, when they violate the precepts of God, and
so may any other Bishop or teacher. For God has placed them in his church to
teach, 2. Timoth. 3. Ierem. 26. Preachers may reprove Princes.
reprove, instruct and reform as well Princes as others, and charged them not
to conceal one word of that he has spoken neither for favor nor terror of
any Prince. The will of God must be declared to all, and sin reproved in all
without dissembling, or flattering with any sort, or State of men: and that is
most expedient for all, even for Princes themselves, rather to hear with
humility what God has decreed for their salvation, than to run to their own
destruction without recalling, or warning.

So Samuel reproved king Saul, Ahias king Jeroboam, Elias king Achab, Elizeus
king Iehoram, 1. Kings 15. 3. Kings 14. 3. Kings 21. 4. Kings 3. Mark. 6. 2.
Kings 12. 2. Chron. 19. 4. Kings 20.

The Prophets reproved as well good kings as evil.


John Baptist king Herod. Neither were wicked Princes only, but also the good
and virtuous kings of Judah reproved by the Prophets, as namely king David by
Nathan, king Iehosaphat by Iehu, and Ezechias by the Prophet Esaie; but this
reproof reached no farther than to put them in mind of Gods graces and
mercies toward them, and their duties again toward him. They never
offered violence to their Persons, nor prejudice to their States; only they
did Gods message unto them, without halting or doubling: and so should every
Preacher, and Bishop not fear with meekness and reverence to lay before
Princes the sacred and righteous will of God, without respect whether Princes
took it in good or evil part: But farther or other attemptes against Princes,
than in words to declare the will and precepts of God, God has not permitted
unto Preachers, Prophets, Prelates, nor Popes.


Phi. Yes they may repel them from the Sacraments, Preachers must not admit
Princes to the Sacraments but on those conditions which god requir^th
which is more than reproving them in words.


Theo. If you mean, they may not minister the Sacraments unto Princes,
without faith and repentance, which God requires of men that shall be baptized
or have access to his table, we grant they must rather hazard their lives,
than baptize Princes which believe not, or distribute the Lords mysteries to
them that repent not, but give wilful and open signification of impiety, to
the dishonoring of his name, that is author of those things; and the
profaning of the things themselves which be holy and undefiled. If Princes
will be partakers of Gods graces, they must receive them as he does propose
them.
For if Princes will be partakers of Gods aboundaunt blessings proposed in
Christ his Son to all that believe and convert, they must not look to
command God and his Sacraments, but with lowlines of heart, assurance of
faith, and amendment of life, submit themselves under the mighty hand of God,
to receive his graces in such sort as he has prescribed; otherwise they
provoke God to their utter and eternal overthrow, and the minister that
joined with them in their sins, shall not be severed from them in their
plagues, God hating and punishing the pride and presumption of Princes against
himself, as much as the vices of meaner men, Chryso. in Mat. hom. 83. Ibidem
ad populum Antioch. hom. 60.
or rather more. No small vengeance, says Chrysostom, hangs over your heads
(which be ministers) if you suffer any heinous offendour to be partaker of this
table: His blood shall be required at your hands. Whether he be Captain,
Lieutenant, or crowned king, if he come unworthily, forbid him; (in this case)
thy power is greater than his.


Phi. This is new Romish divinity, which in deed is mere impiety.
If they may be excommunicated, ergo they may be deposed.


Theo. How does that follow?


Phi. Well enough. When a Prince is excommunicated, he loses all right to
rule, and his subjects are streight-wayes free from yielding any obedience to
him.


Theo. Who told you so?


Phi. No catholic Divine of any age ever said the contrary.


Theo. Name any catholic Divine for a thousand years after Christ that ever
said so. In deed some popish prelates and writers of late years finding that
a compendious way to strengthen the Popes kingdom, and to make a speedy
dispatch of such as should molest them, have not by divinity, but by
conspiracy concluded, that Princes may be deposed, and resisted even by their
own subjects, contrary to the law of God, the doctrine of the Apostles, and
the perpetual patience of Christ's church.


Phi. D. ALLENS DEFENSE OF ENGLISH CATHOLICS cap. 4.

LATELY SET FORTH AGAINST THE EXECVTION OF JUSTICE.


I will set you down some catholic writers about this matter, albeit but few
for breuity sake, yet of such excellent credit, as shall be able to instruct and
satisfy any reasonable conscience in this case: as also to be our brethrens
defense against all those that charge them so deadly with these treasonable
propositions.


Theo. The simplest christian that is, except you take a rebellious heart for a
reasonable conscience, will look for some better authority to save himself
from damnation, which God threatens to all that resist powers, than your own
schoolmen and companions, linked in the same faction with you, and living not
long before you: And this seely defense of your brethren by the corrupt verdict
of your confederates, is rather a discredit to your whole cause, than a
clearing of them from traitorous devises, or as you speak, from treasonable
propositions.


Phi. The defense of the English Catholics, cap. 4. S. Thomas.
Thomas Aquin; that glorious Saint and Clerk whose only sentence weighs
more, tha^ all the Protestants wits and words in the world; says thus, Postqua^
Princeps est denu^ciatus apostata, omnes inferiores and subditi absoluu^tur a
praestito turame^to and obedientia illi debita: that is to say, after a Prince
is once denounced to be an Apostata, all his inferiors and subjects are
assoiled of their oath made unto him, and of their obedience unto him. This case
is plainly resolved upon by the greatest of all the school Doctors, and
therefore can be no reasonable assertion, or opinion.


Theo. We are now neither to sift your saints, nor examine your clerks; much
less to debate whether the resolution of a popish Monk drown the wits and
pains of them al, that God has since called to the knowledge of his truth:
your passing pride. Thomas Aquine a late and corrupt writer and a great factor
for the Pope.
I leave to the judgment of the wise. The credit of Thomas is not so excellent
as you make it, nor his saintship so glorious. He wrote more tha^ 1200. years
after Christ, and was both overwhelmed with the corruption of his time, and
wholly wedded to the Sea of Rome. Scripture or father he brings none, but
barely stands on the example of Gregory the 7. who first practiced this
wicked presumption against Henry the 4. a 1000. years after Christ: this is a
simple security for subjects to resist the sword which God has autorized, and
the church of Christ for a 1000. years obeyed, to hear Thomas Aquin a late
Summist in y^ midst of blindness and error affirm they may; and pretend no
better author than Hildebra^d, a furious and seditious monster, as his own
Cardinales and companions report of him. You were best bring some other proof,
they must else be very large consciences that will be satisfied with such
censures.


Phi. The famous professor of our time, The defense of English Catholics, Cap.
4.

Toledoes opinion of a Prince excommunicate.


Francis Toledo writes farther upon the words of S. Thomas. Nota (says he)
quod eadem est ratio de excommunicato; quia cu^ primu^ quis est denunciat us
exco^municatus, omnes subdits absoluuntur ab eius obedientia. Note that albeit
S. Thomas name only an apostata, yet the reason is al one in the Princes case
that is excommunicated. For as soon as one is denounced or declared an
excommunicate, al his subjects be discharged of their obedience. For though the
crime of a Prince be notorious, yet before declaration thereof made by the
church, the vassals are not assoiled from obedience as Caietanus well holds:
which declaration being made by the church, they are not only discharged of
their loialtie, but are bound not to obey him any more; The case of K. Henry
the 8.
except it be for fear of their lives, or loss of their temporal goods, as it
was in England in the time of Henry the 8. Thus does this notable schoolema^
write; neither do we know any Catholic divine of any age to say the contrary.


Theo. Call you these satisfactio^s for reasonable consciences, What care we for
Tholedoes opinion?
in purgatio^ of your selves, that you do not conspire with Popes against
Princes, to bring men alive at this day, that be either hired, or bewitched, as
you are, to take part with Antichrist against God, and his truth; and think you
their surly conclusions to be sufficient instructions for all men's consciences?
Shall Ambrose, Austen, and others look on, and Caietane, Toledo, and such like
sworn chaplains to the Pope, and our prosessed enemies to be judges in this
cause? Preachers must not admit Princes to the Sacraments but on those
conditions which God requires.
What else is this but ask my fellow whether I be a thief? And yet Thomas
Aquinas had this moderation, that Princes should not loose their Dominion for
heresy, or any other crime, but only for Apostasy, which is a general and
final renouncing of Christ's name, to become an heathen, or a Turk. Toledo with
less learning and more unshamefastness tells us upon his credit Eadem est
ratio de excommunicato, The same reason holds in any Prince whom the Pope
list to excommunicate for what cause soever. Be not these dowtie demonstrations
in so weighty questions?


Phi. Tell us what warrant and not what fellows they have to resist the
ordinance o^ God.
We bring them not as our chief grounds in this cause; but only to show that
others have been of the same judgment with us.


Theo. You mean that your fellows of late days have been as dutiful to
their Princes, as you are now to ours. We ask not what company, but what
authority you have to resist, and depose the powers which God has appointed
to be served and honored. Let Aquinas, Caietane, and Toledo go. You may not
displace them whom God has exalted, anointed, and set to be obeyed, without
higher, and better warrant than five thousand Thomases, ten Thowsande
Caietanes, and twenty thowsande Toledoes can give you.


Phi. Thowsandes we could bring you, if that would content you; namely The
famous general Council of Laterane celebrated above 300. years since,
wherein there were Patriarchs and Archbishops 70. Bishops 412. and other
Prelates 800. in all, THE DEFENSE OF ENGLISH CATHOLICS.

The sentence and definition of the great learned and general council of
Laterane. Cap. 3. de haeret.


of the most chosen learned men of all Nations 1282. with the Ambassadors of
the Roman Emperor, of the king of Jerusalem, of England, of France, of
Spain and of Cypres, as also of other Christian States; than which there can
be no surer judgment upon earth: which assembly representing the whole
christian world, would never agree upon any assertion traitorous. These the^
are the words of their most renoumed Decree.

If any Lord temporal, required and admonished by the church, neglect to purge
his State from heretical filth, let him be excommunicated by the
Metropolitan, and Conprouinciall Bishops: But if he contemn to come to order
within one years space, let relation be made to the supreme Bishop: that from
thence forth he may declare all his subjects to be discharged of their
fealty toward him, and give up his Land to be possessed by Catholics, This
was the next way to make all safe on their side.
which catholics without all contradiction (when they have driven out the
heretics) shall have and hold the same, and so preserve it in purity of faith:
(the interest and right of the chief Lord ever remaining safe and whole, so
that himself give no impediment to the execution of this Decree) And the same
law to take place in such also, as be Sovereign Lords and have no superiors.


Theo. Our question is not what numbers the Pope has gathered, nor what
Decrees he has made to settle and assure his kingdom; the judgments of God
are righteous and marvelous, as well against Princes as private men. But we
demand what commission the Pope and his Prelates (whom God appointed to be
subject to Princes) had to determine thus against Princes, and to take both
their crowns and Realms from them, when they listed to excommunicate them?

The number of Persons was above twelve hundred, as you crake, Bishops and
other Prelates, Platin. in Innocent. 3.800. Hungry friars brought into the
council to ouerrule the Bishops.
but will it please you to remember that eight hundred of them were no Bishops,
but Priors conuentuall and their substitutes even dreaming Monks, and begging
Friars, that then began to pester the world, and had no right to sit in
Councels. By such creatures of his own making, and at his sole disposing, it
was easy for your Father to ouerrule all the Bishops of the world, if they
would have said nay; such cunning devises the Bishop of Rome has to call and
frame councels to his purpose.

And what if no such thing were there decreed, A fine stratageme of the Pope to
set out things consulted as if they had bin concluded. Platina in vita
Innocentij 3. Nothing concluded in the Council of Lateran.
but only proposed and consulted on, and your skill now serves you to
allege it as a most renowned decree, and your adherentes deceive the people
with these things, as fully concluded in that Council? Look to the very
same place whence you took the number of them that were present, and the very
next words; and see whether it be not so. Venere, says Platina, multa tum
quidem in consultationem, nec decerni tamen quicquam aperte potuit: Many
things were debated (in that council) but nothing could plainly be
decided, by reason the Pope suddenly departing to compose some tumults then
suddenly risen, died by the way. And so your famous general council of
Laterane is come to a swarm of hungry Friars, consulting how to defeat
Princes of their temporal Dominions and lay them open to the spoil, but not
concluding as being prevented by the Popes hastened and inopined death.


Phi. We can declare and plainly deduce all that has been said in the
premises from holy Scriptures, THE DEFENSE OF ENGLISH CATHOLICS. Cap. 4.
Matthew. 19.

By Gods law you may not resist, much less displace the Prince.

The word of God binding you to obedience, neither Pope nor counsel can
assoile you from it.

This is it which Master Allen professes to prove in the 5. chap. of his
Defense. What subjection and honor God allows unto Princes. 1. Peter 2. Romans
13. Proverb. 8.


and warrant of antiquity.


The. So had you need. For if no No man may sunder that which God has joined
together, much less may you displace that which God has ordained, or so much
as resist the sword which he has commanded to be honored and obeyed. To
discharge your selves from the ordinance of God, from the precepts of Christ,
and doctrine of his holy spirit, you must not bring us Popes, Schoolmen and
Fires, the eldest of the^ a 1000. years after Christ; children will not be
deceived with such ^ables, you must prove your selves assoiled from obedience
to Princes (when the Pope list to give you leave,) by the self same heavenly
records, by which we prove Popes and all others to be subject to them. The
word of God binds you to obey them: the words of men can not loose you. Go
therefore directly and soundly to work, or else you do but increase your sin.


Phi. I will, and you shall see it apparently proved by the old and new
Testament, and by the examples of the primative church that Princes for
heresy, and such like crimes may be lawfully deposed by Priests.


Theo. This is it which we require you to prove: but first you confess that
Princes have their power from God, and that they may challenge honor,
subjection, and tribute of all that be within their Realms, not only by the
consent of men, but by Gods institution and ordinance.


Phi. They be but humane creatures.


Theo. How should men be more then humane creatures; but their power is of
God. S. Paul speaking of them says: There is no power but of God, and the
powers that be are ordained of God. So before him said the wisdom of God: By
me kings reign. Wisdom. 6.
Rule therefore is given (them) of the Lord and power by the most high. Romans 13.
They be Gods ministers, for the wealth of him that does well, and to take
vengeance on him that does evil.

As their power is from God, so the commaundem^nt of God is very plain that
we should honor them. Fear God, honor the king, says S. Peter: and Solomon
expressing the same with a more effectual word: 1. Peter 2.
Fear, says he, the Lord and the king. Prouer. 24. We may not dishonor
princes in word, deed or thought. Exodus 22.
Yea such is the honor that God has allowed them, that we may neither open
our lips, bend our heats, nor lift up our hands against them: Thou shall not
speak evil of the Ruler of thy people, and Eccle. 10. Romans 13. 1. Pet. 2.
Judgment threatened chiefly to the^ that despise Magistrates. 2. Pet. 2. Jude.
curse not the king, no not in thy thought; much less then may we resist them.
Let every soul be subject says the Apostle to the higher powers. Whosoever
resists the power, resists the ordinance of God; and they that resist, shall
receive to themselves judgment. You must be subject not only because of
wrath, but also for conscience sake. And so S. Peter, Submit your selves unto
every humane creature (or ordinance) unto the king as surpassing the rest. For
so is the will of God. And threatening an heavy judgment, he says chiefly to
them that despise gouerme^t, and fear not to speak evil of such as are in
authority. S. Jude notes wicked and fleshly teachers for the same fault with
the very same words. They despise government, and speak evil of them that
are in authority.

Of this subjection due unto Princes, the tribute which we pay them, is by S.
Paul's judgment the very sign and earnest. Romans 13.
You must be subject. For, for this cause pay ye also tribute. Luke 20. Honor,
subjection and tribute by Gods law due to Princes.
And therefore the Lord himself, when he charged all men to give unto Caesar
that which was Cesars, meant that honor, subjection, and tribute which by Gods
law is due unto Caesar. For that is Caesar's, which God by his word has
allotted unto Caesar, and that no mortal man may withhold from Caesar, since
the Son of God has allowed it unto Caesar.


Phi. All this we know.


Theo. All this if you keep as well as know, you shall offend the less. By
the Jesuits doctrine Caesar shall have that which God allows him, so long as
pleases the Pope.

You may not resist them or despise them* ergo much less displace them.





Phi. Honor, subjection, and tribute must be given to Caesar, so long as
Caesar is Caesar; but if Caesar be no longer Caesar, then these things are
not due to him.


Theo. What mean you by this, so long as Caesar is Caesar?


Phi. That is, until he be lawfully deprived of his Empire.


Theo. Then Caesar shall have these things so long as you list to suffer him
to be Caesar; but if you once denounce him excommunicate, then Caesar, who by
Gods law should have honor, subjection and tribute, by your law shall have
neither land, liberty nor life. Is not this worse than despising, or resisting
government, to deprive and bereave the governor of imperie, safety, and life,
if you list?


Phi. We take no such thing on us; but Christ has given that power and
authority to his Uicar general that he may do it, if Princes deserve it.


Theo. Christ never gave any man power to break the precepts which he bound
his Disciples unto, John. 8.
but rather he plainly professed; If ye continue in my word ye are verily my
Disciples. If Christ command subjection to Magistrates, and your holy father
license the people to rebel against their Governors, is he a Uicar or an
adversary unto Christ?


Phi. He first deposes the Prince, and then the subjects are no longer bound
to those that be no Governors. Deposition is an authentike rebellion under the
Popes scale.



Theo. That is, he displaceth them whom God has anointed, and wresteth the
sword out of their hands to whom God committed it, and then he says you may
resist them by reason he first deposed them: but how prove you that he may
depose Princes, or what warrant can you show for his so doing?


Phi. That is the point which I am coming to.


Theo. And that is the thing which we have all this while looked for.


Phi. Saul the first temporal king that ever the Jews (being then Gods
peculiar) had; The defense of English catholics, cap. 5. 1. Reg. 10.15.16.
Saul deposed for usurping spiritual function.
though chosen and inspired by God, was for all that led, and directed by
Samuel so long as he was in order. But afterward for aspiring to spiritual
function, and other disobedience; was by Gods appointment and sentence
(pronounced by the said Samuel) deposed of his kingdom, and an other named
David anointed by him. Which Saul now after his deprivation, or after, as it
were, his excommunication by Samuel, was invaded by an evil spirit, that
provoked him to kill not only David, that was now made the rightful owner of
his crown: but also to seek for Samuels death: yea and to command all the
holy Priests of Nobe (fourscore and five in number, 1. Reg. 22.
as holy Scripture recounteth) to be slain and murdered in most pitiful
wise, as traitors to him, and favorers of David the competitor of his kingdom.
And so it was done at last; though at the beginning his guard refused to
execute so vile and horrible an act; and in this sort he remained enemy many
years against God and Samuel, and kept the kingdom by tyrannical force
notwithstanding his deposition.


Theo. What needs this long repetition of matters impertinent? A short
conclusion and more direct to the question, The Prophets denounced both the
temporal and eternal judgments of God: but they inflicted neither.
were far better.


Phi. That you shall have. Samuel deposed Saul, ergo the Priest may depose the
Prince.


Theo. The Prophets were chosen by God to denounce to the wicked both his
temporal and eternal judgments: will you thence conclude the Prophets were
the workers or authors of Gods judgments? Noah denounced the flood; did Noah
therefore drown the world? Jeremy denounced the bondage of Babylon; did
Jeremy therefore deliver the whole kingdom into captivity? Daniel denounced
Nabucadnezers fall: did Daniel therefore take Nabuchadnezers heart and
understanding from him, or make him ^ate grass like an ox?


Phi. They were the denouncers of these things from Gods mouth, but not the
doers.


Theo. Keep that rule, and you have answered your own examples of Samuel, of
the man of Judah that threatened Jeroboam, of Elias, Elizeus, Peter and Paul; in
which the strength of your discourse consists.

Samuel anointed David, whiles Saul lived, Elias called for fire from heaven
to consume the kings messengers; By these examples Priests may kill men, set
their houses on fire, or pull out their eyes, as well as displace Princes: if
the Jesuits collections be good.
Elizeus anointed Iehu to execute the wrath of God on Achabs house: Peter
struck Ananias and his wife dead with a word for lying unto God: and Paul by
the same power of the holy Ghost struck Elimas the Sorcerer blind. Does this
prove that Bishops and Preachers may pick out men's eyes, or kill whom they can,
or appoint kingdoms at their pleasures?


Phi. No, but that these things are not unlawful for Prophets and preachers
when God commands.


Theo. If God command the case is clear, not only for Popes, but also for
the poorest Priest and meanest creature that is.


Phi. We ask no more.


Theo. And so much we grant; but has your holy father any revelation from
heaven to depose the Queen of England?


Phi. A commission he has though no revelation to depose Princes*


Theo. The Popes commission to depose Princes they promised to prove by
scripture, and now vainly suppose it without Scripture.

Samuel, Elias, and Elizeus had special and extraordinary commandment from
God to do as they did.


The Popes commission to depose Princes, is the thing which we strive for, and
which you seek to deduce by the Scriptures; and now we come to the purpose,
you vainly suppose that without proof, which we required to see, and you
promised to show by the very word of God himself.


Phi. We prove by the Scriptures that Prophets have deposed Princes.


Theo. Belie not the Scriptures. You show where God rejected kings for their
wickedness, and sent his Prophets to tell them so much, and anoint others in
their places. But in this case the Prophets were messengers, not judges;
denouncers, not deposers: and that which they did, they did not in the right of
their Prophetical vocation, but by peculiar and special direction from God,
which was private to them, not common to others that were Prophets, as well as
they. Now what consequent is this? Samuel anointed David; Elias, Hazaell;
Eliseus Iehu; when God expreslie willed them; ergo Prophets may dispose
kingdoms at their pleasures: and Popes may depose Princes, though God expressly
will them not.


Phi. Yes God wills them so to do.


Theo. Prove that, and wear the crown.


Phi. He willed others before them.


Theo. And therefore they might lawfully do that which God commanded them;
The Pope may not do that which the Prophets did, till he have the same
precept which they had.

To put down kings is an honor specially reserved unto God him self.

Luc. 1. Dan. 2. Dan. 4.
and you may not do the like, till you have that special precept from God
which they had. So that in these cases which you pretend, first God was the
doer and not the Prophets: they were but servants to do their message. Next
they took no such thing upon them by their general calling as Prophets, nor
in their own names as superiors to kings, but only then, when they were
precisely charged by God himself, and the person that should succeed
likewise named unto them by Gods own mouth. What is this to the Pope? Or how
does this infer that he may iudicially convent Princes and deprive them of
their crowns when he thinks good? Yea rather if you were not more than
blind, you would perceive this illation of yours is not erroneous only but
also blasphemous, in that you challenge for the pope the same right to depose
kings, which God has specially reserved to himself. It is he that deposes the
mighty from their seat, and exalts the base: it is he that puts down
kings, and sets up kings, and gives (the kingdom) to whomsoever he
will. This power I say you can not attribute to the Pope without apparent
blasphemy.


Phi. The Pope will depose Princes, as well as God.
We give him no such power, but only to remove such from the kingdom as be
unworthy of it.


Theo. And think you that God remoueth such as be worthy?


Phi. No.


Theo. Then do you give the same power to the Pope, which God claims to
himself, to displace the wicked from their thrones.


Phi. But under God.


Theo. If your holy father do this without a particular and precise warrant
from God, he does it not under God, but as well as God, and that which is in
this case done without God, is against God.

The example of Saul.
But on with your example of Samuel. Saul was deposed of his kingdom by Gods
appointment and sentence, which Samuel pronounced unto Saul from the mouth of
God. Ergo what?


Phi. Ergo king Saul was deposed.


Theo. Grant he were; by whom was it done? by God or by Samuel?


Phi. God prescribed the sentence, God prescribed Samuel what he should say to
Saul, full sore for against the will of Samuel.

1. Kings 16. All Israel and David obeyed and honored Saul as the Lords
anointed to his dying day.

The defense Cap. 5.

Aug. contra Adamant. 1. Kings 24.


but Samuel pronounced it.


Theo. In whose name did Samuel speak? in Gods or his own?


Phi. In Gods.


Theo. Said he more than God commanded him?


Phi. I think not.


Theo. Then God spoke the word, and God gave the judgment against Saul; only
Samuel was sent to tell Saul so much, and that was sore against Samuels will,
as appears by his mourning for Saul, which God reproved in him.

And now to turn your own example on your own head, I trust God has as much
right to depose Princes as the Pope.


Phi. What then?


The. Did all Israel and Judah sin in obeying Saul so many years after he
was deposed by God, and an other anointed in his place?


Phi. They did it for fear, because Saul kept the kingdom by tyrannical force,
notwithstanding his deposition.


Theo. Did David sin in serving Saul long after himself was anointed?


Phi. He durst not do otherwise.


Theo. When David had Saul alone in the cave, and might have slain him, did he
well to spare him?


Phi. He might lawfully have killed him, as S. Augustine deduceth, but he would
not.


Theo. Of that anon: in the mean time was it a lie in David to call him his
master and the Lords anointed after his deposition?


Phi. He called him so in respect he had bin so, though presently he were not
so.


Theo. Nay, David affirmed y^ at that present, 1. Kings 24.
he was so. The Lord, says David, keep me from laying mine hand on him. For
he is the Lords anointed. And after showing that this was his duty and not
his courtesy, when he found him asleep and one of his Captains would have
slain him, he said, 1. Kings. 26.
Destroy him not: for who can lay his hand on the Lords anointed, and be
giltles? Where David makes it no favor to spare him, but a sin to touch him.
And to the messenger that brought him news of Saul's death: 2. Kings 1.
How wast thou not afraid, says David, to put forth thine hand to destroy
the anointed of the Lord? And commanding the fellow to be thrust through,
Ibidem.
Thy blood, says he, be upon thine own head, for thine own mouth has
witnessed against thee, saying, I have slain the Lords anointed.

If all Israel obeyed Saul, notwithstanding the sentence of God pronounced
against him; if David himself after his anointing served and honored Saul as
his master, and called and counted him the Lords anointed to the hour of his
death; abhorring it as a sin in himself to lay hands on him, and severely
punishing it in an other that did it: How can you warrant rebellion against
Princes, or make it a meritorious act to murder them, whom the Pope without all
authority from God presumes to displace?


Phi. David might lawfully have killed Saul, Cap. 17.
as S. Austen shows against Adama^tius, but he would not. 1. Kings 26. David
confesses he might not kill Saul without sin.



The. The words of David are plain to the contrary, speaking of Saul and
himself, Who can lay his hand, says he, on the Lords anointed, and be
guiltles? He could not be guilty, but of a sin: it had bin therefore no
lawful, but a sinful deed for any man, David himself not excepted, to have
killed Saul, in respect he then was, and so continued till he died, The Lords
anointed.


Phi. S. Augustine says, David might have killed Saul without fear. His words
be, Contra Adimantum ca. 17.
David had his enemy and persecutour king Saul in his power to do with him
what he would, and he chose rather to spare him, than to kill him. He was
not commanded to kill him, neither was he prohibited; Imo etiam diuinitus
audierat se impune facere quicquid vellet inimico, Yea rather he had heard at
Gods mouth that he might freely handle an enemy how he would, and yet so
great authority he converted to courtesy.


Theo. Adimantus held opinion that the old Testament was contrary to the
new, because the Law as he thought permitted revenge, and allowed men to
kill their enemies, where the Gospel commands us to pray for our enemies,
and to love them as the words of our Savior do witness. This objection
Saint Augustine refelleth, by showing that the killing of the Nations which
God commanded, proceeded of love, not of hatred: and that the just of the old
Testament loved and favored their enemies when it was expedient for them so to
do; as namely David that spared king Saul his enemy and persecutour, though he
might easily have slain him.


Philand. Saint Augustines word is, impune, he might freely have done what
he would to him. The words be grounded rather on Adimantus assertion than S.
Austens persuasion.

S. Aug. speaks not of Saul's deposition, but of revenge permitted by Moses
law, which the Maniches did object.





Theoph. Whether that were Saint Augustines persuasion, or an advantage taken
upon Adimantus assertion, the place it self does not express; of the twain
I think the later to be the truer. For this was Adimantus erroneous position,
that the Law licenced the Jews to kill their enemies: and you may not well
charge Saint Augustine therewith least, you bring him again within the
compass of the Manichees error. Sure it is Saint Augustine does not ground
his speech on this that Saul was deposed, and therefore might have justly been
destroyed, which is our case; but on the permission of revenge, which the Law
of Moses seemed to grant David toward his enemy as well as all others
toward their enemies; marie that was no right exposition, but a
misconstruction of the Law sufficient to refute Adimantus because it was his
own but not rashly to be fathered on Saint Augustine in respect of his
learning and credit otherwise in the church of God. For the law of God gave no
man leave to kill his enemy, but that precept was to be referred to the
Magistrate to whom God gave the sword lawfully to kill such as were by his
Law adjudged to die; which our Savior does not prohibit in the new
Testament, but reproves the Jews for having this false conceit of Gods law,
that every private person might hate his enemies and love his neighbors, (they
corruptly expounding neighbors for friends and acquaintance) and assures
them that to love their enemies and pray for their persecutors, which he then
prescribed them, was no new addition, but the ancient and true intention of
Gods law.

These words then, David had heard by the Law of God (for special revelation
from God to David Saint Augustine knew none) that he might do freely what
he would to an enemy, are assumed against Adimantus as part of his own
confession and former objection: Adimantus antecedent returned on his own head.
and conclude that either Adimantus mistook the meaning of the law, as in
deed he did; or that David perfourming the precept of Christ when he spared
his enemy, gave example that others under the Law should do the like, and
so the Law neither way repugnant to the Gospel; as his conclusion imported.
And if any think it much Saint Augustine should pitch himself on other men's
words as they were apparent truethes, he must remember he dealt with the
Manichees that received no Scriptures but such as they listed: and therefore to
press them with their own position, was a nearer way to confound them, than
to load them with Scriptures which they regarded not; and that makes Saint
Augustine give sometimes not the soundest solution he could, but the readiest
to stop their mouths with their own assertions.

Otherwise Saint Augustine was plainly resolved that David so much esteemed
in Saul the holiness of his regal inunction even unto his death, that he
trembled at heart for cutting the lap of Saul's garment. Quaero si non habebat
Saul sacramenti sanctitatem, Aug. Centra lit. Petilian. lib. 2. cap. 48.
quid in eo David venerabatur? nam eum propter sacrosanctam vnctionem and
honorauit viuum, and vindicauit occisum. Et quia vel panniculum ex eius vest
praescidit, percusso cord trepidauit. Ecce Saul non habebat innocentiam, and
tamen habebat sanctitatem, non vitae, sed vnctionis. If Saul had not the
holiness of the sacrament, I demand what it was that David reverenced in him?
S. Aug. holds that Saul had the holiness of his princely inunction to the
hour of his death.
For the sacred and holy unction (of a king) he honored Saul living, and
revenged his death (on him that said he slew him.) And because himself had
cut but the lap of Saules coat, he was strooken and trembled at heart (for
the fact.) Behold, Saul was not innocent, yet had he the holiness not of life
but of his anointing.


Phi. If David might not lawfully have slain Saul, David might not bear arms
against Saul: for the putting himself in arms proves he was either lawful
king, or a manifest rebel against the king, which I think you will not affirm.


Theo. David was neither king as yet when he did this, David put himself in
arms to save his life and not to seek the Crown.
nor rebel against the king. He put himself in arms not to seek the
kingdom nor to subdue the usurper as you vainly suppose: he fled to save
his life, as every subject may, by your doctrine and doings, yea though life
be not sought.


Phi. How could David be anointed, if Saul were not first deposed?


Theoph. You misconster Samuels words. Saul rejected from having the kingdom
to him and his seed.
For by them the Scepter was not taken out of Saules hands, but his seed
rejected from inheriting the kingdom.


Philand. Nay Samuel said unto him; 1. Kings 15.
God has cast thee away from being king. And again, The Lord has rent the
kingdom of Israel from thee this day and has given it to thy neighbor. What
can this import but he was personally deposed from the government?


Theophi. The present possession of the kingdom was not denied him, but the
inheritance of it to him and his issue. The children of Israel required a
king after the manner of other Nations, that is a settled succession in the
kingdom.

1. Reg. 13.


By a king Samuel meant, not one that should govern during his life: for so
did the Judges of Israel before Saul, that were no kings; but one that should
have the kingdom to him, and his after him by way of inheritance. For that
was it which the children of Israel respected when they required a King, which
was not a Governor for the time, but a settled succession in the regiment, as
other Nations had. This was it that Samuel said unto Saul when he first
reproved him: Thou have done foolishly, thou have not kept the commandment
of the Lord: for (had thou kept it) the Lord had now established thy
kingdom upon Israel To thee and thine for ever.
for ever. But now thy kingdom shall not continue. This was it that Samuel meant
the second time when he more sharply rebuked Saul's disobedience. Because thou
have cast away the word of the Lord, 1. Kings 15.
therefore has he cast away thee from being king. And again, The Lord has
rent the kingdom of Israel from thee this day, and has given it to thy
neighbor, not meaning his person should be degraded, but the kingdom removed
both from his line and from his tribe.


Phi. This is your private sense: for the words sound, that he should not be
king over Israel.


Theo. Aug. de ciuit. Dei, li. 17. ca. 7.
Saint Augustine himself expounds these very words as I do. Iste cui
dicitur: spernit te Dominus ne sis Rex super Israel, and dirupit Dominus Regnum
ab Israel de manu tua hodie, quadraginta annos regnauit super Israel, tanto
scilicet spacio temporis quanto and ipse David, and audiuit hoc primo tempore
regni sui: vt intelligamus ideo dictum quia nullus de stirpe eius fuerat
regnaturus. S. Augustine expounds Saules reiection as we do.
Saul, to whom it was said the Lord will cast thee away, that thou shall not
be king over Israel, and the Lord has rent the kingdom from Israel, out
of thine hand this day: even he reigned forty years as long as David
himself, and this he heard in the very beginning of his reign, that we
should understand it therefore to be spoken, because none of his stock should
reign after him.

And had not Saint Augustine goone clear with us, the circumstaunces of the
Scriptures do thus lymitte the words of Samuel. For David was then a very
young boie, or as the text says a The Scripture is clear for the same sense.

1. Kings 16.

David advanced when he was but a boy keeping sheep David never claimed the
Crown from Saul.

1. Kings 20.


little one, keeping sheep when he was anointed, having neither age,
experience, nor strength fit for the present undertaking of the kingdom. Next,
David neither claymed nor pretended any right to the Crown during Saules life,
but served and obeyed Saul as his liege Lord and Master whiles he lived, and
so confessed him to be. Thirdly, Saul himself never objected this unto David
that he sought the kingdom from him, but from his sons; for so he said to
Jonathan, As long as the son of Ishai lives upon the earth, thou shall not
be established nor thy kingdom. And the priests that were charged with treason
for helping David, The Priests protested that David was a faithful servant to
Saul.

1. King. 22.

All Israel alleged Samuels fact that David ought to succeed.

2. Kings 5. 1. Chron. 11.


did not answer as you do that Saul was an usurper and David the right king,
but Who is so faithful among all thy servants as David, and goes at thy
commandment: witnessing for David that he behaved himself as a faithful
subject unto Saul, not as a claimer of the crown from Saul. Thus all the Tribes
of Israel conceived and constred the words of Samuel. For when they came to
make David king after Saul's death, they said, In time past, when Saul was our
king, thou leddest Israel in and out: and the Lord said unto thee: thou shall
feed my people Israel, and thou shall be captain over my people Israel. So
came all the elders of Israel and anointed David king over Israel, according
to the word of the Lord by the hand of Samuel. The text it self alleges Gods
own words, and Samuels act not for the present possession, but for the
rightful succession of the crown, that after Saul's death it did belong to
David.


Phi. The anointing of a second king is it not the deposing of the former?


Theo. God often times anointed him that should succeed: God anointed such
as should succeed.
as when he willed Elias to anoint Hazael king of Syria, Benhadad his master
yet living, and likewise to anoint Elizeus the Prophet in his own room:
whereby neither Benhadad was deposed from his kingdom, nor Elias deprived of
his ministry, but ^uccessours appointed to them both.


Phi. You see in what sort also Jeroboam king of Israel, The Defense cap. 5.

3. Reg. 13.14.

The example of Jeroboam a wicked schismatik, denou^ced by a priest


had a special Prophet sent to him to denounce the intended judgments of God
against him and his Posterity, for his schism and separation of his people,
from the old ancient true worship of God in Jerusalem; and for erecting a new
altar in Bethel (in which al schism and division from the Apostolic See is
properly prefigured) and for creating of a wicked clergy out of Aaro^s order:
I mean, new, hungry, base, and inordered Priests, (the pattern of heretical
ministers) thrust up, out of the array and orderly succession and creation of
Apostolic priesthood: a crime so highly afterward both in him and his stock
(according to Gods former denunciation) revenged, that none of his house was
left to piss against a wall. Yet he fondly sought to apprehend the man of God,
and to kill him, for bringing this news which he accounted high treason against
his Regalty.


Theo. You promised to prove that Princes might be lawfully deposed by
Priests: Prophets may threaten wicked Princes in Gods name but not deprive them
of their crowns
and now slipping clean from the question, you show that God threatened
destruction to wicked princes, and charged his Prophets to go to them and tell
them so much from him to their faces. Who ever doubted of this? or which way
draw you this to make for your purpose? If God may justly revenge the sins of
all men, even of Princes themselves, and oftentimes does; will you thence
infer that Priests or Prophets may deprive Princes of their kingdoms?


Phi. A priest denounced Jeroboam to be a wicked schismatike.


Theo. He was a Prophet, The Prophet that cried out against Ieroboams Altar
spoke not a word of his schism.
and no Priest that cried out against the Altar of Bethel in Ieroboams
presence, and spoke not one word of Ieroboams schism or deposition, but only
that king Josiah should sacrifice the Idolatrous Priests and burn their bones
on that Altar: which came to pass 300. years after Jeroboam was dead. Such
mighty reasons you bring to justify the deposing and displacing of Princes by
the Bishop of Rome: that when all is said, your own glosing and interlacing
besides ye text is the best ground of your argument. That Ieroboams erecting a
new Altar in Bethel properly prefigured our division from the Apostolic See
(so you call Rome) and that his new, It is easy for any side to apply figures
as thy list. Revel. 17. Revel. 19.
hungry, base, and inordered priests are a pattern of our ministers, these be
the blasts of your spirit and ca^kers of your mouth, they touch not us; but in
your deceived and exaspered fancy. We have forsaken the stru^pet that made
drunk the inhabitants of the earth with the wine of her fornication, and are
gone out of her lest we should be partakers in her sins and receive of her
plagues: otherwise we have divided over selves neither from God, nor his
church. That the clergy of England is vpthrust, hungry and base, is but the
vnloding of your disdainful stomakes; in deed your boy-priests have a brauer
fashion to ruffle in their silks and colors, and think themselves no cast ware,
as if the sight of Rhemes, or Rome did by and by make them Joseph's betters in
dignity, and Abraha^s equals in gravity: for our part we are that we are by
the grace of God, and we hope in his mercy, his grace in us shall not be in
vain. But what is this to the question whether the Pope may depose princes or
no; you began with a matter which you never came near, and now you be clean
besides. For what does Gods threatening or punishing of Jeroboam concern the
Popes deposing and degrading of princes? God repaied the wickedness which
Jeroboam committed with fearful plagues on him, and his whole house after him:
Gods threatening Ieroboa^ is nothing to the doposing of Princes by priests
and Ahias the prophet did not spare to tell Ieroboams wife, that God would do
it, and not leave one of his line to 3. Kings. 14.
wet a wall. Every preacher may do the like; that is, they may protest and
assure princes, that Godwil not leave their sins unpunished both with temporal
and eternal plagues: and yet every preacher may not depose princes. Yea the
preacher of God may do the like to ye pope himself, and yet you think it no
reason: that every preacher should depose the Pope. Much less will it follow
that your holy father may thrust princes from their seats, because the
Prophets of God in old time reproved princes for their Idolatries.


Ph. The Defense cap. 5. The example of proud Ozias that would take unto him
the authority of priests.
Ozias also, or Vsia king of Judah puffed up with intolerable pride (as the
scripture says) and not contented with his kingly souerainty, but presuming to
execute spiritual and priestly function; was valiantly by Azarias and 80.
priests with him, assailed, and thrust out of the temple by force. At what time
for that he threatened the priests of God and resisted them with violence; he
was stricken with a filthy leprosy: and so not only thrust out of the temple,
but by their authority, severed also from al company of men (a special figure
of the priests power to excommunicate for heresy, as well princes as others, in
the new law) and finally the regiment of his kingdom was committed to his
son. A clear example that priests may use arms, and repress impiety by
forcible ways, where it may serve to the preservation of religion and honor of
God.


Theo. Vzziah presuming to burn incense on the Altar of God, which was the
priests office, Vzziah strike^ with a leprosy but not deposed.
was stricken with a leprosy and lived as a leper in an house apart from me^ to
the day of his death: A fair warning for princes not to wax proud against God,
nor to usurp things interdicted them by the law of God: But that Azarias the
priest and 80. of his brethren valiantly assailed the kings person and thrust
him out by force, or that the regiment of his kingdom passed from him, as
deprived of his right, and descended to his son: these be your additions and
imaginations, the text has no such things.

Azarias, The high Priest withstood the king with words, not with weapons.

The Jesuits delight in martial terms


and his brethren withstood the king: but in words, rebuking him for the
breach of Gods law, which they might, not manfully assailing the Magistrate,
nor laying violent hands on him to thrust him out of the temple, as your
martial terms do import. If the scripture it self do not content you,
repeating the words, wherewith Azarias resisted the king: hear Chrysostom.
conclusion upon this place. After the Priest had reproved (the attempt) and the
king would not yield, but offered arms, shilds, and spears, and used his
power, then the priest (turning himself) to God, 2. Chron. 26. De verbis Esai.
Vidi Dominu^.
I have done, says he, my duty (to warn him,) I can go no farther. Nam
Sacerdotis est ta^tum arguere; for it is the priests part only to reprove and
freely to admonish (with words:) not to assail with arms, not to use targets,
not to handle spears, not to bend bows, not to cast darts, but only to
reprove and freely to warn.

This therefore is no clear example that Priests may use arms and repress
impiety by forcible ways, as you infer, The Jesuits gather co^clusio^s clean
against the Scriptures and their own canons.
but a wicked abusing and drawing of the scriptures to serve your warlike
dispositions. For Gods, and man's law will assure you that priests and bishops
may be no warriers in their own persons; and if you regard not that, your own
law will teach you that Cause. 23. quaest. 8. 1.
no clergy man may put himself in arms, no not at the commandment of the
Bishop of Rome. Pope John says, Ibidem. 2.
Tractare de armis terrenae potescatis est: To meddle with arms, pertayneth to
the civil power. Pope Innocentius says: Christ, Ibidem. 3.
who was the pattern of al priests forbad carnal weapons to be taken in hand
for him. A council at Toledo in Spain, Ibidem. Clerici.
Clergy men that in any faction whatsoever, wittingly take arms, shall loose
their degree and be thrust in some Abbay for ever. An other at Meaux in
France, Ibidem. quicunque.
Whatsoever they be that be of the clergy, let the^ take no warlike weapons in
hand, nor go with arms. If they do, let them loose their degree, as
contemners of the sacred canons, and prophaners of ecclesiastical dignity. The
full resolution of all these canons by the confession of your law is this: Hijs
ita respondetur, Sacerdotes propria manu arma arripere non debent. Ibidem dict.
quicunque hijs ita.
The meaning of these places is, that priests themselves in their own persons
should not take weapon. You heard before how often S. Paul charged that a
Bishop should be 1. Tim. 3. 2. Tim. 2. Tit. 1.
no fighter nor striker, and that 2. Cor. 10.
the weapons of (their) warfare were not carnal, and by the Lords own voice,
that he which Mat. 24.
strikes his fellow servants shall have his portion with hypocrites.

What a desperate conclusion then have you wrested out of this example against
your own canons, and against the sacred Scriptures, that priests may not only
use arms and repress impiety by forcible ways: The Princes person no Priest
may violate, or so much as touch. Psalm. 105.
but assail the person of their Sovereign with open violence, which, if it
were lawful for them to use arms as it is for others, they might not so much
as touch? The precept of God is plain. Touch not mine anointed; which
reaches to others but chiefly to Princes. You may not speak evil of them,
and can it be lawful for you to do evil? To resist them is damnation: what is
it then with armed violence to oppress them? 1. Kings. 24.
David was touched in his heart for cutting off the lap of Saul's garment: and
you boldly conclude that priests with their own hands may violate the Princes
person. And where a cursing thought against them is a sin before God, a
murdering hand upon them is a merit by your doctrine.


Phi. We take our light from this example. For here the Priests, as the text
says, They might not use violence, and what needed any when the King hastened
of himself to go forth?
not only resisted, but when they saw the king become a leper they expelled him
out of the Sa^ctuarie.


Theo. The word 2. Chro. 26.
(...) signifies, they caused or gat him to hasten thence, but not with
violence: for the next words show that he was forced of himself to go forth
because the Lord had stroke^ him. And so the word (...) does signify, and the
common translation which you call S. Hieroms has for it, 2. Chro. 26.
Ipse accelerauit egredi: he made have of himself to go forth, as terrified
with the plague which he felt.


Phi. The Priests severed him from al company of men (a special figure of the
priests power to excommunicate for heresy as well Princes as others in the new
law) and the regiment of his kingdom was committed to his son.


The. You promised full proofs out of the word of God that priests might depose
Princes, and now you come with empty figures of your own applying without truth
or coherence. 4. Kings. 15.
Vzziah dwelt apart in an house from others, because of his leprosy: for so
the law of God commanded, and the danger of that disease required; but that the
Priests severed him from al company, this is your own making without the book,
the text has no such words; much less do you find in the scriptures that he
was deprived of his kingdom. 2. Chron. 26. 4. King. 15. Oziah was king of Judah
to the day of his death. The Priests were to discern lepers, but the
Magistrate to see them kept apart from others.

Numb. 5. The leprosy of the soul no cause of deprivation unto Princes. In
Luc. lib. 5. de leproso mundato.

Chrysostom. in Mat hom. 16. and oper. imperfect. hom. 10.


Iothan his son governed his house, and judged the people of the Land; because
the king himself might not be conversant among men by reason of his sickness,
but the crown still continued in the father though a leper, and Iothan began
not his reign, til his father was dead, whom the scripture calls the king of
Judah in the twenty fifth year of his reign and last year of his life.


Ph. Whose duty was it to separate Lepers from sound Persons, but only the
Priests?


Theo. The Priests were to discern who were lepers, but the Magistrate was to
see the^ put apart and to keep them from infecting others. The putting lepers
asunder from others was first commanded to the children of Israel, and by them
first executed; though the pronou^cing them to be lepers was always reserved
to the Priest.


Phi. And the leprosy of the body resembles ye leprosy of the soul. Ergo
Priests may separate Princes from the church for heresy and apostasy, which
be the sores of the inward man, as ye leprosy is of the outward.


The. You must prove first, before your conclusion will follow, that lepers by
the law of God lost their inheritance, which is not true. Next that every
Prince sinning must be deposed, which is as false. For leprosy resembles not
only heresy, or apostasy, but al kind of iniquity. Ambrose says, Contemptus
verbi est lepra mentis, the contempt of the word is the leprosy of the mind.
And so Chrysostom: The leprosy of the soul, which is sin, is only to be
feared. And likewise the rest: Intelligimus omnes auaros, and cupidos intus in
anima peccati lepra esse perfusos. We understand al covetous and greedy persons
to be inwardly infected with the leprosy of sin. If the leprosy of the
soul be a cause sufficient to remove princes from their Seats, what Prince
shall keep his kingdom, or what Bishop his chair? Be they not all sinners,
as well Bishops as Princes? If you take upon you the moderation of the matter,
that all sins shall not deprive them of their Crowns but only heresy: then
you decide the case like a lord, as you list; and check your own conclusion
as pernicious to Popes no less than to Princes; and we may justly reject it
as a figure of your own framing, without probability in the antecedent, or
necessity in the consequent.


Phi. Note the cause, why king Vzziah was smitten with the leprosy: for
presuming to execute the spiritual and Priestly function, whereof now you make
the^ supreme Governors.


Theo. I note it well; and when we defend that Princes may preach, baptize,
forgive sins, or minister the Lords supper, then threaten us with Vzziahs
pride and plague, on Gods name: To bear the sword in matters of religion is
the Princes and not the priests charge
In the mean time learn that to bear the sword is the Princes, and not the
Priests function: and that the kings of Judah which most used their temporal
sword for the restoaring of truth and purging of error, wanne most favor with
God and honor with men, as I showed before in David, Iehosaphat, Ezechias and
Josias.


Phi. To judge of truth, is the Priests charge; and that you refer to the
Prince.


Theo. To know what must be taught, is the Pastors care: to take heed what
they believe, or whom they follow, God has referred that to the hearers, at
their peril, and more than that we give no Prince.


Phi. The office and zeal of good Priests is notably recommended unto us, The
defense, cap. 5.

4. Reg. 11.

The example of the deposition and death of Queen Athalia by Ioida the
hie-Priest.


in the deposition of the wicked Queen Athalia. She, to obtain the Crown
after Ochasias, killed all his children: only one, which by a certain good
woman's piety was secretly withdrawn from the massacre, saved and brought up
within the Temple for seven years space; al which time the said Queen usurped
the kingdom: till at length Ioida the high Priest, by opportunity called to
him forces both of the Priests and people; proclaimed the right heir that was
in his custody; anointed and crowned him king; and caused immediately the
pretensed Queen, (notwithstanding she cried Treason, Treason, as not only
just possessors but wicked usurpers use to do) to be slain with her fautors
at her own Court gate. Thus do Priests deal and judge for the innocent and
lawful Princes (when time requires) much to their honor, and agreeable to
their holy calling. Athalia an usurper, and slain by the Kings authority.



Theo. Egernesse blinds your understanding, when to prove that a lawful
Prince may be deprived of State and life, which you seek to defend, you bring
an example of a wicked woman usurping the crown and playing the tyrant that
was suppressed and punished by the rightful inheritour of the Scepter, first
proclaimed and Crowned by the consent of his whole Realm.


Phi. Ioida the high Priest commanded her to be slain, Ioidaes warrant to
command Athalia to be put to death in the Kings name.
and not the king. For he was a child of seven years age and had no such
discretion.


Theo. Ioida had good warrant by the Laws of God and man to do that he did.
First he saved the young king alive, and hyding him from the fury of Athalia,
secretly nourced him in the house of God: and in that respect might lawfully
protect him, and execute justice for him. Again he was the Prince of his
Tribe, as well as others were of their Tribes: and therefore might take upon him
as much as any other of the Princes, in the minority of the king to pacify
the Realm, and punish the usurper. Thirdly his wife was the kings aunt, and
himself the nearest allye that the king had, and for that cause by the Law of
nature and nations, bound to see the Princes right, age and innocence
defended. Lastly that he did was by the common consent of all the Nobles and
Captains. For the scripture says, 2. Chr^. 23. 4. Kings. 11.
that before he ventered to proclaine king Ioash, He caused the captains, and
the chief fathers of Israel to come unto him into the house of the Lord, and
made a covenant with them, and took an oath of them in the house of the Lord,
and showed them the kings son. So that Ioida had very good and sufficient
authority without and besides his Priesthood to do that he did, which you
dissemble and make a flourish as if he had done this only by virtue of his
vocation, which is most false.


Phi. The defense, cap. 5.

3. Reg. 18.19. The execution done by Elias the Prophet upon many with
deposition of Princes. 4. Reg. 1.


No man can be ignorant how stoutly Elias (being sought to death by Achab and
his Queen Iezabel that ouerthrewe holy Altars, and murdered all the true
religions that could be found in their land) told them to their face; that
not he or other men of God whom they persecuted, but they and their house
were the disturbers of Israel: And slew in his zeal all the said Iezabels
false Prophets, fostered at her Table, even four hundred at one time; and so
set up holy Altars again. How he handled the Idolatrous king Ochozias his
Captains and messengers, wasting them and an hundred of their train,, by fire
from heaven; till the third Captain was forced to humble himself upon his
knees unto him.

How he had commission to anoint Hazael, king of Syria; Eliseus a Prophet
for himself; 3. Reg. 19. 4. Reg. 9.
and Iehu king of Israel, and so to put down the son and whole house of
Achab: which thereby lost all the title and right to the kingdom for ever.


Theo. Elias zeal. 3. Kings. 18.
Elias zeal we know: and his stoue answer to Achab in saying, I have not
troubled Israel, but thou and thy fathers house in that ye have forsaken the
commandments of the Lord, and thou have followed Baalim: Yet have you but a
cold suit of his stout speech. For if Prophets may reprove kings, may they
therefore depose them? you bring your five wits in question, if you stand to
this collection.


Phi. Elias caused the Prophets of Baal to be slain by the public authority
of the King and his people.
He slew in his zeal at one time four hundred of Iezabels false Prophets
fostered at her Table.


Theo. The famine which the land felt, and the wonder which Elias did, were the
cause why king Achab delivered the Prophets of Baal into Elias hands to be
slain by the people according to the Law of God.


Phi. Nay Elias slew them.


Theo. Think you that Elias with his own hands murdered so many?


Phi. The Scripture says Elias slew them, interpret that how you can.


Theo. I took Elias all this while for a Prophet and not for an executioner.
Elias was a Prophet and not an executioner.



Phi. Though it were not his act to kill them; it was his authority that they
were killed.


Theo. His direction you might have said, but not his authority. For Elias
was a private man and no magistrate.


Phi. King Achab was far enough from killing them, had it not been for Elias.


Theo. Elias might induce the king to do it, compel him he could not.


Phi. How could Elias induce the King to do that deed?


Theo. The famine was so great in Israel for lack of rain that man and beast
were ready to perish: How Elias gate Achab and the whole Realm to decree the
slaughter of Baals prophets.
and rain they could have none, but at Elias 3. Kings. 17. Verse. 1.
word as Elias had told the king before the drought began. Meeting
therefore with Achab and being challenged by him as the author of this famine,
and troubler of Israel: he discharged himself, and protessed before the King
that GOD plagued the whole land because he, 3. Kings. 18. Verse. 23. Verse. 24.
and his fathers house had forsaken the commandments of the Lord, and
followed other Gods. And to justify his speech, he offered to prove before
all Israel on the danger of his own head that the King and the land were
but seduced and abused by the Prophets of Baal, and that he would prove by no
worse means, than by miraculous fire from heaven which should show them
whose sacrifice GOD accepted: assuring them of rain abundant after their
conversion to the true GOD, Verse. 1. Verse. 24.
for which cause he was at this time sent unto them. To this the king, and the
rest gave their consents: and when by the sign which Elias wrought, the
Prophets of Baal were convicted to be but false deceivers, and the whole
assembly fell on their faces, Verse. 39.
and gave the glory to GOD, and submitted themselves to follow his truth:
Verse. 40.
Elias willed them to take Baals Prophets, and give them the reward that
deceivers by Gods Law should have, which was death.


Phi. This is your enlarging of the text.


Theo. The books of kings are but short gatherings out of the larger
Chronicles that were extant among the Jews, and the manner of the holy Ghost
is briefly to touch the chiefest things, and yet is there none of these
parts, but may be plainly proved by the circumstaunces of the text.


Phi. How prove you the King consented?


Theo. The particular speech of no one is reported but the general consent of
the whole company. Verse. 24. The King and the people consented to Elias offer.
Verse. 20.
Where also the king was present, is expressed: and yet before the multitude
was assembled, the Kings consent to Elias offer appears in that the king
sent unto all the children of Israel, and gathered the Prophets together for
that purpose, who would otherwise have despised the message and word of
Elias. Again the Prophets of Baal would never have ventered their lives upon
a needless miracle at Elias pleasure, but the King and the whole Realm tied
them to that condition, upon danger else to reject both them and their
profession. And lastly how was it possible for one poor Prophet to catch and
kill four hundred and fifty, so that not a man of them escaped: the king and
the whole State standing with them? Or how was it lawful for Elias to spill
their blood in the kings presence, without the kings consent? Elias therefore
made the motion, which the king and the whole Realm there assembled, did
accept and ratify with this answer, Verse. 24.
It is well spoken: and as he should have lost his life, if he had failed; so
when they failed, he required justice to be done by the king and the Realm
on them, for that they were clearly convicted to be teachers of strange and
false Gods.


Phi. 3. Kings. 19.
Achab when he came home told Iezabel his wife how Elias had slain all the
Prophets with the sword.


Theo. Achab, we doubt not, excused him self, and cast the fault as much as
he could on Elias, that Iezabels Prophets were slain; but this does not show
that Achab did not consent. His words import that Elias was the procurer and
causer of their destruction, Elias is said in the Scripture to have done the
deed, because he was the procurer and author of it. Acts. 7. Iosu. 10. 3.
Kings. 14.
but not the judge nor officer that put them to death.


Phi. The Scripture says he slew them.


Theo. So the Scripture says that Solomon buylt GOD an house: think you
therefore that Solomon was a Mason or Carpenter? And Joshua smote the five
kings of the Amorites, and hanged them on five trees: did Joshua therefore
play the hangman? And king Roboam made shildes of brass: was Roboam therefore
a brasse-smith?


Phi. No: they commanded or caused these things to be done.


Theo. And so did Elias procure, or cause them to be slain: for in the
Scripture the causer, procurer and director are said to do the deed, though
they be but means and helps to have it done. But what is this to the
deposing of Princes? Will you reason thus? False Prophets may be put to death
my magistrates; ergo Princes may be deposed by priests. I think you will not
for very shame make such childish conclusions.


Phi. He himself slew king Ochasias his Captains, and messengers, wasting
them and an hundredth of their train by fire from heaven.


Theo. Elias was the speaker of the word, but God was the doer of the deed:
and in that case God himself slew them, and not Elias.


Phi. God sent ^er from heaven, and not Elias.
He called for fire from heaven.


Theo. Fire from heaven was not in Elias power but in Gods will. Neither might
Elias, had he not been guyded by the special instinct of Gods Spirit: have
presumed to call for that, or any other kind of revenge from heaven: for that
is the manifest tempting of God, as our Savior warned his Apostles when he
rebuked them for offering to imitate Elias, Luke. 9.
and to call for fire from heaven as he did. And sure it is, as these things
were not ordinary, so can you drive them to no conclusion for your purpose;
nor lay them forth for imitation to any; no more than you may warrant men to
steal, because Israel Exodus 12.
robbed Egypt by Gods appointment; or to persuade any to murder themselves,
because Judges. 16.
Samson did the like; or teach them to curse and kill children, because Elizeus
handled 4. Kings. 2.
two and forty so that mocked him at Bethel. And yet all this while you show
not that Elias so much as touched the king, much less deposed him, which you
profess to prove. THE DEFENSE OF ENGLISH CATHOLICS.

The anointing of Hazael.





Phi. Elias had commission to annoint Hazael king of Syria and Iehu king of
Israel, and so to put down the son and whole house of Achab; which thereby
lost all the title and right to the kingdom for ever.


Theo. Neither of them was anointed by Elias, neither Hazael, nor Iehu.
Elizeus only foretold Hazael, that he should be king in Benhadads place: His
words were, The Lord has showed me that thou shall be king of Aram; 4. Kings.
8.
This Elizeus spoke the day before Benhadad died; and other anointing Hazael
had none.

Iehu was indeed anointed by one of the Children of the Prophets (whom Elizeus
sent) and charged by message from God to smite and destroy the whole house of
Achab his master; Iehu willed by God to take the sword and root out Achabs
house 4. Kings. 9. Ibidem. verse. 7. and 8.

4. Kings. 11.


and so he did. For he slew Ioram the King, trod Iesabel under his horse
feet, and caused the seventy sons of Achab that were nourced in Samaria to
be slain; and slew all that remained of the house of Achab in Izrael, and all
that were great with him, and his familiars, and his Priests, so that he let
none of his remain.


Phi. Then yet here was one king deposed.


Theo. Here was no king deposed by any Prophet, but one slain by Iehu, to whom
God gave the Kingdom of Achab for this intent, God might give Iehu the
kingdom and appoint him to revenge his masters sins.
that he should root out the whole house and offspring of Achab.


Phi. Did Iehu well to kill his master and to take the kingdom from him and
his heirs?


Theo. Being expressly commanded thereto by God himself, he did but his duty.
For God may take and give Kingdoms as he will, though man may not.


Phi. Authority so to do Iehu received from Eliseus.


Theo. Unsay that, for fear least you fall into a malicious and wicked untruth.
The Prophet that anointed Iehu began his message with, Thus says the Lord
God of Israel; and not thus says Elizeus.


Phi. But Elizeus sent him and gave him instructions what to do and what to
say.


Theo. Let that be so. Then Elizeus taught him to do this errand in Gods
name, and not in his own, and consequently Iehu received authority from God,
Iehu authorized by God, and not by Elizeus.
and not from man. Now view your argument. God may give kingdoms to whom he
will, and appoint ye subject to be the revenger of his masters sin; ergo the
Pope may do the like. Be you not the right members of Antichrist, when you make
such reasons to flatter the Bishop of Rome?


Phi. The Scripture says of Elias: He cast down Kings, destroyed them and
plucked the honorable from their Seats: Eccle. 48.
and of Eliseus in the same place he never feared Prince, nor could be overcome
by any.


Theo. If the Scripture will not serve your turns, you will make it I perceive
by one means or other. The words as they lie in the Greek are (...): Eccle.
48.
He brought Kings to destruction, and the mighty from their beds: you to
help the matter put in terms of your own and say he cast down Kings,
destroyed them and plucked them from their Seats, Elias and Eliseus were no
deposers.
as if Elias had been some Iustie swash-buckler to pluck them out by the
ears, and not a zealous and sincere Prophet to denounce the will of God unto
them with the peril of his own life, for the which he is commended. And so of
Elizeus, the wise man says, He was shaken (that is driven from the doing of
his duty or afearde to do that which God willed him) for any ruler. These and
such like praises, Eccle. 48.
if you take them as in Prophets and Preachers they may and ought to be taken:
(which is not to shrink from declaring the will of God for any Prince, and to
advertise them as well as others of the danger and destruction that hangs
over their heads) they be great virtues; and shined in Elias and Eliseus very
brightly: But if you aggrauate words to persuade men that Elias or Eliseus did
depose princes as superior judges, or laid violent hands on them to pull them
from their thrones; you make them Rebellious disturbers of states, which was
far from them: and not religious servants to God, as in deed they were.


Phi. The defense, cap. 5.

I^larions and consequents upon the former examples.


By these examples of holy Scriptures we see: first, that anointed and
lawfully created Kings may be deposed: secondly, for what causes they were
deprived: thirdly, that as in the creation and consecration of Kings* so also
in their deprivation, God used the ministry of Priests and Prophets, as
either ordinary or extraordinary Judges or executors of his will toward them.


Theo. Your examples have been thoroughly considered; and howsoever you correct
and qualify your conclusion, the precedents no way fit your purpose. That
anointed and lawfully created Kings may be chased from the government; The
former examples infer no judicial deposition of Princes by Priests. All
saving one were either not lawfully created or not else deposed.
the example of Iehu will justify: if you add these two prouisoes, that the
warrant be special from Gods own mouth, and the fact be done by the Magistrate
whom God has authorized to take the sword; for so does Iehues example require:
the rest intend no such thing. The Princes which you name were either not
deposed, or not lawfully created. Saul was presently rejected from Gods favor
and spirit, from the possession of the Kingdom he was not, but only cut off
from the succession. Jeroboam was sorely threatened, and Vzziah sharply
punished, but yet neither of them deposed. Achab was twice rebuked by Elias,
but not deprived: And Athalia whom the hie-Priest in the young Kings name
commanded to be slain, usurped, and was never lawfully created.

The causes for which they were deprived, we need not dispute of, unless you
first show that they were deprived. Athalia slain for usurping: Vzziah smitte^
for his pride: and Iorams religion no worse than his fathers.

4. King 1.9. Verse. 22. Verse. 7. 3. Kings. 21.

God used the ministry of the Prophets to declare his will, but not their
authority to depose Princes.


Athalia was slain neither for Apostasy, nor heresy, but for usurping the
Crown against the right heir. Vzziahs acts were commended, but his pride
detested by God. Ioram was of no worse religion than Achab his Father, and
others before him, and after him, which yet were not deposed: But God revenged
on him, the whordomes, and witchcraftes of his mother Iesabel, which he
suffered, and the blood of all his servants the Prophets, which he spilt in
the reign both of Achab and Ioram. That cause the Prophet uttered to Iehu: and
Iehu to Ioram when he slew by Israel: And this plague upon Achabs wife and
house Elias threatened after the killing of Naboth.


Phi. Was not Ioram an Idolater?


Theo. Yeas, that increased his sin, but it was not the cause that he lost
his kingdom.

Your third observation halteth down right, and doubleth so many times either,
and or, that in effect you resolve nothing. You say God used the ministry of
Priests and Prophets in the deprivation of Kings. He used their mouths to
foretell, and declare the plagues that he would send on Princes: and sometimes
their hands to anoint such as he would have succeed: But he used them,
neither as ordinary, nor extraordinary Judges, nor executors to depose
Princes. Messengers they were, to deliver by word of mouth that which God had
determined, to such as did, or should inherit the kingdom; other execution,
or authority to deprive Princes they had none: And this is far from that
which you claim for the Pope: whom you make the superuisour of Princes, and
an ordinary Judge to compel them and displace them if he see cause.


Phi. For so much as these Princes held their dignities and Sovereign
authorities of God, The defense, cap. 5.
and were bound to occupy and use the same, with what forces soever they had,
to the advancement of his Religion, and to the true worship and honor of
their supreme Lord and Master: as also to the bene^ite and preservation of his
people in faith and fear of him: the Priests and Prophets (that then had the
principal and direct charge of men's souls and Religion, and were in
spiritual matters superiors to their own Princes) rightly opposed themselves
in all such actions as tended to the dishonor of GOD, destruction of Religion,
and to the notorious damage of the souls of them over whom they did reign:
and in the behalf of GOD executed justice upon such, as contrary to their
obligation and first institution, abused their sovereign power, to the
destruction of true religion and advancement of Idolatry, Heresy, or such
like abomination.


Theo. Never give us a reason why Princes may be deposed by Priests, The
Jesuits give a reason why Priests may depose Princes before they prove the
fact to be lawful.
and Prophets, so long as the fact it self is in doubt, and not yet proved to
be lawful. That kings hold their sovereign authorities of God, and are bound
to use the same to the advancement of his true worship and honor; as also to
the preservation of his people in the faith and fear of him; this is a point
always urged by us, and lately confessed by you before you were ware: for you
were wont to tell us that Princes might not meddle with spiritual things or
causes: and now you profess that Princes are bound to use their authorities
and forces whatsoever to the advancement of Gods religion, and to the true
worship and honor of God and preservation of his people in the faith and fear
of him. This then is a sound and an evident truth alleged by us, and allowed
by you. But when you grow from this to conclude, that if Princes use not their
swords and forces as they should and are bound, Priests may take their
dignities and authorities from them: you put Iron feet to a golden head, and
think the metals will agree. But you be ^owly, deceived. Your consequent is as
false, as your antecedent is true. That Princes should use their swords for
the service of GOD, is a clear and undoubted principle: but that Prophets,
Priests, or Popes may take their Scepters from them, if they use them otherwise
than they ought, this is a false presumption of yours, and not a consequent
either of your former examples, or your later excurrents, where you f^^rish
about with many pretenses, and prefaces to show the reason of your wicked
assertion.


Phi. Our conclusion is, that the Priests and Prophets rightly opposed
themselves in all such actions as tended to the dishonor of God, and
destruction of religion, and in the behalf of God executed justice upon such
as contrary to their obligation, and first institution abused their sovereign
power to the advancement of Idolatry, and heresy.


Theo. What words you list to color and cloak your conclusion with, we care
not. The question is not whether the prophets might oppose them to reprove
wicked Kings, but whether they might by their prophetical vocation depose them.
The matter in question betwixt us, is not, whether Prophets might oppose
themselves by way of reproof, or do that which God commanded them to the
terror of Idolatrous Princes: which you call executing of justice in Gods
behalf upon such as abused their power. But in plain terms whether ever any
Priest or Prophet by virtue of their vocation as superior Judges, did
violently withstand, or iudicially depose Idolatrous or heretical Princes? You
take upon you to prove by holy Scripture they did: we say they did not. They
reproved them and threatened them by special direction and message from God:
they never deposed any. Only God sent one of them to will Iehu to take the
sword in hand, and as a lawful magistrate nominated and elected by God
himself, to take vengeance on Achabs house and race. Whence it will not follow
that other Priests and Prophets by their ordinary calling might do the like,
or give Crowns and kingdoms as they saw cause. This was and is specially
reserved unto God. Til God spoke no Priest may depose kingdoms.
When he speaks the word, Princes shall loose not only Scepter and State,
but life and soul: and until he speak, neither Apostles, nor Prophets,
Priests, nor Popes, may presume to dispose kingdoms, or name successors to
the Crowns of earthly Princes.


Phi. The defense cap. 5.
In these cases, and all other doubts and differences betwixt one man and an
other, or betwixt Prince and people; that Priests and namely the high Priest
should be the Arbiter and Judge, and the interpreter of Gods will toward his
people; is most consonant both to nature, reason, the use of all nations, and
to the express Scriptures.

Deuteronomy. 17.
For in Gods sacred Law thus we read: Si difficile and ambiguum apud te
iudicium esse prospexeris inter sanguinem and sanguinem, causam and causam,
lepram and non lepram etc. The subjection of al men to the judgment of
Priests.
If thou foresee the judgment to be hard and ambiguous, betwixt blood and
blood, cause and cause, leprosy or no leprosy; and find variety of sentences
among the judges at home: rise and go up to the place, which the Lord thy God
shall choose, and thou shall come to the Priests of Leuies stock, and to the
judge that shall be for the time; thou shall ask of them, and they will judge
according to the truth of judgment: and thou shall do whatsoever they say
that have the rule of the place which God shall choose, and shall teach thee
according to his law: thou shall not decline neither to the right hand nor
left. And if any shall be so proud as not to obey the commandment of the
Priest that shall for that time minister unto the Lord thy God, by the sentence
of the judge let that man die; and so thou shall remove evil from Israel: and
all the people hearing shall fear and take heed, that hereafter they wax not
proud.

Thus far in the holy text generally with out all exception: subiecting in
cases of such doubts as are recited, all degrees of faithful men, no less
kings than others, to the Priests resolution.


Theo. What will you do to help your cause, that will thus both corrupt and
wrest the Scriptures to make them serve your fancies? You wilfully pervert the
words of the holy Ghost to bring them to your beck: and as if that were not
corruption enough, you wrench and force the sense of the Scripture against
reason, against truth, against the whole course of the Jews common wealth,
and against the very parts, and branches of the text it self.


Phi. First what corruption have we committed in the words? This place of
Scripture is corrupted by the Papists. Deuteronomy. 17.



Theo. That where the words are, If any through pride will not obey the
commandment of the Priest, which shall for the time minister unto the Lord
thy God, or (disobay) the Decree of the Judge, that man shall die: you change
them and say, If any man will not obey the commandment of the Priest by the
Decree of the Judge, that man shall die.


Phi. So the latin is, Ex decreto ^udicis morietur homo ille, By the decree of
the Judge shall that man die.


Theo. But the Greek and Hebrew are clean against it. The words of the
Septuagint are The Greek and Hebrew, are against the Latin. Deuteronomy. 17.
(...), The man whosoever he be, that shall in pride not obey the Priest, (that
is appointed to minister unto ye name of ye Lord:) or (else shall not obey) the
judge which shall be in those days, that man shall die, and thou shall take the
evil one from Israel. The Hebrew is answerable to the Greek, The man that shall
do in pride, Lebilthi shemoahh el-haccohen hahhomed Leshareth sham eth-Iehoua
eloheca, o el-hasshophet: umeth haish hahu, not to hear the Priest or the
Judge, that man shall die. And so did Cyprian Lib. 1. epist. 3.8.11. lib. 3.
epist. 9. lib. 4. epist. 9.
repete this text, Et homo quicunque fecerit in superbia, vt non exaudiat
Sacerdotem aut Iudicem, quicunque fuerit in diebus illis, morietur homo ille,
and omnis populus cum audierit, timebit. And the man, whosoever shall in pride
not hear the Priest OR THE IVDGE, which shall be in those days, that man shall
die, and all the people when they hear of it, shall fear.


Phi. But S. Hierom read it otherwise, as you see by his translation.


Theo. You have corrupted the translation which you call S. Hieroms, The Latin
text of the Bible depraved.
and now you would bolster out your forgeries with his name: Howbeit know you
that the very same translation not long since was not Ex decreto iudicis, but
and decreto iudicis: He that obeys not the commandment of the Priest, That
reading is yet found in six written Bibles in the new College in Oxford.

Nicol. de Lyrae in cap. 17. Deuteronomy cronomij.


and the decree of the judge, that man shall die. This was the text of the
Bible which you call S. Hierome not much more than 200 years since, when
Nicolaus de Lyra and your ordinary Gloss did comment upon it. And so they
read to this day as also many written copies that I have seen. Hereupon Lyra
says, In these and such cases they must have recourse to the superior Judges,
that is to the high Priest, and the Judge of the people. And sometimes it fell
out that both offices did concur in one person, as in Heli who was both Judge
and High Priest: but commonly both the Persons were distinct and the offices.
And hence grew the custom, from inferior ecclesiastical Judges to appeal to
the High Priest, and from inferior Princes and secular Judges to appeal to
the King or Emperor. You have turned and into ex, and not only debarred the
Prince of all his right, but subjected him to the Priest In all doubts and
differences betwixt Prince and people, even to the loss of his Crown if the
Priest say the word. The common wealth of the Jews and the Scriptures
themselves impugn the Jesuits sense of that place.

Exodus 18. Inferior judges (which afterward heard smaller matters in the gates
of each City,) first appointed by the counsel of Iethro.

Numbers. 11.





Phi. We follow the latin text as we found it.


Theo. You might easily follow that which your selves had framed to your
liking, but the order of the Jews common wealth and the circumstances of the
text it self admit no such meaning, as you make of it. For it is more than
evident, and testified not in a few places of the scriptures, that al causes
neither were, nor might be referred to the Priest.

Moses at the counsel of Iethro chose men of courage out of all Israel and
made them heads over the people, Rulers over thousands, Rulers over hundreds,
Rulers over fifties, Rulers over tens. And they judged the people at all
seasons, but brought the hard causes unto Moses: for they judged al small (or
easy) matters themselves. And though Moses by them was eased of all saving
hard and importing causes, yet finding that burden too heavy for one man
alone, he complained unto God and said, I am not able to bear all this people
alone, for it is too heavy for me. To whom God made answer, Gather me
seventy men of the Elders of Israel, and bring them unto the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, and I will come down, and talk with them there, and take off
the spirit that is upon thee and put it upon them, and they shall bear the
burden of the people with thee: so thou shall not bear it alone. The same
order of inferior and superior judges established by Gods law for ever among
the Jews. Deuteronomy. 16.


This distinction of inferior and superior judges God after by his law
established in that common wealth for ever. In the next chapter before this
which you allege, order is taken for inferior judge in every City throughout
the Land. Judges and officers shall thou make thee in all thy gates (that is in all thy Cities) which the Lord thy God gives thee throughout thy Tribes, and
they shall judge the people with righteous Judgment.

In this Chapter and these very words which here you cite, Superior judges
are prescribed, Deuteronomy. 17.

The superior judgment consisted both of priests to direct, and magistrates
to correct.

The chief magistrates before kings were ordained in Israel n^uer called
Judges.


to whom harder causes and matters of greater difficulty were to be referred.
And so the words precisely sound. If there fall out an hard matter for thee to
judge, between blood and blood, strife and strife, sore and sore, that be
matters of judgment in thy gates, thou shall rise and go up to the place which
the Lord thy God shall chose there (in the land of promise.) And go to the
Priests of Leui, and to the Judge which shall be in those days, and ask them,
and they shall show thee the matter of judgment. The judge of which he
speaks was ye temporal Magistrate, for so the copulative leads us, and by
that name were the chief Rulers of Gods People called, before Kings were
ordained as the Book of Judges witnesses; neither was the judge subject to
the Priest, but had his charge besides and above the Priest, which was to see
the law of God exactly kept and observed in all points of all men, This Court
was after assistant and subject to the King.

Iehosaphat renewed these two forms of judgment. 2. Chro. 19.

The King commanded the^, ergo they were not to command him.


and to take vengeance on the breaker of any part thereof, when as yet there
were no kings, and after the creation of kings both Priest and Judge were
subject to the king.

This form of regiment by lower and higher Judges and those both
ecclesiastical and cyuill, king Iehosaphat renewed after he returned safe from
the battle wherein Achab was slain. For he set Judges in the Land in all
the fensed Cities of Judah, City by City. Also in Jerusalem he appointed of
the Levites and of the Priests and of the heads of the houses of Israel for
the judgment of the Lord and for matters of doubt, and they dwelt at
Jerusalem. And he commanded them saying, thus shall ye do in the fear of
the Lord, in truth, and in a perfect heart every cause that shall come before
you from your brethren remaining in their Cities, between blood and blood,
between Law and precept, statutes and judgments, you shall instruct them
therein, and they shall not trespass against the Lord. And behold Amariah
the Priest (shall be) chief over you in every matter of the Lords; All
matters were not referred to the priest, and the kings matters are namely
excepted from them.
and Zebadiah the captain of the house of Judah (shall be chief over you) in
every matter of the kings, and the Levites shall be Rulers (or overseers) in
your presence (or under you.) Iehosaphat put that in execution which GOD
prescribed by Moses for the debating and determining of greater and weightier
causes among the children of Israel placing a Council of Priests, and secular
Magistrates at Jerusalem to consider of those doubts of the Law, and
offenses against GOD and the king, which passed the reach of inferior Judges
in every City.

Mark then how many errors you have committed in alleging this one place.
How the Jesuits abuse the sense of this place in Deuteronomy* The King not subject to
their Court.
The government which God settled in their common wealth to supply the want of
kings, the defense might both overrule kings and depose kings, and yet when
this was ordained, there was no king created, nor intended in Israel, much
less included, or subjected to this consistory. Again where obedience in
these words is commanded as well toward the civil magistrate as toward the
Priest, The magistrate clean stricken out by the Jesuits, and al his interest
conueighed to the Priest.
you strike out the magistrate clean, and bring both Prince and people in
subjection to the Priest in things and causes that be not spiritual, but
temporal. For the deposing of Princes is a mere temporal act, and you have
less to do with Princes Crowns, than with private men's inheritances which
yet the priest may not dispose. Thirdly the matters which belonged to them, and
the judgments which they should give; were precisely limited to the law of
God: in other things they might not presume. Now resisting, This Court
limited to the law of God and that speaks nothing of deposing Princes.
and deposing of Princes be things clean besides the Law which Moses
delivered, and therefore not determinable by those that sat to judge according
to that Law. Fourthly what question can this be between the Prince and the
people whether the Magistrate shall be deposed since GOD has expressly
commanded the people to be subject to the sword and not to resist: against
the which precept no earthly Court may deliberate, much less determine to
break his law, or license the people to frustrate his heavenly will. It is one
thing to disburden the conscience from obeying the evil that a Prince
commands, which a Priest may do: and an other thing to take the Princes
sword out of his hand for abusing his authority, which the Priest may not
do. Never high priest deposed Kings, but Kings have deposed high Priests.

3. Kings. 2.

Adoniahs right to the Crown was better than Salomons, by the hie priests
judgment: and yet the king removed the hie Priest from his office and put the
competitor to death.

Never King of Israel or Judah removed from the Crown by any Priest: and yet
the causes then as vrge^t as now.

How can you excuse the hie Priests of Judah for not doing their duty: if by
Gods law they had been the Princes superiors?

The Priests and Prophets lost their lives for reproving Princes: and more it
could not cost to depose them.


Lastly you force the whole text against the manifest experience of those
times. For it is evident that kings commanded and displaced high Priests:
but that ever high Priest iudicially displaced a Prince, you shall never show.
Omit Abimelech whom Saul slew for favoring David, and Zachariah whom king
Ioash commanded to be stoned, not remembering the kindness of Ioida his father,
that saved him alive, and set him in his kingdom: Did not Solomon cast out
Abiathar from being (high) Priest, because he took part with Adoniah his
elder brother? Where by your conclusion Solomon should have been deposed
because the high Priest thought Adoniahs right to the Crown to be better than
Salomons.

We show you where the Prince removed the Priest from his honor and
primacie, but you can not show us that ever Priest removed Prince in that
Common wealth from his royal dignity, and yet was there then as urgent, and as
evident cause to do it, as you can now, or do pretend. For all the kings of
Israel were open Idolaters, Iehu himself not excepted, and yet not one of them
deposed by Priest, or Prophet, so long as their kingdom stood, which was 253.
years. The greater part of the kings of Judah, even fourteen of them were
likewise plain Idolaters: as Solomon, Roboam, Abiam, Ioram, Ahaziah, Ioash,
Amazias, Ahaz, Manasses, Amon, Ioachaz, Eliakim, Ioacim, Zedechias: and not a
Priest, or Prophet in Judah so much as offered to displace, or resist one of
them. If by Gods Law, as you suppose, the Priests were superior Judges to
punish such offenses even in princes, how can you excuse the high Priest, and
the rest to whom that charge was committed for not executing that power which
God gave them upon these wicked and Idolatrous Princes?


Phi. The kings were too mighty for them to remove.


Theo. That happily might hinder the effect, but not the attempt of their
judgment. We do not object that they were unable, but that they never made
the onset or offer to do it.


Phi. The cruelty of those kings caused them to forbear.


Theo. That is not true. Many Priests and Prophets gave their lives for
reproouing them: and more it could not cost to depose them. Again, Manasses
was carried captive out of his Realm in the midst of his furious Idolatry: and
yet in his absence and misery no man stirred against him, but his kingdom was
reserved for him till he was released out of prison, and sent back from
Babylon. It was therefore not for fear of death, but for regard of duty that
the zealous Priests and Prophets submitted their persons to those wicked
Princes, whose Idolatry they reproved with the loss of their lives.


Phi. This condition was afterward to be im^lied in the receiving of any king
over the people of God and true believers for ever: The Defense cap. 5.

A condition implied in the creation of al Princes.


videlicet that they should not reduce their people by force or otherwise from
the faith of their forefathers, and the religion and holy ceremonies thereof,
received at the hands of Gods Priests and none other: Insinuating, that
obse^uing these precepts and conditions, he and his son after him might long
reign: Otherwise, as by the practice of their deposition in the books and
time of the kings it afterward ^ppeareth (whereof we have set down some
examples before) the Prophets and Pristes that anointed them, of no other
condition but to keep and maintain the honor of God and his worship,
deprived them again, when they brake with their Lord, and fell to strange
Gods, and forced their people to do the like.


Theo. God would have the more care to be taken in choosing a king, God
required many things in a Prince, the breach of which is not deposition. Deuteronomy.
17.
because it was too late to refuse him when he was once chosen: But I trust
your self will not say that all those conditions which God requires in a
king, are forfeitures of his Crown if he transgress in any of them. GOD in
express words and in the very same place, charge that the king shall not
have many wives, nor many horses, nor abundaunce of gold, nor silver, nor lift
his heart up above his brethren; and think you that if a king did offend in
any of these, he was to be deposed? The precept which your self allege does
not only concern the public sufferance of true religion, but the perfect
observance of every point that was contained in the law of God. Deuteronomy. 17.
He shall read in the book of the Law all the days of his life, that he
may learn to fear the Lord his God, and to observe all the words of this
Law and these statutes to do them. And trow you the breach of any point of
Gods Law was deprivation to the king? You must be void of all sense if you
defend these things, and yet these be conditions, or as you delight to call
them, covenants which God exacteth in him that shall be king over his elect
and peculiar people.

The knitting up of your matter is like the rest of your discourse. The
Prophets and Priests (you say) that anointed them, Princes brake covenants
with God, and yet were not deposed.
of no other condition but to keep and maintain the honor of God, and his
true worship, deprived them again when they brake with their Lord and fell
to strange Gods, and forced their people to do the like. It is utterly untrue
that ever Priest or Prophet deposed Prince in the common wealths of Israel,
or Judah. There were, as the Scripture testifies, of the kings of Israel
nineteen, and fourteen of the kings of Judah that brake with their Lord, and
sell to strange Gods, and forced their people to do the like. Show that one
of them was deprived by any Priest, or Prophet, and take the whole: if you can
not, The defense, cap. 5.

The authority of Priesthood in the new Testament.


leave false supposing, and vain craking, and tell on your tale.


Phi. And this it was in the old law. But now in the new Testament and in the
time of Christ's spiritual kingdom in the Church, Priests have much more
sovereign authority, and Princes far more strict charge, to obey, love and
cherish the Church.


Theo. What was in the old Law you have said and we have seen: and except I
be deceived you found there very little for your purpose: In the new Testament
I can assure you, you will find less. Where you say that Priests now in the
Church, Less in the new testament for the deposition of Princes than in the
old.
have much more sovereign authority than Priests had in the law of Moses: the
comparing of their authorities is very superfluous. Have they more or less, it
is nothing to this question; Authority to depose Princes they neither then
had, nor now have, which is it that you seek for. In what sort Princes are
bound to love, cherish, and obey the Church, was declared before, and need not
now be repeated: But the Church is neither charged nor licenced by Christ to
take Princes Crowns from them. Subjection is rather enjoined her in earthly
things unto Princes, which can not stand with your thrusting them from their
thrones, unless you take rebellion to be subjection, which were very strange.
And depriving them of their right, is worse than rebelling against the^ to
defend your right, which yet is not tolerable. For he that Romans 13.

The defense, cap. 5.

Psalm. 2. Ieremi. 1. Mat. 16.


resists them, shall receive judgment.


Phi. In the Church without fail is the supereminent power of Christ's
Priesthood, who with his Iron rod bruseth the pride of Princes, that rebel
against his Spouse and kingdom in earth, like a potters po^shard: and has
right in his Church over all kingdoms, to plant and pluck up, to buyld and
destroy, before whom al kings shall fall down, and all Nations do him service.


Theo. That the Son of God will bruise the pride of those Princes with an Iron
rod which rebel against his Spouse and kingdom in earth, The supereminent
power of Christ's priesthood is nothing to the Pope.
like a potters shard, and that he has right both within (and without) his
Church over all kingdoms, to plant and pluck up, to buyld and destroy, before
whom all kings on earth (and Angels in heaven) shall fall down, and do him
service: these things are undoubted with us, and brought in by you but only
for a windlace to make the reader cast his eyes on Christ and his kingdom,
while you closely convey the Princes Scepter under the Popes feet. Accursed
be he that does not confess the supereminent power which the Son of God
has over all kingdoms, over all creatures, over the States and lives, bodies
and souls of all men. Will you thence infer the Pope has the like? In sooth
masters you must make hard shift before these reasons will be good.


Phi. Christ's Priestly prerogative, passing his own regal dignity (much more
excelling all other humane power of the world) in most ample and exact terms
is communicated to the chief Priest and Pastor of our souls, The defense,
cap. 5.

Mat. 18.


and secondarily to the rest of the governors of the Church; in other manner
of clauses than any earthly Princes can show for their pretensed spiritual
regiment. Fie on that secular pride and wilful blind heresy, so repugning
against Gods express ordinance; and yet is of wicked Sect-masters and
flatterers vpholden to the eternal calamity of themselves, and of millions of
others.


Theo. This is stale Rhetorike to come with an outcrie, when you should make
your conclusion. Conclude first and rail after: otherwise you show your
selves to trust more to the slippernes of your tongues than to the soundnes of
your cause.


Phi. Our illation is evident. Christ as a Priest bruseth the pride of Princes
with his Iron rod, and has right over all kingdoms to plant and pluck
up, buyld and destroy. But Christ's Priestly prerogative in most ample and
exact terms is communicated to the chief Priest and Pastor of our souls. The
chief Pastor therefore has the like right over all kingdoms to plant, pluck
up, buyld, and destroy.


Theo. The power which you mention in your first proposition, is attributed to
Christ not as a Priest, but as a king. The words of the Psalm are very plain
to that end. Psalm. 2.
I have set my king upon my holy hill of Sion. Ask of me and I will give thee
the heathen for thine inheritance, and the ends of the earth for a possession
to thee. Thou shall crush them with a scepter of Iron, and break them in
pieces like a potters vessel. S. John applies the same place to the royal and
not to the Priestly power of Christ. Revel. 19.
I saw the heaven open, and behold a white horse, and he that sat upon him
was called faithful and true, and he judges and fights in righteousness. On
his head were many Crowns, and out of his mouth went a sharp sword, that with
it he should smite the heathen, and he shall rule them with a rod of Iron.
Christ bruseth his enemies as a king and not as a Priest.
And he has on his garment and on his thigh a name written, the King of Kings
and Lord of Lords. How think you? His horse, his Crown, his robe, his
train, his sword, his style described in this place, express they his
Priestly or Princely prerogative? As a Priest he sacrificed himself on the
cross* and had his own blood shed, for the remission of sins: As a King,
he subdueth his enemies and makes them like dust under his feet, be they
Princes or others. Your Mayor is therefore false, that to bruise kings with an
Iron rod, and to break them in pieces like a potters shard is a privilege of
Christ's Priesthood and not of his Princehoode.

Your Minor, that Christ's Priestly prerogative is communicated in most ample
and exact terms to the chief Priest and Pastor of the Church, has far
less truth in it than your Mayor. For all the prerogative of Christ's
Priesthood is not communicated to any other. Hebr. 7.
Such an high Priest, says S. Paul, it became us to have, which should be,
holy, undefiled separated from sinners, made higher than the heavens: Hebr. 9.
who in the end of the world appeared once to put away sin by the offering up
of himself, and after that Hebr. 10.
one sacrifice for sin is set down for ever at the right hand of God, having
Hebr. 9.
obtained eternal redemption (for us) and being Hebr. 7.

All Christ's dignity may not be imparted to the Pope.


able perfectly to save them that come to God by him, seeing he ever lives to
make intercession for them. These and many such prerogatives of his Priesthood
I hope you will not empart to the Pope, lest we cry, fie on your blasphemous
hearts and mouths, which set the man of sin equal with the son of God. If
you restrain your Minor by confessing that not all, but some of the
prerogatives of Christ's Priesthood are communicated to others; then your
conclusion has no force, both your premises being mere particulars. For
though Christ gave some part of his power and honor to his Apostles; yet this
he gave not, and therefore his gift to them can do you no good, unless you
prove that he gave them this prerogative amongst the rest which he bestowed
on them.


Phi. Mat. 16.
He said to Peter and his successors; Whatsoever thou bindest on earth shall
be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou losest in earth shall be loosed in
heaven: Can you require a more ample grant?


Theo. Peter and the rest were to bind and lose the sins and souls of men by
the word and sacraments, not the Scepters and swords of Princes. And so Christ
himself expounds his grant unto them. John. 20.
Whose sins soever you remit, they are remitted unto them: and whose sins
soever ye retain, they are retained. And in this place you leave out the
first part of the grant which should direct the whole. Mat. 16.
I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, not of the kingdoms on
earth. Bernard though he were but of late years, yet was he not afraid to tell
Pope Eugenius: De considerat. ad Eugen. lib. 2.
ergo in criminibus, non in possessionibus potestas vestra, quoniam propter
illa and non propter has accepistis claues regni caelorum. Your power
concerns sins and not possessions, because ye received the keys of the
kingdom of heaven for those things, and not for these. And so Theophilact,
Theophilact. in 16. cap. Matthew.
Understand the keys which bind and lose, to be the pardoning, or punishing
of sins.

Ambros. de poenite^t. li. 1. ca. 2. August. de doctrina christiana lib. 1.
cap. 18.
And so S. Ambrose: The right of the holy Ghost consists in bynding and losing
of sins. As also Saint Augustine, The keys (Christ) gave to his Church, that
what she loosed in earth, should be loosed in heaven: and what she did bind in
earth, should be bound in heaven: to wit, that whosoever would not believe
his sins might be forgiven in the Church, should not have them forgiven: and
whosoever would believe it and depart from his sins, by amending his life in
the bosom of the same Church, should by that faith and conversion be healed.
And never writer since Christ's time did ever extend the power of the keys unto
any thing, save unto the forgiving and retayning of sins.


Phi. No more do we: this only we add, that when Princes are bound in
earth for their sins, they loose that interest which they had in their
kingdoms.


Theo. That position you undertook to prove by the holy Scriptures, but as yet
you be wide: you still suppose it, and do not prove it.


Phi. The defense. cap. 5.

John. 21. Mat. 16.


Now (in the new Testament) all Christ's sheep, without exception, be they
Princes, be they poor, (if they be Christian men) are put to Peter's feeding
and government. Now the keys of heaven be delivered to Christ's Vicar in
earth; to let in, to lock out; to bind, to loose; to punish, to pardon. Now we
be commanded every one, (be we kings, Hebr. 13. 1. Cor. 4.5. 2. John.
be we Caesar's) to obey our Prelates and Pastors, and to be subject to them, as
to those that must make account to God for our souls: wherein what Christian
Prince may except himself?


Theo. You role from text to text abusing the words and perverting the sense
as you go; and when all is said you be even as near as you were at first
before you began. For what if al these places do concern Princes, as well as
others: will you thence infer, that princes may be deposed? Then these must be
your arguments. Out of these places none other arguments can be made than
these.
Princes must be taught, ergo Princes may be deposed. Prie^tes may exclude
them from the kingdom of heaven: ergo likewise from their kingdoms on earth.
Princes must obey sound doctrine coming from their Pastors mouths; ergo if
they refuse, they may be deposed, Surely such reasons set not them besides
their seats, but you rather besides your wits; for what appearance of truth
have these ridiculous and impious mockeries? Feed my sheep, John. 21.
that is, depose Princes. I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven,
that is, I will give thee the thrones of earthly kings. Mat. 16.
Be advised by your leaders, and yield (to their good persuasions,) for they
watch over your souls: Heb. 13,
that is, obey the Pope when he thrusts you from your goods, lands and
lives. Had you but one dram of shame or sense in you, you would never send
us such sottish and unsavory sequeles.


Phi. They be of your framing, we sent them not.


Theo. We annexe the conclusion, which you must, and would infer to the places
which you allege: and in so doing we can not abuse you. Out of the 21. of S.
John what would you cite but this charge to Peter, feed my sheep? In the 16.
of S. Matthew; what find you there but the promise of our Savior, I will give
thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: whatsoever thou bindest (or losest) in
earth, shall be bound (and losed) in heaven? All the words which the 13. to the
Hebrews has for your purpose, are (...) y^ is be persuaded (by their words)
and give place to their admonitions, which watch over your souls. Now what
your conclusion is and must be, neither can any man doubt, nor do your selves
dissemble. For the fifth chapter of your immodest and untrue defense of English
Catholics as you call them, proposes and purposely handles the deprivation
of Princes for heresy, and falling from the faith. So that help the matter
how you can with your glozes and phrases: these be your antecede^ts, and this
is your consequent.


Phi. Well, if Peter must feed Princes, why may not Peter depose Princes?
Pastors may feed, but not deprive.



Theo. Taking their Crowns from them, is not preaching the Gospel unto them,
which Christ meant by feeding.


Phi. But Peter may correct them as well as feed them, and deprivation is but
correction.


Theo. Any Pastor may reprove them, and if they withstand the truth, that
binds them in earth and shuts heaven against them. But other correction on
the goods, lands or bodies of private men preachers may not exercise, much
less intermeddle with the Seats and Scepters of Princes.


Phi. Be we kings, be we Caesar's, we are commanded to obey our Prelates and
Pastors, and to be subject to them.


Theo. Princes, and all other christians must be reverent and obedient to the
word and Sacraments which God has put in the mouths, and hands of his
messengers: other subjection to Prelates, or Pastors is none due.


Phi. And if they refuse to be subject to the word or Sacraments, shall not
Pastors punish them, though they be Princes? Pastors may threaten, but God must
punish Princes.



Theo. Let them sink in their sins, and leave them to God; that is
punishment enough.


Phi. Shall they go no farther?


Theo. External, or corporal means by loss of life, lands, or goods, God
has not allowed any Pastor to compel, or punish his sheep withal.


Phi. Then may Princes freely despise both the word and the Preacher.


Theo. If you call that freedom, Heb. 10.
to fall into the hands of the living God, which S. Paul says is a fearful
thing. Mat. 16.
Whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when you depart out of
that house, or that city, shake off the dust of your feet. Truly I say unto
you it shall be easier for them of the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day
of judgment, God is the revenger of such as contemn his word.
than for that city. Is not this revenge sufficient for Princes that turn
from the truth, unless you also must be fingering of their crowns, and
treadding on their necks?


Phi. That would terrify them more, than the threatening of helfire.


Theo. It may be that contenteth your appetites better, but God has reserved
the punishment of Princes to himself, and not assigned it over unto you.
Howbeit why do you wander thus from the question? You should prove by the
word of God that Princes may be deposed. Why then do you linger and make so
many profers before you come to your purpose?


Phi. Will you have a plain proof out of the new Testament that Princes may
be deposed? The defense, cap. 5.

Ad Tit. 3.





Theo. That is it we looked for all this while.


Phi. Pastors have full authority to forbid us the company of heretics,
blasphemers and idolaters, and such like: and not so much as to salute them,
much more not to obey them.


Theo. Is this your best discretion? We must not be companions with idolaters,
No company with heretics and idolaters.
ergo we must not be subjects to Princes?


Phi. If they be convicted of heresy or idolatry.


Theo. Put you no difference betwixt familiars and subjects.


Phi. If we may not be familiar with them, much less subject under them.


Theo. Are you not low drawn, when you come with such dregs?


Phi. Jest not at it, but answer it.


Theo. Be earnest in any case. It is a very profound and substantial reason.


Phi. Substantial or superficial it skilleth not: refel it, or receive it.


Theo. Mark the strength of your argument. Needless company with idolatrous
and wicked persons is prohibited: ergo the necessary subjection to Princes
which God commands, Company not duty prohibited by S. Paul.
may be refused.


Phi. We say not needelesse company, but all company.


Theo. S. Paul by that word excludes not charity, much less duty: but
barreth only that familiarity, which may be relinquished without breach of
either.


Phi. That is your paraphrase, not S. Paul's.


Theo. Weigh the words of S. Paul better, and your self will be of the same
mind with me.

Thus he says, I wrote unto you by letters, that ye should not keep company
with fornicatours: and (I meant) not simply with the fornicatours of this
world, or with the covetous, or with extorsioners, or with idolatours; for
then must you go out of the world. 1. Cor. 5.
But now have I written to you that you should not be companions (with such.)
If any man that is called a brother be a Whoore-master, or covetous, or an
idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extorter: eat not with such an
one. To eat with a man, is familiarity: that may be forborne without contempt
of Christian Charity, or duty: and that the Apostle wills them to refrain,
teaching the Thessalonians to what end, and in what sort he would have it
done: If any man obey not our sayings, 2. These. 3.
note him by a letter, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed:
yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother. When as yet
there were no Christian magistates to keep men by fear from offending, S.
Paul charge the Christians to show their zeal in shunning the company of
unruly persons at meat, and other familiar meetinges; thereby the rather to
make them ashamed, and to reduce them to Christian and comely behavior. Which
precept was general for all disorders. We command you, brethren, in the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2. These. 3.
that you withdraw your selves from every brother that walks inordinately,
and not after the institution which you received of us.


Phi. For smaller offenses this might be, Tit. 3.
but for heresy S. Paul says, A man that is an hertike after the first and
second admonition avoid. And so does S. John. 2. John. 10.
If any man come to you and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your
house, nor say God save you, unto him. If we may not so much as salute them,
do you think we may serve them, or obey them?


Theo Were you in debt to an heretic, Each man must have his due, whether he be
Turk, heretic or Infidel.
would you not pay him his own, because you must not salute him?


Phi. Debt is dew whether he be Turk, Infidel, or heretic; and therefore
reason he have his own, but I must not do that which I need not.


Theo. And whether think you the truer debt that which grows by our act and
consent, or that which is imposed upon us by the will and commandment of
God? As when S. Paul says, Romans 13.
Owe nothing to any man: but give to all men their due: Do you not think this
as good debt as if it were in coin?


Phi. If it be their due.


Theo. We owe it not if it be not due: but if it be, must we not render that
which is due to all men, be they Turks, infidels and heretics?


Phi. To heretics nothing is due. Servants by gods law may not forsake their
masters for heresy.

Cod. lib. 1. tit. 5. de haeret. Man. in fin.





Theo. Does not the servant owe faithful diligence to his master,
notwithstanding his master be an infidel or an heretik?


Phi. If the master become an heretik, the servant is ipso facto made free.


Theo. By whose law? Gods or man's?


Phi. By the civil laws of ancient Emperors.


Theo. But before those laws were made by Princes, might servants by Gods law
refuse their masters for idolatry or heresy?


Phi. For idolatry he might not, whatsoever for heresy.


The. If God will have christian servants Colos. 3.
obedient and subject to their masters in all things and Tit. 2.
to please the^ though they be infidels and enemies to the faith; The wife may
not forsake her husband for idolatry or heresy.
why not likewise to them that are deceived in some points of faith?

The like we ask of man and wife. Might the husband forsake his wife, or the
woman her husband for these causes?


Phi. For infidelity they might.


Theo. And what for heresy?


Ph. The case is not ruled.


Theo. Yeas that it is. Our Savior forbids all men to put away their wives
except it be for Mat. 5. and 19.
adultery. Now adultery is not heresy. And this was Pope Caelestinus his
error which Innocentius the 3. Decretal. lib. 4. de diuortiis quanto.
condemns. Therefore the case is ruled both by Gods Law, and by your own
Decretals.


Phi. They may not be divorced.


Theo. Then must she continue still his wife, and is by Gods law bound to 1.
Peter 3. Tit. 2. Ephesians. 5.
be subject unto him, and to love him, though he be an heretic, or an
infidel. And so are the children bound to Mark* 7.
cherish Ephesians. 6.
honor and Colos. 3.
obey their Parents by the Law of God, notwithstanding they be Ethnikes, or
aliens from the faith* And therefore these prohibitions: 1. Cor. 5.
Eat not with them, 2. These. 3.
keep them not company, 2. John. 10.
salute them not, discharge not servants, children, nor wives for yielding that
duty to their masters, parents and husbands which God has commanded, but
cut off only that familiar and friendly greeting, saluting and conuersing,
which amongst brethren is requisite, but to wicked and ungodly persons may
without sin be denied.


Phi. What then is your answer?


Theo. What S. Paul and S. John prohibit.
S. Paul forbids voluntary company, not necessary duty: S. John those
familar and friendly salutations which argue good liking and favor to the
parties, and may be forborne, not that public subjection to Magistrates which
God has enjoined us, whether we will or no.


Phi. Ought we to flatter Princes, if they be heretik^?


Theo. We may flatter no man in that which is evil, yet must we give evil me^
that which God has allowed them. The places which you bring, bar no kind of
duty prescribed by the law of God, neither of servants to their masters nor
of children to their parents, Least of all may the subject forsake his Prince,
though he be an idolater or an heretic. Romans 13.
nor of wives to their husbands, though their masters, parents, and husbands
be heretics: much less do they prohibit submission to Princes, which God
exacteth before these domestical duties; and commands all men, Apostles and
Bishops not excepted, to give fear, honor, subjection and tribute, to
Princes, as their due; when Princes as yet were pernicious idolaters, and
barbarous persecutors of the faith and faithful.

And who that has any regard of truth will prefer your crooked and
shapelesse conseque^ts before the manifest doctrine of Christ and his Apostles?
Mat. 22.
Give to Caesar the things that be Caesar's. Romans 13.
You must be subject: whosoever resists power, resists the ordinance of
God. 1. Pet. 2.
Honor the king and submit your selves, whether it be to the king as (the
chief and) excelling, or unto the Governors as sent by him. For so is the will
of God. These be flat and plain precepts which you can not overthrow, but with
an evident, direct, and special release. The directions which the Apostles
gave to shame the disordered and shun the wicked, The flat and firm precepts
of the Scripture must not be overthrown by general and indirect collections.
when as yet there were no Christian Magistrates, to repress them or punish
them, may not rashly be stretched to the Magistrates person or function,
neither must you so force general and indirect speeches of the Scripture, that
they shall euert the special and express commandments of God. But God has
expressly prescribed subjection and tribute to vicious, tyrannous, and
Idolatrous Princes: for such they were of whom Christ and his Apostles spoke,
as no man can deny: Therefore no consequent of Scripture may be wrested
against it, least you make the will of God changeable or repugnant to it self,
which is heinous impiety to persuade, or believe.


Phi. To tyrants and idolaters we must he subject, Subjection is due as well to
heretical, as to idolatrous and tyrannical Princes. Romans 13.


but not to heretics although they be Princes.


Theo. Confessing the former which you can not chose but admit, by what means
avoid you the later? Heretics may be Princes as well as idolaters; and to
Princes in respect of their power not of their virtues God will have us
subject. S. Paul does not say Let every soul be subject to christian and
virtuous powers; but, unto supreme powers, even when they were worshippers of
devils, and spillers of christian blood. Let us therefore hear what ground you
have out of Gods law why this precept, you must be subject, shall hold in
blasphemous and Idoolatrous Princes, but not in heretical or excommunicate
persons.


Phi. I told you before, S. John says: 2 John 10.
If any man bring not this doctrine, salute him not.


Theo. Did those Tyrants and idolaters that were Prnces whiles S. John lived,
bring the doctrine of Christ with them?


Phi. No: but this is meant of heretics.


Theo. It was spoken of all as well impugners, as betraiers of the faith: and
why then do you restrain it to heretics?


Phi. Christians might eat with Infidels but not with heretics. 1. Cor. 10.
ver. 27 With what sort of Infidels Christians might be conversant. 2. Cor. 6.



Theo. They might, with those that were ignorant of the faith with purpose no
win them, but not with those that impugned the faith; for that could have
none other intent but fear or flattery. And with such S. Paul forbids the
christians all concord, communion and fellowship. Draw not the yoke with
infidels. For what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? what
communion has light with darkness? what concord has Christ with Belial? or
what part has the believer with the infidel? Wherefore come out from among
them and separate your selves says the Lord. Separate your selves from them,
is as much as salute them not, or eat not with them: and yet were Christians
bound to obey such with all submission if they were Magistrates. Again, they
might not eat with adulterers, raylers, drunkards, extorsioners nor with any
covetous persons: might they therefore disobey the magistrate that was spotted
with any of these or the like vices?


Phi. Not, except he were excommunicated for those vices.


Theo. Then neither Apostasy nor heresy deprive Princes of their authority,
but excommunication only, which you may inflict as well for any disorder, as
for heresy.


Phi. What fault find you with that? The Pope respects excommunication,
because he would excommunicate whom he list.



Theo. You make excommunication but a limetwigge to entangle the persons, and
indaunger the states of Princes by maintaining rebellion against them under the
name of religion, when they will not be ruled as you would have them, or not
suffer their Realms to ly open to the pray and pride of the Bishop of Rome.
For then he must take upon him to be the whole church which he is not, and
excommunicate them whom he should not: and after that excommunication
denounced, you teach the people to refuse subjection, and to bear arms
against their lawful Magistrates, upon this pretense that you have deposed
them, and disinherited them of their kingdoms: which is a wicked and false
presumption of yours resistant to the laws of God and man.

The peril of excommunication by Gods law is not depositio^. Mat. 18. Barthol.
sumus in verbo, excommunicat. numero 45 and Margarita decret. in eodem verbo:
V^ile, lex, humile ^es ignorata, necesse; haec anathem^ quidem faciunt, ne
possit obesse.
For grant he might excommunicate them, which yet is not proved: the uttermost
peril of excommunication before men, is that which our Savior expresses in
Saint Matthewes Gospel. If he neglect to hear the church, let him be to thee
as an Ethnike and a Publicane. But Ethnikes by your confession may not be
deprived of their kingdoms, ergo neither persons excommunicate. Again your
own law grants that excommunication discharges neither servants,
children nor wives from the duty which they owe to the father of the family:
and shall it set free subjects from a stronger and higher bond of duty,
which God has more straightly prescribed, and enjoined them to the father of
their Country? What wilful and obstinate blindness is this in you, that
where excommunication is a mere spiritual punishment, and reaches no farther
by Gods Law, than to take from offenders the remission of their sins, by
wanting the word and Sacraments until they repent; you to gratify the
founder of your Rhemish and Romish hospitales, stretch it unto the states,
Crowns, lymmes, and lives of Princes, and derive thence not only the
deposing, but also the murdering of Christian kings and Queens, and that by
their own subjects, if he say the word? And this you assaie to persuade by
corrupting, and maintaining the Scriptures, bolstering the conspiracies, and
impieties of your holy father against Princes, with an unshamefast profaning,
and adulterating of the word of truth: which is not the least of your
irreligious attemptes. Resist your places, and show us but one half word out
of the holy Scripture that Princes may be iudicially deposed by Priests, or
that you have authority from Christ to punish such as you excommunicate with
external, and temporal pains and losses, which is it that you now would feign
infer: and for the rest, though we need not you shall have our assents.


Phi. The defense, cap. 5.
Least any man should think this power to be so merely spiritual, that it
might not in any wise be extended to temporal or corporal damage or
chastisement of the faithful in their goods, lives, possessions, or bodies,
being mere secular things, and therefore not subject to their Pastors
spiritual or Priestly function: it is to be marked in the holy Apostles first
execution of their commissions and authority, Spiritual P^stors have power to
punish corporally.
that though their spiritual power immediately and directly concerns not our
temporal affairs; yet indirectly (and as by accident) it does not only
concern our souls but our bodies and goods, so far as is requisite to our
souls health, and expedient for the good regiment thereof, and the churches
vtility being subject to their spiritual Governors.


Theo. It is to be marked that if you may be suffered, you will soon challenge
not only spiritual things as your peculiar, Pastou^s have no power over the
goods or bodies of christians.
but even the goods, lives, possessions and bodies of the faithful, and as
well of Princes as others to be subject to your tribunals, if not directly yet
indirectly, that is, if not by one means, yet by an other: so far as you think
it expedient for the regiment and health of the soul, and vtility of the
church: and that shall be far enough I dare undertake; If you affirm this upon
your own credit, we little esteem it; your opinion is common, but not current
with us: If you mean to prove it, you shall have the longer and stiller
audience.


Phi. S. Peter, being but a mere spiritual officer and Pastor of men's souls;
The defense. Cap. 5. Act. 13. 1. Cor. 4. 1. Cor 5. 1. Tim. 1. 2. Cor. 10.
yet for sacrilege and simulation, stroke dead both man and wife. S. Paul
stroke blind Elymas the Magician. So did he threaten to come to his contemners,
in rod of discipline. So did be excommunicate a Principal person in Corinth,
for incest: not only by spiritual punishment, but also by bodily vexation,
giving him up to Satan's chastisement. As he corporally also corrected and
molested with an evil spirit Himeneus and Alexander for blasphemy and
heresy. Finally he boldly avouches, that his power in God is to revenge al
disobedience, and to bring under all lofty hearts to the loialtie of christ,
and of the Apostles and Saints in this life. 1. Cor. 6.
Nescitis (quoth he) quoniam Angelos iudicabimus, quanto magis secularia? know
you not that we shall judge Angels, how much more secular matters?


Theo. Such dissolute mariners were never like but to make such desperate
adventures. They should prove that Priests may iudicially torment the bodies
of the wicked, and they prove that God did miraculouslie revenge impiety.
You should prove that spiritual Pastors have power to sease the goods and
possessions, and chastise the bodies of such as they excommunicate: and you
show where God afflicted those for their sins, which the Apostles cast out
of the Church either with evil spirits. or some corporal plague, or death,
as he saw cause; which is not pertinent to your purpose. Can you not
distinguish the finger of God, from the factes of men? Or see you no difference
between miraculous vengeance from heaven, and judicial process on earth? God
struck Ananias dead for tempting him in Peter, and Elymas for resisting him in
Paul. May Preachers therefore put out men's eyes, and murder such as believe
them not? In deed you practice this new kind of preaching, but not by warrant
from Christ or his Apostles.


Philand. Did not Peter kill Ananias and Sapphira with his word? Peter slew
Ananias not with his hands but with his mouth, which was the work^ of God.



Theo. And since you can not do the like with your words, you will take help
of your hands.


Phi. With words or hands, so they be slain, all is one.


Theo. Not so. The one is a miracle wrought by God: the other is a murder
committed by man, which God prohibiteth; and of all other things ought to be
farthest from the Preachers of peace.


Phi. Peter did so.


Theo. Peter reproved them, for tempting the holy Ghost: but the hand of God,
and not of Peter, inflicted the punishment. Read the place: Then said Peter:
Act. 5.
Ananias, why has Satan filled thine heart that thou should he unto the
holy Ghost? Thou have not lied unto men, but unto God. Now when Ananias
heard these words (says the Scr^pture) he fell down and gave up the
Ghost. I ask not, what fa^t of Peter's you find that should hasten the death
of Ananias: but what one word purporting any such thing can you show us in
all that Peter said to Ananias?


Phi. In his words to Sapphira we can. For he said to her: Act. 5.
The feet of them that have buried thine husband, are at the door and shall
carry thee out.


Theo. Did Peter by these words kill her, or foretell her that God would do to
her as he had done to her husband?


Phi. Which say you?


Theo. Peter, we say, neither desired nor inflicted that judgment on them, but
only signified what God would do.

The like we say for Paul, when Elymas was stricken blind. He warned that
Sorcerer what should befall him from God, but himself did neither envy, nor
injury the Sorcerers eyes. His words were, Will thou not cease to pervert the
straight ways of the Lord? Now therefore behold the hand of the Lord is upon
thee; Act. 13.
and thou shall be blind not seeing the Sun for a time. The hand of the Lord
and not of Paul was upon Elymas.
Paul denounced, Paul imposed not that corporal chastisement on him: The deed
was Gods, who may justly take from his enemies not only their eyes, but their
breathes, and spirits when he will, and in what sort it pleases best his
righteous, and sacred wisdom.


Phi. But Paul himself, The defense, cap. 5.
corporally corrected and molested with an evil spirit Himineus and
Alexander for blasphemy and heresy. So did he excommunicate a Principal
Person in Corinth for incest, not only by spiritual punishment, but also by
bodily vexation giving him up to Satan's chastisement.


Theo. You draw the word of God to your fancies by turning doubts into
certaineties, antecedentes into consequentes, man's actions into Gods
judgments. That the Apostle delivered Himineus and Alexander unto Satan, and
so the incestuous Corinthian (whom you of your own head without any witness
call a Principal Person in Corinth, because the slide you saw was easy from
Principal to Princes) is a matter out of question; but that he corporally
corrected and molested them with evil spirits, these be your additamentes
wherewith you thought to lengthen the text to your own liking.


Phi. S. Paul gave judgment of the Corinthian that he should be delivered
unto Satan, The incestuous Corinthia^ delivered unto Satan. 1. Corin 5. Ambros.
in 1. Cor. cap. 5.
for the destruction of the flesh. And how could the flesh be destroyed without
bodily vexation and affliction?


The. This phrase, for the destruction of the flesh: has diverse expositions:
and therefore upon a doubtful kind of speech you can not build an undoubted
conclusion. S. Ambrose expounds the place thus. The Apostle decreed, that by
the consent and in the presence of all men he should be cast out of the Church.
Cum eijcitur, traditur Satanae in interitum carnis. Et anima enim and corpus
intereunt. His casting him out of the Church, is the delivering of him to Satan
to the destruction of (the whole man which is nothing but) flesh. For both
soul and body perish. And lest you should think it much that the soul is
called flesh, he gives this reason, Ibidem.
Victa anima libidine carnis, fit caro: the soul once overcome by the lusts
of the flesh, becomes flesh: and is in the Scripture so commonly called,
Ibidem.
and the lusts of the flesh delivers the soul defiled with it, and also the
body to hell.


Phi. But S. Paul adds, that the spirit may be saved in the day of our Lord
Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 5.
which can not stand with this exposition, that both flesh and spirit were
delivered unto perdition.


Theo. The same father will tell you that the spirit may be referred not to him
that was excluded, In cap. 5. Epist. ad Cor.
but to the rest that remained in the church, as if S. Paul should have said:
I have decreed to cast this unclean person out from among you to his just
condemnation, that the grace of Gods spirit may be preserved in the rest of you
to the day of judgment. The same Saint Augustine follows. Aug. quaest. vet.
and noui Test. quaest. 49.
What spirit does the Apostle affirm should be preserved, when he says,
I have delivered that man to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, etc. The
destruction of the flesh (meant in this place) is, a man addicted to pleasures
and fleshly delights purchases hell to himself. For by such (sins) the
whole man becomes flesh, in so much that the flesh is here called the soul.
Such a man when the church casts from her, she keeps the spirit safe: to
wit the holy spirit (of God) which is the guider of the church. For if they
suffer any such one to be amongst them, he defiles all, and the holy
spirit departs.


Phi. S. Hierom takes it otherwise. Hieron. in 1. Cor. cap. 5.
To deliver him unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh (says he) vt
arripiendi illum corporaliter habeat potestatem; that the devil may have power
corporally to possess him: and so Saint Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. hom.
15.
For the destruction of the flesh, that the devil may strike him with some
grievous sore or other disease.


Theo. This I told you before, was a doubtful speech, and therefore would
yield you no certain conclusion. For besides Saint Augustine and Saint
Ambrose, Saint Hierom in those books which are assuredly his, uses these
words, To deliver unto Satan to the destruction of the flesh, for a
perpetual consequent to excommunication in all ages, and not for corporal
vexation permitted only to the Apostles. Hieron. ad Heliodorum.
Illi si peccauero licet tradere me Satanae in interitum carnis, vt spiritus
saluus sit. A clergy man (says he) may deliver me to Satan, if I sin, for
the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be safe. And inueighing
against Vigilantius, Idem ad Riparium aduers. Vigilantium.
I marvel, says he, the Bishop under whom he is, does not crush this
unprofitable vessel with the Apostolic rod, even a rod of iron, and
deliver him into the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be safe:
Noting by these words the right force of excommunication which does and shall
endure to the end, and not any corporal punishment or plague, wherewith God
sometimes touched such as would not otherwise be reformed.

A third interpretation of these words you shall find in Saint Augustine,
writing against Parmenian. What did the Apostle, says he, Aug. contra ep*
Parm. li. 3. ca. 2*
but provide for the health of the soul by the destruction of the flesh,
whether it were by some corporal punishment or death, as in Ananias and his
wife, which fell down at Peter's feet: or else that the party by repentance,
because he was given over unto Satan, should kill in himself the wicked
concupiscence of the flesh. This later exposition cutteth off clean your
bodily punishments, and shows the end of Apostolic excommunication to be
this, that the offendour by repentance should destroy the lusts of his flesh,
and not that an evil spirit should corporally correct and molest him, which
you conclude out of these words, with as great confidence, as if it were some
maine principle of faith.


Phi. S. Augustine repeateth both expositions and disliketh neither.


Theo. His accepting of both discharges your illation which is wholly grounded
on the first: But admit that also which Chrysostom seems to follow; what
shall your conclusion be?


Phi. That the Apostles punished the bodies of such as were christians. The
Devil and not the Apostles tormented such as were excommunicated.



Theo. Did they lay violent hands on them or use any external means?


Phi. They needed not: the devil did it at their word.


Theo. And because the devil will not do the like for you, you will supply
the devils room, and intermedle with his office. Are you not wise Divines that
to challenge the correction of other men's bodies, make your selves the Devils
substitutes?


Phi. We make our selves the Apostles substitutes.


Theo. Then deliver them to the Devil as they did, and offer them no farther
violence, nor torment with your own hands, and see what power you have to
chastise the bodies of such as you reject from the church, for so did the
Apostles. Mary if you content not your selves with speaking the word as they
did, but because the Devil fails you, you take help of your hands to
punish the bodies of men, beware least you be now not Paul's associats in
delivering, but Satan's in tormenting the carcasses of offenders.


Phi. The Magistrate is Gods minister to punish the body. Romans 13.
Is every one that punishes the body, Satan's associate?


Theo. They that bear the sword with lawful power from God to repress the
wicked, and if cause require, to kill the body, they be Gods ministers
serving for that intent: but they that without this sword claim to be the
correctors, and punishers of men's bodies by violent means, are the Devils
vicegerentes, and not Gods. For they be murderers, and the right members of
Satan.


Phi. But we appoint the Magistrate to do it.


Theo. Do you appoint Magistrates to lay violent hands on themselves?


Phi. No: but on others.


Theo. And we be disputing of Princes whether they may be defeated of their
crowns and chastised in their bodies upon your excommunications.


Phi. Excommunicate persons may be corporally chastised, whosoever be the
deed doer, and that S. Chrysostoms exposition fully proves. For if it were
lawful then, whiles the Apostles did excommunicate, why not as well after, and
in other ages?


Theo. But if you relent from this that your selves may be the deed doers,
then you miss the mark which you shot at. The Magistrate we know may
corporally punish these and all other offenders, but what is that to your
position, which hold that spiritual Pastors may punish the bodies of the
faithful? And therefore look to your footing least you fail in your leaping:
and back with this leg that a mere spiritual officer may touch the lives,
and take the goods of heretics, and other excommunicate persons. It is a wicked
intrusion of Antichrist, seeking indirectly and, as you call it, by accident,
that is by hook or by crook to bring the world and worldly things in
subjection to his appetite.

The Apostles did nothing but separate sinners from the church and house of
God: When and why God suffered the Devil to afflict offenders.
and because in those days there were no christian Princes with ordinary
power to revenge the disorders committed in and against the church of Christ,
it pleased God that whom the Apostles and their after-commers for a season cast
out of the church as entangled with great and heinous offenses, the Devil
should afflict them unto death, or otherwise with some grievous disease as the
fault deserved, that the rest might fear, and not be bold to sin, because
there was no magistrate to punish them: yea many times God visited the sins
of hypocrites and such as remained in the church in like manner; as Paul
himself testifies to those of Corinth. 1. Cor. 11.
For this cause many amongst you are stricken with infirmities and diseases,
and many are dead. For if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged:
but when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the world. Chrysostom. in 1. Tim. hom. 5.
And Chrysostom alleging this place, Many such things fall out (in the
church) at this day. Because the priest knows them not, that laden with sin
receive the reverend mysteries unworthily, therefore God himself often times
culleth them out, and delivers them to Satan.

And that the Apostles did nothing but cast them out of the church when they
delivered any to Satan, Ibidem.
the same Father will teach you. Mark how (Paul) delivered the man (of
Corinth) to Satan. Eijciebatur nempe a communi fidelium caetu; he was cast out
of the congregation of the faithful, he was cut off from the flock (of
Christ) and left naked, and being so destitute (of Gods help) he lay open to
the Wolf, and subject to every assault. Theodoret. in 1. Cor. cap. 5.
So says Theodorete. By this place, (where Paul delivered the incestuous
Corinthian to Satan) we are taught that the devil inuadeth them which are
severed and cut off from the body of the church, finding them destitute of
Gods grace.

Keep your selves therefore within your limits. Pastors have their charge,
which is as S. Paul notes, to watch over souls, Heb. 13.
they have not to do with the goods or bodies of the faithful. Their goods
are Caesar's, by the plain resolution of our Savior. Give unto Caesar, the
things which are Caesar's. Which God willed Samuel to advertise the people of,
Mat. 22.
when they first demanded a king. 1. King. 8.
Show them the right (or law) of the king that shall reign over them. Ibidem.
And so Samuel did, saying: This shall be the law of your king. He shall take
your sons and appoint them for his charets and to be his horsemen: and shall
make the^ captains over thowsandes and captains over fiftyes, and set them to
ear his grounds and to reap his harvest, and to make his instruments of war
and things to serve for his charets. And he will take your fields, and vines and
best olyues, and give them to his servants. And he will take the tenth of your
corn and wine, and give it to his Princes and seruitors. Only Prince^ are to
command the goods and bodies of their s^biects.
And he will take your men servants and maideseruants, and the choice of your
young me^, and your asses, and use the^ to his work. The tenth of your sheep will
he take, and ye shall be his servants.


Phi. Make you the king Lord of al without exception?


Theo. Though God never meant, that Princes inordinate and private pleasures
should wast and consume the wealth of their Realms, yet may they justly
command the goods and bodies of all their Subjects in time both of war and
peace, for any public necessity or utility. Whereby God declares Princes
and not Pastors to be the right overseers of temporal and earthly matters:
and consequently that the power of the keys extends not to those things
which are committed to the Princes charge, I mean neither to the goods, nor to
the bodies of christian men.

To a king, says Chrysostom, are the bodies of men committed: to the Priest
their souls. Chrysostom. de verbis Esaiae, Vidi Dominum hom. 4.
The king pardons corporal offenses, the Priest remitteth the guiltiness of
sin. The king compels, the Priest exhorts: the one with force, the other
with advise: the kings weapons are sensible, the Pri^stes are Ghostly. The like
distinction between them does S. Hierom make: Hieron. ad Heliodor. in epitap.
Nepotiani.
Rex nolentibus praest, Episcopus volentibus: ille timore subijcit, hic
seruituti donatur: ille corpora custodit ad mortem, hic animas seruat ad vitam.
The king rules men unwilling: the Priest none, save the willing: the king has
his in subjection with terror: the Priest is appointed for the service of his:
the king mastereth their bodies with death, but the Priest preserves their
souls to life. This power of the sword, our Savior precisely prohibited his
Apostles as I have showed: and therefore you may not indirectly nor by accident
challenge it.


Phi. 1. Cor. 6. S. Paul abused by the Iesuit^s to make the Pope judge of
temporal matters.
Why then did Paul say: Know you not that we shall judge the Angels, how
much more secular matters?


Theo. If this be the best hold you have in the new Testament for secular
matters: you must take the pains to light from your horse and go on your
feet as well as your neighbors. For the Apostle speaks that of all
Christians which you restrain to Priests; and moves the parties striving,
rather to make their brethren arbiters of their quarrelles, than to pursue one
an other before Infidels. What grant is this to you in your own right to be
judges over your brethren in all secular affairs, and not only without their
consents to determine their griefs, but also to bereave them of their goods,
and lands, and afflict their bodies: yea to pull the sword out of Princes
hands, and take their Crowns from their heads; when the rulers are believers
as well as the Preachers? Do you not know, says S. Paul, 1. Cor. 6.
that the Saints, and not only Priests, shall judge the world? If the world
then shall be judged by you (speaking to all that were of the church at Corinth)
are ye unworthy to judge the smalest matters? He says not, it was their right
to judge secular matters, but they were worthy to be trusted with them, whom
God would trust with greater: and showing that he spoke this of the people,
and not of the Priests, he says: If then you have any judgments concerning
the things of this life, ^. Cor. 6.
make even the contemptible in the church your judges. He says not God has
made them your judges: but rather tha^ your contending and brabling about
earthly things which you profess to contemn, should be known to Ethniks, and
such as hate and deride both Christ and you, your selves make the meanest of
your brethren (whom you will) your judges. Now join your conclusion: ergo the
Pope has authority to dispose the goods, lands and lives of all the faith^ul,
even of Princes themselves, be they never so just or religious Magistrates; and
see what a non sequitur you conclude out of S. Paul's words.


Phi. The Primative church understood this place of Priests and Bishops: as
appears by Saint Augustine complaining of the tumultuous perplexities of
other men's causes in secular matters: De opere Monachorum ca. 29
to the which troubles, says he, the Apostle has fastened us. 1. Corinthians. 5.
The like he witnesses of S. Co^fes. li. 6. ca 3.
Ambrose at Millan. And S. Gregory reports the same of Praefat. in lib.
Dialogorum.
himself at Rome.


Theo. Truth it is, the Bishops of the Primative church were greatly
troubled with those matters; not as ordinary judges of those causes, but as
arbiters elected by the consent of both parties. And I could requite you with
Gregory's own words of the same matter in the same place: Ibidem.

The Bishops might not refuse to hear and end the griefs of their brethren by
charitable persuasion but not by judicial compulsion, without the Princes
warrant.


Quod certum est nos non debere, which it is certain we ought not to do, but
yet I think, so long as it did not hinder their vocation and function, though
it were troublesome unto them, they might neither in charity, nor in duty
refuse it because it tended to the preserving of peace and love amongst me^.
And the Apostle had licenced all men to choose whom they would in the church
for their judges: no doubt meaning that they which were chosen should take the
pains to hear the cause and make an end of the strife. But it is one thing
to make peace between brethren, as they did, by heaping their griefs with
consent of both sides, and an other thing to claim a judicial interest in
those causes, in spite of men's hearts. Which wrong you should not offer the
least of your brethren: much less may you deprive Princes of their Crowns and
take their Scepters from them, because the Apostle willed the christians to be
tried rather by their brethren, than by their enemies, which were Infidels.


Phi. In all which there is no difference betwixt kings that be faithful,
The defense, Cap. 5.
and other Christian men: who all in that they have submitted themselves and
their Scepters to the sweet yoke of Christ, are subject to discipline and to
their Pastors authority no less than other sheep of his fold.


Theo. In believing the word, receiving the Sacraments, and obeying the Laws
of God, there is no difference between the Ruler and the Subject; but the
temporal states and possessions of private men you may not meddle with, by no
color of ecclesiastical power or discipline: much less may you touch the
bodies, or take the Crowns of Princes into your hands by your accidental and
indirect authority: which is nothing else but a silly shift of yours to
cross the commandments of God. The defense, Cap. 5.

The civil Governor subject to the spiritual amongst christians.





Phi. Though the state, regiment, policy and power temporal, be in it self
always of distinct nature, quality and condition from the government
ecclesiastical, and spiritual common wealth called the church or body
mystical of Christ; and the Magistrate spiritual and civil diverse and
distinct; and sometimes so far that the one has no dependence of the other,
nor subalteration to the other in respect of themselves: (as it is in the
Churches of God residing in heathen kingdoms, and was in the Apostles times
under the Pagan Emperors): yet now where the laws of Christ are received, and
the bodies politic and mystical, the Church and civil state, the M^gistrate
Ecclesiastical and Temporal, concur in their kinds together; (though ever
of distinct regimentes, natures and ends) there is such a concurrence and
subalternation betwixt both, that the inferior of the two (which is the civil
state) must needs (in matters pertaining any way either directly or indirectly
to the honor of God and benefit of the soul) be subject to the spiritual, and
take direction from the same.


Theo. This is tossing of terms, as men do tenez-balles to make pastime with.
The state, regiment, policy and power temporal, is in it self, you say,
always of distinct nature, quality, and condition from the government
ecclesiastical and spiritual Commonwealth, called the Church or body
mystical of Christ. You seek to confound that which you would seem to
distinguish, and when you have spent much breath to no end, you conclude, that
though the church and the Commonwealth be distinct states, as you can not
deny, yet you will rule both: Though the spiritual and temporal be distinct
states, yet the Pope will be sure to rule the^ both.
by reason the Commonwealth, as the inferior of the two, depends on the
Church, and has subalternation to the church as to the superior. But, Sir, in
plain terms: and more truth, to the Son of God ruling in his Church by the
might of his word and spirit, all kingdoms and Princes must be subject,
their swords, Scepters, souls and bodies: mary to the Pope, attyring himself
with the spoils of Christ and his church, no such thing is due.

The watchmen and sheepeheardes that serve Christ in his church, have their
kind of regiment distinct from the temporal power and state: Pastors have
their regiment but over the souls, not over the bodies or goods of men.
but that regiment of theirs is by counsel and persuasion, not by terror or
compulsion, and reaches neither to the goods nor to the bodies of any men;
much less to the crowns and lives of Princes: and therefore your shifting of
words, and shrinking from the Popes Consistory to the Church, the spiritual
Common wealth, the mystical body of Christ, and such like houering and
uncertain speeches, is but a trade that you have gotten to make the Reader
believe we derogate from Christ, and would have Princes superiors to the
word and Sacraments, which Christ has left to gather and govern the church
withal. Howbeit this course is so common with you, that now it does but shame
you.

A christian king must take direction not from the Popes person or pleasure,
but from the Laws and commandments of Christ; How the Prince is subject to
the Priest: and likewise the priest to the Prince.
to whom alone he owes subjection: And as for the Bishops and Pastors of
his Realm, (whom you falsely call the spiritual Commonwealth and the
mystical body of Christ, because they be but parts thereof, and not so
much, except withal they be teachers of truth) those he must and should
consult,, in respect they be Gods messengers sent to him and his people, but
with great care to try them, and free liberty to refuse them, if they be
found not faithful. And when the Prince learning by their instruction what is
acceptable to God in doctrine and discipline, shall receive and publish the
same, the Bishops themselves are bound to obey, and if they will not, the
Magistrate may lawfully see the rigor of his laws executed upon them. On the
other side, if the Prince will not submit himself to the rules and precepts of
Christ, but wilfully maintain heresy and open impiety, the Bishops are
without flattery to reprove and admonish the Prince of the danger that is
imminent from God: and if he persist, they must cease to communicate with him
in divine prayers and mysteries: but still they must serve him, honor him, and
pray for him, teaching the people to do the like, and with meekness enduring
what the wrath of the Prince shall lay on them, without annoying his person,
resisting his power, discharging his subjects, or removing him from his
throne, which is your manner of censuring Princes.


Phi. The civil Governor is SVBIECT to the spiritual amongst christians.


Theo. I have often told you how. The civil Governor must hear, believe,
and obey the meanest servant that God sends, if he speak no more than his
Masters will. That subjection Princes owe to the sender, and not to the
speaker. But were they simply subject to the messengers of God, as they are
not, will you reason thus: Princes should obey the Preachers of God: ergo if
they do not, they may be deposed? This is the argument which we so often
have denied; why then labor you so much about the antecedent, when we deny
the consequent?

That Princes should obey God and his word, The Prince is absolutely subject
unto God: and yet if he refuse his duty to God, he may not be deposed by the
minister.

The defense, cap. 5.

In orat. ad popul* trepidan^e^ and Impera. commo^um.

Nazians similitude to express the subordination of civil and of spiritual
government.


is a clearer case, than that they should obey the Pope. For of that no man
doubts, and this we not only doubt, but deny. Take therefore that which is
confessed on both sides, and set your conclusion to it, that the force of your
reason may the better appear. Princes without all question are bound to obey
God: ergo if they do not their duties to God they may be deposed by Priests.
This is the sequel which we always denied: and this is the point which you
first assumed to prove.


Phi. The condition of these two powers (as S. Gregory Nazianzen most
excellently res^mbleth it) is like unto the distinct state of the same spirit
and body, or flesh in a man: where either of them having their proper and
peculiar operations, ends and obiectes, which in other natures may be severed:
(as in Brutes, where flesh is and not spirit: in Angels, where spirit is but
not flesh:) are yet in man conjoined in person; and nevertheless so distinct
in faculties and operations; that the flesh has her actions peculiar, and the
soul hers; but not without all subalteration or dependaunce. Where we see
evidently, that in case the operations of the body be contrary to the end,
weal and just desires of the soul; the spirit may and must command,
ouerrule and chastise the body: and as superior appoints fasting and other
a^flictions, though with some detriment to the flesh commanding the eyes not
to see, the tongue not to speak; and so forth. So likewise; the power
political, has her Princes, Laws, Tribunalles; and the spiritual her
Prelates, Canons, Councels, judgments (and these when the Princes are Pagans)
wholly separate, but in christian Commonwealths joined, though not confounded;
nor yet the spiritual turned into the temporal, or subject by perverse order
(as it is now in England) to the same; but the civil (which in deed is the
inferior) subordinate, and in some cases subject to the ecclesiastical:
though so long as the temporal State is no hinderaunce to eternal felicity,
and the glory of Christ's kingdom, the other intermedleth not with her
actions; but allows, defends, honors, and in particular Commonwealths
obeys the same.


Theo. For you to fly soaring about with comparisons and applications of your
own making is to small purpose: Similitudes have no force farther than the
Author, that first used them, does direct them and urge them.

Nazianzenes words to the Emperor.
S. Gregory Bishop of Nazianzun having occasion in a Sermon that he made
before the Emperor, to entreat the Prince to pardon a fault committed by the
people, after he had taught the subjects their duty to the Magistrate,
turned his speech to the Prince with these words amongst other: Will you
admit then my free speech? Nazian. oration. 18. ad ciues Nazianzenos graui
timore perculsos, and principem irascent.
The law of Christ has committed (or subjected) you to my power and to my
pulpit: for we rule also, and that which is a more excellent and perfect
regiment. Or should the spirit (in perfection and excellency) give place to
the flesh, and heavenly things to earthly? You will I know take my freedom of
speech in good part. You are a sheep of my fould, and a (lamb or) weanling of
the great sheepheardes. Nazianzene makes not your comparison, that the Priest
has the same power over the prince, which the soul has over the body: It is
your own, it is not his: he calls the things which are committed to the
Preachers charge, spiritual and heavenly: and consequently more excellent and
perfect than the bodily and earthly things which Princes have in their power:
farther he urges not this comparison, and this we confess to be most true.


Phi. Nazian. Ibidem.
But S. Gregory says to the Emperor: The law of Christ has subjected you to
my power, and to my Tribunal.


Theo. I might refuse that translation: the words are, (...), does signify
not only to subject, but also to commit as a pledge to be kept by an other
man: and in that respect I might well defend this to be the right
interpretation of S. Gregory's words, The law of Christ has committed you to
my charge: but because the word has both significations I receive either, and
affirm neither to make for your corporal correcting of Princes. Saint
Gregory does plainly lay forth his own meaning, Ibidem.

The Bishop claims free speeches in Gods behalf to entreat the Prince for
the people.


first by the final intent, for the which he used all this preface, next by
the rest of the words which he adds to expound and express his mind.

His request to the Emperor was (...), to bear with the boldness of his
speech, in making request for his brethren. And to show the Emperor that
herein he did no more than Christ had licenced every Preacher to do,
he brings this reason. The Law of Christ has bound Princes, be they
never so great to hear the Preacher, and to submit themselves to this place,
where I stand: which was the pulpitte and not the Consistory. For (...) in the
Church did precisely signify the place where the Preacher stood when he
taught. And to that end he adds, Ibidem.
(...) You are a sheep of my flock: that is sacred and so are you, and a
weanling of the great sheepheards: and therefore bound to hear my voice, whom
the great shepherd has charged with the feeding of his flock. And so he
proceeds very fatherly and pithily not to command or require, but to
persuade and entreat the Prince to be gracious to his subjects and to imitate
the example of God the greatest and mightiest Prince that is.

These be Christian directions, and lawful means to put Princes in mind of
their duties: which we allow and receive. Your deposing them, and arming their
subjects under a color of your Episcopal authority to rebel against the^,
and to take their scepters from them, was far from Nazianzenes mind and
mouth: you do but abuse his eloquent similitudes to beautify your pestilent
conspiracies: and that you may see by the very words following, where he says
to the Emperor, Nazian. Ibide^.
Thou raignest together with Christ, thou rulest together with him; thy sword
is from him, thou art the image of God: He that confessed the Prince to hold
his sword from Christ and with Christ, never craked as you conceive, that he
had power to take the Princes sword from him: yea rather he acknowledged
himself amongst the rest to be subject to the Prince, though he were a
Bishop. Let us says he submit our selves to God, Ibidem.
to each other, and to the Rulers of the earth. To God in all things, each to
other in brotherly love, to Princes for the conservation of good order. For
this is one of the Laws amongs us (that be Christians) and the same praise
worthy and most excellently ordered by the holy Ghost, that as servant obey
their masters, We; that is as well Pastors as people.
and women their husbands, and the Church Christ, and the Disciples their
Pastors and Teachers, so we should be subject to all superior Powers, not
only for fear of wrath, but also for conscience sake.


Phi. You will not deny but S. Gregory says, We have Orati^. 18. ad ciues
Nazian. The preachers function excels the Princes imperfection.
a greater and perfecter regiment than yours, speaking even to the Prince
himself.


Theo. So Preachers have. They govern the souls of men and dispense the
mysteries of God, where as Princes are set to rule the bodies of their
subjects, and to dispose the things of this life. And therefore if the fruits
and effects of their callings be compared, the Preachers passes the Princes by
many degrees of perfection and excellency: God giving earthly food and peace
by the prince, but heavenly grace and life by the word and sacraments which
we receive from the mouths and hands of his messengers. Mary if you compare
their persons or powers to command and compel by corporal punishments,
Wherein princes excel Preachers.
of which we dispute: Preachers are servants to their brethren, Princes are
Lords over them: Preachers may reprove and threaten, Princes may sease the
goods, and chastise the bodies of such as offend: Preachers may shut the gates
of heaven against non-repentants, Princes may root them from the face of the
earth, and let them feel the just vengeance of their sins in this world.
This is the power of Princes which we say must be directed by Bishops, but
is not subjected to their wills or Tribunals; and though the Preachers charge
concern things which be more perfect and excellent, yet that is no reason
why Bishops should corporally correct or depose Princes, no more than if
Philosophers or schoolemasters should take upon them to do the like, because
they profess to train up others in wisdom and virtue, which far exceed
the feeding or clothing of the body; which seem to be the Princes care.

And yet may you not rashly exclude the Princes function from caring for
religion and virtue: It is evident that God first ordained and authorized the
sword to punish error and vice, The princes and the preachers functions
co^curre in the same things, though in diverse sorts.
and to maintain truth and integrity amongst men: and therefore the Princes
and the Preachers functions by Gods institution should concur even in those
Ghostly and heavenly things, which you would challenge to your selves, the
Preacher declaring, the Prince establishing the word of truth; the Preacher
delivering, the Prince defending the Sacraments of grace; the Preacher
reproouing, the Prince punishing the sins and offenses of all Degrees and
States. Howbeit we must confess the Preachers service in these cases
excels the Princes; for that the word in the Preachers mouth engenders
faith and wins the soul unto God to serve him with a willing mind: whereas
the sword in the Princes hand strikes only a terror into men to refrain the
outward act, but refourmeth not the secrets of the heart.


Phi. The defense, cap. 5.

When the spiritual government is to correct the temporal.


When the temporal power resists God or hinders the proceeding of the
people to salvation; there the spiritual has right to correct the temporal,
and to procure by all means possible, that the terrene kingdom give no
annoyance to the state of the Church.


Theo. What you want in proofs, you make out in words. We have heard you I
know not how often full solemnly affirm that the Spiritual power has right to
correct the temporal, whereby you mean that the Pope may depose the Prince:
but as yet we see you not prove it. Your exquisite and affected utterance
which is the chiefest furniture of your book, and the best support of your
cause, can not turn hard into soft, nor sower into sweet: men must have some
better evidence for the deprivation of Princes before they believe it, than
your meretricious and deintie speech.

Pastoures must procure the welfare of of the church, but by lawful and Godly
means.
Pastors are, you say, to procure by all means possible, that the terrene
kingdom give no annoyance to the state of the Church: you should have added
by all means possible and lawful: for by perjury, rebellion, and slaughter of
Princes, though it be possible, yet is it not lawful to procure the welfare
of Christ's Church. If you receive that addition, and auouche it lawful for
Bishops to depese Princes, you run to the point which we first began
with, absurdly presuming and never proouing the thing which is called in
question.


Phi. The Church excels the terrene state and Domination as far as the
Sun passes the Moon, The Defense, cap. 5.
the soul the body, and heaven the earth. By reason of which excellency and
preeminence above all states and men, without exception of Prince or other, our
Lord proclaims in his Gospel: Mat. 18.
that whosoever obeys not or hears not the Church, must be taken and used
no otherwise than as an heathen.


Theo. You must needs be cunning in counting how many degrees a Priest
excels a Prince. The Pride of Popes preferring themselves before Princes.

Decretal. lib. 1. tit. 33. de maiorirat. and obedie^tia cap. 6. praeterea.


Innocentius the third, twelve hundred years after Christ began this
comparison and proves it out of the Scripture full like a Pope. Thou should
have known, says he to the Emperor, that GOD made two great lights in the
firmament of heaven, the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to
rule the night. Whereby is meant, that GOD made two great lights, that is, two
great dignities which are the Priest and the Prince, for the firmament of
heaven, that is of his universal Church. But that which rules the day to
wit spiritual things is the greater, that which rules carnal things is
the lesser, that we should acknowledge as great difference to be between
Bishops and Princes, as there is between the sun and the moon.

Your gloze sets down and casts by plain Arythmetike how much that
amounts to. Ibidem glossa in ver. Inter Solemn and Lunam.

Passing good Arythmetike is 56. not 47.

The Jesuits rake the very filth of their school me^ and Canonists, and set
a new flourish upon it.


Therefore, says he, since the earth is seven times bigger than the Moon,
and the Sun eight times bigger than the earth, it rests that the Bishop
be forty seven times greater than the Prince. And yet aduising himself
better for that his total sum rose no faster, he shows out of Ptolomie
that the sun contains the bigness of the moon, seven thousand, seven
hundred, forty four times, and so many degrees iumpe is every Bishop above
every Prince. These paringes and offscouringes of your Decretals you have swept
together, and using the name of the Church to make the matter more saleable,
though by the Church you understand as they did, the Bishop of Rome and his
College of Cardinals, you perfume their follies with a few words of your
own, and new proclaim them for some precious wares: but take back the filth
and slime of your unlearned and ill advised Canonistes, we look for grauer
and better authorities than either your, or their flatteries.


Phi. Whosoever obeys not or hears not the Church, must be taken and used
no otherwise than as an heathen.


Theo. I could answer you that this place touches only wrongs and injuries
done by men to their brethren, If thy brother sin against thee, that is, do
thee private wrong.
when as yet there were no Christian Princes. And that in these words our
Savior charged his Disciples not to break the bond of peace and unity with
any brother that offered wrong, until they had first secretly warned them,
then with witnesses, and last of all publicly before the whole multitude of
the faithful where he and they lived: and if after so many lawful warnings
he ceased not to afflict and vex his brother, the party grieved should no
farther be bound to communicate with him in brotherly love and charity, no
more than he was with an Ethnike or a Publicane.

Ambros. in Lucam. lib. 8. cap. 17.
S. Ambrose gives this note upon the words, In te, Against thee; Pulchre
posuit, si peccauerit in te. Non enim aequa conditio in deum hominemque
peccare. The Lord very well added, if he sin against thee: for the same
rule does not serve when he sins against God, that does when he
trespasseth man. Saint Hierom likewise, Hieron. ^n Matthaei 16.
If our brother sin against us, and in any thing do us wrong, we have power
to forgive it, yea we must forgive it: but if a man sin against God, the
matter is out of our hands. Lest therefore in private quarrels and offenses
men should at their listes forsake the communion and fellowship of their
brethren, our Savior will have three admonitions and the last public, after
the which, if that take not place, we shall be excused before God, if we no
longer accept him that did us wrong in the number of our brethren.

August. de verbis Domini, sermo. 16. Let him be to thee as an Ethnicke: that
is, count him no longer to be thy brother.
Let him be to thee as an Ethnike and a Publicane, that is says S. Augustine,
Noli illum deputare iam in numero fratrum tuorum, nec ideo tamen salus eius
negligenda: Do not account him in the number of thy brethren, and yet his
salvation must not be neglected. For the Ethnikes themselves, that is heathen
men and Pagans, we do not reckon to be our brethren, and yet we seek to
save them. By this you may do well to erect a Court where every subject may
sewe his Prince for private injuries, and to make your selves Judges of all
such matters, that if the Prince refuse your order you may take his Crown from
him. Is not this think you good divinity for a Christian Commonwealth?


Phi. If he, that will not hear the Church in private offenses between man
and man, must be taken and used as an heathen, how much more he that will not
hear nor obey the Church in public and heinous sins against God?


Theo. Take the place how you will of private, or public injuries, or sins
against man, Let him be to thee as an Ethnike, makes nothing for the
deposition of Princes.

They were Ethnickes to whom Christ and his Apostles commanded all men to be
subject. John. 19.


or against God, no such thing is consequent as you would seem to infer. If
he hear not the Church, whosoever, whenever, in what cause soever (grant
all this that your antecedent may be the freer from check or chance,) what
will you conclude?


Phi. He must be to us as an heathen.


Theo. And what then? must heathen Princes be deprived of their Crowns and
Scepters? Was not Caesar an heathen when our Savior willed all men to give to
Caesar the things which were Caesar's? Was he not an heathen Magistrate before
whom Christ stood when he said, Thou could have no power over me
unless it were given thee from above? Were they not heathen Princes to whom
Peter and Paul required and charged all Christian Princes to be subject
without all resistance? Did not the Church of Christ, taught by them so to do,
submit her self for the space of three hundred years to heathen Princes and
those terrible and most bloody tyrants.


Phi. We deny not this.


Theo. You can not. If then disobayers of the Church must be used no worse than
heathens and publicanes, ergo they must neither be spoiled of their goods,
nor afflicted in their bodies, nor removed from their seats, if they be
Princes. For these things by Gods Law the Church might not offer to Pagans nor
Publicans.


Phi. This that Christ says, if he hear not the Church, let him be to thee as
an Ethnicke, and a Publicane, is (by the judgment of S. Augustine) more
grievous than if he were slain with the sword, consumed with fire, or torn
with wild beasts.


Theo. And why? because the judgment of God, August. contra aduersar. legis
and Prophet lib. 1. cap. 17.

To be left to the judgment of god is more grievous than any humane torment
can be.

Ibidem.


to the which he is reserved, shall be more heavy to him, than any humane
torments can be. And this makes rather against you, than with you. For if the
neglecter of the Church shall be so grievously punished at Gods hands, why do
you challenge to your selves the corporal correcting and chastising of such as
disobay the Church? And so Saint Augustine expounds himself. It is by and by
added, says he, by our Savior, Amen I say unto you: What you bind on earth
shall be bound in heaven, that we should understand how grievous a punishment
it is to be left unpunished by man, and to be reserved to the judgment of God.


Phi. The Church has decreed that heretics shall not bear rule over
Catholics: and this voice of the Church all men are bound to hear, unless
they will be counted for Pagans and Infidels.


Theo. First the Church can make no such decree: next the Church of Christ
never made any such Decree.


Phi. May not the Church make that Decree? The Church can not decree that
Princes shall be deposed.



Theo. She may not. Her power concerns the souls of men and not their
bodies, and never goes beyond the word and Sacraments. She may not
intermeddle with the temporal states and inheritances of Private men against
their wills, much less with the thrones and swords of Princes.

The Church cannot give leave, that children shall disobay their Parents, nor
servants their Masters, nor weomen their husbands: because God has already
commanded they shall obey: The Church may not break the least of Gods
commandments.
whose precepts the Church is with all reverence to receive, and with all
diligence to observe, and not to frustrate or hinder the least jot of his
heavenly will and Testament: If any particular places, or persons attempt the
contrary, they cease to be the Church of GOD in that they wilfully reject and
change the word of God. S. Augustine says well, August. contra Crescon. lib.
2. cap. 21.

Chrysostom. opere imperfect. in Mat. homil. 49.


Non debet ecclesia se Christo praeponere: The Church may not prefer her
self before Christ. Neither may we believe the (true Churches) them selves
unless they say and do those things that are consonant to the Scriptures. Yea
we must Gal. 1.
accurse the Angels in heaven if they should do otherwise. The whole Church
owes the same duty to all and every the precepts of God that each private
person does. And therefore she may not dissolve nor disappoint the least of
them. Now the Church her self is commanded by the mouth of Christ and his
Apostles to honor and obey Princes. For these precepts be general and touch ye
whole church: Luke 20.
Give to Caesar the things that be Caesar's. Romans 13.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. 1. Peter 2.
Submit your selves to the king as the chiefest. For so is the will of God;
neither Monk, Priest, Prelate, Pope, Evangelist, or Apostle exempted as in the
place where I have already showed. Ergo she has no right to dishonor or
depose Princes, nor to license their subjects to resist them at her will and on
her warrant, which is the ground that you build on.


Phi. The defense, Cap. 5.

Deceitful persuasions of Politikes unto Princes for their ruin


They be but flatterers of Princes that so say: or heretics that so think
that the ministers of Christ's most dear spouse, of his very mystical body,
his kingdom and house on earth (whom at his d^parture hence, he did indowe
with most ample commission, and sent forth with that authority, that his
father before gave unto him) have no power over Princes, to denounce or declare
them to be violators of Gods and the Churches Laws: nor to punish them either
spiritually or temporally: not to excommunicate them, nor to discharge the
people of their oath and obedience toward such, as neither by Gods Law nor
man's, a true Christian may obey.


Theo. If we knew not your accustomed bravery, you might somewhat trouble us
with your insolent vanities: but now we have so good experience of your fierce
looks and faint hearts, that we need not fear your force. Bring somewhat
besides your own conceit that the Pope may depose Princes, and then call us
flatterers and heretics at your pleasure. If not, take heed you prove not
presumpteous and stately rebels against God and man.

I win you be the ministers of Christ's spouse and kingdom, no more than his
Apostles were, The Apostles, whose commission was largest, had no power to
depose princes.
if so much: and your commission is no larger than theirs, if it be so large:
and yet the Apostles themselves had no power to depose Princes, but submitted
their bodies and lives to the powers which God had ordained, and taught (
Christ's most dear spouse and his very body mystical) to do the like, and
she did so, not offering any example of resisting and deposing Princes for a
thousand years, after she first received at her husbands mouth a charge to
honor them and in earthly things to obey them.

Episcopal jurisdiction stands not in the depositio^ of princes.
As for your Episcopal power over Princes, if that be it you seek for, and not
to take their kingdoms from them, I told you before, if they break the Law
of God, you may reprove them; if they hear you not, you may leave them in
their sins and shut heaven against them: if they fall to open heresy or
wilful impiety, you may refuse to communicate with them in prayers and other
divine duties, yea you must rather yield your lives with submission into their
hands, than deliver them the word and sacraments otherwise than God has
appointed: farther than this if you will go to the temporal punishing and
final displacing of them from their thrones ( and to the discharging of the
people from the oath and obedience toward such Princes) which is the right
intent of your Romish censures, as your own words import, though your cause
were never so good, as yours is stark naught, you then turn religion into
rebellion, patience into violence, words into weapons, preaching into
fighting, fidelity into perjury, subjection into sedition, and in steed of
the servants of GOD, which you might be by enduring, you become the Soldiers
of Satan by resisting the powers which GOD has ordained.


Phi. Your threats were somewhat, if the Church had not first deposed them.


Theo. Pull not out your own eyes with your own hands. The Church has no
such Commission from Christ. She can not discharge smaller duties, as of
children to their Parents, and wives to their husbands: much less greater, as
subjection, oath, and loyalty to Princes. Say if you dare that the Precepts
of subjection and submission unto Princes in the sacred Scriptures do not
bind Bishops as well as others. The precepts of God for obedience to Princes
bind Bishops as well as others.
If they do, then mark what mockeries you make of the word of God. Romans 13.
What mockeries the Jesuits must make of the Scriptures before they can depose
Princes by the word of God.
Let every soul (and therefore every Bishop) be subject to the higher
Powers, that you will have to stand until the Bishops depose them, and take
their power from them. Romans 13.
You must be subject, the Bishops you mean as long as they list. For if
they like not their Prince, by your Doctrine they may displace him. 1. Pet. 2.
Submit your selves to the king as excelling (all others:) but you will be
sure to excel him, and when you see your time to make him the meanest amongst
the people. Luke. 20.
Give unto Caesar the things that be Caesar's, but if Caesar anger you, you
take from him goods, Lands, Scepter, sword, life and all. O worthy
interpreters of Gods heavenly will! A few such glozes will help Christ
himself out of his kingdom, such cunning you have to defeat the
commandments of the holy Ghost, and to spoil innocent and Christian Princes
of their Crowns, when you list to displace them.


Phi. They be your foolish additions, and not ours.


Theo. Avoid the textes which we bring without these or the like
constructions, and take the whole cause for your labor. Well you may flourish
with the name of the Church, where I say, the Bishops; and require some
causes before Princes should be deposed, The Jesuits pretend that law,
order and judgment should be observed in the deposing of princes, but the Pope
will be tied no farther than to one of these.
which I refer to the discretion of the deposer: but in effect your answers
must be as I report them. For what if the Pope offer open wrong to Princes of
his own Religion, as he did to Philippe the Fair, King of France, to
Frederike the second Germane Emperor, and to many others? Who shall reuerse
his definitive sentence by your doctrine, but himself, that either for shame
may not, or for pride will not relent from his error?


Phi. Therefore we refer the right of deposing Princes to the Church because
we would be sure to ( have it done by Law, order, and judgment.)


Theo. And that solemn process of Law, order and judgment in your Church,
which you crake of, when all is done, is nothing else but the Popes pleasure:
for he will be tied neither to Council, nor Canon, farther than stands
with his liking; his Decrees be Canons, and a reason of his fact may no man
ask him by your Laws, and therefore Princes have a warm suit to depend on
such Laws, orders, and judgments.

As for the Church of Christ she never took any such thing upon her, neither
did she ever make any Decree that Prelates might depose Princes. She endured as
well heretics and Apostataes, as Pagans and persecutours, many hundred years
to the glorious trial of her faith, and eternal reward of her patience. Only
Gregory the 7. Bishop of Rome more than a thousand years after Christ, in the
height of his pride and fury, gave the first onset to depose his Lord and
master, and others after him were easily led to follow his example: but to
this day never christian king, nor Realm acknowledged or obeyed that power in
the Pope, which yet he does wickedly challenge, as you do wilfully defend.


Phi. The defense, cap. 5.

The examples of disobedient Princes to the Church and of their punishment or
confusion.


It may please the gentle readers to inform their consciences partly by that
is said before, and specially by that which follows. Where they shall find
that straight upon the first conversion of kings to the faith, as the good
and godly have ever obeyed the Church, and submitted themselves to
ecclesiastical censures and discipline: so the evil and obstinate could never
orderly discharge themselves from the same, without evident note of injustice,
tyranny, and irreligiositie; and were either in fine brought to order and
penance, or else to confusion both temporal and eternal.


Theo. He must be very gentle that will inform his conscience with your bare
surmises; other enformations you give none. That which is said before, is to
small purpose, that which follows is to smaller. Never good, nor godly king
obeyed the Popes sentence of deposition, and besides the Pope, never Church,
Council, nor Pastor offered any such wrong to Christian or heathen Princes.

Some late Princes have been weary with the Popes practices, but never any
obayed his sentence of deposition.
What you call orderly discharging of themselves, I know not; the wisest and
worthiest Princes that those days bred, neither dissenting in faith from the
Bishop of Rome, nor then doubting of his Pastoral headship over the Church,
(such was the blindness of their times:) yet openly despised and utterly
resisted, his arrogant censures in depriving Princes: and howsoever by wars,
conspiracies and treasons he tired some of them, (God giving Princes for the
neglect of his truth and number of their sins, into the hands and power of
Antichrist) yet others bridled and kirbed your holy father himself in such sort
that he had small joy of his enterprise.

The Pope in greater danger with God for abusing his keys, than Princes for
resisting his attempts.
Of their eternal confusion, neither you nor I be fit judges: we must leave
that to the son of God: howbeit I see no cause but the Pope is in far more
danger before God for his impious abusing the keys to warrant perjury,
sedition, murder and treason against Magistrates, than any Prince can be for
the necessary defending of his person and Realm, against such violence. The
keys are to be feared if they be rightly used; but if you wrenche them to
serve your rages, you bind your selves, not others, whom your ungodly dealings
can not hurt. Your own Law says, Apud deum and eius ecclesiam neminem
grauare potest iniqua sententia. Cause. 11. quaest. 3. cui est. Ibidem
tem^rarium.
With God and his Church, an unjust sentence can burden no man: and rash
judgment, says S. Augustine, hurts him that judges rashly.


Phi. About 13. hundred years ago Babylas Bishop of Antioch excommunicated
the only Christian King or Emperor that then was (as some count Numerius, as
others Philippe) for executing a Prince, The defense. cap. 5.

Chrysostom. in vitae Babyl.

The example of Bishop Babylas.


that was put to him, for an hostage. Whereupon, as evil Kings sometimes do,
he martyred his Bishop; whom S. Chrysostom and others reckon for the most
famous martyr of that time: because he gave by his constancy and courage is
God, a notable example to all Bishops of their behavior toward their
Princes; and how they ought to use the Ecclesiastical rod of correction
toward them, whatsoever befall to their persons for the same.

After the said Prince had murdered his own Pastor; Nicep. li. 5. c. 25.
then holy Pope Fabian for that he was the general shepherd of Christendom
(or as some think Fabian the successor of Babylas) pursued the said Emperor
by like excommunication, and other means, till at length he brought him to
order and repentance.

Afterward Saint Ambrose Bishop of Millan excommunicated the elder Theodosius
the Emperor; Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 24.

Theod. lib. 5. cap. 17.

Ambros. lib. 5. epist. 28.

Aug. de ciuitate Dei, li. 5. ca. 26.


put him to public penance among the rest of the people; commanded him to put
off his Kingly robes; to leave his Imperial throne in the Chauncel, and to
keep his place among the Laitte: and prescribed him after eight months
penance, to make a temporal Law for prouiso, against the occasions of such
crimes as the said Emperor had committed, and for which he was
excommunicated.

This was an other world than we now are in: Our shameless age.
marvelous courage and zeal in Bishops for Gods cause: much humility and
obedience in Princes. Then was there no flatterer so shameful, nor heretic
on earth so impudent as to make the temporal King above all correction of Gods
Church and their own Pastors: nothing being more common in the histories of
all ages than that Princes have received discipline.

As when Anastasius the Emperor was excommunicated by Symmachus, Lotharius,
and Micheal Emperors, by Nicolas the first, and particular Princes by their
provincial Bishops: Diverse princes excommunicated by their Pastors.
as we see in the records of all Nations. Therefore we will stand only upon
more famous and ancient examples.

Innocentius the first, Niceph. lib. 13. cap. 34.

Georg. Patriar. in vita. chrysos.


excommunicated Archadius the Emperor and his wife Queen Eudoxia, for that
they disobayed and persecuted their Bishop S. Chrysostom. We will report the
judicial sentence briefly, because it is much to the purpose and full of
Majesty.

O Emperor (said Pope Innocentius well near 1200 years ago) the blood of my
brother John Chrysostom cries to God against thee, The sentence of
excommunication given by Innocentius Bishop of Rome against the Emperor.
thou have cast out of his chair the great Doctor of the world; and in him, by
thy wives (that delicate Dalida) persuasion have persecuted Christ. Therefore I
(though a poor sinful soul) to whom the throne of the great Apostle Saint
Peter is committed, do excommunicate thee and her, and do separate you both
from the holy Sacraments: commanding that no Priest, nor Bishop, under pain
of deprivation, after this my sentence come to their knowledge, give or
minister the said Sacraments unto you.


Theo. Fairly shot, but quite besides the mark.


Phi. Why so?


Theo. Excommunication does not infer deposition.

The Jesuits prove that some Princes were excommunicated, when they should
prove they were deposed.

With Idolaters and Infideles we may communicate in earthly, but not in
heavenly things.


Our question is whether Prelates may deprive Princes of their Crowns, and you
prove Bishops may deny them the word and Sacraments, if the cause so require.


Phi. Is not that to the purpose?


Theo. Not a whit. You saw we confessed so much before without urging. What
need you then spend time to prove it?


Phi. If you grant that, the rest will soon follow.


Theo. We did and do grant, that with heretics and Apostataes, be they
princes or private men, no Christian Pastor or people may communicate.


Phi. We desire no more.


Theo. Infer then.


Phi. Ergo no Christian pastor nor people may obey them.


Theo. This consequent has been often framed, and often denied, and now you
begin with a long discourse to prove the antecedent.


Phi. The sequel is sure. If we may not communicate with them, we may not
obey them.


Theo. What else have we done all this while but refell that sequel? We may
not communicate likewise with Idolaters and Infidels. May we therefore not obey
them?


Phi. With Idolaters and Infidels we may not communicate in spiritual and
heavenly things, but in temporal and earthly we may, and for that cause must
obey them if they bear the sword.


Theo. We say the like for Apostataes and heretics. We may not communicate
with them in divine things, but in terrene things we may, and therefore we must
obey them if they bear the sword.


Phi. Heretics be excommunicated, and so be not Infidels.


Theo. Infidels be without the Church of their own accord, and heretics be
put out: Infidels of their own accord be out of the church, heretics be
thrust out.
this is all the difference betwixt them. Again, your own Law says, and true
it is that excommunication does not hinder any private Vt supra page 350.
utility, necessity or duty, how much less does it bar the public
utility, necessity and duty that subjects owe their Souereignes? But these
reasons were even now opposed against you, and you retired from the Scriptures
to the use and practice of of Christ's Church; promising as we took you, to
bring us not the self same weak and lame sequel, which we refuted before,
but some plain and apparent example, where the Church of Christ deposed
Princes from their seats, and discharged the subjects from their allegiance.
This if you do, we be ready to give you the hearing: If you run bragging
and vaunting of an other match, we know your mishap, a rotten tree will never
yield sound timber, you would if you could, and because you do not, we
conclude you can not.


Phi. Yet answer that we bring, and of the sequel we will talk farther anon.


Theo. That I will, what bring you?


Phi. Numerius or Philip, it skilleth not whether, Theodosius, Arcadius,
Anastasius, Lotharius, and Michael, the youngest of them 700 years old, though
they were great and mighty Princes and Emperors, yet were they excommunicated
by Bishops.


Theo. Princes in the primative Church were excommunicated, and yet honored and
obayed, ergo depositio^ is no point of excommunication.

The Princes were heretics and yet obaied and served, ergo heresy then was no
deprivation from their Crowns. The Jesuits examples are flat against the
deprivation of Princes.


Your own conclusion you have suspended till anon, in the mean season hear
ours and that out of your own words. These Princes were excommunicated, as you
say, but they were also served, honored and obayed by all their Christian
subjects, Bishops and others, as we say and you can not deny it: ergo we may
serve, honor and obey Princes notwithstanding they be persons excommunicate;
and consequently, your applying of scriptures that we may not salute them, nor
keep company with them, is a violent deprauing of these textes, and refuted
by the manifest practice of Christ's Church.

And because we be come so far, I will add somewhat touching the rest of
your wise pretenses; Constantius, Valens, Valentinian the younger, Anastasius,
Justinian, Heraclius, Constantine the 4. and others were heretical Princes,
Julian an open Apostata: and yet the Church of Christ endured, served and
obeyed them, not in temporal things only, but in ecclesiastical also, so
far as their Laws did not impugn the faith, or corrupt good manners.


Phi. You infer upon our examples, which we can avoid when we will, but you
answer them not.


Theo. Our illation, which you shall never avoid, proves your examples to
conclude for us, and not against us. You show that Princes were removed from
the Sacraments, which we grant: but that they were removed from their
kingdoms, which we deny, that you show not: and so by your silence you
confess that to be most true, which we affirm, that heretical and
excommunicate Princes must have their due subjection, honor and tribute as
they had before they fell to such impieties, because they be perils to their
souls, not forfeytures of their Crowns: Other answer we need not make you
since this will suffice.

And yet if we would examine your examples by the pole, I could take many of
them tardie. Chrysostom. contrae. gentiles, liber continens vit^ Babylae Martyris.

This report of Babylas can not stand with the Church story.


A book written in Chrysostomes name witnesses that Babylas Bishop of
Antioche excluded a Christian Emperor out of the Church, for murdering a young
Prince committed to him for an hostage: and was martyred by the same tyrant for
his constancy: but this can not stand with the stories of the Church, nor with
your own Author whom you allege for the repentance and submission that you
say this Emperor was after brought to by Fabian the general sheephearde of
Christendom.

Eusebius who wrate an hundredth years before Chrysostom, says, that Babylas
Bishop of Antioche died in prison under Decius an heathen Tyrant. After
Philip succeeded Decius, Eusebius. li. 6. ca. 39.
who for hatred of Philip persecuted the Church: in the which persecution
Fabianus Bishop of Rome was martyred: and Babylas Bishop of Antioche died
in prison after the (constant) confession of his faith. Niceph. lib. 5. cap. 26.

Babylas died in prison under Decius, and not slain by Numerius or Philip.

Chrysostom. contra gentiles.


With him agrees Nicephorus, Babylas sub Decio post confessionem fortiter
obitam in vinculis discessit. Babylas after he had made a stout confession of
his faith dyed in Prison under Decius. If he died under Decius, how could
he be slain by Philippus or Numerius that were before Decius? If he
deceased in Prison, how can your Chrysostom say, that he was carried out of
Prison to his death and slain? Can you reconcile these things and not give
one of your Authors the lie? If that declamation were Chrysostomes, he wrate
it when he came fresh from the Philosophers schools, as both the style and
matter argue, and before he was Bishop, as his own words declare. For
speaking of the place where Babylas was Bishop: he says, Nostri huius gregis
curam gerebat, he was Pastor of this our flock: and Chrysostom was Bishop of
Constantinople, Chrysostom. contra Gentil.
not of Antioche.

Who pursued the said Emperor by like excommunication for killing his Pastor,
since the Pastor was alive after the Emperor was dead, and died in prison
without any violence, neither can you tell, neither need we care. Of Philip,
Nicephorus says no such thing in the place which you quote: he repeateth only
that which Eusebius long before reported in these words: Niceph. lib. cap. 25.

Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 34.

The Prince instructed to ask pardon at gods hands for all his former sins,
and not deprived of his Crown.


Of Philip the fame is, that favoring Christ, and willing the night before
Easter to join with the multitude of Christians in their prayers, he was not
suffered so to do by the Bishop that then was unless he would first
acknowledge his sins, and keep his place with the repentants. Otherwise he
could not be admitted, because his sins were many. And they say that he
gladly hearkened (to the Bishop) and showed his sincere and religious mind to
Godward by his deeds.

The ground of the whole, in him that first wrate it, is but hearesay: the
principal matter, whether the Prince were removed from the communion, or
never before admitted to the Lords table, very doubtful. The thing required
at his hands, was no more but to humble himself in the sight of God, to whom
all Princes must stoop with as great devotion and submission as the poorest
woormes that are on earth. The conclusion may be, that Princes then were
trained to Godliness; but that they were deprived of their kingdoms, is a
wicked and ungodly suggestion of yours. We may with as good reason say, a
Friar many times does shriue the Pope: Ergo a Friar may depose the Pope, which
I think your holy Father will not like of.

S. Ambrose is the only example in all antiquity (justly proved) that a Bishop
did exco^municat a Prince.

Theodoret. li. 5. cap. 17.

Theod. lib. 5. cap. 18.

The manner of S. Ambrose his excommunication.


Saint Ambrose is the only example in all antiquity, which fully proves that
a Bishop did prohibit a Prince to enter the Church and to be partaker of
the Lords table: which we neither deny, nor dispraise, considering the cause
and the manner of the fact. The Prince, for a tumult raised by some of the
inhabitants of Thessalonica, caused his soldiers, without finding or searching
the doers, to murder the people; were they strangers or Citizens, faultlesse
or faulty, to the number of seven thousand. After this execution at his next
coming to the Church, S. Ambrose stepped to the Church door, and said, Thou
seem, O Prince, not to understand what a monsterous slaughter of people is
committed by thee, neither does rage suffer thee to weigh with thy self what
thou have done: yet must thou know that from dust we came, and to dust we shall.
Let not therefore the brightness of thy robes hide from thee the weakness of flesh
that is under them. Thy subjects are of the same metal which thou art, and
serve the same Lord that thou do. With what eyes therefore will thou behold
the house of this common Lord, and with what feet will thou tread on his holy
pauements? Will thou reach these hands dropping yet with the blood of innocents
to receive the most sacred body of the Lord? Will thou put that precious
blood of his to thy mouth, which in a rage have spilt so much Christian blood?
Depart rather, and heap not one sin on an other, neither refuse this bond,
which the Lord of all does ratify in heaven. It is not much, and it will
restoare thee the health of thy soul.

This struck the Christian Prince to the heart, and turning about he went home
with tears: Sozome. lib. 7. cap. 24.

The Jesuits help this story with their admixtions.


and all the time that he was kept out of the Church, as a man in mourning he
would not put on his Imperial robes: but that Ambrose commanded him to put
off his kingly robes, and to leave his Imperial throne in the Chauncel, this
is your venomous admixtion; the story says no such thing. You falsely father
it on S. Ambrose, to make men believe, that the Bishop might as well have
taken the princes scepter and sword from him, as his robes and his throne.


Phi. Did not S. Ambrose send him word that he should go out of the
Chauncell, Theodoret. li. 5. cap. 18.
and stand among the people?


Theo. After his reconciliation, when they approached to the divine mysteries,
the Prince came within the bars which were provided for those that should
help the Bishop to minister the Lords supper, Theod. Ibidem.
as his manner was at Constantinople, to whom the Bishop sent word, being
himself at the Lords table, that those Rayles were prepared for the Priests,
and that it was not lawful for any man else to come within them. And so
Sozomene confesses. Sozome. li. 7. Cap. 24.

S. Ambrose would not that the princes presence should hinder the service of
God.


The Emperors, says he, were wont for an excellency above the people to sit
in the same place where the Priests were. Ambrose seeing this to favor of
flattery assigned the Emperors a place in the Church next to the Chauncel,
before the people, but after the Priests. This order Theodosius and other
Princes that succeeded him, greatly praised, and we see it observed from that
day to this. So that Saint Ambrose neither meant to take their seats from them
within the Church, nor their robes without the Church; but thought it reason
that the Princes precepts should not trouble the Priests in the service of
God. And therefore take flattery and heresy to your selves again, we like
and commend both the piety of the Prince and the gravity of the Bishop: but
your malicious deprauing of the story and mischievous abusing the zeal of S.
Ambrose to warrant rebellions and insurrections against Princes, Princes may be
penitent for their sins, and yet keep their Crowns.
whiles they repent them of their sins, we do not like; the more honorable
his act, that sought to save the Princes soul with the hazard of his own
life, the more detestable is yours, that fish for Princes Crowns under a show
of penance, as if earthly kings might not bewail their sins, and keep their
seals, which you are loath they should.

If Anastasius had been excommunicated by Simachus, it hurts not us, deposed
he was not; Anastasius excommunication is not certainly proved.
by him or any other: and with an heretical Prince, neither Simachus, neither
any other christian Bishop might communicate: yet even the^ was the East Church
subject to a Prince that favored Eutiches heresy, and Italy to a follower of
Arius; and the contention, which of the two should be Bishop of Rome, Liber
Pontifi. in vita Symmach.
Symmachus or Laurentius, was referred to the judgment of king Theodoricus an
Arian heretic: but that Symmachus did excommunicate Anastasius I find it in no
authentike writer. Euagrius says that some condemned Anastasius as an
adversary to the Council of Chalcedon, Euag. lib. 3. cap. 34.
and reckened him out of the number of christian Emperors. Yea they of
Jerusalem accursed (or excommunicated) him.

Niceph. lib. 16. cap. 35. Sabel. Aenead. 8. lib. 2. Platina in Gelasio 1.
Martinus in Anastasio. Ioh. Marius de schismat. and council. cap. 6.
Nicephorus rehearsing the words of Euagrius, adds that they of Jerusalem
excommunicated Anastasius yet living, which was more than Euagrius said.
Sabellicus and Platina your very friends say this Emperor was excommunicated
by Gelasius, the second bishop before Symmachus: Martinus Polonus and Johannes
Marius affirm it was done by Anastasius the next before Symmachus: you say
Symmachus did it: which of these reports is ye truest, can you tell? A witness
is not trusted if he be taken with two tales, we find you in three, and that
touching matters done a thousand years before your time: (the wiser and elder
Historiographers whence you should fetch it, as Regino, Sigibertus,
Vrspergensis, Frisingensis, Marianus, Scotus and others affirming no such
thing; the later and most partial faintly coming in with, Platina in Gelas. 1.
sunt qui scribunt, Sabellicus lib. 2.
vt tradunt quidam, there be that write so: as some say,) shall we believe you?

Your Canon Law, the very heart and life of al your records at Rome, has a
very miraculous letter of the Pope Gelasius to this Anastasius, where Gelasius
tells the Emperor how Zachary Bishop of Rome deposed the king of France
and put Pipine the father of Charles the Emperor in his place, Cause. 15.
quaest. 6. Alius.
and discharged all the Frenchmen from their oath and allegiance: Whereas
Zachary was Bishop of Rome two hundredth and forty years after Gelasius
was dead, and Charles began not his Empire till eight hundredth after Christ,
Gelasius dying within five hundredth. Thus Hilderike king of France was deposed
two hundredth years before he was borne: A strange kind of deposing Princes.
and Gelasius wrate news of Charles three hundredth years after Gelasius was
dead and buried. By such devises you may soon depose Princes, if not by
mutinies, yet at least by prophesies.


Phi. The gloze warns you that some take these to be Gratians, and not
Gelasius words.


Theo. But Gratian himself warned you before that they were Gelasius words to
Anastasius the Emperor: for so he prefixeth the title. Vnde Gelasius Papa
Anastasio Imperatori. Ibidem.
In which sense Pope Gelasius wrate thus to the Emperor Anastasius. Then
follow these words summed in red letters before, as his manner of alleging
is throughout the whole body of your Canon Law. And therefore unless you will
say the collectour of your Decrees and Decretals wrate the title waking, and
the text sleeping; you can not choose but see what mortar has been used at
Rome to plaster your holy fathers rotten right to depose Princes. Michaels
exco^municatio^ witnessed in no ancient writer.


Lotharius and Michael Emperors, you say, were excommunicated by Nicholas the
first. If we should ask you how you prove it, perhaps it would trouble you
more than you think. Late writers in this case we trust not, and ancient we
find none that report any such thing of Michael. Platina in Nicolao 1. Zonaras
in Michaele filio Theophili.
Platina says, that Nicholas the first entertained the Ambassadors of this
Michael with great courtesy and sent them home with presents (to their master.)
Zonaras a Grecian confesses that the legates of the Bishop of Rome in a
Council assembled at Constantinople, deposed Ignatius and confirmed Photius.
And though you have shuffled into your Decretals a flaunting Epistle under the
name of Nicholas the first to this Michael to frustrate the judgment of those
corrupt Legates, and to reprove the Prince for his ouer-lustie letters, Epist.
Nicolai 1. ad Michael. Imperatorem, tomo. council. 2.
yet know you that no good story makes mention of any such strife between
them; and that in the letter it self, notwithstanding it be a perfect image of
your shyfting and forging to make the Popes pride somewhat ancient, yet is
there no word nor sign of excommunication denounced or threatened against
Michael.

Lotharius you grossly mistake; it was not the Emperor, whom Nicholas the
first offered to excommunicate, but a king of Lorraine named Lotharius and
brother to Lodouike the second, Regino in anno 855. and Otho ^rising. lib. 6.
cap. 2.

Regino in anno 866.


that held the Empire both during the life of Nicholas the first, and after his
death. Neither did the Pope excommunicate that king as you auouche; but he
willed the king to beware lest he fell within the compass of that sentence which
was given against his harlot, and lest him self were forced to publish that
his wilfulnes to the Church, and so the King should become as an Ethnike and
Publicane to all Christians. And that the deed was not done you may perceive by
Pope Adrians behavior and speech to Regino in anno 869.

Otho Frisingen. lib. 6. cap. 3.


Lotharius, and the rest, when he ministered the Lords Supper to them at their
coming to Rome: yet the attempt was so strange, that Otho Frisingensis says,
See the kingdom decreasing, and the Church aspiring to that authority, that
she will judge kings.

The famous, and as you say maiesticall excommunication of Arcadius and Eudoxia
by Innocentius, This excommunication is proved to be a mere forgerie before.
well near 1200. years ago, is a ridiculous and peevish corruption devised by
some practiser at Rome, and embraced over greedily by Nicephorus, and other
later Grecians in favor of Chrysostom. Which insolent fancy wide from the
matter we strive for, and full of forgerie, because it is refuted before, I may
well ouerskippe. If it were true, as it is apparently false, it remoueth
Princes from the Sacraments, but not from their Scepters.

Thus of seven examples pretended, that Princes were excommunicated in the
ancient times of the Church, only one is duly proved, and no mo within 860.
years after Christ: and that not by the Bishop of Rome, but by S. Ambrose
Bishop of Millan. Of seven examples but one proved, and that of no Bishop of
Rome.
The rest are either enforced against the stories of the Church, or boldly
presumed by you besides the stories. And yet were they all proved and
confessed, they make nothing for your purpose. The question is not whether
bishops shall receive kings with open and obstinate vices to the Lords table,
but whether they may chase them from their kingdoms or no. We mislike not
repentance in Princes, but resistance in subjects; bind their sins as fast as
you can, but pull them not down from their Seats.

The cause why the Church of Christ did so rarely excommunicate Princes.

August. contra Parmenian. lib. 3. cap. 2.

Excommunications of whole realms then be much more proud, pernicious and
sacrilegious. August. contra epist. Parmen. lib. 3. cap. 2.


And yet least you should think that Princes then had no faults, or that
learned and godly Bishops did in those days forbear to excommunicate Princes
rather for fear or flattery, than for any Religion or duty: mark what care
S. Augustine will have observed, how and when discipline should be used. If
contagion of sin have invaded a multitude, the merciful severity of
correction from God himself is necessary; nam consilia separationis and
inania sunt, and perniciosa, atque sacrilega, quia and impia, and superba
fiunt, and plus perturbant infirmos bonos, quam corrigant animosos malos: For
(then) the attempt to excommunicate is frustrate, and pernicious, yea
sacrilegious: because it becomes both impious and arrogant, and more
troubles the good that be weak, than corrects the evil that be careless.

Neither was this the judgment of S. Augustine alone: but the general
wisdom of Christ's church, as himself professes when he enters into this
question. In hac velut angustia quaestionis non aliquid nouum aut insolitum
dicam, sed quod sanitas obseruat ecclesiae, vt cum quisque fratrum, id est
Christianorum intus in ecclesiae societate constitutorum, in aliquo tali
peccato fuerit deprehensus, vt anathemate dignus habeatur, fiat hoc vbi
periculum schismatis nullum est, atque id cum ea dilectione de qua ipse alibi
praecepit dicens, vt inimicum non eum existimetis, sed corripite vt fratrew.
Non enim estis ad eradicandum, sed ad corrigendum. In the straitnes of this
question I will say nothing that is new or unwonted, but that which the
soundnes of the church observes: The whole Church observed this moderation
which Austen speaks of.
that when any of our brethren, I mean Christians within the Church is
deprehended in any such fault that he deserves excommunication, let that be
done, where there is no danger of any schism: and with such love as the
Apostle commanded saying, Esteem him not as an enemy, but rebuke him as a
brother. For you are not to root up but to amend.

And to this end S. Augustine largely disputes throughout that chapter,
showing that excommunication is not to be used, where a schism is justly
feared. August. Ibidem. lib. 3. cap. 2.
It can not be an healthful reproouing by many, but when he that is reproved
has no number to take his part. But if the same disease has possessed many,
the good have nothing left for them to do but to sorrow and mourn. And
therefore the same Apostle finding many defiled with fornication and
uncleanness, in his second epistle to the same Corinthians, does not command
them not to eat meat with such. He that calls excommunication, a proud,
pernicious and sacrilegious attempt, where any number is linked together, that
a schism may follow, what would he have said to you, that excommunicate
Princes and whole Realms, whence not only dangerous schisms, but also
cruel persecutions easily may, and commonly do arise?

2. Thesalo. 3. The subject neither may nor ca^ fly the Princes company.
Again, the end of excommunication which Saint Paul touches, and the mean
which he prescribes do cease in Princes. If any man obey not our sayings, have
no company with him that he may be ashamed. Now the princes company the
subjects may not fly, both in respect of the necessity, that al men have to
deal with the magistrate, and duty that must be yielded to the Princes
person and precepts. And how should the people make their Prince ashamed, whom
by Gods Law they must honor and obey in all things, and by whom they must
justly be punished if they offer default in any thing? And this the church of
God wisely considering never urged any Subjects to dishonor their Princes,
neither did Saint Ambrose separate Theodosius from the company of men: but
he charged him in Gods name to refrain the church and Sacraments until he
appeased the wrath of God by repentance. He charged not the people to
disgrace or shun their Prince, but he burdened the Princes own conscience,
Theodoret. lib. 5 cap. 18.
knowing full well his religious disposition, and offering his life into the
Princes hands, if he misliked the fact.

Your selves provide for this mischief, but, as your manner is, by wicked and
crafty dissembling, The Jesuits provide for this mischief by wily
dissembling with Princes, till they be strong enough to take their crowns from
them.
not by christian and sober forbearing the thing which you should not
adventure. The Pope who is far enough off and free from al hazardes, he must
first pronounce the sentence, you will stand by and watch your time, when you
may safely without loss of life or goods put his sentence in execution: till
that pinch come, you may swear and stare, you be loving and obedient
Subjects: but then in any case you must show your selves, or else you be
accursed for ever. Toledo teaches you, that if there be danger of life or
goods, you may finely iuggle with excommunicate Princes, and serve the^, and
honor them with all circumstances, till you be strong enough to take their
Crowns from their heads in spite of their hearts, and then you must spare
them Tum demum, obliget Catholicos, quando publica eiusde^ bullae executio
fieri poterit. facultas concessa Roberto Parsonio and Edmundo Campiano, 14.
April. 1480. 8. Tim. 2. Ierem. 19.
no longer: and so much the dispensation which Campion and Parsons obtained of
his holiness, when they came into this Realm, imports.


Phi. Would you that men should communicate with heretical Princes?


Theo. Condemn their errors but pray for their persons: for so the Apostle
wills you. I exhort you therefore, that first of all supplications, prayers
and intercessions be made for kings and for all that are in authority: when
kings were Infidels and Idolaters. So God commanded his people, when they
were carried to Babylon. Seek the prosperity of the city, whether I have
caused you to be carried away captives, and pray to the Lord for it: for in
the peace thereof shall you have peace. Which Tertullian witnesses the
christians did in all their public assemblies. Tertul. in Apologet.

The christians prayed not only for their conversion, but also for their health
and welfare.


We call upon the everlasting God for the health of our Emperors, always
beseeching God to send every of them long life, happy reign, trusty
servants, valiant soldiers, faithful counselors, orderly subjects, and
the world quiet: and what soever people or Prince can wish for. Examine your
selves how far you be from the innocence and integrity of Christ's church.
They wished all happiness to heathen Princes, and prayed for the security of
their lives, and prosperity of their states. You curse and ban christian
Princes, and lay plots not only for enemies to invade them, but for subjects
to shake off the yoke, and shorten the days of their natural and lawful
Princes.


Phi. The church of Christ prayed for her Princes if they were Pagans, The
church prayed for the prosperity of heretical Princes.
but not if they were heretics.


Theo. What was Constantius; a Pagan or an heretic.


Phi. An Arian.


Theo. For him the church prayed.


Phi. For his conversion.


Theo. For his health, reign, and welfare.


Phi. Heretics perhaps, like himself, did.


Theo. I say Catholics.


Phi. It was then at the beginning of his reign before his impiety was
notorious.


Theo. About you fetch, and all will not serve. This testimony that the church
prayed for Constantius, though an heretic, was given by a Council of
catholic Bishops in the 21. year of his reign not long before his death.


Phi. Where find you that the church prayed for him?


Theo. Read the two letters, which the West Bishops sent from Ariminum to
Constantius; and see whether it be not clear. Socra. li. 2. ca. 37 Sozom. lib.
4. cap. 18.
In the first thus they say, We beseech you that you cause us not to stay
from our cures, but that the bishops together with the people serving God in
peace, may humbly pray for your health, kingdom and safety, in which the
divine Majesty long preserve you. The conclusion of their second letter is
this, Socrat. Ibidem. Accustomed prayers always made, in the church for
Consta^tius the Arian; and the West Bishops desirous to continue the same.

Hill. ad Constan. lib. 2.

Athan. Apolog. ad Constan.


For this cause we beseech your clemency the second time, most religious Lord
and Emperor, that you command us to depart to our churches, if it so please
your godliness, before the sharpnes of winter come, that we may make our
accustomed prayers together with the people to the almighty God, and our Lord
and Savior Christ, for your imperie, as we have always purposed, and now wish
to continue.

The writings of Hilarie and Athanasius to this very Prince confirm the same.
We beseech your clemency to permit, says Hilarie, that the people may have
such teachers as they like, such as they think well of, such as they choose,
and let them solemnize the divine mysteries and make prayers for your safety
and prosperity. Athanasius by his prayers made for this prince in the open
assembly of the people clears himself from having intelligence with
Magnentius the murderer of his brother. With what eyes could I behold that
bloody homicide? or how could I but call to mind your brothers face, whiles
I made my prayers for your health? How could I endure to think evil of your
brother, or send letters to his enemy, and not rather pray and beseech God
for your welfare, which verily I did? A witness hereof is first the Lord,
which has given you the whole Empire, that was left by your Fathers. There can
witness also with me Felicissimus the captain of Egypt, Asternis the Earl,
Paladius the master of your Palace, and others. The zealous prayer of Atha. and
the people for their Prince though an heretic. Athan. Ibidem.
My words were, Let us pray for the welfare of the most religious Emperor
Constantius: and presently the whole people with one voice cried; O Christ be
favorable to Constantius, and this cry they continued a long time. And
appealing to the Emperors own conscience and knowledge: You have good trial
that all (the christians) make their prayers and supplications to God that you
may live in safety and continually reign in peace. And God grant you, O
most gracious Prince, to live many years.

Hear you deaffe of years, and dull of hearts; the church of Christ prayed for
heretical Princes in the midst of their impiety and tyranny: And when it
was but objected to Athanasius, that he and others wrote letters to one that
rebelled and took arms against the Prince: Athan. eadem Apol. ad Consta^.
Rebellion and deprivation of Princes not so much as thought on by christians,
and specially by Bishops.
he made answer, Vincat quaeso apud the veritas, and ne relinquas suspicionem
contra vniuer sam Ecclesiam, quasi talia aut cogitentur aut scribantur a
christianis and potissimum Episcopis. I beseech you, let truth take place with
you, and leave not this suspicion upon the catholic church, as though any such
things were written or thought on by Christians, and especially by Bishops.
How far then were these men from your humors, which profess to depose
Princes, and not only license Subjects to rebel, but incite them to kill
their Sovereigns, as you did lately Parry with pardon, praise, and recompense
both here and in heaven?


Phi. They might do this in the beginning of his reign before he discovered
his heresy.


Theo. These be senseless shifts. Hilarious wrote his book after the Council
kept at Millan by Constantius, and Athanasius his, after Liberius was banished.
For those points be mentioned in their writings, and fell out the one
immediately before the other after the Council of Ariminum. And therefore the
rathest of these defenses came seventeen years after the beginning of
Constantius reign and in the hoatest of his tyrannical and heretical
persecution, as the books themselves declare: And yet they not only endured
but also obeyed him as their liege Lord, and detested all resistance in deed
and thought as unlawful for Christians, and chiefly for Bishops


Phi. But when in process of time some Princes, The defense, Cap. 5.

When and upon what occasions spiritual Pastors began to use the temporal
sword.


through Gods just judgment and the peoples sin, were fallen to such
contempt of religion (as it lightly happens by heresy and Apostasy) that
excommunication, being only but a spiritual penalty, or other ordinary
Ecclesiastical discipline would not serve: then as well Bishops as other
godly persons, their own Subjects, did crave aid and arms of other Princes
for their chastisement; as most holy and ancient Popes (even in the old
days when the Protestants confess them to have been godly Bishops) did
incite catholic kings to the same: that those whom the spiritual rod
could not fruitfullie chastise, they might by externe or temporal force bring
them to order and repentance; or at least defend their innocent Catholic
Subjects from unjust vexation.


Theo. You begin now to show your selves in your right kind. From the church
you leap to the field; meaning belike, as Julius the second did, that since
Peter's keys will not pleasure you, Paul's sword shall better steed you. The
side of your book seems to direct us when, and upon what occasion
spiritual Pastors began to use the temporal sword, Spiritual Pastors
never used the temporal sword till the Pope began to rule all at his
pleasure.
but the text it self runs quite awrie. We find there neither time
prefixed nor spiritual Pastor named that ever used the temporal sword. Are
rebellions such trifles with you, that you think to prove them with a
Marginall note?


Phi. There is no war in the world so just or honorable, The defense, Cap. 5.
be it civil or foreign, as that which is waged for religion, War for the
Catholic religion both lawful and honorable.
we say for the true, ancient, Catholic, Roman religion; which by the laws
of holy church and all christian Nations, is adjudged to be the only true
worship of God; and unto the obedience of which all Princes and people have
yielded themselves, either by oath, vow, or sacraments, or every of these
ways. For this, it is goodly and honorable to fight in such order and times,
as we be warranted in conscience and law, by our supreme Pastors and
Priests; and not for wild condemned heresies, against most lawful christian
catholics, kings and Priests; as the rebellious Protestants and Caluinistes
of this time do, without all order, law, or warrant of God or man. As the
arms taken for defense of godly honor and inheritance in such sort and
difference from heretical tumults, as is said, are so much more commendable and
glorious; for that no crime in the world deserves more sharp and zealous
pursuit of extreme revenge, (whether it be in superiors or subjects) than
reuolting from the faith to strange religions.


Theo. Be you not marvelous sharp and sound disputers, which always prove
that you need not, and ever infer that you should not?


Phi. We prove directly that which we undertook.


Theo. What undertook you?


Phi. That Princes might be deprived.


Theo. By sentence, mean you, or by violence?


Phi. By sentence if that will serve: but if they yield not thereto, then by
violence.


Theo. Your judicial power to give sentence of deprivation against them, you
would feign have established by the Scriptures and examples of the Primative
church: how short you came of that reckoning, I leave the wise to consider:
You proceed now to the violent expelling them from their Princely seats,
wherein it is a world to see how idly you hunt about, or rather purposely
pursue the wrong foot, because in the right you find no relief.

The Jesuits should prove that subjects may rebel against their Princes for
religion, and they show that one Prince may war upon another.
War for the Catholic Religion is both lawful and honorable, you say: you
must add of the subjects against their Prince, or else you range clean
besides our question. We strive not what causes may lead christian Princes to
make war on their neighbors, but whether it be lawful or tolerable for the
subject to bear arms against his natural and absolute Prince. You prove,
which is nothing to your purpose, that princes have waged wars for religion:
and when you come to make your conclusion, you secretly convey this under hand
which is most in doubtt betwixt us, and in general terms you proclaim that
wars for religion are just and honorable. But Sir in this interprise the
person must be respected as well as the cause. In all wars the person must be
warra^ted to draw the sword, as well as the cause good that they fight for.
Be the cause never so just, if the person be not authorized by God to draw the
sword, they be no just nor lawful wars but barbarous and theenish vprores.
For say your self, when malefactors deserve to die, may private men put them
to death without the Magistrate?


Phi. No.


Theo. And if they do, be they not murderers, though the crime which they
revenge, be worthy of death?


Phi. They be.


Theo. Then if in private punishments men may not presume without his
authority that bears the sword, much less may they venture on open wars
(which are wilful and furious executions by plain force without all order of
justice) unless they be directly warranted by him that has the sword from God
to take vengeance of the wicked.


Phi. We be warranted in conscience and law.


Theo. We talk now of your conclusion, not of your commission. If Princes
who bear the sword may lawfully wage war for religion, is it consequent, I
ask you, that private men which have not the sword may do the same?


Phi. Private men may not bear arms without authority. Private men can give
no warrant to use the sword.



Theo. And if they do, be they not plain thieves and murderers?


Phi. If they be not warranted to fight.


Theo. To rifle and slay one is theft and murder by the laws of God and man,
what then are they that spoil Realms and kill thowsandes with armed violence,
but grand thieves and murderers? They be but thieves and murderers that use
the sword without the magistrates authority.



Phi. If they be not lawfully authorized thereto, they be no better than
robbers and slaughterers.


Theo. Then Princes may mage war if the cause be good, because God has
given them the sword to maintain justice: and, if that be refused, to offer
force both at home and abroad; private persons may not do the like, be the
cause never so just, for so much as they be not licenced by God to bear or
use the sword.


Phi. I told you before, Pastors can authorize no man to use the sword. They
that bear it by Gods ordinance, must license others to use it. Pastors be no
superior judges for bearing arms
that we be warranted.


Theo. So had you need. Your wars else for religion be no lawful and just
arms, but desperate and wicked tumults. But by whom are you warranted?


Phi. By our supreme Pastors and Priests.


Theo. Do Pastors and Priests bear the sword?


Phi. I say not so, but they warrant us to take the sword.


Theo. Can they warrant you to take the sword, that have no authority to bear
the sword?


Phi. They be superior judges to these that bear the sword.


Theo. What? In temporal causes?


Phi. No, but in spiritual,


Theo. Fighting and killing are martial, not spiritual affairs.


Phi. Yet to be directed by spiritual Pastors.


Theo. We strive not for directing, but for authorizing of arms. Preachers may
be consulted whether the quarrel be just, but only the Magistrate that has
from heaven supreme power of goods, lands, life and death can warrant the
subject to use the sword.


Phi. The cause makes the war lawful or otherwise. The defense.
It is godly and honorable to fight for religion, we say: for the true,
ancient, catholic, Roman religion, in such order and time as we be warranted
in conscience and law by our supreme Pastors and Priests: and not for vile
condemned heresies against most lawful christian catholic kings and Priests
as the rebellious Protestants and Caluinistes of this time do, without all
order, law, warrant of God or man.


Theo. If Nabals sheep be not all shorn, I dare warrant you better
intertainement there, than ever David had. Spoils, massacres, conspiracies and
treasons even to the destruction and murder of Princes by their own servants,
How favorable the Papists be to their own tumults.
if a Priest say the word, you count in your selves to be just, honorable and
godly wars: If others do but stand on their guard to keep their lives and
families from the bloody rage of their enemies, seeking to put whole towns
and Provinces of them to the sword against all law and reason, and to
disturb the kingdoms in the minority of the right Governors: or if they
defend their ancient and christian liberties couenanted and agreed on by those
Princes to who^ they first submitted themselves, and ever since confirmed and
allowed by the kings that have succeeded. If in either of these two cases the
godly require their right and offer no wrong, impugn not their Princes, but
only save their own lives, you cry, rebellious heretics, rebellious
Caluinistes, fury, frenzy, mutiny, Laws of their own making do not excuse
them from rebellion.

The Jesuits take arms to depose Princes, that is, to subvert their states
and lives, whom by Gods law they should honor and obey.


and I know not what. You may pursue, depose and murder Princes, when the
Bishop of Rome bids you and that without breach of duty, law, or conscience
to God or man, as you vaunt, though neither life nor limme of yours be touched:
we may not so much as beseech Princes that we may be used like subjects not
like slaves, like men not like beasts, that we may be conuented by laws
before judges, not murdered in corners by inquisitours: we may not so much as
hide our heads, nor pull our necks out of the greedy jaws of that Romish
wolf, but the foam of your unclean mouth is ready to call us by all the names
you can devise.

Howbeit look well to your selves: it is not enough for you to have laws of
your own making to license you to bear arms against your Prince, you must
have Gods law for your warrant: or else you come within the compass of heinous
and horrible rebellion. For you do not defend your selves, but impugn your
Prince: you seek not the freedom of your religion, but the subversion of other
men's estates: you do not take arms that your condition may be tolerable, but
that her highness should be no Prince: you save not your own lives, but intend
her death. These shameful and manifest treasons, against the law of God,
nature and nations you smooth with a few faint colors, and publish them to the
whole world for just, honorable, and godly wars. But deceive not your selves:
the breath of your mouths may not ouerbeare the laws of God and states of
men. You must show some better warrant than the Popes decrees, or else your
rising in arms against your Prince, though the Bishop of Rome back and abet
you with all his Bulls and Decretals, is an unlawful, irreligious and wicked
rebellion.


Phi. The defense.

cap. 15. 2. Paral. cap. 15.


Whosoever seeks not after the Lord God of Israel, let him be slain (said
king Asa admonished by Azaria the Prophet) from the highest to the lowest
without exception. And all the people and many that followed him and fled to
him out of Israel from the schism there, did swear and vow themselves in
the quarrel of the God of their forefathers. And they prospered and deposed
Queen Maachah Mother to Asa for Apostasy, and for worshipping the venereous
God called Priapus.


Theo. Does the example of king Asa, forcing his Subjects with an oath and
under pain of death to seek after the Lord God of Israel, A king forcing his
people is no proof for subjects oppressing their Prince.
serve you to prove that Subjects may assault their king and oppress him with
arms? Will this go for a reason with you? The Magistrate may use the sword
and put offenders to death, ergo the Subject may use the same and that against
his Prince. Sure if you make such collections, we shall mistrust rebellion
has so possessed your brains, that reason has no place in you.


Phi. This example proves that heretics may be deposed, and put to death.


Theo. But by whom? By the Prince, or the people?


Phi. The king I grant was the doer.


Theo. Then seek farther for your conspiracies against kings; this example
will do you no good.


Phi. The people that fled to him out of Israel from the schism there, did
swear and vow themselves in the same quarrel with the king of Judah. These
strangers did take an oath to serve God, but not to impugn their Prince.



Theo. The strangers that fled out of Israel for their conscience sake,
took an oath to serve the same God, but not to bear arms against their own
country.


Phi. They prospered and deposed Queen Maachah mother to Asa for Apostasy and
for worshipping the venereous God Priapus.


Theo. You enlarge the number where you should not: which by your leave is a
plain corruption of the Scripture. The text is, 2. Chron. 15. 3. Kings 15. The
mother could have no right to the Scepter her son being in full possession of
the crown.
And king Asa deposed Maachah his mother from her rege^cie, because she had
made an idol. And again, not ( they) but he deposed Maachah his mother from
her estate because she had made an idol. The Queen mother was removed from her
honor and dignity by the king her son for her idolatry: but Asa did not put
her to death though that were the sum of the oath which the king and the rest
took: and he that did this deed, was the true king of Judah, and in full
possession of the crown many years before, and suffered his mother not in her
own right but of reverence and courtesy toward her, to enjoy some part of her
former degree and dignity: from the which he lawfully might and worthily did
put her when she fell to erecting and worshipping Idols.


Phi. The text notes not how long he was king, before he deposed his
mother. 2. Chron. 15.



Theo. After the death of Abiah, Asa his son (says the Scripture) reigned
in his steed, in whose days the Land was quiet ten years. Then came the
AEthiopians out against him with an huge hie host, and those he overthrew. And
at his return the Prophet Azariah met him and encouraged him to go forward
in the reformation of the Land, which he performed in all the Cities of
Judah and Benjamin; and gathered all the people of the Land together, in the
fifteenth year of his reign, Asa had been king 15. years and above, before
he removed his mother from her dignity.

Asaes mother lost the dignity which she had, but not the crown, which she
had not.

The defense, cap. 5.

Deuteronomy. cap. 13.


where this oath was taken and pain appointed, before his mother was deposed.
So that he, not she was rightful Governor of Judah; and that which she lost
was either the honor and dignity which otherwise did appertain to so great a
State as the kings mother: or else that portion of the Land which was
assigned to her to rule under the king in respect of her dowry. Howsoever, the
kingdom she had not: and therefore the crown she lost not, neither find you
here a Prince deposed by his subjects, but a Prince removing her that in
nature was his mother, in condition his subject, from that authority or
dignity (choose you whether) which before of favor not of duty he suffered
her to have.


Phi. For that case also in Deuteronomie express charge was given to slay all
false Prophets, and whosoever should auert the people from the true worship of
God, and induce them to receive strange Gods and new religions; and to
destroy all their followers, were they never so near us by nature. And in the
same place; that if any City should revolt from the received and prescribed
worship of God, and begin to admit new religions; it should be utterly wasted
by fire and sword.


Theo. Death by Gods law provided not for heretics, but for Apostates.
The commandment in Deuteronomie touches not heretics, but manifest
Apostataes, such as clean forsook the very name and outward profession of
God, and served strange and new gods: and the rigor of this precept, I mean
the punishment does not bind us that are under the Gospel by the judgment
of the best learned that ever taught in the church of Christ. For by the same
law of God blasphemers, Leuit. 24.20. Exodus 22.21. The penalties of Moses law
stand not in force under the Gospel. Aug. contra Cresc. li. 3. ca. 50 nullis
bonis in catholica hoc placet, si vsque ad mortem in que^quam, licet haereticum
saeuiatur.

Deuteronomy. 13.


adulterers, witches, strikers and cursers of Parents should die: Which
penalties your own church did never execute, nor any christian Magistrate that
ever we read of. Touching heretics you heard Saint Augustines opinion
before, that it never pleased any good man in the catholic church that
heretics should be put to death. And therefore the ancient Fathers did not
extend these precepts to heresy as you do, or else they thought themselves
and the church of Christ not bound to the judicial part of Moses law, which
properly concerned the Jews Commonwealth and expired at the coming of our
Savior. But admit this place were meant of heresy, which is not so; when God
says, that Prophets shall be slain: and thou shall slay the inhabitants of
that city with the edge of the sword and destroy it utterly: does he speak
to private or public persons? To private men he said, Exodus 20.
thou shall not kill; ergo this precept, he shall be slain, is directed to
the Magistrate to whom God gave the sword for this purpose, that he should
take vengeance of the wicked in his name and according to his law.


Phi. What if the Magistrate himself be the party that so sins, and
should be put to death: shall he escape?


Theo. That is the case which you take in hand to prove, that the people may
punish the Prince offending as well as the Prince may the people.


Phi. Either the people, or none must do it.


Theo. And since the people may not do it, it is evident that God has
reserved the magistrate to be punished by himself, and not given the people
power over their Prince. The Prince is to punish others, and not to be punished
by others.
David committed adultery, Solomon e^ected Idolatry; both offenses being
death by Gods law. Might the people therefore have put David and Solomon to
death? In many christian commonwealths, rapes, thestes, murders, be capital
crimes and punished by death: shall the people therefore take their Princes if
they be culpable in any of these, and by their own laws chop off their heads?
I think you be not so mad to put the sword in every man's hand that first will
use it.


Phi. Princes when they sin must be left to the righteous judgment of God.
Then Princes have impunitie to do what they list without fear of Laws.


Theo. Princes appoint penalties for others, not for themselves. They bear the
sword over others, not others over them. Subjects must be punished by them,
and they by none, but by God whose place they supply. Saint Cyrill says
rightly, Nemo leges Regum impune reprobat nisi Reges ipsi, in quibus
praeuaricationis crimen locum non habet. Prudenter enim dictum est, impium esse
qui regi dixerit, inique agis. No man may break the laws of Princes without
punishment but the Princes themselves, who may not be charged with the
transgression (of their own Laws.) For it was wisely spoken, he is wicked
that says to a king thou art an offendour. And if it be a monster in nature
and policy to suffer the children to chastise the father, Children may not
chastise their parents though faulty: much less subjects their Sovereigns.
Deuteronomy. 25. Execution done upon Princes.
and the servants to punish the Master, what a barbarous and impious devise of
yours is this to give the Subjects power of life and death over their Princes?
Stick not to these things, if you be wise; least Children and Servants
think it more need, you be purged for Frenzy, than answered by Divinity.


Phi. Neither pertains this to poor men only, but to the Governors and
Leaders of the people most of all. As we see in the book of Numbers, where
Moses by the commandment of God caused all the Princes of the people to be
hanged upon Gibbettes against the Sun, for communication in sacrifice with
the Moabites; and the rest of the people every one by the hand of his
neighbor to be put to the sword for the same fault: wherein Phinees the
Priest of God by sleaing a chief Captain with his own hands deserved
eternal praise and the perpetuity of his Priesthood. You would slay 3000.
By Moses also his appointment the faithful Levites slew 3300. of their
neighbors, brethren, and friends, for committing idolatry and forsaking the
true God. Mary in all this (as you see by the examples alleged) the Prophet
and Priests must direct them for the cause and action, that they err not of
fantasy, partiality, pride, and pretense of Religion, as heretics and
rebels do, but the quarrel must be for the old faith, service and Priesthood,
against innovation; and directed and allowed by those which by order and
function have charge of our souls.


Theo. Can you see no difference between Nobles that be Subjects, and the
Prince that bears the sword? Numb. 25.4. Verse. 1. 2. This fact had the
commandment of God and the magistrate for a warrant, rebellion against Prince^
has neither.
Moses the chief Magistrate was commanded by God to hang up the heads and
captains of the people for committing whoordome with the daughters of Moab and
bowing down to their gods; and so he did. Your conclusion is; ergo the people
may do the like to their Magistrates. You may hang this reason on a hedge for
the goodness of it. Your antecedent has two sufficient warrantes, which your
conclusion lacks. First God precisely commanded that kind of revenge to be
taken: and secondly the Magistrate was the revenger. How can you then upon
this infer that Subjects may do the same, since Subjects be no magistrates,
and have a streit commandment from God not to lay hands on his anointed?


Phi. Phinees the Priest of God slew Zimri the Prince of the house of Simeon,
with his own hands, and thereby gat the perpetuity of his Priesthood.


Theo. Phinees had for his warrant before he did the deed the voice both of God
and the Magistrate. For Moses had charged the Judges of Israel before Zimri
came with the woman of Midian into the tents: Numb. 25.5.
Every one slaie his men that joined unto Baal Peor. And the Magistrate
commanding, as in this case you see he did, it was lawful for Phinees or any
other private person to execute that sentence.


Phi. Why then was Phinees so highly commended and recompensed at Gods hands?
God embraced the zeal of Phinees not for using the sword without authority,
but for neglecting his own dignity, whiles he did execute the precept of God
and the magistrate.



Theo. Not for attempting to kill without commission as you imagine, but for
his readiness to accomplish the will of God, and word of Moses with his own
hands in the sight of them all, and hastening in his own person to do that
execution though he were the chief Prince of the tribe of Levy, and son to
Eleazar the high Priest: whose zeal for his service God so embraced, that he
willed the office of the high Priest, after his fathers death to remain to him
and his line for ever.


Phi. The Levites, before that, slew 3300. of their neighbors, brethren and
friends for committing idolatry and forsaking the true God.


Theo. Why should they not, when as God and the Magistrate appointed them so
to do? Moses gave them the charge in these words: Exodus 32.

The Levites were charged by God and the Magistrate to do this execution.


Thus says the Lord God of Israel, put every man his sword by his side, and
go to and fro, from gate to gate through the host, and slay every man his
brother, and every man his companion, and every man his neighbor. And the
children of Leui did as Moses had commanded, and there fell of the people that
day about three thousand men. What fact can be more lawful than where God
prescribes what shall be done, and he that bears the sword authoriseth
others to do it?


Phi. The Priests you see made this slaughter of the people.


Theo. The Levites were not all Priests, though they were to attend on the
Arc, and the rest of the service of God: Aaron and his sons had the
Priesthood and not the whole Tribe of Leui. The Scripture it self will give
you that distinction. The Levites were appointed unto all the service of the
Tab^rnacle of the house of God. 1. Chron. 6.
But Aaron and his sons burnt incense upon the Altar of burnt offering. And
what should let the Levites to bear arms at Moses commandment, who
afterward in defense of king Ioash at his coronation, in the Temple, did
compass him, ^. Chron. 23.
Every man with his weapon in his hand? Against the Magistrate they did not
bend their swords as you do, but rather for obedience to the Magistrate, and
therefore their example will not warrant your displaying of banners against your
Prince.


Phi. Was Moses a Magistrate?


Theo. How think you, was he not?


Phi. Moses was a Magistrate. Genesis 14. Priests and Prophets among the Jews
were sometimes magistrates. Psalm. 99.
The Scripture says he was a Priest and a Prophet, not a Prince.


Theo. Those be no reasons to exclude him from bearing the sword. Melchizedec
was a Priest of the most high God and king of Salem. Ely was a Priest and
Samuel a Prophet, and yet both were Sovereign Rulers over Israel. Moses might
annoint Aaron at the first erection of the Priesthood, and deliver the law of
God unto the people, and yet keep the Civil regiment.


Phi. Why then does David number Moses and Aaron among the Priests of God?


Theo. The word which David uses does signify those that be chief in any
service as well as Priests: as in the second of Samuel the eight chapter where
it is said that 2. Sam. 8.
Zadoc and Abimelec (the Sons of Phinees) were the Priests, it is presently
added, and the sons of David c^hanim haiu were (no Priests, but) chief
Princes or Rulers: And yet the word is the very same that was used before to
Zadoc and Abimelec the sons of Aaron. So in the 20. of the same book 2. Sam.
20. The word cohe^ signifies as well a Prince as a Priest.
Zadoc and Abiathar were Pristes and Ira the Iairite was cohen ledauid, not a
Priest to David, for that had been wickedness against the law of God to make
a mere stranger that was no Leuite a priest, but a chief Prince about David.
And so David joins Moses and Aaron as the Principal seruitours about God,
and chief Rulers of the people: Moses for regiment, Aaron for sacrifices.

And did the word exactly signify Priests, the letter beth which goes
before it, imports either in the number of the Priests or together with the
Priests: so that Moses and Aaron with the Priests called on the name of the
Lord. But that Moses was a Priest after Aaron and his sons were anointed,
is a manifest untruth against the Scriptures. God said to Moses, Exodus 40.
Aaron and his sons only had the priesthood
Thou shall put upon Aaron the holy garments and shall annoint him. And
sanctify him that he may serve me in the Priests office. Thou shall also
bring his sons, and cloth them with garments. And shall annoint them, as
thou did annoint their Father, that they may serve me in the Priests
office: so shall this their annoynting be to them for an everlasting
Priest-hoode in their generations. Numb. 3. Moses was Aarons brother and not
his son.
And again, Thou shall appoint Aaron and his sons to execute the Priests
office, and the stranger that comes near shall die. Which precept excluded
not only the rest of the Tribes, but even the Levites themselves, that were
not the sons of Aaron, from being Prestes or meddling with the sacrifices,
that should be offered unto God.

To Aaron God said: Number. 18.
Thou and thy sons with thee shall bear the iniquity (or burden) of the
Priests office. Thy brethren of the Tribe of Leui shall thou take to minister
unto thee: but thou and thy sons with thee shall minister before the
Tabernacle of the Testimony. Aarons brethren might not come near the Altar.
They shall keep the charge of all the Tabernacle, but they shall not come
near the instruments of the Sanctuary, nor to the Altar, least they die,
both they and you. Where you see the Priests office so tied unto Aaron and his
sons, that the Levites his brethren, and of his fathers family, might watch
and ward about the Tabernacle and minister unto him and his sons that were
priests, but not come near the Altar nor any instruments of the Sanctuary.
How then could Moses be a Priest after Aaron was anointed, when the Priesthood
was delivered and confirmed to Aaron only and his sons?


Phi. Moses was a Leuite.


Theo. He was Aarons brother, Moses might anoint Aaron, and yet be no Priest.
but the Priesthood was given to Aaron and his sons.


Phi. He anointed Aaron and his sons.


Theo. Not by his ordinary function as a Priest, but by special direction
from God as a Prophet. For Aaron was called to that office, not by Moses but by
God himself, Heb. 5.
as the Apostle testifies, though he were anointed by Moses hands.


Phi. Moses might be a Priest before Aaron was called.


Theo. If Moses were a Priest, what needed an other to be chosen? Why should
Moses be deprived of his Priesthood, he no way displeasing nor offending
God? Reason you show both his calling and his annoynting, before you challenge
the Priesthood for him.


Phi. David says he was.


Theo. What David says, we saw before. The word by Saint Hieroms own
observation signifies a Master or Ruler. Hieron. traditiones Hebraicae in
libros Regum tomo 3.
Ira Iairites erat sacerdos David, id est magister: sicut alibi scriptum est:
filij autem David erant sacerdotes, id est magistri fratrum suorum. Ira the
Iairite was a Priest of David's, that is a Ruler as it is elsewhere written, the
sons of David were Priests that is Rulers of their brethren.


Phi. Hieron. in Psalm. 98. S. Hierom and S. Aug. take the word Priest largely,
for him that teaches as well as for him that offers: and in that sense Moses
may be called a Priest, notwithstanding he were also a Magistrate. August. in
Psalm. 98.
Saint Hierom and Saint Augustine writing upon this Psalm of David affirm
that Moses was a Priest.


Theo. All that Saint Hierom says is this: that Moses had the rule of the
Law, and Aaron of the Priest-hoode, and that either of them did fore-shewe the
coming of Christ, with a Priestlie kind of proclamation: (Moses) with the
sound of the law, and (Aaron) with the belles of his garments. Where S.
Hierom calls the Prophetical function of Moses to teach the people the Laws
of God a Priestly kind of proclaiming, and foreshewing that the Son of God
should come in flesh to teach us the will of his Father. Saint Augustine uses
the word in like sense for that sacred service which Moses yielded unto God in
reporting his Laws and precepts to the people. And therefore in the same
place he says of Samuel, he was made high Priest, which is expreslie
against the Scriptures, if you take the word Priest for him that was anointed
to offer sacrifices unto God. For Samuel was but a Leuite and no Priest, much
less high Priest. The sons of Samuel are reckened in the Scripture it self
among the 1. Chron. 6.33.34.
Levites apart from the Priests office and lineage, and the high Priesthood
was long before Number. 25.13.
given to Phinees and his house by covenant from Gods own mouth, and in the
days of Samuel was held by 1. Sam. 14.
Abiah the son of Abicub, who was directly of the descent of 1. Chron. 6.
Phinees.

Saint Augustine elsewhere debating this question of Moses and Aaron,
resolves in doubtful manner. Aug. quaest. super Leuit. lib. 3. cap. 23.
Moses and Aaron were both high Priests, or rather Moses (the chief) and
Aaron under him: or else Aaron chief for the pontifical attire, and Moses for
a more excellent ministry. And in that sense Moses may be called a Priest,
if you mean as Saint Augustine does, an interpreter of Gods will to Aaron and
others; which is the right vocation of all Prophets that were no Priests, and
common to them all; save that by a more excellent prerogative than any other
Prophet of the old Testament had: God spoke to Moses Numb. 12.
mouth to mouth, and Exodus 33.
face to face, as a man speaks unto his friend. But this does not hinder his
civil power which was to be chief judge and sovereign executor of justice
among them, and by virtue thereof to put them to death that were offend ors
against the law of God. And in his steed succeeded not Eleazar or Phinees the
sons of Aaron, but Numb. 27. Deuteronomy. 31.
Joshua, and Judge. 1.
Judah the captains and leaders of Israel.


Phi. Your collection of Samuel is not true. 1. Sam. 16. Samuel no Priest.
For God sent him to do sacrifice when he anointed David, and therefore Samuel
was a Priest.


Theo. My collection is grounded upon the law of God. Samuel was none of the
sons of Aaron, ergo Samuel was no Priest, nor might not come near the Altar
to offer any sacrifice in his own person.


Phi. The Scripture s^yeth, 1. Sam. 7.
He took a sucking Lamb and offered it for a burnt offering unto the Lord.


Theo. You mistake the speech of the holy Ghost. So Iephtah said, Judge. 11.
That thing which comes first out of the doors of mine house to meet me, I
will offer it for a burnt offering: and yet Iephtah was neither Priest nor
Leuite. So the Angel said to Manoah, Judge. 13.
If thou will make a burnt offering offer it to the Lord: and yet Manoah was
of the tribe of Judge. 13.2.
Dan. Of David that was no Priest the Scripture says, 2. Sam. 6.
Then David offered burnt offeringes and peace offeringes before the Lord. And
again, 2. Sam. 24.
David built there an Altar unto the Lord, and offered burnt offeringes and
peace offeringes: and the Lord was appeased toward the Land. And likewise of
Solomon, The 1. Kings 3.
king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there; a thowsande burnt offeringes did
Solomon offer upon that Altar. 1. Kings 9.
Thrice a year did Solomon offer burnt offeringes and peace offeringes upon
the Altar which he built to the Lord, and he burnt incense upon the Altar
that was before the Lord. What the scripture means when it says that they
which were no Priests offered.
Nothing is oftener in the Scriptures than these kinds of speeches: by the
which no more is meant, but that either they brought these things to be offered,
or else they caused the priests to offer them. For in their own persons they
could not sacrifice them, because they were no Priests.

In that sense the Scripture says of Saul, that 1. Sam. 13.
He offered a burnt offering at Gilgall before Samuel came, not that Saul
offered it with his own hands, as you before did fondely imagine, and said
he was deposed for aspiring to the spiritual function: but he commanded the
Priest to do it, who was then present in the host with the Ark of GOD, as the
next chapter does witness in two several places.


Phi. Then was Saul free from sin when Samuel reproved him. 1. Sam. 14. verse.
3. and 18.



Theo. Samuel reproved him for distrusting and disobeying God. Saul's offense
was distrust and impatience: and not sacrificing in his own person.
For when God first advanced Saul to the kingdom, he charged him by the mouth
of Samuel to go to Gilgal and there to 1. Sam. 10.
stay seven days (before he ventered to do any sacrifice) til the Prophet
were sent to show him what he should do: but he seeing his enemies 1. Sam.
13.
gathered to fight against him on the one side, and his people shrinking from
him on the other side, because Samuel came not; began to suspecte that Samuel
had beguiled him, and therefore upon his own head against the commandment
of God, willed the Priest to go forward with his sacrifices, and to consult
GOD what he should do. This secret distrust and presumption against the
charge which God had given him, was the thing that GOD took in so evil part:
and since he would not submit himself to be ruled by GOD and expect his
leisure, God rejected him as unfit to govern his people. Neither did Samuel
challenge him for inuading the Priests office, but for not staying the time
that God prefixed him, before the Prophet should come.


Philand. The defense, Cap. 5. Numb. 27. The punishment of Princes for schism
and revolt. 2. Paral. 13. 1. Paral. 21. 4. Reg. 8.
We read in the book of Numbers that the Captain and all the people, were
commanded to go in and out, that is to proceed in wars according to the
order of Eleazarus the Priest. Such were the wars of Abia and other kings of
Judah, that fought most justly and prosperously against the schismatic
Israelites, and justly possessed the Cities which they conquered in those
wars. As also Edom and Libuah revolted from king Ioram for Religion; even
because he forsook the God of their forefathers, and could never be
recovered to the same again. Wherein also the example and zeal of the
children of Israel was very notable; that they would have denounced war
against the Tribe of Ruben and Gad, only for erecting (as they took it) a
schismatic altar out of the only place where our Lord appointed that
sacrifice should be done unto his honor.


Theo. Ye be tried men to interpret Scriptures. The words which you apply
to Eleazar the Priest, stand in the text Numb. 27.21.
indifferent to be referred either to God or to Ieboshuah, or to Eleazar: and
you lustilie leave out both GOD and the Magistrate, and will have the Priest to
be the Master of the Musters. The Priest was to consult God for the kings
wars but not to appoint the king what he thought good
And did the words pertain to Eleazar, no such power as you conceive is
thereby given to the Priest, to caulme and kindle wars when he list, but
only to consult the Lord before his Arc, and to report back to the Captain
and leader of the people, what the Lord said: that no wars might be
undertaken without express warrant from God. This kind of asking counsel at
Gods mouth in their wars, you should find exemplyfied in sundry places of
the old Testament, as Judges Ver. 18.28.
twenty, Ver. 18.
first Samuel fourteen, Ver. 2.4.11.12.
first Samuel twentie-three, Ver. 8.
first Samuel thirty. But in this case the Priest had no farther authority than
to inquire at Gods mouth, and that he did when the king commanded him, which
is far from licencing subjects to rebel against their king, as you would
have it.

The wars of 2. Chron. 13. The wars of Abiah were of one Prince against an
other.
Abia the king of Judah against Israel, were not of Subjects against their
Sovereigns, but of a lawful Prince bearing the sword, and thinking to
recover the kingdom of Israel, which Roboam his father lost; from his
enemies. Where you justify the wars of Abia against Israel more bouldly
than wisely: GOD himself prohibiting the children of Judah and Benjamin in
the days of Roboam his Father to 2. Chron. 11.
fight against the children of Israel their brethren, and professing the
division of the Kingdom to come from God and not from man.

If you say that Abia sought not for the kingdom but for Religion, though his
own words 2. Chron. 13.5.

And not so much for religion as for renting the kingdom of Israel from Judah.


sound to the contrary, know you that as Jeroboam was stark naught, so Abia
for all his crakes and your praises was little better. The holy Ghost, whose
report we must believe before yours, says, that he walked in all the sins
of his Father, which he had done before him, and that his heart was not right
with the Lord his God. And the sins of his Father are thus described in the
Scripture: 3. Kings 15. 3 Kings. 14.22.
Judah wrought wickedness in the sight of the Lord, and they provoked him
more with their sins, which they committed, than all that which their Fathers
had done. For they also made them high places, and images, and groves on
every high hill and under every green tree. There were also Sodomites in the
Land that did according to all the abominations of the people which the Lord
had cast out before the children of Israel. This was in the time of Roboam, and
Abia walked in all his ways, Abia was as bad as Jeroboam.
and therefore lacked not much of Ieroboans wickedness, though you make him a
victorious and religious conqueror.

That Edom and Libuah revolted from king Ioram, is very true: 4. Kings 8. The
men of Edom were profane infidels, and had no respect to religion when they
revolted.
but that their revolt was either lawful or for religion, that you prove not.
Edom had no such respect; they were profane persons and Infidels, and as soon
as they saw their time, they cast off the yoke which the kings of Judah had
laid upon them. But not long after in the reign of Amaziah, they were meetely
well plagued by the king of Judah for their reuolting, he smiting ten thousand
of them with the sword, and taking other ten thousand alive, and casting
them down from the top of a rock that they burst al to pieces, 2. Chron. 25.
thereby to give them a just recompense for their former rebellion.

The Scripture says that Libuah, a city of the Priests as appears by the
first allotment made in the 21. of the book of Joshua, Joshua 21. 4* Kings 8.
rebelled at the same time, but it commends their rebellion no more than it
does the rebellion of Edom. Every thing reported in the Scripture is not by
and by commended.
It will be as hard for you to prove either of them did well, as that your
selves may do the like. Leude deeds are reported in the Scripture as will as
good: but not commended. No more are these.


Phi. The text says they did it, 2. Chron. 21. They did evil to rebel, or
else all the rest that obeyed, did not well.
because (the king of Judah) had forsaken the Lord God of his fathers.


Theo. The Scripture does not set down the cause why they might lawfully do
it, but adds this as a reason, why God suffered these troubles to fall on
king Ioram. As if it should have said, no marvel to see these rebel against
him, for he had forsaken the God of his fathers. And if this were a fault in
king Ioram to forsake the God of his fathers, as in truth it was, how can the
priests of Libuah be excused for seuering themselves from the line of David
without warrant from God, and, that which was worse, from the temple and
service of God established by express commandment at Jerusalem? If that be
true which you say, that Libuah could never be recovered again to the kingdom
of Judah, This defectio^ of Libuah from the kingdom of Judah and temple of God,
was directly against the law of God.
your self convince them of a pestilent and wicked revolt. For though they
might pretend religion against king Ioram, yet against the godly kings of Judah
which followed, as Ezechia^, Josias and others, they could pretend none: and
therefore by your own confession it was no defection from Iorams idolatry, but
a plain rebellion against the kingdom of Judah, and an utter renouncing the
Altar, Temple, and service of God at Jerusalem. Which, how it might stand with
their duties to God and his law, we yet conceive not: neither will you ever be
able to justify that fact of theirs with all your cunning and eloquence.

The ten tribes Joshua 22. The ten tribes had sufficient authority to fight
with twain. Judge. 20.
assembled to sight with Ruben and Gad for building an Altar by Jordan against
the commandment of God: and therein they did but their duties. If you ask by
what authority they did it, the answer is easy. Their commonwealth consisting
of 12. tribes, and al endued with like sovereignty, ten might lawfully repress
two without any farther warrant, as after they did the Beniamits for that
filthy fact of the men of Gibeah. But yet at this time Joshua lived whom God
himself had appointed captain and ruler of the 12. tribes, and therefore
besides that authority which the whole had over a part, and that in common
regiment is suffice^t, there was a superior magistrate at the denou^cing of
these wars: and though they had fought together as equals, yet will not that
example rati^ie the rebelling of subjects against their Princes, which is your
purpose.


Phi. The defense, cap. 5. But what fights can you show of subjects against
their Princes? The wars of prince against prince are nothing to this purpose.
Since Christ's law and religion was establ^shed, diverse great and honorable
fights have bin made for the faith against princes and provinces that unjustly
withstood and annoied the same.


Theo. What wars have bin for religion since the coming of Christ, if you
mean between Prince and Prince, Realm and Realm, is bootles for you to seek
and needless for us to answer. We dispute not what causes may justly be
pursued with battle, but what what persons are permitted to take the sword, and
against whom. And unto the time of Gregory the 1. (which compass you take to
bring us some presidents of your doings) you can not show that ever christian
subjects did bear arms against their Princes for any quarrel of regilion,
and were allowed. Rebellions were rife in those ages as well as now: but we
deny that the Church of Christ, or the godly Bishops of those times did ever
consent, allow or like those tumults: much less procure them, or use them for
the safeguard of their Sees, as you bear men in hand they did.


Phi. The defense, Cap. 5. Eusebius. li. 9. ca. 6.
In old times of the primative church the christian Armenians lawfully defended
themselves by arms against their Emperor Maximinus.


Theo. You that fear not to deprave the scriptures, will make no bones to
corrupt and vitiate other Stories at your pleasures. The Armenians were no
subjects but consederates.
The Armenians, being no subjects but confederats, when Maximinus would have
compelled them to worship idols, and to that end offered them force, resisted;
as they lawfully might, and of fellows and friends became strangers and
adversaries. The words of Eusebius are very plain for that purpose. Maximinus
had also war with the Armenians, Eusebius. li. 9. ca. 7.
who of long time before that had bin friends and confederates with the
Romans. That people being christians and very devout, this hateful tyrant
attempting to force to the sacrifices of idols and devils, made them of friends
foes, and of colleagues enemies.


Phi. The Catholic people of diverse Provinces have often by force defended and
kept their Bishops in their seats, The defense, Cap. 5.

Wars made for religion.


against the Infidels; but specially against the commandments of heretical
Emperors: yea and resisted them in defense of their Churches, and the sacred
goods of the same. As the Citizens of Antioche defended their Church, against
the Emperor Galerius his officers.


Theo. Your general and voluntary reports we may hardly trust, It is not
enough to prove that some rebelled but this also must be showed that their
rebellion was allowed.
since your special instaunces be so corrupted and wrested. And could you
show that which you speak of, as you can not, you must also prove it well
done, or at le^t to have been liked and allowed of the Church of Christ before
we can receive it. The Apostles rule is strong against it: Romans 13. Well they
might shut the Church doors against Ethnickes whiles they were at the divine
mysteries, but they never rebelled nor refused to suffer any punishment that
Galerius or others would inflict on the^.
You must be subject not only for wrath: but for conscience sake. Many
thousand Martyrs, Bishops and others submitted themselves and endured the
vilest torments that could be devised against them, as the ten persecutions
of Christ's Church under heathen Princes most clearly witness: that ever any
of their subjects rebelled against those bloody persecutors in respect of
religion, must be your care to show: We reading all the monumentes of those
times verily find none, and by your silence it should appear your selves know
none: otherwise we do not think you would disfurnish your cause, and trouble
the reader with impertinent matters.

That the Citizens of Antioch defended their Church with arms against the
Emperor Galerius his officers, I find it written in no good Author, neither do
you quote the place: that Story you may put in your Legende as taken thence by
most likelihood. The temples of their bodies which were far more precious,
they did not defend from the furious and insatiable rage of Diocletian, and
Maximinus, but as well at Antioche, as in all other places subject to the
Roman Empire; the christian men and women mildly and gladly suffered those
Eusebius. li. 8. ca. 7.9.10.12.
torments, deaths and Eusebius. li. 8. ca. 7.9.10.12.
shames, which in our eyes neither flesh could bear, nor nature brook: so
that we have cause rather to marvel at their patience, than to mistrust
their disobedience.


Phi. S. Basil and S. Ambrose people, defended them against the invasions of
Heretics. The defense, cap. 5. Nazian* de land Basil. Ambros. lib. 5. epist.



Theo. After Valens the Emperor had twice decreed to banish S. Basil, and was
the first time stopped of his course by the sudden sickness of his son and
terror of his wife, and the second time by a strange Theod. lib. 4. cap. 19.
trembling of hand and heart as he was subscribing the sentence of deportation
against him, he never after offered to meddle with Saint Basil, S. Basil
would not suffer the people to grow to a tumult for his defense. See
Nazianzenes funeral oration in the prayer of S. Basil.
but suffered him quietly to enjoy his Bishopric. Yet fell there out after
this a contention between the Lieutenaunt of Pontus and Saint Basil, about
the liberties of the sanctuary for a Noble woman, that had taken the Church
for her refuge, to save her self from one that would have forced her to
marriage against her will. The Deputy required the woman to be delivered: the
Bishop replied that he might not violate the Laws of GOD and man. The
Deputy stomacking Saint Basil, and the more for his stout defense otherwise
of the Christian faith, sent for the Bishop to his Tribunal, and commanding
him to be stripped, threatened to whippe him, and to tear his flesh with Iron
hooks. The people offered to save their Bishop from the private and
intemperate rage of a deputy, but not from the Emperor. Nazian. in laudem
Basilij oration funebr.
This indignity the people could no longer abide, but seeing their Pastor thus
shamefully handled without the Emperors commandment or knowledge, upon the
private displeasure of a Deputy for the liberties of the Church established by
the Roman Laws, the whole city, men and women fell to an uproar, and were
like enough to have done the Deputy some mischief, but that Saint Basil with
much ado repressing the people, delivered his persecutor from that peril.
This is the true report of Saint Basils case even out of the same author which
you auouche, Gregory Nazianzene.

Their grief you see was not against the Emperors power or fact, but against
the malice of a Lieutenant presuming upon a private grudge without any warrant
from the Prince, not only to do that which the Emperor in his own person
had refrained, This tumult seemed tolerable, and yet S. Basil would not allow
it.
but in most spiteful and servile manner to abuse their Bishop against all
order of Law: And this tumult S. Basil neither procured nor praised, but
assuaged with his presence, and offered himself to the Deputies pleasure.

Of S. Ambrose we spoke before by occasion, and thither we send you. It is
most untrue that the people of Millan either did, or might take arms against
the Emperor; S. Ambrose would not suffer the people of Millan to defend him
against the Emperor.

Ambros. epist. lib. 5. epist. ad Marcel. 33.


though he were then but a child, and therefore might make no Laws for
Religion, or otherwise, without Theodosius joint Emperor with him, and in
possession of the scepter before him. Which exception, neither S. Ambrose, nor
other godly bishops used against him, but submitted themselves with all
meekenes, when in reason they might have taken this advantage. Of the people S.
Ambrose himself gives this testimony. In singulis vobis Job reuixit, in
singulis sancti illius patientia and virtus refulsit. Quid enim praesentis dici
potuit a viris Christianis, quam quod ^odie in vobis locutus est Spiritus
sanctus? Rogamus Auguste, non pugnamus, non timemus, sed rogamus. Hoc
Christianos decet. In every one of you Job is alive again; in each of you his
patience and virtue shined. What could be said fitter by Christian men than
that which the holy Ghost this day spoke in you? We beseech, O Emperor, we
offer not arms. We fear not (to die,) but we entreat (thy clemency.) This
beseems Christians to desire tranquillity of peace and faith, but to be
constant in the truth even unto death. And for his part, when he heard that
his Church was taken up by the (Emperors) soldiers, Ibidem.
he fet only somewhat the deeper sighs and said to such as exhorted him to go
thither, deliver up my Church I may not, but sight I ought not. Pugnare non
debeo.



Phi. But the people were in a commotion: which appears by that S. Ambrose
answered when they willed him to assuage their fury, It lay in him not to
incite them, but he had no means to repress them.


Theo. Truth it is that the people flocked to their Churches, and chose rather
to be slain in the place, than to leave them unto Arians. But that they
offered arms, or attempted any force either for S. Ambrose or against
Valentinian, is a manifest untruth. The merchaunts were amerced and
emprisoned: See the fifth book and 33. epistle of S. Ambrose for this whole
action.

This casual disorder was much against the Bishops will: and yet nothing near
a rebellion.

Lib. 5. epist 33.


the Nobles were hardly threatened, and S. Ambrose himself charged as with a
sedition, and yet all the violence that was offered was this. The people
passing from one Church to an other met a Chapleine of the Arrians, and some
unruly persons, as in such heates it can not otherwise be chosen, began to
illude and abuse the man; but the Bishop presently sent his Priests and
Deacons, and rescued him from that injury: which yet the Emperor took so
grievously that he laid a number of them in Irons and imposed a great mulet
upon the whole City to be paid within three days. Farther force was none
offered by the people of Millan, and yet of that small disorder Saint Ambrose
says, If they thought him to be the inciter (or stirrer) of the people they
should straightway revenge it on him, or banish him into what wilderness they
would. And to that end, Ibidem.
he departed home to bed to his own house, that if any man would have him
into exile, he should find him ready. Had the Jesuits been in S. Ambrose
place they would have told the Emperor an other tale.
Had you been there, you would not only have set the people against the
Prince, but encouraged the subject to pull the young boy by the ears, and to
teach him better manner against an other time to meddle with Bishops: and it
grieueth you to see Ambrose so faint hearted as you take it, that when so fit
opportunity served him and the rest, they would give no president to rebel
against Princes: which is the thing you seek to prove, and long to do.


Phi. Not the people only, which may do things of headynes without counsel or
consultation: The Defense, cap. 5.
but the bishops of Countries so persecuted by heretical Princes have justly
required help of other Christian kings.


Theo. If the multitude of Christians in the primative Church for all their
rashness and headynes were afraid in respect of the Apostles doctrine to rebel
against Powers, If the people were afraid to rebel in the primative Church,
what think you were the Bishops?
whom shall you persuade that their religious and godly Pastors were
firebrands of sedition? If they taught others to obey, with what conscience
could they themselves resist? Or rather with what face do you slander them
with that they never did?


Phi. Holy Athanasius: The defense, cap. 5.

Theodoret. li. 2. cap. 13.

The example of Athanasius.

Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 13. Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 7. Dama. in Pontific.

Athanasius no rebel.


(who knew his duty to his sovereign well enough and in what case he might
resist him) asked aid against Constantius the Arrian the first heretical
Emperor (whom Pope Felix declared to be an heretic) of his own brother
Constance Catholic Emperor of the West. For fear of whose arms the said
Arrian restored Athanasius and other Catholic Bishops to their Churches and
honors again, though after this Catholic Emperors death the other more
furiously persecuted Athanasius than before.


Theo. He that never sounded the fidelity and honesty of Jesuits before this
time may take hence his light how to trust them in other cases. Did Athanasius
ask aid (of arms) against Constantius the Arrian?


Phi. For fear of arms the said Arrian restored Athanasius and other
Catholic Bishops to their Churches and honors again.


Theo. But did Athanasius move Constans so to do?


Phi. He asked aid of Constans against his brother Constantius.


Theo. But did he ask that aid, to be restored by arms? For of that aid
we now dispute, and that aid must you mean, if you will say ought to the
purpose.


Phi. He accepted it, and therefore it is likely he requested it.


Theo. You would prove by this example that Athanasius (who knew his duty to
his sovereign well enough, and in what case he might resist him) not only used
but asked (forci^le) aid against Constantius of his own brother.


Phi. So he did.


Theo. Be you well in your wits to avouch it with such confidence? Athanasius
horribly bel^ed by the Jesuits.



Phi. Why should we not?


Theo. Why should you not? Athanasius himself, when that very point was
objected to him, not only abiured it as false, but detested it unto Constantius
as a wicked and ungodly part for himself to have stirred brother against
brother. What extreme boldness was it then for you to fasten that on him which
he defieth and forsweareth?


Phi. Where does he so?


Theo. Where you might soon have found it, but that you thought to have
brought the matter from words to blows before this time.

Athanasius clears himself of that which the Jesuits father on him.

Athanas. ad Imperator. Constantiu^ Apolog.

Did this man stir Constans against Constantius?


It was laid in his dish by Constantius amongst other things after the death of
Constans, that he provoked and incited his brother against him, and that he
resisted the Princes precepts. To this Athanasius answers in his Apology to
Constantius: I am not mad, I am not besides my self, O Emperor, that thou
should suspect, I had ever any such thought. And that made me say nothing
to it, when others questioned with me about it, lest whiles I labored to
clear my self, some perhaps would make a doubt of it. But to your highness I
answer with a loud and plain voice, and with my hand held out, as I learned
of the Apostle, I call God to witness against my soul, and as it is written in
the book of kings, I swear, the Lord can bear me record, and his anointed,
(your brother:) (suffer me I beseech you so to say) I never made mention of you
for any evil before your brother of blessed memory, I mean that religions
Emperor Constans; neither did I ever stir him up against you as these And
Jesuits.
(Arrians) do slander me; but contrariwise whenever I had access unto him,
he himself recounted your gracious inclination; and God knows what mention I
made of your godly disposition. Suffer me and pardon me most courteous Prince.
That servant of God Constans (your brother) was not so open nor so lent his
ears to any man, neither was I in such credit with him, that I durst speak a
word of any such matter, or derogate from one brother before an other, or
find fault with a Prince, in the hearing of a Prince. Athanasius says it had
been madness to have done that which the Jesuits say he did.
I am not (so) mad, neither have I forgotten the voice of God, which says,
Curse not the king in thine heart, nor backbite the mighty in the secrets of
thy chamber. For the birds of the air shall tell it, and the fowls which
fly shall betraie thee. If the things which be spoken in secret touching you
Princes can not be hid; what likelyhoode, that I in the presence of a Prince,
and so many standing by, would say any thing of you otherwise than well?

And showing how often he spoke with the Emperor Co^stans and in whose presence,
and to what effect, which were to long to repeat, he concludes: Athanas.
Ibide^.
I beseech your highness (for I know well the force of your memory) call to
mind my behavior when it pleased you to admit me to your presence, first at
Vimimachum, then at Caesarea, and thirdly at Antioch, whether I did so much as
offer an evil word of Eusebius my bitter enemy, or gave a displeasaunt speech
of any my pursuers. If then I refrained my tongue when I was to plead against
them in mine own defense, what madness had that been for me to traduce an
Emperor before an Emperor, and to stir up one brother against an other?

What think you? Does not Athanasius reject that which you would father on
him, as a manifest untruth; nay as a villainous and frantike attempt to set
brethren together by the ears, and to stir wars between Princes? Why then
do you burden a godly Bishop with that which he never thought; and which he
was farthest from? Why make you Athanasius your rest for rebellion against
Princes, whereas he thought it unlawful in heart to curse a cruel and
heretical Prince? How far he did, and said he was bound to obey Constantius,
his own words will testify, and therefore no reason we believe your vaunting
and facing that he procured war against Constantius, when he himself
affirms the contrary. Ibidem.
They lay to my charge, says he to the same Prince, that I obayed not your
precepts, by the which it was enjoined me that I should depart from Alexandria.
How far the was he from rebelling?
I never resisted the commandments of your highness: no no: God forbid I
should. I am not he that will withstand the Governor of any City: much less
so great a Prince. Truly I prepared to depart: for so Montanus (your messenger)
knows, that upon the receipt of your letters, if your grace vouchsafed but to
write, I might presently be gone, and with my readiness to obey prevent your
rescript. Be they sober or well in their wits that not only think but openly
affirm they may resist and deprive the prince?

The people of Alexandria were very seditious.

Socra. li. 7. c. 13.


For I am not so mad as to think I may contradict such precepts. With what
forehead then can they say, I obaied not powers? Never reckon this man for a
resistant that so many ways protests and confirms his obedience to
Princes: learn you rather to follow his submission, and draw him not against
his own both deeds and words, to be of your faction.


Phi. The people of Alexandria were twice or thrice in an uproar about him:
first under Constantius, and after under Valens.


Theo. The people of Alexandria were very tumultuous, and raised many horrible
garboyles both in the Church and common wealth. Socrates says of them, Populus
Alexandrinus prae alijs populis seditionibus delectatur, and si quando
occasionem seditionis fuerit nactus ad intolerabilia mala prorumpit, nec sine
sanguine sedatur. The people of Alexandria delight in sedition more than other
Cities, and if at any time they catch any occasion to make a tumult, they run
headlong to foul outrages, and never end but with blood. The self same report
Euagrius gives of them: Euag. li. 2. ca. 8.
The people are soon stirred and easily incited to a tumult, most of all
others they of Alexandria: who by reason of their great number, and those
obscure persons, and of all sorts, are insolent, rash, bold, and in fury will
venture on any thing. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 2. and lib. 5. cap. 16. and li. 7.
cap. 13. Euag. lib. 2. cap. 5. and 8.
Lamentable examples whereof you may read in the stories of the church,
describing the horrible fights and slaughters that were between the Jews,
Gentiles, and Christians of that City, as well against the truth as with it.
And therefore in these populous and tumultuous Cities, if you did show some
insurrections of the people for their pastors, it would do you no great good.
Men have raised tumults in all ages, and that does justify rebellion in you,
Thieves and murderers far more tolerable than deposers of Princes.
no more than Cains sword dipped in his brothers blood at the first beginning of
the world, and never since dry, does warrant thieves to take men's lives by the
high ways side; yea rather less: for they kill to supply their needs, you
to revenge your grifes: they unhorse private men, you vnthrowe Princes: they
rifle howses, you spoil kingdoms: they fly upon the fact, you stand to the
defense of it before the whole world.

Far from this affection were S. Basil and S. Ambrose, as even now we saw:
and Athanasius as far, if you dare trust him on his oath: if not, you shall
shift him nearer by his acts. Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 9.
When he saw the people of his Church grudge (at the Emperors precept to
remove him from his seat) and ready to take weapon in hand, he departed the
city. Under Valens the people of that city likewise resisted and would not
suffer any violence to be offered Athanasius by the Captains, Sozom. lib. 6.
Cap. 13.

Athanas. ever submitted him self, when he saw the people inclined to any
tumult for his cause.


until the Emperors pleasure were precisely known touching Athanasius. In so
much that the multitude flocking together, and a great hurly burly rising in
the City, a sedition was feared. When the people some days after was appeased
Athanasius by night closely conueigheth himself out of the City. Others say
that foreseeing the rashness of the multitude, and fearing least he should seem
to be the author of that evil which might ensue, he hid him self all that
time in his fathers tumbe. Thus when he might have been defended by the
people, he would not: and because they suffered him not to depart from them by
day, he frale from them by night, and left his Bishopric to be disposed by
the prince.

Sozom. lib. 8. cap. 18.

And so did Chrysostom.


The like did Chrysostom in his troubles. For when the people knew (of his
deposition) they brake out into an uproar, and would not suffer those that had
it in charge from the Emperor to carry him into banishment. Chrysostom
fearing least any other crime should be fastened on him, either that he did not
obey the Emperor, or that he stirred the people to sedition, the third day
after his deprivation privily leaves his Church and yields himself to be
carried into exile. So that by S. Chrysostomes judgment it is first a fault in
a Bishop, The Defense, cap. 5.

Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 17. 30. Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 19.


not to obey the Prince, next it is an other fault to stir the people to
sedition, be the cause never so good, as Chrysostomes was not badde.


Phi. Likewise against Valens the Arrian Emperor; Petrus successor to
Athanasius and brother to S. Basil, did seek to the Pope of Rome for succor,
as al other afflicted Bishops and Catholics ever did. Socrat. lib. 4. cap.
37.



Theo. The Bishop of Rome in those days was neither so mighty that he could,
nor wicked that he would assist subjects with arms against their Sovereigns.
Peter Bishop of Alexandria brought letters from Damasus Bishop of Rome, The
tumult at Alexandria for the receiving of Peter and rejecting of Lucius.
allowing his election and Confirming the same: the people upon that spying
their time, displaced Lucius an Arrian, and received Peter their right Bishop.


Phi. And what was this but resistance to the Prince?


Theo. Resist they might and did, but not with arms.


Phi. Which way then?


Theo. By refusing his communion, disobeying his jurisdiction, and withdrawing
their duties from him, and yielding the same to Peter as to their lawful and
true Bishop.


Phi. Socrates says the people taking courage expelled Lucius, and set Peter
in his place. Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 37.



Theo. They might drive him away, and make him forsake the City though not
with arms. But whatsoever the people did against Lucius in their heat, The
people drove Lucius from his See: but not with arms.
having, as I noted before unto you out of the same writer, a very sharp and
seditious humor, and being miserably handled by Lucius, as scourged with
whippes, their flesh torn with hooks, and diversely tormented with fire unto
death: the letters of Damasus incited them to no such thing, but only approved
the election of Peter.


Phi. But Peter, it should seem, allowed the people in their enterprise, for
by their tumult he recovered his Bishopric.


Theo. You must not imagine rebellions, where none are written. The people
drove Lucius from the Sea, being an intruder, an heretic, and a murderer,
other tumult the Story does not mention.


Phi. The Prince had placed Lucius there.


Theo. The election of Bishops in these days belonged to the people and not to
the Prince, and though Valens by plain force placed him there, The people
might cleave to their true pastor, though the Prince by force had placed an
other in his steed.
yet might the people lawfully reject him as no Bishop, and cleave to Peter
their right Pastor.


Phi. Might they reject him with arms?


Theo. I said not so.


Phi. But so they did.


Theo. That must you prove: we find no such thing in the Story, neither of
Socrates nor Sozomene.


Phi. Socrates says they expelled him.


Theo. But not with arms.


Phi. Do you think he would yield without force?


Theo. Do you think any great force needed for a whole City to expel one
man? But why come you with thoughts when you should bring us proofs? That he
was expelled, we grant: That Lucius was expelled from his Bishopric is
confessed, but the mean how it was done is not expressed.
but whether it were done by forsaking, threatening, compelling, or inuading
him; the Story does not express, neither may you suppose what you list
without any proof: Had they assaulted him with arms, it had been as easy to
have slain him there; as to have driven him thence: but no doubt Peter their
Bishop, kept them from that, which Moses a convert of the Saracenes, not long
before bitterly reproved in Lucius.


Phi. You mean Moses the Moncke that Mauia the Queen of the Saracens required
to have for the Bishopppe of her Nation, whose faith the Bishop of Rome
confirmed in the same letters with Peter's election.


Theo. I do.


Phil. What of him?


Theo. When he was brought to Lucius to be made Bishop; he said, Socrat.
lib. 4. cap. 36.
I think my self unworthy of this function: but if it be profitable for my
Country that I take it, Lucius shall never lay hands on me (to make me
Bishop:) for his right hand is embrued with blood. Lucius answering that he
should not rail, but first learn what religion he taught. I ask not a
reason, says Moses, of thy religion, thy doings against thy brethren convince
what religion thou have. A christian does not strike, Lucius detested for
sheding of blood by one that was a convert of the Saracens.
does not slander, does not fight. The servant of God may not fight. But thy
works openly show themselves by those whom thou have banished, whom thou
have cast to be devoured of beasts and consumed with fire. If Moses thus
abhorred Lucius for fighting and striking, what would he have said to Peter
for bearing arms and rebelling, if he had been so good a warrier as you make
him?


Phi. The defense, cap. 5.
So did Atticus Bishop of Constantinople crave aid of Theodosius the younger
against the king of the Persians that persecuted his Catholic subjects,
Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 18. Niceph. lib. 14. cap. 21.
and was thereby forcibly deprived, and his innocent subjects delivered.


Theo. The christians of Persia being barbarously persecuted by Bararanes an
Infidel, and put as Theodorete shows to strange and Theodoret. li. 5. cap.
39.
unusual torments, fled their Country, and saving themselves within the
Roman Dominion, besought the Christian Emperor they might be harbored
within his land and not be yielded unto the fury of their king. The Persian
presently sent Legates to have them back that were departed his Realm. How
the Persians were harbored by Theodosius the younger.
Atticus the Bishop of Constantinople Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 18.
opened their cause to the Emperor, and labored what he could for them.
Theodosius the Emperor would not deliver them, as being suppliants to him,
and no offenders against their king, but only that they professed the
Christian Religion: and having besides just Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 18.
cause to make war upon the Persians for that they spoiled his merchants and
would not restore his Goldminers, which they hired of him, bid open battle to
them, and caused the king to be glad with peace, and to Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 20.
cease his persecution against the Christians.

Can the Jesuits find no difference between deposing princes, by their own
subjects and harboring of strangers by other princes?
Here is nothing for your purpose; unless you say that subjects may rebel for
Religion because strangers may be harbored for religion, which were a mad
kind of conclusion. The Persians asked not arms against their King though a
Tyrant, but refuge for themselves; neither did they assault their Prince on the
one side when the Romans invaded on the other, but with prayer expected what
end God would give.

Atticus was no subject to the king of Persia: and therefore whatsoever he did
against a stranger and an enemy, is no president for subjects to do the like
to their Princes; and yet all that he did was this; Atticus no subject to the
persian, can be no president for subjects.
Atticus Episcopus supplicantes cupide suscepit, and totus in eo erat, vt pro
viribus, ipsis succurreret, and Imperatori Theodosio, quae gererentur
significauit: Atticus the Bishop embraced their request (for themselves) with
great good will, and labored what he could to help them, and signified their
state to Theodosius the Emperor.

Theodosius the Emperor had other good causes to war upon the Persian.
Theodosius was a lawful magistrate, and had other, and those just causes to
war upon the Persian, and in that he refused to deliver the profugient and
innocent Christians to the slaughter, he had the Law of nature and nations
for his defense. And lastly the king of Persia was neither deprived of his
kingdom, as you falsely report, nor his subjects discharged from their
obedience: but a peace concluded wherein the King was contended to cease from
pursuing the Christians. Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 20.
All this you shall find, not in the second book as you quote, but in the
seventh where Cap. 18. and 20.
Socrates describes the occasion and conclusion of this Persian war. From
him Nicephorus takes his light, and more than Socrates said before he neither
does nor could affirm.


Phi. So did holy Pope Leo the first, The defense, cap. 5.
persuade the Emperor, called Leo also, to take arms against the Tyrant of
Alexandria for the delivery of the oppressed Catholics from him and the
heretics Eutichians: The example of Pope Leo the first.
who then threw down Churches, and Monasteries, and did other great
sacrileges. Whose words for examples sake I will set down. Leo. epist. 75.
Euag. li. 2. ca. 8.
O Emperor (says Saint Leo) if it be laudable for thee to invade the
heathens, how much more glorious shall it be to deliver the Church of
Alexandria from the heavy yoke of outrageous heretics, by the calamity of
which Church all the Christians in the world are iniuried?


Theo. Leo was so holy that he never taught any man to bear arms against his
Prince: Leo requested the Prince to punish his subjects, what is that to the
deprivation of Princes? Euag. li. 2. ca. 8.
and yet it did nothing hurt his holiness to pray the Emperor to pursue with
due punishment the wicked uproar that was made in Alexandria by Timotheus an
heretic, that placing himself in the Bishoprike, and killing Proterius the
true Bishop at the font in the Church: caused the carkas by some of his
faction to be drawn along the streets in a rope, and to be so cut and
mangled that the very intrayles drayled upon the stones, and the rest of the
body to be burnt and the ashes scattered into the air.

That villainous and devilish fact, Leo the Bishop of Rome beseeches Leo the
Emperor with all severity to revenge, assuring him that it is as glorious a
conquest before Christ to punish such outrageous heretics, It is a glorious
thing for a Prince to punish heretics but not for subjects to rebel against
their Prince.
as to repress miscreantes and Infidels. But how this should serve your
turns we can not imagine. Will you reason thus? Leo the Bishop of Rome
persuaded the Emperor to chastise some of his subjects that were heretics and
murderers, Ergo the people may assault their Prince with arms. Take heed left
Timotheus heresy and fury revive in you again, if you fall to liking such
consequents.


Phi. In brief; The defense, cap. 5.
so did S. Gregory the great move Genadius the Exarch, to make wars
specially against heretics as a very glorious thing.


Theo. You speak truer than you are ware of. Gregory made the like request to
the Emperors deputy.
In deed Gregory the great wrate to Genadius the Exarch in the self same
sense that Leo before did to Leo the Emperor, which is that Magistrates ought
to resist and punish the adversaries of Christ's Church, as well as the
troublers and disturbers of the Commonwealth; neither is there any difference
in their writings or meanings, save that Leo wrate to the Prince himself, and
Gregory to his Deputy.

And since you be come to Gregory, For 600. years after Christ, no subject
took arms against his prince for any matter of religion.
it is high time you begin to awake and remember your self that for six
hundredth years you have not, nor can not show us any one example, where
heretical Prince, was deposed, or subject allowed to bear arms against his
Sovereign. Which is a sufficient conviction that Pagans and heretics were all
this while honored, obeyed and endured by the Church of Christ, if they were
Princes. Or if that collection be not good, hear Saint Augustines confession
of him that was the very worst of them, I mean Julian the Apostata: and learn
that they which suffered and obeyed him, Aug. in Psalm. 124.
would never resist nor rebel against any. Iulianus extitit infidelis
Imperator, nonne extitit, Apostata iniquus, Idolatra? Milites Christiani
seruierunt Imperatori infidels. Vbi veniebatur ad causam Christi, non
agnoscebant nisi illum qui in caelo erat. Quando volebat vt idola colerent, vt
thurificarent, praeponebant illi Deum. Quando autem dicebat producite aciem,
ite contra illam gentem, statim obtemperabant. Distinguebant Dominum aeternum a
Domino temporali, and tamen subditi erant propter Dominum aeternum, etiam
Domino temporali. Julian was an unbelieving Emperor: If Apostataes were served
and obaied by Christians, what Princes should be deposed?
was he not an Apostata, an oppressor and an Idolater? Christian soldiers
served that unbelieving Emperor. When they came to the cause of Christ, they
would acknowledge no Lord but him that is heaven. When he would have them to
worship Idols and to sacrifice, they preferred God before their Prince. But
when he said, go forth to fight, invade such a nation, they presently obeyed.
They distinguished their eternal Lord from their temporal, and yet were they
subject even unto their temporal Lord, for his sake that was their eternal
Lord and master. Cause. 11. quaest. 13.. Iulianus.
The like testimony your Law brings out of S. Ambrose. Julian the Emperor
though he were an Idolater, had yet under him Christian soldiers: to whom
when he said, go, fight for the defense of the commonwealth, they did obey
him: but when he said, go fight against the Christians, then they regarded
the Emperor in heaven (before him.)


Phi. The defense, cap. 5. What Princes may be excommunicated and when.
The holy Bishops might most lawfully (and so sometimes they did)
excommunicate the Arrian Emperors, and have warranted their Catholic subjects
to defend themselves by arms against them: But they always did not so;
because they had no means by reason of the greater forces of the persecutours.
As there no question but the Emperors, Constantius, Valens, Julian, and others
might have been by the Bishops excommunicated and deposed, and all their
people released from their obedience, if the Church or Catholics had had
competent forces to have resisted.


Theo. The Jesuits finding no example in the Primative church where a prince
was urged with arms by his own subjects, come to this shift, that they might
have done it, though they did it not.
Uayne shifts you have brought us many, but none vayner than that which here
you broche. You undertook to show us ancient examples that Princes were
iudicially deposed by Priests, and impugned with arms by their own
subjects: You be now come to the uttermost pitch of Antiquity, and finding
your self not able to be as good as your word, you tell us that though
Bishops did it not, yet they might most lawfully have warranted their
Catholic subjects to defend themselves by arms, against (the Arrian
Emperors.) But sir, you were to bring us their examples what they did, not
your vants what they might have done. The point we began with, was; what
Bishops in this case might do. You to show what they might do, promised us
the particulars of ancient ages what they had done: and having perused six
hundred years after Christ, and perceauing no such deed done, you come with
a return at the last, that though they did it not, yet they might have done
it, whereas we rather collect they might not do it, because they did it not.
For had it been most lawful, as you say; we can prove it most needful they
should have done it. If the Bishops might have deposed princes and did not,
the^ were they permitters and increasers of their heresy and tyranny.
The blaspheming of Christ, the murdering of his saints, the seducing of many
thousand souls, (which things were not only committed by their means, but
also maintained by their power, that were suffered to bear and use the sword
for the strengthening and establishing of their error;) were causes sufficient
to move the Bishops to do* what they lawfully might to prevent these
mischifes, and save the Bishops you cannot from the blemish of permitting and
increasing the pestilent heresies of Arius and others, if they did not what
they might in dewtie to withstand, and depose those Princes that were the
chief Patrones of those impieties.


Phi. There is no question but the Emperors Constantius, The defense, Cap. 5.
Valens, Julian, and others might have been deposed by the Bishops and all
their people released from their obedience, if the Church or Catholics had
had competent forces to have resisted.


Theo. You falsely and wickedly slander the Martyrs of Christ's church, The
Jesuits slander the ancient martyrs of christ's Church, as if they had been
willing but not able to resist their Princes.

Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 22.

What oportunities the christians had to distress Constantius.

Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 25.


when you avouch they wanted not will, but power to resist their Princes. The
Christians had forces sufficient and many fit opportunities offered them to set
those heretical Emperors besides their Seats, and would not. Constans the
West Emperor was of power sufficient to have repressed Constantius his
brother, for fear of whom Athanasius was restored to his Bishoprike by
Constantius, and with whom if the Catholics of the East would have but joined
themselves, it had been most easy for them to have taken the Scepter from
Constantius.

When Constans was slain, Magnentius the Tyrant surprised all Italy, subdued
Africa and Lybia, and had France in subjection: and the soldiers of
Illyricum erected Betranion against Constantius; in which distress if the
Christians would but have forsaken Constantius and not ventered their lives for
him, he must have been deprived of the West Empire, if not of the East also.
Athanasius being charged that he with others secretly by letters incited this
Magnentius, to take arms against the Emperor, answered as I showed you
before: Athanas. apolog ad Constant.
Cast not this suspicion, O Emperor, upon the whole Church as though such
things were written or thought on by Christian men, and specially by Bishopes.
The like occasion was offered the Christians to displace Constantius when
Gallus, Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 34.
who was both Caesar and next to the Crown began to advance himself to the
Empire; but they took it, as you see by Athanasius words, to be no Christian
man's part to think on bearing arms against their Emperor though an heretic.

And Julian.
Of the Christian soldiers under Julian you heard S. Augustine say they In
Psalm. 124.
served their temporal Lord (though an Idolater and an Apostata) not for
lack of force to resist, but for respect of their everlasting Lord in heaven.
Otherwise the Christian soldiers had Julian in his voyage against the Persians
far from home and from help, and might have done with him what they would;
and yet they chose rather to spend their lives for him, than to lift up their
hands against him; and the Christian world in his absence stirred not against
him, but with patience endured his oppression and with silence expected his
return.


Phi. They were heathen soldiers that were with Julian in the Persian wars.


Theo. Their own words testify they were christians, for when Iouinian the
next day after Iulians death was chosen Emperor by them, and refused the
place, because he thought the most part of the soldiers to be Gentiles,
Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 22.
they cried al with one common voice and confessed themselves to be christians.

And valens.
Against Valens, the church of Christ had forces abundant, if she would have
sounded or used them. For all the time of his reign not only the West
Emperors were Catholics, first Valentinian and after him Gratian, but
Procopius at Constantinople taking arms against Valens, and the Goths
detayning all Thracia from him, Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 3.

Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 35.


gave the Christians great advantage to have shaken him clean out of the East
Empire: if their wills had been answerable unto their strength.

And Valentinian. Paulus Diaconus de gest. Romanor. lib. 1.
Valentinian the younger infected with Arianisme, Maximus a rebel of this land
thrust quite from the West Empire and made him fly into the East parts, and
had not Theodosius a Catholic Prince, conquered that Tyrant and restoared the
young Prince to his Scepter again, he had lost his Crown for ever. Where you
see not only what forces the Catholics had, but how far they were from
deposing heretical governors, that would hazard their lives to restoare them.

And Anastasius.

Euag. li. 3. ca. 44 Anastasius an heretic offered to resign his Crown and
the people would not suffer him. Regard of duty and the Apostles doctrine kept
the primative Church from resisting heretical princes.


And what think you was the force of all the christians in the world, when the
people of one City falling into a sedition for matter of Religion so prevailed
and passed all the power of resisting, that Anastasius the Emperor was feign
to come to an open place without his Crown, and by heraults to signify to the
people that he was ready with a very good will to resign the Empire into
their hands? At the sight of whom, the people moved with that spectacle
changed their minds, and besought Anastasius to keep the Crown, and promised
for their parts to be quiet. Yet was Anastasius both an heretic and an
excommunicate person, if your own words before, or stories otherwise may be
trusted.

Not therefore disabilitie but duty, not lack of competent forces, but a
reverent regard of the Apostles Doctrine kept the Primative Church of Christ
from resisting her Princes. She never determined, she never attempted any
such thing: she might often times have repelled them from their Seats and
would not, but taught all men to submit themselves, and rather to be
crowned as martyrs for enduring, than to be punished as rebels for inuading
their Princes. For Romans 13.
they that resist, shall receive judgment, which not only the ancient
Christians but the very Barbarians did confess. Athanaricus king of the
Goths, when he came to visit Theodosius, Paulus Diaconus de gest. Romanor.
lib. 1.
Sine dubio, inquit, Deus terrenus est Imperator, contra quem quicunque manus
leuare nisus fuerit, ipse su^ sanguinis reus existit. No doubt, says he, the
Emperor is the God of the earth, against whom, whosoever will offer to lift up
his hand, is guilty of his own blood.


Phi. Yea the quarrel of Religion and defense of innocence is so just that
heathen Princes not at all subject to the Churches Laws and discipline may in
that case by the Christians arms be resisted, The defense, cap. 5.

Se. S. Thomas 2.2. quaest. 10. artic. 10.


and ^ight lawfully have been repressed in times of the Pagans and first great
persecutions, when they vexed and oppressed the faithful; but not otherwise (as
most men think) if they would not annoy the Christians, nor violently hinder
or seek to extirpate the true faith and course of the Gospel. Though S. Thomas
seems also to say that any heathen king may be lawfully deprived of his
superiority over Christians.


Theo. What S. Thomas seems to say we care not, so long as we know what S.
Paul says: Romans 13.
and that is, You must be subject, not only for fear of wrath, or lack of
force, when you can not choose, but even for conscience sake, though you were
able to resist. If your schools have gotten any other doctrine than this,
look you to that: we be the disciples of Christ, and not of Occam, Scotus,
or Thomas; men may by this perceive what your schoolmen would adventure in
other points of Religion, that in so clear a case of conscience and
obedience, they would flatly contradict the holy Ghost. Their scroles resolve
directly against S. Paul. Romans 13. Luke. 20.
Heathen Princes may not be resisted by their Christian subjects: of them
Saint Paul wrate when he said, Whosoever resists power, resists the
ordinance of God; and of them Christ spoke, when he charged us to give unto
Caesar, the things which are Caesar's. They might not therefore lawfully have
been repressed in the times of the Pagans and first great persecutions when
they vexed and oppressed the faithful, because sufferance made their subjects
martyrs before God, whom resistance would have doubbed for rebels against God
and man.

If your meaning be, that by Christian Princes, (had there been any such in
those days, This is nether pertinent to our question nor any part of their
meaning.
) they might lawfully have been repressed and pursued with arms, you alter
the question, and touch not our case: We reason not what Christian Princes may
do to heathen Tyrants, but what duty Christian subjects must yield to their
Princes, be they Pagans or others that bear the swoorde. And for that we
have the manifest voice of Gods spirit which I have often repeated, and
against the which we give ear to no creature, man nor Angel.

That voice the church of Christ diligently remembered, and constantly followed,
as Tertullian witnesses. Tertullian. ad Scapulam.

Never rebels were christians in the primative Church.


We are disfamed, says he, concerning the Emperors majesty, but never yet
Albinians, Nigrians nor Cassians, (Albinus, Niger, and Cassius being rebels in
his time) could be found to be Christians. A Christian is enemy to no man,
much less to the Prince: whom he knows to be appointed of God* and so of
necessity must love, reverence, and honor him, and wish him safe with the
whole Roman Empire. Therefore we sacrifice for the health of the Emperor,
but unto our God and his God, and with chaste prayer, as GOD has commanded.
The reasons why Christians would not resist, taken out of their own confessions.
So that we pray for the Emperors health more than you, asking it of him that
is able to give it. And God forbid we should take those things which we
suffer, in evil part, since we desire to suffer them, or imagine any revenge
against you, which we wait for at Gods leisure. Yet needful it is we
lament your case, since not a city of yours shall escape at Gods hand for the
shedding of our blood.

Tertul. in apologetico.
And again in his Apology for all Christians: Thou that think we have no
care of the welfare of our Princes, look upon the words of GOD, I mean our
books, which neither we suppress, and many chances bring to your eyes.
Know, that there we are commanded for the plentiful increase of our
charity to pray to God for our enemies, and to wish well to our persecutours.
Ibidem.

Christians commanded by God to pray for their Princes though they were
persecutors.

Ibidem.


Yea namely and plainly he says, Pray for kings, for Princes, and powers,
that all things may be peaceable (unto them.) For the Empire can not be
shaken but we also must be partakers of the fall. And after some words, But
what speak I more of the religion and piety of Christians toward the
Emperor? Whom we must needs reverence as one that our Lord and master has
chosen. And to speak the truth, Caesar is rather ours (than yours) as being
ordained by our God. And giving a better reason for their obeying than you can
for your warring: We are says he, the same men to our Princes that we are to
our neighbors. To wish evil, to do evil, to speak evil, to think evil,
is indifferently forbidden us toward all men. We may do that to no man,
which (we say) we may not to our Prince: and if to no man, so much the less to
him that is so highly advanced by (our) God.

This is sounder and seemelier doctrine for Christians than that which you
bring us out of Thomas Aquinas. And where you will us by the note in your
margin to See S. Thomas a Saint of your making, we will you to See S. Paul and
S. Peter Saints past all doubting. See S. Paul and S. Peter for obedience to
heathen Princes.
You see the continual obedience of Christ's Church, so long as Pagan and
heathen Princes had the sword. She taught that all men, and most of all
Christians, should love, reverence and honor heathen Princes as ordained by
God, to bear the swoorde, even by the God of Christians, and that they might
neither wish evil, do evil, speak evil or think evil of any such Powers,
much less resist them with arms and deprive them of their superiority over
Christians, as your new saint seems to say.

And lest you think the Christians of those times served and honored heathen
Princes rather for fear than for conscience, (which is an open slander to
them, and a lewd shift of yours, directly thwarting the words of Saint Paul,
Romans 13.
You must be subject not because of wrath only, but also for conscience sake.)
You shall hear Tertullians report in the same place what forces the christians
had, if they had thought it lawful or godly to resist when they were cruelly
vexed and oppressed. Tertul. in apologetico.
One night, says he, with a few fierbrands, would yield us revenge sufficient,
if it were lawful with us to requite evil with evil. But God forbid, that
either they, which take part with GOD, should revenge themselves with humane
fire, or be grieved to suffer, wherein they be tried. If we would not practice
secret revenge, but profess open enmity, Mark what faces the Christians had
200. years after Christ.
could we lack number of men, or force of arms? Are the Moors think you, or
the Parthians, or any one nation whatsoever, mo in number than we, that are
spread over the whole world? We are not of you, and yet we have filled all the
places and rooms which you have; your Cities, Islands, Castles, towns,
asse^blies, your tents, tribes and wards, yea the very Palace, Senate, and
judgment seats. For what war were we not able and ready, though we were
fewer in number than you that go to our deaths so gladly, if it were not more
lawful in our religion to be slain than to slay? We could without arms never
rebelling, but only dividing our selves from you have done you spite enough
with that separation. For if so great a multitude as we are should have broken
from you, into some corner of the world, the loss of so many Citizens would
have both shamed you, and punished you. Believe me you would have bin afraid to
see your selves left alone and amazed, as amongst the dead, to see silence and
desolation every where. You would have had more enemies, Desolation would have
followed if the Christians should have but forsaken the Pagans. The Citizens
almost all Christians.
than inhabitauntes, where now you have fewer enemies by reason of the
multitude of your Citizens that are almost all Christians. Within two hundredth
years after Christ, the beeleeuers, as you hear by Tertullian, wanted neither
number, strength nor courage to resist or revenge their persecutours. What
numbers and forces then had they four, five, six hundredth years after
Christ, when they were backed by Princes, defended by Laws, and provoked with
favors and honors to profess Religion? and yet all that while, neither under
Pagans, nor Arrians, did they, or would they resist with arms, but yielded
their lives with all submission, though they wanted neither means, nor
multitude convenient for any wars.


Phi. Howsoever that be; The defense, cap. 5.
plain it is that kings that have professed the faith of Christ and the
defense of his Church and Gospel, may be and have been justly both
excommunicated and deposed for injuries done to Gods Church and revolt from the
same; as sometimes also for other great crimes tending to the pernition of the
whole people subject unto them.


Theo. You presume more in seven lines than you are able to prove in seven
years. That Popes have attempted to depose Princes, and for the perfourming of
their enterprise have shaken the Church with horrible schisms and wearied the
world with slaughter and bloodshed we know full well, you need not urge it.
But that they justly did, or might depose Princes which is the point we strive
for, though you affirm it to be plain, we deny it to be true: and therein
the paune of your bare credit, if you knew not so much before, we take for no
good evidence in this cause.


Phi. The defense, cap. 5.

Princes excommunicated and deprived for defects in religion.


To speak specially of matter of religion, and the crimes thereunto belonging:
Leo the third was excommunicated and deprived of all his temporalities in
Italy by Gregory the second. For defect also in Religion and of the Churches
defense, were the Greek Emperors discharged, and the Empire translated to the
Germans by Pope Leo the third. As afterward diverse German Emperors for notable
injuries done to Gods Church, for sacrilege, and for heresy; by godly
discipline of the Church, and by the diligence of sundry Popes, have been
brought to order, or in fine deposed; or else where they would not obey Christ's
Vicar, either in themselves, or in their posterity have been notoriously by
God confounded. As Frederick the first, Frederick the second, Otho the first,
Jews, the third, Jews the fourth, and whom we name last (because we must say
some thing more of him) Henry the third (or as some call him) the fourth, by
Gregory the seventh; which example the Libeller and other heretics most
mention; for that the said Henry so obstinatly resisted (though otherwise by
the invincible courage and constancy of the Pope often brought to penance and
extremity) that in fine by arms he drove the said Pope out of his Sea; and
placed an Antipape: An Anti pape.
that is to say, one so opposite to Christ's Vicar as Antichrist shall be
against Christ* which by arms and Patronage of this wicked Emperor, usurped
and occupied the Apostolical throne against the true Pope Gregory the seventh,
whom the Libeller (after the vulgar vain of rebellious heretics) voutsafeth
not the name of Gregory the seventh, but calls him commonly Hildebrand: as
the heretics when they were in arms in Germany against their Emperor,
Heretical malice.
would not name him Charles the fifth, nor Emperor, but Charles of Gaunt.


Theo. No president for the depriuatio^ of princes within a 1000. years after
Christ.
Finding no president for the Deprivation of Princes within the first six
hundred years after Christ, you go lower to get somewhat for your purpose:
and within the next four hundredth years you name us one that was not deprived
of his Empire, but denied his revenues in Italy by the rebellion of the
soldiers and Citizens of Rome, Rauenna, Venice, and other places against him.


Phi. Zonar. annal. to. 3. in imperio Leon. Isa^ri.
The Greek and Latin writers do consent that this was Gregory's act. Zonaras
says, Gregory which then ruled the church of old Rome refusing the
fellowship of the Bishop of new Rome, and of all that were of his opinion,
wrapped them together with the Emperor in a Synodical excommunication, and
stayed the tribute which til that time was paid to the Empire: and made a
league with the Germans. Vrspergens. in anno 718.
Vrspergensis says, Gregory the Pope of Rome prohibited any tribute to be
given to the Emperor out of the City of Rome or out of Italy. Otho
Frisingen. lib. 5. cap. 18.
Frisingensis has the like, Gregory the Pope warning the Emperor often times
by letters, and finding him incorrigible persuaded Italy to revolt from his
Empire. And so Sigebert, Sigebert. in anno 731.
Gregory reproved Leo the Emperor for his error, and turned both the people
of Rome and the tribute of the West parts from him. More I could bring you,
but these are enough.


Theo. You speak truer than you are ware of. The rebellion of the Italia^s
against Leo the third was like enough to be Pope Gregory's act. The rebellion
of the Italia^s against Leo might be the Popes secret practice, but he durst
not appear in the matter.
For the Bishops of Rome were then Malcontentes, to see the Bishops of
Constantinople live in such wealth, ease, and honor, and themselves neglected
by the Greek Emperors and afflicted daily by the Lumbardes. And therefore I
think they were forward enough to kindle the people against their Prince
upon the least occasion that might fall out. And that may be the meaning of
those Greek and Germane writers which you bring, that the Bishop of Rome
occasioned or secretly encouraged the rebellion of Italy against Leo: But that
he took upon him in those days to be the deposer of Princes, as now he does,
or that he openly showed or pleaded his universal and supreme power to dispose
kingdoms, which is the thing that you should prove, that I deny: and therein
your own stories, as well the elder as the later sort of them, that otherwise
be very partial, will justify my speech.

Diaconus alive in those days, says: Leo the Emperor took the images of
Saints at Constantinople and burnt them, Paulus Diaconus de gestis Romans li.
8. in Leo. The Bishop of Rome deprived not Leo the third of his temporalities.
and commanded the Bishop of Rome, if ever he looked to have his favor, to do
the like. But the Bishop refused to do it, and all the soldiers of Rauenna
and Venice resisted this precept with one consent, and but that the Bishop of
Rome prohibited them so to do, they had attempted to make an other Emperor
over them. Regino, that lived 200. years before Sigebert, Frisinge^sis,
Vrspergensis or Zonaras, says the same.

Blondus a diligent searcher and reporter of antiquities, Regino in anno Dom.
655. Blondus decadis 1. lib. 10. This was a rebellion of the soldiers, and not
a deprivation of the Popes.
where partial affection does not blind him, says: The Emperor dealt by
fair means at first with the Bishop of Rome, if he would have his favor,
to pull down and burn the images in all places of Italy as he had done in the
East. Upon this precept of the Emperor, first the citizens of Reuenna, then
the people and soldiers of Venice brake into an open rebellion against the
Emperor and (his deputy) the exarch, and labored to the Bishop of Rome, and
to other cities of Italy to abrogate the Empire of Constantinople and to chose
one of Italy or Rome for their Emperor: and the rebellion went so far, that
rejecting Magistrates which the exarch had appointed, The Pope durst not openly
be seen to take their parts howsoever he privately incensed or favored this
tumult.

Naucle^us generat. 25.


every city and every town began then first since the inclination of the
Roman Empire to create and elect Magistrates of their own, which they called
Dukes. But Stephen the Bishop of Rome repressed that attempt of the Italians to
choose a new Emperor because he hoped Leo would upon better advise hereafter
forbear such enormities. Yet the rebellion of the people of Rome, and of other
persons in Italy went forward, and every day increased against the Emperor.
Nauclerus agrees with Blondus, save that he makes Gregory the second then
Bishop of Rome, when Blondus names Stephen.

Platina in Gregory 2.
Platina tells his tale this way. Leo the Emperor, the third of that name,
when he could not have his will at the Bishop of (Rome) proposed an edict
that all men under the Roman Empire, should take out of their Temples the
images of all the holy Martyrs, and Angels, for avoiding of idolatry as he
said: and who so did not, he would account him for an open enemy. Gregory
(the second) not only obeyed not, but also warned all the Catholics, (so
your adherentes call themselves, though they be nothing less than Catholics)
that they should not fall into that error for any fear or precept of Prince.
This made the Germans and Graecians impute this rebellion to the Bishop of
Rome: and perhaps not without cause if all his private packing had bin known.

Sabel Ennead. 8. lib. 7.


By the which exhortation the people of Italy were so animated, that they
lacked very little of chosing themselves an other Emperor: but Gregory
interposed himself to stay them by his authority from doing it.

Sabellicus adding a third cause why the people of Rome and Italy were sore
grieved with the Emperor, and with-helde their tribute, and not long after
divided the Empire, which was the continual impugning of them and prevailing
against them by the Lombardes without any help from the Graecians.

Leo, says he, prayed (the Bishop of Rome) friendly that following his
example, he would raze the images of Saints out of all the temples (in Italy.)
Wherein the Bishop not only would not gratify the Prince, but wrote unto all the
churches that they should continue their most ancient custom. That procured
Leo passing hatred amongst other Nations but chiefly among the Italia^s, The
Italians were many ways grieved with the Graecians and that made them take
light occasions to revolt.
insomuch that the people of Rome began to consult of the choice of a new
Emperor within Italy, and the hearts of all Italy were joined with them in
that attempt, and that consent of theirs had broken forth into an open
defection, had not the Bishop of Rome enterposed his authority, and restrained
the fierceness of his citizens by mollifieng them and admonishing them to
persist in their former duty to the Emperor, when as that co^spiracie had
already so prevailed; that Marinus the ruler of the city and his son the
president of Campania being slain by the people, and the Exarch likewise
murdered at Rauenna, the cities and commons had chosen for themselves new
Magistrates.

Aeneas Sylu. in Decad. Blo^d. lib. 10. Decad. 1.
Aeneas Syluius, even when he was Pope Pius the second speaking often his
uproar made against Leo the third says: To this rebellion the Bishop of
Rome did not consent, hoping that Leo would be better advised.

The Pope calls Leo most religious Lord the last year of his life.
If the report of other Writers be not sufficient, the letters of Gregory the 2.
and Gregory the 3. will witness no less: the one writing in the 7. year of
Leo, the other, in the 23. which was the last year of the reign and life of
Leo the 3. where they call him not only Emperor but most religious Lord:
which could not be* if for his impiety they long before had forsaken his
obedience as Zonaras the Monk imagines. Auen. lib. 3. annalium fol. 289.
Gregory the 2. ends his letters with, Imperante Domino pijssimo Augusto
Leone, a Deo coronato, magno Imperatore, imperij eiu^ anno septimo. In the 7.
year of the reign of the great Prince crowned by God, Ibide^ fol. 291.
Leo the Emperor (our) most gracious Lord. Gregory the third writes,
Imperante Domino pijssimo Augusto Leone, Imperij eius anno vicesimo tertio. In
the 23. year of the reign of (our) most religious Lord Leo the Emperor.
Marianus in annis 727. and 741.
Both which letters Marianus Scotus remembers with their dates in his account
of times and years. If Leo the last year of his life were called religious
Lord and Emperor by the Bishop of Rome: how can it be true, that either of
the Gregory's forsook his obedience and deprived him of all his dominions in
Italy, long before his death?

Who stirred this rebellion against Leo the third, I will not dispute: The
Graecians had good cause to suspect the Bishop of Rome, and to think him to
be the very author and contriuer of it, as Zonaras does: but that which he
did was closely done under hand, by conspiring privily with other places and
inciting the people by secret means to revolt from the Empire. The Bishop of
Rome did not then take upon him to be the deposer of Princes.

This proves rebellion of the people against their Prince if the Jesuits
will, but it concerns not the Popes censures.

The Defense, cap. 5.


As for any open and apparent act, he was so far from taking upon him to
deprive the Emperor by judicial sentence in his Consistory, that he durst
not be known in this tumult to stand with the people, or favor their
doings by any public aid or consent, but seemed rather to stay them by his
persuasion, and to labor against that defection of theirs in the sight of
others as your own Stories do confess. And therefore you may prove, if you
will by this example a rebellion of the Romans against their Prince, which the
Bishop of Rome neither did, nor durst avouch; but deposition of Princes by
the Popes censures, which is the point that we demand, you can not prove by
this or any other president in the West parts for a thowsande years after
Christ.


Phi. You can not deny but that for defect in religion and of the churches
defense the Greek Emperors were discharged and the Empire translated to the
Germans by Pope Leo the third.


Theoph. That the Empire was divided I do not deny, The division of the
Empire.
but that it was done for defect in religion, or that the Pope alone of his
absolute authority did it, both these I deny: and therein though certain
Monks and Friars of yours do slubber up the matter, and attibute the doing
thereof to the Popes sole and sovereign power: yet the truer and exacter
writers of your own side do witness the contrary.

And that first it was not done for any defect in Religion, The Empire was not
divided for any defect in religion. Synod. Nicenae 2. actio. 2.
the time, when it was done, will declare. The second Council of Nice was
celebrated in the eight year of Constantine and Irene, as the first session of
the Council does specify: Where not only the Legates of Adrian Bishop of
Rome say of themselves, Nos postquam ab Apostolico Patre nostro Adriano
litteras accepissemus, eas ad pios nostros Imperatores pertulimus, The letters
which we brought from our Apostolic Father Adrian we delivered to the hands
of our religious Emperors, ( Constantine and Irene.) But Adrian himself
writing to them by name, Ibidem epist. Adrian. ad Constant. Imperat. and Iren.
matrem eius.
says: Being lately by your godly commandment advertised of your pleasure, we
offered prayers and thanks to almighty God for your Empire. And growing to an
end, Haec sunt serenissimi and pijssimi Imperatores: These are the things most
gracious and godly Emperors, which we have gathered out of the Scriptures, etc.
the which by our Apostolic relation we present to the good affection of your
Majesty's with all humility and sincerity: beseeching your clemency and as
it were kneeling in your presence, and prostrate before your feet, I with my
brethren make supplication and request to you in the sight of God, The Pope
confesses the church of Rome to be the Greek Emperors: in the second Nicene
Synod: and after that council was no change of religion in Greece. The Empire
was divided by the public decree of the Roman state and not by the Popes
keys.
that keeping the tradition of this your most holy and blessed church, you will
detest the wicked rage of heretics that you may embrace this catholic and
Apostolic church of Rome which is yours, without dissolution. At this Synod
Constantine and Irene were acknowledged by Adrian and his Legates for Emperors
of Rome: and after this Synod til the division of the Empire, there was no
change of religion in Greece, but the affairs of the church stood in the same
state in which they were at the time of this Synod. And sure it is that Irene
was wholly addicted to images, for by her help this council was kept and images
restored: and yet in her reign, when she alone had the rule of all, the Empire
was divided. So that religion can not be pretended for the translation of the
Roman Empire from the Greeks to the Germans.

Again the maine consent of your Stories is; that the Senate and people of
Rome did concur with the Bishop in this action, and their decree that he
should, and request that he would crown Charles for their Emperor, are
expressly remembered in the most of your writers, otherwise deriuing all the
power they can in these and such like cases to the Bishop of Rome. Platina and
Blondus say it was done, Populi Romani scito ac precibus: by the decree and
request of the people of Rome: Platina in Leone 3.

Blondus Decadis 2. lib. 1. Nau^l. volum. 3 generatio. 27. in anno 800. Sabel
ennead. 8. lib. 8.

Auen. annal. boior. lib. 4. fol. 344.


Nauclerus says it was done, populi Romani consensu: with the consent of the
people of Rome: Sabellicus says, Scito rogatuque populi Romani. The Pope did
it by the determination and petition of the people of Rome. Auentinus says,
Pontifex, Senatus, populusque Romanus, imper^um transfer, iure suo in
Germanos Carolumque tacito Senatus consulto, plebiscitoque decernunt. The
Bishop, Senate, and people of Rome, conclude by a decree of the Senate and
people secret among themselves, to remove the (Roman) Empire, and in their
own right to derive it unto the Germans and unto Charles.

Sigeber. in ann. 801.

The Romans pretended the wickedness of Irene to be the cause why they forsook
the Graecians.


Sigebert showing the time, and adding the cause, says: Romani qui ab
Imperatore Constantinopolitano iam diu animo disciuerant, nunc accepta
occasionis opportunitate, quia milier excaecato Imperatore Constantino filio
suo eis imperabat, vno omnium consensu Carolo Regi Imperatorias lauds
acclamant, eumque per manus Leonis Papae coronant, Caesarem and Augustum
appellant: The Romans, which in heart were long before fallen from the
Emperor of Constantinople, taking this occasion and opportunity that a woman,
which had pulled out the eyes of her own son the Emperor, had gotten the
Dominion over the^, with one general consent proclaim king Charles for their
Emperor and crown him by the hands of Pope Leo, and salute him as Caesar and
Emperor (of Rome.) Frisingensis says of her: Otho Frisingen. lib. 5. cap. 29.
Digna cuius diebus orbis imperium quod in manus faeminae non digne deuenerat,
ad Francos transferretur. She well deserved that in her days the Empire of the
world, which came into the hands of a woman by so vile means, should be
translated to the Germans.

Aeneas Syluius gives an other cause that moved them no less, than this.
Aeneas Syluius de authoritate Romani Imperij, cap. 9.
Demum vero negligentibus Romam Graecis, eamque nunc Barbarorum, nunc aliorum
direptions relinquentibus, populus ille Romanus, qui suo sanguine tantum
pararat imperium, qui suis virtutibus Monarchiam fundauerat orbis, venientem in
auxilium eis Carolum magnum Francorum Regem, qui vrbem sacraque loca ab omni
hostium incursione defendit, concurrente summi consensu Pontificis Caesarem
salutauit: The Princes of Greece beginning to neglect the city of Rome, A
second cause pretended for the division of the Empire.
and to leave it to the spoil of Barbarians and others, the people of Rome
which with their blood had gotten so great an Empire, and with their virtues
established the Monarchy of the world, saluted Charles the great king of
Germans (as he came to help them, and had defended the city and temples from
all inuasio^s of enemies) for their Emperor, not without the consent of the
Bishop of Rome.

So that the wiser sort even of your own fellows do neither pretend
religion, nor the Popes superemine^t power over al kingdoms, for the
translation of the Empire as you do, but set it down as an Act done by the
general consent and authority of the Bishop, Senate and people of Rome for
mere civil respects. And at the time of their defection from the Grecians,
they neither deprived Prince, The indignity which the Romans conceived against
Irenes usurpation and cruelty.
nor pretended any Papal censure for the matter; but abhorring to see a wicked
woman (that had thrust the right heir and her own son from his throne, and
pulled out his eyes) to invade and hold the Monarchy of the world by injury
and tyranny, they rejected her as an usurper and disposed otherwise of their
own state by electing a new Emperor.


Phi. They would never after be united again to the Grecians.


Theo. You range without your bonds. The division of the Empire so long as it
was neither for matter of religion, The division of the Empire makes nothing
for the Popes depriving of Princes.
as I have proved, nor done by the Popes Apostolic power, as your own
companions grant, but by the consent of the whole state of Rome, either for
displeasure to see themselves neglected in their miseries by the Grecians, or
for disdain that a wicked Tygresse usurped the Empire without all right, is
nothing to your question; and therefore whether it were lawful or unlawful
for the Romans so to do, can do you no more good, tha^ it can do us, Many
realms fell from the Greek Empire before the Romans.
to prove that the Queen of England, or the king of France may depose
Princes, because either Realm had long before that severed and disioyned
themselves from the Roman Empire, and had by this time, when the Romans fell
away, peaceable and absolute regimentes of their own.


Phi. These Countries were conquered, and so by the Law of arms divided from
the Empire.


Theo. So could we say that Italy was conquered first by the Lombards, and
after by Charles, who took their king captive, and by the law of arms
inherited his crown. But we stand not on that as being without our compass:
it suffices to confute you that the Empire was divided by the Romans for
earthly respects, as appears by the confession of your own fellows, and
not any Prince deposed by the Popes authority for default in matter of
religion. You heard before what Aeneas Syluius said: Blo^dus, Sabellicus,
Nauclerus and others report the like occasion and reason for the Romans
dividing the Empire.

Blood. Decad. 1. lib. 10.

Upon what occasion the Empire was divided, by the report of their own
stories.


Aistulfus king of the Lombards, says Blondus: invaded and spoiled the parts
of Italy that belonged to the Romans. The Bishop of Rome did his best with
gifts and entreaties to pacify the wicked king; and when he perceived it did
not avail him, he wrote to Constantine the Emperor, and showed him in what
state the City of Rome and all Italy stood, assuring him that unless he
did ^ende help, the City and the whole Country would be subdued by
Aistulfus: The Emperor moved with the earnest petition of Gregory* (the
third) wrote to Aistulfus, but his Legates brought nothing back from
Aistulfus but words, and those sharp enough. The Bishop hearing this and
seeing no good done, called an assembly of the whole people of Rome, The Pope
himself pretends not religion in this consultation.
and there at their earnest motion and request resolved to deal thus with the
Emperor, that unless he would succor the City and Country in this
extremity with his presence and army, they would seek some other way to
save and defend themselves. The messengers were skant gone, but Aistulfus sent
Heraultes to menace the Bishop and people of Rome, that unless they would
yield themselves and the City, he would come and take them by force, and
kill man, woman, and child. The Pope did not cease with presents and promises
to win Aistulfus to continue the league which he had begun with the
Romans. Help sought from the king of France by the common assent of the
people of Rome.

Sabel. ennead. 8. lib. 8.


And when he labored in vain, and the messenger which was ^ent to the
Emperor neither returned, nor gave them any hope of aid (from the Empire)
TOGETHER WITH THE PEOPLE OF ROME HE DETERMINED to desire the help of the king
of France.

Sabellicus putting Stephen where Blondus does Gregory, says: Not long
after Aistulfus took Rauenna, which when the Bishop of Rome by Legates
required to have restored, the Lombarde not only refused, but with great
threats willed them to tell the Bishop and people of Rome, that except they
did render their city and whole Dominion into his hands, he would shortly
come and subdue them with arms, and kill them every one. Stephen amazed with
these terrors of war gave counsel to send to Constantinople, whence they
which were sent signified by letters that there was no looking for help from
Constantine, either for that he would not or could not, and therefore they
must seek some other way. Nauel. volum. 3. generat. 26. anno 753. Blond.
Decad. 1. lib. 1.
The Bishop appalled with these letters, dealt with the people that some
might be sent into France to king Pipine. Nauclerus and others say the same,
insomuch that when Aistulfus streitly besieged Rome three months and wasted
all that was round about it with fire and sword, Blondus says, Dum tantis
fluctuat angiturque vel detrimentis velpericulis Roma and Italia, Constantinus
Imperator nullam subueniendi curam suscepit. Whiles Rome and Italy tottered
and was ready to sink under these ruins and hazards, Constantine the Emperor
had no manner of care to relieve them.

This neglect of their calamities, not religion, made the Romans seek and
take all opportunities to forsake the Grecians. I speak of the people, not of
the Pope: The Pope had his secret purposes in laboring the division of the
Empire.
for he had deeper reaches and other purposes in laying this plotte, and those
were the bettering his state and enriching himself with the spoils of the
Empire, and aspiring to be free from the Princes check, to whom till that
time he was wholly subject: which were the chief intentes of his first joining
with the Germans. And therefore when he was once set at liberty from the
yoke of the Grecians and endued with a good part of the Emperors revenues in
Italy, he never left practicing till he brought the Roman Scepter to
nothing, and himself to this height that we now see him in, by the final
ruin and subversion of the East and West Empire.


Phi. Might the people of Rome forsake the Grecians that bare the sword?


Theo. Look you to that. You may prove them rebels, The Jesuits by this may
prove the Romans to be rebels if they lift, they can not prove the Pope to be
the disposer of kingdoms. See Zonaras annalium, lib. 3.
if you be so disposed; you can not prove the Bishop of Rome to be the
deposer of Princes. That which was done had the common consent, and was the
public Act of the Roman state, when there was no disagreement in religion
between them and Irene; but a dislike for lack of convenient aid in their
distresses as some affirm, or else a coffeehouse to see that furious woman
usurp the imperial dignity, and no lawful successor left to vindicate the
same out of her hand, as others seem to say.

What-soeuer the cause was that moved the Romans; the Empire amongst the
Grecians at that time went neither by succession nor election, but they were
fallen to cutting of throats, and he that was mightiest took the sword.
Justinian the younger was deprived of the Empire and banished, The Grecians were
fallen to catching and fighting for the Scepter, before the Romans shranke
from them.
and his nose cut off by Leo the second: and Leo the second thrust from the
throne and imprisoned by Tiberius the third. Against them both when Justinian
had prevailed and recovered his crown and put them to death, Philippicus in
open field slew Justinian, and gat his place: but kept it not long. For
Arthemius the next year after took from him the Scepter, and both his eyes.
Theodosius saw that, and he set Arthemius besides the stool, and with
maine force of arms made him of a Prince a poor Priest, and was himself
within one year served of the same sauce by Leo the third. This wretched
tumbling for the Empire by rebellion and murder might provoke the Romans to
give ear to the Popes private whisperings: and when they saw Constantine the
sixth the last of Leoes line deprived both of his kingdom and eyesight by his
own mother, to forsake her as well as the Grecians did after deprive her, The
Grecians deprived Irene as usurping the scepter.
and close her in an Abbay; but that I esteem not, so long as the Pope by the
power of his keys did not divide the empire, for defect in religion, as you
vainlie avouch.


Phi. Many writers witness with us that the Bishop of Rome translated the
Empire. The Pope by right of his keys had naught to do with the Roman Empire



Theo. We do not deny but the Bishop as a principal part of the city and
policy of Rome had a stroke therein, and gained well thereby: but that he did
it by his Priestly power as Peter's successor, and not rather the people and
the Bishop joining together with their common advise and authority as a
politic state, that you shall never prove.


Phi. What had the people to do with translating the Empire?


Theo. Nay what had the Pope to do with disposing the temporal sword? The
people had more to do with translating the Empire than the Pope.
The Roman state and Commonwealth had as good right to dispose the Roman
Empire, as all other christian and heathen kingdoms and countries had to settle
the sword and scepter that reigned over them. And since all other nations, once
members of the Roman Empire, were suffered to plant those several forms of
regiment which they best liked, and when the right heirs failed, to elect
their own Governors, I see no cause why the Romans might not provide for
themselves, as well as other Realms had done before them, specially if the
purportes of your Stories be true, that they were neglected by the Grecians
when they were besieged by the Lombardes, and the scepter at Constantinople
went not by descent or succession, but by violent and wicked invasion and
sedition; but that the Bishop of Rome by his Priestly keys, or Apostolic
power did or might dispose the Empire, that we deny: And if any of your side
to flatter the Pope, make report that he did it of his absolute power, and
judicial authority, we little esteem such stragglers: as having the
general consent of your best authors and chiefest pillours for the contrary.


Phi. The chiefest of our side are against the most of your assertions. You
hold opinion that Leo the third was not deprived of all his temporalities
within Italy by Gregory the second: Platina foully ouerseen in the
translation of the empire. Plat. in Greg. 3. Nau^. volum. 2. generatio 25. anno
725. Volum. 2. generatio. 25.
and yet Platina and Nauclerus say, that Gregory put him Imperio simul and
communione fidelium, both from his Empire and from the communion of the
faithful.


Theo. This they say of Gregory the third, not of Gregory the 2. as you do:
but it can be true of neither. Nauclerus by and by recites Epistle of Gregory
the third written the same year that Leo the Emperor died, where he calls
him Dominu^ pijssimum, Augustu^ Leone^: most religious Lord, Leo the Emperor.
Sabellicus leaves out the word ( imperio) as unlikely to be true, and says
that Gregory the third magno Cleri, populique consensu piorum communione
private: Sabel. ennead. 8. lib. 8.
put the Emperor (Leo) from the communion with the consent and liking of the
clergy and laity. Blondus holds hardly that Gregory the third was not
Bishop of Rome, whiles Leo the third had the Empire.

Again the Empire could not be translated in the time of Leo, but Constantine
his son must likewise lose the same; his father taking him into the society
of the crown the fourth year of his empire, and writing seven where
Constantine wrote four, as appears by the letter of Gregory the second to
the Germans, and Bonifacius Habetur Auentin. li. 3. fol. 888. Blondus Decad.
oath and contestation before the same Gregory. Now to Constantine 1. lib. 10.
and Sabellic. ennead. 8. lib. 8.
the son of Leo did the Bishop of Rome send both Platina in Gregorio 3.
letters and Legates for help against Aistulphus when he besieged Rome, as to
the right owner, protector, and Emperor of that city. And therefore it must
needs be false that Platina says, the tutele of the church was removed from
the Emperors of Constantinople to others by this Gregory in the reign of Leo:
for so much as Supra fol. 414.
Blondus, Sabellicus and Nauclerus witness the defense of the city against
the Lombardes was craved at Constantines hands by those whom Platina places
after Gregory.

And the chiefest reason which he gives of this transferring the defense of
the church is most false. Gregory derived it to others, says he, Plat. in
Greg. 3. Platina contradicts all other stories.
maxim quod vrbem regia^ aegre Leo a Saracenis tutaretur: chiefly because Leo
was hardly able to defend his own city (of Constantinople) from Saracens:
whereas the Saracens besieged not Constantinople but the Sigebertus, Zonar. and
Cuspinian.
first year of Leo, before his edict against Images came forth: and
Luitprandus besieged Rome not ( Interim) as Platina says, but a long time
after: and the Bishop of Rome sent first for help into France not when
Luitprandus, but when Aistulphus besieged him: and then he sent not unto
Charles as Platina would have it, but to Pipine the father of Charles, with
many such errors which convince Platina to be a very indiligent and
insufficient writer in this point.

Nauclerus contented himself with the words of Platina, Sabel. ennead. 8.
lib 8.

Much shuffling in popish writers about the division of the empire.


and searched no farther: which Sabellicus perceived to be so repugnaunt to
the course of other Stories, that he says, Neque tempora legentibus, neque
rerum ordo constare liquid^ potest. It is hard for the reader to distinguish
either the times or the order of those things which were done, by reason
Platina in these words runs so on head against the rest. And therefore you
shall pardon us for receiving a man of mean judgment, and one that writes
very negligently of these affairs, before the rest, that purposely and
largely treated of those matters as near as they could get the knowledge or
come by the likelihood of those actions.

These be your presidentes for the depriving of Princes between sixe-hundreth
and a thowsande years after Christ. Other or better you have not, and these
you see, be very slender.


Phi. We could allege more, but you will shift them, as you do these.


Theo. We shift not, when we reprove the partial and corrupt reports of
your own fellows by better and elder testimonies. More if you have, you need
not spare.


Philand. Philippicus was deprived of the Empire by the Bishop of Rome: and
so was Childerike of the kingdom of France.


Theoph. Your Law does not stick to boast that Philip and Childerike deprived.

Cause. 15. quaest. 6. alius.

Plat. in Zach. 1.


Zacharias deposed Childerike King of France, and placed Pipine in his room.


Philand. So he did.


Theo. Who says so besides you?


Philand. Platina says; Eius authoritate regnum Franciae Pipino adiudicatur.
By Zacharies authority the kingdom of France was adjudged unto P^pine. And
Frisingensis affirms that Pipine was absolved by Pope Steven from the oath of
allegiance, Frisingen. lib. 5. cap. 22.
which he had given to Childerike, and so were the rest of the Nobles of
France; and then the king being shaven and thrust into a Monastery, Pipine
was anointed king: which you think much the Pope should do in our days.


Theoph. Set aside your helping and interlacing the Story, and I see no
cause why Zachary should be thought by his Apostolic power to have deposed
Childerike. Well the Pope might make a pack, for the deposition of Childerike:
but his keys were then of no such power as to depose Princes. Cause. 15.
quaest. 6. alius.



Philand. Deposed he was.


Theoph. But neither for religion, nor by the Popes Consistory.


Philand. For the cause of his deposition I will not greatly strive. Our Law
says he was deposed, Pro eo quod tantae potestati inutilis erat, for that
he was unfit for the kingdom, but sure Pope Zachary deposed him.


Theoph. Sure you be deceived. Pope Zachary was then of no such account that
he could depose Princes. He was consulted whether it might lawfully be
done or no, but farther than so the Bishop of Rome did not in open sight
intermedle with the matter, whatsoever his privy practices were: though many
of your Monks and Bishops to grace the Pope, do make it his only Act.


Philand. In all these cases our Stories are against you; and no reason we
credit you, to discredit them.


Theoph. I desire you not to credit me: and give me leave to do as much for
you: but if your own Stories make with us, I see no cause you should
discredit them.


Philand. We do not.


Theoph. You may not.

Then touching the persons which did the deed: Sabellicus says, Proceres
Regni and populi amplexi Pipini virtutem, Sabell. e^nead. 8. lib. 8.

The germans consulted the Pope, whether it were lawful for the^ to depose the
Prince or not. Blondus Decad. 1. lib. 10.


pertes^que regis amentiam, Zacharia Romano Pontifice prius consulto, regis
appellatione Childerico adempta, vt spes etiam regni adimeretur in clerum
detondent, Pipinum regem creant. The Nobles and Commons (of France or
Germany) embracing the valor of Pipine and hating the foolishness of their
king, having first consulted Zachary Bishop of Rome, took from Childerike the
name of a king, and to cut him from all hope of aspiring to the crown, they
sheere him a Monk, and elect Pipine for their king. Blondus says, I find in
Alcuinus, Paulus, and diverse others, which wrote the Acts of the Francks,
that the Nobles and Commo^s of that Nation duly considering the worthiness of
Pipine, and sottishnes of Childerike, consulted Zachary the Bishop of Rome,
whether they should tolerate so folish a king any longer, The whole nation
deposed Childerik.
and defraud Pipin of his deserved princely honor; and when the Bishop made
answer, that he was (best worthy) to be king which could best discharge the
duty of a king: the Fra^kes with the public consent of the whole Nation
pronounced Pipine for their king; and Childerike was shorn and made a Monk.
Nauc. generat. 26.
Nauclerus says: The Franckes elected Pipine for their king by the public
consent of the whole Nation: which is all one with that Blondus says, Cause.
15. quaest. 6. Alius and gloss. ibidem in ver. Deposuit.
They declared or pronounced him for their king. And this is the reason that
your own gloze limiteth your Law in this sort, Deposuit, id est deponentibus
consensit: Zachary deposed Childerike, that is he consented to those which
deposed him.


Phi. The most of our Stories say, The deposing of Childerike to make Pipin
king of France had a further reach than every man saw.

The Pope and Pipin divided the west parts of the world between them.


he did it.


Theoph. Your Stories are very forward to attribute every thing to the Pope
that may any way increase his power. And it may be the Pope had an oar in
that boat more than every body well perceived. For Pipine was the man on
whom the Pope wholly relied, and whose power he afterward used to quail the
Lombards, and defeat the Grecians; that the Pope and Pipine* might divide the
spoils of the West between them. And therefore I can be soon induced to
think that a maine plotte was laid, first to make Pipine king of France: and
then by his help to turn the Greek Emperor out of Italy that the Pope
might have share of the revenues of the Empire, as not long after it came to
pass: but that the Pope then claymed any power to depose Princes and give
kingdoms; or that the better sore of your own stories stay on any such
pretenses, you shall never show. Zachary being consulted made answer, what
the Germans by Gods Law, as he thought might do: but he did not appoint them
by sentence or censure, what they should do.


Philand. How shall we know that in this diversity of reports?


Theoph. You shall hear Zacharies answer to the Legates that were sent about
this matter: Auen. lib. p. 299 Zacharies answer to the German Legates.
and that you may safely trust.


Philand. I mistrust not his own words.


Theop. You need not, he would favor himself as much as he might with any
good color. When Volorade and Burcharde were sent to Zachary to understand
his judgment, his answer was, I find in the sacred story of the Divine
Scriptures that the people fell away from their wretchlesse and lascivious
king, that despised the counsel of the wise men of his Realm, and created a
sufficient man, one of themselves, king, God him self allowing their doings.
All power and rule belong to God, Princes are his ministers in their kingdoms.
And rulers are therefore chosen for the people, that they should follow the
will of (God) the chief ruler in all things, This Pope claims no power to
depose Princes, but supposes it to be lawful for any realm to provide
themselves of a fit king.
and not to do what they list. He is a true king that guides the people
committed to his charge according to the prescript and line of Gods Law. All
that he has, as power, glory, riches, honor and dignity, he receives of
the people. The people create their king, and the people may (when the cause so
requires) forsake their king. It is therefore lawful for the Franckes and
Germans refusing this unkindly monster (Childerike) to choose some such as
shall be able in war and peace by his wisdom to protest and keep in
safety their wives, children, parents, goods and lives.

I will not examine the Popes divinity, in that he says, Princes have their
powers of the people: which the Scripture says they have of God: Romans 13.
Jeroboam and the ten tribes had Gods warrant for their revolt, and so had not
the Germans when they chose Pipine. When princes are unfit for the regiment of
their people, their own Realms and not the Pope must have care of that defect.
Extreme folly and frenzy be just causes to remove Princes from bearing the
sword.
this is plain, he claims no power to depose Princes, but alleges an
example that the people may change their king when he is not able (for
frenzy or folly) to do the duty of a king. And by that concludes it
lawful for the Germans to refuse that simple idiote, which had the Scepter by
succession, and elect an other.


Phi. Though you hold the Pope may not, yet you confess the people may depose
their Prince.


Theo. I tell you not what I think, but what Pope Zachary said to the
Germans.


Phila. Do you like or dislike that he said?


Theo. I should have asked you that question: but because you prevent me, you
shall hear what I say. Z^charie touches not the causes for which Princes may
be deposed, but the persons by whom it must be done, if it be needful to
do it: and that is by their own Realms, and not by tribunalles abroad, as
you suppose.


Phi. Then it may be done.


Theo. When it should be done, the whole Realm must do it, and not the
Pope.


Phi. But neither he, nor they can do it, except you first assent that it may
be done. There can be no deposers, if Princes be not deposeable.


Theo. There may fall extremities: when Princes are not able to guide
themselves, much less their Realms.


Phi. What be those?


Theo. I named them before, frenzy and folly. As if the right heir to any
Crown be a natural fool; or he that is invested in the Crown, wax mad, and
run besides him self. In either of these two cases any Realm by public
consent and advise may choose an other.


Phi. What unlikely cases you bring us which never yet fell out in proof?


Theo. Yeas that they have. Childerike, of whom we spoke even now, was deposed
by the Germans for a fool. The last of Pipines race deposed for a bedlem.
Regino lib. 2. anno 887. Euag. lib. 5. c. 11
And Charles the 3. the last Emperor of Pipines line (Gods justice requiting
his children with the very same measure that he met before unto his master)
was deposed by the same people for * a bedlem. As also when Justinius the younger
was * distract of his wits, Tiberius was placed in the Empire.


Philand. You make Childerike a fool, because you would avoid the Popes
power to deprive Princes.


Theophil. If you made him not a fool, when you put him from his right under
that pretense, I do him no wrong: Your Stories blaze him for a frantike fool.
Blondus and Nauclerus say they did it Blond. Decad. 1. lib. 10. Naucl. volum.
3. gener. 26.
Pensantes Regis amentiam: considering the madness of the king: Sabellicus
adds thereunto, Sabel. ennead. 8. lib. 8.
* Regis deliria and ineptias, the folly and frenzy of the king. Gaguinus
says he was Gag. li. 3. in Carolo Martel.
* homo vecors and bellua: a very sotte and a beast: and for that cause his
title in your Stories is Childericus stupidus, Childerike the fool: whether
he were or no, God knows: but this we see, they handled him like a fool,
and the Pope had information against him that he was Deneger monstrum, a
monster and not a man; and therefore were the causes which they alleged for
this deposition true or no, we greatly care not. They pretended a cause
sufficient, if it were true; and the Pope confessed it lawefull for the whole
Realm to displace such a Prince, as was both vn-fitte and vn-able to bear the
sword.


Philand. But Stephen absolved Pipine from the oath of alleageaunce which he
had given unto Childerike. Vrss ergens. in anno 753.



Theoph. High time to absolve Pipine from his oath three years after
Childerike was deposed, and he placed in the kingdom. Regino, lib. 2. anno
753.
Regino, whence that fable first came of Stephens sickness at Paris and his
recovery by a vision of Saint Denis, says not a word of any such
absolution, but only that Stephen confirmed Pipine and his two sons as
lawful kings of France, The Jesuits must prove that the Pope may dispense
with a lawful oath.

The staggering of their stories make many men think that Childerike was no
fool.


and adjured the Nobles not to choose them a king of any other line so long as
Pipines race endured. The rest is added by Monks and Friars in favor of the
Pope as infinite other things are in the accidents of every Age. Howbeit
absoluing from others if they be lawful and good, is a greater matter than we
yet believe your holy father may deal with.

The wavering of your Stories in the cause of Childerikes deposition, (for
sometimes they urge a defect in Childerike, sometimes they plead a right in
Pipine without the king, and above the king, as having the regiment of that
Realm and all public affairs committed to him and his, for the space of
fourscore years by way of inheritance before he sought the crown:) this
wavering in the cause, and curious seeking for absolutions, and confirmations
makes many men suspect that your pretenses against Childerike were not all
true. But whether Pipine had better interest to the Crown of France than
Childerike: by reason the Auent. lib. 3. fol. 293. and Nau volum. 3. generatio.
26. anno 750. and Frising. lib. 5. cap. 13. This power of the Marshal over the
King made Pipin aspire to the crown.
Marshall of the Palace was become the kings master, in so much that the king
could not command his own diet but at the Marshals pleasure; and was
governed and ouerruled in all things by him as a boy by his tutor, which is the
constant report of all your witers touching the state of the Germane kings,
when Pipine aspired to the crown: or whether Childerike were an idiote and the
last of his house, as for the better strength of Pipines title your stories
avouch, I will be no judge. Childerik I say was deposed by the Nobles and
commons of his nation, and the Pope being consulted whether it were lawful for
them so to do, made answer, they might, but added no word of his divine power
to dispose kingdoms to his liking. And this for Childerik may suffice.

For Philippicus the answer is easier. Beda de sex aetatibus mundi.

Regino lib. 1. in anno 648.

Marianus in Philippico.

Frisingens. lib. 5. cap. 15.

Vrspergens. in anno 713.


He was a rebel and slew his Master in the field, and therefore without any
farther cause the Romans might refuse both his name and his reign. To this
usurpation when he added as they thought impiety, it was no marvel to see
them so earnest against him: But in this as in many other things your later
Stories stray from the former. The elder sort of Historiographers as Beda,
Regino, Marianus, Frisingensis, and Vrspergensis say: The people of Rome
decreed that neither his name, nor letters, Blondus decadis 1. lib. 10. Nauc.
volum. 2. gener. 23. Sabel. ennead. 8. lib. 7.

Sigebert. in anno 712.


nor coin should be received: the later, as Blondus, Sabellicus and Nauclerus
have changed their tune, and say: The Bishop of Rome did it at the clamor and
petition of the people. Sigebert as indifferent between them says, the Bishop
and the people jointly did it. So handsomely you can hammer things when they
come to your fingering, and such credit your Stories deserve when the case
concerns your holy Fathers authority.

Mo examples than these they have not for a 1000. years after Christ.
These be all the examples you do or can bring for the space of a thousand
years after Christ, where Princes were deprived of their crowns by the Bishop
of Rome: and these how little they make for your purpose, I leave to the
judgment of the christian Reader.

Your catalogue of the Germane Emperors, that insueth: As of Frederike the
first, The eldest of the Germane Emperors that were offered deprivation by the
Pope, was Henry the 4. Jews the 3. was not deposed.
Frederike the second, Otho the fifth, Jews the third, Jews the fourth, and
Henry the third (or as some call him the fourth) makes show to the simple,
but does you no good. The eldest of these that were offered deprivation by the
Pope, is Henry the fourth whom Gregory the seventh a thousand, threescore and
six years after Christ provoked with that injury, but to his own and utter
overthrow.

You reckon Jews the third, and Jews the fourth for Princes deprived of
their Empires by the Bishop of Rome, but reason were you did first tell us
whom you mean, and how you prove it. Marianus Scotus and they that follow him
make* Jews the third to be Lodouicus Balbus to whom Pope John fled and
anointed him king of the Romans, Marian. in Lodouic. 3.

Sabel. ennead. 9. lib. 1.

This Jews was not deposed.


when the Nobles of Rome inclined rather to Charles the third, and gave him
possession of the city, who was after anointed by Pope John at his return;
Lodouike the third living skant two years after his coronation. Martinus
Polonus numbreth him for Jews the third that was next after Arnulphus: but
whether it were Lodouike the son of Arnulphus, Marian. in Lodouic. ^3.
Blondus Decad. 2. lib. 2 Marian. in Lodouic. filio Arnulph. Platina in
Benedict. 4. Martinus in Arnulph. Plat. in Formos. This Jews was never crowned.
or an other of that name the son of Boso, he does not determine, only he
says Berengarius caught him at Verona and recovered the Empire: which Blondus
and Marianus report of Lodouike the son of Boso, and not of Lodouike the
son of Arnulphus, as Platina does. In this uncertainty of your Stories you
might have done well to have distinguished the person, and pointed out your
author: you now drive us to suspect that you go about to have them deposed that
were never crowned.

Of Lodouike the son of Arnulphus, Martinus says: He succeeded his father,
sed ad coronam Imperij non peruenit, but he never was crowned Emperor. And
Platina confesses the same: In the place (of Arnulphus) we read that Lodouike
was made Emperor, quem tamen nusquam habuisse imperij Coronam accepimus: of
whom we do not find that ever he had the Crown of the Empire. If he never
received the Crown, how could he be deposed from the Crown?


Phi. Perhaps the Pope kept him from it.


Theo. Perhaps you can not tell: but think you that Princes will loose their
Crowns for your perhaps?


Phi. He never had it.


Theo. But had he any wrong to be kept from it?


Phi. How think you of that?


Theo. Your proofs be very mighty that must depend on my thoughts.


Phi. We brought in these instances as it were by the way, to let you see what
stoare of examples we had.


Theo. Then take them out of the way, for they do but hinder your cause.

When Charles the third, otherwise called Carolus Crassus, grew both sick
and lunatike, the Nobles of Germany clean forsook him, and choose Arnulphus
which as some say was the son of Charlemaine, but as Blondus affirms, was
The last of Pipines line deposed for a mad man.
obscurissimo natus loco, a man very basely borne, and not of Charles line: by
reason whereof Blond. decad. 2. lib. 2.
the kingdoms which before were subject to Charles, now as destitute of a
right heir, began to fall in sunder on every side, and to choose kings of
themselves. Then France Regino lib. 2. anno 888.
took Charles the child, cognamed Simple, and when his simplicity displeased
them, they Blond. vt supra.
set Otho the son of Robert Duke of Saxony, in his place. At the same time
the people of Italy meaning to have a king of their own, could not agree on the
matter, but chose some Berengarius; and others Guido, and so had two kings in
Italy both calling and bearing themselves as Emperors. Besides these
defections, Arnulphus had long and sharp wars with Italy forsook the
Germans and choose to themselves two kings of their own.
Rodolph that proclaimed himself king of Province, and with the Regino lib.
^. anno 888.
Nortmanes that ranged in many parts of France and Germany. So that the Pope
did not depose Jews the third, as you would insinuate: but Italy seeing the
line of Charles to be expired, thought to make an Emperor of their own
bowels, and to keep off strangers that before had the rule over them: and so
they did for threescore years, till barbarous invasions, and domestical
seditions, and disorders made them glad to send to Otho the great, Seditions
and invasions made the Romans glad after 60. years to submit themselves
again to the Germans.
and to receive him for their Emperor, and to yield to a form of electing to
the Empire by certain Bishops and Princes of Germany, which has endured
until this present.

This your own Stories abundantly confirm, save that some write of Arnulphus
that he marched with his army through the midst of Italy and took Rome, and
caused himself to be crowned Emperor, (as Regino says who then lived) by
Formosus the Bishop of Rome: which Regino lib. 2. anno 896. Decad. 2. lib. 2
Blond. Decad. ^ lib 2.
Blondus does skant believe. Howsoever that were, they all agree that
Berengarius and Guido were chosen kings of Italy when Arnulphus was first
advanced to Charles his place. Blondus says, Arnulpho apud Francos in
Imperatorem creato Romani and caeteri Itali nullum ab imperatore nouo dissidijs
Regni Franciae implicito auxilium aduersus rebels Longobardos affuturum
intelligentes, Berengarium Foron^liensem Ducem Roma oriundum crearunt
Imperatorem. An other change of the Empire, but not by the Popes keys.
Arnulphus being chosen Emperor by the Germans, the Romans and Italians
perceiving they might look for no help against the rebellious Lombards from
that new Emperor, having his hands full of the dissentio^s of his own kingdom,
created Berengarius the duke of Frioli a Roman their emperor. Neither yet did
they so well agree in that election but that other chose Guido the Duke of
Spoletum to be king of Italy. Otho Frisingensis makes the same report. Otho
Frisingen. li. 6. ca. 9. and 10.
Charles the next year after he was deposed, died. From that time to Otho we
find the regiment at Rome very confused. For after the death of Charles,
which reigned six years and led a private life, the seventh year the
Empire was rent in many parts, every Province desirous to have a several
king: only Arnolfus had the greatest share. Therefore the Italians make
themselves two kings: Berengarius Duke of Friault, and Guido Duke of Spoletum.
Of the which Berengarius chased out of his country by Guido ^led for succor to
Arnolfus.

You can not prove hence that Arnulphus or Jews his son were deprived by the
Pope, but only that the Romans made an other defection from the Empire: who
after they had once tasted the sweetness that came by cutting the empire in
pieces (for where before they were supplia^ts and subjects, The Romans were no
losers by often cutting the Empire in pieces
now by the larges of Pipine they were Lords of half Italy) by their wills
could never have rested. And though the Germans and Italians differ in their
reckonings; the Germans accounting Berengarius and those that succeeded him
until Otho the great, for usurpers, and contrary-wise the Italians accepting
them for their natural and true Emperors; The Germans and Italians differ in
their reckonings.
Yet that is no cause for you to avouch that the Pope deposed any of them. For
put the case either way, that the Germans were lawfully excluded as having no
right, or wrongfully debarred of their right, you may conclude hence a just
allegation, or a civil sedition in the Romans, but no deprivation of Princes
by the Pope.

Jews the son of Boso was not deprived by the Pope.
If by Jews the third you mean Jews the son of Boso, (for him you may
mean, and by your indistinct speaking, you drive us to guess at your
meaning;) he with violence gate some dominion in Italy, putting Berengarius to
the worst; and by negligence lost not only that he gate, but his eyes also,
which he might have saved with staying at home: mary the doers of it were
Berengarius his enemy, and the citizens of Verona which betrayed him: mention
of the Pope there is none, except you think it unfit for his holiness that
any treason should be wrought without him, for that his^ See is so well
practiced in them. Of this Jews, Otho Frisinge^s. lib. 6. cap. 15.
Otho says: In the year of our Lord 905. Lodouike the son of Boso getting
the Empire expelled Berengarius: and having the whole kingdom of Italy at his
beck, dismissing his army, went to Verona with a small train, where being
betrayed by the citizens (that sent for Berengarius from the place where he
was in exile) he was caught and his eyes pulled out. Three Lodouikes, and not
one of them deposed by the Pope.
And after that Berengarius held the kingdom of Italy together with the
Roman Empire. So have we three Lodouikes, each of them in sundry writers
surnamed Jews the third, and not one of them deposed by the Bishop of Rome.

Henry the fourth was the first, that ever was offered dopositio^ by any Pope.
Henry the fourth was the first that was troubled with the Popes presumption
to depose Princes: but he was so far from taking it, that he put the Pope
besides his cushinne, and had him deposed from his triple Crown, not only by
force, but also by judgment and sentence as good or better than that which the
Pope pronounced against him. Respect whether you will, the cause, or the manner
of their proceeding each against other.


Phi. You crake of this Emperor: The defense, cap. 5.
For that in fine by arms he drove the said Pope out of his Sea, and placed
an Antipape, that is to say, one so opposite to Christ's Vicar, as Antichrist
shall be against Christ: which by arms and patronage of this wicked Emperor
usurped and occupied the Apostolic throne against the true Pope Gregory the
seventh.


Theo. We crake not of Princes as you do of Popes, neither do we defend them
in open wickedness as you do Popes in their pestilent disorders and outrages:
only we say neither your holy father with his proud claim, nor you with your
smoothe tongues may take from Princes their Crowns, without warrant from God,
of whom they have their power, and by whom they are exalted to their Royal
dignity. And therefore if you will play the proctour for Pope Hildebrande in
that attempt of his to deprive Henry the fourth, leave wastful words, and
spiteful speech, and go to the matter. Scoffs and taunts are soon cast and
recast without any pains or praise.


Phi. Because this good and notable Pope, The defense, cap. 5.
was not able in fine to resist the Emperors forces (the which Emperor, as
all the histories of that time record, was a most wicked, sacrilegious,
simoniacal and heretical person) the adversaries of Gods Church do triumph
(as the Libeller here does) over the blessed man: as Herod might have done
over John Baptist, whose admonition was taken in so evil gre, that it cost him
his life: as also the executing of the Churches sentence, which is Gods, has
done to many a Prophet and Bishop in the world.


Theo. If to call Gregory the seventh, It is no sin nor wrong, to call
Gregory the seventh Hildebrand. The Jesuits mannerly speeches of the Emperor.
Hildebrand, which was his proper name, and whereof neither he nor you should
in reason be ashamed, be a note of rebellious heretics as you term them:
what is it for you to call a Prince (on whom by Gods Law you are forbidden to
rail) a most wicked, sacrilegious, simoniacall and heretical person? What is
it to say that all the stories of that time record the same, and to produce
none? As for John Baptize you may use his name when you follow his works.
Herod was an incestuous Tyrant, yet did not John Baptist take the scepter from
him nor arm his subjects against him, but warned him of the breach of Gods
Law, which he wilfully committed, and the punishment which would ensue at
Gods hands: farther practices against Herod John Baptist had none, and
therefore you might as well have yoked Belial with Christ, Acts. 12. verse. 22.
as Hildebrand with John Baptist. But you must be suffered, when other things
fail you, to have glorious words: which is a right Herodian affection.


Phi. By the event of things, whosoever measures the right of cause; The
defense, cap. 5.
will make a good religion and a good defense of the execution of justice. For
so most tyrants might be justified for a time, The conte^tio^ between Pope
Gregory the seventh and Henry the third Emperor.
against all the Saints of God. This Gregory say they was in fine banished by
the Emperor: And so was Saint Chrysostom by Arcadius and Eudoxia, and dyed in
banishment as Gregory the seventh did: yet they were but homely Christians
that would justify the Emperors, and condemn. S. Chrysostom.


Theo. Prove the Popes right to depose Princes and we remit the success.
We measure not the right of causes neither by the sequel nor success of
things, for then the Saints of GOD from the first beginning of the world
should have had an evil cause, since their success has always been to
loose their lives for bearing witness unto the truth. We make it no reason
that Hildebrandes cause was evil, because in the end he was banished: We
all this while have stood with you on this point, that neither Hildebrand nor
any other Pope had or has right to depose Princes. Your commendation of
Hildebrand, and accusation of Henry the fourth, if both were true, are little to
this purpose, unless you will reason thus, the Pope was a good man and the
Prince an evil, Ergo the Pope might depose the Prince, which were a very
rediculous conclusion.


Phi. That right is yet unproven.
The Popes right to depose Princes we have proved before.


Theo. Not yet that we see. Your authorities came very short of it, your
examples shorter. Some shifts and sophismes you have here and there offered
us, but so weak that children would hardly be deceived by them. Those you
thought, being destitute of other helps, to strengthen with examples: and
having searched all the corners you could for a thousand years after Christ,
you find not one, till you come to Gregory the seventh: who did attempt it
but could not effect it, and lost his Popedom for enterprising it.

And here you slip from the right of the cause to the praise of the Person,
which is utterly impertinent to this purpose. The praise of the person is
nothing to the right of the cause.
For what trow you, is every thing good that good men do? May you not so
commend any vice? What sin is there but some good man otherwise has fallen
into? If to measure things by their events, be no sure way to judge rightly
of them, what is it to allege no better ground for the Deposition of Princes
than the bold attempt of the Bishop of Rome? Were the Person commended not
by the assentation of his adherents, but by the confession of his adversaries:
that proves not his fact to be good, or his enterprise lawful. We must
balance things by the Laws of God, and not by the fancies and affections of
men: and yet touching the Person, if the syncerest of your own side may be
trusted, I see no such cause to commend him.


Phi. The defense, Cap. 5.
This Pope, whom they specially hate, because (as it may be thought) he was
the first man that authentically condemned the Berengarians heresy, and in
open disputation refuted it; though certain of the said Emperors flatterers
and enemies of the Sea Apostolic (as the fashion of our heretics is at this
day) wrote slanderous libels against him; Pope Hildebrand a good man.
yet was he a very notable good man and learned, and did suffer whatsoever he
did suffer, for mere justice: in that he did godly, honorably and by the
duty of his Pastorship, whatsoever he did against the said Emperor: whereof
we could allege all the best writers of those days, or near that time, but
that we should be tedious.


Theo. Hildebrand might well be a dealer in Berengarius recantation for the
goodness of it.

The Jesuits should condemn them selves if they should not commend Hildebrand.


Whatsoever Berengarius heresy was, the recantation which your holy Father with
his learned advise prescribed him, is a very wicked and palpable error. If
Hildebrand were the author of that condemnation, we envy not his praise. A
lewder or grosser folly, was never uttered with tongue.

No marvel to see you so forward in affirming that Gregory the 7. was a very
notable good man, and learned, and did suffer, whatsoever he did suffer, for
mere justice, and did Godly and honorably, and by the dewtie of his
Pastorship whatsoever he did against the Emperor: he was the first Pope that
ever served or fitted your rebelling humor: Your case and his are all one, and
therefore unless you should praise him, you must dispraise your own doings,
which you will not, you be so far entered into these Italian policies, and
perceive them to be so profitable for your Rhemish monarchy. But Sirs, if you
were asked under benedicite whether S. Peter did better in submitting him self
to Nero, Which like they better, Peter enduring or Hildebrand displacing
Princes.
and charging al others to do the like, or Pope Hildebrand in taking the crown
from Henry the fourth, and dischargeing his subjects, which would you prefer?
The mild and Christian submission of Peter suffering death at Neroes hands, or
the disdainful and arrogant stomach of Gregory the seventh, making the
Emperor with his Queen and young Prince in extreme frost and snow, wait his
leisure three days barefoted, and in woollen, Lambert. Schaf. Abbas Vrsperg.
at the gates of Canusium, whiles himself was warm in a Ladies chamber: and
(notwithstanding this rare example of humility in a Prince) practicing a
general revolt of his Nobles and people from him, and causing an other to be
chosen in his place, and licencing his own subjects, The mildnes of Pope
Hildebrand.
servants and sons to bear arms against him, and filling the Christian
world with unnatural, and parricidial wars and bloodshed? I know you dare
not in plain terms disgrace Saint Peter, but in deeds evident to the eyes
of all men you take part with Pope Hildebrand against Saint Peter: extolling
and praising him for a very notable good Pope, that first gave this detestable
and damnable adventure.

He did suffer, you say, whatsoever he did suffer for mere Justice. It was
mad mere Justice that the Church of Christ for a thousand years would not
be so much as acquainted with; What justice call you that which the Church of
Christ for 1000. years counted wickedness?
and a madder imagination of yours that all that refused to be partakers of
Hildebrands wickedness, were flatterers to the Emperor, and enemies to the Sea Apostolic: far better cause have we to say, that they which conspired
with the Pope against their Prince, upon so great submission as Christendom
has not seen the like, were Jude epist.
DESPISERS OF GOVERNMENT, Romans 23.
RESISTERS OF POWER, and consequently disobeiers of Christ, and worse than
hierlings of Antichrist. And if you may shake them off that lived in the same
age, and wrate of things they saw with their eyes, and heard with their ears,
who smoothed not the vices of men, but defended the ordinance of GOD: What
should bind us to regard the corrupt and partial judgments of those that
came some hundreds after and knew no more of the certainty of those actions,
than we do at this instant; and were withal so wedded to the Sea of Rome, that
in respect thereof they did resist, as you do now both the power of man, and
the truth of God?


Phi. The defense, cap. 5.

Lib. 3. cap. vlt. factorum memorabilium.


We have for Gregory the seventh the grave testimony of Baptista Fulgosius a
noble and learned man, that was Duke of Genua above an hundred years past,
which we shall not let to set down as we find it in the Latin.
Constantissimus habitus est Gregorius septimus Pontifex, qui quod Henricum
tertium Imperatorem propter aperta nimis Symoniae crimina, pro Pastorali
officio reprehendebat, grauibus ab eo iniurijs affectus est. Itaque iniuriarum
magnitudine compulsus, Henricum Gregorius vt haereticum Imperij honor
priuauit. Cum autem Henricus solut ecclesiastica censura non emendatione vitae,
sed armis quaereret, alium creari Pontificem enixus capta vrbe obsidere
Gregorium caepit. Quae mala cum Gregorius pateretur nunqua^ tamen a iusto
proposito dimoueri potuit. That is, The testimony of the Duke of Genu^ for
Pope Hildebrand.
Gregory the seventh was notable for his constancy; who for that according to
his Pastoral charge, he had admonished Henry the third Emperor to leave his
known impiety of Symonie, was by manifold intolerable injuries vexed by the
same Emperor; and by the greatness of his wickedness was compelled to deprive
him as an heretic, of his Imperial dignity. But Henry seeking not by
amendment of his life but by arms to be absolved from the censure; he went
about to set up a new Pope, and beseeged the City of Rome and brought the
Pope into great distress. In all which miseries Gregory could never be
removed from his just purpose. See Vrsperpen. lib. 5. annalium.
So he writes of the parties both. And of the horrible crimes for which the
Emperor was most justly in the sight of all good men deposed.


Theo. How knew Baptista Fulgosius the goodness of Hildebrand that lived 400
years before him?
Truth depends not upon nobility but sincerity. Noble men have their
affections and ouersightes in writing as well as others. Baptista Fulgosius
lived four hundredth years after Gregory the seventh, and had no better
intelligence of the cause than we have at this day. In his banishment he
collected certain examples out of such books as came to his hands, to spend
the time, and ease his misery: but he took not upon him to judge between
your stories which were credible and which not. All that he says of Gregory
the seventh, is (Constantissimus habitus est) he was counted very constant, and
could never be removed from the purpose, Lib. 3. cap. 8. de Constant.
which he thought to be just: the rest is a report of the fact, no debating of
the cause.

A noble man's fancy is no fit balance for this cause.
And had this exiled Person given greater commendation to Gregory than he
does, every Noble man's fancy that is or has been these five hundredth years
in Christendom, must not appoint what power the Pope shall have over Princes.
And if Nobility might prejudice truth, as in deed it can not, why should the
judgment of Baptista Fulgosius in this case be preferred before a thousand
others of greater Nobility that have taken part with their Princes against the
Pope? No reason that Princes rightes should be tried by Italian Dukes.
Meaner states than Princes will not lose their liberties for the Duke of
Genua; and therefore if you seek for the right of the cause, it must be tried
neither by Dukes, Popes nor Princes. The word of God does not go by the
verdicts of men: If you stand not on that, but on the vices of Henry and
virtues of Gregory: Your Italian Duke is too young to pronounce exactly what
they were that died some hundreds before he was borne.


Phi. Trithemius reports in brief thus, The defense, cap. 5.
of the wickedness of this Emperor: Episcopatus, Constantiensem etc. He sold
the Bishopriks of Constance, Bamburgh, Mentz and diverse others for money: those
of Ausbourg, and Straisbourgh for a sword: Trithem. in Chron.
that of Munster for Sodomie: and the Abbacie of Fuld for adultery: Heaven and
earth witness and cry out on these: and for the same abominations he stands
excommunicated, and deprived, and therefore has no power, nor just title to
reign over us Catholics.


Theo. This is the next way to build the Tower of Babel, If Baptista knew
little of Hildebrand Trithemius knew less of Henry the fourth.
to descend from a Duke to an Abbat: from one that lived fiueskore years ago
to one that died not much more than threeskore years since; and to think by
men of your own faction, that were alive in this our age, to make proof of
things that were done five hundredth years before. Trithemius an Abbate of
late days, has no credit in this case: you must show us some elder writer
and nearer the time wherein these things were done, or else we shall pass it
over as a peevish and pestilent slander.


Phi. We have elder if you list to believe them: but you will discredit them,
as you do Trithemius.


Theo. I discredit not Trithemius: Trithemius a man of their side and our age
is no good witness in this case.
but le^ue him his due commendation: only I say there is no reason that a man
of your side, and our age, should be the first and sole deponent of matters
many hundredth years elder than himself.


Phi. We have long before him that did witness the same.


Theo. Produce them.


Phi. Dodechinus, who lived within an hundredth years of that time, has the
same report word for word of Henry the fourth that Trithemius has.


Theo. We find that repeated by Dodechinus, Dodechinus in anno 1090.
but not of his own knowledge or judgment. Valtrame Bishop of Megburg wrate a
sober and seemly letter to County Lodouike to persuade him to submit himself
to the king and not to resist the powers which God had ordained. This pestilent
slander of Henry the 4. came first from the mouth of a rebel that sought to
supplant him.
Lodouike puffed with pride and filled with disdain wrate back to Valtrame a
furious and spiteful libell both against the Bishop and the king: wherein
these things are objected to the Prince without farther trial or testimony.
Both their letters Abbate Dodechine inserteth in his story. So that the first
author of this tale was Lodouike, in favor of himself, disfaming the Prince
which he sought to subvert: and what credit that can have in the ears of
indifferent men, let the wise consider.

Where he says the Emperor sold the Bishopriks of Ratisbon, Three
bishoprics for one sword is no such heinous Symony.
Ausbourg, and Straisbourgh for a sword, his malice was so great that he could
not dissemble his folly. For he that took but a swoorde for three
Bishoprikes, was no great Symonist: your holy father would have made a better
bargain for him self, if he had had the sale of them. Sure swords were very
dear, or Bishoprikes very good cheap, when the Prince let go three
Bishoprikes for a sword. Such toys you seek to deface Princes, and so quickly
you give credit to him that will say any thing against them.

How Henry the fourth behaved himself, in giving the Abbaie of Fulde and
Bishopric of Mounster, I know not, neither do I find it credibly reported in
any good writer. The rebellious heart, and conuicious mouth of Frederick first
raised this unclean suspicion upon the Emperor: and you now are as earnest to
proclaim your Abbasses for Whores, The Jesuits are content to make their
abbasses whoores, and their Bishops Sodomites, to deface this Emperor.
and your Bishops for Sodomites, rather than you will distrust the bare
accusation of a Malcontent against his Prince; you be so linked with him in
cause and condition: But for our parts as we detest the vices, so we believe
not every crime, that an enemy and a rebel in excuse of himself list to
vpbraide his Prince with: we require some surer proof for so heinous a
crimination as this is before we trust the unbridled tongue of a seditious
subject against his Sovereign.

The greatest fautors of Hildebrand alive at the same time with him, never
charged him with these unclean surmises.

Dodechinus in anno 1106.

Marianus in anno 1075.

He that will rebel against his Prince must be a slanderer of his Prince, or
else he shall seem to rebel without cause.

Vita Henrici 4. habetur in fasciculo rerum sciendarum Colonie impresso.

He touches the very crimes that the Jesuits object.

Vrsperge^s. in anno 1071.


Marianus Scotus and Lambertus Scafnaburgensis, which lived, both of them, at
the same time with Henry the fourth, and were to flatterers of his, but
fautours of Hildebrand, and of the Saxones that rebelled against him, never
charged him with those enormities. Dodechinus him self, when he comes to the
final censure of Henry's faults and offenses, omitteth these as unlikely; or at
least, as unproven; and says, He sold all spiritual livings, and was
inobedient to the Sea Apostolic, by setting Wigbert in Gregory's place, by
exceeding the order of Christianity toward his lawful wife, and by
neglecting the sentence of the Apostolic See. These be the crimes for the
which Dodechinus says he was justly cast out of the Church. And Marianus,
says he, was excommunicated, maxim propter Symoniam, chiefly for Symonie, not
for Sodomitrie.

He that wrate the life of Henry the fourth presently upon his death, a modest,
ancient, and Christian reporter of such things as happened unto that Emperor,
says of the Saxons and others that sought to palliate their civil sedition
with a fair show, Confictis, conscriptisque super eo criminibus, quae pessima
and immundissima potuit odium and liuor excogitare, and quae mihi scribenti
tibique legenti nauseam parerent, si ea ponerem, vera falsis miscentes apud
Romanum Pontificem Gregorium septimum, eum deferebant: Faining and articulating
crimes against him, the worst and most vncleanest that hatred and envy could
imagine, which are loathsome for me to write and thee to read, if I should name
them, and mingling some truth amongst their lies, they complained of him to
Gregory the seventh the Bishop of Rome. Vrspergensis says: The Saxons, making
a general coniuration against the King, put up against him to the Sea
Apostolic, accusationes blasphemas and inauditas; blasphemous accusations, and
never heard of before. These blasphemous and fained accusations you rake up
again, and publish them to the world with great sooth upon the credit of an
Abbate that lived in this our age; such is your discretion and gravity that
you patron not only the violent and armed rage of rebels against their
Prince, but even their dishonest and loathsome suspicions.

If we would bring against Gregory the seventh not laymen but Bishops, It were
easy to paint out Hildebrand in his coulors, if that were to this purpose.
not one but many, not strangers but his own Italians, Romans and Cardinals,
that knew him and were conversant with him, he would lack a great deal of
that praise which you, and other such Pharisaicall Friars as you be, give him.
The Council of Woormes, where were present Vniuersi pene Teutonici Episcopi,
almost all the Bishops of Germany, condemned him of great periuries,
newfangled abuses, and manifold infamies of life: Vrspergens. in anno 1076.
after that thirty Bishops of Italy gathered together at Brixia, having
there the Legates and letters of nineteen Bishops assembled at Mentz with
the Nobles of Italy and Germany, Vrsperg. in anno 1080.
not only avouched of him; that he most impudently intruded himself into the Sea of Rome by fraud and money, subverted the ecclesiastical order, troubled
the regiment of the Christian Empire, sought destruction of body and soul
upon their Catholic and peaceable king, and maintained a periure against him,
but in fine they adiudge, Vrsperg. Ibide^.
the said Hildebrand a most shameless person, breathing out sacrilege and
spoil, defending periuries and homicides, calling in question the Catholic
and Apostolic faith of the body and blood of Christ, the ancient scholar of
the heretic Berengarius, an obseruer of dreams and diuinations, a manifest
coniurer, and a worker with a familiar spirit; and therefore fallen from the
true faith to be canonically deposed, and expelled from his Bishopric.


Phi. These be the slanderous libels, The Jesuits believe one rebel against
his Prince without pr^s^: but they will not believe the Bishops and Nobles of
Italy and Germany iudicially pronouncing against the Pope.
which I told you some of the Emperors flatterers and his enemies wrote
against him.


Theo. You believe not the report of so many Bishops and Nobles iudicially
proceeding, and ^inding him culpable in these things, and affirming so much to
his face: and even now you when you heard the malicious and slanderous
accusation of one private man against his Prince, neither discussed, nor
proved, but objected only in defense of his rebellion, you believed that and
put it in print to the view of all men, with no less leuitie than partiality;
as if al were true that likes you be it never so unlikely or untrue: and
again all false that fitteth not your fancy be there never so many deponents
for it, and judges with it, both Bishops and nobles. Such indifferency well
becomes such writers as you are, which seek nothing but that your tales may
take place, be they never so unchristian or incredible.


Phi. Will you believe men in a faction one against another?


Theo. If the Princes faction may not be credited against the Pope, why should
the Popes faction be received against the Prince?

And yet the Princes faction against Hildebrand, Italy displeased with Henry
for submitting himself to Hildebrand.
if it were a faction, was very general. France, Germany and Italy were of
that faction, in so much that when the Emperor had reconciled himself to the
Pope at Canusium, and Legates were sent to absolve such as were excommunicate,
the Princes and people of Italy fell to an vproare against the Emperor for
submitting himself, and meant to have set his son in his place, as
Schafnaburgensis confesses in these words: When the Legate came, Lambert.
Scafnaburgens. in anno 1077.
and showed to the people of Italy the cause of his coming, a vehement
offense and dislike was conceived against him. Fremere omnes, and saeuire
verbis ac manibus caeperunt, Apostolicae Legationi irrisorijs exclamationibus
obstrepere, conuicia and maledicta vtcunque turpissima furor suggessisset,
irrogare, se excommunicationem illius nihili estimare, quem ipsum omnes Italiae
episcopi justice de causis iam pridem excommunicassent, qui sedem Apostolicam
per Symoniacam haeresim occupasset, homicidijs cruentasset, adulterijs alysque
capitalibus criminibus polluisset, regem secus ac deceat egisse, crimenque
gloriae suae intulisse nunquam abolendum, quod homini haeretico and probis
omnibus infamato maiestatem regiam submiserit, etc. They all began to mutter,
and to manifest their grief of mind with words and hands, and to deride
and interrupt the Popes Lagate, and to taunt him and rail on him even as their
rage lead them, saying, that they esteemed not (Hildebrands) excommunication,
whom all the Bishops of Italy long before had excommunicated, for that he
gate the Apostolic Seat by Symonie, All the bishops of Italy had condemned
Hildebrand for capital crimes.

Hildebrand infamous for all vices.


and had embrued it with blood, and defiled it with adulteries, and other
capital crimes: and that the king had done otherwise than became him, and had
utterly blemished his glory in submitting his royal majesty to an heretic,
and one that was infamous for all vices. This sedition growing ripe, they were
all of one mind and determination to refuse the father, who had made himself
unworthy of the scepter, and to choose his son to be their king, though very
young and unfit for the affairs of the Realm: Hildebrand an Apostaticall Pope.
and to go to Rome with him, and elect them an other Pope, by whom both he
should be crowned, and all the acts of this Apostatical Pope should be
reuersed.

This opinion his own people had of him, how learned and godly a man soever
he seems in your eyes: and these were not procured by the Prince, but ready
to forsake the Prince, for humbling himself to so infamous an heretic as
Hildebrand was, whom you call a very notable good Pope. The rest of his
goodness if I should lay forth as Beno the Cardinal, He that will see the rest
of Hildebra^ds virtues, let him read Beno the Cardinal of his life and acts.

The fact and not the life of Hildebrand is the thing which we strive for.

The pope had his flatterers as well as the Prince.


that lived with him, describes him; all other the vicious and infamous Popes
which the whore of Babylon has bred us, would seem punees to him: but
thither I refer the reader that list to behold the man of sin exalting
himself in the Church of God: I seek to examine the fact and not the life of
Gregory the seventh: if that were good, though he were badde, I will use no
advantage.


Phi. These were his enemies.


Theo. To an evil man how could they be but enemies, if that they said were
true?


Phi. True? not a word of it.


Theo. So say you: but what if we believe them before you: have we not good
cause so to do?


Phi. These were such as held against him, and therefore hardly would speak
well: But others and the best of that age greatly commend him.


Theo. Were they not such as took his part?


Phi. Yes: but yet they would not lie for him.


Theo. Might not the Pope have flatterers as well as the Prince?


Phi. He might, but these were none.


Theo. How shall we know that?


Phi. They were godly Monks and Bishops, that would not flatter.


Theo. They might be godly, and yet be deceived in judging of other men's
persons. The best men are hardest to believe evil reports concerning others,
though perhaps true if they were perfectly known: and yet there were other
causes which wanne him the favor of many Monks and Bishops in those days,
and of many Romish writers since that time: and those were, the suppressing of
married Priests, and aduauncing of Monks, and the exempting of Bishops from
their Princes: which things the Church of Rome after him greedily embraced, and
holds unto this day as the glorious, acts of Hildebrand.


Phi. Do you dispraise them?


Theo. The Church of Christ til that time suffered the marriage of Priests,
Marriage in Priests and obedience to Princes impugned by the names of
fornication and Symonie.
and expected the Princes consent in the choice of her Bishops: both which
Hildebrand impugned at one time.


Phi. He impugned Concubinaries and Symonists.


Theo. So your Cloysterers called such as were married, and preferred by the
Prince, and for that cause they took stitch with the Pope against the Prince,
and highly commended Hildebrand as the first begynner of ecclesiastical
purity and liberty. But in deed it was but a quarrel sought out by the Pope
under a fair pretense to tread down Princes, and exalt himself. Hildebrandes
grief against the Emperor.
He could bear no such sway as he would in the Church so long as the Bishops
did depend on the Prince, and not on the Pope. For by their help the Prince
often times not only crossed, but deprived the Pope, if he waxed unruly, or
over lusty. This was it, that Hildebrande could not digest.

Lighting therefore on a Prince that was young and somewhat lascivious,
Hildebrandes policy to quell the Empe^o^.

These advantages the Pope had against the Prince.

Lambert. scafnaburg. in anno 1077.


and perceiving the Nobles of his Realm to dislike and disdain one an other:
and seeing the Normanes in Italy able to withstand the Emperors force, and
the Saxons in Germany willing to cast off the Yoke, as they thought of
bondage: and getting into such favor with Mathilda, a great and mighty Lady
of Italy, that she should not be out of his sight, but as a very friend of
Gregory's says, Pontificis Lateri comes indiuidua adhaerebat, eumque miro
colebat affectu, she cleaued to the Popes side as his continual companion,
and loved him exceedingly. Hildebrande having these oportunities, gave the
adventure both to pull all spiritual livings out of the Princes gift, that the
Clergy might depend on him and not on their Prince, and to show himself the
censurer and deposer of Kings and Emperors if they withstoode him.
Hildebrands first attempt was to pull the Clergy from the king.
And for that cause he first decreed it to be Symonie to take any spiritual
living at a lay man's hands, and in the same Synod did excommunicate as well
the giuers as the takers, were they Dukes, Princes, or Kings which he knew
the Emperor neither could nor would endure. Not long after he received
diverse and sundry suggestions against the King from the Saxons, who sought by
arms what they could to prevail against the Prince, The next was to make him
self the corrector and master of Princes.
and when that succeeded not, fell to slaundering and accusing their king: for
answer whereto the Pope summoned the King to appear at Rome, and prefixed him
a day to clear himself of those crimes. And when the king neither would
loose his right in bestowing his Bishoprics and Benefices as he saw cause,
and as his progenitors before him had done: and refused to come in Person to
answer the complaints of rebels against him, but sent his Agents to refell
their objections: the Pope discovering the malice and pride which till that
time he concealed, The mystery of iniquity shows it self.
took the Princes messengers and cast them in Prison, and caused them to be
carried about the City as gazing stocks; and in his Synod deprived the
Emperor both of the communion of the faithful, and of his Crown and kingdom
also, and to his dying day would not be removed from his purpose.


Philand. Men of their own religion have observed in Hildebra^d as much as I
report.
These be your vain collections which we regard not.


Theo. I look not you should regard mine: but if your own writers which
have labored in this matter, find the report which I make to be true, you
may not so lightly neglect them. Auentinus a man addicted to your religion, not
to ours, exactly and uprightly weighing the parts and proofs of this cause,
observes the same that I do, and a great deal more.


Philand. Auentinus was too favorable to the Germans his Countriemen. Auent.
annal. lib. 5. fol. 562.569. and seque^t.



Theop. Any writer may be touched in that sort with favor or affection. If
you reject men of the same profession with you, because they differ in
judgment from you: much more is it lawful for us in this contention between
the Prince and the Pope, to refuse such as were altogether inclined and devoted
to the Sea of Rome. If you trust not Auentine because he was a Germane, why
should we trust those Monks and Bishops that were joined in faction with
Hildebrand against the king?


Philand. The Jesuits trust none but Italians, and such as flatter the Pope as
fast as themselves.
Will you trust none but your seluee?


Theoph. You do not so much as trust your selves: we allege none but your
own men in this case, and you trust them not.


Philand. We give you some cause why we trust them not.


Theoph. None, but this that you like them not: your other exceptions be very
frivolous. If some were Germans and favored the Prince, others were Italians
and flattered the Pope. You trust not the one, nor we the other; let therefore
the sticklers of both sides alone* and examine the doers themselves. I hope
you will believe Gregory's words, and not distrust him, as you do the rest.


Philand. He will not belie himself.


Theo. Then touching the causes of Henry's excommunication, the Pope himself
makes this report to the Princes of Germany. Vrspergens. in anno 1076.

Hildebrands own confession for what causes he did excommunicate the Emperor.


Pro hijs illum causis, primum videlicet quod ab eorum communione qui pro
sacrilegio and reatu simoniaca haeresis excommunicati sunt se abstiuere noluit:
deinde quod pro criminosis actibus paenitentiam non dico suscipere, sed nec
promittere voluit, Synodali iudicio eum excommunicauimus. For these causes, to
wit first for that he would not forbear their company which were
excommunicated for the sacrilegious and heretical guylt of Symonie, next for
that he was so far from taking any penance (at our hands) for his criminal
acts, that he would promise none, we by a Synodal sentence did excommunicate
him. Here be the two causes which the Pope pretended for his excommunication
and deposition of the prince: partaking with Symonists, and refusal of
judgment and penance at his hands.


Philand. Were not Symonie and obstinacy two great crimes?


Theoph. Your holy father did call that Symonie which was none.


Philand. The Prince did sell Bishoprics and Benefices.


Theoph. So your Monks affirm, but they lie the more. The Pope himself you
see does not charge him with selling Bishoprics or benefices, but with
retaining their society that did.

Lambertus that lived in that time, Henry the 4. free from Symony by the report
of his very enemies.

Lambert. Scafn. in anno 1075.


and wholly favored Gregory, confesses that by many examples the Prince
showed, how much he detested the corruption and ambition of Prelates and
Abbates seeking preferment by money and flattery. When the Abbay of Fulde was
void, and the King with his Nobles conferring about the choice of a new, the
Abbates and Monks, says Lambertus, as it had been at a solemn game, began
to offer some golden mountains, other great booties out of the lands of the
Abbay; and some, more services to the commonwealth than accustomed, and in
offering they kept neither mean nor modesty, horum impudentiam rex
vehementissime, vt dignum erat, detestatus, Did not this prince vehemently
detest Symonists?
the king most vehemently detesting their impudency as it became him, when he
was importuned with their prayers and offers, on the sudden led with a
divine spirit as men thought, called one Ruzelin a Monk that stood before
him, which came to the court about the business of his house at the
commandment of the Abbate, and never dreampt of any such thing: and putting
the Pastoral staff in his hands first himself named him Abbate, and prayed
the rest both soldiers and Monks to consent to his election.

Likewise when the Abbate of Loressan was dead, Lambert. Scafn. Ibidem.
and the Monks and soldiers (he means the Clergy and the people of the
place) had elected the Prior with one accord to succeed and came to the Court,
(for the kings consent) neither was it thought that the king would dissent, No
prince freer in his elections tha^ Henry the 4.

If the Pope had committed no worse Symony than henry the 4. did the Church had
been in better case than it is.

The Monks of purpose diffame the prince to flatter the Pope.


for that the Prior was in some grace and favor with the king by reason of his
diligent service before that time, the king caught an other of the Monks of the
same house by the hand, which came with the rest of his brethren, thinking on
no such thing, and drew him into the midst of the company amazed at the
matter, and to the great admiration of all men gave him the Pastoral staff.
This report the very mislikers of Henry the fourth do give him touching his
hatred and detestation of Symonie and his Princely disposition to make free
choice of Bishops and Abbattes. If some times he were led with affection
and fancy, I know neither Pope, people, nor Prince that may not be often
affected, entreated and deceived in their gifts and elections, be they never
so wise, and otherwise never so sincere. But your Monks, as Marianus,
Dodechinus, and others did the Prince great wrong to diffame him with all
posterity for one that sold all spiritual lyuinges: especially where the
Pope himself charged him with no such thing in his Synodall sentence against
him.


Phi. All Stories cry out on Henry the fourth for Symonie.


Theoph. Neither do I think that his time was free from it, though his person
were. The writer of his life seems to complain of those that were about him
and had the governing of him in his nonage. After the young king was taken from
his mothers lap, Vita Henrici 4. in fasciculo reru^sciendarum.
and lighted into the hands of his Nobles to be brought up by them:
whatsoever they prescribed him, as a child he did it: he exalted whom they
would, and deposed whom they willed him, in so much that they did not serve
him but reign over him. Henry the 4. abused by his tutors in his minority.
When matters of the kingdom were handled, they regarded not the commonwealth
but their private respects, and in all things which they went about, the first
and chiefest mark they aimed at, was their own This fault of other men is
imputed to the Prince by the Moncks.
gain. But when he came to that stay of age and wit that he could
discern what was honest and profitable (for him self and his Realm) what
not; retracting those things which he had done at the suggestion of the
Nobles he condemned many of his own factes, and becoming as it were a judge
of himself, he changed things where need so required. I will therefore
neither excuse him for licentiousnes of life, when he was young, nor those
that were about him from briberie: but the Symonie which your holy Father shot
at was an other matter.

The true cause why Hildebrand was offended that the Prince should give
spiritual livings.
He saw the Clergy did rely too much, as he thought, upon their Prince, by
reason all Bishoprics, Abbayes, and Benefices were in the Kings gift: and
none placed in them but such as loved and honored the King, which was not for
the Popes purpose, the whole Clergy by their example and doctrine leading the
people to reverence and obey the magistrate. The first step therefore to
weaken the king not by sedition on the sudden, but by defection in
continuance, was to get the Clergy to be neither promoted by the King, nor
beholding unto the king: but to ex^mp^ first their lyuings, This was the way to
pull first the clergy and after the people from the Prince.
and after their persons from the Kings power, that thereby they might the
more freely take part with the Pope against the King without all danger, and
draw the people after them under pretense of Religion, when time should
serve. Which at first was not spied of Princes, till all too late they found
by proof that when the Pope began to quarrel with them and excommunicate
them for very trifling and earthly causes: the Bishops, Priests and Monks
presently syded with the Pope against the Prince, Princes were never weakened
till their clergy took part with the Pope against them.
and taught the people that it was damnable, to aid, maintain or assist any
Person or Prince excommunicate against the Church, (so they called the Pope and
his Cardinals) and this terror of conscience made subjects even by heaps
abandour their Princes, and aggregate themselves to the Popes faction, which
otherwise they would not have done, had they not been rightly instructed by
their Pastors to obey their Princes, and not to fear frivolous and rash
excommunications from Rome, whiles Popes will rule all, and be resisted by
none.

The first layer of this corner stone in the kingdom of Antichrist was
Hildebrand with his skillful exposition of Symonie, Hildebrand made it Symonie
for a lay man to present to a spiritual living.

Platina in Gregor. 7.

Vide cause. 16. quaesi. 7. Si quis deincept.


who resolved in his Councels at Rome, that to accept any spiritual living
from a layman, were he King or Caesar that gave it, must be taken for
Symonie: and as well the giver as the taker be cursed and excommunicated.
These be his words: Following the steps of our holy fathers, as we have
done in former Councels, so in this by the authority of almighty GOD we
decree and pronounce, that he which hereafter accepts any Bishoprike, Abbay
or other ecclesiastical Benefice, at a lay man's hand, shall in no wise be
counted a Bishop, Abbate or Clerk, and that he shall not dare approach to
Rome under pain of the greatest curse, until repenting him of his fact, he
has refused the place gotten by such ambition and contumacie, which is al one
with Idolatry. Lustily said and like a Pope.

Ibidem.


To the same censures we will have Kings, Dukes, and Princes tied and
subjected, which shall presume to give Bishoprics or other ecclesiastical
dignities, a thing neither fit nor lawful. This, says Platina, he decreed,
lest the Church of Rome should receive any hurt by briberie and Symonie.

Gregory decided it to be Symonie for a layman to present to a Benefice, or
for a Bishop to expect the Princes consent, whereas in the Primative Church,
This was never counted Symony before Hildebrands time.
the people, which were laymen, chose their Pastors, and for a long time the
Bishops of Rome themselves were not chosen without the Princes consent, and
that which Hildebrande affirms here to be Symonie, the Bishops of the same
See before him confessed to be godly, and the Emperors were possessed of it
as of their right ever since the days of Charles, which was very near three
hundredth years.

That stood good (says Platina six hundredth and eighty years after Christ)
in the election of the Bishop of Rome which the Emperor or his Deputy in
Italy confirmed. Platina in Benedict. 2.

The Bishop of Rome could not be chosen without the Princes consent.

Lambert. Schaf. in anno 1073.


This was in force a thousand years after Christ even when Hildebrande came
to the Popedom, as appears by the message which Henry the fourth sent to
the Romans upon the choice of Hildebrand, and his answer back again to the
Emperor. For when the Romans after the death of Alexander had elected
Hildebrand without expecting the Princes pleasure, the King sent Eberhardus an
Earl to the States of Rome to know the cause, quare praeter consuetudinem
maiorum Rege inconsulto Romanae ecclesiae Pontificem ordinassent, ipsumque, si
non idonee satisfaceret, illicite accepta dignitate abdicare se praeciperet:
Why they had created a Bishop of Rome without the kings consent against the
ancient use of their fathers, and to command him that was chosen, if he made
not due satisfaction, to forbear the dignity which he had unlawfully taken.
To this Hildebrand answered, that he was chosen of the Romans, and violently
constrained to take the place, Hildebrand when he came to be Pope durst not be
ordered without the Princes pleasure.
and yet by no means could be brought to permit himself to be ordered
Bishop (of Rome) until he certainly knew that the king and the Nobles of
Germany had consented to his election: and for that cause he had hitherto
differred his consecration, and surely would differ it, until he were
advertised of the Kings pleasure by some trusty messenger.

That which Hildebrand condemned was long before confirmed to the Prince by the
former Bishops of Rome.

Distinct. 63. Adrianus.


The like Custom and privilege the Prince had to consent to the elections of
all other Bishops within his Empire, before they could be ordered as your
own Law confesses, and he that withstoode it was accursed by the Popes own
mouth long before Hildebrande was borne. Adrian the Pope, with a whole Synod
(of an hundredth fiftie-three Bishops) yielded unto Charles (the great) right
and power to choose the Bishop of Rome and to dispose the Sea Apostolic.
Also Adrian defined that the Archbishoppes and Bishops of every Province
should receive inuestiture of Charles, so that unless a Bishop were first
liked and invested by the King, he might not be consecrated by any man. And
whosoever did against this Decree, he accursed. In an other ^^^ncell held at
Rome Leo the eighth of that name, Hildebrand accursed by his predecessors.

Distinct. 63. In Synod.


after the example of Adrian confirms this custom to Otho the first, King of
the Germans, and Emperor of the Romans. I Leo with the whole Clergy and
people of Rome do settle, confirm and establish, and by our Apostolic
authority we grant and give unto our Lord Otho the first, and his
successors, power for ever to appoint a Bishop of (this) chief Apostolic
See: and likewise Archbishoppes and Bishops, that they shall receive
inuestiture of him: in so much that no man of what dignity or profession
soever he be, This was the yoke which Hildebrand could not endure.
shall have power to choose a Bishop of this chief Apostolic Seat, or to
consecrate any other Bishop without consent of the Emperor. If therefore a
Bishop be chosen by the Clergy and people, let him not be consecrated,
unless he be first allowed and invested by the foresaid king. And if any man
attempt any thing against this our Apostolic sentence, we determine him to
stand excommunicate.

Martin. Polon. in Adriano and Leone 9.

Plat. in Pasc. 1. and Leon. 8.

Sigebert. in anno 1111.


These grauntes and confirmations, your own Stories do witness, though
Blondus seem to doubt of them, as unlikely. Sigebert says, From Charles the
great, for the space of three hundredth years and above, during the lives of
threeskore and three Bishops of Rome, they that were Emperors of Rome gave
Bishoprics and Abbayes by the delivery of a ring and a staff, and that then
was counted lawful. Now in the days of Hildebrand, This was the chief quarrel
between Hildebrand and Henry the 4.
against the Decrees of their fathers, the Popes in their Synodes have
determined, that no Bishoprike nor ecclesiastical inuestiture can or should be
given by a lay man with a staff and a ring: and they which so received
Bishoprikes or other ecclesiastical preferments, were excommunicated.

Thus Hildebrand pretended to follow the steps of his fathers when he
forsook them; and concluded that to be Symonie which was none, and made it a
cause of deprivation for the Prince to hold that right which two Bishops of
Rome with their Synodes expressly confirmed to Charles and Otho, Was not this a
wise cause to deprive a Prince of his Crown?
and sixty three Bishops had suffered and approved in the Germane Emperors,
and himself had protested to the Princes Legates at his first entrance to the
Bishoprike. If this were not a mere quarrel unjustly sought by the Pope upon
the Prince against all order and equity, your nearest frindes shall be my
judges.

The second cause of Hildebrandes presumption against the Prince is like the
first. The Prince was not bound to appear in the popes consistory.

Refusing the Popes penalty is no deprivation in a Prince.

Any Pastor may remit the Princes sins as well as the Pope.

Mark the stately proceedings of Hildebrand against the Emperor.


For what Law, divine or humane, forced the Prince to go to Rome at the Popes
call? How prove you, that for sin committed against God the Pope may enjoin
what penance he list? And the Prince must abay? Or that if the Prince refuse
the Popes new found and needless penances, he must be deposed?


Philand. Would you not that Princes should repent their wicked lives?


Theoph. Yeas, and amend them with all Christian care and speed: But what
power has the Pope by Gods Law to pardon the sins of Princes more than an
other Bishop has? Or why should Princes repenting not be forgiven, without
perfourming such penance as the Bishop of Rome list to devise for them? Had
Gregory dealt with Henry the fourth to correct those things which were amiss,
and to return to GOD with earnest and hearty repentance, we would not have
misliked that fatherly monition, both to give ear to the sinister and
slanderous informations of subjects and Rebels, against their Prince; to
cite him in person to appear at Rome that was his Sovereign Lord and master;
to repel his messengers with reproach and infamy that came to clear him; to
deprive him of his kingdom, for not consenting to such penaunces as the Pope
in pride and rage should impose; to make him stand three days in the cold
frost barefooted before he could be admitted to presence: The devil himself
may minister as good Justice as Hildebra^d did.

The popes arbitrarie penances are no parts of our conversion unto God.


and after his submission and absolution given by the Pope him self to set
up his servants and sons to take his Crown from him: If this be Justice,
the dyuell himself may suffer for Justice as well as Pope Hildebrand.


Phi. Are Princes too good to do penance for their sins?


Theoph. Prove first that such penances as you list to enjoin, are necessary
parts of our conversion unto GOD, and then we will say, Princes may be blamed
for refusing them: otherwise you wickedly abuse the keys in that you make them
serve your lusts to compass your purposes, and to be revenged of your
enemies, under color of repenting and reconciling unto God.


Phi. Must not the Church also be satisfied?


Theo. If Popes under the name of the Church play the Tyrants, and content not
themselves with those signs of inward sorrow, The Pope abuses the keys to
increase his gain and power.
which God accepts, they be now not forgiuers of sins, nor watchmen over
souls, but cunning huntsmen after g^^^e and peruerters of truth with their
profane policy, which turn the ke^^s and Cannons of Christ's Church to
enrich themselves, and to get a Lordly Dominion over all persons and places by
restraining the Sacraments and enioyning penaunces, such as they see make most
for their advantage. And this has been the manner of all your late Popes,
upon private and earthly displeasures and quarrels to curse and banne both
Prince and people, till amends were made them even in their own liking, as if
Christ had ordained the Sacraments to be, not seals of his grace and helps
of our faith, but baits to catch kingdoms, and rods to revenge such Princes
as will not, or can not procure the Popes favor. For so the Bishops of Rome
have used their excommunications against Princes and others, as the examples
that follow, will fully declare.

How Hildebrand sped with his enterprise.
To make an end first with Hildebrand, if either the success that GOD gave him
in his furious attempt, or the judgments of your best and syncerest Stories
near that time, be worthy to be regarded, they condemn this act of
Hildebrande as unjust and ungodly. Rodolf, whom the Pope and the Saxons set up
against his master, lost his right hand in the field as he sought to get the
Crown from him, The just reward of a rebel, showed in Rodolph.

Vrspergens. in anno 1080.


and when by reason of that and other wounds he was ready to give up the
ghost, Vrspergensis reports of him, that looking on the stumpe of his arm,
and fetching a deep sigh he said to the Bishops that were about him,
behold this is the hand wherewith I swear alleagance to my Sovereign Lord
Henry: and now I leave you see, both his kingdom and this present life: you
that made me aspire to his throne, take you heed that you lead me right, I
followed your advise.

Sigebets. in anno 1080.

Hildebrand Prophesies against himself.


The same year that Rodolf was slain, Hildebrand by revelation from heaven, as
he said, foretold that that very year the false king should die, but his
conjecture of the false King which he interpreted to be Henry, deceived him,
says Sigebert. For Henry fighting a set battle with the Saxons: Rodolf the
false king and many of the Nobles of Saxony were slain. If this were a
revelation from God, as Gregory pretended, then by the foretelling and
perfourming of this accident, GOD himself pronounced him the false King, whom
the Pope erected and maintained against Henry the fourth: If it were no
revelation from above, but a consortion with spirits from beneath, then was
Gregory no such Saint as you make him, that had fellowship with Devils, and
his own master betrayed and beguyled the frantike humor of his infernal
disciple.

Hildebrand himself turned out of his Popedom.
Four years after, Hildebrande himself was forsaken of his own people, and
by their consent deprived of his Popedom, and he feign to fly to the
barbarous Normanes for refuge, and there in banishment died. Romani Imperatorem
Henricum recipient in vrbe, and eorum iudicio Hildebrandus Papatu abdicatur.
Sigeber. in anno 1084.
The Romans receive Henry Emperor into their city: and by their judgment
Hildebrand is deprived of the Popedom. Vrspergensis confirms the same.
Vrspergen. in anno 1083.
Vnde Romani commoti, manus Regidederunt, Hildebrandum vero Papam vnanimeter
abdicarunt: whereupon the Romans being moved, (that the Pope would not come in
the kings presence to have the matter heard) submitted themselves to the king,
and with one consent abandoned Pope Hildebrand. Who lying at the point of
death, as Sigebert found written of him, called unto him of the twelve
Cardinals whom he loved above the rest, and confessed to God, Siger. in anno
1085.
S. Peter, and the whole church, that he had greatly sinned in the Pastoral
charge which was committed unto him, and that at the instinct of the devil he
had stirred hatred and hart-burning amongst men. Beno the Cardinal testifies
the same, In vita and gestis Hildebrand.
though some of your Romish writers stoutly avouch the contrary.

This was the success of Hildebrande and his new made king; the one upon the
loss of his hand and end of his life remembering his oath, and repenting his
treason; the other seeking to displace the Prince, was displaced him self, and
lost his Popedom, whiles he labored to set the Prince besides his throne.

As touching the fact, Frisingensis says this was the first onset that ever
Bishop of Rome gave to deprive the Emperor. I read and ouerreade, says he,
the gestes of the Roman kings and Emperors, Otho Prisingens. li. 6. cap. 35.

Deprivation of Princes never offered by any before Hildebrande Sigeb. in anno
1088.

This is right the Jesuits cause.


and I never find any of them before this man excommunicated by the Bishop of
Rome, or deprived of his kingdom. Sigebert wisely and truly gives his
judgment of this and the like interprise. To speak with the leave of all good
men, this only nouelty, I will not say heresy, was not crept into the world
(before the days of Hildebrand) that Priests should teach the people they owe
no subjection to evil kings, and that although they have sworn fidelity unto
him, yet they must yield him none, neither may they be counted periures for
holding against the king; but rather he that obeys the king is
excommunicated, and he that rebelleth against the king is absolved from the
blemish of disloyalty and perjury. Gerochus a great champio^ of Gregory's, is
fain to say of him: Apud Auent. lib. 5. fol. 563.
The Romans vsurp to themselves a divine honor, they will yield no reason of
their doings, neither can they abide that any man should say unto them, why
do you so. They answer as the Poet writes: so I will, and command. Let my
will stand for reason. Vrspergensis says of the Synod at Mentz, where in the
presence of the Roman Legates the Bishops that rebelled (with Hildebrand)
against the Emperor were deposed; Vrspergen. in anno 1085.
Ibi communi consensu and consilio constituta est pax Dei, There by common
consent and counsel the peace of God was established: which concludes
Gregory to be the author of a devilish dissension against the Emperor.


Phi. We care for none of these that speak evil of Gregory's doing, so long
as we have a greater number of stories to commend him.


Theo. And we having the true reports of these that lived in the same age
with him, which neither you nor the rest of your Romish faction can disprove,
The later writers of the Romish faction, to please the Pope, commend Hildebrand
to the heavens.
little regard what men that came after; and were more desirous to please the
Pope than to write the truth, have published in their stories. You nor all the
writers you have shall ever be able to refell the assertions of Sigebert and
Frisingensis, that Hildebra^d was the first Bishop of Rome which attempted to
deprive Princes of their Crowns, and that this novelty or rather heresy was
never heard of before. How lawful then it was, which for a thowsande years
the church of Rome never durst adventure, till Gregory the seventh first
presumed to do it, leaning rather to wicked and seditious policy, than to
christian and confessed authority, the simple may soon discern, or if they
look to the end, they shall see the reward that is consequent to all
rebellions.

Vita Henrici 4. in Fasciculo rerion sciendaru^.
A good instruction (says that ancient reporter of Henry's life) was given
to the world that no man should rise against his master. The right hand of
Rodolph cut off, showed a most just punishment of perjury, in that he feared
not to violate his fidelity sworn to the king his Sovereign: and as though
other wounds had not been sufficient to bring him to his death, That part
punished which offended.
that part also was punished, that by the plague the fault might be perceived.


Phi. If you stand on success, Henry himself was lifted at last out of his
kingdom by his own son.


Theo. Was it not wickedness enough to arm the subjects against their
Prince, and to set the son to impugn the father, but you must also crake of
it? What Hildebrand began, the pope that came after would never leave off.
Three erect^^ against Henry the 4. and all slain.
The way that Hildebrand began, his successors would not leave, as being
the only mean to make them Lords of al. And therefore when Rodolf was
slain, Herma^nus was speedily erected against Henry: and had his reward as
speedily at a woman's hand, which with a mighty stone, as he was coming in
sport to try the force of his soldiers, beat out his brains from the top
of a castle in earnest. Ecbertus was the third, that ascended to his masters
seat: and he not long after was caught in a windmill, and paid his life for
his ransom.

The two sons of Hen. the 4. set up in arms against their father.

For this whole story see Cuspinian in He^r. 4. Auent in Annalibus: and the
life of Henry the 4. in fasciculo reru^ sciendaru^.


Subjects having so evil success against their Prince, the Pope and his
confederates thought to try what the son would do against the father: and
first they persuade Conradus, the eldest son of Henry, whom his father left
in Italy to repress the force of Mathilda, to join with her against his own
father and to with-drawe the whole kingdom of Italy from obedience to the
Emperor. Which unnatural dealing of Conradus forced the father to disherite
him and to make choice of his younger son Henry the fifth to succeed him in
the Empire; taking an oath of him, least he should run his brothers course,
that during his own life, the son should not meddle with the fathers
kingdom, or countries but by the fathers consent. The elder brother not long
after departed this life: which occasioned the Pope and his adherentes to
temper with Henry the fifth, though by nature and oath bound to the contrary,
that he should take the Scepter in hand, and rather bear himself as king,
than suffer a stranger to rise up and put both the father and the son in
hazard to have the kingdom from them. This fear joined with a youthly desire
to reign, brought the son to take arms against the father, and to meet him
in open field, with a perjured and wicked purpose to defeat him of his crown.

The matter had come to dint of sword but that the chief on both sides
abhorring those unnatural wars, The Nobles shrinking from the father to the
son.
pretended to parle as if they would compose the strife without blood; in which
conference of theirs, the father found the Nobles that were with him, incline
rather to the son rising than setting, and to faint from the possessour of
the Crown, for dread of him that should be successor: Henry the 4. aided
by his mortal enemies when he was forsaken of his friends.
and for that cause secretly conveyed himself from the camp and fled to
the Duke of Bohemia and to the Saxons who before were his mortal enemies and
the first attempters of his deposition, but now, seeing that ungrateful and
parricidiall attempt of his bowelles against him, honored and assisted the
father to the uttermost of their power. The Popes Legates and the rest of that
faction fearing the friends, and doubting the valor and former success of
Henry the fourth turned themselves to their Romish arts, and persuaded the
son to feign a kind of submission and reconciliation to his father, upon
this condition if he would but retain peace with the Sea of Rome. To that
the father accorded, referring himself and his cause to the indifferent
judgment of his Nobles and Princes, and receiving of his son for the safety
of his life and honor, promises, tears, and oaths; all which notwithstanding
he was with a fair pretense led to a castle by the way as they traveled,
and being received in as an Emperor, he was kept there as a prisoner, A right
pattern of the Romish institution.
and this offer made him either to loose his head, or to resign his Empire:
By these detestable periuries and practices the son gat the father to
relinquish the Crown: and this if you think to be good success you may say
that Judas had as good in betraying his master, as Henry the fifth in
displacing his father.


Phi. The same Gregory the seventh did the like commendable justice upon the
king of Pole, The defense, cap. 5.

Chron. hist. Pol. lib. 4.

Kings of later times excommunicated.

Cuspin. in Hen. 4.


Bolislaus the 2. as well excommunicating as depriving him for murdering of his
Bishop S. Stanislaie at the very altar. Against which sentence though he
stood by force and contempt for a time, yet at length he was forsaken and
resisted wholly by his subjects, fled, and in fine slew himself.


Theoph. The justice done upon Henry the fourth was not very commendable.
One of your own friends confesses the Prince was condemned Absens and
inauditus; both in his absence and not so much as heard wha^ he could say for
himself. The Bishops of Italy and Germany thought it not very commendable
when they deposed the Pope, Cuspin. ibidem.
Quod Regem nullo exemplo, anathemate praeter omnem causam perculisset: for
that he had accursed and deprived the king which was never seen before, and
that without al just cause. And surely to restore the Prince to the communion
as Gregory did at Canusium, and yet to defeat him of his Crown, and to set up
his servant to rebel against him: this had no show of justice. And if you
commend it, you have your consciences seared with an hot Iron, and will
speak nothing that may displease the Pope, be it never so just or true.

Bishop Stanislaie murdered by king Boleslaus.
The murdering of Bishop Stanislay by Boleslaus the second, king of Polonia, we
mislike as well as you: but the depriving him of his Crown and allowing his
subjects to conspire his death, that was to requite sin with sin and to
revenge murder with a more heinous and impious murder. It was not lawful for
the king to kill a Bishop that admonished him of his vici^us life; much less
was it lawful for subjects to conspire the death of their Prince. Neither act
was good, This kings ^ct was evil, (...) the Popes was worse. It is a greater
sin for a subject to kill his Prince, than for a king to kill a Bishop.
Cromerus de rebus Polon. lib. 4. in Boleslao.
but of the twain the Popes was the leuder. For in steed of reducing the king
to repentance, which should have been his only purpose, he interdicted the
whole Realm from the service of God, which is rather the subuerting of
innocents, than the punishing of offend^urs, and used the kings sin as a
pretense to incite the subjects to greater sin, and to settle his usurped
power over the Princes of Polonia that should succeed; by charging the
Bishops to annoint or crown no king after that without his consent. Your own
author confesses no less.

When these things, says he, which Boleslaus had done, were reported at Rome,
Gregory the seventh then Bishop moved with the haynousnesse of the fact,
interdicted the whole Realm from divine service, accursed Boleslaus to the
deep pit of hell, and in solemn manner deprived him of his kingdom, and
commanded the bishops that they should anoint and crwone no king after that
without his license. Notwithstanding this deprivation Boleslaus reigned a year
and more after that, but hated of all (at home) and contemned abroad;
Rebellion and murder are the fruits of the Popes deposing Princes.
in so much that the Nobles of Ruscia, which he had conquered refused their
subjection, and certain of his Nobles and states at home conspired his death;
which conspiracy being detected, he fearing lest more were of their counsel,
fled to ( Ladislaus king of) Hungary, who received him very courteously and
honorably.

We defend not the vices of Princes but examine the Popes power to deprive
the^ of their crowns.
He fled fearing his own subjects, whom he had tyrannously oppressed not long
before with shameful cruelty, as the same writer witnesses; who also
brings three reports of his death: one that he fell mad and slew himself;
an other that in hunting he was cast off his horse and torn of dogs; the
third that wandering into a strange Country he became a skullin in a
certain monastery, and there in repentance ended his life.


Phi. If his end were so strange, his life could not be good.


Theo. I commend not his life, if it be true that Cromerus writes of him; I
rather acknowledge the just judgment of God in taking vengeance of his sins.


Phi. Why do you not acknowledge the like in his deposition?


Theoph. Because the Pope is not God, to whom the punishing of Princes sins
does rightly belong.


Phi. Would you that Princes should kill Bishops at the very Altar for doing
their duties, and yet go free?


Theo. As if God were not both as sincere and severe a judge as the Pope?


Phi. Who doubts of that?


Theo. Then shall they not go free, that sin against his law, be they
Princes or others.


Phi. I speak of the mean time, before that day come wherein he shall judge.


Theo. And in the mean time which you speak of, God punishes Princes, though
not by the Pope.
God mightily punishes all sorts and states, though not by the Pope.


Phi. He punishes by diseases and strange kind of deaths, as he sees
cause; but yet good Laws must be made and maintained by men for the repressing
of vice amongst men.


Theo. Uerie true: but those laws must be made by Princes and not by Popes.
Bishops have not to do with the sword which God has given unto Princes for
the punishment of evil doers.


Phi. And what if Princes themselves be the doers of evil, who shall punish
them? And what if the Pope be a malefactor, who shall punish him?



Theo. Every soul must be subjected to them, and they to God. They bear the
sword over others: not others over them. Besides them or above them no man
bears the sword by Gods appointment.


Phi. The keys are above the sword.


Theo. The keys open and shut the kingdom of God: The keys do not touch
the crowns of Princes.
they touch not the bodies nor inheritances of private men, much less of
Princes. Only the sword is corporally to compel and punish, which is not the
Priests but the Princes charge, as I have often showed.


Phi. To let Princes do what they will, Tyrants were never yet repressed by
Priests. 1. Sam. 22.
without fear of punishment, is the next way to overthrow commonwealths.


Theo. What kingdom can you show wherein it has been otherwise? Saul willed
Doeg in his presence to ^lea fourscore and five of the Lords Priests, and
he smote their city with the edge of the sword, both men, women, children
and sucklinges. Did Abiathar the high Priests son, that fled and escaped,
deprive Saul of his kingdom? or did David, for whose cause they were slain,
when shortly after he had Saul in his power to do with him as he would,
seek the kings life, or suffer his men to take it, that were ready to do it?
David when he was king defloured Bethsabe and caused her husband to be
murdered. Did therefore any Priest or Prophet in all his Realm offer to depose
him? or did Absolon well to conspire against him? Achab joined with Iesabel in
putting 2. Sam. 11.
Naboth to death, and 3. Reg. 21. and 18
killing the Lords Prophets. Did Elias deprive him? or incite his subjects to
forsake him? Herod Mat. 14.
beheaded John Baptist, and likewise Act. 12.
James, and apprehended Peter with a purpose to send him after, but that he
was delivered by an Angel: did Peter therefore take vengeance on Herod, which
he might have done with a word as well as on Ananias; or did he leave him to
the judgment of God, which shortly after insued with an horrible plague? The
tyrants of all ages and vices of all princes both before the coming of our
Savior and since, have they been punished by Priests as you would have it?
or else have they been reserved to Gods tribunals as we affirm?


Phi. Some have been punished by Priests, though not all.


Theoph. Many Princes have been deposed by their own Realms, but not by
Priests.
Show but one prince for five thousand years since the first foundation of the
earth that was iudicially cited, examined and corrected by a priest til
Hildebrand began this new president. If any princes were during all that time
repressed, it was done by their own states and realms, and that for their
extreme tyranny; priests always refrained those attempts, and never thought it
any part of their vocation to meddle with the changing and altering of kingdoms.


Phi. It is a better and readier way to reform princes, to subject them to the
tribunal of one godly Bishop as we do, than to leave them in thraldom to
popular tumults and mutinies as you do.


Theo. We leave them in thraldom to none but only to God, Princes were better
to refer themselves to their realms, if they were to choose their judges, than
to endure the Popes pride.
and to serve him is no thraldom, but an honorable and princely liberty. Yet
if princes were to choose their judges among men, they were far better
refer themselves to the general consent of their Nobles and commons at home,
than hold their scepters at the pleasures of disdainful and seditious Popes
which seek to dishonor their persons, and impouerish their Realms.


Phi. You speak this of spite.


Theo. Your own examples will prove it a truth.

How dealt Adrian the fourth, and Alexander the third with Frederike the first,
How Frederike the first was handled.
a wise, valiant and virtuous prince? Did not Adrian receive a great sum of
money to excommunicate the Emperor? and the stomach which the pope took against
the prince, grew it not upon these causes, for that the Emperor in his letters
put his own name before the Popes, and required homage and fealty of the
Bishops for their temporalities, and would not suffer the Cardinals to pray
upon the churches of Germany? Did not the Cardinals conspire and bind
themselves with an oath that they would never choose any to be Pope, By these
arts the Pope has grown great, and by these he yet stands.
but one that should be an opposite to this Emperor? And when Alexander the
third was shuffled in by that faction against Victor, did he not twice refuse
to have the matter discussed by council, and stirred up the kings of Scicily
and France, and the states of Venice against the Emperor, and caused all the
cities and countries of Italy to rebel against him, and having taken his
third son prisoner, would he restore him or make peace with the father til
in presence of all the people at the door of S. Marks church in Venice the
prince had cast his body flat on the ground, and the pope setting his foot on
the Emperors neck, had auanced himself with that part of the Psalm which
says, Thou shall walk upon the aspe and the basilisk, and shall tread the
lion and dragon under thy feet? Psalm. 91.


The parts that were played by the Bishops of Rome with Frederike the second,
Lodouik of Bauaria, king John of this Land, and Jews the 12. of that name,
king of France (which are your own examples) if I should largely pursue the^,
The tyra^nies and injuries of Popes against Princes were infinite.
a whole volume would not suffice them: I will therefore rip up so much only as
shall let the reader see with what cunning these princes were wearied and with
what pride they were despised, when they traveled for peace.


Phi. But say no more than you will prove.


Theo. Your own friends shall hear me record that I do not feign.

The grief that Adrian the fourth conceived against Frederike the first, and
the occasious thereof, though I might report out of Radeuicus that th^^ lived,
yet had I rather take them out of Adrians own words, Radeui^us de gestis
Frederici, lib. 10.

Apud Naucler. volum. 3. gener. 39. anno 1156. The Popes letter to the Emperor.


in his epistle to Frederik, which are these, By the word of truth we are
taught, that every one which exalts himself shall be brought low. Wherefore we
marvel not a little at your discretion that you give not S. Peter and the holy
Church of Rome that reverence which you ought. For in your letters directed
unto us you set A foul sin for the prince to set his name before the Popes.

The Pope would not have the clergy swear fealty to their Prince.

The popes gain must not be impaired.

Nauel. ibidem. The mildnes of Frederikes answer to the Popes letter.

Bishops owe fidelity to Princes not only in respect of their temporalities
but of their duties to gods ordinance.


your name before ours, which is a note of presumption, I will not say,
arrogancy. What shall I speak of the fidelity which you promised and confirmed
with an oath to S. Peter and to us, in what sort you perform it, when as you
require homage and exact fealty of them which be gods, and the sons of the most
high every one of them, I mean the Bishops closing their hands within yours
(when you receive it) and setting your self against us, you shut not only the
churches but the cities of your kingdom against the Cardinals that came from
our side? Repent therefore, repent we advise you, lest whiles you covet the
things which you should not, you loose that which you have.

For the better discerning of the Popes ambitious and envious spirit, you shall
hear with what mildnes and lenity the prince made his answer. Whatsoever
regality your Popedo^ has, you gat it by the gift of princes. Whereupon when
we write to the Bishop of Rome, by right and by ancient use we set our name
first. Look your records, and if before you did not mark this which we say,
there you shall find it. Of them, whom you call gods, I win by adoption;
since they hold part of our regalities, why should we not exact both homage,
and an oath of fealty, whereas our master and yours, holding nothing of any
earthly king, but bestowing all good things on all men paid tribute to Caesar
for himself and for Peter, and gave you an example so to do, saying: Learn of
me for I am meek and humble in heart. Let therefore your Bishops either restore
us our temporalities, or if they find them so profitable (that they will not)
let them give to God that which is Gods, and to Caesar that which is Cesars due.
To your Cardinals our churches are shut and our cities not open, because we see
them to be no Preachers but spoilers, no makers of peace, but snatchers of
money, no reformers of me^, but insatiable scrapers of gold. When we shall see
them to be such as the church needs, that is bringing peace, lightning
countries, assisting the humble in equity, we our selves will not fail to
appoint for them necessary provision and maintenance. And (to tell you truth)
you give us cause to suspect your humility and meekenes which is the nource of
(al) virtues, when you quarrel with temporal persons about these matters which
make nothing to religion. We ca^ not choose but send you this answer when we
see the detestable beast of pride to have crept unto Peter's seat. The
detestable beast of pride cr^pt long since unto Peter's seat. Antichrist
practicing for life to make him self strong.


This reply, though grounded on nothing but manifest reason and truth, did so
sting the Pope and his Cardinals that they joined in a general conspiracy with
William king of Scicily, and very near all the cities of Italy, to cross the
Emperor to the utmost of their powers, and when the Pope died to choose none
but one of the same faction that should continually pursue the Prince both with
sedition and excommunication till they gate the upper hand of him. Iohannis
Cremonensis a writer of that time says: Abbas Vrspergens. in anno 1152. and
Nauc. genera. 39. anno 1158.

The Pope co^triueth a mighty co^spiracie to resist the prince and to drive him
clean out of Italy.

Vrsperg. in anno 1152. Naucler. generat. 39. Cuspinian. in Frederico.

Adrian choked with a fly.


In this conspiracy the greater part of the Cardinals, William king of
Scicilie, and almost all the cities of Italy bound themselves with many
Barons and other greater men: and a mighty mass of money was given to Pope
Adrian that he should excommunicate the Emperor. And farther he says, he
learned of credible men of Millan and Brixia that were parties in this action,
that the conspiracy with Pope Adrian was so fastened with oaths that none of
them might leave the rest, or seek the Emperors favor without the consent of
all, and if the Pope departed this life, they should choose a Cardinal of the
same confederacy.

The reward which Adrian received at Gods hand as that writer says was this,
that A few days after he had denounced his excommunication against the Emperor
at Anagnia, as he walked abroad to refresh himself, and came to a spring to
taste of the water a fly by report entered his mouth, and stuck so fast to his
throat, that by no help of Physicians it could be removed, til he gave up
the ghost.


Phi. Nauclerus, you know, doubts of this story because the Italian writers
make no mention of it.


Theo. That is no reason to disprove the writer: Cuspian. in Friderico 1.
Cuspinian. in Frederico 2.
You know what Cuspinian a man of your own side says of your Italian stories
in the lives of both the Frederikes. Merula (an Italian) not knowing the
things which Emperor Frederike did, but as following Blondus or Platina, does
foully err many times. And again, The Italian stories wholly bent to justify
the Popes doings and to belie the Germane Princes
The Italians as Blondus and Platina both of one age, complain of the want of
stories. They disdayned to read the chronicles of the Germans, the which,
because they sauored not of the Roman eloquence, they rejected, and missing in
many points they affirm very often lies for truth. Some of them offended with
the whole Nation of Germany, call all the Germane Princes (that were Emperors)
barbarians. And to flatter their Popes, they charge (the Germane Princes) with
many more vices (than they had.) Want of other writers before them, hatred of
the Germans whose Princes often wasted Italy with fire and sword, and a
natural desire to magnify the Pope, made the Italians disdain to seek the
truth, or to dissemble it when they saw it.


Phi. Did not the Germans think you bear affection toward their Princes,
In these cases I allege no writers but men of their own religion.
and spite the Pope for accursing and impugning their Emperors?


Theo. I allege none but Priests, Monks, and Abbats that were in the Popes
danger, and not in the Princes: and such as otherwise did honor the Pope, and
depend upon his See, save when he offered so open wrong and violence that no
Prince could endure it.

But we wade further than we need. Nauclerus doubts whether Adria^ were
choked with a fly: but of the conspiracy, which is the thing that I purposed,
neither he, nor you can doubt. It was Radeuicus de gestis Frideric. 1. lib. 2.
cap. 52. cap. 69. cap. 67. cap. 69. and 71.
complained of by the Cardinals that refused their society, it was Radeuicus
de gestis Frideric. 1. lib. 2. cap. 52. cap. 69. cap. 67. cap. 69. and 71.
confessed by the citizens of Millan, it was Radeuicus de gestis Frideric. 1.
lib. 2. cap. 52. cap. 69. cap. 67. cap. 69. and 71.
proved in the Council of Pauia, it was reported by letters both from
Radeuicus de gestis Frideric. 1. lib. 2. cap. 52. cap. 69. cap. 67. cap. 69.
and 71.
the Prince and from the * Bishop of Babenberge to Eberhard the Archbishop of
Saltzburge; it was verified by ye sequel, I mean by the wilful resista^ces
which the co^federat cities of Italy doubled and tripled to their utter
overthrow, and by inciting the kings of France, England, Spain, and Scicily
to join against Frederike, which thing Alexander the third a Cardinal of the
same conspiracy with Adrian, labored for life to compass.


Phi. Could you blame him? Did not Frederik set up Victor an Antipape against
him, and chase Alexander from his See?


Theo. Frederike did not set him up: This conspiracy was made whiles Adrian
lived: before Alexanders election came in question.
but when two were chosen in a tumult, the council of Papia discussing the
cause pronounced for Victor against Alexander, and their judgment did the
Emperor follow.


Phi. He might well follow it, for himself did procure it.


Theo. It is not true. The Bishops of Italy, Germany, and other Countries were
assembled by him, and the matter committed as in the sight of God to their
integrities and consciences. The Princes words in the council were. The
council of Papia pronounced Victor to be lawfully chosen.

Radeuicus de de gestis Frideric. 1. lib. 2. c. 64

Bishops had skill in the canons of the of church, which princes had not.

Radeuic. lib. 2. cap. 67.68.70.


Though I see the power to call councels is ours by the office and dignity of
our empire, especially in so great dangers of the Church (for so Constantine,
Theodosius, Justinian, and of later memory Charles the great and Otho are
known to have done) yet authority to define this weighty and chief matter I
leave to your wisedoms and judgments. For God has made you Priests, and
given you power to judge of us. And because in things which pertain to God,
it is not for us to judge of you: we exhort you to behave your selves in this
cause, as those that look for none other judge over you but God. This when he
had said, he withdrew himself from the council, committing the whole
examination of the matter to the church and to the persons Ecclesiastical
there assembled, which were infinite. There were fifty Archbishops, and
Bishops, and Abbats and Priors innumerable. There were also the Ambassadors of
diverse nations promising whatsoever the Synod decreed, should undoubtedly be
received of their Realms. See their proofs and proceedinges of this council
in the chapters that follow, and show us how you can infringe them.


Phi. Alexander had the greater part of the Cardinals.


Theo. The greater part of the Cardinals had conspired to choose none, The
greater part of the cardinals had conspired against the Prince.
but one that was and would be an enemy to the Prince, and to that intent had
they taken an oath, Adrian yet living. After his death when they came to choose
a successor, the people and the Clergy were as earnest to have none, but one
that should keep the city at peace with the Prince. Whereupon the
conspirators not daring to utter themselves for fear of some vproare, nine of
the Cardinals, the rest seeing and not contradicting, at the importunate
clamor of the people and clergy, put the Popes mantle or cope upon Octauian
the Cardinal, and placed him in S. Peter's chair, The choice of Victor.
and performed all other solemnities of his inthronization with the great joy
of the whole city, the conspiratours which were 14 in number beholding all this
and not gainsaying it, or any part of it, though they were present.

Twelve days after Victor was immantled, Alexander se^ up by the co^spiratours
against Victo.
and possessed of the Popedom, and had received the obediences of the clergy
throughout Rome, the conspirators secretly departing the city, and not so much
as calling the rest of the Cardinals to their election, by themselves without
the presence or allowance of the people, or clergy, set up Rowland the chief
man of their faction to be Pope, and named him Alexander. This garboyle being
brought to the Prince by the complaint of both parts, he by letters and
messengers warned both sides to come to the council that should be kept at
Papia, and there to hear the judgment of the Bishops for the determining of
this strife, which Alexander and his adherentes utterly refused. These things
were justly proved before the Bishops assembled at Papia, and sentence
pronounced with Victor against Alexander.

Frederike did but the duty of a christian Prince, and much less their
ancient Emperors did in the like case.

Victors election was faulty, but Alexanders was worse.

Alexanders election was utterly void.


What did Frederike in this case that a Christian Prince might not lawfully do
in the like? How could he do less than call both parts to the Synod, and commit
the matter to the judgment of the Bishops? Or how could he but favor and and
defend that ^ide which was now cleared and confirmed by the council?


Phi. Victors election was faulty from the beginning.


Theo. If there were any fault in Victors election, it was theirs that should
have presently protested against his ordering: but in Alexanders there was
neither right, nor form of any election. They were joined in a wicked compact,
and had thereto bound them selves by oath, which by law was sufficient to
forfeit their voices. Again their own silence drowned their interest, when
they would not, or durst not speak their minds at the time and place appointed
for the choice. Thirdly to their election they called not those who had right
to be present, and to choose as well as themselves, and therefore all that they
did was utterly void. Fourthly they had neither the consent of the clergy, nor
laity, which by order and duty they ought to ask. Lastly they disdained the
summo^s both of the Emperor, and y^ council, which by the canons they should
have obeyed: and therefore might be deprived of the right which they had: much
more discharged from that which they never had.


Phi. The council was not indifferent.


The. No more is any judge to him that offends.


Phi. The Prince had no power to call the council, much less to summon the
Pope.


Theo. You speak like your self. Who called the ancient councels, and
summoned the Popes to be present at them, Councels before and after did as much
as this came to.
but Princes? And why might not this council cite and deprive Alexander for
his contempt, as well as the councils of Pisa, Consta^ce, and Basil, did other
Popes, that came after, for the like contumacie, specially when as Alexander
was yet no Pope, but in strife with an other for the Popedom?


Phi. Platina says, Alexander had 22. Cardinals, and Victor but 3.


Theo. So Alexander himself craketh whom Platina follows, but the contrary
part testified that there were nine on the one side and fourteen on the other.
Howbeit I stand not on these minutes of elections, Apud Rudeuic. lib. 2. cap.
51. ca. 52.

The causes of this conspiracy.


I note first the causes that provoked the Pope and his Cardinals to conspire
against Frederike: next the means they used to pursue him and weary him.

The causes were, the setting of the Princes name in his letters before the
Popes: the requiring of homage of the Bishops: and stopping the Cardinals from
spoiling his churches under a color of visiting them. Of these pretenses, and
Frederiks answers let the world judge.

The means were: The means which the Pope used to tire the Emperor. Naucl.
gener. 39. and 40. Cuspinian. in Fred. 1.
the Pope did excommunicate the Prince and his fautors, gate Crema, Placentia,
Verona, Millan and Brixia to rebel, linked fifteen cities of Italy in a
league with the king of Scicilie not long before his mortal enemy, of purpose
to withstand Frederike: procured Henry Duke of Saxony to forsake his master
in the field: stirred the Princes of France, England, Spainei, and the
Venetians what they could, to annoy him. With these policies he began: and
with these he continues even at this present.

Thus your holy father with wars, rebellions and conspiracies sought to shake
this Emperor out of his clothes: Frederike tamed those count^ies that
rebelled against him.

Vide Naucl. gener. 40. anno 1177.


but God so assisted him, that he razed and destroyed the cities that rebelled,
and turned the Duke that betrayed him out of his Dukedom, and electorship, and
made the Pope glad to leave his Palace, and fly to Venice in a cooks attire:
and had not indulgence of nature won him to accept the peace, which the Pope
offered, and his captive son entreated, he was like enough to have taught
the Bishop of Rome a new lesson: The time for Antichrist to be exalted.
but the time was then for Antichrist to be exalted, and therefore it pleased
the wisdom of God to suffer this worthy Prince to be weari^d, and content to
embrace peace for the safety of his son that was prisoner at Venice. Where,
if it be true, that is written of Pope Alexander even by your own fellows, he
showed himself in his right colors. Naucl. genesis 40. anno 1177*
For willing the Emperor before all the people to lie flat on the ground, he
set his foot on the princes neck and said, it is written, thou shall, walk
upon the aspe and Basiliske, and tread the Lion and Dragon under thy feet. And
the prince answers, I do it not to thee, but to Peter whose successor thou
art: the pope replied, (it must be done) to me as well as to Peter. The Pope is
where he would be.
The Pope is now where he would be, not on mean men's shoulders, but on Princes
necks: and that advancement has he gotten, not by religion or virtue, but by
breaking oaths, bearing arms, shedding blood, and such like turkish and
devilish stirs. Can you tell where S. Peter did wage war upon any private
man or Prince.

Naucl. genesis 39. anno 1158.

The Pope fights with Princes for earthly gains and griefs.

What quarrels the Pope has pursued these 500. years.





Phi. Would you not he should defend himself?


Theo. If he be Peter's successor, he must feed, not fight, teach obedience,
not authorize rebellion, pray for his enemies, not pursue them with force and
fury. Else he succeeds Romulus in murdering, not Peter in feeding.


Phi. What if words will not serve, shall the chiefest Pastor of our souls
see the keys and the church contemned, and oppressed, and not draw the sword?


Theo. That is in effect, if men will not believe your Preaching, may you not
take boytels and knock them on their heads? Nay the case goes not so well
with you: You wage wars with earthly states, if they dislike your pride, or
auert your gain, you pretend Saint Peter and the Church, when you mean
nothing but your temporal commodities and superfluities: it suffiseth you not
to be free from Princes Laws and swords, or to be their equalles, you strive
with them to be their superiors, and to displace the^ if they displease you.
These be the quarrels which your holy father and his adherentes have professed,
and persued for the space of five hundredth years with all their might and
maine: for these things have you spilt more Christian blood than ever Turk, or
Tyrant did: and at this day you take it in evil gree that you may not still
continue that course.

First clergy men's livings and then their persons must be exempted from the
Prince.
With Frederik the first you fell out, for that he durst place his own name
before the Popes, which all Emperors ever did: and as you fought with Henry
the fourth to get clergy men's livings of his hands, so you tumbled with this
Frederik to exempt their persons: least they should either for commodity or
duty lean to the Prince: and when he began but to look to your fingers,
that you should not decay his Realm and enrich your selves, you conceived such
immortal hatred against him, that you took an oath to revenge him not only by
conspiration, but even by succession.

With Frederike the second you dealt much after the same sort, whom you did
excommunicate twice, thrice, four times for no cause, without all order of law
and justice, How Frederik the second was handled.
as if princes had bin footbals for popes to play with, and not powers for
christian Bishops, to reverence.


Phi. Was not Frederik the 2. excommunicated for very good causes?


Theo. They were very good I promise you. Vrspergensis an Abbate then living
says of them, Vrsper. in anno 1227.

Blond. dec. 2. lib. 7.


The pope of very pride the first year of his Popedom began to excommunicate
Frederik the Emperor for frivolous and false pretenses without al order of
judgment.


Phi. But Blondus and Platina tell you an other tale. Blondus says, The first
year of his coronation, making light account of his oath he attempted many
enormous things against the Pope: who warned him to forebeare these All that
wickedness was the lawful defense of his own right.
wicked, perfidious and rebellious interprises, but he every day more and more
despised his admonition, which made the Pope to terrify him with an
excommunication, if he did not relent and make restitutio^. And when the
Emperor set light by the first curse, the second time the Pope added a
deprivation from his Empire and crown, and third time when the Emperor stood
still out, the Pope very much offended thereat absolved al his subjects from
their oaths, Platina in Honorio 3.
whereby they were bound to yield him allegiance. And so says Platina,
Honorius the third did excommunicate and deprive Frederik the second, for
molesting the Popes dominion against right and law.


Theo. Your Italians perceiving their Popes to have bin very waspish and eger
against the Emperors that liked them not, The Italians cannot defend the Pope
but by enforcing heinous crimes against the Emperors though they know none.
and knowing what a shame it would be in the eyes of al posterity for them to
have proceeded in such rage without vrge^t and evident matter, in general words
do charge those Emperors with many grievous crimes. But we trust neither the
Popes discretion, nor the reporters construction, unless we see the particular
facts that were committed. They may think those things to be heinous, which
indeed are frivolous: and if the quarrel were for lands and territories lying
in question between the Empire and the Sea of Rome, the Pope did wickedly in
his own cause to abuse the keys for earthly mammon.


Phi. The causes of the Popes egernes against Frederik the ^
Who made you the Popes judge?


Theo. I judge him not, there is one that shall judge both him and his acts:
yet I may ask you the causes for which Frederike was accursed and deprived.


Phi. You have heard them out of Blondus and Platina. In Henrico 3.



Theo. Platina says, Contra ius fasque ditione^ Pontificiam vexabat: he
molested the Popes inheritaunces against all right: Decad. 2. lib. 7.
that Blondus calls wickedness, rebellion, and perjury: These be high
words, but I see no deeds. And if we credit them which wrote that very
present, when these things were done, the Pope did the Emperor open wrong in
receiving and succouring his rebels against him. Vrspergensis says, the first
year after Frederike was crowned Emperor, Vrspergens. in anno 1221.
he began to war upon two Earls of Thuscan, Matthew and Thomas, which had
surprised certain fortes, and pieces of his territory within Apulia: and
clean put them from all they had; who flying to Rome sought help at the Popes
hand; whereof the Emperor often complained that the Sea Apostolic fostered
his public adversaries and enemies. This was the falling out between the
Prince and the Pope which your Italian Stories do mention. The Pope did the
Prince wrong though the Italians say nay.
Platina says, it was the Popes right: Vrspergensis two hundredth years before
him, and a writer in the midst of these actions, says it was the Princes
right: and that he did but rec^uer his own out of their hands: for the which
Blondus charge him with rebellion and perjury. Cuspinian therefore a man of
your Religion very truly notes him and other Italian writers in this case
for mere flatterers. Having repeated the same fact that Vrspergensis before did
testify, Cuspinian. in Frederico 2.

Cuspinians admonition of the Italian stories.


Thence, says he, sprang the first occasion of enmity between (the Prince
and the Pope). Although the Italian writers do say that Frederike the Emperor
after the death of his mother Constantia, which kept him in tune, and would not
suffer to grow to these passions, did the worst he could against Honorius
the third, Gregory the ninth, and Innocentius the fourth, and handled Rome,
which had nourced him up, It was no small point of Antichrists policy to get
some that should make all manner of lies for him and his See.
as if she had been his stepmother. But those flatterers of the Bishop of Rome
will have al things lawful for the Pope, inuesting him with both swords, and
making all Emperors but his servants. This was Frederikes wicked rebellion
against Honorius, that Blondus expresses in so great words to win his own
by force of arms out of their hands that invaded him, and to requite them
with the like; and such quarrels can your holy father pick to Princes, when he
is disposed to spit his venyme against Princes.

Gregory the nynth, Gregory's fury against this Emperor.
upon less cause showed more fury. He did excommunicate Frederike the
second, for that he stayed his expedition against the Turk till he had
recovered his health, and when the Prince sent his Ambassadors to make faith
thereof, he would not so much as hear them, or see them. And after in the
absence of the Prince whiles he was fighting against the Turk, Note the piety
of Popes.
the Pope invaded his Land, and caused the soldiers that should have aided
him against the Turk, to be spoiled and stopped of their iourneie, and a fame
to be spread that the Emperor was dead, and the Almanes that returned from
Jerusalem to be slain, least they should notify the Princes life and welfare.


Phi. These be horrible lies, So had you need to say; for if you grant them to
be ^ru^, the pope could be little less than a devil incarnate.
devised by such as would have the Pope in hatred with all men.


Theo. They be true tales, and truer than those which some of your side have
coigned to claw the Pope with. Your own fellows confess as much as I say.


Phi. Germans perhaps in favor of their Emperors.


Th. If you refuse the Germans of your own religion as welwillers to their
Princes, how shall we receive your Italians that were more than partial to
their Popes? Yet this advantage we have over you: the elder and sincerer
Stories even of your Romish profession and devotion make with us in these
matters.

Naucler. gener. 41 anno 1229. The Italians would feign pretend other causes to
save the Popes honesty: th^se be so shameful, that they blush to hear them.
Nauclerus discussing the causes of Frederikes excommunication, and repeating
what Antoninus a Florentin writes in the soothing of Gregory's fact, adds
But surely by the epistle of Gregory, which he wrote to the king of France
with this beginning, Out of the Sea is the beast ascended, it is convinced that
Gregory at this time did not excommunicate Frederike for these causes (which
Antoninus pretends) but for that Frederik stayed longer with his soldiers
from succouring the holy land than the term which he had vowed by oath, and was
enjoined by the Pope under the pain of his curse. To the which the Emperor
answered that he was unjustly excommunicated for so much as he entered the
journey within the term, and besides the death of the Lant-graue (one of the
chiefest that should aid him) a dangerous sickness constrained him to take la^d
again, and so by his evident infirmity ought to be excused.


Phi. The Emperor fained himself sick, and that the Pope understood by the
letters of Bishops that were in his train. Naucler. Ibide^. The Pope would not
admit the Princes ambassadors to prove their masters sickness. This was no
pride.



Theo. That was the Popes reply to salve his doings: but why did he not
voutsafe to hear or see the Archbishop of Brundusiu^ and others whom the
Prince sent to make faith of his sickness? why did he not expect the Princes
purgatio^ by oath or otherwise that his excuse was not fained? What servant was
ever so disdayned by his master if he were honest, but his reasonable defense
was heard? And our holy father forsooth will not expect, no not admit the
Emperor of Christendom to make faith of his corporal infirmity.


Phi. We tell you he was not ^^cke.


Theo. We tell you that was hard for you to know, and harder to prove. You
should have called his messengers to their oaths or have sent some to feel his
pulse if you had suspected him, for a moicher. In the mean time the world
sees the frantike pride of that wicked Pope, Vrstergen. in anno 1227.
who not only denied audience to the Archbishop and other the kings
messengers, and would not so much as admit the^ to his sight, but condemned and
accursed the sick Emperor for not passing the seas to sight against the Turk.

And here see, the right vain of your Romish justice. Your holy father did
hinder the prince secretly what he could by rebellions and vprores from going
against the Turk: The Pope did hinder the Prince from going, and yet
excommunicated him for not going.

Naucler. gener. ^1. anno 1226.


and yet did excommunicate him for not going.


Phi. Did the pope hinder him?


Theo. Look your own stories. The year before, which was 1226. The Lombards,
says Nauclerus (as it was thought) at the suggestion of Honoriu^ the Pope
entered a league amongst themselves, and with the cities n^ere adjoining against
Frederike the 2. which continued many years, by the name of the Lombards
league, a very great annoiance to the Roman empire, and a manifest impediment
of the journey to Jerusalem, because the expedition which Frederike had
promised to make into Syria, was kept off a long time by this occasion.


Phi. This was but a thought.


Theo. The league was apparent, the instigation was secret. This confederacy
if the Pope had not favored, he should have assisted the Emperor with his keys
and cursinges, The Popes keys were ever ready against the Prince, but never
against those that molested the Prince.

Vrspergen. in anno 1228.


which were ever ready against Princes, but never against those that troubled
them; yet if you think the Pope was no dealer in this conspiracy, read what
Vrspergensis writes of them the next year after his sickness when the Prince
was taking his voyage to Jerusalem. In the year of our Lord, 1228. The Emperor
minding to accomplish his vow, and appease the Pope, sailed to the Land of
Jury, and that year before his going he had indicted a general meeting of
his Princes at Rauenna, from the which he was hindered by the messengers and
Legates of the Pope. For they of Verona and Milla^ suffered none to pass
through their coasts, but spoiled the very soldiers that were to go against
the Turk, and that, as they affirmed, by the authority of the Pope, which alas,
is a shameful thing to speak of.

After Frederiks departure, as if the former wrongs had not bin spiteful
enough, the Pope taking occasion of the Emperors absence, Vrsper. ^odem anno

The Pope inuadeth the Emperors dominions whiles he was fighting against the
Turk.

What was this but to betraie the christians to the Turke^

Vrspergen. in anno 1229.

The Pope is angry that the prince returns with peace and victory.


addressed a maine army into Apulia, and took the Emperors countries from
him who was then in the service of Christ (a most horrible thing to speak) and
subdued them to his own use, and hindered the soldiers that were going against
the Turk, Nau^. l. genera^. 41. anno 1228. The pope stirs the princes
soldiers to rebel against him when he was encamped against the Turk.
the most he could, from passing the Seas, as well in Apulia as Lombardy. Who
rightly considering these attempts, will not lament them, and detest them as
the foresignes and prognosticatio^s of the ruin of the church? And when the
composition was made between the Emperor and the Suldane, that Jerusalem with
certain places near bordering should be restored to the christians, and truce
remain for ten years: and the Emperor by letters advertised the Pope and the
rest of christendom of this joyful news, The Pope cast away the letters and
would not receive them, and with his fautors, as men affirmed, made a rumor to
be spread in Apulia that the emperor was dead. Whereupon the cities, that yet
stood for the emperor, inclined to render themselves into the popes hands, and
to kill the Almanes that returned from the holy land or were commorant in
Apulia; a most barbarous and wicked purpose.

And lest there should want any thing to the uttermost of al wickedness, when
Frederik (after his arriving in the holy land) sent messengers to Rome to
require absolution and reconciliation, because he had now performed his
promise, the Pope repelled his petition, and enjoined the soldiers in Asia to
withdraw their help from Frederik, as from a public enemy. It was not enough
to fill the Princes hands with civil wars when he should prepare against the
Turk to stop and spoil his soldiers that should accompany him, to invade his
land, and solicit his towns in his absence, your holy father must set the
Christians, when they should fight against the Turk, together by the ears,
and will them not only to forsake, but also to impugn their Emperor. What could
the devil himself have done more, if he had bin couched in the Popes chair,
than Gregory did?


Phi. These things Gregory himself denied, and the Italians that since have
written, Though this Prince suffered al these wrongs at the Popes hands, yet
the Italia^s rail mightily on him and magnify the Pope in all his doings.
reject them as false.


Theo. So had they need. For if they should confess them, they must yield the
Pope in so doing to be rather the foreman of Satan, than the Uicar of Christ.
And therefore your Italian Stories presuming all that the Pope said in defense
of himself to be true, and all that he claymed from the Empire to be his,
rail on Frederike in great choler, as on a wicked, and faithless Prince, and
acquit the Pope as doing his duty in all these counterplots: But Italian
wits are too well known to be trusted when they are offended, and in Blondus
a man may soon perceive an intemperate heat against those Princes that
withstoode the Pope.


Phi. You dislike our stories, and we dislike yours.


Theo. May you dislike your own, and such as then lived and honored the Sea
of Rome, having no just exception against them but only that they could not
apparel the Popes pride with some smoth devises, as the Italians do?


Phi. Blondus in favor of the Pope deals very spitefully with Frederik the
second.
Not long since you praised Blondus: have you now cast him out of conceit?


Theo. I did commend Blondus for his diligence where affection did not
interpeale him: But in this case, drawing all things to his appetite, the more
dilligent the more dangerous. He not only takes every word that Gregory spoke
for a Gospel, but adds of his own head such things as Gregory never objected
to Frederike; and that with no small spite. For where Frederik complained to
the Princes of Almanie, how injuriously and deceitfully the Pope had dealt
with him, amongst other things, whiles he was in the service of Christ
against the Turk, Naucl. gene. 41. anno 1229.
how the Pope had surprised a part of his kingdom with arms: Gegory in his
letters replied, that because Raynold Frederiks captain invaded the kingdom
of Scicily, the special patrimony of the church, least the Sea Apostolic
should thereby be impugned, his Legates entered Frederiks kingdom, and found
many ready to submit themselves. This is all that Gregory pretended who would
not spare to speak any thing, that with any color he might, in his own
excuse and against Frederike.

Blondus finding this to be but a simple cause for the Pope to invade the
Emperors dominion in his absence, Blondus helps Pope Gregory's tale.
and in that service, first for so much as the right of Scicily was in strife
between the Empire and the church of Rome, and secondly for that if Scicily
were held in fee of the church of Rome, yet Frederike was right heir unto it
by the mother side; and in full possession of that kingdom before he was made
Emperor: and therefore well Raynold his captain might put over soldiers into
Scicily to man the forts for all occasions, and to contain them in their duties
whatsoever should happen to his master in that voyage against the Turk: But
other inuas^o^, prejudicial to the church of Rome the princes captain neither
needed, nor could make any; Bondus, I say, perceiving that Gregory's pretense
would seem but a quarrel sought of purpose to make a rebellion against the
Emperor whiles he was from home, ^londus Decad. 2. lib. 7.
helps the matter with certain additions which are both odious and
slanderous.

Blondus false s^rmise of Frederike.
Frederik, says he, ready to take ship and sail from Italy, was so far from
asking the Popes absolution and benediction, that making one Rainold the
governor of the kingdom of Scicilie, in plain words willed him to oppress
the Pope and Clergy by all means. Blondus might have done well to tell us
who stood by and heard these words; which Gregory would never have omitted
if he had known them. And if the Pope that sifted his words and deeds with
all diligence knew no such thing, how should Blondus so many years after come
by the knowledge of them?

The other objection, that he despised the Popes absolution, is as foolish. For
as soon as he was landed on the other side, and began to march toward the
Turk, Platina confesses that he What will not Italian wits do when they be
displeased?

Platina in Gregorio 9.


was very earnest both by letters and messengers to be absolved by the Pope
(from his excommunication) and could not obtain it. To have dealt therefore
with the Pope before his going to be absolved, had been in vain, the Pope
doubting that he would not go, and refusing, as your selves confess, to
absolve him when he was there arrived and encamped against the Turk.


Phi. The Pope would not absolve him, because he went about to make peace with
the Turk. Frederike recovered the kingdom of Jerusalem from the Turk.



The. The Pope would ever have some cause to molest him; otherwise I see no
reason to mislike the peace. For whether the Turk stood in fear of him, or
was to be distracted and employed about other wars, I know not; the Emperor had
not bin there a year, but the Turk was glad to yield him the kingdom of
Jerusalem, saving the Temple and a few Castles; and to hold peace with him and
Christendom for ten years. Which conclusion as it was honorable in it self,
The Pope grieved with the Princes return, because his presence would hinder
the Popes practices.
so was it acceptable to all Christian states, save only to the Pope; mary he
of mere malice against Frederike when the letters were brought, that should
advertise him of the Emperors good success, threw them away, and showed
himself much agreeued with the matter, as one that did abode, the Princes
speedy return would disappoint him of his hope. And he missed not his
conjecture. For within short space the Emperor recovered his towns that were
lost, and stayed those that were shrinking from him to the Popes no small
regreet.


Phi. He was offended with Frederick for that the Temple was left in the
Turks hands. The Prince had been well occupied to stand fighting for Christ's
sepulcher, whiles the Pope spoiled him in the mean time of his kingdom at
home.

The holy land did the Pope good service.





Theo. The Prince perceiving the Pope to enforce his countries at home and to
irritate his soldiers against him, what else should he stay for, when he was
once reuested with the kingdom of Jerusalem?


Phi. Our Lords sepulcher and the Temple were the chiefest things that the
Pope regarded.


Theo. And good cause why. They gate him more money, and rid him of more
enemies than any places in the world besides.


Phi. Which way trow?


Theo. The Pope no sooner lacked money but he must have a collection through
Christendom for the succourse of the holy land as you call it, and if he fell
out with any Prince or Emperor, or saw him likely to stand in his way that he
could not rise so high as he would, he would never cease, what with
excommunications to fear him, what with indulgences to allure him, till he had
gotten his consent either to bestow his own person on the service, or at
least to employ his treasures and forces to recover the land of Jury from the
hands of Saracens; and in their absence he ruled the roast as pleased him, and
grew great by their decays.


Phi. Would you not have the Turk resisted?


Theo. Your holy father never took the way to have that done. He suffered the
Turk to devour the Greek Empire, and set the Princes of the West, not to
help them, but to fight for the place where Christ was crucified by the Jews,
The Pope rather increased than resisted the Turks power.
whiles the Turk in the mean time ouerthrewe many thousand Christian
Churches, and Cities, else where and and nearer home. And the supplies of men
and money were so straggling and interrupted with dissentions and discords at
home, that the Turk reconquered more in three years, than the Christians wanne
in threeskore years before.


Phi. Yet the Popes good will is to be commended: the fault was in them that
would not agree. The Pope himself spoiled the west Empire and betrayed the
East to the Turk.

Italy shaken into shiuers by the Pope. And so likewise Germany.





Theo. And who was the cause of that, but only the Pope?


Phi. You speak of spite.


Theo. Who filled the Emperors hands with rebellions and dissentions more than
the Bishop of Rome did? Who brought the Empire to a bare title, and the
Emperor to be skant able to defend his own, but only the Pope? Who cut
Italy into so many several Marquesdomes and Dukedomes as we now see, but
your holy father, seeking to exclude the Germane Prince clean out of Italy,
and to hedge up his way to Rome with many particular states, and regiments
interiected, and all linked in one league to repel him from passing or entering
their Countries?

Neither was it enough to straighten him abroad, unless he did also weaken
him at home, for fear least some valiant Prince occasioned by so populous and
stout a nation as the Germans are, should attempt with force of arms to
recover Italy. And therefore you were never quiet till Germany was shaken
into as many shiuers as Italy, and the Emperor able to command none of them,
but by their common consent, and according to their own liking. Which is the
state of the Empire in our days. The Emperor dieted lest he should get
strength to wrestle with the Pope.

The holy la^d used as a continual issue to weake^ christian Princes left they
should stir against the Pope at home.

The Pope would never a^sist the Grecians against the Turk.


This was not the way to make the Emperor strong against the Turk, for the
regetting of Jerusalem out of his hands, but to diet the Emperor, and to take
him so low, that he should not be able to wraffle with the Bishop of Rome,
without a present foil and instaunt danger of loosing all. And thus weak
though he were, yet to make him weaker the holy land was ever urged by the
Pope as a perpetual Lottarie, to make him, and other Christian Princes spend
their people and wealth with so small success, and mighty loss, that no one
thing did wast and weaken Christendom more than this.


Philand. Is this the thanks you give the Pope for staying the Turk from
inuading Europe? Were it but for that respect, you should think better of him
than you do.


Theo. To keep the Turk from subduing Christendom is a good and godly
enterprise: but from that the Pope was fardest off. He would never assist the
Christians of Grecia, continually fighting with the Turk six hundred and fifty
years after the division of the Empire under Charles the great, before their
Empire was overthrown; but rather held the Princes of Christendom from
succouring them, unless they would submit themselves to the Sea of Rome,
which they would never do; though some of their Princes do now and then in
hope of aid inclined to a kind of concord. And suffering the Turk still to
prevail against them, The Grecians were delivered as a pray to the Turk by
the Pope and his adherents.
and at length to swallow them up, to the great shame of the Christian princes
that next adioined, but most of himself, who was well willing because they were
not his obedients, to leave them and theirs as a pray for the Turk, he would
needs go fish for for Christ's sepulcher, as if that had been the next way to
safegared Christendom from the Turk; to keep the place where Christ was
buried; and to let him in the mean while conquer half Christendom.

And that made your holy father storm so much at Frederikes peace concluded
with the Turk, wherein the Sepulcher was left out that he would not absolve
him after his return but upon the payment of six skore thousand ounces of
gold. Which after three pounds an ounce, as it is valued in our days, is The
price of one dinner at the Popes table, and yet Blondus thinks it was to good
cheap.
three hundred and three skore thousand pounds. And though the Prince for all
this money had but one dinner at the Popes table, yet Blondus is so far out
of charity with Frederike, that he says the Pope was easier (in receiving so
small a recompense) than he ought or was fit he should. Blondu^ decad. 2.
lib. 7.



Phi. That money was paid for the damages done to the Church by the Princes
soldiers in their late wars, The Princes deputy did but defend his masters
right and inheritance while he was in his voyage against the Turk.

The Pope after the receipt of so much money persued the Emperor worse than
before.


not for his dinner as you gibe.


Theo. Blondus and Platina do presuppose that Frederike by his Agents in his
absence did spoil and sack S. Peter's Patrimony: but Gregory that received the
money, says the Princes deputy invaded Sicilie and no more, which was
Frederikes right and inheritance, though the Pope claimed thence a yearly
custom. And therefore since Frederikes captain did the Pope no wrong to
invade Sicilie, being his masters dominion, when the cities perhaps upon the
Popes censures began to slide from Frederick: no reason the Prince should
perform the losses and damages of the war, which began by the Popes
egernes: and consequently no cause for the Pope to exact so much money of ye
prince, but either for his dinner which was too dear; or for his keys which
should not be sold, or for his favor which dured not long. For within short
space after they fell at worse variance than before, and the same Pope the
second time accursed and deposed Frederike, and the matter grew to such heat
that your holy father crossigned soldiers against the Emperor, as if he had
bin a Turk or a Saracene.


Philand. Did not Frederike rather play the Turk with such as fought against
him, They came into the field against him as if he had been a Turk^ why should
not he recompense them as rebels?
when he cut their heads in four parts, and laid them crossewise on their
shoulders, and with hot Irons burnt a cross in their foreheads whose lives he
spared, and caused the Clergy men's crowns to be cut square to ye very
sculles? What Turk or Saracene ever showed like cruelty?


The. Al executions not in war only, but in peace also seem cruel, if you
look to the punishments, and not to the offenses.


Phi. What was their offense?


Theo. They rebelled against him for the Popes pleasure, whom by Gods Law they
should have honored and obeyed, as their Sovereign Lord and lawful Prince:
and not therewith content, they take up the cross against him in their badges
and banners, as if it had been against a Turk or an Infidel. If subjects so
far forget their duties, as to use their Princes like Infidels, because the
Pope disfauoureth the^: why should not princes forget their clemency, and
reward rebels and enemies according to their deserts? It was therefore more
enormous for the Pope to proclaim the cross against a Christian Prince,
(though his adversary for some private respects) as he does against the
Turk; than for the Prince to inflict some such punishment as should make them
repent their follies.


Phi. The cross first used against infidels for Christ's glory, the Pope
turns against Christian Princes to revenge his private enmity.

The cause of the second quarrel between the Pope and this Emperor.


Frederike impugning the Pope with all his might, why should not the Pope such
himself the best way he could?


Theo. And the Pope bringing rebels into the field against the Prince as it
had been against an Infidel, why should not the Prince teach them to beware
how they used the cross against Christian Magistrates, which was devised
against Turks and Saracenes?


Phi. The Prince himself was in all the fault.


Theo. Because he would not suffer the Pope to ride on his neck, as he had
done on his graundfathers, and the rebellious Cities of Lombardie to shut him
clean out of Italy. For what other cause had Gregory the ninth again to
excommunicate and depose Frederike after he had showed himself so desirous of
peace, that he paid a huge heap of gold to content the Popes ambitious
spirit? What one injury done to the Church of Rome can your Italian Sories
justly charge him with after his first absolution? If you think your holy
father may turn and wynd Princes like dishcloutes, and curse them, and depose
them for what causes he list, The pope first armed the subjects against their
Prince and the^ deposed him for seeking to subdue them with force of arms that
rebelled against him.
then Frederike was in some fault, for that he would not grant peace to the
Cities of Italy which rebelled against him at the Popes motion: but if that
be mad divinity, as in deed it is; the Pope himself was not well advised,
first to set the subjects up in rebellion against their Prince, and next to
deprive the Prince for offering to repress them that resisted him. Show us
therefore what offense it was against the Popes holiness for the prince to compel
his subjects to obedience by force of arms: or else we must conclude your
holy father did the prince open and wicked wrong to thunder his censures
against him, for seeking his own by those means, which God has allowed unto
magistrates.


Phi. The Emperor hired some to rebel in Rome against the Pope.


Theo. Your Italian writers would feign find holes in Frederiks coat if they
could tell how; but their tales hang not together. Platina runs one way,
Blondus an other, and Antoninus a third. Platina says that Peter Fregepanes
taking part with the Emperor, Platina in Gregor. 9.
kept the Pope out of Rome, and made him decline to Viterbium, as he was going
with an army against the Emperor, whom he understood to be within Italy;
and to oppugn the confederate Cities. So that by Platinaes confession the Pope
was in arms against the Emperor before the fautors of Frederike offered him
any violence.

Blondus a deadly persuer of Frederike with his pen reports this resistance
made by Peter Fregepanes, Blondus decad. 25. lib. 7.
before the Emperor entered Italy: adds, as his manner is of mere spite,
that the Prince had hired him with money so to do.

Antoninus as Nauclerus alleges him, writes that Frederike hearing the
cities of Lombardie, Millan, Bononia, and many others of Romandiola Naucl.
generat. 42. anno 1238.

The original of this second war between the Prince and the Pope.

The Popes legates were in the field against Frederike, when the Prince came to
recover his own.


to be fallen from him, and turned to the devotion of the Church, went against
them with a great army. And the Citizens of Millan with all their strength, and
the Popes Legates and the whole confederacy of Lombardie, which did cleave to
the Church, fought a field with the Emperor in a place called New court, and
the Millanoes with their adherents, after a sore conflict were overthrown,
many of the^ being slain, and many taken prisoners with their Carroch, where
the Ruler of Millan being the son of the Duke of Venice and sundry other
Noble men of Lombardie were taken and sent into Apulia; the Prince causing the
Dukes son to be hanged on a tower by the Seas side, and the rest to be
executed some one way, some an other. This Florentine con^esseth the Popes
Legates were in the battle that was fought with Frederike, at his first
entrance into Italy: and that the very original of ye war, was the defection
of the Lombardes from the Empire to join with the Pope, or as he speaks,
Gregory nourished the co^spiracy which Adrian made to keep the Emperor out of
Italy.
with the Church: which in deed was the only strife between the Pope and the
Prince, whatsoever Blondus and others in hatred of Frederike do surmise. Uiew
now this quarrel, and tell us whether Frederike did more than a Christian
Prince might do: or whether the Pope rather did not wickedly nourish the
conspiracy that the Lombardes made with Adrian the fourth against Frederike
the first, to drive the Emperor clean out of Italy: which was the point that
the Pope pushed at all this while.


Phi. The Pope required nothing at his hands, The Popes peace was this, that
the Emperor should loose all his right in Italy.

Naucler. gener. 40. anno 1183. The Prince perceiving the Popes purpose, would
make no such peace.

How needful it was for the Prince not to give over his right in Italy.


but the preservation of that league, which his graund-father made at Constans,
and his father during his life had kept inviolable.


Theo. That peace included none but Frederike the first, and Henry his son:
it extended not to their heirs and aftercommers, as appears by the oath of
fidelity which the confederate cities took to Frederike then Emperor, and
king Henry his son, and no farther; and therefore that peace being expired by
the death of his father, the Prince was at liberty to do as he saw cause.


Phi. But the Pope sought the continuance of that peace.


Theo. And the Prince perceiving the Popes fetch in time to exclude the
Emperor clean out of Italy by the renewing of that peace, would not assent to
it, but came with a mind resolved to bring the Lombardes to their former
subjection. What wrong was this in Frederike?


Phi. It was hard dealing.


Theo. None at all. And considering the Popes drift, to be free from the
Emperors force, that he might with more safety quarrel with him when he
lysted, and deprive him at his pleasure without danger: it was necessary for
the Prince to settle his state and keep his right in Italy: it should
otherwise not be possible for him, and the Princes that succeeded him to
repress the Popes insolency which began to increase apace. This was the
true cause why Gregory the 9. set himself against Frederike the second after
his first absolution, which cost so many thousands; what soever the Italian
writers do imagine in hatred of Frederike whom they misliked as well for
persuing the Pope, The Italians hate the Germane Emperors.
as for spoiling and wasting their native Country.


Phi. Did he not well deserve their hatred, that ranged over all Italy with
incredible cruelty? sacked their cities, filled every town, village and
family with mortal discord and dissension, banished and murdered Bishops,
imprisoned the Cardinals and Prelates as they were coming to the Council, and
so pursued and enclosed the Pope that he died for very grief of heart as
Platina writes? Platina in Gregorio 9.



Theo. Will you kindle a fire and then look it should not burn? What other
fruits of war could you expect but these or worse? What pranks were played
with Frederick before he ^ought revenge.
You made leagues to bereave him of his right; you caused his subjects to meet
him in the field, you accursed his person, and deprived him of his Empire, you
came out in arms against him, as you would against a Turk or an Infidel: you
did what you could to requite him and his with like rage and violence, and when
you could not be even with him, you thought it best to complain of his
cruelty. But you loose your labor: For wars are judged by their causes, The
Princes cause being good, his revenge was both lawful and needful.
and not by their consequents. If Frederikes cause were good, as the persuite
of his right and demand of obedience, within the Territories of his Empire
could not be evil, the^ your rebellions, confederatio^s, exco^munications,
deprivations and such like actions to resist him, defraud him, or oppress him,
were al wrongful and wicked: and his revenge of your conspiracies, and
treacheries (though sharp and severe) was lawful, and as the cause stood,
needful.


Phi. No Prince ever dealt so badlie with the Church of Rome as Frederike did.


Theo. No Prince was ever provoked with half the injuries with the which he was.
He was four several times solemnly deposed by the bishops of Rome, once by
Honorius, twice by Gregory, and lastly by Innocentius the 4. his This Prince
of all others most wickedly abused by Popes.

Naucler. gener. 42. anno 1242.


good friend, whiles he was a Cardinal, but his capital enemy when he came to
be Pope.


Phi. It skilleth not how often it was done, so long as it was done for causes
urgent and important.


Theo. If the Pope had any such power as he has not, the causes must be just
and true, which these were not.


Phi. Yes that they were. And though the rest did not so plainly express
the^, which makes you to carp at them, yet Innocentius the 4. lays his down
in writing which are extant to this day. Sexti Decretal. lib. 2. de senten. and
reiudicat. ad Apostolice and vt ad.



Theo. You say truth. The censure of Innocentius against Frederike the second
is extant in your Decretals: and four causes of his deposition there remembered.


Phi. And those no less than perjury, sacrilege, heresy, injury, and
oppression of the Church of Rome.


The. If it be enough for you to object what you list, you may soon condemn
whom you please.

Frederick charged with perjury.

Sext. Decret. li. 2. vt supra.


We hear your holy father in his magnificence charge the Emperor with these
four things, but I win it would trouble him, or you to prove them. He
committed perjury, the Pope says in his judicial sentence, by rashly
breaking the peace that was made between the Church and the Empire. If the
truth were well tried, The Pope charge the Prince with perjury for
repressing that rebellion which the Pope favored. With Sacrilege.
this perjury lights on the Pope, and not on the Prince. For How could the
Popes Legates be in the field against the Prince to assist his rebels, and not
break the peace that was made between the Church and the Empire? Is the Popes
power so infinite that he can make right in the Prince to be perjury, and
war in himself to be peace?

The taking and deteyning of Cardinals and Prelates was the sacrilege which in
this place is objected to the Prince; but when you prove that Prelates and
Cardinals be no subjects, and that they may lawfully take arms against
Princes, and yet no Prince must lay hands on them, then you may chance to
have an action of wrongful detynue against the Emperor, but not of sacrilege.
It is a point of your popish pride, The Pope makes it Sacrilege for a Prince
to impriso^ a rebellious priest.
to make it sacrilege for a lawful magistrate to restrain your parish
Priests of Rome from their seditious intens and practices. What are your
Cardinals by Gods Law more than other Clergy men? or why may not the Prince
both repress them, and punish them, if they disturb his state?


Phi. They were not his subjects.


Theo. Then were they his enemies, and since they came armed, Naucler. gener.
42. anno 1240.
and presumed with their ships to encounter his, why should he not sease them
as his prisoners?


Phi. They came to keep a Council, being thereto called by the Popes
authority.


Theo. To call Councels was the Emperors right, and not the Popes: and this
conuenticle was called to oppress the Emperor. Why therefore might he not
prevent it, and disperse it? especially when strangers offered to pass his
dominion by plain force without his leave.

Heresy was the third crime, With heresy.
for which the Pope suspected him. Wherein if a mortal enemy may be both
accursed and judge, and proceed upon no better ground than suspicion, The Pope
proceeds against the Emperor upon suspicion. With injury. Frederik offered
no wrong in defending his own.

Sexti Decret. li. 2. vt supra.


you may quickly condemn any man of heresy. Princes have warm offices, if
they shall lose their Crowns as soon as the Pope lysteth to suspect them of
heresy.

The fourth cause is more foolish than any of the former. The prince forsoothe
forced his subjects in Sicilie to aguise him, and obey him as their lawful
prince, notwithstanding the Bishop of Rome had deposed him, and the persons
that would not, he banished and diversely punished. This in deed was not for
your profit, but this was nothing against his duty.


Ph. He forced them to impugn the Church of Rome, whose vassalles they were.


Theo. The Church of Rome had a yearly pension out of Sicilie which is here
specified, more the Pope could not claim, and that pensio^ was first yielded by
those that usurped the kingdom of Sicilie against the Empire. For Roger of
Normanie, when Lotharius ye Emperor had chased him Naucler. gener. 38. anno
1137.
out of Apulia, and Campania, and taken those countries from him, (and Naucler.
gener. 38. anno 1138.
intended the like for Calabria and Sicilie, but that he was called away by
sudden occasions, and died before he could return) grew to a secret compact
with the bishop of Rome, to hold the kingdom of Sicilie (which the Emperor
claymed,) as from the Church of Rome by a yearly recognisance. After the death
of Lotharius, Conradus the next Emperor was so troubled first with rebellion
at home, and then with an expedition into Syria, The King of Sicilie conspireth
against the Emperor to keep him from recovering his right in Sicilie.
that he had no leisure to think of Sicilie. Against Frederike the first, who
succeeded Conrade in the Empire, did William of Sicilie nephew to this Roger,
(for his son reigned not long) conspire with the cities of Lombardie and the
Bishop of Rome, to keep the Germane Emperor aloof from Italy, and so long
they striued (having the Popes aid) with exco^munications, and rebellions,
that Frederike began to hearken to a peace, and William of Sicilie having no
children married his sister to the Emperors son called afterward Henry the
sixth, and father to this Frederike, that we speak of, Naucler. gener. 40.
anno 1186.
as willing the kingdom should return to the Emperors line: who otherwise
laid a challenge to it. When William of Sicilie was dead, Henry the sixth by
maine force of arms subdued Sicilie, Naucler. gener. 40. anno 1193. and 1194.
and was received into Falernum the chief town of Sicilie as a conqueror.

So that Frederike the second had a double right to the kingdom of Sicilie,
either as heir to his uncle, Frederick the second had a double right to
Sicilie.

Vide Naucler. anno 1138. and 1210.

The Pope had only a pe^sion out of Sicilie.


in which case the Popes pension was not extinguished; or else as Emperor, by
reason his Father did recover it by conquest, and reunite it to the Empire.
Either of these tytles is sufficient to defend his doings in Sicilie. As
Emperor he might claim it before the Pope, and from the Pope, for so did
Conrade the third, and Otho the fourth. As king of Sicilie, he was to pay but
a pension, not to be the Popes Uasal; and if the Pope should offer him any
wrong, he might lawfully repel force by force, and punish the people of the
land that would not obey him as their king, and assist him to hold his own.

The Popes allegation therefore against Frederike for compelling the subjects
of Sicilie to continue their obedience, notwithstanding the Popes interdict, is
very frivolous. Frederike herein did no more than any Prince might, and would
do in the like state. The sou^dnes of the Popes ce^sure against the Prince.
And grant he had somewhat abused the kingdom of Sicilie, which he did not,
is that a cause to remove him from the Empire?


Phi. The other three be the principal causes.


Theo. Two of them, namely heresy and perjury, be stark false: the third
was arrogance in the Pope to make it sacrilege to touch a Cardinal: not
wickedness in the Prince to take them as enemies, that labored to defeat him of
his Crown.


Phi. You would take the Princes part, we see, were his cause never so evil.


Theo. You do take the Popes part, we see, though the sentence he gave be
neither agreeable to Gods Law, nor man's Law, nor his own Canons.


Phi. How prove you that?


Theo. Nay it is hie time for you to come forth with your proofs, or else wise
men will discern in Innocentius the image of Antichrist, proudly judging in his
Consistory without regard of God, or man. What justice Princes may look for
in the Popes consistory.
A professed adversary to sit judge alone in his own quarrel, and for causes
apparently false, or frivolous, to proceed to the deprivation of a Prince, yea
the greatest Prince in Christendom, and in right his Sovereign Lord and
master; neither admitting his proxy, nor hearing what exceptions he could take
to his accusers, but appointing him to come in Person out of his own Realm
into an other princes Dominion, and to pronounce him guilty of all that was
objected, being neither present, nor heard, for that he refused to put his life
into his enemies hands; If this be justice, the wild Irish, and Savage
Indians that know not what belongs to cyuil society, or humane reason, may
be judges as well as the Pope.


Phi. If the crimes were notorious, and the Prince refused judgment, why
should not the Pope proceed against him in his wilful absence?


Theo. The prince sent to show the reason of his absence, and his atturnees to
deal for him, as far as should be needful, but that the Pope would not
expect their coming, no not the space of three days, at the The Pope, a very
pat^ent and discreet Judge. Na^xl^^. gener. 42. anno 1246.
petition of most of the Nobles, and Prelates that were in his council. The
crunes pretended to be notorious were conceived in great words, as perjury,
sacrilege, heresy, and tyranny: but the facts committed by Frederike, as
breaking peace with the Pope that took part in the field with his rebels
against him, deteyning the Cardinals that went to work his deposition, and
fought with his fleet constraining his subjects in Sicilie to acknowledge him
for their king, were temporal and private quarrels directly concerning the
Popes atte^pts against the Prince, and the Princes right to defend himself,
which your holy father of his accustomed presumption, Would it not do Princes
good to have such a ioylie Judge?
called perjury, sacrilege, and tyranny, and being the adverse part, gave
judgment in his own cause as liked best his own displeased and grieved
stomach. Now how this could stand with the prescription of divine, or
moderation of humane laws we would gladly learn.


Phi. Your refuge will be to impugn the Popes power which was the^ confessed;
though the hastynes of his censure were somewhat misliked.


The. By whom was it confessed?


Phi. By all men, even by Frederike himself.


Theo. You must make truer reports, before you give true judgments.

Frederike in his epistle to the king of France, showing this sentence by all
laws to be void, Naucler. gener. 42. anno 1242. The Popes power to depose
Princes vtt^rly denied in those days.

What a fire the popes proceeding s^^dled in Italy. Naucler. gener. 42. anno
1240.


alleges that though the Bishop of Rome had full power in spiritual things,
so as he might bind or loose sinners whatsoever, yet it is no where read, that
the Pope by the warrant of gods or man's law, may remove the Empire when he
list, or judge temporally of kings and princes to deprive them of their crowns.

The cities and people of Italy by that open and eger faction of Guelfs and
Gibelines, which dured even to our age, showed how many there were that took
with the Prince against the Pope, notwithstanding the Popes excommunications
and deprivations, which you would so feign uphold at this day. This faction (of
Guelfs ayding the Pope against the prince, and Gibelines standing with the
prince against the Pope) grew so general, says Nauclerus, that no city, no
town, no people remained free from that infection^ City has waged war with
City, province with province. One half of the people with the other, from
that time to this our age for no cause else but for this faction; some helping
their prince against the Pope, Blondus decad. 2. lib. 7.
and some the Pope against their prince. For 200. years and upward, says
Blondus, even to these our times they pursued each other with such rage under
these unlucky names, that the Italians wrought greater mischief among
themselves, than before they suffered at the hands of barbarous nations.
Horrible tumults ensued this depositio^ of Frederike.
Town against town, Country against Country, the people of each place
divided among themselves, fought together for no cause but for this
dissension; and their victories had no end nor mean but bloodshed and utter
subversion: neither only neighbors and cohabitants, but those that dwelt five
hundredth miles asunder, even the poorer sort and beggars, as well as rich and
mighty men, when they met each other, committed al cruelty one side on the
other. This flame your holy father kindled in his own Co^ntrie with his rash
proceeding against the Emperor, so wide it skattered, so long it endured, so
fiercely it raged, amongst your own Deuotionists, and yet you would make the
world believe the Popes power to deprive princes was never doubted of but in
these our days, and by men of our side.

Germany rejects the Popes proceedings against Friderike.
What Germany thought of this tragical intemperance of the Bishop of Rome, I
speak for the most part of them, their manifest neglect of the Popes factours
and bulls, and plain speech in their Synodes and assemblees will testify.
Which Auentinus, a man of the same religion that you are, thus reports.
Albertus (the Popes agent in Germany) sent the Popes bulls to all the Germane
Bishops; Auent. annal. boior. lib. 7. fol. 675.
for the publishing of Frederikes excommunication, not one of them obeys him.
He commanded the Abbats to accurse the Bishops: they regarded him not. He
charge the Clergy to choose them new Bishops, and the Monks to elect other
Abbates, if they continued in this contempt. Every one began to marvel at the
straungenes of this example never offered, much less urged before his time* In
no one place was this message quietly heard. Al men stormed, disdained and
raged: detesting the rashness of the Popes Nuntio, whose life and manners they
were well acquainted with. What germany thought of the Popes enterprise.
Germany was full of tumults, men saying plainly that the Bishop of Rome
commenced a most shameful enterprise against right and equity.

Even so when Rauerius an other of the Popes Agents delivered Sigefride Bishop
of Rentzburge a bull from Rome against the Prince, Al men derided the
impudency of the man, Auent. lib. 7. fol. 674.
and demanded what that light and superstitious Frenchman, What intertainment
the Popes nuncioes had in Germany.
or what the Bishop of Rome himself had to do in Germany without the
consent of the Germane Bishops his colleagues. They were offended and
displeased to see such tumults raised, and discord sowed, they proclaimed with
open mouth that the liberty of Christians was oppressed, and the flock
redeemed with the blood of Christ, brought into bondage by false Pastors.
Auent. lib. 7. fol. 677.
And when Albert would not cease, The Bishops of Germany not only made light
of his mandates, but accursed him in every Church, and Abbay, as an enemy of
Christian concord, and a most pestilent Arch-heretike: The Popes agent accursed
in every Church as a pestilent arch-heretike.
decreeing him to be worse than any Turk, Jew, Saracene or Tartare: and openly
blaming the Bishop of Rome for attempting those things among Christians,
contrary to right and reason, contrary to the Law of Nations, and Doctrine
of Christ, which were not used among the most cruel Tartares.

In the midst of these sturres, the Nobles and Prelates of Germany meeting to
consult for the state of their common wealth, Eberhardus the Archbishop of
Saltzburge a grave and worthy father; one that sat primate of that place
forty six years, and had experience of ten Bishops of Rome, under Frederike
the first, Henry the sixth, and now this Frederike: having long tried, and well
marked the driftes and cunning of the Romish Prelates, in the ears of the
whole assembly displaied your holy fathers arms with these words.

Our Lord and Savior Christ, Auent. annal. lib. 7. fol. 683.
did earnestly warn (us) that we should take heed of false Christ, and false
Prophets, which covered with sheep clothing, that is with the names of
Christians and titles of Bishops, would tyrannize over us and illude us: and
they as he taught, must be discerned by their works, to wit, their avarice,
luxury, contention, hatred, emulation, wars, discordes, and ambitious desire
to reign. To whom did our heavenly king by these words more plainly point
than to the Scribes and Pharisees of Babylon? Under the title of chief
Bishop, The Pope lively described in his colors.

The Romish warfare.


if we be not blind, we see a most cruel wolf in a shepheardes cloak.
The Bishops of Rome have their ways, and weapons for all sorts of Christian
men. By presuming, circumuenting, kindling war upon war, they are become
great, and now thy kill and slay the sheep, they dispell peace and concord
from the face of the earth, they raise civil wars, and domestical seditions
from the pit of hell: every day more and more they consume the strength of all
men, Ibidem, fol. 684.
that they may ride on the necks of all men. Christ forbids us to hate our
enemies, charge us to love them, and deserve well at their hands: to keep
says with them and do good for their evil. But the Prelates of Rome command
us, and that under a ioly countenance of piety, to violate that which is holy,
to abuse the sacred name of god to beguile men with, to be ungrateful to those
that have dealt well with us, and to requite good turns with evil: yea to
fight, strive, deceive, betray and cosen: they will have us set naught by the
majesty and providence of GOD, withstand nature, and resist the supreme power
that is ordained of GOD. Hildebrand was the first that eight skore and ten
years ago, Hildebrand the first layer of this plot.
laid the foundation of Antichrists kingdom under color of religion. This
wicked war (with Princes) he first began, which his successors have pursued
to this day. Believe me that have looked in to their doings, Ibidem.
(almost these fifty years) they will not cease till bringing the Emperor on
his knees, and dissoluing the honor of the Roman Empire, and also oppressing
the true Pastors which feed, and dogs that are able to bark, they quench
all, or kill al after this manner which you now behold. The highest God took
the shape of a servant that he might minister to his Disciples, What the Pope
seeks for, by warring with P^inces.
and wash their feet: but those Bishops of Babylon will reign all alone,
they can abide no equal, they will not give over, till they have trodden all
under their feet, and sit in the temple of GOD aduauncing themselves above
all that is worshipped: their thirst for riches and honor can not be
satisfied. He that is the servant of servants, affects to be the Lord
of Lords, The servant of servant affects to be Lord of Lords.
as if he were a God. The Sacred Synodes and Councels of his brethren, nay of
his Sovereign Lords he despises. He fears lest he shall be forced to
give account of those things which he daily does against all law and order. He
speaks proud things as if he were some God, he lays new plottes to
establish him self a kingdom, he changes and makes what laws he list, The
right portraiture of the Pope.
he sacketh, spoileth, deceives, kills, being that son of perdition, which
they call Antichrist, in whose forehead is written, a name of blasphemy, I AM
A GOD, I CAN NOT ERR, in the temple of God he sits and reigns far and
wide.

He was elected 1200.
I think you understand him, he speaks so plain.


Phi. He speaks so odiously that I little regard him.


Theo. Yet an archbishop and in great credit with Frederick the first, above
380. years ago.


Phi. We care neither for Frederick, nor his schismatical Archbishop.


The. Less care we for the wicked and Pharisaicall attempts of your Romish
Antichrist: whose immoderat ambition, The Bishops of their own religion have
detested the Popes pride in deposing Princes.
and intolerable presumption the Kings and Bishops of your own religi^n have
always detested and resisted; and that with vehement and sharp speech, as you
see by this example.


Phi. What strange thing is it to see some withstand him?


Theo. Less marvel is it to see some obey him. The name of the Church, the
power of the keys, the dumbnes of Bishops, and discord of Princes made many
men yield, that otherwise would not.


Phi. The Princes of Germany choose an other in his place as soon as the Pope
by his letters willed them.


Theo. The one half of the electours were Bishops, that neither durst nor
would abide the Popes fury: in the other half it was easy to find one that
would be seduced, displeased, or some way corrupted to go to the choice of a
new, Naucler. gener. 42. anno 1247.
but that the elect of theirs was slain the same year in the siege of Vlme,
and William of Holland that was chose^ next after him had as short a dispatche
by those that took part with Frederick. The new elect against Frederick had
small joy of their promotion.
And had you not been more active with your poisons, than lucklie with your
elections: Frederick had sped them faster than you had named them.


Phi. His own bastard stisled him.


Theo. But his Antagonists first drenched him; and so Cuspinian says, The
Popes hatred against the Prince ceased not, Cuspinian. in Frideric. 2.
whom he night and day devised how to destroy: and after the conspiracy of
Theobaldus, Franciscus, Gulielmus of San Seuerine, and Pandulphus was detected,
who confessed they were set on by the Pope, as Peter de Vines witnesses in his
second book and tenth, and thirtieth epistle: Yet at last the prince could not
be so watchful, but when he returned to Apulia, he was poisoned. And lying
very sick of the potion which he took, and beginning at length to recover, he
was stifled of Manfrede his base son with a pillow as he lay in his bed. Thus
you made away that worthy Emperor Frederike the second: and these be the
weapons of your Romish warfare against Princes, The Popes weapons against
Princes.
excommunications, rebellions, poisons.


Phi. You rai^e without all reason.


Theo. I speak no more than truth. Your own examples shall justify the
same. Omit Henry the seventh, called Henry of Lucenburg, whom a Dominican
Friar Naucler. gener. 44. anno 1313.
poisoned in the chalice: Lodouike of Bauaria and king John of this land,
Lodouike deposed without all cause.
were they not thus persued and thus dispatched?

Begin with Lodouike the fourth. What cause had John the 22. to curse and
banne him, and to condemn him for an heretic?


Phi. Platina tells you, Platina in Clemente 5.
he called himself Emperor without the authority of the Sea of Rome, and
aided the deputies of Italy to get the city of Millan, and to be Lords over
it.


Theo. Two shameful sins I assure you. He had Be not these weighty causes to
depose a Prince?
four voices, when he was first chosen in contention with Frederike of
Austria. Auentinus says he had five: after in the field he took the other
elect prisoner, and so ended the strife: Naucler. gener. 44. anno 1314. Auent.
lib. 7. fol. 748.
why then should he not take himself to be lawful Emperor?


Phi. The fourth voice which did the deed was cunningly stolen. For where the
Marquess of Brandenburge then absent wrate his letters for Frederike,
Lodouickes election.
his name was rased out and Lodouikes conuaied in.


Theo. Sir, by your leave, that is a legend. The marquess of Brandenburge sent
his substitute with a general commission to choose as he saw cause, Naucler.
Ibid.
though as some said, his meaning were that Frederike should have his voice:
and that instruction he had given privately to the party that was sent: who
deceived his expectation, and named Lodouike.

The second objection is more absurd. The Pope deposed the prince because he
would not look on, whiles the Popes faction did ransacke the Empire.
For Lodouike aided those that stood for the safety of the Empire against the
Popes incourses and practices. And that, since he was chosen Emperor, in
honor and equity he was bound to do.


Phi. He aided them against the Church.


Theo. The Church of Christ has naught to do with the warlike and wilful
tumults of Popes.


Phi. He made a new Pope against John the 22. and set him up as an Idol in
Peter's chair.


Theo. The Pope before that had done ye worst he could against Lodouike; openly
exco^municating him and all his favorers, Naucler. gener. 45. anno 1324.
and appointing him three months to renounce the election to the Empire that
was made of him, and come personally to excuse himself of his fact in giving
aid to heretics, schismatikes, and such as were rebels against The Pope
calls his furious faction the Church.
the Church He also deprived al Clergy men, that yielded the Prince any
counsel, help or favor. And when Lodouike appeared not, the Pope accursed
him, and condemned him of heresy. These be the sober and grave proceedings of
your holy father, which he and his flatterers called the defense and exaltation
of the church. But the sounder and sincerer of his own Canonists and
schoolmen abhorred, as the confusion and desolation of all Godliness.

Hermannus, then living, says, Naucler. gener. 45. anno 1324.
These proceedings (against Lodouike) were curiously observed by some, but very
many reputed them little worth, because as men said they were examined by the
Doctors of both Laws and pronounced by them to be utterly void. Pope John's
doings misliked both of lawiers and divines.
Yea many famous divines well commended for their learning and life concluded
the Pope to be an heretic for certain errors, which he coldly recanted at
the hour of his death, and Benedictus his successor, is reported to have
publicly condemned those erroneous opinions.


Phi. Nothing is so well done that all men like it.


Theo. It must needs be evil that so many of your own side mislike; yea
which the Pope that came next, most of all others misliked. For when the kings
of France and Apulia by their Legates defaced the person of Lodouike and
rehearsed what things he did against the Church, Naucler. gener. 45. anno
1335.
the Pope replied, nay we did against him. He would have come to the feet of
my predecessor, if he might have been received to favor: And by his own
successor.
and that he did, he did it provoked.

The Prelates and Princes of Germany being assembled at Franckforde, with
their common consent rejected all the Popes judicial process against this
Emperor as wholly void, Naucler. gener. 45. anno 1338.
and of no validity; the Prince declaring so much by his Imperial decree. By
the counsel and consent of all the prelates and princes of Alemannie assembled
at our town of Francford we denounce and determine these processes (of Pope
John against us) to be none in Law, All the prelates and Princes of Germany
took with Lodouike against the Pope.
and of no strength or force. And we straightly charge and command all and
every within the limittes of our Empire, of what condition and state soever,
that no singular person, nor society presume to observe the said sentences of
excommunication and interdiction.

Where also you may see the protestations and allegations of that Prince
against the doings of Pope John, taken out of the grounds of your own Canons
and the very same that are defended of us at this day as warrantable by the
sacred Scriptures and ancient order of Christ's Church: Naucler. gener. 45.
anno 1338.

These principles were defended by the Emperor and al his adhere^ts.


namely these, The Prince has his (sword or) dominion not from the Pope, but
only from God. The sacred Canons, and the Church of Christ prohibit and do
not grant to the Pope the right of the Empire, and power in temporal things.
The sentence is ipso iure none, which is erroneous: as when it commands the
subject not to obey his superior, or prescribes any thing against God, or the
Scripture. But it is manifest that Pope John has commanded that our subjects
shall not obey us, to whom all that are in our Empire ought to yield
alleagance and reverence by the Laws of God and man.

Auent. lib. 7. fol. 761.
This he did upon conference had with the best learned that were in his age.
When it was known in Germany, what Pope John had decreed, Ludouike, says
Auentine, consulted the best Lawyers and skilfullest divines that were in
Italy, Germany or France: especially the doctors of both laws, and divines
of Bononia and Paris. They all wrote back that the acts and decrees of pope
John against the Emperor, Pope John's proceedings repugnant to the Laws of God.
were repugnant to Christian simplicity, and the heavenly Scriptures. The men
of note and such as wrote against the Pope for this inordinate presumption were
Marsilius Patauinus, Johannes Gandauus, Andreas Laudensis, Vlricus Haugenor,
Luitpoldus de Babenburg, Dantes Alligerius, Occam, Bergomensis, Michael
Caesenas.


Phi. What, Reckon you these? The most of them were condemned by the Church of
Rome for heretics.


Theo. They were condemned by the Pope for speaking truth. Marsilius book is
extant entitled, Defensor pacis Marsil. Patin.
The defender of peace: What error can you charge him with, The Pope makes it
heresy to speak against his pride.
but this that he wrote against the insufferable pride and ambition of the
Pope? Dants error, for the which he was condemned, your friends affirm to be
this, for that in his book of the Monarchy, he said: The Roman Empire had
no dependence of the Pope (in temporal things) but only of God. Naucler.
gener. 45. anno 1338. Naucler. Ibid.
Occam the Minorite pursued that argument so far, that he brought the Popes
power and his Prelates touching their temporal dominion, to nothing. He^esie to
deny the Popes temporal dominion.
These were their errors for y^ which the Church of Rome otherwise called the
Pope and his Cardinals, condemned these learned and innocent men. With as good
reason you might have condemned christ and his Apostles, for the same causes.
S. Paul avouches the one: There is no power but of God: and Christ himself
commanded the other, Romans 13. Luke. ^2.
Kings of nations bear (temporal) rule. You shall not do so.


Phi. They held other errors.


Theo. Even such an other. And so was it to speak against his wastful and
excessive wealth.
For this was against the state and pride of Prelates: and that touched their
cofers and treasures; which indeed were their Gods. The Poor Franciscanes
began to dispute that it was a sign of more perfection, and a nearer
resemblance to the life which Christ and his Apostles led on earth for
clergy men to renounce the world, and possess nothing of their own, rather
than to nestle themselves i^ the sweetest and richest seats of christendom,
and t^ heap up mammon and wealth, in such abundance, that they were able not
only to beard Princes in their Palaces, but also shoulder them in the field.
Cause. 12. quae^t. 1. dilectissi^^. Sexti Decretal. lib. 5. de verb. significat.
cap. 3.
The ground of their opinion they took from your canon Law, and your holy
father himself in erecting the Rule of Friar Frauncis could confess as much:
mary when the Emperor in hatred of the Popes hauftines and greedines cast some
favor to the Franciscanes: the Pope to match the Prince, gave forth an edict,
and made it heresy to say that Christ and his Apostles possessed nothing in
this world: which because the Friars impugned in their schools and sermons,
the Pope condemned them and all their aiders and abetters, whereof Lodouike was
one, for heretics.

This is that other heresy for the which Micheal Cesenas, Occam and other
Franciscanes, and Lodouike the Emperor, as a Patron of theirs were impeached:
which Platina thinks was scant advisedly done by the Pope and his
counselors. Platina in Joan. 23.
Pope John, says he, set forth a Decree, wherein he declared them to be
rebels (to the Church of Rome) and heretics, which affirmed that Christ and
his Disciples had nothing of their own. Platina likes not pope John's decretal
against the Franciscanes.
This decree does scant accord with the sacred Scripture, which testifies in
many places that Christ and his Disciples had nothing of their own. Thus your
holy father to spite the prince, and to revenge such as opened their mouths at
his sumpteousnes and furiousnes, made it heresy to commend humility and
poverty.


Philand. That Christ and his Disciples did possess nothing neither in private
nor in common, this was their error; and not as you report it.


Theo. In deed it is worth the noting, What the Franciscanes meant by their
assertion.
how finely your Holy Father did circumuent them. For where they meant that
Christ and his Apostles left the world to follow their vocation, and would
after possess nothing superfluous neither in private, nor common, but held
themselves satisfied with apparel, and food, such as the goodness of GOD by
the alms of other, or by their own industry, not slacking their function,
did provide for them: the Bishope of Rome having already gotten a good part of
the Empire into his hands, and daily devising new quarrels to get more: and
besides oppressing al Christian Realms with intolerable taxes and paiments
for the maintaining of his wars, Why the Pope could not digest their doctrine
and furnishing of his other expenses, which were both needeles and excessive:
and knowing by this urging of christ's and his Apostles poverty, which the
friars began every where to publish, how unlike he should appear to S. Peter,
whose successor he would seem to be: perverted the words and sense of the
poor friars; as if they had taught that the diete and raiment, which Christ
and his Apostles used, had not been their own, The Pope perverted the meaning
of the wretched Friars.
but wrongfully taken and unjustly withheld from others that were the right
owners; and with this shifte made it heresy and blasphemy to say that Christ
had nothing of his own: where the friars were never so mad to defend that
Christ and his Apostles had no right nor propriety to the clothes which they
ware, and meats which they used, but they rather detested the monstrous
wealth and riote of Monckes and Bishops which pretending to forsake the world
and follow Christ, heaped greater riches and wallowed in oftener pleasures than
any secular persons: which soar when the wretched friars began to touch, The
Pope would no peace with Lodouicke but on such conditions as no Swine-heard
would accept.
they were condemned and burned for heretics.

These were the principal grifes against Lodouike, which the Pope and the
Cardinals could never digest, I mean his resisting their pride, and misliking
their wealth for these causes, when he offered reconciliation and satisfaction,
that the Christian world might have rest from those domestical wars and
miseries, the Pope would receive none, but on these conditions: that the Prince
should confess him self guilty of al those errors and heresies that were
laid to his charge: that he should resign the Empire, and not resume it
without the Popes leave: Naucler. gener. 45. anno 1343.
that he should put himself, his Children and his goods into the Popes hands,
Where he should be sure to be well used.
to be done withal as should please the Pope. Such was the mildness of this
Romish Saint, that his heart could not be satisfied but with the utter
destruction of the Emperor and his children: which when the Princes and
Bishops of Germany perceived, they signified their general determination to
Lodouicke in these words: Naucler. gener. 45. anno 1344.
Most gracious Lord and Emperor, the Princes electours and other the faithful
of your Empire, perusing the articles of your submission, which the Pope
requires and rests on, The Germans would suffer no such submission.
with one consent have decreed them to be conceived to the subversion and
overthrow of the Empire, so that neither you, nor they by reason of the oath
you have taken to the Empeire, can yield to them: and they intend to send
orators to the Pope, and to the College of Cardinals to request them to cease
from this course. If they refuse, your Princes are resolved to meet at Rens
upon Rhene, there to deliberate with you for the farther resisting of these
practices.


Phi. If these electors were so earnest for Lodouik, how happened they choose
Charles the fourth against him?


Theo. The Pope wan the Duke of Saxony with money as A pact made by the Pope
to choose an other Emperor.
Conrade of Maidenburge craketh: and so with a new Archbishop of Cullen
whom the Pope intruded, the former incumbent yet living, Charles son to the
king of Bohemia, and nephew to the Archbishop of Treuers, was chosen; who were
easily induced to consent to the election of one so near them in blood: but
neither would the Princes of Germany receive him, nor durst he meddle with the
Empire so long as Lodouike lived. Aue^t. lib. 7. fol. 785.
For when Ludouik called the Nobles together upon the choice of Charles, and
asked the^ whether of the twain they would have to bear rule over them, The
whole assembly without any stay cried out that Lodouike was their Sovereign,
The germans swear afresh to Lodouike after the pope had deposed him.
and their Emperor appointed by God, and that they would continue in his
obedience. And there detesting the persidiousnes of those few (that made this
new choice) and defieng Charles in the worst words they could give, with great
zeal: they renewed their oath to Lodouike and promised him their help to
revenge that wickedness.

And so Charles hated of all (the Germans) for the breach of his oath (to
Lodouike) and no where received as Emperor, Auent. lib 7. fol 787. Naucler.
gener. 45. an. 1346.
was conveyed into Bohemia. Neither durst he come out of his hoale, or take the
government upon him so long as Ludouike lived. Nauclerus likewise confesses
that, Ludouike gathering the imperial cities together at Spires found them
very earnest on his side, so that none of the cities of Rhene, Sueuia, or
Franconia any whit esteemed the new election of Charles, or the Popes process.

In this state they stood, Frederick drenched.
defending their Prince and neglecting the Pope till the death of Ludouike, who
being well in health and very pleasant at a feast where he met the Duchess
of Austria, Naucler. gener. 45. an. 1347.
as soon as he drank of the cup which the Duchess reached him, presently
felt himself sick: and as Cuspinian says Cuspinian in Friderico. 2.
feeling a griping at his heart, suspected himself to be poisoned: and getting
on his horse to ride abroad, Naucler. anno 1347.
was stricken with a palsy, and fell from his horse and gave up the Ghost.

After his death, the Bishop of Mentz, the Marquess of Brandenburge, Naucler.
anno 1348
the Palatine of Rhene, with the Duke of Saxony that newly succeeded,
co^cluding the choice of Charles to be void, sent a solemn message to Edward
the third, king of England, inuiting him to take the Empire. But he with
thanks refused it.

Not long after they choose Gunter: Naucler. anno 1350.
who the same year was poisoned with a potion, his Physician also dying within
three days, whom the king commanded to drink before him.


Phi. This was not the Popes doing. An other elect poisoned.



Theo. Whose doing it was we know not, but thus they were made away that
withstood the Pope.

And so was king John of his Land: upon whom your holy father, and his
religious adhere^ts showed the fulness of your Romish devises. You forced a
disordered election upon him, and when he would not like it, you deprived him
of his crown and offered the same to the king of France and to his heirs for
ever with full remission of his and all their sins that would take weapon in
hand to drive king John from his Realm. King John's cause.
And after you had assembled a mighty force against him, you counseled him
rather to resign his crown into y Popes hands, and to take it again of him
in farm, than with fire and sword to be chased out of his land, and loose both
his kingdom and his life. And by this cunning when you had gotten the kings
grant to subject himself and his crown to the church of Rome, you restrained
him, and cursed the French kings son and soldiers (whom your selves had
incited to this pray) for not leaving off, when you willed them: and loosing
all their labor and charges, when you were once seized of that you sought for.
In the end when you saw him so much in the Popes favor, that he prevailed
against his Barons and Bishops as he would himself, you sent him packing with
poison, which a Monk tempered for him in the Abbeie of Swinesteade not far
from Lincoln.


Phi. That he was poisoned is not true; as also that Stephen Langhto^s election
to the Sea of Canterbury was disordered: and as for the rest, I see no cause
why you should mislike. Fructus temporum, lib. 7. Gualterus, Hemingfordus,
Gisburnens.

The monks turn this poison to a surfeit.

Polydor. lib. 15. Anglicae history in Iohanne.





Theo. That he was poisoned is witnessed by Caxton, Hemingfoord and others:
Matthew Paris and Matthew of Westminster in favor of the Monk that did it,
themselves being Monks, say he surfited with eating Peaches and drinking sweet
wine: which also the rest affirm: but those they avouch were poisoned. Polydor
brings both reports as finding them both written. There are, says he,
which write that a Monk (of Swinestead) provoked with certain words (which
king John spoke) tempered poison with wine and drank thereof himself before
the king to get him to do the like, and so they both departed this life almost
at one instant.

Of Stephen Langhtons election to the Sea of Canterbury, we need no better
witness than y^ Monk of S. Albons that was then alive, Stephen Langhtons
election.
and had no fancy to king John, as may ^e seen by his writings.


Phi. Will you stand to his opinion in this cause?


Theo. Historiographers use to declare what was done, not to decide what was
well or evil done. I take the fact as he reports it: let the reader be judge
of the cause.

Some of the Monks of Canterbury choose their Subprior to be Archbishop, in
the night without any solemn form, Matthew. Paris. anno 1207.
without the kings consent, and without the greater part of the convent; the
rest choose the Bishop of Norwich, in the day time, the king being there and
consenting to their election which was celebrated before sufficient witnesses.
Both parts presenting their electes to the Bishop of Rome, after long
discussing, the Pope pronounced either election to be void, The Pope
disanulled both, because he would place a Cardinal of his own.

Matthew. Paris. anno 1207.


and disabled both the contendours to be chosen to that See. And knowing what
good an Archbishop might do him in furthering his collections and exactions in
this Land, he commanded the Monks there present upon pain of excommunication
to make choice of Stephen La^ghton before they departed the place. And when the
Monks answered they could not celebrate an election that would be canonical
without the kings consent, and the rest of their covent, the Pope catching the
word out of their mouths, said, know ye that in elections made here with us
the assent of Princes is not wont to be expected. Wherefore in virtue of your
obedience, and under the danger of our curse, The monks forced for fear to
chose Stephen Langhton at Rome.
we command you to choose him, whom we appoint you to be the father and pastor
of your souls. So the Monks for fear of excommunication, though against their
wills and not without grudging gave their voices, and choose Stephen Langhton
to be Primate of England.

Let go the wrong, which the Bishop of Norwich received, in that the Pope of
his mere pleasure did frustrate his election to gratify one of his own. What
Law permits the Pope to force men in their elections to choose whom he list
to prescribe? The goodness of this election must hang on the Popes infinite
power otherwise it had neither law nor conscience.
How could that election be good which was plainly wrested from a few Monks
beyond the Seas with threats and excommunications, the rest that were at home,
being neither called, nor bound to go out of the Land for the choice of their
Archbishop? Why should not the king refuse that violent and shameful packing
of the Pope to plant his Cardinals in this Realm? Or what should the king look
to have of him that was devoted to the court of Rome, and obtruded on him in
this violent manner, but a deadly enemy to his state, as it after fell out, and
a continual practiser against his person?


Phi. That is your suspicion. This prelate became after a pestilent enemy to
king John.



The. It proved too true for the kings avail. For this prelat not only
ince^sed the Pope against the king that he might be received to his See, but
after the king was reconciled, and himself quietly possessed of his church, he
Matthew. Paris in anno 1215. says, coniurati Steph. Archiep. capital. consent.
habuerunt.
set all the Barons of this realm in an open rebellion against the king, that
never ceased till the king was poisoned.


Phi. You charge him untruly.


Theo. His own acts will not belie him.

The next year after his untoward election, the Pope interdicted the whole
Land, for that the king would not admit Steven Langhton into his Realm, (no
point of godly discipline to chaftise the king, but a trick of your Romish
policy to get the subjects to murmur at the Magistrate) And four years after
when the Pope stayed somewhat long as they thought in contriuing his matters
against king John: your Canterbury Cardinal with the Bishops of London and
Fly went to Rome, and complained to the pope of the manifold rebellio^s and
enormities, Matt. Paris anno 1212.

The Bishops of England incense the Pope against their king.


which king John had continued from the time of the interdict to that present
day, increasing his cruelty and tyranny (so these ambitious hirelings termed
their sovereigns doings) against God and his holy church without intermissio^.
Whereupon they made supplication to the pope, that he would voutsafe of his
godly compassion to help the church of England in this extremity. So nice your
clergy was y^ when they were but a little defalked of their abunda^ces and
superfluities, they could no longer abide it, but desired to have the king
deposed.


Phi. The king seized on all their goods, caused them to redeem their
immunities and liberties, and raised a grievous persecution against ye whole
clergy through out England.


Theo. We doubt not, but your Monks in this freight will make great flames of
small sparks. The king of England did, as any prince in this like case would.
The clergy of this realm, was at that time a richer and wealthier state than
the Laity, discharged from all burdens and taxes to the crown by the favor of
the Princes his progenitors. If therefore when the Pope began to quarrel
with the king about the chiefest church in his Realm, and offered him so open
wrong, the clergy were ready with their wealth and strength to assist the
Pope against the king, why should not the king both sease their goods into his
hands, and make them redeem their privileges which they were well able to do,
for the maintenance of his crown and kingdom against a wicked and injurious
oppressor?

And sure for ought that I see the king did but justice. For where the clergy
refused to do their duties, Why should the clergy have their liuinges, if
they would not discharge their duties?
and would not so much as say him or his people any divine service, why
should the Prince suffer them to enjoy those liuinges that were provided for
such as would?


Phi. The fault was not theirs; they were restrained by the Popes interdict.


Theo. Were the fault in them or the Pope, this is evident, the clergy might
better lack their liuinges, than the Realm divine service.


Phi. Was it not tyranny to famish so many thousand Monks and Priests as were
in this Land? Matt. Paris in anno 1208.

The king allowed his clergy food and raiment, so that he barred them only of
their abundance. Interdicting of whole realms wrap peth innoce^ts as well as
nocents.





Theo. The king allowed them victum and vestitum parce ex rebus proprijs:
meat, drink and raiment out of their livings, though sparefully, in respect of
their former and usual excess, the rest he kept in his hands, till they
discharged that function, for which they were endowed with so liberal
recompense.


P^i. You can not blame them.


Theo. He that perfourmeth a wicked interdict is to be blamed as well as he
that commands it.


Phi. This was not wicked.


Theo. There could be no wickeder.

The prohibition of public prayer, and restrainct of the word and Sacraments
throughout the Realm is rather a dishonor to God, and an injury to the
faith, than a seemly sentence for a christian Bishop. You can neither show us
warrant for it in the Scriptures, nor example of it in the church of God for a
thousand years. They did excommunicate persons not places: they thrust not the
innocent into the same extremity with the nocent as you do: much less did
they prohibit God to be served in the church, his Sacraments to be ministered,
his word to be preached: which the Turks do not offer where they conquer:
Interdicting God to be publicly served, is the high way to increase the
kingdom of Satan.
and Satan himself can wish no better increase of his kingdom than this
horrible desolation of all those means that God has appointed to save the
souls of men.


Phi. Then let them be obedient to their Bishops.


Theo. You can not say the people were disobedient, but only the king: why
then should they be restrained from serving God, and stand in danger of
everlasting destruction which transgressed not?


Phi. Let them be earnest with their king to yield.


Theo. And what if he will not, though they be never so earnest?


Phi. Let them be ready to compel him, The right meaning of their Romish
interdicts.
when they be required so to do by their Bishops.


Theo. You hit the nail right on the head. Your general debarring of divine
service throughout a Realm, was nothing else but an Antichristian Policy to
set the people in a discontent, and to make them the readier to rebel against
their Princes, for whose sakes they be thus put in the high way to perish. And
therefore the clergy men that did execute, and fulfill such an interdict were
partakers of the same wickedness with the pronouncers: The executors of such
interdicts as bad as the pronouncers.
and by no reason can it be counted cruelty in the king to take from them
their ecclesiastical promotions; so long as they wickedly ceased from their
ecclesiastical functions, by this or any other like interdict.

This was all the persecution and rebellion that king John might justly be
charged with; and yet the Pope by the counsel of his cardinals and Bishops,
Matthew. Paris. anno 1212.

By this bait the Pope drue many ambitious princes to serve his turn.

Not so much as the Popes pride and fury, but it must be shrewded with the name
of the Catholic Church.

Matthew. 3.


sententially defined that he should be deposed from his throne, and an other
placed by the Popes procurement that should be worthier. And for the execution
of this sentence, the Pope wrote to Philip the most mighty king of France,
that in the remission of all his sins, he should undertake this matter, and
after the expulsion of king John, he and his heirs for ever should be
rightful ^ owners of the kingdom of England. He wrote likewise to all the
Nobles, Captains, and soldiers of diverse Nations, that they should crossigne
themselves to the deposing of the king of England, and following the king of
France their leader in this viage, revenge the injury of the universal
church. Thus your holy father set kings together by the ears for the
remiss^on of their sins; and turned the warfare that was provided against the
Turk, ^o pursue his private quarrels with christian Princes, and like the
Prince of darkness gives kingdoms, that be none of his, to them and their
heirs forever.

And your blessed Bishops of Canterbury, London, and Elie, that first made
suit at Rome to have this impiety decreed against their Prince in their own
persons, Romish devotion the very mother of devilish rebellion
to show their christian and obedient dispositions, plied the king of France
and other Potentates to hasten them with all hostility toward this land; and
would needs be both the messengers and ringleaders in that action.

The next year Stephen of Canterbury, William of London and Elias of Elie,
Matthew. Paris. anno 1213.
returned from the court of Rome, and gathering a Council on the other side of
the Sea, solemnly published the judgment that was given against the king of
England in the presence of the French king, and his Bishops, and his clergy,
Were nor these good subjects?
and communaltie. That done, they enjoined the king of France and all the rest
on the behalf of the Pope, for the remission of their sins, that they all
joining together should invade the Realm of England in hostile manner, and
thrust king John from his throne, and substitute a worthier by the Apostolic
authority. It was not enough for them unnaturally to procure this pestilent
invasion against their prince: but they themselves must assist it with all
their might, and be the chief doers in it; least ages after them should be
ignorant how zealous they were for their * backs and bellies against their
lawful and sovereign Magistrate.


Phi. Being deposed, he was no Magistrate.


Theo. When you *prove the Pope may depose Princes, then pronounce king John no
Magistrate: till you so do, give us leave to tell you, that this was a cursed
presumption in the Pope, and a more cursed rebellion in the Bishops.


Phi. The Realm of France you see, took the offer, and thereby confessed the
Pope might dispose Princes.


Theo. A kingdom will make men do much. The King of France would fain have
had the Crown of England, and in that respect took the Popes offer. fol. 95.
The king of France was led thereto not with religion, but with ambition to
get the crown of England for Lodouike his son. Where you see the desire
which Princes had to enlarge their dominions made them regard the Popes
censures against their neighbors, which otherwise in themselves they did
mightily despise, as appears by that which fell out not long after between
Philip the Fair and Boniface the eight. Where the king of France resolutely
withstood the Pope with all his interdictions and depositions, and used his
person in the end very coursely, as I before have touched in place where upon
occasion. Princes to serve their turns, and to be revenged of their enemies,
have oftentimes backed and enforced the Popes judicial sentence against
others: which corrupt affection, to man the Popes process, when it made for
their purpose, god has punished in them, by making him their master, whom for
lucre they served as long as they gained. By the dissension and ambition of
Princes the Pope grew to be Lord over them.
By the envy and enmity of Princes one against an other, not by the laws of
God, or examples of Christ's church, has the Pope gotten the mastery of all
Princes: and so long as they will invade each other at his teasing, they shall
never be free from his yoke. By their help he became of a Bishop under them to
be a Prince with them, and by their dissentions, of a Prince with them, he is
now Lord over them.

Take king John for a pattern. Had not the French king in hatred of king John,
Fear of the French King drove King John to put his neck under the popes
g^rdle.
and hope of the crown bin willing to hear of this match, and wagered his men
and money for that prize, the king of England had easily forced the Pope to some
reasonable order. But now, seeing the whole Realm of France was in arms
against him, and his own Land likely to be divided within it self, what
marvel if he accepted rather any conditions at the Popes hands, tha^ he would
suffer strangers that gaped after his kingdom to devour it?


Phi. He did wisely to submit himself; he had otherwise lost both rule and
life.


Theo. The Pope did as wickedly not to content himself with the kings
submission, and restitution of all that was detained, but with a fine devise to
circumuent both parts, The Pope gate the kingdom of England for himself.

Mat. paris. in anno 1213. hijs ita gestis.


and to get the kingdom for himself and his successors, which was promised
before to the French king and his heirs. Such cunning your holy father has to
set others to beat the bushe, whiles he does catch the birds. The king of
France was led in a string to muster his men, to rigge his ships, to bestow
above threescore thowsande pounds for the preparation of the war, and was
told he should have for his labor, pardon of all his sins, forsooth and
the crown of England to him and to his for ever without fail: and when al was
in readiness, and they waited nothing now but the French kings coming to go
with the army: the Popes Legate stepped over before and showed king John what
a power was levied against him: The Pope a skillful fisher for kingdoms.
and how many of his own Nobles had purposed to forsake him: and wanne him
rather to hold his kingdom in fee farm of the Bishop of Rome for an easy
rent, than to leave it a pray to the French king and his people, who would
egerly spoil him of al. Upon which advise the king consented to receive the
Archbishop and the rest of the exiles in peace; to restore that to them which
he had seized of their liuinges to his use; to resign his Crown into the
Popes hands, and to take it again as his liege man and Secundary for a
thousand mark sterling by the year. King John fa^med his crown of the Pope
by a yearly rent.
This done the Legate sailed back, sent home the Bishops, discharged the army,
prohibited the French king to proceed any farther, for so much as the king of
England was newely become a tenant to the church of Rome. With this slight the
Pope caught the crown of England: neither as I think was there ever any
kingdom purchased with less charge and more speed tha^ this was by the Pope.


Philand. If the King would resign it, why should not the Pope receive it?
And in my conceit, it was safer for the King to fall into the Popes hands to
be rented, than into the French Kings to be spoiled.


Theo. That conceit, which you speak of, made the King of England content to
be the Popes vasall.


Phi. Better so, The Pope showed favor to King John, but most of al to himself.
than worse. Better farmer to the Pope, than prisoner to the French: and in
that offer to my judgment the Pope showed favor to king John.


Theo. Such favor a thief shows when he cutteth off both hands, and lets
the head stand.


Phi. Compare you the Pope to a thief?


Theo. I did him no wr^ng, if I should; except you think it less sin to
rob a King of his Crown, than an other man of his goods.


Phi. The King was content, and so long it could be no robbery.


Theo. So is any man by ye high ways side content rather to yield his purse,
The pope had as much right to the crown of England, as a thief has by the
high ways side to an other man's purse.

Mat. Paris. in anno 1213. rebus, vt iam dictum est.


than loose his life, and yet that is fellonie.


Phi. What right has a thief to an other man's purse?


Theo. As much as the Pope had to the Crown of England, when he forced King
John to yield it.


Phi. Of that we will not dispute.


Theo. You should but shame your selves, if you did.


Phi. But since that surrender he has better title to this Realm.


Theo. No more than he had before King John was borne, and that was none at all.


Phi. The whole Realm of England with that of Ireland, with all their right
and appertinentes were given to Innocentius and his Catholic successors: and
the king bound his heirs and after comers for ever to do homage and fealty
to the Bishop of Rome.


Theo. A fair pair of indentures, but somewhat too short to convey a Kingdom.
The King by an oath might make himself thrall during his life, as perhaps he
did, but tie his Realm and crown to that perpetual bondage, The king might
bind himself, but not his successors to these conditions.

The Barons of this realm detested the kings act.


by his single deed or chart he could not. It is well known the Kings of
this Realm can not do less things than the selling or giving of their
crowns away without the consent of their nobles and commons.


Phi. He had the consent of his Barons.


Theo. That is not true. The deed says, with common counsel (or advise) of our
Barons, meaning such as were then by chance about him at Dover; but the most
part of his Barons detested that act, and the Kings that came after him never
took themselves bound in honor, law, nor conscience, to respect that private
submission of their predecessor.


Phi. May not a King subject his Realm to whom he will?


Theo. I think Lawyers will say no, as well as divines: sure I am the Barons
of this Realm thought no. For, when the Popes Legate spoke to the French king,
that his son might not disquiet king John being now fendarie to the church of
Rome: the king of France answered, The kingdom of England neither was, Matthew.
Paris. anno 1216. sub hiis diebu^.
is, nor shall be S. Peter's patrimony. No king nor Prince can make away his
Realm without the assent of his Barons, that are bound to defend the Realm;
and if the Pope go on to uphold this error, he gives a most pernicious
example to all kingdoms. Then all the Nobles (of England) (for to France were
they fled, to accompany their new king whom they had chosen in king John's
place) with one voice cried they would stand to maintain this article even
with the loss of their lives, that a king or prince cannot at his pleasure
give or subject his kingdom to any other, to make the Nobles of his Realm Much
less successors.
servants. So that his Barons neither consented he should, nor liked that he
did subject his realm to the Bishop of Rome; and so far were they from
consenting, that in words they reviled, and in deeds resisted both the king
and the Pope: and utterly despicing the curses and comminations that came from
Rome, they brought in Lodouike the French kings son to take the crown of
England from the Popes lease.

For when the Pope had sent first a general and after a special
excommunication to curse them by name that went about to take the kingdom from
his vasal: They said every one of them, Matthew. Paris. anno 1216. Cumque omnes.
The complaint of the Barons against the Pope and the king.

Marcidi ribaldi.


that those bulls were of no force, chiefly for that the ordering of temporal
affairs did not appertain to the pope, since the Lord gave Peter and his
successors no power but to dispose Church matters. Why the^, said they, does
the insatiable greedines of Romans encroach upon us? What have the Bishops of
Rome to do with our wars? Behold (they will be) the successors of Constantine,
and not of Peter. And in somewhat homely terms, out upon such shriueled
ribalds, as are neither valiant nor liberal, and yet will rule the whole world
by their excommunications, like ignoble usurers and Simonistes as they are.
Even so the Barons, Woe be to thee, the outcast of kings, Matthew. Paris. anno
1216. Circa hos^ dies*
the abomination of English princes, and confusion of English nobility. Alas
England, England, til this time the Queen of Provinces, but now in subjection
and under the rule of base servants and strangers: where as nothing is viler
than to be in servitude to a servant. We read that other kings and princes
have striued even unto death for the liberty of their Lands, but thou John
(of mourneful memory to al ages) have devised and contrived, that thy Realm
being anciently free should become bound: and thy self of a most free king a
servile tributary, farmour and vassal. And of thee, O Pope, what shall we say,
which should shine to the world as the father of holiness, the myrror of
godliness, The end of all the Popes devises.
the tutor of righteousness and keeper of truth, that thou consentest,
comme^dest and defendest such an one? But for this cause do thou maintain,
the waster of English wealth, and extinguisher of English nobility depending
on thee, that all may be plunged into the gulf of Romish avarice.

This was the Barons complaint against king John for intiteling the Pope to the
crown of England: No King of England ever acknowleged this subjection to the
Pope. The Kings of England most of all others kept the Pope shortest from
infringing the liberties of their Crown. The pope had a 1000. marks land given
him by King John, part whereof the Pope sold after to William wickham.
and though they added other things as occasions to the wars called the
Barons wars I mean the laws and liberties of king Edward, yet this was the
ground of their grief, as you may collect by their words: and this respect made
them refuse their king, and elect an other: and never leave pursuing him till
they brought him to his end.

And as for the kings that came after him (set his own son aside, who to make
himself strong against Lodouike that possessed half this Realm, did homage
to the church of Rome for his kingdom and took an oath for the payment of the
thousand marks granted by his father, thereby to continue the Popes censures
against all those that affected his crown, or molested his Land) not one of
them ever recognized this subjection, or represented this yearly pension to the
Bishop of Rome; but kept him off at slaves end, from infringing the roialties
of the crown, and oppressing the liberties of the Land more than any Realm
christian of the West parts that we read. Insomuch that Polydore, no mean
advocate of your side, concludes this subjection and pension touched
personally king John, and not his successors that should reign after him.

By reason of king John's delivering his Crown into the Legates hands and
receiving it again as his gift, It is a fame, says Polydore, that king John
desirous to eternise the memory of this good turn, Polidor. Angli. hist. lib.
15. in Joan.

King John burdened him self and not the Princes after him.


made himself beneficiarie to the Bishop of Rome with this prouiso, that the
kings of England after that, should receive the right of their crown only from
the Pope. But the kings that followed never observed this form, neither do the
Chronicles of England report any such submission. Wherefore it is certain that
all those burdens were laid on the person of king John that offended, and not
on his successors.


Phi. For heresy George king of Boemland was excommunicated, and thereupon by
the forces of the king of Hungary at length actually deprived. The defense
cap. 5.

George died King of Bohemia, notwithstanding the Popes practices and Mathias
forces.

Cromer. de gestis Polonor. li. 27.





Theo. For the mislike of your Roman vanities; your holy father played his
part with George king of Boemland 1466. years after Christ, as he had done
with other Princes before, deiecting him from his kingdom by presumptuous
judgment at Rome, and enticing the Princes that were neighbors, in hope of
his kingdom, to invade him with arms: and to join with the Bohemians that
rebelled against him. Which offer Mathias king of Hungary first embraced, a
proud, unthankful, crafty, fraudulent, and ambitious man, as Frederike the 3.
then Emperor of Rome complained of him in his embassage to Cazimire king of
Pole: and might well appear by his behauior to king George, who had him in
hold, when he was chosen king of Hungary, and might have deprived him both of
kingdom and life, Cromer. eodem libro.
and would not: but yet that inhumane and aspiring head of his did not
prevail. For George persisted and died king of Bohemia, notwtstanding the
Popes curses and Mathias forces, and after his death was Vladislaus Cazimires
son chosen to the kingdom: and not only held it in spite of Mathias and
the Popes grant to him and none else, but also succeeded Mathias in the kingdom
of Hungary.


Phi. The Pope very liberal in giving kingdoms that be none of his.
Yet the Pope gave the kingdom of Bohemia to Mathias.


Theo. He might have given him the kingdom of Constantinople or Persia with as
much right as he did this: but how that gift was esteemed even by those that
otherwise depended on the church of Rome, the choice of a new and the next king
did declare.


Phi. The defense, cap. 5.
Also John Albert had half his kingdom of Navarre taken from him by
Ferdinandus surnamed Catholicus, of Aragon; for that he gave aid to Jews the
12. being excommunicated by Julius the second.


Theo. The driftes of Princes, intertaining the Popes Bulls, and admitting his
keys so far as they make for their profit, The King of Navarre.

Princes content to take part with the Pope so long as it makes for their
profit.


do not prove the Popes power to be good, or their persons and states to be
subject to his censures by Gods Law. Philip the 2. king of France, was earnest
to execute the Popes Bull against king John: and spared no cost for the
preparation of the war. The cause was, he hoped to get the Crown of England
for his pains: but Lodouike his son, Philip the 4. and this Jews whom you
name, neither reverenced nor regarded the Popes Bulls which made against them:
but showed a manifest contempt of his censures, and with open Edicts severed
themselves and their people from his obedience. So Ferdinand king of Spain,
when by violent and sudden invasion he had gotten that part of Navarre which
bordered upon him, was content for the keeping of it, to pretend the Popes Bull
against Jews the 12. but Charles the fifth, the next king of Spain could let
his soldiers surprise Rome and desposse it in most cruel manner, abusing and
illuding the Priests, Nonnes, Bishops and Cardinals with all military despites
and furies, Guicciard. hist. lib. 18.
and keep the Pope fast locked in prison till he paid 400000. pounds for his
ransom, and consented to such other conditions as they listed to prescribe.


Phi. It was not Charles will, Charles looked through his fingers and said he
saw nothing.
that Rome should be sacked, or the Pope thus handled: it was the Germans rage
for want of pay.


Theo. Charles could do little, if he could not dissemble. He neither rebuked
his army, nor enlarged the Pope, nor recompensed any part of the Pillage which
his soldiers as well Spaniards as Germans had committed in Rome, leaving
nothing behind them that was worthy the taking. And so long though his consent
did not appear, yet he made his advantage of their act and secretly supported
them by his protraction to take the whole spoil of the city.


Phi. The variance between the Pope and Charles was for temporal matters.


Theo. So Jews the 12. contended with Julius the 2. for temporal dominion:
and therefore the king of Navarre ayding the French king in a civil quarrel,
Guicci. li. 11. Ferdinand lacking a better title pretended the popes Bull for
that part of Navarre which lay so near him.
was nothing so much to be blamed as Charles: but the truth is, Ferdinand had
cast his eyes on that kingdom confining so near and lying so commodious ( the
ancient desire of the kings of Spain to be Lords of Navarre being well known,
as Guicciardin confesses) and for that cause when he could devise no better
title he took hold of the Popes Bull, coloring his injurious ambition with a
sembla^ce of Romish devotion.


Phi. It is holden at this day by the same right.


Theo. This was no right: and other I know none the king of Spain has to it
besides the sword, by the which it was gotten, not yet 73. years since.


Phi. Will you dispute his title?


Theo. I am not so curious in an other man's common wealth: Right and force do
not always meet.
let the Princes whom it concerns try their own titles: yet this is
certain, that neither the kings of England, France nor Spain would suffer the
Pope to dispose their kingdoms or any part of their dominions against their
likings.


Phi. For like causes, and namely for that he was vehemently suspected of the
murder of the blessed Bishop S. Thomas of Canterbury, was Henry the second
driven by Alexander the third to order and penance. The defense, cap. 5.



Theo. The strife between the king and Thomas Becket then Archbishop of
Ca^terburie, Henry the 2 and Tho. Becket.
is reported before; and not now to be iterated. The laws and liberties of the
church, for the which he resisted the king, were nothing else but the rescuing
of malefactors, if they were Clerks, from due punishment; and exempting
themselves from the kings subjection: which be quarrels of their own nature
wicked and irreligious: and therefore well you may call him BLESSED, because
you be consorted in the same quarrel with him against God and your Prince:
otherwise his pride was intolerable, his contention with the king detestable,
his end miserable.


Phi. Are you not ashamed to stain the glory of that worthy Martyr?


Theo. First prove him an innocent, Beckets quarrel must be good before he can
be blessed.
before you make him a Martyr.


Phi. Who ever charged him with any crime?


Theo. The very cause he stood in, was crime enough: besides his resisting the
prince, which S. Paul pronounces to be damnable.


Phi. Do you make it damnable to defend the liberties of the church?


Theo. To dream, that the statelines of Popes, Appeals to the Pope, and
immunitie of wicked Priests were the quarrel that Becket stood in.
and licentiousnes of Priests was the perfection and happiness of Christ's
church, and in that le^de conceit to neglect your oaths, and resist the powers,
which God has established is a triple damnation.


Phi. That we do not.


Theo. That he did, whom you call a blessed bishop for his labor: and your
selves do worse. For you be not content to resist as he did by wilful
departing the Realm, you take weapon in hand to depose the Prince, and term it
just and honorable war to rebel against a lawful Magistrate, which impiety
he did not declare in act, though in heart perhaps he did not abhor it.

But omit that he meant and come to that he did, Beckets fact damnable for
these three respects unless the Jesuits prove those laws which he with
stood, to be repugnant to the word of God.

Such proud prelates are likeliest to be of your Romish religion.


except you show what one thing in those ancient laws of the crown (to which
the Archbishop had expressly sworn) was repugnant to the word of God, or office
of a christian Prince: we conclude your blessed Bishop and Canterbury Saint,
to be a shameful defender of wickedness, an open breaker of his oath, and a
proud impugner of the sword which God has authorized as the Scripture
teaches. And albeit we like not the manner of his death, that private men
should use the sword, which is delivered unto princes: yet the cause for which
he withstood the king, was enormous and impious: and dying in that, though his
death were violent, he could be no martyr.


Phi. You be loath to have him a martyr, he was so far both from your opinion in
this point, and religion otherwise: but yet he died in the defense of the
Catholic church, and therefore we justly count him blessed.


Theo. He died not in defense of the church: he stood stiffly for the Popes
pride and gain, and for the impunitie of malefactors among the Clergy, which
things no way touch the true laws or liberties of Christ's church. And
therefore you must either prove that clergy men are not subject to the Princes
sword for heinous offenses, which is most false: and that appeals from all
places must be made to the Bishop of Rome, which you shall never do: or else
it is evident that Thomas Becket deserved rather the reward of a traitor,
Becket far from a martyr
than the honor of a Martyr: these two being the principal causes for which
he resisted the king, whiles he lived, and was canonized after he was murdered.


Phi. The church of Rome liked and allowed of his doings, though you do not.


Theo. She had good reason so to do. He gave his life for the maintenance of
her wealth and ease: The Church of Rome were to be blamed if she did not honor
Becket
and therefore if she should not esteem him, she were to blame: but this
was no quarrel for a christian Bishop to spend his blood in. The due correction
of offenders by the temporal sword, though they were clergiemen: and diligent
execution of justice at home without running to Rome, when either part was
disposed to vex the other; were lawful and wholesome precepts of the kings
of this Realm: and so long as the resistance made by the Archbishop against
the king was sinful and seditious; and consequently the state he stood in,
damnable; though the death he suffered were wrongful, as not proceeding
orderly from a magistrate, but furiously inflicted by some that were offended
to see a Bishop breast a king in so vile a cause.


Phi. The king himself in the end was driven to order and penance.


Theo. It was easy for you, when not only his neighbors, but his own son
rose in arms against him to win his consent to any thing. The popes practice
to subdue Princes.
By wars and invasions of Realm upon Realm, by defection of subjects from
their sovereigns, and by the rebellion of children against their parents,
your cunning has been to drive Princes to order and keep them in awe; but
that does not justify your unnatural and unchristian tumults to force them to
your bent. We dispute not whether of late you have so done, but whether of
right you may so do; we see the means which Antichrist has used to advance
his kingdom: but those we say be neither agreeable to the sacred scriptures,
nor to the course of Christ's church in former ages, they be late devises and
practices of Popes to exalt themselves above the highest: the justice of God,
preparing that plague for the sins of men, and dissension of Princes, Princes
punished for the neglect of truth and discord that reigned amongst them.
which should have joined together to succor his truth, and safeguard his
church, by repressing the Popes pride, and driving him to Christian integrity
and modesty, and would not. Wherefore God gave them over into his hands, that
he should tread on their necks, and play with their crowns, as pleased
himself: and they think it some great honor and preferment to kiss his
feet, and hold his bridle, whiles he gets to horseback.


Phi. A number of the like examples mo we might recite, of our Country and of
the christian world, The defense, cap. 5.
whereby not only the practice of the church in all ages may be seen; but also
catholic men warranted that they be no traitors, nor hold assertions
treasonable, false, or undutiful; in answering or believing that for heresy or
such like notorious wickedness, a Prince (otherwise lawful and anointed) may
be excommunicated, deposed, forsaken or resisted by the warrant of holy
churches judgment and censure.


Theo. From the conquest to King Henry the eight there was no Prince of this
Land deposed by the Pope but only King John. No King of England deposed by the
Pope but only King John.

The Kings of France were too good for the Pope.

Philip King of France.




Deposition was offered to Philip the fourth and Jews the twelfth, Kings of
France: but they were so far from taking it, that they withdrewe their whole
Realm from the Popes obedience, and ouerreached your holy Father with his own
practice.

Philip by the general consent of his Nobles and Bishops not only despised
the Popes sentence of deprivation against him, but requited him with the like:
and Nauel. gener. 44. anno 1300.
to tame his pride, took him prisoner and made him end his life for very
grief of heart within six weeks after. Thus, says Platina, died Bonifacius,
he that went about rather to strike a terror into Emperors, kings, Princes
and Nations, than to plant religion in them: and challenged to give and take
kingdoms, and to advance and debase men at his plasure. And so says
Gaguinus. This end of his life had Bonifacius the contemner of all men, who
not remembering the precepts Gagu. in Phil. pulchro. Platina in Bonifacio 8.
Platina Ibide^. Gaguin. lib. 7. in Phil. pulchr.

How Philip of France handled Bonifacius, see part 1. fol. 95


of Christ, took upon him to dispose crowns and deprive kings as he saw
cause: whereas he supplieth his room on earth whose kingdom is not of this
world, nor in earthly things but in heavenly: and gate the Popedom by deceit
and ungodly means, and kept his predecessor in prison so long as he lived,
from whom he wrested that dignity. This example you would not allege, because
you saw the whole Realm of France stood with Philip against Bonifacius,
that the Pope had no right to depose Princes.

Jews the twelft in a Council at Tours had the resolution of all the French
Bishops, Jews King of France.

Massaed. in an. 1510.

The Realm of France in this our age despised the Popes ce^sure against their
King.

Velleij ad Gag. agge^. in Lodou. 12.

The Pope will be tried by the sword and not by the word.


that he might surcease from the Popes obedience, and contemn his unjust
censures: and had not Maximilian somewhat slacked and Julius in the mean time
died, the Pope himself had bin deprived of his triple crown in the Council
of Pisa, which was indicted by the Prelates of Germany and France at the
instaunce and pursuit of Lodouike. The Bishops of Nations assembled and
decreed Julius to be cited. Upon the citation he refused to come, and knowing
his own wickedness, sought to defend himself with arms. Alas, says this writer
being one of your own friends, whither is that ancient sanctity of the
Roman Bishops vanished? whither is that clearness of conscience gone, which
neglecting the threats of Princes, built the church not with arms, but with
the beams of their virtues? They refused not Councels, but rather frequenting
them, cleared themselves from such things as they were charged with, in full
assemblies of their mother the church. Behold, Julius, who is taken to be the
shepherd, gives no ear to the complaint of his sheep, but kills the
weak ones, and he that with his own blood should purchase them peace, does
what he can with his curses to increase their trouble. The Pope no pastor but
a warrier.
And getting the Spaniardes and Venecians to uphold him, sheddeth not tears
with Ambrose, but displaieth his banners with Julian, whose name he bears
against the church.

All the Germane Emperors, that were deprived by the Pope, you have recited:
Others perhaps were blasted with his excommunications, All the Germane
Emperors that were offered deprivation by the Pope, are already recited.
as Henry the fifth: or not agnised by him for some dislike in their
elections, as Philip of Sueuia, and at his first entrance Albert of Austria:
or busied with continual wars, (in which the Pope had an oar,) as Conrade
the third: but iudicially deposed they were not.


Phi. Philip of Sueuia and Otho the fourth, that was chosen against him, were
both deposed by the Pope. Philip of Sueuia and Otho the 5.



Theo. Otho the 4. the same which you call Otho the fifth, was rashly advanced
by the Pope against Philip, and as rashly displaced after the death of Philip;
the right of the Empire being all that while in Friderike the second:
Vrspergens. in anno 1197.
whom the Princes of Almanie by the procurement of Henry the sixth had chosen
to be their king lying in his cradle and sworn fealty unto him, and testieth
so much under their hands and seals to the Emperor, his father. The Pope
would not acknowledge this Philip for Emperor.
After whose death, when the Princes forgetting their act and oath began to
treat of a new election, Philip Frederikes uncle fearing least a stranger
should be thrust in, to the ruin of himself and his nephewe, sought to keep
the Empire in his hands during his life, or till Frederik came to age. Ide^ in
an. 1198.
This Innocentius the 3. would not suffer: but vpbraiding him with the cruelty
which his brother and father had showed, and heaping many absurd and some false
things against him, in his Epistle to Berthold Duke of Zaringia: stood on
frivolous exceptions to hinder him, and objected that he was excommunicated by
Celestinus his predecessor whiles he was governor in Tuscia: yea so great was
his malice that he protests, he would either take the emperial diadem from
Philip: or Philip should take the triple crown from him.

Naucler. gener. 44 anno 1195.

Otho erected against Philip.


In this rage the Pope caused first Berthold of Zaringia to be chosen king of
the Germans: and when he was too weak to encounter Philip, he gate Otho the
fifth to be set up against him: whom Philip so long as he lived, drove to the
wall: but being Cuspinian. in Phil. Caesar.

Frederikes election ratified to spite Otho.


traitorously slain in his chamber by one that would have married his daughter,
he left Otho in full possession of the Empire, in which he continued no long
time. For two years after the Pope fell into sorer hatred of him than ever he
had of Philip: and after excommunication and deprivation, to spite him dealt
with the Princes of Germany to remember their choice made of Frederike the
second when he was but young, and their oath past under their seals to Henry
the sixth for the ratifieng of that election: and so by the help of the French
king gate the Germans to forsake Otho and stick to Frederike, Frederick in
greater hatred with the Pope than either of the former.
their right and natural Prince: whom in the end he pursued with greater
disdain than any of the former, in so much that in three and twenty years
after Frideriks death, the Empire was not settled in any lawful successor.

The fruits of these stirs, as your own friends confess, were impiety
and all kind of iniquity, in the Priests and people; flattery, perjury and
conspiracy in the Nobles; What followed of these garboiles.
briberie, division and inconstancy in the electours: only the Pope used them
as means to increase his wealth, augment his pride, and procure his ease.
Then, says Vrspergensis, began evils to be multiplied on the earth. For
there sprang discordes, deceites, treacheries, treasons to the destroying and
murdering of each other. Vrspergens. in anno 1198.. audiui to tempore.
The spoiling, sacking, wasting and burning of Countries, seditions, wars,
and rapines were openly allowed, in so much that every man now breaks his
oath, and gives himself to these sinful mischiefs: yea the Priests are as
bad as the people. Ibidem properant electi. Dispencing with oaths is the Devils
art.
The Princes and Barons of the Land learning the Devils Art, care for no oaths,
violate their faith, and confound all right, sometimes forsaking Philip and
clea^ing to Otho, sometimes contrary. Upon these tumultes it came to pass that
Ibidem iam tunc Colon. The Pope gained by all this.
there was skant any Bishoprike, ecclesiastical dignity, or parish Church
which was not litigious and the cause carried to Rome, but not with an empty
hand. Which made the Abbate then living and seeing the whole order of their
doings to cry out, Rejoice our mother Rome, because the windows of earthly
treasures are opened, that even streams and heaps of money in great abundaunce
may flow unto thee. Be glad for the wickedness of the sons of men, thou art well
recompensed for their foul enormities. Take delight in discord thy best
assistant, which is issued from the bottomless pit to increase thy gain. Thou
have that which thou did always thirst for: As true a song as any the Hunnal
has.
sing this song, that by the malice of men, not any religion of thine, thou
have conquered the world. Neither devotion nor good conscience draw men to
thee, but manifold sins and strifes wherein money bears the sway.

And because the Pope would be sure the Emperor should not trouble, Blondus
decad. 2. lib. 10.
nor interrupt his excessive gain nor pride: he would not suffer Charles the
fourth to be crowned, but on this condition, that he neither stay at Rome, nor
in Italy; which Petrarke a man of that time pretily gibeth at. Blondus Ibide^
and Naucl. generat. 46. an. 1355

The Pope would not suffer the Emperor to come near Italy.


All power is impacient to bear an equal: whereof if we had not ancient
presidents enough, I fear our age has given us a late example, and that the
Bishop of Rome has forbidden the Emperor of Rome to abide at Rome: which as
they say he has done, and not only looks but commands the prince should be
content with the (bare) crown and title of the Empire: and whom he
permits to be called Ruler: by no means will he suffer him to rule. And
writing to the Emperor himself: Blondus and Naucler. vt supra.
With a promise I know not how, and with an oath as it were with a strong wall
or high hill, you are prohibited to have access to the city of Rome. The
Emperor as glad to be gone as the Pope to have him go.
What pride is this, that the Roman prince, the author of public liberty,
should be deprived of al liberty, and that he should not be his own, whose by
right all things should be?

Mary the Pope and the prince were well met: for the Pope was not as earnest to
have him gone, but he was as glad to go, and as willing never to return. And
therefore to take his farewell, he sold all the right and title that the
Emperor had throughout Italy: Blondus decad. 2. lib. 10.
and as Blondus says, The Prince sold all the Emperor had both in Italy and
Germany.
om^ia vbique concessit ex quibus pecunia abra di potuit: passed away every
thing in every place, by the which he might get any money. And as he did in
Italy so did he in germany. For laboring to have his son Ve^celaus chosen his
successor in ye Empire, when the electors would not agree to it, because ye
child had nothing in him fit for so great a calling, ye Emperor offered every
of the Electours a hundred thowsande pounds to go through with the choice,
The price of a voice in the election of the Emperor.
and so they did. And not having money sufficient to defraie such an infinite
sum, he pawned the Lands and revenues of the Empire into their hands,
Aeneas Siluius histor. Bohem. cap. 32.
till they were paid, and so they remain to this day. Hence the Roman Empire
came to naught, neither was it ever after able to stand upright, the Princes
Electors keeping al in their hands, and swearing the Emperor, The Roman
Empire come utterly to nothing.
(when he is first chosen) that he shall not claim such things as they have of
the Empire in morgage.

Vencelaus, Ve^celaus put from the Empire as unfit to rule.
for whom his father paid 600000. pounds to have him Emperor, proved so
unprofitable for the place, that the electours, when Charles was dead, of
their authority Cuspinian^ in Vencelao.
put him from the crown, and set an other in his steed.

Some Princes of other countries you might repeat which I omit: no man
doubts but your holy Fathers pride and arrogance served him to venture on
meaner Princes, as well as on Emperors: For a 1000. years no such thing
offered: to this present day no such thing acknowledged.
this is it that we stand on; for a thowsande years there was no such thing
used nor offered in the church of Christ: and since that time though Popes have
been very forward to depose Princes, you shall never show any Prince that
acknowledged or obeyed that sentence; yea none of their people under them, nor
of the borderers about them, embraced those judgments, but such as had
secret quarelles against them, or sought to gain some part of their kingdoms
from them. The rest of their subjects and neighbors honored them as Princes,
In all these examples infinite numbers of their own religion have stood with
Princes against the Pope.
notwithstanding your furious lightning and thundering from Rome, as I have
showed by many specialties from the time of Henry the fourth to these our
days: and an infinite number of your own side have by deeds and words
boldly and sharply reproved that insolent presumption. And therefore if you
do any good in this cause, you must go higher; and bring us elder examples
that Bishops of Rome have deposed Princes, than these violent and tragical
vproares of later Popes blinded with error, and puffed with pride, who to
compass their ungodly desires have overwhelmed the earth with fraud and
force, with perjury and iniquity, with battle and bloodshed, like furies of
hell, not like teachers of truth, or Pastors of men's souls. We may not leave
the precepts of the holy Ghost and the ancient obedience of Christ's Church to
follow these fierbrands of hell.

The defense, cap. 5.


Could you prove ten thousand such attempts, it would relieve you little: we
may not leave the manifest commandments of God, and constant obedience of
Christ's church for so many hundreths, and allow of those hateful and
heathenish devises which the son of perdition has lately broched.


Phi. Will you yield to an elder example, if it be brought you?


Theo. Reason we know the man, before we reverence his act.


Phi. It shall be Gregory the great and first of that name, whom you confess
to have been both learned and holy. He being many hundredth years before
Gregory the seventh and our special Apostle, practiced the poinct we now
stand on, and therefore likely to be believed of all reasonable men.


Theo. Did Gregory the great ever depose Princes?


Phi. That he did.


Theo. Name the Prince which he deposed, and win the field. Gregory the
first n^uer dreampt of deposing Princes.



Phi. He deposed them before hand whatsoever they were that should at any time
after to the worlds end impugn his privilege.


Theo. Then he deposed princes not only before they were Crowned, but also
before they were conceived of their mothers.


Phi. He adjudged they should be deposed, that so offended, though actually he
deposed none. The def^nce, cap. 5.

An exco^mucation of S. Gregory upon Kings and Princes.

In fine libri 12. epist.


In the form of his privilege granted to S. Medardes Monastery thus he
decrees, Si quis Regum, Antistitum, Iudicum, vel quarumcunque personarum
secularium huius Apostolicae authoritatis and nostrae praeceptionis decreta
violauerit, cuiuscunque dignitatis vel sublimitatis sit, honor suo priuetur.
If any King, Prelate, Judge, or what other secular person soever shall
transgress this decree of our authority and commandment, of what
preeminence of highth soever he be, let him be deprived of his dignity.


Theo. Why stop you there, and go no farther?


Phi. I need not; here is enough for my purpose. In fine 12. lib epist. ibidem.



Theo. Yet read on the rest, or if you will not, I will. Cum Judah traditore
Domini in inferno inferiori damnetur, and let him be damned with Judas the
traitor in the nethermost hell.


Phi. There is nothing in this against us.


Theo. You might the better have rehearsed it. But think you that Gregory did
damn men to hell, Gregory had no more power to depose Princes than he had to
damn the^.
or reserve you that power only to Christ?


Phi. None can cast body and soul into hell fire but only God.


Theo. Does Gregory take Gods office from him?


Phi. No, but he means to terrify them with this kind of curse, and prays
it may fall on their heads, if they infringe his godly acts.


Theo. Then as Gregrie had no power to condemn Princes to hell though he
threaten it to them, no more had he right to depose Princes, though he wish
their overthrow, Gregory's words are a curse, and not a judicial sentence.
if they frustrate his decrees. It is therefore AN IMPRECATION, or curse which
in the like case the meanest founder that is may lay on the greatest Prince
that shall be borne without any judicial authority: It is no deprivation
neither prosecuted, nor purposed by the Bishop of Rome.


Phi. He says, Let him be deprived of his dignity.


Theo. And know you not, that is the optatiue mode, by the which Gregory
wishes and prays it may come to pass: but neither pronounces nor perfixeth
any such judgment?


Phi. If it may come to pass, then Princes may be deposed.


Theo. God has many ways to displace the mighty from their seats, (to whom
Gregory prays for vengeance,) though the Pope be not the doer.


Phi. If this be but a wish, every doner may do as much. Every doner has
the like words in his grant. Ibidem.



Theo. They be the very words wherewith every doner does strengthen his
endowment: And even in this place Gregory is not alone. Thirty Bishops of
diverse cities subscribed to this grant and curse in the self same words that
Gregory did; Theodoricus the King, and Brunichildis the Queen used the same
manner of subscription that the Bishop of Rome did, and the general
comprisement that presently follows, shows the words that went before to
be but curses. Omnium maledictionum anathemate, Ibidem.
let him be laden with all those heavy curses wherewith Infidels and heretics
from the beginning of the world to this day have been hampered. So that your
eye sight was not up, when you took a prayer for a judgment, a form of
imprecation for a sentence of deprivation, a curse precedent for an execution
that should be subsequent.


Phi. The defense, cap. 5.
This was the right and power of S. Gregory, and this has been the faith of
christian men ever since our Country was converted; and never subject called in
question, much less accused of treason for it, til this time; and lest of al,
made or found treason by the old laws in K. Edward the thirds reign, as is
pretended; howsoever by their new Laws they may and do make what they list a
crime capital.


Theo. Gregory cursed them and prayed against them that should disorder, or
alter his grant made at the Princes motion, In eodem priuilegio.
with the consent of all the prelates in Italy, with the good will of the
Roman Senate, and the favorable judgment of all the Bishops of France. This
is not it, that is called in question. You bear arms against your natural
prince, and encourage her subjects that by Gods law should obey her, Gregory's
act nothing like the Jesuits.
to take her crown from her, when the Pope wills them. This Gregory never
spoke of; neither did England at any time from the first receiving of the faith
to this day, ever acknowledge any such right or power in ye Pope to depose
princes. Much less then was this the faith of christian men ever since our
Country was converted, as you bravely but falsely boast.


Phi. In K. John's time, the Prince and realm were of this opinion, which we
are now.


Theo. They were not. Some bishops and Monks, offended with ye King for the
loss of their goods, fled the realm: and took part with the Pope against ye
King, and the Barons for other causes loved not their King as appeared by their
King John lost the hearts of his Nobles before these troubles began.

Matthew. Paris. anno 1203.


departure from him in Normandy before this trouble began, and by their general
rebellion against him when the Pope had not only released him, but also did
uphold him to the uttermost of his power. And though he had lost the hearts of
his Nobility before, and now of his Clergy, by turning them out of al their
livings, yet was there no conspiring against him in those five years in which
he stood excommunicate. And to him for defense of himself and his land, came
Matthew. Paris in anno 1213.
threeskore thousand able men of his own subjects well furnished: besides an
infinite number that were sent home again for want of armor, and a King John
thought it easier to loose a 1000. marks by the year than to fight for his
Crown and state.
fleet greater than that which the King of France had against him.


Phi. If his army were so great and his people so sure, why would he not try
the field with the king of France?


Theo. He saw the strife was but for the admittance of a bishop: and better to
slip his right in so small an injury than to put his own state and welfare to
the doubtful success of battle.


Phi. The story says Matt. Paris. Ibidem Rex denique Johan.
he was afraid lest he should be left alone in the field, and be forsaken of
his own nation and nobles.


Theo. So Pandulfus Ibide^. Dum autem Rex.
told him, to afreight him and make him yield the sooner: but ye Pope himself
co^plaineth of the contrary, yt the Barons of England by a perverse order did
rise in arms against their king after he was converted and had satisfied the
Church, Matthew. Paris. anno 1215.
who assisted him when he did offend the Church. (...) ^^ins epist.
And yet I am of opinion they would easily have forsaken him: not for respect
of your Romish censures, but for their extreme detestation of his odious and
tyrannous government, The Nobles pursued King John after his reconciliation to
the Pope, wo^se than before.
which they showed after his reconciliation to the Sea of Rome, more than they
did before: and obeyed neither King nor Pope so long as he lived and enjoyed
the Crown. This realm therefore in the time of King John assisted their Prince
against the Pope: and when the king had submitted himself, and rented his
Crown at the Popes hands, they resisted both Prince and Pope, and elected an
other. Before that and since that this realm never confessed or believed any
right or power in the pope to depose Princes.


Phi. They never made it treason to be of that belief til this miserable time,
in which we live. Anno 13.

Richardi 2.

King Richard made it death to bring any process from Rome to impugn the
laws of his realm, for benefices and patronages.





Theo. Richard the second very near two hundredth years ago made it death for
any man to bring or send within this realm any summons, sentence or
excommunication, (from Rome) against any person: for the cause of making
motion, assent or execution of the statute of prouisours: which barred the
bishop of Rome from giving, reserving or disposing Bishoprics and benefices
in this land. To impeach the Kings laws, or to defeat him of his smaller
inheritances, as aduousons and Patronages, by censures from Rome, was death in
those days: what think you would they have said to him that should have
brought a bull to deprive the Prince of his crown, or a warrant to rebel
against him, and to take his life from him as you do in our days?

And because you stand so much on the word treason, why should not the statute
of Edward the third recensing Treasons extend directly to your doings? It is
there numbered among treasons, 25. Edwardi 3.
to compass or imagine the death of the King, to leuy war against him in his
Realm, or to be adherent to the Kings enemies in his Realm, or to give them
aid and comfort within the realm or else where. To war against the King is
treason in subjects, though it be for religion.
If al wars waged against y^ prince within the Realm (that is by subjects) are
treasonable: how should your wars for religion against your sovereign be
just and honorable? If to aid or comfort the kings enemies within the
realm, or else where, be traiterous conspiracy; how can you stir up
foreign power to assault the realm, and persuade the people of this land with
arms to displace the prince and not incur that crime?


Phi. Do we set strangers to invade, or subjects to rebel?


Theo. You be adherents and instruments to him that does.


Phi. You mean we be of the same faith with the Church of Rome: If that be
treason, then we are traitors.


Theo. We talk not of your faith, but of your works. Believe what you list,
so you meddle not with ayding nor comforting invasion nor rebellion.


Phi. We do not.


Theo. You commend them and allow them that will do either, yourselfe in this
place defend their enterprise to be godly, just and honorable; Is not this
giving comfort to the Queens enemies?
Your fellows before you in their printed books openly did celebrate them as
Martyrs that lost their lives in the North for bearing arms against the
Queen. What greater comfort can you give to rebels and enemies, than to
animate and encourage them with praises, promises, defenses, and honors, both
in this world and the next? It is more pernicious to fire the heart, than to
warm the hand: to minister courage, than to give drink to them that shall
fight against the Prince. In all actions the perswaders and enducers are equal
with the doers and executours. The perswaders be traitors as well as the doers.
Why then should you not be within the compass of king Edward the thirdes
statute, for ayding and comforting the Queens enemies within the realm or
elsewhere?


Phi. You must understand that we never will any man to take arms, but for
the catholic faith, And yet your adherents bare arms against King John and
the Germane Princes for mere private and earthly quarrels.
and at the commandment of the supreme magistrate against one that was, but
is no Prince, as being justly deposed.


Theo. And you must understand that the statute of Edward the third does
neither allow the Pope to depose the Prince, nor license the subject to bear
arms for religion against his sovereign: and therefore your wars for
religion be traiterous insurrections against the Prince by the Laws of Edward
the third, notwithstanding your new found glozes that you first depose them,
and after resist them, and pursue them with arms by the warrant of holy
Churches judgment and censure.


Phi. Edward the third never meant, that to obey the Pope above the prince
should be treason. Edward the 3. never meant to be deposed by the Pope, why
therefore should not war to depose him, be treason against him?



Theo. It is not for you now to appoint his meaning. His words are, that to
give aid or comfort to the Kings enemies and such as levied wars against him
in his realm, (were it the Pope, the French King, or whom ye will,) should
be treason. He had before his eyes the example of King John, upon whom the
Pope set the King of France with all his power for not obeying his censures
from Rome: he knew he could not be defeated of his Crown without war: and
so long as his own subjects were trusty to him he feared not the French, nor
any other that should invade him. To make himself therefore assured of his
own people against all men, Spanish, Scottish, French, It was wisdom in king
Edward not to name the Pope, and yet the quarrel includes the Pope.
Romish or any by whom the deed might be done, and yet to decline the envy
of naming the Pope: he with his whole realm by their public law without
exception of Person, or cause, made it treason to give aid or comfort within
the realm, or else where to any (whatsoever) that should war upon the king:
perceiving the general would include the Pope or any other that he should
incite against the King, as well as if they were distinctly named.


Phi. You suppose the Prince and the people did secretly conspire against the
Pope: The King and the commons in open parliament join to defend the laws and
liberties of the realm against the Pope by name.
where as in those days they did honor him as the Sovereign father and
Pastor of their souls.


Theo. Howsoever they embraced the religion which he professed, it is evident
the King and the whole realm in open Parliament made a general consociation
to repel provisions and impetrations of ecclesiastical dignities and offices
from Rome: and bound themselves each to other with all their might in common
to withstand citations, suspencions, excommunications and censures coming
from that Consistory for matters decided in the Kings Courts, or pertinent to
the Laws and royal liberties of this Realm: and the commons did not stick
in parliament likewise to promise King Richard the second to stand with him in
all cases attempted by the Bishop of Rome against him, his Crown and his
Regalitie in all points to live and die.

The consociation against the procurers, bringers, and executours of prohibited
process from Rome was this: 28. Edwardi 3.

The consociation of King Edward against the Pope.


The King, the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Nobles and other Commons,
Clerks, and Lay people, be bound by this present ordinance to aid, comfort,
and counsel the one and the other, as often as shall need: and by all the best
means that may be made of word and of deed to impeach such offenders, and
to resist their enterprises, and without suffering them to inhabit, abide or
pass by their Seignories, possessions, lands, jurisdictions or places: and be
bound to keep and defend the one and the other from al damage, villainy, and
reproof, as they should do their own persons and for their deed and
business: and by such manner and as farreforth as such prosecutions or
process were made or attempted against them in especial, general, or in
common.

The complainct and offer of the Commons to king Richard was this: Of late
diverse processes be made by our holy father the Bishop of Rome, 16. Richardi 2.

The people offer to defend their Prince against the Pope.


and censures of excommunication upon certain Bishops of England because they
have made execution of the kings commandments (notwithstanding process from
the Court of Rome for the contrary) to the open disherison of the Crown and
destruction of our Sovereign Lord the King his Law and all his Realm: so as
the Crown of England, which has been so free at al times that it has been
in subjection to no realm, The Crown of England not subject to the Bishop of
Rome.

The commo^s will be with their king in all cases attempted against him, his
crown, and regalitie: could they then suffer him to be deposed?


but immediately subject to God and to none other in all things touching the
regalitie of the same Crown, should be submitted to the Bishop of Rome and the
Laws and statutes of the realm by him defeated and destroyed at his will, in
perpetual destruction of the king our sovereign Lord his Crown and regalitie,
and of al his realm, which God defend: Wherefore they, and all the liege
commons of the same realm will be with our said Sovereign Lord the King and
his said Crown and his regalitie in the cases aforesaid, and in all other
cases attempted against him, his crown, and his regalitie in all points to live
and to die. This was the ancient love and faith of the Commons of this Land
toward their Princes, against the Bishop of Rome even by name: and this if you
were true English or good Christian men, you would rather exhort the people
unto, than as you do, wish them to take weapon in hand to pull the Prince from
her throne, because the Bishop of Rome has sent out his calves to disclaim
her.


Phi. Ever since the said S. Gregory's time, The defense, cap. 5.

The oath of the Kings of England at their coronation.


or thereabout, all Kings in Christendom, specially those of Spain, France,
Pole and England take an oath upon the holy Evangelists at their Coronation,
to keep and defend the Catholic faith: and ours of England expressly, to
maintain also the privileges and liberties of the Church and Clergy, given by
King Edward the confessor and other faithful Kings their ancestors.


Theo. Kings swear to defend the faith and assist the Church.
That Kings should take an oath to defend the Catholic faith and assist the
Church of Christ we do not repine: only your collection is foolish, if you
think, that by Catholic faith is by and by meant your late Romish faith: or
that the church can have no privileges nor liberties, except the Pope may deal
and distribute kingdoms to his liking. The Princes oath in the Laws of King
Edward the confessor, Leges Edwardi Regis, cap. 17.

The Prince sworn to govern the church of her Kingdom.


was to keep, nourish, maintain and govern the holy Church of his kingdom
with all integrity and liberty according to the constitutions of his Fathers
and predecessors. But in our days you will not suffer the Prince to govern
the Church of her kingdom: and the Church liberty which you seek for, is a
wicked impunitie for sin, and a plain contempt of all Christian authority.


Phi. S. Thomas of Canterbury puts his Sovereign Henry the second in
memory thereof both often in speech and expressly in an epistle written to
him in these words: The defense, cap. 5.
Memores sitis confessionis q^am fecistis and posuistis super altar apud
Westmonasterium, In vita S. Thomae.
de seruanda Ecclesiae liberate, quando consecrati fuistis and vncti in regema
predecessore nostro Theobaldo. Keep in memory the confession which you made
and laid upon the altar at Westminster, touching the keeping of holy churches
liberties, when you were consecrated and anointed king by my predecessor
Theobald.


Theoph. Your Canterbury Saint was very careful to put the King in mind of
Church-mens liberty: Thomas of Canterbury put others in mind of their
promises and forgot his own oath.
but he was never so religious as to remember what was Church-mens duty to
God and the magistrate. He could call on others to keep touch, but himself
procured a dispensation, that his oath should not tie him, though it were
never so lawful and honest. And surely this was a seemly sight, for a subject
that had violated his own faith and truth to importune his Sovereign to
observe couenaunts: but such is your store, for want of better, you must bring
periures to talk of promises.


Phi. The Patriarchs of Constantinople took an instrument of such as were to
be crowned Emperors (specially in the times of heresy) wherein they made the
like promise and profession, The defense, cap. 5.
to keep and defend the faith and decrees of holy Councels. So did the
Patriarch Euphemius, in the coronation of Athanasius; Nicephorus, in the
inuesting of Michael: and others in the creation of other Emperors of the
East. Zonar. tomo 3. and Cuspinian. in Anast. and in Zimisce.
And Zonaras writes that the Patriarche of Constantinople plainly told Isaac
Commenus the Emperor: that as by his hands he received the Empire: so if he
governed not well, by him it should be taken from him again.


Theo. The Patriach once or twice required of him that should be crowned a
confession of his faith.

Euthemius and Anastasius.


From Popes you come to Patriarchs, from Rome to Constantinople, and there in
steed of deposing them after their coronation, you show what was exacted at
their hands before they were crowned: and that not ever, nor by any superior
calling, but the Bishop of that city offering once or twice rather to loose
his life, than to crown one that he feared would innouate the faith or afflict
the Church.

Euphemius was the first that gave this onset, and the first that repented it.
When Ariadna the Empress that buried her husband alive, being fallen into a
trance, would needs exalt Anastasius a man of no great reckoning before, and
bestow both the scepter and her self upon him, Euphemius the Patriarch,
whether it were that he claymed a consent in that election as well as others,
or suspected Anastasius inclination, and so thought it easier to exact a
confession of his faith before than after his coronation: required him under
his handewriting to promise that he would alter no point of Religion
established in the Church. Which Anastasius then yielded to do: Zonar. in
Anast. Dicoro.

The Prince banished the patriarch.


but as soon as he was crowned, the first thing almost that he did, he
banished Euphemius for his bold adventure. What you would conclude out of this
fact for the deposition of Princes, I know not: well I wotte the Prince
deprived the Patriarche, and not the Patriarch the Prince, though he fell from
the faith which he professed, and promised at his coronation to continue.


Phi. He did, that he did, by violence.


Theo. I commend not his doings, only I would have you mark that though he
joined tyranny with heresy, neither Patriarch nor Pope did depose him.
Anastasius not deposed though he brake the promise made at his coronatio^



Philand. The Pope did excommunicate him.


Theo. So you said before, but you proved it by no sufficient testimony: yet
grant he were, I thence infer, the teachers and people of the Primative
Church endured and obeyed an heretical and excommunicate person as their
lawful Emperor: which clean euerteth all your platfourme.


Phi. Nicephorus required the like writing of Michael. Niceph. and Michaell.



Theo. Michael was chosen to the Empire, Stauracius yet living and not allowing
their act: and when he came the next day to the Church to be Crowned, Zonar.
in Michael. Rangab.
the Patriarch required his writing, that he would neither spill Christian
blood, nor change the faith of the Church, which Michael willingly granted.


Philand. The Patriarch then prescribed conditions to the Prince.


Theo. When the Empire went by election, the people might prescribe needful
and honest conditions, to which their princes should subscribe before they were
crowned.


Phi. But I talk of the Patriarch.


Theo. The Patriarch did it not often. There were forty Christian Emperors
from Constantine to Michael, and this writing never required but of two: and
those not succeeding, but elected. Whose coronation the people might tie to
those Christian and godly conditions. And though the Church were the meetest
place, and the Patriarch the fittest person in matters of faith, The patriarks
fact had the peoples consent.
to take the Princes subscription, yet was it done in the presence of the
whole people, and not without their consents, and then only, when some fear
of alteration urged them unto it. The Patriarch of himself had neither right,
nor power to draw the Prince to such covenants as he would limit; and
therefore it was necessary the people should join their authority with his in
that action.


Philand. The Patriarch would not crown him, unless he would subscribe.


Theo. If he would not, an other might. The ceremony of setting the Crown on
the Princes head, He that crowns is not superior to him that is crowned.
is a service due to him that is chosen, not any superiority in him that does
it; and if it be refused by him, that of order is bound to do it, any
Christian Bishop may perfect it, and the other be punished for his recusance.


Phi. Polieuctus and Zimisces.
The Patriarch by your leave had more interest to the crowning of the Emperor
than you mention. For Polyeuctus the Patriarch would not suffer Ioannes
Zimisces so much as Zonar. in Ioh. Zimisce.
to enter the Church, till he had banished the murderers of the former
Emperor, and thrust the Empress out of the Court, and torn the book which
the Bishops were in trouble for: and given all his goods to the poor.


Theo. The Empire of Constantinople was now 970. years after Christ carried
along neither by lawful succession nor election, but become a very pray for
him that would murder his master, and defile his mistress: without all
respect of duty or honesty. Zimisces not content secretly to keep Nicephorus
wife, with her help most villanously flew the Emperor in his bed, Zonar. in
Niceph. Phoca.
commanding his men, besides the wounds they gave him in the head and
elsewhere, with the hilts of their swords to dash out his teeth, and break
his iaw-bones. Upon this horrible and devilish slaughter, when he came to the
Church intending to have the crown, the Patriarch Zonar. in Zimisce.

The Patriarch would not suffer a murderer that aspired to the crown to enter
the Church before some recompense were made.


would not suffer him being polluted with blood to come within the Church.
Where he confessing that others did it by instigation of the Empress, the
Patriarch required, that she might be forthwith banished, and they pursued,
and the book torn that entangled the Bishops, and that he would think on
some punishment for himself. Zimisces yielded to all that the Patriarch asked:
and for himself promised to give the goods which he had gotten whiles he was
a private man, to the poor.

How this serves your turn, I see not. The Patriarch kept him, not from the
Crown, but from the Church; and he that was kept off, was no Prince either by
descent, or by choice: but one that aspired to the crown by killing the king,
and abusing the Queen in most heinous manner. Zimisces killed the King and
defiled the Queen.
In which case, if the Patriarch had offered his life, rather than suffered
such an one to approach to the Lords table, he had done but his duty.


Phi. Would you now have bishops rebel?


Theo. You think so much on it, you can not choose but talk of it, I said no
such thing: the common wealth had to do with the crown, and not the Bishop:
that if they gave, he might not deny: but as for divine service and
Sacraments, the Bishop might well d^me them to that infamous adulterer and
murderer.


Phi. You may perceive by that which the Patriarch of Constantinople said to
Isaac Commenus, Isaac Commenus.
what sway the Bishop of that city bare in crowning the Emperor. He told the
Prince plainly that as by his hands he received the Empire, so if he
governed not well, by him it should be taken from him again.


Theo. We may perceive by that which you bring, both the pride of the
Patriarch, and the falsehood of your dealing. This Bishop was a ringleader in
the rebellion wherein Michaell Stratiotes the former Emperor was displaced,
Zonar. in Mich. Stratio.
and Isaac Commenus exalted in his stead: and when the new Prince happened to
deny the proud and seditious Patriarch a request which he made, he brast
out in great rage and told him, that as he had helped him (by his wicked
conspiracy) to the Crown, so would he (by like means) help him from it. A
fit president for the Ies.
An example as fit for your doings as you could possibly light on, that a
Priest should tell his Prince, he would thrust him out of his seat by the head
and shoulders.


Philand. If he governed not well, he would take the Crown from him.


Theo. If he governed not well, is your addition and misconstruction of your
Author: Zonar. in Isaac. Commeno.
the story lies as I report it. The words of Zonaras are: Neque vero
Patriarcha superbia illi cedebat, sed imperare illi volebat, a^ si quando non
impetrasset quae petierat, egre ferebat, increpabat, minabatur denique,
quemadmodum imperium illi contulisset ita se idem illi orepturum. The Patriarch
yielded not a jot in pride to the prince, and if at any time he missed of the
requests which he made, he disdayned, and cast it in the princes teeth and
threatened, that as he had promoted him to the kingdom, so he would take it
from him. Now in what sort he with others conspired for Isaac Commenus
against Michael, Zonaras shows in this page before. And in truth he was
led with the same spirit that Hildebrande was, An other Hildebrand.
living at the same time with him and sitting at Constantinople, whiles the
other reigned in Rome: and had the very same event of his pride which
Hildebrande had; the Greek Prince being not able to bear the Patriarchs
insolency, and therefore banishing him, where for spite and anger he shortly
after dyed.


Philand. Likewise when kings, The defense, cap. 5.

In what ca^es subjects may break with their Princes.


that before were infidels, do enter by Baptism into the Church, they
submit their scepters to Christ, and consequently make themselves subject
and punishable if they revolt from their faith and promis^.


Theoph. When Kings by Baptism put on Christ they submit their scepters and
souls to the word and will of Christ, Baptism makes not princes
depriueable by the Pope.
but what this avails the Pope I see not: except you assume that your Holy
Father is Christ, and so the subjection professed by Kings unto Christ must be
yielded to your Romish Antichrist; which were very far fet, and skant worth
the carriage.


Phi. If they revolt from their faith, Revolt from the faith is punishable in
Princes, but not by man.
they be punishable by reason of their former subjection unto Christ.


Theo. Yea verily: and that not only in this world if it please him, but in
the next also with everlasting pains if they repent not.


Philand. If they be punishable in this world, then may they be deprived.


Theo. Does Christ use no punishm^^t but deprivation? or ever read you that in
this life Christ sententially deposed any Prince, though he might have
punished many?


Phi. I mean they may be deprived by men, if they revolt from their promise
made to Christ.


Theoph. Your own meanings be your best arguments: otherwise I see no
strength in this reason. Princes are punishable, if they break their faith
given to Christ: Ergo by men: and if by any man, ergo by the Pope. This is
leaping logike, of all that ever I heard.


Philand. Baptism binds no man to corporal or temporal losses of land or
life.
They submitted themselves in Baptism to be punished by deprivation, if they
kept not faith and truth with Christ.


Theo. If you should not eat, till you prove that assertion, you should
fast a lent not of days but of years. It is a wicked error to say, that any
private man in Baptism must or does submit himself to the violent and
corporal correction of his flesh: or to the temporal losses of land or life:
which you would fasten on Christian Princes by virtue of their Baptism.


Philand. Upon these conditions and none other, Kings be received of the
Bishop that in Gods behalf annoynteth them: The defense, cap. 5.
which oath and promise being not observed, they break with GOD and their
people; and their people may and by order of Christ his supreme minister their
chief Pastor in earth, must needs break with them: heresy and infidelity
in the Prince tending directly to the perdition of the commonwealth and the
souls of their subjects, and notoriously to the annoyance of the Church and
true religion, for the defense of which kings by GOD are given.


Theoph. Again you leap from the baptising to the crowning of Princes, and
because at their admission into the Church they promised to renounce the Dyuell
and his works, but not their swoordes and scepters which are of GOD: you
range to their coronations and tell us in great state that the Bishops which
anointed them in Gods behalf did not receive them to be kings but on these
conditions; as though it were in the hands of Bishops to receive and reject
Kings, Bishops have nothing to do with the Crowns of Princes.
and to prescribe them conditions of taking and leaving the Crown. Feign you
would encroche upon Kings by the Bishops act and oil, that in the end you
might possess the Pope with a full interest to dispose their Crowns at his
pleasure: but such as be wise will look to your fingers and keep you short
of that desire.

The solemn rites of coronations have their end and utility, but no direct
force nor necessity. Inunction makes not the Prince subject to the Priest.

Anointing is a service, not a superiority to the prince.


They be good admonishmentes to put Princes in mind of their duty: but no
increasements of their dignity. For they be Gods anointed: not in respect of
the material oil which the Bishop uses, but in consideration of their
power, which is ordained: of the sword, which is authorized: of their Persons,
which are elected by GOD and endued with the gifts of his spirit for the
better guyding of his people: If oil be added, it is but a ceremony
representing that to their eyes, which all the godly believe with their
hearts: If oil be wanting, they be perfect Magistrates notwithstanding, and
Gods anointed as well as if they were inoyled. And so for the person of the
Bishop, that does annoint them. It is fittest, it be done by the highest:
but yet if they can not or will not, any Bishop may perform it.

Authority to condition with Princes at the time of their coronation, The
Bishop is to declare gods will and not his own unto Princes at their
coronation.
the Bishop has none: he is faithfully to declare what GOD requires at the
hands of Princes: not in religion only, but in rewarding virtue, revenging
sin, relieuing the poor and innocent, repressing the violent, procuring
peace and doing justice throughout their Realms: and that if they fail in any
of these, God will not fail severely to visit the breach of his Law, and
contempt of their callings: but yet he has no commission to denounce them
deprived, The Jesuits would have Princes hold their crowns by Indenture.
if they miss in some or all of these duties: much less to draw Indentures
between God and Princes containing the forfeiture of their crowns, with a
clause for the Pope and no man else to reenter, if they keep not covenants.


Phi. You grant they be bound to God: to defend the Church and true Religion.


Theo. Even so be they bound to do those other things which I before
rehearsed. The covenant which God made with the Prince of his people, was to
fear the Lord his God and to keep (not some but) all the words of his Law.
Deuteronomy. 17.
The oath which the Kings of England take, has many things besides the
defense of the faith and the Church. Edwardi Lege^ cap. 17.
The King shall fear God and love him above all things, and keep gods
precepts through his whole kingdom. He shall advance good Laws and approved
customs, and banish all evil Laws from his kingdom. He shall do right
judgment in his realm, and maintain justice by the counsel of his Nobles:
with many other points there specified: All these things the King in his own
person shall swear beholding and touching the holy Gospel, in the presence of
the people, the Priests and the Clergy, before he be crowned by the
Archbishoppes and Bishops of his Realm. The breach of covenants is no
deprivation.

The defense, cap. 5.


Shall a king be deposed, if he revolt as you call it from his promise and
oath in any of these points?


Phi. Heresy and infidelity tend directly to the perdition of the
commonwealth and the souls of their subjects, and notoriously to the
annoyance of the Church and true Religion.


Theoph. We compare not vices, The people may not break with their Princes
though Princes break with God.
but discuss the vitiousnes of your conclusion. Kings you say covenant with
GOD at their anointing. That oath and promise if they break with God, the
people (you add) may, and by order of Christ's supreme minister, their chief
Pastor in earth, must needs break with them. If by BREAKING you meant not
obeying them in those particular cases which tend to the defacing of Gods
truth, your illation were not much amiss: for in all things we must obey God
rather than man: but by BREAKING you understand an utter refusing of obedience,
in all other cases, and a violent remoouing them from their crowns: which we
say is not lawful for Pastor nor people to attempt against princes though they
answer not their duties to God in every point. If two swear to do^ any
thing, and one break his ^th, shall the other be excu^ed before God if he
follow that example?
They covenant at the same time, and with the same oath the keeping and
observing of the whole law of God: and yet was there never any man so
brainsicke as to defend that Princes for every neglect and offense against the
Law, should be deposed.


Phi. Heresy is one of the greatest breaches of Gods Law.


Theo. To hold the truth of God in manifest and known unrighteousness, without
repentance, is a greater impiety than ignorantly to be deceived in some points
of religion: but we stand not on the degrees of sins, which God will revenge
from the greatest to the smallest as much as on the person which may do it, and
the warrant whereby it must be done. We deny that Princes have any superior
and ordinary Judge to hear and determine the right of their Crowns. We deny
that God has licenced any man to depose them, and pronounce them no Princes.
The son cannot desherit his father, nor the servant countermaund his master
by the laws of God and nature; It is against the Law of God and nature for
subjects to punish their Princes.
be the father and master never so wicked. Princes have far greater honor
and power over subjects than any man can have over sons and servants. They
have power over goods, lands, bodies and lives: which no private man may
challenge. They be fathers of our Countries, to the which we be nearer bound by
the very confession of Ethnikes, than to the fathers of our flesh. How then by
Gods law should subjects depose their Princes to whom in most evident words
they must be subject for conscience sake though they be tyrauntes and
Infidels? Romans 13. And strangers have less to do with their Crowns.
And if the subjects themselves have no such power, what have strangers to
meddle or make with their Crowns?


Phi. Do you count the Pope a stranger to Christian Princes?


Theo. Would God he were not worse; even a mortal and cruel enemy to all that be Godly. He was a subject under them eight hundredth years and upward:
he after by sedition and usurpation grew to be a s^ate amongst them: a
Superior over them in causes concerning their Crowns and states you shall
never prove him to be. For a thousand years he durst offer no such thing:
Depo^ition of late years attempted, but not agnised to this present day.
these last five hundredth he often assayed it, and was as often repelled from
it: by factions, conspiracies, excommunications and rebellions he molested and
grieved some of them, as I have showed: but from the ascension of our Lord and
Savior to this present day never Prince Christian did yield and acknowledge
any such power in the Pope: and those that seemed in their neighbors harms
somewhat to regard his doings for an advantage: when the case concerned
themselves most boldly rejected his judgments.


Phi. The defense, cap. 5.
By the fall of the King from the faith, the danger is so evident, and
inevitable, that GOD had not sufficiently provided for our salvation and the
preservation of his Church and holy Laws, if there were no way to deprive or
restrain Apostata Princes.


Theo. You make us many worthy reasons for the deprivation of Princes, but of
all others this is the chiefest. If there were no way to deprive Princes, God
has not, say you, sufficiently provided for our salvation and the preservation
of his Church. Extra. commu. de maioritat. and obedient. vna^ sanct^^ in addi^.
Petri Bern. respondeo and di^^.
Even so one of your own fellows said before you of the very same poin^e:
Non vider^tur Dominus discretus fuisse (vt cum reuerentia ^ius loquar) etc. The
Lord (by his leave) should have seemed scant discreet, except he had left
one such Vicar behind him as might do all things (to wit) depose Emperors
and all other Princes. Unless your rebellious humors may take place, you
stick not to charge the son of God with lack of discretion and negligence:
but look better about you, ye blasphemous mouths, and you shall see that the
Church of God is purest when she is tried in the furnace, cleanest when she is
vanned, whitest when she is scoured, and safest when she is judged in the world
that she be not condemned with the world. The Church of Christ has always
prospered in misery, and decayed in prosperity: Israel increased whiles they
were oppressed by Pharaoh: and when they came to be fed with Manna under Moses,
they were consumed. The blood of the Martyrs is the very nourcerie of the
Church, and the first poison of Religion was the wealth and pride of Bishops.
2. Cor. 22.
The grace of God is made perfect through weakness: 2. Cor. 4.
and when our outward man perishes, our inward is daily renewed.


Phi. Why rage you thus? If Jesuits may not rebel, their salvation is
vnsufficie^t in their judgments.
What have we said?


Theo. That which never learned or Christian man said before: you say your
salvation is insufficient if you may not rebel against Princes, when they
oppress you.


Phi. If there were no way to deprive or restrain Apostata Princes.


Theo. Then was not the Primative Church sufficiently provided for by the son
of God, for they lacked compotent forces as your self did confess to
restrain those heretics, Apostataes and tyrants that afflicted them. Then were
the Apostles unfurnished for their salvation, for they had nothing besides hope
to bear the brunt of those continual and bloody persecutions which they
suffered. Then is God careless of his Saints, (for so much your religious
words import) since they shall have none other refuge in all assaults but
Re^^lat. 13.
faith and patience. Woe worth your worldly minds, that cannot so much as say
with the Apostle, whatsoever you think, 2. Cor. 1^.
I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in neces^ities, in persecutions,
in anguish for Christ: for when I am weak, then am I strong.


Phi We have given better experience thereof than you: we have these 27. years
endured al sorts of afflictions and calamities that might befall men in exile;
and therefore never charge us to be worldly minded: our long and hard
banishment does clearly quite us from that slander.


Theo. You have been long absent, but much against your wills: had any of your
practices well succeeded, you had many years since returned with fire and
sword, The Jesuits impatient to see themselves disappointed.
but God of his mercy toward this realm, has wearied their heads and filled
their hands that should be your leaders: and now waxing sharp through
impatience, and much displeased to see your selves so often disappointed, you
not only by your book blow the trump to rebellion; but show the very ground
and persuasion of your hearts to be this: that except you may deprive the
Prince with dint of sword, God has not sufficiently provided for your
salvation; as though life to come would do you little good, except in the
mean time you might abound and not feel want: live in honor, and not thus
wander: reign over Princes, and not obey them, or endure them.


Phi. The defense, cap. 5. The example of a Prince most dangerous.
We see how the whole world did run from Christ after Julian, to plain
Paganism: after Valens to Arianisme: after Edward the sixth with us, into
Zwinglianisme: and would do into Turcisme, if any powerable Prince will lead
his subjects that way.

If our faith or perdition should on this sort pass by the pleasure of every
secular Prince, and no remedy for it in the state of the new Testament, but
men must hold and obey him to what infidelity so ever he fall: then we were
in worse case than heathens, and all other humane common wealths; which both
before Christ and after, have had means to deliver themselves from such
tyrants as were intolerable, and evidently pernicious to humane society, and
the good of the people: for whose peace and preservation, they were created by
man, or ordained by God.


Theo. You find that multitudes ran from Christ, to Paganism after Julian:
to Arianisme after Valens: but do you find that the godly did rebel against
them, because a number ran after them? What presumption is this in you to
control the wisdom and goodness of God, sifting his Church by the rage and
fury of wicked Princes, God has provided patience for his saints, not
violence to co^quere tyrants.
and crowning those that be his as patient in trial, and constant in truth?
Were you thoroughly persuaded that the hearts of Kings are in the hands of
GOD, and that the hairs of our heads are numbered, so that no persecution can
apprehend his, which he disposes not toward them for experience of their
faith, or recompense of their sins: you would as well honor the justice of
God in erecting tyrants that our unrighteousness may be judged and punished in
this world: as embrace his mercy in giving rest to his Church by the favor
of good and virtuous Princes. And therefore I appeal to the consciences of all
good men, whether this reason of yours ( if there were no way to deprive
Princes, and to take their Crowns from them, we were in worse case than
heathens) be not a profane despising the Counsel of God toward his Church,
and an open betraying of your unquiet stomachs when you be in trouble. Our
Savior foreteaching his that they should be Mat. 10.
brought before Kings and Rulers, and put to death, and hated of all men for
(his) names sake: adds not as you would have it, and he that first
rebelleth, but Mat. 10.
he that endures to the end shall be saved; and again, not with violence
restrain them, but Luke. 21.
in patience possess your own souls. This is the way for all Christian
subjects to conquerre tyraunts, and this is the remedy provided in the new
Testament against all persecutions, not Romans 13.
to resist powers, which GOD has ordained, lest we damned: but with all
meekenes to suffer, that we may be crowned.


Phi. The defense, cap. 5.
The heathens before Christ and after had means to deliver themselves from
such tyrants as were intolerable, and evidently pernicious to humane society
and the good of the people, for whose peace and preservation they were created
by man or ordained by God.


Theo. A mean they had to dispatch such as they counted tyrants, and that was
to kill them, The Jesuits would fain be heathens.
which Christians may not imitate: and yet did your Holy Father of late in
Cardinal Comos letter promise earthly and heavenly recompense to Parry for
offering his service to kill her majesty. The letter is extant, the purpose
confessed, the party executed. The Pope encourages subjects to kill their
princes.
Look there, you shall see the Bishop of Rome and his Cardinals to be right
heathens, and to carry the same minds that they did, if not worse. For they
knowing no GOD besides the guess of their own hearts, and having no rule to
lead them but only reason, and buylding a felicity to themselves in this
life: saw no cause why one man should be suffered to afflict and disease a
number: and supposing any thing to be lawful that relieved the Common wealth,
they decreed him to be no murderer, but a delyuerer of his country that
would kill a tyrant: You having the manifest voice of GOD thou shall not kill,
which you ought to prefer before your own lives: and being prohibited by the
holy Ghost Exodus 20. Romans 3.
to do evil that good may come thereof, with what faces can you, not only
acquit them, and praise them, that kill Magistrates, but also assure them of
reward in heaven that wilfully destroy their Princes: and where GOD threatens
Romans 13.
damnation to all that resist them, make it meritorious to murder them, and
encourage subjects to the slaughter of their Princes, as to an holy and
honorable exployte?

Lest you deny it, Cardinal Comos letter for the murdering of her Majesty.
or Posterity not believe it, thus says the Cardinal in his letter to
William Parry: Mon signore la Santita de N.S. ha veduto le lettere di V.S. del
primo con la feed inclusa, and not puo se non laudare la buona disposittione
and risolutione, che scriue di tenere verso il seruitio and beneficio publico,
nel che la Santita sua lessorta diperseuerare, con farne riuscire li effetti
che V.S. promette: Et accioche tanto maggiormente V.S. sia aiutata da quel buon
spirito che l^hamosso, le concede sua Beneditione, plenariae Indulgenza and
remissione di tutti li peccati, secondo che V.S. ha ^hiesto, assicurandossi che
oltre il merito, che n'hauera in cielo vuo, le anco sua Santita constituirsi
debitore a riconoscere li meriti di V.S. in ogni miglior modo che potra, and
cio tanto piu, quanto che V.S. vsa maggior modestia in non pretender mente.
Metta dunque ad effetto li suoi santi and honorati pensieri, and attenda a star
sano. Che per fine io me le offero di core, and le desidero ogni buono and
felice success^*

Di Roma a 30. di Gennaro. M.D.Lxxxiiii. Al piacer di V.S. N. Cardinale di
Como. Al Sig. Guglielmo Parri.


Sir, the holiness of our Lord (the Pope) has seen your letter with the
credence enclosed, and cannot but praise your good disposition and That
resolution was to kill the Queen, as PARRY himself confessed.

A passing good spirit that leads subjects to murder their Princes.
Holiness fit for your holy father.


resolution which, you write, holds to the service and benefit public.
Wherein his holiness exhorts you to continue and to bring to pass that which
you promise. And to the end you may be the more aided by that good spirit
which has enduced you to this, his blessedness grants you full pardon and
forgiveness of all your sins, as you requested; assuring you that besides the
merit which you shall receive in heaven, his holiness will make himself a
farther debtour, to acknowledge your deseruings in the best manner that he may:
and so much the more, because you use so great modesty in not pretending any
thing. Put therefore in act your holy and honorable thoughts, and look to your
safety. And so I present my self heartily to you, and wish you all good and
happy success.

From Rome the 30. of January, 1584. Yours to dispose, N. Cardinal of Como.




Cicero never said so much in the praise of Brutus and Cassius that slew Caesar
in the Senate house: as Como does to incite this Traitor to murder the Queen
of England. You did well therefore to take the heathens for your Pattern: it is
right an heathenish trick to kill Princes upon any color of tyranny or
heresy: The holy ghost abhors the murder of Princes. 1. Sam. 26. Romans 13.
but if you lysten to the spirit of God speaking by the mouths of his Prophets
and Apostles, he will teach you an other lesson. Who can lay his hand on the
Lords anointed, and be guiltless? says David of Saul: when yet Saul in all
men's sight was a tyrant and by your opinion deposed. Whosoever resist, purchase
to themselves damnation, says Paul, when none were Princes but such as were
manifest and mighty bloodsuckers: what then shall become of such as pursue
them to death or lay violent hands on them? 1. Peter. 2.
Submit your selves, says Peter, that is murder them not: though you suffer as
innocents.


Phi. The Jesuits allow that Princes should be murdered. William Chreictons
letter to sir FRANCIS WALSINGHAM. PARRYES confession under his own handwriting
to the prince. The murdering of Prin^es allowed by their defense of Catholics.
As for murdering of Princes I will not meddle with it. If Parry did attempt
it, reason he should answer it, and not we.


Theo. Your holy Father did commend him, and exhort him to continue the mind
with promise to reward him.


Phi. These be secrets to us.


The. In deed they be the mysteries of Antichrist: but some of your fellows
were well acquainted with the case and consulted in plain speech, if it were
leason to kill the Queeene, as William Chreicton confesses he was.


Phi. There you see he answered no.


Theo. But you resolve yea.


Phi. You hear me say no such word.


Theo. Parry himself collected no less out of your own writings. DOCTOR
ALLENS book, says he, was sent me out of France: It redoubled my former
conceits, every word in it was a warrant to a prepared mind. It taught that
kings may be excommunicated, deprived and violently handled: It proves that
all war cyuill or foreign undertaken for religion is honorable.


Phi. By his patience and yours to, no such thing may justly be collected out
of my words, that Princes may lawfully be murdered by their own subjects.


Theoph. May there not? Go no farther than the very sentence which Parrie
cites. There is no war in the world so just or honorable, be it civil or
foreign, The defense* cap. 5.
as that which is waged for religion. Be not these your own words?


Phi. They be.


Theo. Civil war, is of subjects against their Prince. He that may fight,
may kill.



Phi. It is.


Theo. And in war, he that may lawfully fight, may he not lawfully kill?


Phi. You fetch about otherwise than I meant.


Theo. Murdering and killing of Princes, be gross and unmannerly speeches: but
observing your dainty style, War against the Prince and murdering of the
prince are inevitable consequents
you could not speak it in exacter terms. The issue of war is death, as
every baby knows. If then Subjects may levy war against their Princes for
religion, which is the maine scope of your fifth chapter: Ergo your doctrine is,
they may kill their Princes: unless you can command their swords that they
shall not cut, and their bullets that they shall not enter, when they fight.


Phi. They may save the Princes life, The Prince directly impugned by the
Jesuits arms.
though they win the field.


Theo They may, if they lift; but I pray you Sir, when you fight for religion,
whom do you directly impugn? the people or the Prince?


Phi. That's an other matter.


Theo. And when you must place an other in the steed of the prince ^^posed,
whose life do you chiefly seek for? Not the Princes?


Phi. If the Prince will not otherwise yield.


Theo. And if the Prince do yield, are not your laws such, that you may put
him to death for an heretic?


Phi. Except he revolt from his heresy.


Theo. Then never dissemble, the principal person that you shoot at in your
civil war for religion is the Prince: whose crown you reach at as being
deprived by your censures, and whose life by your laws you can not spare: The
Pharisees did but ce^sure Christ when they put him to death. Acts. 7.
except her highness will forsake Christ, and stand at the Popes mercy: which
God defend.


Phi. That is no murdering but censuring of Princes, by the judgment of holy
Church.


Theo. So the Pharisees did not murder Christ, they did but censure him as
worthy to die: and then delivered him to the secular power: but yet S. Stephen
said unto them: you betrayed and murdered that just one.


Phi. We have the judgment of holy Church for our doings.


Theo. Never talk of your censures, As though the church could be holy that
contradicts the holy Ghost.
as if they were the judgments of holy church, so long as they end in
murders; they be the wicked, injurious and mischeeuous attemptes of
Antichrist, incensing subjects to rebel against the powers which God has
ordained, to their own damnation: and you be the blazers and abettours of that
his impiety: and for lack of better proofs, you bring the Paga^s and
Heathens which knew not God, to fortify your doings.


Phi. They had means to deliver themselves from tyrants: shall we have none?
They had murdering of tyrants, which God has prohibited to all christians
toward private men, much more toward Princes. Deliverance if you would have,
obtain it by prayer, and expect it in peace: those be weapons for Christians:
Somerfields Unfit weapo^^ for Christian men, but fit for Jesuits and heathens.
dagge, and Parries Romans 12.
dagger be devilish means to dispatch princes, used by Heathens to revenge
their pursuers, but to their sharp and heavy punishment before God, who has
taught his an other way to deliver themselves from tyrants: that is, to repay
no man (therefore not Magistrates) evil for evil* to be pacient in
tribulation, to rejoice in hope, not to avenge the^ selves but to bless their
persecutors, to bless them I say and not to curse them: much less to kill
them. These be the manifest precepts of Christ: If you be of God, you will
hear them: If not, in truth you be heathen: and then may you well follow your
forefathers the heathens, in murdering, or as you call it, in depriving and
restraining of Princes.


Phi. The defense, cap. 5. Our bond to Christ more than to our Prince.
The bond and obligation we have entered into for the service of Christ and the
Church, far exceeds all other duty, which we owe to any humane creature:
and therefore where the obedience to the inferior hinders the service of the
other which is superior, we must by Law and order discharge our-selues of
the inferior.


Theo. You say you have heaps of learning: sure you show little. There is no
doubt, but the duty which we owe to Christ and his church, far exceeds the
service that we can owe, We may yield God his due with out rebelling against
the Prince: marry that is by suffering the Princes pleasure which the Jesuits
cannot brook.
or must yield to any humane creature: and also against the superior we must
yield no obedience to the inferior: and thence you may rightly conclude, that
we must not obey man above, or against God: but when you infer that if
Princes command some things against Go^, you must therefore obey them in
nothing: this is wicked and most absurd sophistry. We must not obey them in
those points which they command against God: in all other things we must;
because God has so prescribed us to do.

Take an example of the Tyrants that were in the Apostles time. Did they not
directly command against God, not in one or two, but in all matters of
religion? It is evident they did. Did the Apostles thence conclude that the
christians should take them for no Princes; but by law and order be discharged
of all other service due unto them as you do. It is evident they did not. Yea
rather they earnestly adjured all christians to be subject to them in all other
things, and even in those things which were commanded against God, to The
Jesuits in no wise can away with this submissio^ to the swords of Princes:
and therefore they imagine Princes may be deposed: and by that coulor also
resisted.
submit themselves with meekness and reverence, to endure the Magistrates
pleasure, though not to obeie his will. Why then in matters of so great moment
bring you so light and vain delusions? Why repeat you so often the same
antecedent, and never attend the fault of your consequent?


Phi. The defense, cap. 5. How man and wife may depart for Christ. Theod. L.
Man. de haere^.
The wife if she cannot live with her own husband (being an Infidel or an
heretic) without injury and dishonor to God; she may depart from him, or
contrariwise he from her, for the like cause: neither owes the innocent
party, nor the other can lawefullie claim any conjugal duty or debt in
this case.

The very bondslaue, which is in an other kind no less bound to his Lord and
master, than the subject to his Sovereign: may also by ancient Imperial
Laws depart and refuse to obey or serve him, if he become an heretic, yea
ipso facto he is made free.

Cap. ^in. Ex^^. de haere^.
Finally the parents that become heretics lose the superiority and dominion
they have by Law or nature over their own children.

Therefore let no man marvel that in case of heresy the Sovereign loses his
superiority and right over his people and kingdom.


Theophil. If we should grant you these three precedentes, even as your
self set them down, Husbands, Parents and Masters loose not their right by
Gods Law though they be heretics.
they would nothing further your conclusion.

That heretical Husbands, Masters and Parents loose their right and interest
which they otherwise have in their wives, servants and children: is no
position of Gods Law, but a terror devised and established by the Princes
power to fraie men from Heresy. Now Princes appoint punishments for their
Subjects, not for themselves: therefore no good consequent can be framed
from these paternes to the deprivation of Princes. The Jesuits would punish
Princes in the same sort that princes punish their subjects.
It is over much boldness in you, Masters, without authority to require to
punish your Superiors in such sort, as they with authority punish their
subjects. They be Princes, you be not: they bear the sword to revenge
wickedness, you do not: they may dispose of their people be they Masters or
Parents, you may not dispose of them being Magistrates: Much less may you
turn the Laws, which they made to punish subjects, against themselves: That
were to make them not Princes over others, but Subjects under you; which I
trust they be not.

You see the disparison of your examples: and so the disiuncture of your
argument: Heresy dissolueth not matrimony. 1. Cor. 7.
and yet your supposementes be not simply true. Neither infidelity nor
heresy by Gods Law does dissolve matrimony. The Apostle wills the
believing wife to stay with the unbelieving husband: if he be so content:
and our Savior will have no man put away his wife for heresy, Mat. 19.
but only for incontinencie. Where danger of life is feared, or bodily wrong
offered; the Magistrate may permit the wife to dwell asunder from her husband
till he be reclaimed: The subjects more bound to the Prince than the servant
is to his master.
but in no case to be divorced.

The Servant is not so surely bound to his Master as the Subject is to the
Prince: power of life and death the Master has none: the Prince has; refuge
against the Master the Servant has to the common governor of them both, The
Prince may discharge the servant; but no man ca^ discharge the subject. 1. Pet.
2.
which is the Magistrate: the Subject has no refuge against his Sovereign,
but only to God by prayer and patience: and therefore the Prince may demise
the Servant, if the Master be like to corrupt him: but no man can discharge
the Subject, though the Prince go about to oppress him, and that your own
example will conclude. The Apostles neither did nor could set servants free
from their masters for any cause.
For who set free the Servant from his Master, the Apostles or Princes? You
know the Apostles neither did nor might attempt any such thing. Peter in Gods
behalf requires all Servant with fear to obey their Masters (excepting
neither infideles nor heretics) not only if they were good and courteous, but
though they were froward. For that is thanksworthie if a man for conscience
toward God (that is chiefly for religion) endure grief and suffer wrong
undeserved. If then Peter, whom you make the Pillor of your Popedom, neither
would, nor could deprive a poor crafts-man (though an infidel or an heretic)
of his servant or prentize: what right can your holy Father now have to
deprive Princes of their crowns for those or any other causes: and to absolve
their subjects from all obedience, though they would yield it and have sworn
it?

That Parents should loose the regiment and authority which by nature and law
they have over their children; is a late Popes decree, which we little regard:
and not found in the extrauagants, as you quote it, Cap. ^in. but in the
Decretals of Sixtus, No law gives the son leave to dishonor or disherite his
father.
lib. 5. de haereticis, cap. 2. and were it to be found in ancient imperial
Laws that heretics should not bring up their children, for fear of infecting
them, which we greatly mislike not: yet no Law, Gods, nor man's does license the
son to dishonor, relinquish, forswear and murder his father, though a Turk
or a Saracene, as you teach subjects to use their Princes.


Phi. Thus much may (as we trust) suffice with all reasonable indifferent
persons, The defense, cap. 5.
for defense of our brethren.


Theo. Thus much suffices to convince you of that wherewith you were charged:
that is with liking, laboring, persuading, and expecting the deprivation and
destruction of your natural and lawful Sovereign: If Princes may not be
deposed, ergo civil war to displace them is a wicked and wilful rebellion
against God and his ordinance.
And since the foundation of your doings has neither warrant in the word of
God, nor example in the church of Christ for a thowsande years, as we trust
the reader by this time perceives, but only depends on the late violent and
wicked treacheries of Popes, swelling with earthly pride, and savoring of
filthy gain, who for the readier atchiuing of their interprise, began with
cursing, and always ended in sowing seditions, menaging rebellions, kindling
wars, allowing periuries, upholding treasons, and shaking the frame of the
earth with horrible tumults: I hope no Christian subject will be so unwise as to
believe you, or so wicked as to follow you: seeing you pretend religion, and
defend rebellion, and come now to the public patrocination of that which all this while you secretly cloked with cunning and subtle euasions: knowing that
God is the ordainer of Princes, and will be the revenger of all that presume to
displace them or resist the^: he having expressly commanded them to be served,
obeyed, and honored.


Phi. It shall not be amiss perhaps to set down the judgment and practice of
Protestants in (this very) case: The defense, cap. 4. The Protestants opinion
and practice for deposition of Princes in case of false Religion.
which though it weigh little or nothing with us, as being altogether both done
and spoken of seditious and partial affection to their heresy, and against
the lawful Magistrate of God: yet you seeing (your) own masters against (you)
shall well perceive that the resisting of Princes and Magistrates in cause of
religion, as also the subjects taking arms for their defense in such a case,
is no way to be accounted treason: but most lawful according to (your) new
Gospel.


Theo. As for the newness of our Gospel, we say with Tertullian: If Christ
were ever and before all, Tertul. de Virg. velandis.
the truth (of his Gospel) is as ancient and everlasting. Let them therefore
look to themselves, to whom that is new, which in it self is old. Masters
we have none, but Christ, neither bind we our selves to the will of any but
only of God. The Jesuits abuse the names of protestants for the colou^ing of
their conspiracies.
And though by your own confession in the next Section before, we need not
busy our selves to defend every private man's writing or action concerning
(this) matter: yet least by deprauing the sense and abusing the words of some
that never spoke of the case in question between us, you should commend
rebellion to the common people as allowed of either side, yours and ours, in
cause of religion: I will not be grieved to sit their sayings, and to
consider how far they make with you or against you.


Phi. First (your) grand-master John Calvin puts down his oracle as a
conclusion approved of (your) whole sect and confraternity in these words: The
defense. cap. 5. In Dan. cap. 6. verse. 22.25.
Abdicant se potestate, terreni Principes, dum insurgunt contra Deum: immo
indigni sunt qui censeantur in hominum numero. Potius ergo conspuere oportet in
illorum capita, quam illis parere, vbi sic proteruiunt vt velint spoliare Deum
suo iure, etc. Which in english is thus: The doctrine of Father CALVINE.
Earthly Princes do bereave themselves of al authority when they do erect
themselves against God, yea they are unworthy to be accounted in the number of
men: and therefore we must rather spit upon their heads, than obey them;
when they become so proud, or perverse, that they will spoil God of his
right; and to the same place I further refer the Reader for his instruction.


Theo. Calvin is so well known to those that be learned or wise for his
great pains and good labors in the church of God: that a few snarling Friars
can not impeach his name, though you never so wretchedly pervert his words.
Calvin wrested by the Jesuits.



Phi. We pervert them not, we allege them as they lie.


Theo. Calvin in that place speaks not one word of depriving of Princes of
their Crowns, or resisting them with arms: but only shows that Daniell did
rightly defend himself for not obeying the kings wicked edict, because it was
joined with the manifest dishonor of God and restraint of his service, which no
king can prohibit.

By Abdicant se potestate, he means not they forfeite their Crowns, but that
they loose their power to command in those things, Calvin says Princes
have no power to command against God, but he does not say that subjects may
displace them with arms.
which in other cases, that be lawful, they notwithstanding retain. And
though the phrase, to spit upon their heads seem somewhat hard: yet the
comparison so standing as he makes it: that is, whether we were better utterly
to contemn their impious edictes, and to defy such sinful acts to their
faces, which is meant by spitting at them, or else obey them spoiling God of his
right, and as it were pulling him out of heaven; I say we must no way consent
to yield any regard or reverence to their idolatrous rage and pride against
God. This is all that Calvin in vehement words, as his manner is, urges; and
this is far from rebelling and pursuing Princes with arms, as you would have
his words to sound.


Phi. Let the Reader view the place and see whether your construction be true
or no.


Theo. With a good will. Not a word of using weapon or violence in all that
place of Calvin.
If you find one word there of taking or using weapon or violence against the
king, I yield the whole. For how could any such thing be grounded upon Daniels
example? He submitted himself to be cast to the Lions for the breach of the
kings commandment. And when he was mightily delivered from their jaws by
the hand of God, all that he said to the king, was, against thee O king I did
no evil, meaning in that he served GOD, though the king by his Law had
prohibited him so to do for thirty days. Upon that Calvin says: Daniell
could not obey the kings edict, but he should deny God. He sinned not
against the king, when he constantly went forward in the exercise of prayer to
God. Daniel therefore, does rightly Dan. 6. Calvin. in 6. Dan. verse. 22. He
defended his Innocence with reverent words, as every subject may, not with
violent weapons.
defend himself that he did no wickedness against the king, in that, being
bound to obey the precepts of God he neglected the kings commandment to the
contrary. Then follow your words: that Princes loose their right to be obeyed,
when they presume to command against God: and that we were better defy their
edictes to their faces, than obey them when they wax so froward that they will
put God from his right and sit in his throne.


Phi. For declaration of (this) text and for cutting off all cauillation about
the interpretation of his words, (your) brother Beza shall speak next, The
defense, cap. 4. The doctrine of brother Beza.
who allows and highly commends in writing, the fighting in France for
religion, against the laws and lawful king of that country, saying in his
Epistle dedicatorie of his new Testament to the Queen of England her self:
That the Nobility of France, (under the noble Prince of Condy) laid the first
foundation of restoring true Christian religion in France, In editione anno
1564. The opinion of the congregation art. 39.
by consecrating most happily their blood to God in the battle of Druze. Where
of also the Ministers of the reformed French Churches (as their phrase is) do
give their common verdict in the confession of their faith, thus: We affirm
that subjects must obey the Laws, pay tribute, bear all burdens imposed, and
sustain the yoke even of infidel Magistrates: so for all that, that the
supreme dominion and due of God be not violated.


Theo. You have already belied Calvin, and now you take the like course with
Beza and the French churches. Their speech can be no declaration of Caluines
words; if they did lean that way which you make them, as they do not: and
therefore this is but a Friars trick to abuse both writers and Readers.


Phi. Beza highly commends the fighting in France for religion, against the
Laws, and lawful king of that country.


Theo. The battle, which Beza speaks of, The battle of Druze.
was neither against the Laws, nor the king of that country. That old fore
the Duke of Guise, hating the Nobles of France as being himself a stranger,
The Nobles of France repressed the fury of the Guise, the king being under age.
and seeking to tredde them down, whom he knew inclined to religion, that he
might strengthen him self and his house to take the crown, if ought should
befall the kings line: as his son the young Duke at this present in arms for
that cause does not stick to profess watching his opportunity, whiles the
king of France was yet under years, armed himself to the field, as his
son now does, and against all Law with open force murdered many hundredth
subjects, as they were making their prayers to God in their assemblies: upon
pretense that their service was not permitted by the Laws of that Realm. The
Nobles and Princes of France perceiving his malice and seeing his injustice,
that being a subject as they were, he would with private and armed violence
murder innocents, neither conuented nor condemned, which the king himself, if
he had been of age, by the laws of their Country could not do, gathered
together to keep their own lives from the fury of that violent bloodsucker:
and in that case if they did repel force, what have you to say against it, or
why should not Beza praise the Prince of Condy and others for defending the
Laws of God and that Realm against the Guises open injury with the
consecrating of their blood most happily to God?


Phi. The Duke did nothing without the king and the Queen mother: and
therefore impugning the one they impugn the other.


Theo. The king was young and in the Guises hands: and therefore his consent
with the Peers and states of his Realm, that a subject should do execution
upon his people by the sword without all order of justice, could be nothing
worth. The king had neither age to discern it, nor freedom to deny it, nor
law to decree it. The King had neither age nor Law to license the Guise to
murder his people. L^x Salica.



Phi. The Queen mother had her son in custody and not the Duke: and with
her consent were these things done.


Theo. Of the Queen mother of France, I will say no more, but that the
ancient law of that Realm did bar her from the Crown: and therefore her
consenting with the Guise might sharpen the doer, but not authorize the deed.


Phi. Defend you then their bearing arms against the king?


Theo. To deprive the king or annoy the Realm they bare none; but to save
themselves from the violent and wrongful oppression, of one that abused the
kings youth to the destruction of his laws, Nobles and commons.


Phi. As you say.


Theo. And you shall never prove the contrary.

But these things are without our limits. We be scholars not soldiers,
divines not lawyers, English not French. The circumstances of their wars no
man exactly knows besides themselves: as also we know not the laws of that
Land. Bezaes judgment of bearing arms against the Prince out of his own works.
We will therefore not enter these acts which have so many parts, precedentes,
causes, concurrents, and those to us unknown, and yet all to be discussed and
proved before Beza may be charged with this opinion by his commending the
battle of Druze: but will rather give you his undoubted judgment out of his
own works quite against that which you slander him with.

Purposely treating of the obedience which is due to Magistrates, thus he
resolves: Beza in confessione fidei Christianae and eiusdem cum Papisticis
erroribus Collatione, cap. 5. sect. 45.
Quod autem attinet ad priuatos homines, tenere illos oportet plurimum inter se
differ, iniuriam infer and iniuriam pati: Iniuriam enim pati nostrum est,
sic praecipiente Domino, and suo exemplo nobis praeeunte, quum nobis illam vi
arcere non licet ex nostrae vocationis praescripto; extra quam nefas est nobis
vel pedem ponere: neque aliud vllum remedium hic proponitur priuatis hominibus
tyranno subiectis, praeter vitae emendationem* and preces and lacrymas. As
touching private men, they must hold great difference between doing and
suffering wrong. It is our part to suffer injury: the Lord so commanding and
teaching us by his own example, for so much as it is not lawful for us to
repel it with force, by the prescript of our calling, from the which we may
not step one foot: neither is there here proposed any other remedy for private
men that are under a tyrant, but the amending of their lives, and therewithal
prayers and tears.

And making a plain distinction between not obeying and taking arms, when
the Magistrate commands against God, he says: Ibidem, cap. 5. sectio. 45.
This rule is firm and sure, that we must obey God rather than man, so often
as we can not obey the precepts of men, but we must violate the authority of
that supreme King of Kings and Lord of Lords: yet so that we remember it is
one thing not to obey them, and an other thing to resist, or take arms, which
God has not permitted thee. Priuatme^ may disobay a wicked prince but not bear
arms against him. To you Sir slanderer.
So the midwiues are praised that obeyed not Pharaoh: and the Apostles and all
the Prophets and Martyrs could by no tyrants be brought to betray the truth
with their silence. What then we think of the subjects duty to the
Magistrate, you shall far more certainly and truly learn by this our doctrine,
than by their slanders which are not ashamed to join us with the frantike
Anabaptists subuerting the Magistrates authority.

The wars of the French ministers lewdly perverted by the Jesuits.
How the confession of the reformed churches in France should allow rebellion,
I see no conjecture in their words, unless a rebel may have them to mistake
and deprave at his pleasure. Subjects must obey the laws, pay tribute, bear
al burdens imposed, and sustain the yoke even of infidel Magistrates: so for
all that, that the supreme dominion and due of God be not violated. What
mislike you in these words? Would you that Infidels should be served before, or
above God?


Phi. Their meaning is that if Gods due be once violated, we must no longer pay
tribute, nor obey the Laws of any Prince.


Theo. How gather you that out of this place? Their words sound otherwise.
Subjects must obey the laws, If the supreme dominion of God be violated by
the commandment of any prince, that precept may be well disobeied but not
the prince displaced.
and sustain the yoke even of Infidels, so that the supreme dominion of God be
not violated.


Phi. If that be violated, they must obey no longer, but elect an other Prince.


Theo. That is your rebellious inclination, not their position: They say
subjects must obey Princes ( so) far forth ( as the supreme dominion of God
be not violated). In any matter if the choice come between God and the
Prince, which of the twain shall be served and obeyed, God must ever be
preferred.


Phi. Surely they mean, that if once the Magistrate violate the supreme
dominion of God, we must account him no longer a magistrate.


Theo. The devil himself can show no greater malice than to pervert that
which is well spoken: and to force a leude sense of his own on an other man's
words. It is evident they never meant that if the Magistrate once violate Gods
due, the people might reject him, for then were it not needeful at al to
sustain the yoke of a^ infidel, as their own words import; Infidels must be
obaied so far forth as their precepts tend not to the dishonor of Gods holy
name.
because he can not be an Infidel, except he first violate the supreme
dominion of God by commanding against his truth in matters of religion; and
therefore they meant as their words lie; that even Infidels if they be Princes
must be obeyed, but so that Gods due be ever forprised. If they presume to
violate the dominion which God has reserved to himself, we may not rebel
(that is your Iesuitical doctrine) but disobey them, in that or any point that
is prescribed by man against the will of God, and submit our selves to endure
persecution for Mat. 5.
righteousness sake: which, as our Savior assures us, is not without great
and happy recompense.


Phi. Zuinglius likewise a cater-cosen to the Caluinistes in religion, writes
thus: The defense, cap. 4. The defense of Zuing. lib. 4. epist. Zuing. and
O^col. fol. 186. 4. Reg. 21.
If the Empire of Rome, or what other sovereign soever, should oppress the
sincere Religion and we negligently suffer the same, we shall be charged with
contempt, no less than the oppressors thereof themselves: whereof we have an
example in the fifteenth of Jeremy, where the destruction of the people is
prophesied; for that they suffered their king Manasses, being impious and
ungodly, to be unpunished.

And more plain in an other place. Art. 42. explan. fol. 84.
When kings (says he) rule unfaithfully, and otherwise than the rule of the
Gospel prescribes, they may, with God, be deposed: as, when they punish not
wicked persons, but specially when they advance the ungodly, as idle Priests,
etc. Such may be deprived of their dignity, as Saul was.


Theo. I undertake not to discuss or defend each several man's opinion or
speech. The manifest for^es of common wealths make diverse men speak diversely
of the magistrates sword.
The Romans we know could never abide in their city ye name of a king. The
commonwealthes of Venice, Millan, Florence and Genua are of the same mind.
Many states have governors for life or for years as they best liked that first
erected their policies: and yet a sovereignty still remaning somwhere in the
people, somewhere in the Senate, somwhere in the Prelates and Nobles that elect
or assist the Magistrate: who has his jurisdiction allotted and prefixed unto
him, thus far and no further, and may be resisted and recalled from any
tyrannous excess, by the general and public consent of the whole state where
he governs. In Germany the Emperor himself has his bounds appointed
him which he may not pass by the laws of the Empire: Germany a free state,
and the Emperors authority limited by the Laws of the Empire.
and the Princes, Dukes and cities that are under him, have power to govern
and use the sword, as Gods ministers in their own charges. And though for the
maintenance of the Empire, they be subject to such orders as shall be decreed
in the convent of all their States, and according to that direction are to
furnish the Emperor with men and money for his necessary wars and defenses:
yet if he touch their policies, infringe their liberties, or violate the
specialties which he by oath and order of the Empire is bound to keep: they
may lawfully resist him, and by force reduce him to the ancient and received
form of Government, or else repel him as a tyrant, and set an other in his
place by the right and freedom of their Country. The germans proportion their
speeches according to the state of their country.
Therefore the Germans doings or writings can help you little in this
question. They speak according to the laws and rights of the Empire:
themselves being a very free state and bearing the sword as lawful
Magistrates to defend their liberties and prohibit injury, against all
oppressors, the Emperor himself not excepted.

In this sense, Zuinglius may say that if the Empire of Rome, Zuinglius me^t
this of Princes elected and limited.
or any other Sovereign should oppress the truth and they (that have rightful
power by the laws of their country to withstand) should negligently suffer the
same, they shall be charged with contempt no less than the oppressors
themselves: but that subjects and such as are only bound to obey, and not by
the Laws of the Land authorized to use the sword, should take weapon in
hand to displace the Prince and change the state, that Zuinglius never said
nor much less that the Pope might warrant such private violence.


Phi. For his example he brings the men of Judah and Jerusalem whom God by
Jeremy threatened to destroy for that they suffered their king Manasses, being
impious and ungodly, to be unpunished, and yet the people of Israel had no such
Soueraingty over their king.


Theo. What Sovereignty the whole people of Israel had over their kings is a
question amongst the learned, and Zuinglius might be of opinion they had. When
Saul would have put Jonathan his son to death: the people would not suffer him
so to do, 1. Sam. 14.
but delivered Jonathan that he died not. When David purposed the reducing of
the Arc, his speech to the people was: 1. Chron. 13. 1. Kings. 12.
If it please you we will send to the rest of our brethren, that they may
assemble themselves unto us. After Salomons death all the congregation of
Israel came and said to Roboam, make thy fathers yoke, which he put upon us,
lighter, and we will serve thee: as if it had lien in their choice to be subject
or free from the kings power. The people likewise took Jeremy, when he had
prophesied against them and said, thou shall die the death. Ierem. 26.


These places have persuaded some and might lead Zuinglius to think, that the
people of Israel, notwithstanding they called for a king, yet reserved to
themselves sufficient authority to ouerrule their king in those things which
seemed expedient and needful for the public welfare: else God would not
punish the people for the kings impiety which they must suffer and might not
redress. But yet in the 15. of Jeremy there is no such cause pretended: their
consent rather and zeal to please Manasses in his wickedness, God never
required the people to displace their King, but not to consent to his wickedness
and their general shrinking back from truth so lately professed under
Ezechias, for fear of his cruelty that did next succeed: were the causes why
God would punish both the king and the Realm. For God never required of the
people to displace their Prince that we can read, but only that they should
rather yield their lives than forsake his truth, when any tyrant offered to
deface his glory.


Phi. By Zuinglius decision, the people may depose the Prince.


Theo. Zuinglius does show the causes for which magistrates may be justly
deplaced by those that have authority to do it: but he gives no private man
leave to take the sword or offer violence to any Prince, though he be a tyrant:
again, he speaks of Rulers elected and limited, not succeeding and absolute:
In which ease by the Laws of sundry Realms, much is permitted, which
otherwise may not be presumed.


Phi. Nay he speaks of all sorts of Princes whether they be made by
succession, election or usurpation.


Theo. In that Article he mentions them, but he neither resolves any
certainetie of them, or allows any force to be used against them. Of
hereditarie succession these be his words: Explanat. articulo 42.
Mihi ergo compertum non est vnde hoc sit, vt regna per successiones and quasi
per manus posteris tradantur. I confess I have no skill in this how kingdoms
should be derived to posterity by succession and as it were by hand. If then a
tyrant chosen by no man get a kingdom by inheritance: which has his foundation
I know not how: Ibidem. A tyrant inheriting may not be displaced by Zuinglius
opinion.
far hunc oportet: sed quomodo imperitabit? he must be endured, but how shall
he govern? His answer is: Regnum aliquo sapiente administrandu^ erit, the
kingdom must be governed by some wise man: that shall assist him. If a tyrant
succeeding may not be repelled from his inheritance, but suffered and ass^sted,
then by this confession may he not be deposed.

And that no violence may be used to any Prince promoted by succession or
election, his words are plain. Ibidem. Princes may neither be murdered nor
assaulted with any tumult by Zuinglius judgment.
Disputing quo pacto mouendus sit officio by what means a magistrate may be
displaced, he says: Non est vt eum trucides, nec vt bellu^ and tumultis quis
exitet, quia in pace vocauit nos Deus. Thou may not kill him, nor leauie war
or any tumult against him: because God has called us in peace.


Phi. How then shall he be displaced since no Prince will yield his crown
without force?


Theo. He answers, hic iam labor est: this is the difficulty: but his conceit
is, that they which chose him, should denou^ce him unfit to wear the crown:
and if he yield, it is well; if not, they must offer their lives in so good a
cause as to die for justice and truth. Ibidem.



Phi. In faith that were folly, first to provoke a tyra^t with depriuatio^, and
after to lay down their necks to his fury.


The. Yet that is his resolution: Ibidem.
for he adds, Qui hoc far no^ possunt, ferant insolente^ tyrannu^, They
that ca^ not abide (to die for the defense of justice) let the^ tolerate the
pride of the tyra^t.


Phi. Are you of that mind?


Theo. You are not to seek after al our reasoning what I think; I have
meetely well repeated it. And as for Zuinglius though he measure all Nations by
the Germans, and proportion other kingdoms to the Empire: and in that respect
speak somewhat strangely; yet he justifies no tumult against a tyrant, much
less rebellion against lawful and absolute Princes: which is the case at this
instant in question betwixt us.

That touching rebellion: now for succession, as I muse at his words, so I
like not his judgment, when he says, he can not tell whence it is that
kingdoms should go by succession. Succession most usual in christian kingdoms
and allowed by God himself.
The Roman Empire it self from Constantine the great and before till the time
of Otho the third, that is 700. years and upward, went by succession; save
where the right lines failed, or sedition disturbed the heir. The greatest
kingdoms of the West parts, as France, England, Spain, Scotland and others
have always gone by succession since they were divided from the Empire, and
never by election. The like I might say almost of all profane kingdoms and
Monarchies: where not election but succession has prevailed. But omit them:
God him self gave this to David as a great blessing, of the fruit of thy body
will I set upon thy throne: Psalm. 132.
and this was it which was denied to Saull for revenge of his disobedience:
Thou have done foolishly: for the Lord had now established thy kingdom upon
Israel for ever. All the recompense which Iehu had for his zealous service was
this, 1. Sam. 13.
Because thou have deligently executed that which was right in mine eyes, 2.
Kings. 10.
(therefore) shall thy sons unto the fourth generation sit on the throne of
Israel. So that succession in kingdoms has not only the consent of al ages
and Nations: but the manifest subscription of God himself, that it is his
special favor and blessing to continue the successions of godly Princes.


Phi. And what our english Protestants write or think of this matter, The
defense, cap. 4.
you shall well perceive, by their opinion and high approbation of Wiats
rebellion in Queen Mary's days: whereof one of your chief Ministers called
Goodma^ thus speaks in his treatise entitled; Goodmans opinion. Cap. 14. a
page 204. ad page 212.

Goodmans private opinion long since corrected by him self, cannot prejudice
the whole realm.

Goodma^ did not hold that lawful Princes might be thrust from there Crowns,
but that Queen MARY was no lawful magistrate.


How superior Magistrates ought to be obeyed. Wiat did but his duty, and it
was the duty of all others that profess the Gospel, to have risen with him,
maintenance of the same. His cause was just, and they all were traitors that
took not part with him. O noble Wyat, thou art now with God, and those worthy
men that died for that happy interprise.


Theo. It is much that you measure the whole Realm by one man's mouth: and more
that you draw the words which he spoke, from the meaning which he had, to
warrant your rebellions. The party which you name at the time when he wrote
took Queen Mary for no lawful Prince: which particular and false supposal
beguiled him and made him think the better of Wyats war; but our question is
of lawful Princes not of violent intruders. And therefore Goodmans opinion
which himself has long since disliked, is no way seruice-able for your
seditions.


Ph. Hold you Queen Mary for an intruder?


Theo. Not I, but he then did when he spoke these words: and so the case does
not concord.


Phi. We take Princes deposed if they stand out, to be intruders: and so by
your own rule may debell them with arms.


Theo. Prove first you may depose them; and then if they yield not, use your
right.


Phi. We take them for deposed.


Theo. So did the Jews take Christ for a blasphemer of God, and deceiuer of
the people, and yet that nothing impeached his sanctity or sincerity. The
Princes right may not go by your thoughts. You may quickly persuade
yourselues, what you list, as you teach the boys and girls with us to pretend
conscience, when in deed they should blush at their shameful ignorance.


Phi. What the Scottish Ministry defines in this question, is plain, by the
verdict of John Knokes their mightiest Prophet: The defense, cap. 5.

The judgment of the Scottish ministry.

John Knokes Ibide^ page 77.


the argument of a treatise of this matter being set down by himself thus: If
the people have either rashly promoted any manifest wicked person, or else
ignorantly chosen such an one, as after declares himself unworthy of regiment
above the people of God (and such be all idolaters and cruel persecutors) most
justly may the same men depose and punish him.


Theo. Were it in a point of doctrine, or part of faith, it had yet some show
to charge the rest with one man's verdict: but in a singular and superfluous
assertion it has no more ground, than if we should pronounce al Popes, to be
coniurers and Atheistes, because John the twelfth, and Syluester the second
were such: or suspect al Spaniardes to be as loving to their brethren as
Alfonsus was to Sleid. lib. 17.
Ioannes Diazius, whose head he claue a sunder with an hatchet, and the
Romanistes to be as virtuously disposed as ever were Sleid. lib. 19.
Petrus Aloisius the son, a famous citizen of Sodom, or lib. 21.
Paulus the third his father a fit bishop for Gomorra, which ywis would offend
you.

Knokes book I have not seen, and therefore the circumstances I do not
know: yet the very words which you bring, prove that he spoke not of
Princes entering by inheritance, but of Magistrates promoted by election: and
that not a part of the people but the very same States that elected, by their
common consent may forsake their Governor; if he show himself unworthy of the
regiment: but whether he mean they may do this by the law of God in all
kingdoms or by the laws of the Land in some places, these words do not
express, only he says they that promoted any, may justly for these causes
depose them: which we grant to be true, if the laws of the Realm warrant the
promoters in that action as in some places they do. If his meaning be
otherwise, as we see not his reasons, so we receive not his speeches, though by
his own words he be clean out of our question: for he says not that men
may bear arms against inheritours, but that they which choose one Governor,
have the same right to choose another if he be unfit: which is nothing to
Princes that inherit, nor to subjects that are absolutely bound to obey: as
in this Realm and some others they be.


Phi. So Luther also the Protestants Elias being asked his opinion of the
Almanes confederacy, The defense, cap. 4.

The opinion and definition of Luther. Sled. hist. li. 8.


made at Smalcalde against Charles the fifth their lawful and noble Emperor,
answered: that in deed he was in doubt for a time, whether they might take
arms against their supreme Magistrate, or no: but afterward seeing the
extremity of things, and that religion could not otherwise be defended, nor
themselves: he made no conscience of the matter, but either Caesar, or any,
waging wars in his name, might be resisted.

Sleidan also records that the Duke of Saxony and the Lantzgraue, gave this
reason of their taking arms against their supreme Magistrate: Lib. 21.
For as much (say they) as Caesar intends to destroy the true religion and
our ancient liberty, he gives us cause enough, why we may with good
conscience resist him, as both by profane and sacred histories may be proved.

The same writer reports the like of the Ministers of Magdeburge, Lib. 22.
declaring how the inferior may defend himself against the superior,
compelling him to do against the truth and rule of Christ's laws.


Theo. It was skill not to report these places as you found them; least you
should open their meaning which makes nothing for you: and bewray your malice
in omitting the limitation of their words to serve the licenciousnes of your
weapons. Luther as a divine taught constantly and truly that no Magistrate
should be resisted, exception to that doctrine he saw none in the word of
God, as at this day we do not, but that subjection was due to the Magistrate
were he tyrant, heretic or infidel: What Luther taught of obedience to
magistrates.
subjection he meant to obey the princes will if it were agreeable with Gods, or
else to endure the sword if the Prince opposed himself against God: Yet when
Charles the fifth determined to war with the Princes and cities that had
renounced the Pope, and the Germane Lawyers made evident demonstration, that
the free States by the laws of the Empire might defend their liberty against
Caesar him self if he would impugn it, to whom they were not subject but
with that condition: and no liberty more urgent or necessary than liberty of
conscience, Luther not reuersing his former opinion, but expou^ding himself
with an other position which he always held, that the Gospel does not bar nor
abolish any politik laws, Sleid. lib. 8.

The Gospel does not bar the politic laws of any country.


resolved that in such extremity, having the laws of ye empire for their
warrant, which he knew not before, they might enter a league, not to displace
Caesar as you do, but to defend themselves and their ancient freedom against
Caesar or any that would disturb them in Caesar's name. This is the right
intent o^ Luthers words: and this I ween you will hardly refute or convert to
your purpose.

Sleid. lib. 8.
Luther, says Sleida^, had always taught that the Magistrate should not be
resisted: and his book of that matter was exta^t. Yet when the lawiers in that
co^sultatio^ had proved that the laws (of the Empire) permitted resista^ce in
some cases, The Laws of the Empire permit resistance.
and that this was one of those cases which the laws did mention, Luther
plainly confessed he was ignorant thereof before, that any such thing was
permitted (by the laws of the empire) and because the gospel does not repeal
nor abolish the laws of any commonwealth, and the time was now so doutfull and
dangerous that not only the laws themselves, but the very force of conscience
and necessity did lead the^ to arms: he said they might make a league to
defend themselves, though Caesar or any in is name, would wage war against the^.

The Duke of Saxony and the La^tzgraue made the same reply to the Emperor when
they were proscribed by him, Sleid. lib. 18. not the 21. as you quote.

The states of Germany not subject to the Emperor but with condition.


If the Emperor, say they, had kept his bo^ds and covenants, we would have done
our duties: but because he began first to make the breach, the fault is his.
For since he attempteth to root out religion and subvert our liberty: he
gives us cause enough to resist him with good conscience. The matter standing
as it does, we may resist, as may be showed both by sacred and profane stories.
Unjust violence is not Gods ordinance, neither are we bound to him by any other
reason, than if he keep the conditions, on which he was created Emperor.

Sleid. 22.
The same defense was alleged not by the ministers but by the magistrates of
Magdeburg. So our religion and liberty left us by our forefathers may be
permitted we refuse no kind of duty that ought to be yielded to Caesar or the
empire. Now by the laws themselves it is provided that the inferior Magistrate
shall not infringe the right of the superior: and so likewise, if the
magistrate exceed the limittes of his power and co^mmaund that which is wicked,
This is true in free States but not in absolute subjects.
not only we need not obey him, but if he offer force we may resist him.

I ask not what fault you can find with their answer: but what propinquity or
neernes has your fact to theirs? They were magistrates and bare the sword in
their own dominions: The difference between the Ies. and the Germans
resistance.
you are private men, and want lawful authority to use the sword. Their states be
free and may resist any wrong by the laws of ye Empire: you be subjects and
simply bound by the laws of your country to obey the prince, or abide the
pain, which the public state of this realm has prefixed. The germane Emperor
is elected, and his power abated by the liberties and prerogatives of his
princes that ow not many services, and those co^dicional. The Queen of England
inheriteth and has one and the same right over all her subjects, be they
Nobles or others. And that which is most to be detested in you: they having so
good warrant for their interprise did but ioin together to save themselves, and
their countries from servitude and subversion: you having nor one of those
reasons to justify your doings, take arms to pull the prince from her throne and
to shorten her days with violence.


Phi. We have better reason for our doings, than the Germans had for theirs. We
have the laws of holy church and ye judgment of Christ's vicar to bear us out.


Theo. The church of christ has not to do with delivering or drawing ye
temporal sword. She cannot make laws for princes crowns: No law permits the
Pope to depose Princes, but that which is of his own making.
neither ca^ she license private men to stand in arms against a Magistrate:
much less ca^ the Pope, whose presumptuus and proud meddling with the swords and
scepters of earthly princes, no law, gods nor man's, but of his own making, did
ever allow. If this be all the warrant you have for bearing arms against your
prince, ye Germans for ought y^ I see may be commended for retaining their
liberty: The defense, cap. 4.
and you not excused for impugning authority.


Phi. The Protestants of al sects do both hold and practice it, England it
self specially alowing of the same. And therefore there is no treason in this
case, if we follow the present divinity of England, nor new example if we
respect the furious atte^pts and rebellio^s of Scotland, Fla^ders, France, and
Germany, against their superiors, for maintenance of their heresy, and al well
allowed by the ministry of every province. And upon these examples you should
look (my masters of England) when you make so much ado for one poor
co^motion, made in defense of the catholics, in 26. years space of the
greatest persecution and tribulation that ever was since Goths and Va^dals
times. Where if the Q. had holden her ancestors faith and had ruled over so
many protestants but a quarter of the time, afflicting the^, as she has done
catholics (though perhaps not her self so much as her unmerciful Ministers)
her Majesty should have seen other manner of attempts against her state and
quietness, than have fallen by Catholics either in England or Ireland in this
her reign.


Theo. A boulde face, and a bitter tongue be your best objections throughout
your book. The Protestants, you say, of al sects do both hold and practice it,
England it self, specially allowing of the same. How loud a ly the first is,
we have already seen: now to the rest. The tumults of any subjects against
their sovereigns as we do not allow: so may we not co^demn the poor afflicted
christians, our neighbors, before we hear them what they can say for their
defense. The rage of popish persecutors is able to set good men besides their
byas.
Admit the^ to their answer, and then if their attempts be like yours, or
themselves of the same mind that you are, we reject their doings, as hateful
before God and man, no less than yours. Your Spanish inquisitions and French
massacres, where you murdered men, women and children by 1000. and 10000.
against the very grounds of al equity, piety, charity and humanity, without
co^uicting, accusing, or so much as calling them before any judge to hear what
was misliked in them, are able to set grave men and good men at their wits
ends: and to make them justly dout, since you refuse the course of all divine
and humane laws with them, whether by the law of nature they may not defend
themselves against such barbarous bloodsuckers: yet we stand not on that: if
the laws of the land, where they converse do not permit the^ to guard their
lives, when they are assaulted with unjust force against law: or if they take
arms as you do to depose princes, we will never excuse the^ from rebellion.


Phi. Then they may resist, but we may not.


Theo. Your lives are not hunted after for religion as theirs be: nothing is
attempted against you without due course and trial of law: toward them no law
is observed; no punishment is laid on you, There is great diversity in
bearing arms, though we allow none if the laws of the Land do not warrant the
same.
but by the full consent of the Nobles and Commons of this realm: and that
openly decreed in Parliament. The Friars presume to put them to death upon his
sole authority that has naught to do with other men's subjects: you mean to
deprive Princes, they seek no farther but to defend themselves: not denying
to their princes any tribute, subjection or honor which the laws of their
Country require: only they will not have the Pope ouerrule Princes as his
manner is, and tease them on to all kind of tyrannyes. These be differences
enough between your wars and theirs: and yet for my part I must confess,
that except the laws of those Realms do permit the people to stand on their
right if the Prince would offer that wrong, I dare not allow their arms.


Phi. What their Laws permit, I know not; I am sure in the mean time they
resist.


Theo. And we, because we do not exactly know what their Laws permit, see
no reason to condemn their doings without hearing their answer.


Phi. Think you their Laws permit them to rebel?


Theo. I busy not my self in other men's commonwealths as you do, neither
will I rashly pronounce all that resist to be rebels: cases may fall out even
in christian kingdoms where the people may plead their right against the
Prince, and not be charged with rebellion. In some cases the nobles and
commons may stand for the public regiment and laws of their Country.



Phi. As when for example?


Theo. If a Prince should go about to subject his kingdom to a foreign
Realm, or change the form of the common wealth, from imperie to tyranny: or
neglect the Laws established by common consent of Prince and people, to
execute his own pleasure: In these and other cases, which might be named, if
the Nobles and commons join together to defend their ancient and accustomed
liberty, regiment and laws, they may not well be counted rebels.


Phi. You denied that even now, when I did urge it.


Theo. I denied that Bishops had authority to prescribe conditions to kings
when they crowned the^: but I never denied that the people might preserve ye
^sundation, freedom and form of their commonwealth, which they forprised when
they first consented to have a king. Christian Kingdoms may settle their
States with common consent of Prince and people, which the Prince alone cannot
alter.



Phi. I remember you were resolute that subjects might not resist their
Princes for any respects, and now I see you slake.


Theo. As I said then, so I say now, the Law of God gives no man leave to
resist his Prince: but I never said that kingdoms and commonwealths might not
proportion their States as they thought best by their public laws, which
afterward the princes themselves may not violate. By superior powers ordained
of God we understand not only princes, but al politic states and regime^ts,
somwhere the people, somwhere the Nobles, having the same interest to the
sword, y Princes have in their kingdoms: and in kingdoms where princes bear
rule, by ye sword we do not mean the princes private will against his laws:
but his precept derived from his laws, and agreeing with his laws: which,
though it be wicked, yet may it not be resisted of any subject with armed
violence. Mary when Princes offer their subjects not justice, but force: and
despise all Laws to practice their lusts: The Princes sword is his law and
not his lust.
not every, nor any private man may take the sword to redress the Prince: but
if the laws of the land appoint the nobles as next to the king to assist him
in doing right, and withhold him from doing wrong, the^ be they licensed by
man's law, and so not prohibited by Gods to interpose themselves for the
safeguard of equity and innocence: Princes may be stayed from tyranny by their
own realms, though not deposed.
and by all lawful and needful means to procure the Prince to be
reformed, but in no case deprived where the scepter is inherited.


Phi. If I should assent to this, how does it acquit your fellows in
Germany, Flaunders, France, and Scotland, that resist their Catholic Princes
for maintenance of their heresies?


Theo. Not unless they prove their states to be such as I speak of.


Phi. That they shall never.


Theo. You be deeper in policy than in divinity: that belike fitteth your
affection better: and yet therein you show but what a malicious conceit and a
slipperie tongue may soon suspect and utter. It is easy for a running and
railing head to sit at home in his chamber and call all men rebels, himself
being the rankest; otherwise I see neither truth in reporting, nor sense in
debating the matters that are so often in your mouth.

Why should the Germans, Germany.
submitting themselves to the Emperor at his election but on condition, not
enjoy the same liberties and securities of their publik State which their
fathers did before them? Why should they be counted rebels for preserving their
civil policy, more than Italians which cut themselves utterly from the
Empire, by no consent nor allowance, but only by force and disturbance?

The like we say for the Flemmings. Flaunders.
What reason the King of Spain should alter their State, and euert their
ancient Laws, his style declaring him not to be King but Earl of Flaunders?
And being admitted for a protector if he will needs become an oppressor, why
should they not defend the freedom of their country?

The Scotts what have they done besides the placing the right heir and her
own son when the mother fled and forsook the realm? Scotland.
Be these those ( furious attempts and rebellions) you talk of?

In France the King of Navarre and the Prince of Condey might lawfully defend
themselves from injustice and violence, France*
and be aided by other Princes their neighbors, if the King as too mighty for
them sought to oppress them, to whom they owe not simple subjection but
respective homage as Scotland did to England, and Normandy unto France when
the Kings notwithstanding had bitter wars each with other. The rest of the
Nobles that did assist them: if it were the Kings act that did oppress them
and not the Guises: except the Laws of the land do permit them means to save
the State from open tyranny: I will not excuse: and yet the circumstances must
be fully known, before the fact can be rightly discerned, with which I
confess I am not so exactly acquainted.

But grant you could find us where PROTESTANTS have taken arms in some one
place or other for religion: their arms were defenciue: not inuasiue, as yours
are; they resisted the Popes inquisitions, not the laws of their Countries,
The Jesuits forget how often the Italians have rebelled both against the
Emperor and against the pope himself, and in every nation what dissentions and
rebellions have been before our time.
as you do: they rescued their wives and children from horrible butcherie;
they deprived not Princes as you would. And yet all these imparities
considered, if I do not show by your own stories an hundredth outrages of your
side for one of ours, I am content to lose the cause. Look back therefore,
Sir Auditor, to your own accounts, and view with shame enough how many
rebellions your fellows have made within these last five hundredth years, how
many Princes they have displaced, poisoned, and murdered: and make no such
tragical exclamations at others for saving them selves, and their innocent
families from your cruel and incredible furies.


Phi. We put you in mind of the Protestants in other Countries, because you
make so much ado, for one poor commotion in England made in defense of the
Catholics, in twenty six years of the greatest persecution and tribulation
that ever was since the Goths and the Vandals times.


Theophi. That we had but one commotion in this realm, we may thank God and
not you: you did your best by procuring invasion abroad, and ripening
rebellion at home, to multiply that one to twenty six, twice told, but that
the mighty hand of GOD did always vnioint your devises.

The practices of the Jesuits wherewith this land is grieved and displeased.
Neither make we not so much ado that you did once rebel: but that you still
seek to continue the same by comforting foreign powers to enter the land, by
disposing the hearts of all Catholics, as you call them, within the realm to
wait for that day, by maintaining and auouching the Popes wicked claim to
depose Princes for a point of Christian faith, by canonising the Northern
rebels in your open writings for Martyrs; by proclaiming as you do in this
book, such wars against the Prince to be Godly, just and honorable: and
last of all by resolving, directing, and encouraging Parry, Somerfield, and
other that with violent hands sought to attempt your sovereigns life. These be
no points of religion, but flat treason.
These be the things for which we make so much ado, and which if there be but
one jot of true religion or obedience in you, my masters of Rhemes, you would
not so freshly approve and practice.

The correction that is here laid on you, you every where amplify, with
words of the highest and hoattest degree: as if it were tyranny to touch the
hemmes of your garments, notwithstanding you seek to pull the Crown from the
Princes head, and teach others to treadde the same path by your example; This
easy punishment for twenty years shows the goodness of her disposition and
the mildness of her regiment.
but such is your daintiness that you offering others fire and sword, never
think it sharp enough: And tasting no quicker discipline with us for twenty
years than the loss of two shillings by the week, or some restraint of
liberty, cry out of the greatest persecution and tribulation that ever was
since the Goths and Vandals times. We speak of things that are in the eyes
and ears of al men, what punishment did the Laws of this realm the first
twenty years of her majesty's reign inflict to any recusant for religion but
either imprisonment or amercement? Which was as easy as you could wish, till
within these six or seven years, by the facility of the Law which you
despised, your attempts grew so dangerous, that the Prince was forced for the
repressing of your audacious adventure, to temper her Laws with more
severity. This later severity the Ies. have provoked by their wilfulness.
You must thank your selves therefore if this latter affliction seem
somewhat heavier: till you gave the onset to put the bull in execution which
deprived her highness of the crown, you were used with as much mercy and
clemency as was possible for a Christian prince to afford unruly subjects:
whatsoever has since fallen out must be imputed not to her majesty's
inclination, whereof you had so good proof for twenty years: but to your
wicked and undutiful affection, that were perplexed to see her live and
govern in so long happiness, and therefore assayed to shorten her reign.


Philand. You never found that affection in any Catholic.


Theoph. We need not search your affections for it: you have made it an open
point of your faith which no Catholic as you teach must deny, though the
affirming of it should cost him his life. The Jesuits make rebellion a point
of their Catholic faith, because they would the sooner infect the people with
it



Philand. What do we teach?


Theo. That if the Pope say the word, none of your Catholics within this
Realm must obey or account her Majesty for Queen of England. And because
you would be sure to root this persuasion in the hearts of your adherentes,
you deliver it them as a part of their faith, which they must auouche and much
more execute, notwithstanding any danger of death that may be offered.


Philand. Where do we teach so?


Theoph. In the cases of conscience, wherewith you furnished the Jesuits that
came into England. There to the 55. article when you be asked whether,
notwithstanding the bull (of Pius the fifth) that was given out, Casus
conscientiae qui hodie in Anglia occurrunt sacerdotibus comissis: artic. 55.
And if you be asked, do you believe that the Bishop of Rome may license you to
bear arms against the Queen of England, and to kill her if you can, what
must you answer by this resolution of your but, I believe he may.
or any bull that the Bishop of Rome can hereafter give forth, all
Catholics be bound to yield obedience, faith and loyalty to Queen
Elizabeth as to their lawful Prince and Sovereign: you make this resolution,
Qui hoc modo interrogat, illud quaerit, an id potuerit S. Pontifex facere? Cui
quaestioni quid debeat Catholicus respondere, clarius est quam vt a me hic
explicetur. Sirogatur ergo Catholicus, credis Romanum Pontificem Elizabetham
potuisse exauthorare: respondebit non obstante quouis metu mortis, credo.
Quaestio enim haec ad fidem spectat and exigit confessionem fidei. He that
demands this question, asks (in effect) whether the Pope might do it or
no. To the which demand what a catholic ought to answer, it is plainer than
that I need here to explicate. If therefore a catholic be asked, do you believe
the Bishop of Rome may deprive Queen Elizabeth of her crown? He must
answer, not regarding any danger of death, I believe he may. For this
question is a point of faith, and requires the confession of (our) faith. And
your self in your defense of English Catholics say: This was the right and
power of Saint Gregory (to deprive Princes) and this has been the faith of
Christian men ever since our Country was converted. Why then are you so angry
that Jesuits should be counted traitors, since you make treason to be a
point of your faith and religion? And how just cause has the Prince to banish
you her land under pain of death, when you do with this cunning inueighle her
subjects to rebel against her?


Phi. It is no treason to say the Pope may depose Princes.


Theo. Much less is it a point of Christian faith that the Pope may deprive
the Queen of her Crown; Till this position be recanted by the Ies. a traitor
and a Jesuit cannot be sundered.
as you falsely, absurdly and traitorously teach.


Phi. The Pope received that power from Christ.


Theo. If you did prove it, you had some color to believe it: but now you
require all Catholics boldly to put that into their Creed, which the Pope
himself for a thousand years was ashamed to profess.


Phi. Has he not the keys of the kingdom of heaven?


Theo. But you must prove he has the keys of all earthly kingdoms.


Phi. He may bind and loose.


Theo. Sins he may where he has charge: but no where Scepters.


Phi. If Princes persist in sin, he may take their Scepters from them.


Theo. That is it, which all this while you were to prove; you teach that for
religion, which the word of GOD rejects for rebellion: you embrace it as
piety, which the Church of Christ abhorred as iniquity.

Mat. 22. Princes not depriueable by any mortal man.
Give to Caesar, says the son of God, the things which are Caesar's. The
swoorde and scepter are Caesar's: this therefore is a plain precept to Peter
himself and all other Christians to suffer Caesar to enjoy his own. Now
show you an other, that you may take from Caesar that which is Caesar's. When
one said, Luke. 12.
Master, bid my brother divide the inheritance with me: the Lord answered,
man, who made me judge or diuider over you? If Christ would not meddle with
private men's inheritances, as being without the compass of his vocation, I
pray you who could make the Pope judge and disposer of Princes crowns? Our
Savior being asked of Pilate what kingdom he claymed, openly avouched my
kingdom is not of this world; John. 18.
and you by one turn of the keys which he gave to Peter and the rest of his
Apostles, would bring all the kingdoms of the woorlde to be at the Popes
appointing. S. Augustine assures Princes by force of these words, August. in
Psalm 47.
that they shall not need to fear deprivation of their earthly kingdoms at
Christ's hands. Why envy you, says he, ye kings? Mark and envy not. (Christ)
is a king, but far otherwise (than you are) which said my kingdom is not of
this world. Fear not therefore lest the kingdom of this world be taken from
you; (rather) an other kingdom shall be given you and that of heaven where
he is king. Ibidem.
And so expressly resolves: Kings ought not to fear lest they loose their
kingdom, or that their kingdom be taken from them, as wretched Herod
feared. Which is utterly against you, that make it a point of your faith, for
the Pope to take not only their kingdoms from them but also their lives.


Phi. That we mean when they will not otherwise obey.


Theo. By your construction and meaning the world is well amended with you. For
where the holy Ghost commands Prelates, Popes and all others to be subject
to Princes, you with the cunning of your keys give the Spirit of God the
plain ^lip, and challenge not only right to rule them, but power to deprive
them at your pleasures. And this heinous impiety, lest the simple should
distrust it, The Jesuits make the Popes pride a poinct of Christian faith.
you ouer-spred with a cover of the Catholic faith, as if the Popes ambition,
and your sedition, were lately become parts of Christ's doctrine.


Phi. In obedience to the keys we put no difference between princes and
private persons.


Theo. Prove that of private persons, which you presume touching Princes, and
we will agnise the rest, though we need not.


Philand. What shall we prove?


Theo. That the Popes keys by Gods Law reach unto the goods or lands of the
meanest subject in this Realm. The Popes keys exte^d not to the goods or
lands of the poorest subject in this realm.



Phi. I proved that before, by the dealing of Peter with Ananias, and of Paul
with Elimas.


Theo. And I answered you before, that from Gods miraculous woorking by their
mouths, to your ordinary calling and attempting the like with your hands, is
no good argument. And therefore they might pronounce the word, and not be
murderers, because the fact was Gods and not theirs: you can not execute the
Popes censures, without actual conspiring and rebelling against your Prince,
which God has prohibited. If then you may not offer the poorest crafts-man
that is, that wrong, by the word of God; what ground of christian religion can
this be, that the Pope may take the sword and Scepter from the Prince, and
command you to be his helpers and coadiutours in that wicked enterprise, whom
the Apostle charge to give tribute, custom, fear and honor to superior
powers that have the swoorde in Gods steed to reward good, and revenge evil?


Phi. May not the shepherd reclaim the sheep, if they will not be ruled?


Theo. But no good shepherd lameth or kills his sheep though they will not
be folded; and yet similitudes be no syllogismes. I trust you will not claim
that same dominion over Princes, which owners have over their sheep and oxen.


Phi. No, but I show you by this example that correction is permitted, where
direction is refused.


Theo. Pastors have their kind of correction even over Princes, Pastors have
their kind of correction over Princes, but that is far from deprivation.
but such as by Gods law may stand with the Pastors vocation, and tend to the
Princes salvation; and that exceeds not the word and Sacraments: other
correction over any private man, Pastors have none, much less over Princes.


Phi. Yeas they may force them to repentance if they can not persuade them. The
Pastor cannot force his flock.



Theo. Princes may force their subjects, by the temporal sword which they
bear: bishops may not force their flock with any corporal or external
violence. Chrysostom largely debateth and fully concludes this matter with
us. Chrysostom. de sacerdot. lib. 2.
If any sheep, says he, go out of the right way, and leaving the plentiful
pastors graze on barren and steepe-places, the sheephearde somewhat exalts
his voice to reduce the dispersed and straggling sheep, Pastors may not
co^straine but only persuade.
and to compel them to the flock. But if any man wander from the right pathe
of the christian faith, the Pastor must use great pains, care, and patience.
Neque enim vis illi inferenda, neque terrore ille cogendus, verum suadendus
tantum, vt de integro ad veritatem redeat. For he may not be forced, nor
constrained with terror, but only persuaded to return again to the truth. And
again, A (Bishop) can not cure men with such authority, as a shepherd does
his sheep. For a sheepeheard has his choice, Ibidem.
to bind his sheep, to diet them, to sear them, and cut them: but in the
other case the facility of the cure consists not in him that gives but
only in him that takes the medicine. This that admirable teacher perceiving
said to the Corinthians: not that we have any dominion over you under the name
of faith, but that we are helpers of your joy. For of all men Christian
(Bishops) may least correct the faults of men by force. Bishops least of al
men may correct with force.
Judges that are without (the Church) when they take any transgressing the
Laws, they show themselves to be endued with great authority and power,
and compel them in spite of their hearts to change their manners. But here
(in the Church) we may not offer any violence, Compulsion neither lawful nor
expedient in Bishops.
but only persuade. We have not so great authority given us by the Laws, as
to repress offenders: and if it were lawful for us so to do, we have no
use of any such violent power, for that Christ crowns them which abstain
from sin, not of a forced, but of a willing mind and purpose.

Hilar. ad Constable. lib. 2. imperfect.
Hilarie teaches the same lesson. If this violence were used for the true
faith, the Doctrine of Bishops would be against it. God needs no forced
service, Bishops may not meddle but with those that be willing.
he requires no constrained confession. I can not receive any man, but him
that is willing: I cannot give ear, but to him that entreats, I cannot sign
any but him that (gladly) professes. Origin agrees with them both. See the
wisdom of the holy Ghost. Because that other faults are judged by the Laws
of Princes, Orig. in cap. 13. epist. ad Romans
and it seemed superfluous now to prohibit those things by Gods Law, which
are sufficiently revenged by man's, God will not have crimes revenged by the
Rulers of the Church, but by the Judges of the world.
he repeateth those and none else as fit for religion, of which man's Law said
nothing. Whereby it appears that the Judges of this world, do meddle with
the greatest part of Gods law. For all the crimes which God would have
revenged, he would have them revenged not by the Bishops and rulers of the
Church, but by the Judges of the world: and that Paul knowing rightly calls
(the Prince) Gods minister and judge of him that does evil.


Phi. Bishops may not offer force with their own hands, but they may
command others to do it for them.


Theoph. A gross shift. As though temporal Princes or Judges did execute
malefactors with their own hands. Bishops by virtue of their calling cannot
authorize violence or arms.
Bishops by virtue of their vocation can not claim the swoorde: and
consequently they cannot command or authorize any man to take the goods or
touch the bodies of Christians or Infidels. Which being a clear conclusion,
it is most evident they can much less license you to take the Crowns, and
touch the lives of Princes, to whom God has delivered the swoorde to judge
the earth, Romans 13.
and made them servants only to himself, since all other souls must be
subject to them by the tenor of his own prescription and their first erection,
as the Scripture witnesses.


Phi. Say what you will, it is religion, it is no treason to defend that the
Pope may lawfully depose Princes for tyranny and heresy.


Theoph. It is easy for you to multiply words: you have stoare of them as
appears by your Apology and defense of English Catholics which consist of
nothing else: but the Popes power to deprive princes, Defendor^ of the Popes
power to depose princes are no Martyrs but heinous traitors.
is a matter of more dependence than may be ouer-ruled with a few piked and
well couched terms. You must therefore exactly and directly prove the Popes
authority to depose Princes (which you shall never be able to do) or else
he for attempting it is the man of sin exalting himself in the Church of
GOD, and you for defending and executing the same, lack not many degrees of
high and heinous treason.

The carrying of this in your own hearts, The maintainers and abettours of
this power put to death, and none else.
and reconciling of others within the realm that they might be ready to
receive this impression at your mouths, when time should serve, were the very
causes why some of your fellows tasted of her majesty's just and provoked
indignation: and if it be tyranny for the Prince to put them to death, that
lay plottes to have her crown, and her life, and write books to avouch it
lawful for themselves, and all others so to do, when the Pope says the word:
then her highness has done you some wrong: but if by divine and humane records
it be damnable in the subject to attempt or abet any such thing: and most
laudable in the Prince to revenge the consenter and encourager as well as the
doer: then, for religion has none of your side been martyred in England, as
your shameless eloquence would enforce, only some were executed for
affirming, publishing, and furdering the Popes Antichristian power to rule
realms and deprive Princes: which you call religion, because you would plant
it in the peoples hearts with less labor, and more liking, though in deed it
be pestilent pride in him, and a plain contempt of God and the Prince in you
that should obey.


Phi. M. John Slade and M. John Body, two famous confessors, The defense, cap.
1. An. 1583. M. Slade. M. Body.
were they not condemned to death in public judgment for confessing their
faith of the Popes spiritual sovereignty, and for denying the Queen to be
head of the Church of England, or to have any spiritual regiment* and that
twice at two diverse sessions (a rare case in our country) the later sentence
being to refourme the former, (as we may guess in such strange proceedings)
which they perceived to be erroneous and insufficient in their own Laws?


Theo. Promotions are rife at Rome: you would not else so soon advance two
froward and rude companions for masters and martyrs. Their judgment was twice
given, not, (as you peruersly, yet after your manner, interpret) the later to
reform the former as erroneous and insufficient, but for that they complained
they were drawn before they were ware and against their wills, to utter speeches
against the Princes sword, for which they were condemned: the grace and mercy
of the Prince was such, that her highness was content they should be tried
the second time, (to see whether those words were unadvisedly and unwillingly
spoken as they pretended, or of set mischief and malice) and warned by the
Judge to take good heed, and look well about the^ before they rashly offered
themselves to the danger of the Laws. Where, if they fell again openly and
lustily to avouch that the Pope was supreme head of the Church of England, and
consequently the Queen had no right to make laws as she had done, but was
subject to the Popes Decrees and censures, which is the maine ground of all
your rebellion, and his presumption: who besides you that are yoked in the same
cause with them, will say they died for religion, and not rather for their
wilful charging the Prince with usurpation, and yielding the Pope that dominion
which he claims over kingdoms, and you would feign establish with your
untrue surmises?


Phi. The question of Peter's keys is it not a matter of mere religion? The
question of Peter's keys as the Jesuits expound the^ is no religion.



Theo. If you draw Princes crowns and swords within the limits of Peter's
keys, you leave religion, and hatch rebellion.


Phi. Yet is it a question, whereof divines do doubt.


Theo. You may doubt what you list, to flatter the Pope, but your doubting may
not stop Princes from defending that which is their own, against the Popes
unjust claim and unlawful force. The Prince strives not with the Pope
neither for the dignity which he takes above all Bishops, nor for the
power which he seeks to bind and loose sins in heaven, (though therein he
does the Church of Christ great wrong and oppresses his brethren: To subject
the Princes sword or Crown to the Popes courts and Bulls is treason by our
Laws* the rest of his usurped power is heresy, not treason.
) but only for her right to command and punish within her own Realm in
ecclesiastical causes and crimes, (as well as in temporal, which I have
largely proved every Prince may within his own Dominion) and for the wrong
that her majesty received, when she was deprived of her crown by him that
had no warrant from Christ to disquiet her state or dispose her crown. These
be the points comprised in her highness Laws. Against these if your rash and
ill advised brethren would run headlong to their own perdition, when they
were admonished by the magistrate to have better regard to their words; they
have the just reward of their unfaithful and disloyal hearts, and my
assertion is true that these two ignorant, yet obstinate persons, with some
others which came not to any particular mention of the Popes bull against the
Prince, but generally stood in defense of that power to be good and lawful,
from whence the bull proceeded, died in the same quarrel with the rest that
purposely promoted, defended and assisted the bull; and so can be no witnesses
of Christ's truth and glory, which would needs cast away their lives for the
Popes pride and tyranny.


Phi. These treaso^s be no trifles.
It is hard dealing to make such trifles treasons.


Theo. Call you those trifles, when Princes shall lose their kingdoms, and
their people freely rebel, and you defend the wars of their own subjects
against them to be just and honorable, by virtue of that power which you
attribute to the Pope, when you make him head of the Church? Had you lived in
Saint Augustines days, you would have said it had been harder dealing that
one word against the Christian Emperors although they were dead should be
counted treason. August. contra literas Petil. lib. 2. cap. 92.
Thou do promise, says Augustine to Petilian, that thou will reckon many of
our Emperors and judges, WHICH BY PERSECVTING YOU, PERISHED: and concealing
the Emperors thou meanest two Judges or Deputies. Why did thou not name the
Emperors of our communion? were thou afraid to be accused as guilty OF
TREASON? where is your courage which fear not to kill your selves? To say that
Emperors PERISHED FOR PERSECVTING, was Treason in his time: In our age you
think it much that reproching of Princes as tyrants and heretics, and ayding
the Pope with your persuasions, absolutions, and rebellions to take their
crowns from them, should be punished, or adjudged Treason.


Phi. There is no law so rigorous but your divinity will serve you to defend it.


Theo. What is against your duty to God and your Prince, in that I am a
divine, I may justly debate: what punishment the Prince will appoint for such
offenses as be committed against her, neither you, nor I have to do with it.
We may do better to learn obedience, than sawcely to check the magistrate for
allotting such penalties as we do not like, yet this I will say, there is no
conspiracy so pernicious and dangerous to the State, as that which is secretly
crept into the heart upon a sense of devotion, No co^spiracie so dangerous as
that which possesses the heart under a show of religion.
and outwardly covered with a show of religion. If therefore the Prince severely
revenge both your pretenses in opinion, and practices in execution, absurdly
grounded on Peter's keys, and wickedly derived thence for the removing of her
crown, defacing of her person, and diminishing of her right, that rigor may
well be defended as coming from just and lawful authority not without
sufficient and evident necessity: Peter's keys wickedly wrested to command
the swords and dispose the crowns of Princes.
neither can you bring ought against it, but only that you profess it, as a
point of your Catholic religion: not of any sinister or direct intention to
hurt her majesty or any other Christian Prince, which is most frivolous and
false. For the Popes authority, jurisdiction and power, lately claymed by him,
and usurped within this Realm, and since maintained, extolled and defended by
you and such your adherents as have suffered death, to prescribe Laws as he
list, to command Princes, and interdict their Realms, yea to deprive them of
their crowns, absolve their subjects, license rebellions, and dispense with
the murdering of heretics as you call them, A lewd deceit of the Jesuits to
call that religion which is none.
even of Princes themselves. This authority, jurisdiction and power, we deny
to be any doctrine or doubt of Christian religion, or to be so much as once
spoken or thought of, I say not by the Scriptures (which put no difference
between the Pope and an other Bishop,) but by any father or Council for a
thousand years in the Church of God. It was the mere devise and drift of
Antichrist to make himself mighty, when it was first attempted by Hildebrand,
and it is now colored by you with the name of religion, because you would
poison the people the sooner with that persuasion, and have somewhat to say for
your selves when you be charged with rebellion and disobedience to the
temporal magistrate.


Phi. Your own masters and leaders, Apol. cap. 4. sect. 21.

Magdebur. in praefat. Cent. 7.

Call. in 7. cap. Amos.


whom I trust you will not condemn for Traitors, have detested the title of
Supreme head of the Church, in princes, as well as we, the Lutherans flatly
controling it in general, and Calvin himself with all the Puritants much
misliking and reprehending the first grant thereof to king Henry. Why then put
you poor men to death for that which your own side abhors?


Theo. Your brethren were not put to death, for denying her majesty to be
supreme head of Christ's Church in England in causes ecclesiastical, though
Body said so at Andeuer, but he lied the more.
one of them for want of truth or wit, did so report at his end: and you for
lack of better proof have brought his own words spoken in favor and
excuse of himself, as some worthy witness. No man is compelled by the laws of
this Realm to confess any such title in the Prince, much less punishable by
death for denying it; and therefore your martyr was a Liar at the hour of his
death, and either of malice inuerted, or of ignorance misdeemed the cause for
which he dyed.


Phi. It is all one to be head of the Church and to be chief Governor in
causes ecclesiastical. Apol. cap. 4. sect. 21.



Theo. They suffered neither for the one, nor for the other; but for 1.
Elizabethae: The statute upon the which they were condemned.
maintaining and defending the jurisdiction and power of the Bishop of Rome
heretofore claymed and usurped in this Realm: which general includes all
your erroneous and traiterous assertions of the Popes power tending no way to
religion, but only sauouring of the Popes pride to be ruler and displacer of
Princes. And therefore either prove that claim to pertain to faith, or leave
your vain presuming, and fond discoursing that a number of your brethren have
been condemned and executed for mere matter of religion. Though you list to
take that for spiritual which is temporal, and call it religion, which in
deed is sedition, yet your idle multiplying of words, and changing of names,
does not convince your quarrel to be righteous, or the Laws of this Land to
be tyrannous. Show that power, jurisdiction and authorit^e, which your holy
father has heretofore claymed and used in this realm, to be consonant to the
laws of God, or church of Christ for a thousand years, and we will yield your
friends and familiars have dyed for religion: otherwise you do but face out the
matter with fiery words, to keep deceived and simple s^ules from suspecting
the secrets of your profession.

Popish Bishops were the first that consented to have the king called supreme
head.
As for supreme head of the church: it is certain that title was first
transferred from the Pope to king Henry the eight by the Bishops of your side,
not of ours: and though the pastors in King Edwards time, might not well
dislike, much less dissuade the style of the crown, by reason the king was
under years and so remained until he died, yet as soon as it pleased God to
place her majesty in her fathers throne, the Nobles and preachers perceiving
the words, head of the church, (which is Christ's proper and peculiar honor,)
to be offensive to many that had vehemently refelled the same in the Pope,
besought her highness the meaning of that word which her father had used might
be expressed in some apter and plainer terms, A plainer style received to
avoid offense
and so was the Prince called Supreme governor of her Realm, that is ruler
and bearer of the sword with lawful authority to command and punish
answerably to the word of God in all spiritual, or ecclesiastical things,
and causes, as well as in temporal. And no foreign Prince or prelate to have
any jurisdiction, superiority, preeminence, or authority, to establish,
prohibit, correct, and chastise with public laws or temporal pains, any
crimes or causes ecclesiastical or spiritual within her Realm. This Calvin
and they of Magdeburge never misliked: howsoever you would seem to take
advantage of their words.


Phi. Calvin says it is sacrilege and blasphemy. Look you therefore with
what consciences you take that oath, Supreme head no more blasphemous in the
Prince than in the Pope to who^ the Jesuits give that style.
which your own master so mightily detesteth.


Theo. Nay look you with what faces you allege Calvin, who makes that style
to be sacrilegious and blasphemous as well in the Pope, as in the Prince:
Reason therefore, you receive or refuse his judgment in both. If it derogate
from Christ in the Prince, so does it in the Pope; if it do not in the Pope,
as you defend, no more does it in the Prince. Yet we grant the sense of the
word supreme, as Calvin conceived it by Steven Gardiners answer, and
behavior, Calvin mistook supreme by Gardiners wily suggestio^,
is very blasphemous and injurious to Christ, and his word, whether it be
Prince or Pope that so shall use it. For by supreme Calvin understood a power
to do what the Prince would in all matters of religion without respect to the
will, or precepts of God: which is a thing most impious.


Phi. His words are, Calvin. in 7. Amos. Call. Ibidem.
They were blasphemers in calling him supreme head of the Church under Christ.


Theo. They are so: but that which goes before and follows after, shows in
what sense he took the word supreme. At this day, says he, where Popery
continues, how many are there which lode the king with all the right and
power they can, that there should be no disputing of religion, but this
authority should rest in the king alone, to appoint at his pleasure what he
list, and that to stand good without contradiction. They that first so highly
advanced king Henry of England, were inconsiderate, they gave him supreme power
of all things, and that was it which always wounded me. Steven Gardener
expounded supreme as if the prince might do what he would in matters of
religion without regard of God o^ his word.
Then succeed your words; and withal a particular exemplication how Steven
Gardener alleged and constred the Kings style in Germany. That Iuggler, which
after was Chauncelour, I mean the Bishop of Winchester, when he was at
Rentzburge, neither would stand to reason the matter nor greatly cared for any
testimonies of the scriptures, but said it was at the kings discretion to
abrogate that which was in use, and appoint new. (He said) the king might
forbid priests marriage, the king might bar the people from the cup in the
Lords supper, the king might determine this or that in his kingdom. And why?
Forsooth the king had supreme power. This sacrilege has taken hold on us (in
Germany) whiles Princes think they cannot reign, How Calvin understood
Supreme head.
except they abolish all the authority of the church, and be themselves supreme
Judges as well in doctrine, as in all spiritual regiment.

This was the sense, which Calvin affirmed to be sacrilegious and blasphemous,
for Princes to profess themselves supreme Judges of Doctrine and discipline,
and in deed it is the blasphemy which all godly hearts reject and abomine in
the Bishop of Rome. Neither did King Henry take any such thing on him for
ought that we can learn: But this was Gardiners Stratageme to convey the
reproach and shame of the six articles from himself, and his fellows that
were the authors of them, and to cast it on the kings supreme power. Supreme
must be referred to pe^so^s and not to things.
Had Calvin been told that supreme was first received to declare the Prince to
be superior to the Prelates (which exempted themselves from the Kings authority
by their Church liberties and immunities) as well as to the Lay men of this
realm, and not to be subject to the Pope; who claymed a jurisdiction over all
Princes and Countries: the word would never have offended him; but as this
wylye fox framed his answer, when the Germans communed with him about the
matter, we blame not Calvin for mistaking, but the Bishop of Winchester for
perverting the kings style, and wresting it to that sense which all good men
abhor.


Phi. Do not you at this day make the Queen supreme Governor of al
ecclesiastical doctrine and discipline? And what discrepance I pray you
between Judge and Governor?


Theo. You may be Steven Gardiners scholar, you be so well trained in his
method, and maxims. We told you long since and often enough, if that will
serve, the prince by her style does not challenge, neither do we by our oath
give her highness power, to debate, decide, or determine any point of faith or
matter of religion, much less to be supreme judge or governor of all
doctrine and discipline: But if in her realm, you will have the assistance of
the magistrates sword to settle the truth, We give the Prince no right to be
judge of religion, but power to receive and settle in her realm that which is
good both in doctrine and discipline.
and prohibit error, and by wholesome punishments to prevent the disorders of
all degrees, that authority lies neither in Prelate nor Pope, but only in
the Prince: and therefore in her Dominions you can neither establish doctrine
nor discipline by public Laws without her consent. This neither Calvin, nor
the compilers of the Centuries, nor any other of sound religion ever did, or
justly can mislike: only, Jesuits and their adherents would feign reserve
this power to the Pope in all Christian realms, because they be sure he will
allow and suffer no religion but his own: and so long their profession shall
not miscarie.


Phi. The Centurists say: Princes may not be heads of the Church, that
primacie is not fit for them.


Theo. That word if they mislike, we stand not for it. The holy Ghost has
invested the son of God with it, and therefore reason princes even for
reverence to him should forbear the style which he first used, and most
esteems. And though some defense might be brought for the word, as that which
Samuel said to Saul, 1. Sam. 15.
When thou wast little in thine own sight, wast thou not made HEAD of the tribes
of Israel? For the Lord anointed thee king over Israel: and that which David
says of himself, 2. Sam. 22.
Thou have made me HEAD of the heathen: and that which Esai says of the king
of Syria, Esai. 7.
THE HEAD of Aram is Damascus, and the HEAD of Damascus, is Rezni: and again,
Esai. 9.
the honorable man he is the HEAD; as also S. Paul: 1. Cor. 11.
the man is the woman's HEAD: and Chrysostom not sticking to call certain women
that labored in the Gospel, Chrysostom. in ca. 4. ad Philip. homil. 13.
HEAD OF THE CHVRCH at Philippi: and saying of Theodosius the Emperor, Idem
homil. 1. ad Papil. Antioch.
Summitas and caput omnium super terram hominum, SVPREME AND HEAD of all
mortal men: Though these and many like places might be brought to auouche the
word, HEAD; yet because that title, HEAD OF THE CHVRCH, rightly and properly
belongs only to Christ, and not to Princes without many mitigations and
cautions: Head of the Church belongs properly to Christ.
and head as it is applied to Princes is al one with Supreme, for it imports
but the chiefest or highest person of the Church on earth: and with the
regiment of the Church whereof Christ is head, I mean his mystical body,
Princes have nothing to do, yea many times they be scant members of it: and
the Church in each country may stand without Princes as in persecution it
does, and yet they not headless; we think not good to contend with our
brethren for words, and to grieve their ears with titles first abused by the
pope, and first reproved in him, so long as in matter and meaning there is no
discord betwixt us.


Phi. Will you make us believe, they mislike nothing but the words head of the
Church?


Theo. Yeas they mislike, that Princes should mingle truth with falsehood, and
temper religion with corruption as their private fancies lead them, which we
mislike no less than they. This is the scope (of our speech) say they, that it
is not lawful for civil Magistrates to devise forms of religion in
destruction of the truth: Praefat. 7. Centuriae.

Princes may not be deuisers of new religions.


and so to reconcile truth and error that they may both be lulled asleep. They
may not prescribe religions alone, they must not engender new articles of the
faith; they must not strangle the truth with errors, and shackle it when it is
reueiled, that they may let loose the bridle to corruption. These be the points
which they dislike, and we be as far from approving any such thing in
Princes, as you or they.


Phi. If the Prince establish any religion, We may by our oath serve God and not
men, if their laws dissent from his.
whatsoever it be, you must by your oath obey it.


Theo. We must not rebel and take arms against the prince, as you affirm, you
may: but with reverence and humility serve God before the Prince, and that is
nothing against our oath.


Phi. Then is not the Prince supreme.


Theo. Why so?


Phi. Your selves are superior, when you will serve whom you list.


Theo. As though to serve God according to his will were to serve whom we list,
and not whom Princes and all others ought to serve.


Phi. But you will be judges, when God is well served and when not.


Theo. If you can excuse us before God, when you mislead us, we will serve him,
as you shall appoint us: We be subject to Princes in that we must suffer, not
in that we must obey whatsoever they command.
otherwise if every man shall answer for himself, good reason he be master of
his own conscience in that which touches him so near, and no man shall
excuse him for.


Phi. This is to make every private man supreme judge of religion.


Theo. The poorest wretch that is may be supreme Governor of his own heart:
Princes rule the public and external actions of their Countries, but not the
consciences of men: and therefure this thwartling is to no purpose.


Phi. By what authority then in the first Parliament of the Queens highness
reign, Apol. c. 4. sect. 6.
was the determination, decision and definition of truethes or of heresies and
errors; of the true worship of God and the false, attributed to that Court of
the states no less or rather more than to the four first or any other general
Council: to which the deciding of such things is there granted with this
limitation, so far as they can warrant their doings by the express words of
Canonical Scriptures, and no farther: but to the Parliament absolutely,
decreeing at the same time, that nothing there determined should be counted
heresy, error or schism, what order, decree, sentence, constitution, or law
so ever were to the contrary, the holy Scriptures themselves not excepted.


Theo. The Jesuits as bold with the Parliament as they be with the Prince.
It is no wonder to see you quarrel with the court of the Sates, that are so
busy with the Princes Crown. And therein, as in the former, your behavior
does not change. For entering with a manifest untruth, and keeping on a course
of empty and haughty words, which is your glory, you tell us at length with
pride enough, that our Laws be strange and unnatural dealings, proceedings
dishonorable to her MAJESTY and the Realm, Apol. cap. 4. sect. 10.
against Gods express commandment lymiting his constant and permanent
truth, to mortal men's wills and fancies, violent disorders, which to all our
posterity must needs breed shame and rebuke, unjust, and therefore bind not
in conscience; repugnant to the dignity and privileges of the Church, against
the oath of the makers, and in deed no Laws at all, the makers lacking
competent power, authority and jurisdiction to proceed iudicially and
authentically to hear, determine and define (...) give sentence in any such
things as be mere ecclesiastical, with a number of those bold and stately
bragges, having neither proof of your part, nor reproof of ours, but only
pretending certain legalities, quiddities and solemnities of humane judgments,
which in Gods cause be very ridiculous, and in matters of faith more than
superfluous. God will not be tied to the form of humane judgments.
For God will not have his truth depend either on the numbers or qualities of
persons; and when his word is offered, we may not stand staggering till the
Pope and his Cardinals please to assemble, and there iudicially and
authentically hear and determine what they think good, which I win they will
never against themselves.

The Church planted without any judicial process.
Christ sent not judges with judicial process, but a few disciples with the
sound of their voices to convert the world; the Prophets that taught the
people of God, and reproved both Priests and Princes, used no legal nor
authentical proceedings, but a bare proposing the will of God to such as
would believe. The Kings and Princes before Christ that subverted Idols and
reformed religion in their realms relied on their Princely Power and zeal,
for the doing of that service, and not on the ceremonial and sententiall acts
and decrees of Priests or Prophets. The Christian Princes, take which you will,
that first received and after restored the faith in their Empires and
kingdoms, tied not them selves to the voices and suffrages of the Clergy that
were in present possession of their Churches: but often times removed them
without Council or common consultation. You may do well to correct S. Paul,
where he says, Apol. cap. 4.
faith comes by hearing and hearing by the word of God: and to add, faith
comes by sect. 19.
judicial cognition, and sect. 12.
competent jurisdiction of such as have sect. 19.
legal means to deliberate and pronounce of God and his truth.


Phi. Would you have such disorder and confusion suffered in the Church, that
every man should follow what he list? Christ will not be subject to the voices
of men.



Theo. I would not have such presumption or wickedness brought into the
Church, that Christ, or his word should be subjected to the wills or voices of
mortal men: for though the whole world pronounce against him, or it, God will
be true and all men shall be liars.


Phi. No more would we.


Theo. Why then restrain you truth to the assemblees and sentences of Popes
and Prelates, as though they must be gently entreated and fayrely offered by
Christ, before he might attempt or should expect to recover his own.


Phi. We would have things done orderly.


Theo. Call you that order, where Christ shall stand without doors till your
Clergy consent t^ bring him in?


Phi. God is not (the author) of confusion but of peace. He has authority
enough that has God on his side.



Theo. It is no confusion for one family, yea for one man to serve God though
all the families and men of the same realm besides will not. Joshua said to
the whole people: Ios. 24.
If it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom you
will serve, but I and mine house will serve the Lord. Elias was 3. Kings. 19.
left alone for any that he saw willing to serve God in Israel, and yet that
abated not his zeal. Micheas alone 3. Kings. 22.
opposed himself against four hundredth Prophets, with what judicial
authority can you tell? Jeremy assured the Priests and Prophets of Jerusalem
that God would Ierem. 23.
forsake them; and that he did without any legal means that we can read.
Amos spared neither Amos. 7.
Jeroboam the King, nor Amaziah the Priest, and yet he was but a simple
heardman, and not so much as the son of a Prophet. John Baptist had no
competent jurisdiction over the Scribes and Pharisees that sat in Moses
chair, and yet he condemned them for Mat. 3.
a generation of vipers. The Councels where Acts. 5.
Peter, 6.
Steven, 23.
Paul, and other of the Disciples were conuented, accused and punished, lacked
none of your judicial formalities, and solemnities, and yet the Apostles
stoutly resisted and utterly contemned both their deliberatiue, and their
definitive sentences.

In deed your forefathers assaulted our Savior himself with that very
question; The wicked always asked the godly for their authority.
as also they did John before him, and the Apostles after him. When the Lord
was teaching in the temple, the chief Priests and the elders of the people
came unto him and said, Mat. 21.
by what authority do thou these things? and who gave thee this
authority? When John began to baptize, Ioh. 1.
the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, WHO ART THOU?
And when he denied himself to be either Elias, or the Prophet that was
looked for, they inferred, Ioh. 1.
Why Baptizest thou then, if thou be neither Christ, nor Elias, nor the
Prophet? And even so they asked the Apostles, Acts. 4.
by what power, or in what name have you done this?


Philand. The Apostles commission we know, but yours we know not. He that
preaches the same doctrine which the Apostles did, has the same co^missio^
which they had.



Theo. You can not be ignorant of ours, if you know theirs. So long as we
teach the same Doctrine which they did, we have the same power and authority
to preach, which they had. Keep your competent jurisdictions, judicial
cognitions and legal decisions, to your self; the son of GOD first founded
and still gathers his church by the mouths of Preachers, not by the summons
of Consistories: and he that is sent to preach may not hold his tongue and
tarry, til my Lord the Pope, and his mytred fathers can intend to meet, and
list to consent, to the ruin as they think, of their dignities and liberties.


Phi. Despise you Councels?


Theo. By no means, so long as they be Councels, that is sober and free
conferences of learned and godly teachers: but if they wax wanton against
Christ, and will not have truth received, until they have consented, we
reject them as conspiracies of the wicked, which no Christian ought to
reverence.


Phi. One man preaching truth has warrant enough against the whole world.
Had you truth on your side you said somewhat, but you have it not.


Theo. Then should that be the question betwixt us: and not whether the Prince
might make Laws for Christ without your consents, or whether the Realm had
competent power and authority to debate and determine without a Council what
religion they would profess. For though the Prince and the realm have done
nothing herein, that Gods and man's Law does not warrant, yet may we not
suffer you to stand on these quirks to delude God and his t^ueth: Tertul. de
virg. velandis.
against the which, as Tertullian says, no man may prescribe, not space of
times, not patronage of persons, not privilege of places. He therefore that
defends truth, The whole world drowned for resisting the preaching of one
man.
is armed with authority sufficient though all the world were against him, as
it was against Noah, when GOD saved him and drowned them, for a monument of his
justice, to quail the route, and pair the pride of such as after should
resist the meanest servant that he would send.


Phi. Still you ground your selves, as if you had the truth.


Theo. If we have, Whether side has truth must be the question, the rest is
superfluous quareling.
the poorest Preacher in this Realm, has lawful power enough to pronounce
the Pope and all his Cardinals to be heretics: and therefore whether we have
or no must be the question.


Phi. We say you have not: and yet if you had, your proceedings in it are
disorderly.


Theoph. You must show us some reason.


Phi. The Prince and Court of Parliament has no more lawful means to give
order to the Church and Clergy in these things, than they have to make Laws
for the hierarches of Angels in heaven. Apol. cap. 4. sect. 21.



Theo. Will you suffer God himself to make Laws for his Church?


Phi. What else?


Theo. And may not every private man for his own person embrace those Laws,
God must be obaied, when he commands, whosoever dissent.
which God has made, whosoever say nay?


Phi. He must.


Theo. May not the Prince and the people do the like?


Phi. They may no doubt embrace the Laws of God.


Theo. What if some Bishops will not agree they shall? must the Prince and
the people cease to serve God till the Clergy be better minded?


Phi. That is odiously spoken.


Theo. But truly. The case between the Clergy and the Laytie in the first
Parliament of her Majesty's reign, was whether God should be served
according to his word, or according to the devises and abuses of the Romish
Church. The Jesuits call it a disorder to obey God before the Bishops.
The prince, as also the Nobles and commons submitted their consents to the
word of God: the Bishops refused. The foundation of all the Laws of our
Country being this, that what the Prince and the most part of her Barons and
Burgesses shall confirm, that shall stand for good, there was no disorder nor
violence offered in that Parliament, as you lewdly complain, but that to
public protection which the Prince and most part had agreed on.


Phi. In matters of faith the Prince and the lay Lords had no voices.


Theo. In making laws they had.


Phi. True, but laws for religion they might not prescribe.


Theo. No more might Bishops: It is only Gods office to appoint how he will be
served.


Phi. Gods will must be learned at the mouths of Bishops.


Theo. They must teach, leaving always this liberty to the Prince and people,
to examine their doctrine, and avoid their errors; and if they teach not
truth, the Prince and people may repel them, as the Parliament did which you
speak of.


Phi. The decision of truth or heresy pertained not to that Court. Apol. cap.
4. sect. 6.



Theo. They took it not upon them.


Phi. Yeas. The determination, decision and definition of truths and errors,
The Prince and the Parliament took not upon the^ the decision but the
permission and protection of truth.
of the true worship of God and the false is attributed to that Court no
less or rather more than to the four first, or any other general council.


Theo. The simple Rustikes of our Country do not so grossly conceive of
their acts and decrees as you do that would seem great masters in Israel.
For who knows not, that in diverse realms have been diverse positive laws,
and in this kingdom within our age clean contrary Parliamentes? No man is
therefore so foolish as to think it, neither is any besides you so malicious
as to report it, that the temporal States of this Realm took upon them the
absolute deciding of truths and errors above the four first general
Councels, Queen Mary by Parliament received the Pope, why might not Queen
Elizabeth do as much for Christ?
yea the holy scriptures themselves not excepted.


Phi. What did they then?


Theo. They submitted themselves and the public state of this Realm, to the
word of God, which by law they might, as well as the same Court six years
before in the first of Queen Mary subjected this Realm to the Popes decrees
and fancies.


Phi. The Parliament of Queen Marie can not be misliked for admitting the
faith of their fathers.


Theo. Much less can the Parliament of Queen Elizabeth be reproved for
receiving the faith of Christ.


Phi. The faith of Christ is in question: the faith of our fathers is not.


Theo. The faith of Christ we be bound to keep, We be bound to the faith of
Christ, not of our fathers.

Deuteronomy. 32.


the faith of our fathers we be not.


Phi. Keeping the faith of our fathers we can not miss the faith of Christ.


Theo. What privilege had our fathers more than we that they could not err?


Phi. Ask thy father, says Moses, and he will show thee; thine elders, and
they will tell thee.


Theo. Shall not we be fathers to our posterity, as well as our ancestors were
to us?


Phil. Yeas.


Theo. Then must our children ask of us, as we must of those that were before
us. If therefore we may err, why might not our fathers as well err in their
generations before us?


Phi. They kept the steps of their fathers, They be gone from the faith of
their first fathers and egerly follow the blindness of their later fathers.
which if you do, you shall not err.


Theo. This is the next way round about to come to the wood. For how will you
prove that every generation which has been these 1500. years since Christ,
has precisely kept the rules and limits of their forefathers?


Phi. You can not show when or where they swarued.


Theo. If we could not, our ignorance in that point, is no great security for
your faith. The defection of every age from their fathers might be either not
marked, or not recorded, or since oblitered; and therefore reason you prove
your faith to have descended from age to age without alteration, before we
believe it to be the faith of your fathers.

God has not referred us from his word, to our fathers.
But what means this that you prescribe that way to judge of religion and the
service of God, which God himself prohibiteth?


Phi. Does God forbid us to follow our fathers?


Theo. In as plain words as can be spoken with a tongue: by the mouth of
Ezechiel he says, Walk ye not in the precepts of your fathers, Ezech. 20.
neither observe their manners, nor defile your selves with their idols. I am
the Lord your God, walk in my statutes, and keep my judgments. Psalm. 78.
By David he says, Let them not be as their fathers were, a disobedient and
rebellious generation: a generation that set not their heart aright, and whose
spirit was not faithful unto God. And dehorting them from their fathers steps:
Psalm. 95.
To day, says David, if you will hear (Gods) voice, harden not your hearts, as
in the day of contention, and as in the day of temptation in the wilderness,
where your fathers tempted and proved me though they had seen my works.
Forty years did I contend with that generation, and said, they are a people
that err in heart, they have not known my ways. By Zachary he says, Zach.
1.
Be ye not, as your fathers, unto whom the former Prophets have cried saying,
Thus says the Lord of host^^, turn you now from your evil ways and from
your wicked works, but they would not hear nor harken unto me says the Lord.
And what you count devotion and humility for the people to follow their
fathers, that God himself calls defection and conspiracy. Ierem. 11.
I have protested unto your fathers, ever since I brought them out of the land
of Egypt to this day, saying, obey my voice. Nevertheless they would not obey,
nor incline their ear, but every one walked in the stubbernesse of his wicked
heart. And of the children doing as their fathers did he says, A co^spiracie
is found among the men of Judah and among the inhabitants of Jerusalem. Ibidem
verse. 9.
They are turned back to the iniquities of their forefathers that refused to
hear my words. With what face then can you deal so earnestly with the simple
subjects of this Land, to regard neither God nor his word, but only to run
the race of their Elders, seeing God so straightly commanded the children of
Israel to beware the paths and presidentes of their forefathers?


Phi. We must beware their wickedness.


Theo. Then may they be wicked and so no paterns for us or any others to
follow. Our fathers may err, though his elect can not.



Phi. The Jews were wicked.


Theo. What charter can you show, that christians shall not be the like?


Phi. Hell gates shall not prevail against the church of Christ.


Theo. No more did they prevail against the chosen and elect of Israel: but
the greatest number and gaiest men are not always the church of God. 2. Tim. 2.
The foundation of God stands sure, and has this zeal, the Lord knows who
are his. Of his elect which are his true church our Savior has pronounced it
is not possible they Mat. 24.
should be deceived: the rest have no such privilege; yea rather the holy
Ghost forewarneth that all besides the elect shall be deceived. Mark. 13.
Our Savior our says, Mat. 24.
There shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets, and shall show great
signs and wonders, so that, if it were possible, they should deceive the very
elect. The rest then, which are not elect, they shall deceive. And so S. Paul
speaking of the very same deceivers, 2. These. 2.
adds, whose coming is by the working of Satan with all power, and in all
deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness among them that perish, because they
received not the law of the truth, that they might be saved. And therefore God
shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe lies, that al they
might be damned, which believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. And S. John speaking of the beast that made war with the
Saints and had power over every kindred, Reue^ 13. All shall err saving the
elect.
and tongue, and nation, says, Therefore all that dwell upon the earth, shall
worship him, whose names are not written in the book of life. So that the
visible church, consisting of good and bad, elect and reprobate, has no such
promise, but she may err: only the chosen of Christ which are the true members
of his body, The elect cannot be discerned of men.
properly called his church, they shall not err unto perdition: and those if
you could point them out with your finger, the people might safely follow:
otherwise if you set men to follow the rest of their fathers, be they never so
many, never so grave, never so godly to your seeming: you bid them take the
wide gate and broad way that leads to destruction, Mat. 7.
because there were many that entered it before them.


Phi. Will you make us believe that our fathers are perished? To follow the
greatest number is most dangerous.



Theo. Who are perished, is not for us to pronounce. They were his servants
that judges justly: neither have we to meddle with their doom, but to look to
our own: yet this we can assure you, Mat. 22.
that many be called and few chosen, And therefore if you advise the people to
imitate the multitude of their fathers, you teach them the right way to hell.
And though we may not judge of your fathers, yet know you for a certainty
that God is not afraid to judge them and condemn them, if they refused his
truth, as you do.

Neither is it any such dangerous doctrine to say that our forefathers have
sinned and displeased God, Our Fathers sinned and rebelled against God.
as you would make it: the godly have always confessed it of their fathers:
and not spared to tell the wicked so much to their fates. David slandered not
his forefathers when he said: Psalm. 106.
We have sinned with our fathers, we have done wickedly. Our fathers understood
not thy wonders in Egypt, neither remembered they the multitude of thy mercies,
but rebelled at the Sea, even at the red Sea. Daniell knew what he pronounced
when he confessed: Dan. 9.
O Lord to us (belongs) open shame, to our kings, to our Princes, and to our
fathers, because we have sinned against thee. Ezechiah was not ashamed to say:
2. Chron. 29.
Our fathers have trespassed and done evil in the eyes of the Lord our God,
and have forsaken him, and turned their backs. And lo, our fathers are fallen
by the sword. John told the Pharisees to their faces, their fathers were
vipers, and themselves venomous, in saying, Mat. 3.
'Ye vipers brood; and Steven full of the holy Ghost rated the Jews on this
wise, Acts. 7.
Ye stifnecked and of uncircumcised hearts and ears, ye have always resisted
the holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do you. It is therefore a strange
course that you take to make the people disobey God to follow their fathers:
and a stranger, that you freely permit all kind of Infidelity and tyranny to
your selves under the names of your fathers, as if the men that were before you
could neither err, nor shed innocent blood.


Phi. What they could, we dispute not: we say they did not.


Theo. That must be proved, before you may propose their acts for your
imitation. Their doings may be doubted and disliked as well as yours, and so
the labor is all one to justify theirs and yours. Our fathers cannot pre^udice
the truth of God. Luke. 16.
Times and persons do not prejudice the truth of God. It is permanent in all
ages, and eminent above all things. If your fathers disdained and pursued the
truth as you do, they were enemies to God as you are, notwithstanding their
earthly dignities and other excellencies, which may seem precious in your eyes,
but are abominable in the sight of God, when men are void of truth.


Phi. We are not.


Theo. Leave then your fathers and other idle fancies, and go directly to that
question. For if her Majesty received and established nothing but the truth of
Christ in her Parliament, A parliament taking part with truth has the warrant
of God and the Magistrate.
in vain do you bark against God and the Magistrate, for lack of competent
Courts, ecclesiastical judges, and legal means to debate and decide matters
of religion. When God commands, all humane bars and Laws do cease. If
they join with God, they may be used: if they impugn the truth, they must
be despised.

And yet in our case the scepter united and adjoined it self to the word of
God: and therefore if Princes may command for truth in their own dominions,
as I have largely proved they may: why should not the Prince having the full
consent of her Nobles and Commons restoare and settle the truth of God within
her Realm?


Phi. Lay men may not pronounce of faith.


Theo. But lay men may choose what faith they will profess, Lay men may make
their choice what faith they will profess.
and Princes may dispose of their kingdoms, though Priests and Bishops would
say nay.


Phi. Religion they may not dispose without a Council.


Theo. Not if God command?


Phi. How shall they know what God commands unless they have a council?


Theo. This is childish wrangling. I ask, if God command whether the Prince
shall refuse to obey till the clergy confirm the same?


Phi. You may be sure a wise and sober Clergy will not dissent from Gods
precepts.


Theo. What they will do, is out of our matter: but in case they do; to which
shall the Prince hearken, to God or those that bear themselves for Priests?


Phi. In case they do so, you need not doubt, but God must be regarded, and
not men.


Theo. And has the Prince sufficient authority to put that in ^^e which God
commands, The Prince is authorized from God to execute his commandment.
though the Priests continue their wilfulnes?


Phi. There is no council nor consent of men good against God.


Theo. Hold you there. Then when christian Princes are instructed and resolved
by learned and faithful teachers what God requires at their hands, what need
they care for the backward disposition of such false Prophets as are turned
from the truth and preach lies?


Phi. In England when her Majesty came to the Crown, it was not so. The
Bishops that dissented, were grave, virtuous and honorable Pastors, standing
in defense of the catholic and ancient faith of their fathers.


Theo. You say so: we say no.


Phi. Those be but words.


Theo. You say very right; and therefore the more to blame you, that in both
your books do play on that string with your Rhetorical and Thrasonicall
fluence, The Jesuits presume that al is the^^s.
and never enter any point or proo^e, that may profit your Reader. You presume
your selves to have such apparent right and rule over the faith, over the
church, over christian Princes and Realms, that without your consent they
shall neither conclude, nor consult what religion they will profess: Their
acts shall be disorders, their laws injuries, their correction tyranny, if
you mislike them. This dominion and jurisdiction over all kingdoms and
countries, if your holy father and you may have for the speaking, you were not
wise if you would not claim it; but before we believe you, you must bring some
better ground of your title than such magnifical and maiesticall florishes. The
Prince may command for truth, though the bishops would say no.


The Prince and the Parliament, you say, had no power to determine or
deliberate of those matters. And why so? You did dissent. May not the Prince
command for truth within her Realm, except your consentes be first required
and had? May not her highness serve Christ in making Laws for Christ, without
your liking?

Claim you that interest and prerogative, that without you nothing shall be
done in matters of religion, by the laws of God, The Jesuits have neither
Gods law nor man's to make that which the Prince and the Parliament did, to be
void for lack of the Bishops assents.
or by the liberties of this realm? By the laws of the Land you have no such
privilege. Parliamentes have bin kept by the king and his Barons, the clergy
wholly excluded, and yet their acts and statutes good. And when the Bishops
were present, their voices from the conquest to this day were never negative.
By Gody law, you have nothing to do with making laws for kingdoms and
commonwealthes. You may teach, you may not command: Persuasion is your part,
compulsion is the Princes. If Princes embrace the truth, you must obey them: If
they pursue truth, you must abide them. By what authority then claim you this
dominion over Princes, that their laws for religion shall be void unless you
consent?


Phi. They be no judges of faith.


Theo. No more are you. It is lawful for any Christian to reject your
doctrine, if he perceive it to be false, though you teach it in your churches
and pronounce it in your councels, to be never so true.


Phi. That proves not every private man's opinion to be true.


The. Nor yet to be false; the greater number is not ever a sure warrant for
truth. And Judges of faith, though Princes be not, yet are they maintainers,
establishers and vpholders of faith with public power, and positive laws,
which is the point you now withstand.


Phi. That they may do when a council is precedent to guide them.


Theo. What council had Asa the king of Judah when The Kings of Judah did
command for truth without Councels.
he commanded his people to do according to the law, and the commandment,
and made 2. Chron. 14. Cap. 15. Cap. 15.
a covenant that whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel should be
^laine?


Phi. He had Cap. 15.
Azariah the Prophet.


Theo. One man is no Council; and he did but encourage and commend the King,
and that long after he had established religion in his realm.

What Council had Ezechiah to lead him when he restored the true worship of God
throughout his land, 2. Chron. 29.
and was feign to send for the Priests and Levites and to put them in mind of
their duties?

What council had Josiah, when ten years after his coming to the crown he
was forced to send for direction to Huldath the Prophetess, 4. Kings. 22.
not finding a man in Judah that did, or could undertake the charge?


Phi. These were kings of the old Testament: and they had the Law of God to
guide them.


Theo. Then since christian Princes have the same Scriptures which they had,
Christian Princes may do the like.
and also the Gospel of Christ and Apostolic writings to guide them, which
they had not, why should they not in their kingdoms retain the same power,
which you see the kings of Judah had and used to their immortal praise and joy?


Phi. Constantine authorized Christian religion without any Council.
The christian Emperors ever called Councels, before they would attempt any
thing in Ecclesiastical matters.


Theo. What council had Constantine, when with his Princely power he publicly
received and settled christian religion throughout the world, Eusebius. de vita
Constant. lib. 2. Justinian had no Council for the making of his constitutions.
twenty years before the fathers met at Nice? What councels had Justinian for
all those ecclesiastical constitutions and orders, which he decreed and I have
often repeated? What councels had Charles for the church laws and chapters
which he proposed and enjoined as well to the Pastors as to the people of his
Empire?


Phil. They had instruction by some godly Bishops that were about them.


Theo. Conference with some Bishops, such as they liked, they might have: but
councels for these causes they had none.

In 480. years after christian religion was established by christian Laws, I
mean from Constantine the first, to Constantine the seventh, there were very
near forty christian Emperors, whose Laws and acts for ecclesiastical
affairs were infinite: But 6. general Councels in 790. years.
and yet in all that time they never called but six general Councels, and
those for the Godhead of the Son and the holy Ghost, and for the two distinct
natures and wills in Christ: All other points of christian doctrine and
discipline they received, established and maintained without ecumenicall
councels, upon the private instruction of such Bishops and Clerks as they
favored or trusted.

S^c. lib. 5. ca. 10. Theodosius made his own choice what religion he would
establish, and when the second general council could not get him to receive
the Arians from their churches, Amphilochius did win him to it. Theod. lib. 5.
cap. 16.
Theodosius, as I showed before, made his own choice what faith he would
follow, and had no man, nor means to direct him unto truth, but his own
prayers unto God, and private reading of those sundry confessions that were
offered him. And when neither Bishops nor Councels could get him to remove the
Arians from their churches, Amphilochius alone with his witty behauior, and
answer wan him to it. For entering the Palace, and finding Arcadius the
eldest son of Theodosius lately designed Emperor and sitting with his father,
Amphilochius did his duty to the father and made no account of his son that
sat by him. Theodosius thinking the Bishop had forgotten himself, willed him
to salute his son: to whom the Bishop replied, that which he had done to
the father was sufficient for both. Whereat when the Emperor began to rage,
and to con^^er the contempt of his son for his dishonor, the wise Bishop
inferred wi^h a loud voice, Art thou so grieved, O Emperor, to see thy son
neglected, and so much out of patience with those that reproach him? Assure thy
self then that almighty God hates the blasphemers of his Son, and is
offended with them as with ungrateful wretches against their Savior and
deliverer.

Had you been in the primative church of Christ you would have gallantly
disdained these and other examples of christian kings and Countries converted
and instructed sometimes by Marchaunts, Realms have bin Christened upon the
persuasions of Lay men and we^men.
sometimes by women, most times by the single persuasion of one man without al
legal means or judicial proceedings: the poor souls of very zeal embracing
the word of life when it was first offered them, and neglecting your number of
voices, consent of Priests, and competent courts, as frivolous exceptio^s
against God, and dangerous lets to their salvation.

Frumentius a christian child, taken prisoner in India the farther, and brought
at length by Gods good providence to bear some sway in the Realm in the
nonage of the king, India converted by Merchants.
carefully sought for such as were christians among the Roman Merchants, and
gave them Ruffin. l. 1. ca. 9
most free power to have assemblies in every place yielding them whatsoever was
requisite, and exhorting And never asked the Priests leave so to do.
them in sundry places to use the christian prayers. And within short time he
built a Church and brought it to pass that some of the Indians were instructed
in the faith, and joined with them.

The king of Iberia near Pontus, when he saw his wife restoared to health by
the prayers of a christian captive, and himself delivered out of the sudden
danger that he was in, only by thinking and calling on Christ, whom the captive
woman named so often to his wife, sent for the woman, and desired to learn the
manner of her religion, and promised after that never to worship any other God
but Christ. The captive woman taught him as much as a woman might: and
admonished him to build a church and described the form (how it must be done).
Whereupon the Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 19.

Iberia converted by a woman.

Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 10.

The Jesuits would have been eloque^t against this King, that yielded his
Realm to Christ at the direction of a see^^e wenche.


king calling the people of the whole nation together told them what had
befallen the Queen and him, and taught them the faith, and became as it were
the Apostle of his nation, though he were not yet baptized.

The examples of England, France and other countries, are innumerable, where
kings and co^monwealths at the preaching of one man, have submitted themselves
to the faith of Christ, without councels or any Synodal or judicial
proceedings. And therefore each Prince and people without these means have
lawful power to serve God and Christ his Son, notwithstanding twenty Bishops,
as in our case: or if you will, Any man may serve Christ whosoever say nay.
twenty thousand Bishops, should take exceptious to the Gospel of truth,
which is nothing else but to wax mad against God, by pretense of humane reason
and order.


Phi. Their examples and yours are not like. They received the same faith that
the church of Christ professed, Many Countries received the faith before they
knew what the Church ^^nt.
you do not.


Theo. They know not what the church of christ meant, when they submitted
themselves to the faith of Christ; they respected not the countenaunces of men,
but the promises of God when they first believed. And were you not so wedded to
the Popes tribunals and decrees that you think the God of heaven should not
prevail nor command without your allowance, you would remember that the
church her sel^ was first collected and after increased by Christ's Apostles,
maugre the councelles of Priests and Courts of Princes that derided the
baseness, and accused the boldness of such as would preach Christ without
their permission.


Phi. The Apostles had a just and lawful defense for their doings. Act. 5.



Theo. What was it? If truth were ^ ^ufficient ^^^charge for fishermen to
withstand both Priests and Princes, much more may Princes upon that warrant
neglect the consent of their own subjects, though they be Priests.

John. 7.





Phi. We ought rather to obey God than men.


Theo. Was that authority sufficient for them to withstand the Synodes of
Priests and swords of Princes?


Phi. Most sufficient.


Theo. And the truth of God changes not, neither does his right to command
against the powers and laws of al mortal men decay at any time.


Phi. By no means.


Theo. Then this must only be the question betwixt us, whether the Prince or
the Prelates stood for that which God commands. If the Prince took part
with God, then your clergy were but Antichrists Atturnies, and all your
Apologies, Defenses, Replications and Demonstrations are but profane brables
and quarrels, such as Julian or Porphyrie might and did object against Christ,
for that his faith came first into the world, by the disordered rashness, as
they thought, and tumultuous headiness of the common people; even as the Jews
also disdained Christ himself, and said of his followers; Does any of the
Rulers or of the Pharisees believe in him? but this people, that know not the
law, are cursed. If your Bishops held the faith, then had you wrong before God,
but no violence before men since every Realm may dispose themselves, their
Lands, and liuinges, as they see cause, and make choice of their religion and
teachers, though they take not upon them to decide and define which is truth
and which error, as you falsely and scornefully report.


Phi. Thy make it treason to call their proceedinges heresy.


Theo. To call the Prince tyrant or heretic, is no point of Religion, but
plain railing on powers, Railing on Princes is prohibited by the Law of God.
which all christians are prohibited: That law represseth the filthiness of your
tongues, it forces not the persuasions of your hearts, it is no decision of
heresy, but a prohibition of cursed and intemperate speech* which of duty you
should forbear, and the Prince may justly punish.


Phi. Shall it be death for a man to speak what he thinks?


Theo. If the speech be slanderous or opprobrious, why should it not? Exodus 21.
He that curses his father or mother, shall die the death by the law of God: and
the self same reverence is due to the magistrate, Leuit. 20.
thou shall not rail upon the judge, nor Exodus 22.
speak evil of the ruler of the people: yea says Solomon Eccle. 10.
Curse not the king, no not in thy thought: and though David himself in respect
of his oath spared Shimei that railed on him, yet he charged Solomon his son
to give him ^^ his deserts. 3. Kings. 2.
Thou shall not count him innocent, for thou art wise, and know what thou
ought to do unto him, therefore thou shall cause his hoare head to go down
to the grave with David judged Shimei worthy to die for railing on him.
blood. Therefore you must either leave railing with Shimei, or not think it
much to suffer at Salomons hands as Shimei did.


Phi. The Princes person we will spare, but that shall never drive us to think
well of your proceedinges.


Theo. If this Realm have received or established any other faith than that
which Christ commanded, the Apostles preached, the catholic church embraced,
then let all our proceedings be violent, disordered and reproachful: but if we
have not, then look to your selves. For the Prince and the Parliament had Gods
and man's authority to do as they did.


Phi. If, does not hurt us: our faith is catholic.


Theo. No one point of your faith which we reject, is catholic: And the
reformation which is now settled, by the laws of this Realm in matters of
religion, is warranted by the word of God, and ancient judgment of Christ's
church.


Phi. Nay our faith is grounded on the sacred Scriptures and the general
consent of the catholic church.


Theo. Prove that and we require no more.


Phi. Will that content you?


Theo. Yea verily. But you were best, beginning a fresh matter, to spit in your
hand and take better hold than heretofore you have done.


Phi. My handfast is so sure that you shall not shake it off.


Theo. Your heart serves you, what soever your handfast does. Proceeding with
the next part we shall see how sure you hold.


The end of the third part.
THE FOVRTH PART SHOWS THE REFORMATION OF THIS Realm to be warranted by the
word of God and the ancient faith of Christ's Church, and the Jesuits for all
their crakes to be nothing less than Catholics.
Phi. WHAT one point of our religion is not catholic?


Theo. No one point of that, which this Realm has refused, is truly
catholic. Your having and adoring of images in the church: your public
service in a ^oung not understood of the people: your gazing on the Priest
whiles he alone eats and drinks at the Lords table: your barring the
people from the Lords cup: your sacrificing the son of God to his father for
the sins of the world: your adoring the elements of bread and wine with
divine honor in stead of Christ: your seven Sacraments: your Shrift: your
releasing souls out of Purgatory by prayers and pardons: your compelling
Priests to live single: your meritorious vowing and perfourming Pilgrimages:
your invocation of Saints departed: your rules of perfection for Monks and
Friars: your relying on the Pope as head of the church, and Uicar general unto
Christ: these with infinite other superstitions in action, and errors in
doctrine we deny to have any foundation in the Scriptures, or confirmation in
the general consent or use of the catholic church.


Phi. We stick not on your words, which you utter to your most advantage: but
be not these things as we defend them, and you reject them, Catholic?


The. Nothing less.


Phi. What count you catholic?


Theo. You were best define that: Vincentius Lirinens* aduers. haeres.
it touches you nearest.


Phi I mean catholic, as Vincentius does, that wrote more than 1100. years
ago.


Theo. So do I. And in that sense no point of your religion, which this Realm
has refused, is catholic.


Phi. All.


Theo. None.


Phi. These are but bragges.


Theo. Indeed they are so. Nothing is more common in your mouths than
catholic: and in your faith nothing less.


Phi. Who proves that?


Theo. Your selves, who after you have made great s^urre for catholic,
catholic, and all catholic, when you come to issue you return it with a non
est inuentus.


Phi. Will you lie a little?


Theo. I might use that sometimes, which is so often with you: but in this I do
not.


Phi. I say you do.


Theo. That will appear, if you take any of those points which I have
rehearsed.


Phi. Which you will.


Theo. Nay the choice shall be yours, because the proof must be yours.


Phi. Take them as they lie. Having and worshipping of Images in the church, is
it not catholic?


Theo. It is not.


Phi. Eight hundred years ago the general council of Nice, the second,
decreed it lawful and ever since it has been used.


Theo. Catholic should have four conditions by Vincentius rule, and this has
not one of them. How Vincentius defines Catholics.
There can nothing be catholic, unless it be confirmed two ways: first by
the authority of Gods law, and next by the tradition of the catholic Church,
not Vince^s. aduers. haeres.
that the canon of the Scripture is not perfect and sufficient enough for all
points of faith, but because many men draw and stretch the Scriptures to
their fancies, Vincent. Ibide^.
therefore it is very needful that the line of the Prophetical and
Apostolical interpretation should be directed by the rule of the
eccl^siasticall and catholic sense. Ibidem.

Quod semper, vbique and ab omnibus creditum est.


Now in the catholic Church her self we must take heed we hold that, which
has been believed, at all times, in all places, of all persons, for that is
truly and properly catholic.

By this rule your erecting and adoring of images in the church is not
catholic. Worshipping of Images is against the Scriptures.
For first it is prohibited by gods law: and where ye text goes against you,
the gloze cannot hel^ you. If there be no precept for it in ye word of god, in
vain do you seek in the church for the catholic sense and interpretation of
that which is no where found in the Scriptures. If it be not Prophetical nor
Apostolical, it cannot be catholic nor ecclesiastical.

Again, It has not been believed at all times.
how has this been always in the church, which was first decreed 780. years
after Christ? It is too young to be catholic that began so late, you must go
nearer Christ and his Apostles, if you will have it catholic or ancient.

Thirdly al places and persons did not admit the decrees of that counsel. For
besides Africa and Asia the greater, Neither in all places nor of all persons.
which never received them, the churches of England, France and Germany did
contradict and refute both their actions and reasons. And in Greece it self
not long before, a Synod of Sigebert. in anno 755.
330. Bishops at Constantinople condemned as well the suffering as reuerencing of
images.


Phi. The most part of this that you say is false: the rest we little regard, so
long as we be sure the church of Rome stood fast with us.


Theo. All that I said is true: and as for the church of Rome, she can make
nothing catholic. That the church of England detested that 2. council of
Nice: Roger Houeden, that lived 400. years ago, witnesses. Charles the king
of France sent over into England, the Acts of a Synod sent him from
Constantinople: Where, out alas, are found many unseemly things and contrary
to the true faith, specially for that it is there confirmed with the general
assent of all the East teachers, Continuationes Bedae anno 792. The Church of
England against Images.
to wit, of 300. Bishops and more, that images ought to be adored, the which the
church of God utterly detesteth. Against the which Albinus wrote an epistle
maruelously grounded on the authority of the divine scriptures, and carried it
with the said Synodical acts in the name of our (english) Bishops and princes
to the K. of France.

Charles two years after called a great Synod of the Bishops of France, The
churches of France, Italy and Germany, condemned the second council of Nice.
Italy and Germany, at Franckford: where the 2. council of Nice was rejected
and refuted.


Phi. Nay the council of Constantinople against images was there reuersed and
explosed.


Theo. Your friends have done what they could, to make that seem likely, and
many of your stories run that way for life, but the worst is, the men that
lived and wrate in that very age do mar your play. Regino says: Regino,
lib. 2. anno 794.
Pseudo synodus Graecorum, quam pro adorandis imaginibus fecerant, a
Pontificibus reiecta est. The false Synod of the Graecians which they made for
defense of the worshipping of images, was rejected by the Bishops (assembled at
Franckford under Charles.) Hincmarus Archbishop of Remes, then living when
these things were in fresh memory, says thus of Charles his Council:
Hin^mar. Remens. contra Hincmar. Iandunensem epist. cap. 20.

The Council of Nice the second refuted by a general Synod of Germany.

A whole book written in the refutation of the 2. Nicene Council by Charles
and his Bishops.

The Monks have razed our Nice, and put in Constantinople. Vrspergens. in anno
793.

That Council was assembled at Nice and not at Constantinople.


The seventh general council so called by the Graecians (in deed a wicked
council) touching images, which some would have to be broken in pieces, and
some to be worshipped, was kept not long before my time by a number of Bishops
gathered together at Nice and sent to Rome, which also the Bishop of Rome
directed into France. Wherefore in the reign of Charles the great, (the Sea
Apostolic willing it so to be) a general Synod was kept in Germany by the
convocation of the said Emperor, and there by the rule of the Scriptures and
doctrine of the fathers the false council of the Graecians was confuted, and
utterly rejected. Of whose confutation t^ere was a good big book sent to Rome
by certain Bishops from Charles, which in my young years I read in the Palace.

Vrspergensis has bin under the file of some monkish deprauer, as many other
writers and fathers have bin. For in him you have razed out the name of the
city of Nice and put in Constantinople, to make men believe the Synod of
Fra^ckford condemned, not the 2. Nicene council that settled adoration of
images, but an other of Constantinople that banished images. Vrspergensis
says, The Synod, which not long before was assembled under Irene and
Constantine her son in Constantinople called by them the seventh general
council, was there (in the council of Franckford) rejected by them all as
void, and not to be named the 7. or any thing else. Here some foolish forgerer
has added these words (in Constantinople) whereas it is evident, the council
under Irene and Constantine her son, was kept at Nice, and not at
Constantinople, and Hincmarus that lived in the time of Charles and read the
book it self of the Synod of Fra^ckford, when it was first made, says the
Bishops assembled in Germany by Charles utterly rejected and refuted the
council of Nice, called the seventh general council.

The very same words (at Constantinople) are in the acts of the council of
Fra^kford, as Laure^tius Surius Tomo Council. 3. admonit. Surij ad lector. de
Synod. Francof. ^ol. 226.
says, though very falsely; for though that I find in the book it self, and
contrary to the plain words, in many places and namely in the 4. book, 13.
chapter, where they are refelled from comparing themselves with the 1. Nicene
council, because they were assembled in the same city, and so li. 4. ca. 24.
But if the words had bin conveyed in, as they are not, (except Surius copy be
framed by Surius himself to verify his own saying) what proof is this that
the Synod of Franckford never de^reed against adoration of Images, but rather
with it, as that mouthie Friar observes, where the reasons and authorities of
the 2. Nicene council for adoring images, are truly and fully refuted
throughout those four books? And his conclusion, that we have forged those
books, and conveyed them into the Popes library, where they ly written in
ancient characters, as the Augu. Steuch. de Donat. Constant. lib. 2. numero 60.
keeper of the Popes library confesses, is like the rest and not unlike
himself, who cares not what he writes, so it serve his humor, and help his
cause.

For otherwise who that were master of himself, would suppose it easier for us
to forge four whole books in Charles name, and to write them in ancient
hands, and thrust them into the Popes library and into many other churches
and Abbaies, and no man spy it, than for you having the books so many
hundredth years in your keeping to put in this one word ( Constantinople?) And
if our luck were so good, to forge so near the Popes nose, and not be
descried, who forged Hin^marus, Regino, Houeden, Vrspergensis, Adon, Auentine
and others that testify the Council of Frankford refuted the false Synod
which the Graecians kept Adon. aetase 6. Auent. lib. 4. says, Scitae Graeco^um
de adorandis Imaginibus rescissa sunt.
Pro odorandis imaginibus, For the adoring of images? If you were so negligent,
as to suffer so many to be forged against you and laid in your libraries, and
you not find it: how just cause have we to persuade our selves that you would
wink with both eyes, when others should be corrupted to make for your purpose?


Phi. Many, Their Monks and Friars being worshipers of Image^ themselves, would
not believe that the 2. Nicen Counsel was condemned for decreeing Images to b^
worshipped.
you know, report for us, that Charles and his council condemned the breakers
of images; and a number of your own side confess the same.


Theo. In stories we must not respect the number and vehemency, but the
antiquity and sincerity of the authors. Two hundredth, that lived long after,
and were not acquainted with the deeds themselves: can not counteruaile two
that lived in the same age, and had the full perusing of their acts. Again
your later writers were all addicted to images, and therefore they would not
acknowledge that ever the council of Franckford condemned the council of Nice
for adoring images. Lastly it is not altogether a lie when they say the
council of Franckford refused the council of Constantinople. For where the
council of Constantinople said it was idolatry to have them, and the council
of Nice defined it lawful to worship them, The book exta^t agrees with this
report of Hincmarus.
the council of Franckford, as Hincmarus confesses, liked neither, but held
it a thing indifferent to have them, and adjudged it a mere impiety to worship
them.


Phi Then having of images, The west Church 800. years after Christ suffered
stories to be painted and carved in the Church, but not to be worshipped, as
the second Council of Nice concluded.
you grant, was catholic, though the worshipping of them, in some places were
not so taken.


Theo. The having of images was never catholic, and the worshipping of them
was ever wicked, by the judgment of Christ's church.


Phi. At this time the West church did not gainesay the having of them


Theo. The West church at this time used them only as ornaments, and
monumentes for the ruder sort to learn the lives and deaths of ancient and
undoubted Martyrs: but if you forget not your self, you be 800. years too
short of catholic; and even then by the churches of England, France, Spain,
and Germany, was the worshipping of images detested and refuted as contrary to
the christian faith.


Phi. By worshipping and adoring of images, we do not mean, that godly honor
should be given to them, but only a kind of external duty and reverence with
the gesture of the body, as kneeling, kissing, censing, religious holding up of
eyes and hands before them, with such like signs of outward submission.


Theo. The Grecians were not so brutish as to decree divine honor to stocks.
Neither do I think that Adrian the Bishop of Rome, or the Grecians were so
blas^hemous and brutish idolaters, that they decreed divine honor to dead and
sensles stocks: though your Schooleme^ not long before our age came to that
gross and ^il^hy doctrine, and salued it with a vain translation of the honor
that was done to the image, as passing from the image to the principal it
self represented by the image: But the Grecians I think meant an external
regard and reverence, such as is given to the sacred vessels, books, and
elements that are used in baptism and at the Lords Supper. The west Church
refused to give any external honor to images.
For those be their own comparisons though their words be adoration and
veneration: and yet that external and corporal honor given to images the West
Bishops abhorred as neither catholic, nor christian, and the church of Christ
long before them condemned as heretical.

Gregory the first, 200. years before Charles called the council of
Fra^ckford, thought it not amiss to have painted histories suffered in ye
church, but in no wise the pictures to be worshipped. Greg. lib. 7. epist. 109.
Your brotherhood, says he to Serenus Bishop of Massilia; seeing certain
worshippers of images, brake the said images and cast the^ out of the church.
The zeal which you had that nothing made with hands should be worshipped, we
praise: but we think you should not have broken those images. Stories painted
in the Church, but no picture worshipped.
For painting is therefore used in churches, that they which are unlearned may
by sight read that in the walls, which in books they cannot. Your brotherhood
should therefore have spared the breaking of the^, and yet restrained the
people from worshipping them, that the rude might have had, how to come by the
knowledge of the story, and yet the people not Sin to wor^hip pictures.
sin in worshipping the picture. Painted stories, Gregory thought might be
tolerated in the church, for the simple to learn the deaths and martyrdoms of
many Saints, which in books they could not: but as for worshipping them, he
confesses the people should sin in doing it, and the Bishop did well in
keeping them from it. Gregor. lib. 9 epist. 9.

The scriptures prohibit the wor^hipping of pictures. Ambros. de obi^^^
Theodos. Error and wickedness to worship the Cross that Christ died on.

Aug. de moribus ecclesiae Catholicae. lib. ^. cap. 34.




And treating in an other place of the same matter, he says: The children of
the church now disperced are to be called together, and taught by the
testimonies of the sacred scriptures, that nothing made with hands may be
worshipped. And so concludes, adoration of images by all means avoid.

S. Ambrose speaking of that cross, on which Christ was crucified, says:
Helena found the title, and worshipped the king, not the wood surely: for that
is the error of the Gentiles, and vanity of the wicked. S. Augustine requiring
the M^nichees to show what one thing they could mislike in ye catholic church:
Bring me not, says he, such christians as either know not or keep not the
force of their profession. Rake not after the rude sort, which even in true
religion are entangled with superstition. My self know many that are
worshippers of tombs and pictures. I warn you that you cease to speak evil
of the catholic church, by carping (these) men's manners, whom the church her
self condemns, and seeks every day to correct the^ as ungracious children.

Marcellina is reckoned and detested as an heretic by Ireneus, Epiphanius and
Augustine, Bowing and burning incense to the Image of Christ objected to
heretik^ as Idolatry. August. de haeresib. haeres. 7. Epipha. in 80. haeres.
anaceph^ Epipha. lib. 1. ^om. 2. haeres. 27.
for having the images of Christ and Paul in her closet, and setting garlandes
on their heads and burning incense to them. Marcellina, says Austen, was of
Carpocrates sect, and worshipped the images of Jesus, Paul, Homere and
Pythagoras with bowing her self and burning incense. So says Epiphanius. Of
this sect was Marcillina of Rome. She made secretly the images of Jesus and
Paul, and Homere and Pithagoras, and burned incense to the^ and worshipped
the^. And charging the whole sect of Carpocrates, with the same fault, he
says: The heretics called Gnostici, Besides all this, have images painted
with colors, and some of gold and silver, which they say are the images of
Jesus, and made in the time of Pontius Pilate, when (Christ) was conversant
amongst men. These they keep closely. And so does Ireneus also witness, Iren.
li. 1. ca. 24.
they all restrayning and adiudging it to be heresy and idolatry to cense and
bow to the image of Christ or Paul, as well as to the image of Homer or
Aristotle.


Phil. Not so neither.


Theo. Yeas even so. This in manifest words is reckoned by these three fathers
for a special point and part of their wickedness as well as the worshipping of
other Philosophers images. The worshipping of Christ's Image is idolatry.



Phi. Put you no distinction between the images of Christ, and other profane
persons?


Theo. The worshipping of either, is heathenisme and idolatry.


Phi. Call you the image of Christ an Idol?


Theo. Not unless it be worshipped: but if it be, then is it an Idol, and
incense burnt unto it, is idolatry.


Phi. How prove you that?


Theo. If the judgment of christ's church in accompting them heretics for
that act do not weigh heavy enough with you, the law of God confirms the
same.


Phi. Where?


The. You be not I trust to seek of that which every child with us ca^ say:
Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5.
Thou shall make thee no graven image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in
heaven above, or the earth beneath, or in the waters under the earth. Thou
shall not bow down to them, nor worship them.


Phi. Does this precept touch the image of Christ?


Theo. It touches any thing made with hands, that is worshipped, be it the
image of God, of Christ, or of who^ you will.


Phi. No Sir, it touches the images of false Gods, but not of the true God:
for they be Idols, that are nothing.


Theo. We speak not of the things themselves but of their images made with
hands. A false God is an idol in the heart of man, and so are all things in
heaven and earth, to the which we give any such ghostly or bodily honor as
God has prohibited. Saint Paul calls the Ephesians. 5.
covetous man a worshipper of idols: of others he says, Phil 3.
whose God is their belly, teaching us, that, whatsoever we love, Bodily or
ghostly honor given to any thing which God prohibiteth is Idolatry.
serve or obey against the commandment of God, we make it our God by
preferring it before the will and precepts of the true God: and in that it is
our god, which of it self is not God, it is an idol, and the love, service,
and honor, that is so yielded to it, is idolatry by the law of god. For this
cause, the bowing our knees, and holding up our hands to an image, though it
be not all the honor we ow and yield to god, yet is it such honor as he has
prohibited to be given to any thing made with hands, and in that respect our
advised and determined doing it against his commandment is idolatry, For his
precept is resolute: Thou shall not make thee the likeness of any thing in
heaven or earth, Exodus 20.
thou shall not bow thy self before them, nor serve them.


Phi. This may not be understood of the image of the true God. For if the
images of Princes may be reverenced, and idolatry not committed, much more the
image of God.


Theo. Earthly similitudes of your making, may not control the heavenly
precepts of Gods own giving. The images of Princes may not well be despited or
abused, least it be taken as a sign of a malicious heart against the Prince,
but bowing the knee or lifting up the hand to the image of a Prince is flat and
inevitable idolatry.


Phi. The image of God deserves more honor tha^ the images of me^ in respect
of the person that is resembled.


The. You heard the plain precept of God commanding no such honor to be
given to any image made with hands, no not to the image of himself.


Phi. God prohibiteth the worshipping of his own Image.
I hear you so interpret, but I hear not him so command.


Theo. You may when you will, the scripture in that point is very clear. Moses
the reporter of the law from Gods own mouth, laying forth the ground of the
second precept, says: Deuteronomy. 4.
The Lord spoke unto thee out of the midst of the fire: and ye heard the voice
of the words, but saw no similitude. Take therefore good heed to your selves,
for you saw no image (of God) in the day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb
out of the midst of the fire: that ye corrupt not your selves, and make you a
graven image (of God) or likeness of any figure whether it be of male or female,
or of any beast that is on earth: And so along pursuing the several branches
of the second commandment. They saw no shape of God, least they should make
them any image of God, contrary to that which he had commanded them.

Esai. 40.
By this precept Esaie proves that God should not be figured. To whom then
will you liken God? or what similitude will you set up unto him? And sharply
rebuking the people for not remembering that part of the law, wherein they were
charged to make no likeness nor similitude unto God, Ibidem.
he says; Know ye nothing? Have ye not heard it? has it not been told you
from the beginning? Not meaning any secret or private instruction of man, but
the open and written law of God, which was then delivered them, when they first
became the people of God. Moses and Esaias refer the second precept to any
Image made with hands and erected unto God.
So that as well the writer, as the interpreter of the law yield this to be the
sense of the second precept, that no similitude or likeness should be made unto
God because no such image ca^ resemble the brightness of his glory, but only
demonstrate the baseness of our fancy.


Phi. We talk not of making similitudes unto God that be unlike him, but of
worshipping those that be like him.


Theo. And since none can be made, that is like him, the bowing to any is not
the honoring of him, but the serving of idols, which he ahhorreth. Again, the
first part of this precept, Thou shall not make thee any graven image, The
later part of the 2. precept forbid^th to worship that which the first did
forbid to make.
nor the likeness of any thing, directly concerning the shapes and images that
any man would or could make unto God, as Moses and Esaie do witness, the rest
of the same precept: Thou shall not bow down to them, nor serve them, must
needs be referred to the selfsame similitudes and figures which before were
prohibited to be made. Thirdly if any graven Image of God might be worshipped,
why might it not be made, since it cannot be worshipped until it be made? God
therefore prohibiting it to be made, instructs us that though it were made,
it should not be worshipped. And to that end God himself protests, Esa. 42.
My glory will I not give to an other, nor my praise to graven Images; meaning
no part of the honor and service that is due unto him, whether it be
spiritual, as fear, love, faith, obedience, prayers and thanks: or
corporal; as bowing the knee, lifting up the hand, burning incense, and such
like, which are Idolatries when they are done to Images as well as the former
kinds of inward and Ghostly worship.


Phi. Idolatries they be, when they be done to the Images of false Gods which
are Idols; not otherwise.


Theo. False Gods by nature there are none: 1. Cor. ^.
We know, says the Apostle, that an Idol is nothing in the world, and that
there is none other God but one, and he is wholly truth: But the shape or
figure made with hands, to resemble the true God, whatsoever it be, is an
Idol, prohibited by Gods Law, as I have proved; and therefore bowing the knee,
or holding up the hand to it, is Idolatry condemned by that precept which I
last repeated, Thou shall not bow thy self to them, nor serve them.


Phi. What? not to the Image of the true God?


Theo. The Image of the true God, An Image made by man unto God, is but a
dishonor unto God. Deuteronomy. 27.
made with hands, is a false God, and no likeness of his, but a lewd
imagination of yours, set up to feed your eyes with the contempt of his sacred
will, dishonor of his holy name, and open injury to his divine nature. For
what resemblance has a dead and dombe stock, shapened like a man, to the
glorious, invisible and infinite Majesty of the living and everlasting God?
How are you not afraid to defend the worshipper, when God accurseth the maker
of any such carved or molten Image; as being an abomination in his sight? Does
your cunning or conscience serve you to gainsay the manifest voice of God
himself speaking by his Prophet? Esa. 40.
To whom now will you liken me, that I should be like (him) says the holy one?


Phi. We be not so foolish as to think the shape of a mortal man resembles
the incomprehensible substance of the deity.


Theo God grant you be not. Do you then acknowledge, that every likeness
made with hands to represent the God of heaven, Every Image erected unto God is
an Idol.
is an Idol?


Phi. Every likeness: what mean you by that?


Theo. I mean the likeness of man, woman, or of any other creature in heaven or
earth.


Phi. It is somewhat hard to call the Image of God an Idol.


Theo. To call that an Idol which man makes for an Image unto God, since God
himself refuses every such likeness, and pronounces it Deuteronomy. 27. Sapient. 14.
Esa. 44.
accursed and abominable, is no hardness at al. Yea rather to give it a better
name, were to make God a liar, and in spite of his spirit to save the Jews
and Gentiles from that Idolatry, wherewith they were charged, and for the which
they be condemned in the scriptures. For the things which they worshipped, they
thought to be the Images of God, and in that respect did they honor not them
so much as God by them, supposing them to be his Images.


Phi. The Gentiles and Jews that were Idolaters, worshipped false Gods and not
the Image of the true God.


Theo. Their false Gods were the works of men's hands made to resemble in their
conceit the true God. The Idolatrous Jews pretended to worship the Image of
God when they set up the calfe.
The children of Israel did not think their golden Calfe to be a God, but
minding to have some monument of God always in their sight to stir them to
devotion, they made choice of a calfe, because they had seen such Images set
up to God in Egypt, where the people serving God in that visible shape were
wealthy and mighty, by which blessings they coniectured God was well pleased
with the service of Egypt; and therefore to testify their thankfulness for
their deliu^rance, they erected an Image unto god their deliverer, and
proclaimed Exodus 32. verse. ^.
an holy day, (not to the calfe but) unto the Lord. The mother of Micheala
Iudic. 17.
vowed silver unto the Lord, to make a graven and molten Image. Which she after
perfected and named Teraphim, building a chapel and entertaining a Leuite for
it, in the honor no doubt of him to whom the silver was first dedicated.

The Jews in all their generations knew there was no god but one, and yet
seeing the Gentiles that served god in the shape of a man or likeness of other
creatures, to prosper and live at hearts ease, and oftentimes to be Lords over
them that were the people of god, Iudic. 2.
they fell to the manners of the nations round about them, and honored as they
thought the true god of Israel with bodily shapes and figures, whereas god by
his prophets notwithstanding their good intentions rejected and reproved that
their service as done to strange gods and Idols. Baal was set up, for the
Image of god.
Yea Baal it self, which the Scripture detesteth as a most infamous Idol, was
nothing else but a corporal Image erected unto god: by which the people dreampt
they served and pleased god, as may be gathered by Osee where god promises to
receive Israel unto favor and to cause them to cease from their Idolatrous
dishonouring him with the name of Baal. Ose. 2.
At that day says the Lord, thou shall call me no more Baal: and by Esaias where
god denies the Images that were set up for him, to be Esa. 40.46.
like unto him.

The very heathens were not so blind as to believe the things which they made
with their hands were gods, neither did they set them up as gods, but rather as
Images unto god, whom they thought to be delighted with that kind of visible
and voluntary service. Ambr. in Psalm. 118. sermo. 10.
Saint Ambrose says of them: Gentes lignum adorant, quia Dei Imaginem putant:
The heathen worship their (pieces of) wood, because they think them to be the
Images of God. Themselves could answer the Christians in that sort, as Celsus
in Origin: Origin. contra Celsum, lib. 7. The Heathen did not take their Images
for Gods.
Quod si vel lapidem negent, vel lignum, vel aes, vel aurum Deum esse,
ridiculum profecto erit id sapere. Quis enim ea nisi stolidus quispiam pro Dijs
habuerit? Sed Deorum sunt ista vel sacra vel effigies quaedam. If the
(Christians) deny things made of wood* stone, brass or gold to be God, we
grant that were a ridiculous opinion. Who but a stark fool did ever account
them for Gods? Yet these are services unto the Gods, or else certain
resemblances of the Gods. Lactant. de falls. religione, lib. 2. cap. 20.
So Lactantius witnesses of them: Non ipsa, inquiunt, timemus, sed eos ad
quorum Imaginem ficta and quorum nominibus consecrata sunt. (The heathen) use
to say, we stand not in awe of these (Images) but of them after whose likeness
they be figured, and in whose names they be dedicated. Their words in Clemens
are: Clemen. recognitio. ad Iac. lib. 5. Aug. in Psalm. 113. concione 2.
Nos ad honorem inuisibilis Dei visibiles Imagines adoramus: We worship the
images which we may see, in the honor of that God which can not be seen: And
in S. Austen, Nec simulachrum, nec Daemonium colo, sed per effigiem corporalem
eius rei signum intueor quam colere debeo. I worship neither the Image, Mark
well this shi^^, and tell me what the Papists lack of it. Romans 1
nor the Devil: but by a corporal figure I behold the sign of that which I
ought to worship. Saint Paul charge all the Gentiles not with having new
Gods, or other Gods, but for turning the truth of God unto a lie (to
wit,) the glory of the incorruptible GOD to the similitude of the Image of a
corruptible man, which they made and honored as the Images of the true GOD.

Grosser idolatry than the which can not be committed. It is wickeder
Idolatry to worship an Image than to worship a creature.
For if to worship the creatures themselves which are the works of Gods
hands, and wherein his eternal power and divinity do appear, were palpable
Idolatry: how inexcusable is it to serve the works of our own hands and
the shadows of those creatures prepared by art and applied by our vain
conceit to resemble the creator? you must therefore either grant every
likeness made with hands, and set up for an image unto God, to be an idol, or
else excuse both Jews and Gentiles from idolatry; which I trust you will not.


Phi. The gentiles knew not God, A greater sin for those that know God, to set
up an Image unto him than for those that knew him not.
and for that cause could set up no Image unto God, but unto their own
ignorant imagination of God.


Theo. And you that presume to know god, if you set up such images unto god as
the gentiles did, which knew him not; you be ranker Idolaters than they were.
The more knowledge you have of god, the more sure you be that those things
made with hands be no way like unto god, and that he utterly detesteth and
expressly forbids both the making and the reuerencing of all such Images as
woorkemen could devise for him, were they Pagans, Jews or Christians.


Phi. What if we grant you that god should not be figured? The figure of a man
set up unto God is an Idol as well as the figure of a beast. Deuteronomy. 4. Romans 1.



Theo. Then you must also grant that every image erected unto god is an idol.


Phi. The figures of beasts, birds, woormes and other unreasonable creatures
made to resemble god are idols.


Theo. And so is the figure of a man: Moses teaching the children of Israel so
much in precise terms: Take heed that you corrupt not your selves and make
you a graven image or representation of any figure, whether it be of man or
woman: And S. Paul affirming of the gentiles, that when they knew God, they did
not glorify him as God, but became vain by their discourses (of reason) and
their foolish heart was full of darkness, in that they turned the glory of the
incorruptible god to the likeness of the image of a corruptible man. The same
you may see in Psalm. 115. Esa. 44.
David and Esaias: where ye shape of man set up for an Image unto God, is
directly condemned for an Idol; as well in the Jews that knew God, as in the
Gentiles that knew him not. Whether it be therefore the likeness of man, beast,
bird, worm, fish, or whatsoever creature in heaven or earth, if it be made or
used as an image unto God, it is an Idol: and the submission of the knee, and
devotion of the hands, that is, any reverent and religious gesture unto it, is
Idolatry.


Phi. All this yet touches not us.


Theo. Does it not? first what answer can you make for figuring the Image of
the most blessed and glorious Trinity, sometimes with three faces, as in your
common An horrible picture of the Trinity with three faces in the popish
prayer books.
prayer books printed in the late reign of Queen Mary, and sometime like
Horae Mariae Impressae per Johan. le Pressed. impens. Rob. Valen^. 1555.
an old man having a long gray beard and his son sitting by him with a dove
between them: as in most of your Churches and Oratories: what answer I say
can you make for these notorious and enormous impieties? Not only the adoring,
but the very making of such pictures is abominable, and the selfsame frenzy
that GOD revenged in Jews and Gentiles with horrible plagues. Secondly if to
worship the image of God made by art, with kneeling, censing, or holding up the
hands be against the law of God, and condemned in the Scriptures for the
service of Idols, how can your adoration of Images not only with corporal
gestures, but with spiritual prayers and vows be Catholic, or that Council
be Christian, which first decreed, Nicen. Synod. 2. action 2.
the Images of all Saints, men and weomen, might perfectly and openly be
adored?


Phi. We were not the makers of those pictures of the Trinity.


Theo. We know you be neither Printers nor Caruers: but you were the sufferers,
allowers, proposers and commenders of these pictures unto the people: and in
that respect your sin is far greater than theirs that were only the
painters and grauers of them, Sapien. 14.
though there lie a curse even on the^ for their wicked labor and travel, to
have God dishonored by their art and industry.


Phi. The Images of the Trinity we will not You do defend them in your
Rhemish Testament, fol. 345.
defend, because your tongues are so bent against them: and yet the Catholics
did not sin in doing their devotions to God by those or any other occasions.


Theo. The people are in good case to have such teachers as you be. The
figuring of the trinity the most of you dare not defend (though your Rhemish
obseruers have the faces to defend any thing) because the Law of God is direct
against it, pronouncing all such resemblances of God to be Esa. 44. Deuteronomy. 27.
an abomination unto him: and yet you closely encourage your Catholics to
continue their former liking of those pictures, and by some smoothe words
would feign make them believe they serve God, when they honor that which God
openly rejects as an Idol.


Phi. The artificial figure of Christ's humane flesh may not be worshipped.
Against the Images of Christ and his saints you have no such exception; why
then mislike you that those should be worshipped?


Theo. If the Image of Christ's divine nature may not be worshipped, much
less may the figure of his humane flesh framed of wood or stone be so highly
reverenced. Secondly man himself is a perfecter and truer Image of Christ than
any can be made with hands, and yet for all that you neither do, nor may
offer to worship any mortal man. Thirdly if ought should be worshipped in the
painted and carved Images of Christ, it must be the matter, or the form. The
matter is wood, stone, brass, silver or some other metal: in which is no
religion. The form is nothing but the skill and draught of the crafts-man,
proportioning a shape not like unto Christ whom he never saw, but as his own
fancy leads him: and in that case you worship not the similitude of our
Savior, but the conceit of the maker. Lactant. de falls. religio. lib. 2. cap.
2.
Fourthly the workman is ever better than the work; for so much as there is
no grace in the Image which came not from the Caruer. And since no man boweth
to the workman, why should you kneel to the work of his hands? Lastly see you
not how absurd it is, that Lactant. Ibide^.
men which have reason, sense and life should worship things that are void of
reason, senseless and dead? Lactant. li. 2. cap. 19.
Wherefore doubt you not but there is no religion (or devotion) wheresoever
there is an Image. Religion consists of divine things, and nothing is divine,
but that which is heavenly: Images ergo are far from (devotion and) religion,
since there is nothing in them that is heavenly, they consisting of earth.


Phi. You reason as though we worshipped the earthly matter or shape, and not
rather the things represented by them.


Theo. If you talk of worshipping Christ and not his image, Christ must be
worshipped with all humility, but not his Image, because that is not Christ.
we yield to you without any farther speech that you must worship him with all
humility as the natural, true and only son of God: but what is that to the
adoration of his image made with hands, which you defend to be Catholic?


Phi. May we not give some reverence to the Image of Christ, though he be in
heaven: as well as you do to the thrones and letters of Princes, when
themselves be not present?


Theo. Have you no surer ground of your catholic doctrine for adoring images,
than a single similitude taken from the civil and external reverence that is
yielded to Princes seats and Seals?


Phi. Yeas we have surer: but first answer this.


Theo. This is not so sure as you think.


Phi. Sure or unsure, what say you to it?


Theo. First that painted and carved Images, Earthly similitudes are all the
proofs that Papists have for adoration of Images.
be neither the Seats nor Seals of Christ, and so no sequel from those to
these. Next that the civil honor which is due to Princes can be no president
for any religious honor to be given to Images: Especially the same God, which
commands each man to honor the King, forbids all men to bow themselves
to any Similitude of his made with hands.


Phi. Let them have some reverence yet, either religious or civil for his sake
whom they represent.


Theo. If a man should make a seal like the Princes, or nail up cloth of
Tissue where the Prince is not, and say it is a chair of state, would you be
so foolish as to regard either of them, or should you not dishonor the king
if you did reverence them, since they be not such things as the Prince
accepts or uses for his, but other men's counterfaites?


Phi. I speak of that Chair where the Prince did sit, and of that Seal which
the Prince did send.


Theo. I know you did, and therefore I refused your similitude as unlike the
matter in question betwixt us: because images are neither places of Christ's
presence, The Seats and seals of princes make nothing, for adorat^on of
Images.
nor witnesses of his will, as Seats and seals are unto Princes: no nor
ordained, allowed or admitted by Christ to have any credit or use about his
heavenly person or pleasure; but only proposed by men of a natural and kind
affection as they thought toward Christ: though clean without warrant, and so
without thanks from him. For he of purpose took his bodily presence from the
eyes of men that he might dwell in their hearts by faith, An Image can teach
us nothing of that we should behold in Christ.
and to teach us to honor him not by that proportion of face which the painter
would draw, but by that abundance of love, grace and mercy, which he has
extended on us and laid in stoare for us, and which no corporal eyes can
behold, nor colors express, but only the hearing of his word and woorking
of his spirit can lighten and persuade the heart of man to conceive and
believe.


Phi. Is it not thanks worthy with God to have always the shape of his
son before our eyes, that we may honor him with our hearts?


Theo. To honor him with your hearts, and to have him at all times in your
minds is religious and requisite: Christ has left better and safer means to
remember him, than by an Image: which papists leave and prefer their own
devises before his.
but to make light of those means which he has prescribed to nourish your
faith and continue the memory of himself, and to seek out others of your
own fit to please your senses, not to resemble his greatness or goodness, this
is neither acceptable unto God, nor profitable for your selves.


Phi. To remember Christ cannot be evil.


Theo. Not to remember him till you look on a picture can not be good. Your
hearts ought always to be lifted up unto him, that 1. Cor. 10.
whether you eat or drink, wake or sleep, or Colos. 3.
whatsoever you do in word or deed, (you may) do all in the name of the
Lord Jesus, Ephesians. 5.
giving thanks always for all things unto God the father in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ. You must not tarry for the execution of this precept till
you see an Image. But all your actions, words and thoughts must be directed
to the praise of his glory and honor of his name.

By what means and ways the holy Ghost occasioneth us to remember the son
of God.
This if you put in bre you shall need no painted nor carved Image to bring you
in mind of his mercies. The benefits and blessings within you, without you,
and on every side of you (which GOD for Christ's sake bestows on you) are so
many that you can hardly forget him: unless you also forget the earth that
bears you, the heaven that covers you, the day that guydeth your feet, the
night that gives you rest, the meats that you feed on, and the breath that
you live by: yea your own bodies which he woonderfully made, and souls which
he preciously bought: All these things and all other things in heaven and
earth you must drown in utter oblivion, before you can infer that Images be
needful to put us in mind of our duties to GOD. He has a dull heart that
reme^breth not Christ till he see an Image.
And since without Images you can and must remember the Father that created,
and the Holy Ghost that ^anctified you, why should you forget the son that
redeemed you more than the other, except you have Images at your elbowes to
kindle you appetites?

But this is nothing to the worshipping of Images, which you should prove to
be Catholic. Though there were an historical use in painting the shape of
our Savior, yet is it no piety to worship the picture. Grant it might be
used for remembrance, for religion it may not; and therefore you are all this
while besides the mark.


Philand. You deny both the having and woorshipping of Images to be
Catholic. We prove the having of them to be necessary by the fruit and
profit that comes from them: What commodities the Papists say they suck out
of Images.
namely the instruction of the ignorant in the story of their salvation, the
putting us in often remembrance of our Savior, and the stirring up our
devotion with more feruencie.

The worshipping of them we prove with more facility: for if he that
honors the Image honor the person himself thereby represented, as All
these fathers are wrested by papists from their right meaning.
S. Athanasius, S. Basil, S. Chrysostom and S. Ambrose do affirm: then the
worship which is done to the Image of Christ, passes unto Christ himself: and
by consequent if it be lawful to adore and honor Christ, it is not unlawful
to do the like to his Image. Besides we can prove that adoration of Images
is a tradition delivered from the Apostles, and observed in all Churches: and
that the Scripture it self supporteth us in this point, as the learned epistle
of Adrian the Bishop of Rome to Constantine and Irene does largely show:
and for the credit of the cause we have a general Council eight hundredth
years old to say as much in every point as I affirm, and more.


Theo. We marvel not to see you so deeply deceived and strongly deluded as
you be: 2. These. 2.
such is the just judgment of God on all that admit not the love of the
truth, but have pleasure in unrighteousness. You rest on the vanities and
forgeries of such as were inclined to the same error before you, The Papists
greedily embrace other men's forgeries and many of their own for adoration of
Images.
not examining their proofs, nor considering their reports; but presuming
their evident follies to be pregnant authorities for you, whith is ever the
next way to seduce others, and to be seduced your selves. As touching the show
which you make of Scriptures, Apostolic Tradition, Churches, Fathers and
Councels, it is a childish and frivolous vaunt. The fathers which you quote,
are abused, the Apostles and their Churches belied, the Scriptures depraved and
wrested, the Council, which you call general, rejected as wicked, and
diligently refuted in the same age by the West Bishops. Of these empty and
unlucky Maskes, the more you bring, the less you win.


Phi. We loose nothing so long as you lode us only with words.


Theo. If your proofs be vain, my words be true: Look you therefore to
the soundness of that which you allege: otherwise your own burden will
ouerpresse you.


Philand. The collection which I made out of Saint Basil and others is very
sure. Saint Basil says: Honos Imaginis in ipsum prototypum redit. The honor
done to the Image redoundeth to the principal that is thereby represented.
Nice. Council. 2. act. 6. Ibidem.
S. Athanasius, Qui Imaginem adorat, in ipsa Imperatorem adorat. He that
reuerenceth the Image, honors therein the Emperor. And S. Chrysostom*
Know thou not, that he which hurts the Emperors Image, Ibidem. Ambros.
in Psalm. 118 Concio. 2.
defaceth the Imperial dignity it self? And so S. Ambrose, He that crowns
the Emperors Image, honors surely him, whose Image he honored: and he that
despises the Emperors Image, does the injury to the Emperor whose Image
he did spit at.


Theo. We doubt not of this similitude.


Phi. Then we infer: ergo he that worshippeth the Image of Christ
worshippeth Christ himself: and so the adoration of Christ's Image is not
Idolatry, but piety.


Theo. You mean that Image of Christ which is made with hands.


Phi. I do.


Theo. Then we deny the consequent.


Phi. Why so? Between the resemblances of Christ and others the proportion is
good. Great difference between the services and Images of God and men.



Theo. Yea, but between the services of God and men, and also between their
Images, the distinction is great. Princes can expect no more but a sober
reverence due to their states, expressed by some decent gestures of the body,
that others may behold it; and that to be yielded chiefly to their persons, and
secondly to their deputies, vicegerents and messengers, yea to their ensigns,
arms and recognisances, such as they shall use or allow to represent their
power or to notify their pleasures. In which case they that honor the Princes
throne, Scepter, Seal, sword, token or Image, honor not the things which
they see, but the power that sent them.

Thus far your similitude is current, marie from hence to adoring the carved
and painted images of Christ can you draw no consequent.

The Similitude of honoring the original by the Image answered.
First because Christ has neither appointed nor allowed them to represent his
person, as Princes have.

Next for that our savior as the son of God must have a divine honor in
spirit and truth, fit for the creator whereof neither images nor any other
creatures are capabl^: and is so ielous of it that he will part it with none,
and namely not with graven or molten images, No Creature, nor Image capable of
Christ's honor because it is divine.


Thirdly the image of any Prince is then to be honored when the Person is
absent: but in the presence of the Emperor himself to turn to his image
were Lib. de falsa religio. cap. 2.
apparent madness as Lactantius teaches. Since then the Lord Jesus is by his
divine majesty present in all places at all times to receive that honor and
adoration of all men that is done unto him: it is no piety but frenzy to
honor his image when he himself is not absent: The Fathers make Christ the
Image of God, and not a piece of wood to be the Imgae of Christ.
and requires as well the religious behavior of the body as the inward
motions of the mind to be yielded unto him.

Lastly these fathers do not bring this similitude to prove that we should
worship the image of Christ made with hands, but that we should adore
Christ himself as being the express image of his father, proposed by God to
have one and the same honor with him, and in that respect the honor done to
him passes unto God the father whose Image he is, even as the reverence given
to the officers, arms or Images which Princes send to set up, unto them
selves, is accepted as rendered to their own persons, when they can not
otherwise be present in the place to receive it but by a Substitute, or a sign
that shall represent their state.


Phi. You may quarrel with any conclusion if you be once minded to be
froward.


Theo. Call you that quarelling, when you can not be suffered by a similitude
stretched whither you list your selves, If an Image must have Christ's honor,
ergo it must be God.
to subvert the very groundworke of all religion and godlynes? for if this
sequel be sure, that the honor done to the painted or carved Image of Christ
is transf^rred to Christ himself; then must you give to the Image of Christ no
baser, nor other honor than Christ is willing and worthy to receive: Mar. 4.
Luke 4.
and that is the highest and diuinest kind of adoration that may be, which the
Scriptures reserve only unto God.

And what is this but to set your selves against heaven, and to cry defiance
unto God, Images may have no divine honor, and Christ will hau^ no civil
salutations nor friendly greetings.
by giving his honor unto others: yea to the vilest and ignoblest things of
all others; and to serve most abicet creatures in equal degree of glory with
the most mighty creator and quickner of all? If you give them no religious nor
divine honor but a loving aspect or a reverent behavior, that single
salutation or mannerly submission may not pass unto Christ, lest you seem to
use him as your good familiar and old acquaintance, or else as some earthly
Potentate rather than as the God of grace and second person in the blessed
trinity. Less than divine honor Christ will not have: he that otherwise
honors him, defaceth him, and that honor you can not empart to his Image
without sacrilegious and damnable Idolatry: your conclusion therefore is not
only vain but also wicked, if you refer it to the Image of Christ made with
hands: and other acceptions of Christ's Image can do you no good.


Phi. S. Ambrose uttering the words which I last rehearsed, adds farther,
Vides quod inter multas Christi Imagines ambulamus: In Psalm. 118. sermo. 10.
Thou see we walk among many Images of Christ: and therefore all sorts of
Images which pertain unto Christ must have their convenient honor.


Theo. But S. Ambrose the next words before utterly excludes your wooden
Images as not within the limits of his speech, and reproves the Gentiles for
thinking a piece of wood could be an image unto god: and then adds as you
say, Christ acknowledges the poor to be his Image, and yet it were wickedness
to worship them.
that the church had many images of Christ: not, many kinds of Images, but
many in number that Christ accepts and reputeth for his Images; and those he
makes to be the poor and afflicted in whom Christ is relieved or despised,
as he shows by the words of Christ speaking of them as of himself in the
twenty five of Saint Matthewes Gospel. And this rather hurts than helps
your conclusion. For if the honor which is due to Christ may not be given to
men who are the living Images of Christ made by the woorkemanshippe of GOD
himself, Men are the living Images of christ made by the hands of GOD
himself.
much less may the same be derived to wood or stone fashioned by man's hand,
and in no point answerable to the true proportion of Christ, but in this only
that they be shaped like men. For which cause they resemble the son of God
no more than they do any other of the just or unjust that did or do live, and
cannot truly be called the Images of Christ, but only by the Painters
purpose, The Image which is made for Christ, is no more like him than it is to
any other of the saints or wicked.
and the peoples error, which have no power to appoint what Image shall stand
for Christ, much less to prescribe what honor he shall be content to
excommunicate to that Image, which they list to erect unto him. These be
sufficient causes to stop your conclusion, if your antecedent were general as
it is not, and similitudes you may not wrest farther than they, that made them,
did intend them.


Phi. Making and worshipping of Images fal^ly fathered on the Apostles.
You said somewhat if the worshipping of Images were not delivered us by
Tradition from the Apostles.


Theo. Were the Apostles makers or woorshippers of Images?


Philand. Never read you that?


Theoph. Yeas I have read it often, but I was never so wise as to believe it.


Phi. Then I perceive you would hardly believe that Christ himself made the
first likeness of his own face, and sent to king Abagarus, as Damascene and
Nicephorus witness. Damasc. lib. 4. cap. 17. and Nicepho. lib. 2. cap. 7.



Theoph. You may well swear, I will neither believe you, nor Damascene,
Damascene says, Fertur quaedam historia: there is such a story spread abroad,
A fable of Christ painting his own face.
but he neither tells by whom it was made, nor of what credit it is, and
Eusebius that first took this story of Abagarus, and that at large out of the
monuments of the City Edessa, reports no such thing: yea the Church of Rome
her self some hundreths before Damascene, Eusebius. lib. 1. cap. 13.
repelled that Distin^t. 15. S. Ro^ana.
Epistle of Christ to Abagarus then extant by name as Apocryphal. And therefore
you bolster an error, and abuse the people of God with forgeries long before
condemned, though since received by Nicephorus and other fablers among the
Grecians, who wrate all they found without judgment, or without all shame
feigned that they never found, except it were in some wicked and witless
legend, Of such lege^ds the Church of Rome has plenty.
such as your Church of late days had good stoare.


Philand. And so the image of our Lady made by Saint Luke, you will say is a
fable; and yet Simeon Methaphrastes does confirm it.


Theoph. Leave these late and obscure Liars, and bring somewhat worth the
answering.


Philand. Saint Basil says the painting and adoring of Images is a tradition
of the Apostles: and so does Damasc. lib. 4. cap. 17.

Citatur ab Adriano in epist. sua Nicen^

Synod. 2. act. 2.


Damascene. The words of S. Basil are, Quam ob causam and historias Imaginum
illorum honoro and palam adoro. Hoc enim nobis traditum a sanctis Apostolis non
est prohibendum, sed in omnibus eccle^ijs nostris eorum historias erigimus. For
which cause I honor and What shame have they left that make such places in the
fathers names?
openly adore the stories of their Images. And this being What shame have they
left that make such places in the fathers names?
delivered us from the Apostles is not prohibited, but in What shame have they
left that make such places in the fathers names?
all our Churches we erect their histories.


Theoph. Can you turn us to the place in Saint This place is not found in all
S. Basils Epistles, and yet there are extant of his 180; and many of them not
fouer lines a piece, so that all were preserved, saving this that was never
wri^^^n.
Basil?


Phi. The epistle is not extant, but Adrian the Bishop of Rome, whose credit
is sufficient for a greater matter than this, does allege i^ ^ut of his
writings against Julian the Apostata.


Theo. Adrian and you b^th shall pardon us for believing you, when we find no
such words in all S. Basil.


Phi. They might be then in Saint Basil, though they be not now.


Theo. If the words did agree with the spirit of Saint Basil, or with the
s^a^e of those times, or with the rest of the fathers and ancient teachers in
Christ's Church, we would not so much dislike them, though they were not
found in Saint Basils works: but now seeing the words to be sensibly
false, if not utterly wicked, and to have no conuenience with the doctrine of
those that taught in the same time or near about his age: and knowing in the
contention of the Grecians for images somewhat before Adrian, If that were
Adrians Epistle he might soon be deceived: but it seems to be rather a late
forgerie in Adria^s name.
what framing and ^^ling of fathers there was to bear out either side: we
think it easier for the Bishop of Rome to be deceived in a Greek writer,
that lived 450. years before him, by some false reporter, lewd translator, or
cunning forge^er, than for Basil to be so great a stranger in the Church of
Christ and so manifest a despiser of Gods precepts, that he would openly
defend, and himself use, adoration of Saints Images without any scruple; as
delivered from the Apostles; who were far from having, and farther from
teaching the godly to worship the Images of Prophets, Apostles or Martyrs, as
this deluder dreameth. And therefore either show us the Epistle where this is
written, or else leave loding the learned fathers names with such unlearned
corruptions.


Philand. Were there not many things written by the Catholic Fathers that
now are perished?


Theoph. And as many things forged in their names that were never written by
them, as appears in all their works to this day by the judgment of your
very friends. Infinite forgegeries have been committed in the fathers names,
as appears at this day in all their works.

The west Bishops that refuted the 2. Nicene council and al authorities one
after an other, never mentioned this place: and therefore it has been put in
since their time.





Phil. This is the next way to call all their writings, and so the whole
Christian says in question.


Theoph. You would feign have us swallowe your monkish impieties under the
color of their authorities: but the wisdom of God has better provided for
his church than so. The rule of our faith is the voice of our Shepherd. By
that we judge of the writings of all others be they f^ith^^ll or Infidels. If
this were written in Basil, we would not receive it until we had tried it by
that touchstone: finding no such thing in all his works, why should we
regard it?


Philand. There it was, though now it be not.


Theophi. There it is not, wheresoever it was; and your alleager has no such
credit with us that we should trust him.


Philand. Trust no man I pray you, that is against you.


Theo. We trust not you to be your own caruers.


Phi. This authority was alleged and allowed to be S. Basils in a general
Council 800. years ago.


Theo. That Council was never received nor confessed to be general by the west
Churches, but rejected and condemned as a wicked coniuration against the faith:
and the The Epistle has neither truth, learning, reason nor sense.
letter there framed in Adrians name, besides that it sauoreth altogether of
your late forge at Rome, is a pestilent and shameless deprivation both of
fathers and Scriptures.


Phi. You be very choice that can like nothing, except it be exquisite.


The. You be worse than gross, if you take such palpable lies to be the
fortresses of your faith. Omit that fond and false report of Constantines Seven
notorious lies repugnant to all the Church stories, touched in one corner of
this Epistle.
leprosy purposing to be washed in a bath of infants Seven notorious lies
repugnant to all the Church stories, touched in one corner of this Epistle.
blood, and dehorted from it in the night as he slept by some that appeared to
him, whom he afterward Seven notorious lies repugnant to all the Church
stories, touched in one corner of this Epistle.
knew to be Peter and Paul by their Seven notorious lies repugnant to all the
Church stories, touched in one corner of this Epistle.
Images which Siluester Bishop of Rome showed him: and that thereupon
Constantine being first a Seven notorious lies repugnant to all the Church
stories, touched in one corner of this Epistle.
persecuter of the Christians, was converted, and Seven notorious lies
repugnant to all the Church stories, touched in one corner of this Epistle.
baptized by Syluester, and began to build Churches and Seven notorious lies
repugnant to all the Church stories, touched in one corner of this Epistle.
decked them with Images in every place; (lewder and viler fables than which
your legend has none:) the rest of Adrians allegations out of the scriptures
and Fathers, what are they but open injuries and mockeries of GOD and man?

The scriptures alleged in Adrians Epist.
The Scriptures which he brings to prove the making and adoring of Images be
these: God made man of the slime of the earth after his own Image. Adam of his
own free will Genes. 1.
called all the beasts of the field and fowls of the air by their proper
names. Genes. 2.
Abel of his own accord presented a sacrifice unto God of the firstlings of
his flock. Genes. 4.
Noe after the flood of his own head buylt an altar unto the Lord and offered
thereon. So Abraham of himself erected an altar in the honor and glory of
God. Genes. 8.
Jacob also, Genes. 28.
when he had in his sleep seen the Angels of GOD ascending and descending by
the ladder, after he rose of his own motion set up a stone on the ground,
where his head lay, and powered oil on it, and named the place Bethel, and we
do not read that God for this cause was angry with him. Again the same
Jacob worshipped in the top of his staff. Not that he woorshipped the
staff, but him that held it in a sign of love.

If the scripturs be not horribly abused, let Images on Gods name be adored.
Then alleging the brazen Serpent, and the Cherubins made by Moses and Solomon,
he descends to other testimon^es of Esaias and David, as sit for his purpose
as salt for sore eyes. Esai says, Esa. 19.
In those days there shall be an altar unto the Lord in the mydst of the Land
of Egypt, and a pillour touching the ends thereof, and it shall be for a sign
and a testimony to the Lord in the land of Egypt. And David the tuner of
Psalms says Psalm. 95.
confession and beauty before him. And again: Psalm. 25.
Lord, I have loved the comlynes of thine house. And again: Psalm. 26.
Thy face Lord will I seek. And again: Psalm. 44.
the rich among the people shall bow themselves before thy face. And again:
Psalm. 4.
the light of thy countenance is signed upon us.

These be the best proofs which Adrian or he that framed this letter in
Adrians name could find in all the Scriptures for the making and adoring of
images, Children would not thus play with Scriptures.
and these you see be very miserable. For what fellowship has Adams act,
Abels sacrifice, Noah's or Abraham's altar, Jacobs stone and staff, Esaies title
or pillour with images: or when David spoke of the face and countenance of God,
did he so much as dream of the graven and wooden figures, which you would
erect unto God against his heavenly will and truth?


Phi. In deed these places be not altogether so pertinent as we could wish
the^: but the brazen serpent and the two Cherubins which Moses set up, directly
make for Images. The brazen serpent made by Moses.



Theo. They do not warrant your erecting of Images: and your adoring of Images
they utterly overthrow. For the Brazen serpent was a figure of Christ, as we
find confirmed by his own words in the John 3.
gospel of S. John: and yet though God Numb. 21.
commanded Moses to make it, and healed the dreadful plague of the people by
it, and the Jews had kept it above 700. years as a monument of Gods mercy
toward them in the desert, when they began but 1. King. 18.
to burn incense to it, Ezechiah the religious King of Judah brake it in
pieces and is commanded by the holy Ghost, namely for that act.

This example we would have you advisedly to mark. And broken in pieces by by
Ezechias when it was abused.
A figure of Christ erected by Gods own commandment, and serving to put al
Isreal's posterity in mind of the wonders which their fathers saw in the
wilderness, when it was abused was defaced, and the fact allowed by Gods own
mouth. Hence we conclude; that the painted and carved Images of Christ himself
may not be adored, and if they be, they may be removed, though they were
delivered even by the Apostles, as yours were not.

The Cherubines were made by Gods appointment, but not set in any place for the
people to adore them, or so much as to see them: nay the Priests themselves
were kept from the sight of them; Hebr. 9.
only the High Priest, once every year, went into the second Tabernacle where
they stood, the veil being closely drawn between that and the first
Tabernacle, where the rest of the Priests served. And since Gods care was so
great that they should not be seen; we infer, his will was as clear that
they should not be worshipped, for so much as they could not be worshipped
unless they were seen.


Phi. Yet this shows that God would have them made. The Cherubins not seen
much less worshipped. Tertul. de Idolatria.



Theo. But not seen, much less worshipped. And as for the making of them, Gods
act above his Law is no warrant for you to break his Law. By his Law he
restrains you, not himself from the making of any such similitudes. And
therefore though he might for causes to him known go against his Law, you may
not. This rule Tertullian will teach you. It is no hurt that the same God by
his Law forbade a similitude to be made, and by an extraordinary precept
commanded the similitude of the brazen serpent to be made. If thou will obey
God thou have his law, make thee no similitude. If thou look to the precept
that was given after for making a similitude, then see thou imitate Moses. Make
no Image against the law, unless God bid thee (as he did Moses.)


Phi. The fathers who knew the Scriptures as well as you, were of an other
mind, as you may see by Adrians letters, Fathers abused by Adrian, as well as
scriptures.
auouching many and good authorities out of them.


Theo. Adrian deals with the fathers as he did with the Scriptures. Eight of
them he alleges and abuses every one of them. Augustine says, Nicen.
Synod. 2. act. 2.
The Image of God what is it but the face of God in which the people of God are
signed? And Ambrose; Eight fathers perverted in this one Eistle.
when we worship in Christ the divine Image and Cross, do we part him in
sunder? The divine Image and countenance, which these fathers speak of, is the
brightness of Christ's divine nature and glory: his cross is his death and
humility: those Adrian grossly supposes to be such as grauers and caruers
do make with their hands. And where Cyril says, Faith painteth (or lively
describes unto us) the word which was in the form of God: The fathers draw
similitudes from profane things, and Adrian wresteth them unto divine things.
that evidence and clearenes of the Gospel setting the son of God in his
divine majesty before our eyes, your holy father lewdly misconstereth for
painting with pencils and colors. Athanasius, Chrysostom and Basil, drawing
similitudes from the painters art, and Emperors Image, to other purposes, are
violently wrested to make for that they never meant nor thought. Gregory Nissene
confesses he had often seen the story of the passion pictured, but he neither
says in Churches, nor allows it any worship.

Hierom is brought in last and made to say that which not only no learned
father ever uttered, Hierom made to speak open Impiety.
but no sober nor Christian man ever imagined. As (God) gave leave to the
Gentiles to worship things made with hands, and to the Jews (to worship)
the carved works and two golden cherubins which Moses made, so has he given
to us Christians the Cross, and to paint and reverence the Images of good
works, and so to get him to like of our labor. The two first points, that
God gave leave to the Gentiles to worship things made with hands, and licenced
the Jews to adore the works and shapes of Cherubins which Moses made, are so
directly against the truth of the Scriptures, and rule of our faith, that
nothing can be more: the last may well be written by him that wrate the first,
and as soon true as the rest. No such thing in all Hieroms works.
And were it found in Hieroms works, as it is not, it would but argue that
other men's hands had been in Hieroms books as well as his: which is no news
in the most of the Fathers Greek and Latin that you have left us at this day:
But of that pains Adrian himself has eased us by alleging that which is not
in all S. Hieromes volumes.

The place of Basil is set amidst these deprauations of Scriptures and
fathers. The same place otherwise repeated in the same Council, and therefore
the first or the last must needs be forged.

Nicen Synod. act. 4 ex ep. Basil. ad Julian. Imperator.


Amidst the route of these follies and forgeries, comes in that Bastard place
of Basil, no where found in all his writings; which, besides the apparent
slander there fastened on the Apostles and Churches of Christ against al truth,
the legates of Adrian in this very Synod convince of a manifest and mighty
corruption in the words that be most material for your purpose.


Phi. Did the legates of Adrian contradict their masters allegation?


Theo. The same place being rehearsed by Demetrius a Notarie out of the book
it self, which the legates of Rome offered in the council, sounded far
otherwise than Adrian had cited it. For where Adrian in his letters alleged,
Hoc enim traditum nobis ab Apostolis non est prohibendum: This being delivered
us by the Apostles must not be prohibited: the book which they read, had Hoc
enim nobis a sanctis Apostolis non est prohibitum: this is not forbidden us by
the Apostles. It is one thing to say The Apostles did deliver it, and an other
to say The Apostles did not prohibit it. Between these two reports, if you
weigh them w^ll, you shall find good difference.


Phi. If you like not the former reading, The Apostles did not prohibit the
making of Images in speci^l words, because God had done it sufficiently before.
take the latter, and that in sight is true. For the Apostles in particular
words did not prohibit the making and worshipping of holy Images.


Theo. They needed not. God by his Law long before had done it very
sufficiently: and that standing in full force, there needed no new
prohibition, since no authority could be greater than his, who had already
forbidden it. And yet by your leave the Apostles did not only propose the
whole Law of God, as Romans 7.
holy, just, and good, but they namely touch the second precept, which we
reason of; Saint Paul confessing the Jews did well according to the Law Romans
2.
to abhor Idols, and that the Gentiles Romans 1.
were given over to their vile affections for turning the glory of God to the
Image of a man; and S. John requiring all christians to beware the like, 1.
Ioh. 5.
in say^ng, Babes, keep your selves from Idols.


Phi. From idols: but not from images.


Theo. An Image made with hands if it be set up to God himself, and
worshipped, is an idol, as I have proved; and therefore you must either
renounce your adoring of images, which your forged Basil would establish, or
else suffer the^ to stand for Idols, from which S. John deterreth us.


Phi. S. Augustine says it is not an Idol except it b^ Dei falsi and alieni
simulachrum, August. quaest. super Iudic. li. 7. ^^p. 41.
the image of a false and strange God. And in that respect you do the Images of
Christ and his Saints great wrong, to call them idols.


Theo. S. Augustine in that place disputes how Gedeons Ephod should be said in
the scripture to be fornication in the people, and the destruction of Gedeons
house since it was (as he thought,) no likeness of any thing against the law,
but an imitation of the Priests apparel prescribed in the Law. Gedeons Ephod
was an Idol, though it were not the Image, of a false God. August. Ibidem.
And albeit to interpret himself, what he meant, when he said it was no idol,
he adds by way of explication, (that is no shape of any false or strange God)
yet does he not limit the word to that continual use: but rather grants, as
his conclusion shows, that there were mo kinds of Idols, and that this,
though it were a garment in the law, and not an Image against the law, yet was
it in sort an Idol, and so his words import: Factu^ est Gedeon and domini eius
in scandolum, quia and hoc quodda^ genus Idoli quoda^modo erat. This was the
ruin of Gedeon and his house, because it was in some sense a kind of idol.

Tertullian will tell you the word is general, Tertul. de Idolaetria.
and notes the likeness or shape of any thing. (...) graece, formam sonat, ab
^oper diminutionem (...), aeque apud nos formulam fecit: Igitur omnis forma vel
formula Idolum se dici exposcit, This word (...) in greek signifies a shape,
whence (...) is derived as a diminutiue, and with us signifies any likeness:
therefore every shape or likeness may well be called an Idol. Isidor repeating
Tertullians words as worth the noting, adds of his own; Isido. Originu^ lib.
5.
Idolum est simulachrum quod humana effigy factum and consecratum est. An
Idol is an Image made after the shape of a man and dedicated (unto some
religious use.)


Philand. Nay dedicated unto some false God, and then it is rightly an Idol.


Theoph. But Isidore says generally that an image consecrated is an idol: and
consecration is the addicting of any thing to holy and divine uses.


Phi. That is not Isidores meaning.


Theo. Those be Isidores words.


Phi. You heard S. Augustine say, it must be the Image of a false GOD.


Theo. S. Augustine does not tie the word to that signification as you heard by
his own confession: An Image worshipped is a false God, and consequently an
Idol.
and yet if you take false and strange Gods, as S. Augustine does, your
adoration of painted and carved Images will prove them to be false Christ's,
and your selves to be worshippers of false Gods. For if you worship Christ
not after his will, but after your conceit, you woorshippe now not Christ,
but the fiction and imagination of your own hearts; and that is a false Christ
as Saint Augustine learnedly and truly teaches. Quaest. super Joshua. lib. 6.
cap. 29.
Quisquis talem cogitat Deum, qualis non est Deus, alienum Deum vtique and
falsum in cogitatione portat. Whosoever supposes God to be that he is not,
bears a strange and false GOD in his cogitation. This elsewhere he calls
the Idol of the heart, The Idol of the heart.
not only in Pagans but also in Christians. Of the false fancies that Pagans,
had of GOD he says: August. de verbis Dom. secundum Mat. sermo. 6.
Prius id agimus vt Idola in eorum cordibus confringamus. The first thing that
we labor is to break down those Idols in their hearts. Of the wrong
imaginations of christians he says, Idem in Joan. tract. 19.
Quae omnia Idola cordis sunt: all which are Idols of the heart.


Phi. A false opinion of his essence is an Idol in the heart of man.


Theo. And so is a wrong persuasion of his will or woorship. Hieron. in Iere.
cap. 32.
Hierom says, Vsque hodie in domo Dei, quae interpretatur ecclesia, sieve in
cord animaque credentium ponitur Idolum, quando nouum dogma constituitur. Even
to this present day, an Idol is set up in the house of God, Every false
opinion of God is an Idol.

Hieron. in Esaiae cap. 2.


which is interpreted to be the Church, or else in the hearts and souls of the
believers when a new point of Doctrine is devised. And therefore generally
resolves of all errors, Quod omne dogma contrarium veritati adoret opera
manuum suarum, and constituat Idola in terra sua: that every opinion repugnant
to truth worshippeth the works of his own hands, and erecteth an Idol in the
land where it is.

By the works of their own hands he means the devises of their hearts, as
else where he shows. Hieron. in Ose. cap. 4.
Haeretici perdito mentis iudicio adorant Idola quae de cord suo finxerunt.
Heretics with their wicked resolution of mind, (or else void of sense and
feeling of mind) adore the Idols which they have framed in their own
hearts. S. Augustine cites and commends the saying of Socrates. August. de
consens. Evangelist. li. 1. ca. 18.

To serve God as we list and not as he will, is idolatry.

Why the serving of God otherwise tha^ he wills is Idolatry.


Vnumquemque Deum sic coli oportere, quomodo ipse se colendum esse praeceperit.
Every God must be worshipped in such sort as he has commanded himself to
be worshipped. And thereupon infers, that if any would worship (the God
of the Hebrews) otherwise than he himself had willed, non vtique illum
colerent, sed quod ipsi finxissent, they should not have worshipped him, but
their own fiction.

In this consists the chiefest ground of all religion. For God has not
charged us to be curious in searching his essence, but to be careful in
observing his will. He neither takes nor requires any thing at our hands
besides his woorship. That if we yield him according to his will, we honor
him as our God: if we alter that which he has appointed for himself, or add
any thing unto it, he rejects all our service as done not unto him but to
the conceit of our hearts: which by nature is no God, and therefore an idol.
For this cause God is every where so earnest with us that we should serve him
not after our fancies, nor with our devises, but answerable to his will
reueiled in his word. You shall not do, every man what seems him good in his
own eyes: whatsoever I command you, Deuteronomy. 12.
that take heed you do that (and nothing else). Thou shall put nothing thereto,
nor take ought there from. And when the Jews thought to be very forward in
deserving God with their devotions and oblations, they were repelled with this
demand, Esa. 1.
who requires this of your hands? Our Savior himself assures you that Mat.
15.
you worship God in vain, if your fear (or service) toward him be taught
(you) Esa. 29.
by the precept of men.


Phi. All this we admit.


Theo. Then when we serve God besides his will, we serve not him, but the
presumption of our own hearts which is an idol: and this devotion of ours,
though we wholly intend it to him and earnestly urge it on him, yet is it the
worship of idols, and not of God, since he utterly renounceth it as none of
his, and being refused by him as injurious to his truth, though it be appointed
for him as most ^^t in our fancies, it must of necessity be counted idolatry.


Phi. What is this to the image of Christ, whereof we were reasoning?


The. Unless you can prove that Christ will be served with material and
artificial images, and is content to accept that honor as done to himself,
which is yielded unto them, your adoring them makes them idols and your selves
Idolaters. For they be things made with hands, which you cannot worship
without apparent idolatry.


Phi. We worship not them, but him that is represented by them.


Theo. It lies not in your power to divide adoration betwixt Christ and his
image, The worshipping of Christ by an Image except himself command it, is
Idolatry.
or with your inten^ion to assign that honor unto him, which you do to the
works of your own hands without his warrant. You must know whether he will
accept it as done to himself, before you may venture to convey it unto him by
dead and dumb creatures.


Phi. We doubt not of that.


Theo. Your confidence will not help the matter till his commandment be
showed.


Phi. All men, They must show where Christ commanded him self to be
worshipped by an Image.
you know, think that done to themselves, which is done to their image.


Theo. But Christ, that is God as well as man, is not so content.


Phi. How prove you that?


Theo. Nay the proof must be yours, since the fact is yours. You must show
that Christ allows of the honor done to a painted or carved image as done to
himself. If you cannot, you convince your selves of sacrilege, presumption and
impiety when you give that honor which is due to Christ, unto a stock or a
stone set up in his steed without his leave or liking. For this precept, Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, excludes as
well images as creatures from being partakers of his divine honor: and the
image which you make, be not so good as the creatures which God made: which yet
in no wise may be worshipped.


Phi. You reason as And so you do, as shall appear by the confession of your
fellows.
if we gave divine honor unto images, which we do not.


Theo. Your schools with one consent do give the same honor unto the image
which is due to the original: that is divine honor to the image of Christ. If
you be ashamed of that error, you rid your selves of some danger, but you
leave your church in the briars; which has all this while professed and
practiced that idolatrous doctrine.


Phi. Our church never gave images any divine honor.


Theo. The fortress of your faith is direct against you: Tortalicium sidei
contra Iudae^s, Saracenos etc. lib. 3. Considerat. 4. argumen^. 24.

Divine honor given to Images by the Church of Rome.


Crux Christi and eius imago venerari debent adoratione latriae. Et haec est
opinio Thomae in 3. sententiarum distinctione 2. The cross and image of Christ
ought to wo^shipped with such honor as is due unto God. And of this opinion is
Thomas upon the third of the sentences, the second distinction.


Phi. Holcot was not of that mind as you find it testified in the same place.


Theo. But Holcots reward was to be repelled with his contradiction, because
your church took part with Thomas. And so your fortress says, Fortalicium
fidei Ibidem. Jacob. Nanctan. in 1. cap. ad Roma.
Licet hoc rationabiliter videatur dictum, tamen loquendum est, vt plures and
communis opinio tenet oppositum. Though this saying (of Holcot) seem
reasonable, yet we must go with the multitude: and the common opinion holds
the contrary. One of your Italian Bishops, who knew better than you what the
church of Rome holds, says: Ergo fatendum est fideles in Ecclesia adorare
imaginem sine quo volueris scrupulo: qum and eo illam venerari cultu quo and
prototypon eius. Propter quod, si illum habet adorari latria, and illa habet
adorari latria. We must therefore confess, that the faithful in the church
do without any qualification ADORE THE IMAGE (which they see) yea with the same
kind of worship that is due to the original. Wherefore if that have divine
honor, the image MVST HAVE THE LIKE DIVINE HONOR.


Phi. We give not this honor to the image, but rather to the original.


Theo. They give Christ's honor to an Image, and then they say they do it in
respect of Christ.
Your church in plain words gives the same honor to the image that is due to
the original, which in Christ must be divine honor: and when you be charged
with it, you say you give it not to the image, but rather to the Original: and
so by your later evasion you subvert your former assertion. For why dare you
not give divine honor to the image of Christ, but only because it were
manifest and apparent idolatry so to do? And if that be true, why then do
you teach all men to give the same honor to the image of Christ that is due to
Christ him self? You conclude it must be done: and yet you confess it can
not be done without a sacrilegious injury to Christ, if his divine honor
be given to an image made of earth and framed by Art.


Phi. The Papists think to shift off the art of Idolatry with a logical
respect.
You understand us not. When we give divine honor to the image in respect of
Christ, we give it to Christ and not to the image.


Theo. God grant you understand your selves. You first dishonor the Son of
God, by exhibiting the heavenly service, that is due to him, to an Image made
with hands: and then with a shift of words you think to delude him in
telling that he may not choose but like of your doings, because you meant it
unto him, when you did it to a dumb creature for his sake. But awake out of
your frenzy, God will not thus be mocked by your relations or intentions. He
is zealous of his honor, he will not resign it to any other, and namely not
to graven (or carved) images. Esa. 42. God respects the act if it be against
his law, and not the inte^tion.
If against his word, against his will, against his truth and glory, you
impart it to any other, or take upon you to conueie it to him by creatures or
images, as if he were not present in all places with might and majesty to
receive the service that is done unto him; you not only make new Gods, but you
reject him as no GOD, who alone is the true GOD, and will be served without
mate or mean of your devising.


Phi. Our Lord showing what account he makes of such as represent his person,
says: Mat. 25. Christ will have charity showed to others for his sake, but not
divine honor to any creature or Image.
In as much as you have done it to one of the least of these, you have done
it unto me.


Theo. Did Christ speak that of images?


Phi. No^ but thereby you see, it passes ^^to Christ, whatsoever is done in
his name or for his sake to others.


Theo. If you mean such charitable relief as Christ has commanded us to
yield to our brethren, in respect of his will, their need, and our duty: you
say well: we have for that the manifest precept and promise of our Savior
accepting it as done to himself whatsoever is done to any of his brethren or
servants: but if you leap from men to images, and from humane comfort to
divine honor, you leap too far to have the sequel good.


Philand. If divine adoration may not be given to Images, yet humane reverence
may without any danger. Whether civil reverence may be given to Images, ca^
be no question of religion.



Theo. Religious honor may not: and as for external and civil reverence,
whether that may be given to images, can be no doubt of Doctrine, nor point
of faith. The one is impious to be defended, the other superfluous to be
discussed.


Philand. So you give them either we care not.


Theophil. If you fly from adoration to salvation, and stand not on piety
but on civility: then is it a question for Philosophers and not for Divines,
and to be decided rather in the Schools than in the Church: neither can any
manne be praised or prejudiced for using or omitting that kind of courtesy,
which neither the Gospel nor good manners convince to be necessary.


Philand. Should we not Yeas, but you honor not him when you honor an Image.
honor Christ and his Saints by all the means we can?


Theophil. Christ you must honor with all power, and all your strength, as
being the Son of the living GOD: but you may not fasten his honor to any
Image or creature, since he is always present to behold, and willing to
receive as well the religions submission of knees, hands and eyes, as the
inward sighs and groans of the heart, neither can you bestow the least of
these gestures on an image in your prayers without open and evident wrong to
him to whom you should yield them.


Phi. For adoring of images I am not so earnest, as for having them in the
Church, that they may put us in remembrance of the bitter pains and death,
which it peased our Lord to suffer for our sakes: and that I am sure is
catholic, though adoration be not.


Theo. We do not gainesay, the remembering or honoring the death and
bloodshedding of our Savior: he is not only dull but wicked that
intermitteth either: but this is the doubt betwixt us, whether we should
content our selves with such means as he has devised for us and commended
unto us; Christ has appointed us be^ter means than an Image to remember his
death, and those the papists despise and prefer their own devises before
them.
thereby daily to renew the memory of our redemption, or else invent others of
our own heads fit perhaps to provoke us to a natural and humane
affection, but not fit to instruct our faith. The hearing of his word and
partaking of his mysteries were appointed by him to lead us and use us to the
continual meditation of his death and passion, a crucifixe was not: he
knowing that images, though they did intertaine the eyes with some delight, yet
might they snare the souls of many simple and silly persons: and preferring
the least seed of sound faith beholding and adoring him in spirit and truth,
before all the dumb shows and imagery that man's wit could furnish to win
the eye and move the heart with a carr^all kind of commiseration and pity,
such as we find in our selves, when we behold the torments and pangues of
any miscreant or malefactor punished amongst us.


Phi. All If they be not dange^^us and withal superfluous.
means are good that bring us in mind of his death.


Theo. By sight you may learn the manner of his death, but neither the cause,
nor the fruits, which are the chiefest things that the son of god would have
us remember in his death: and you very peruersely and wickedly keeping the
people from those means which Christ ordained, as the hearing of the word, and
right use of the sacraments (which you drowned in a strange tongue that the
people understood not) set them to gaze on a Roode and taught them to give all
possible honor both bodily and ghostly to that which they saw with their
eyes, bearing them in hand it passed from the image, to the original: that is
from a dead and senseless stock to the glorious and euerlyuing Son of God:
which in effect was nothing else but to worship and serve the creature, Romans 1.
before the Creator which is blessed for ever.


Phi. You are now besides the matter. We speak of having images for
remembrance, not of adoring them for religion: and that is catholic, if this
be not.


Theo. Since the having of images being neither delivered nor allowed by Christ
nor his Apostles, Neither Christ nor his Apostles delivered or allowed Images.
is superfluous, and the abusing of them is so dangerous and yet so frequent
and often that in all ages and places it has intrapped many Gentiles, Jews
and Christians, I see no reason why for a curious delight of the eyes, which
the Apostles neglected and the primative Church of Christ wanted, we should
scandalize the ignorant and exercise the learned, as for a necessary point of
catholic doctrine.


Phi. Had the Apostles and their scholars no images?


Theo. Had they think you?


Phi. Remember you not the image which Nicodemus that came to Christ by night,
made with his own hands and left to Gamaliel S. Paul's master: and he to
James, and James to Simeon and Zacheus. This report you shall find written by
Libell. Athan. de passion. Imaginis Christi.
Athanasius 1300. years since: and besides that it is amongst his works at
this day, it was repeated 800. years ago in the Nicen. Synod. 2. act. ^.4.
second Nicene council as Athanasius writing.


Theo. By this let the world judge both of your cause and cunning. A thing bone
by the confession of your own stories above 760. years after Christ,
Sig^ber^. in anno 765.
under Constantine the 5. not long before the second Nicene council, is
colored with Athanasius name, as written by him, that was dead 400. years
before the matter happened, Fortali^ium fidei, lib. 3. consid. 10. mirab. 5.
and not only published with his writings, but inserted into the second
Nicene council as his work, whereas the Bishops then assembled were all alive
when this outrage was attempted by the Jews not 24. years before the calling
of that Synod. Vincent* speculi histor. lib. 24. cap. 160.
Such fables and forgeries do well become the quarrel you have in hand, but
they will never prove your having of images to be catholic or Apostolic.


Phi. In deed they do; and therefore look to your 2. Nicene Council what
gross forgeries are in it.
In deed our stories do mention such an accident at the time which you name:
but if it be true, though it be not so old as Athanasius, we care not.


Theo. He that will forge must not stick to ly: lying is the very ground of
forging: and of a liar we look for no truth. And yet this tale of Nicodemus,
Gamaliel, James, Simeon and Zacheus, delivering an image from hand to hand, is
not the ass^rtio^ of the author, but the rude report of a poor ignorant man
fathering his image on them that never were christians, as Gamaliel was not,
and that 700. years after their deaths without any proof save only by
hearesay. By such legends you may soon prove what you will: but he that has
any spark of christian courage or wisdom, will utterly abhor these lies as
feeling the grosnesse of them with his fingers.


Phi. Since you so much dislike our proofs that the Apostles and the Primative
church had images, The Apostles and the Church succeeding for 400. years had no
images and all that was suffered in the Church for 600. years, was the painting
of stories.
can you prove they had none?


Theo. Does your discretion serve you to put us to prove the negative?


Ph. You affirm they had none: our demand is how you know that.


Theo. You can not prove they had: and that is cause sufficient for us to
avouch they had not.


Phi. Is that all you can say?


Theo. If it were, you can not void it: but we have evident proofs that the
church of Christ succeeding the Apostles had none, and thence we conclude the
Apostles delivered none: otherwise the church would not so soon have rejected
the tradition of the Apostles.


Phi. You may be sure they would not.


Theo. And since they did reject Images, The Gentiles obi^cted this to the first
Christi^ns that they had no Images. Arnob. aduers. gentes lib. 8. Origin.
contra Celsum lib. 7.
ergo it was no Apostolic tradition.


Phil. How prove you they did reject them?


Theo. The christians were charged by the Pagans for having no images, and they
not only confessed so much, but also defended it, as most agreeable with the
law of God. In Arnobius the heathen say of the christians, Cur nullas aras
habent, nulla tenepla, nulla nota simulachra? why have they no altars, no
temples, no (open or) known images? In Origin Celsus says, Hij non patiuntur
vel templa, vel aras, vel sim^lachra and statuas intueri. The christians can
not abide to behold temples, or altars, or images.

What the Christians answered. Clemens Alexand^. orati^ exhortatoria ad gentes.
In making their answer the Christians agnised they had none, and alleged the
law of God to prove they should have none. Cleme^s says, Nobis non est imago
sensilis de materia sensili, sed quae percipitur intelligentia. We have no
image that is material and seen with eyes, but (only) such as is conceived
with understanding. And adds this reason, Ibidem.
We are plainly forbidden to use that deceitful art (of making images.) Thou
shall not make, says the Prophet, the likeness of any thing. The Orige^s
^^t^a Celsum lib. 7.
Christians and Jews, says Origin, when they hear (the law of God) thou
shall not make to thy self any graven image nor the likeness of any thing:
neither shall thou bow down to them nor serve them, not only refuse these
temples, Altars and images of God, but if need be, choose rather to die. And
extending this as well to the image of the true God, as of those that were no
gods, he says, Ibidem.
Nec simulachra quidem nos veneramur, quippe qui Dei vt inuisibilis ita and
incorporei formam nullam effigiamus. We reverence not images, as making no
figure to God who is invisible and without all bodily shape. Arnob. contra
gentes. lib. 8. Lib. 2. cap. 19.
So Arnobius, What image shall I make to God, whose image, if you rightfully
judge, man himself is? And Lactantius as you heard before affirmed There
could be no religion, wheresoever there was an image.


Phi. These spoke not of the christian images, but of the Pagans: such as in
deed we may neither worship, nor have.


Theo. They speak namely of themselves which were christians: confessing they
neither had nor might have any image of God.


Phi. Not of the Godhead, but of Christ and his Saints they might
notwithstanding these words; and it is evident by Eusebius they had. For the
woman that was cured by Christ of the bloody issue, erected an The woman that
was cured of the bloody flixe by Christ erected an Image unto him as unto her
benefactour, her self being an heathen. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 18.
image of brass unto him in Cesaria where she dwelt, under the feet of which
image grew a strange herb healing all diseases as soon as it touched the
brazen skirt of his garment. This image remained together with the herb to the
time of Eusebius, and after till Julian the Apostata in spite of Christ brake
it in pieces and set up his own image in place thereof, which God struck with
fire from heaven in revenge of his son so dishonored by Julian, and threw the
head of Iulians image from the body, and pitching it with the face downward
into the earth, and blasting the rest with lightning for a terror to all that
ever after should offer the image of his Son any reproach or misuse: Sozomen.
lib. 5. cap. 21.
as you may read in Sozomene. And this example is a fair warning for you that
have beheaded and burned so many images of Christ and his Saints within this
Realm.


Theo. This image the woman that was healed, erected in the city where she
dwelt as a monument of the mighty power which our Savior had showed on her:
she being then an heathen and not instructed in religion, and thinking thereby
to provoke others to harken after him and seek for his help as she had done.
And when many trusted not her words, it pleased God, not only to ratify her
report as true, but to show the Gentiles by the wonderful event of the herb
there growing what virtue was in his son to cure all their griefs thereby to
lead them the rather to believe in him, that they might be saved by him. In
this we dispraise not the woman's purpose minding to celebrate the benefit
which she received at our Saviors hands, the best way that she then knew:
and we honor the goodness of God in preparing the hearts of unbelievers by
means of this miracle to be ready to embrace his Son: Julian overthrew this
image in detestation of Christ his person and doctrine.
detesting the wickedness of Julian that to discover his contempt of Christ and
malice against Christ (whose faith he had openly re^ounced) amongst other
villainies, which he offered, caused the Pagans in a triumph to draw this image
about the streets, and breaking it in pieces to set up the image of himself:
which God overthrew with fire from heaven, not in defense of the brazen shape:
but of his holy name profaned and illuded by this Apostata.


Phi. This image the Apostles saw and suffered.


Theo. A memorial of their masters act not abused by the people, Eusebius
iudg^ment of the woman's making this Image.
and erected before they came to preach the Gospel to that place, they might
suffer: but they never taught men to make the like, nor allowed any to
worship that.


Phi. We think they learned the setting up of this image from the Apostles.


Theo. Eusebius says, they did it of an heathenish custom, and not of an
Apostolic instruction. His words are, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 18. This setting up
of an image unto Christ is counted by Eusebius an heathenish custom.
And no marvel, that the Heathens which were healed of our Savior did him
this (honor,) for so much as we have seen the images of his Apostles Paul
and Peter and of Christ himself drawn in colors and kept in tables, which
kind of honor, antiquity of a custom which they used when they were
heathens, was wont to yield to such as they counted (Benefactors and) Sauiors.


Phi. By that you see the images of Christ and his Apostles were expressed in
colors and reserved by the ancient christians long before Eusebius.


Theo. Eusebius does not report it as a thing either openly received in
Churches, or generally used of all christians; but as a secret and seldom
matter, rising from the persuasion and affection of some which whiles they were
heathen, had yielded that honor to other of their friends and fautors, to
whom they were most beholding.

For had the Apostles delivered any such tradition, or the Primative church of
Christ used any public erection of images, Images rejected in Spain Council.
Eliber. canon. 36.
as you suppose, would the council of Eliberis in Spain assembled about the
time of Constantine the great, in plain words have banished them out of their
churches? Placuit picturas in ecclesiis esse non debere, ne quod colitur aut
adoratur, in parietibus d^ pingatur. We have decreed that pictures ought not to
be in the churches, lest that which is worshipped or adored be painted on
walls. August. de consent. Evangelist, lib. 1. cap. 20. Images rejected in
Africa.
Would S. Augustine, think you, have pronounced them worthy to err which
sought Christ and his Apostles in pictures and paintings, if the people had bin
taught that way to seek him? Sic omnino errare me^uerunt qui Christum and
Apostolos eius non in sanctis codicibus sed in pictis parietibus quaesierunt.
So they deserved to err, which sought Christ and his Apostles not in the
sacred Scriptures but in painted walls.

Or would Epiphanius have rent the image, which he found hanging in the church
by Jerusalem, and pronounced such painted imagery, notwithstanding it
represented Christ or one of his Saints to be contrary to the Scriptures, and
to the religion of Christ. Epiph. in epist. ad Johan. Hierosolymitan. Images
erected as contrary to the Scriptures.
His words are, (When I entered the church to pray,) I found hanging there in
the entrance of the said church, a stained and a painted cloth having the
image as it were of Christ or one of the Saints. When I saw this, that
against the authority of the Scriptures the image of a man was hanged up in
the church, I did tear it in sunder. And I pray you hereafter to command, that
such clothes repugnant to our religion, be not hanged in the church of Christ.
It becomes your fatherhood rather to have this care to banish this
superstition unfit for Christ's church, and for the people committed to your
charge. By this you may see that images were not received, much less adored in
the church of Christ, whiles these ancient fathers lived: and that to remove
them and keep them out of the church was then adjudged a seemly care for
Christian Bishops, agreeable with the Catholic profession, and public use
of the church of Christ in those days.


Phi. Gregory the first, you know, was of an other mind: that images should
be suffered and not defaced in the church. Gregory disliked not painting of
stories in the church, but he condemned adoration of Images.



Theo. Gregory lived 300. years after the council of Eliberis, and 200.
after Epiphanius, in which time the painting of stories was crept into the
church, as an ornament for the naked walls, and a mean to set before the
peoples eyes the lives and labors of the Saints and Martyrs: but that
pictures or images in the church should be worshipped or adored, Gregory did
in most manifest words abhor, alleging the law of God which we do that
nothing made with hands should be adored (or served). Greg. lib. 9. epi. 9



Phi. Not with divine honor.


Theo. You mean with no part of that honor, which God requires of us.


Phi. What else? They must not have divine honor in whole, or in part.


Theo. Then must they have none at all. For God requires bodily honor no less
than ghostly, as due to him: and by his law excludes all things made with
hands from having either in saying, Thou shall not bow down to them, nor serve
them. Exodus 20.



Phi. Bowing the knee, is not divine honor, but such as we yield to Parents
and Magistrates.


Theo. Bowing the knee is a part of Gods honor, as also holding up the hands,
Submission of knees, hands and eyes are parts of gods honor.
and lifting up the eyes: Esa. 45.
To me, says God, shall every knee bow. Ephesians. 3.
For this cause, says Paul, do I know my knees unto the father of our Lord
Jesus Christ: showing that the bowing of our knees is an honor due to God,
even as the lifting up of our hands and eyes belongs likewise unto him.
Psalm. 63.
As long as I live, says David, I will magnify thee on this manner, and lift
up my hands in thy name: 1. Tim. 2.
I will, says the Apostle, that the men pray every where, lifting up pure
hands. And so for the rest. Psalm. 123.
Unto thee, says David, do I lift up mine eyes, thou that dwell in the
heavens. And again, Psalm. 25.
Mine eyes are ever unto the Lord. And so of our Savior when he prayed, S.
John reports, John 17.
He lift up his eyes to heaven and said. The outward honor therefore of eyes,
hands, and kne^s God requires of us as his due, though chiefly and
principally the heart, which he will not suffer any man to have besides
himself, Magistrates and Parents have part of Gods external honor, because
they present his person in judging and blessing.

God has prohibited that Images should have any part of his corporal honor.


howsoever he allow those that present his goodness and glory in blessing and
judging, as Parents and Magistrates, to have some part of his corporal, but in
no wise of his spiritual honor.


Phi. And so many images have part of his external, though not of his internal
honor, which is the higher of the twain, and meeter for the divine majesty.


Theo. It is not in your hands to make allowance of Gods honor to whom you
list; and again God himself has made a plain prohibition in this case that
images shall have no part of his external honor. The words are as clear as
day light; thou shall not bow down to them.


Phi. Not to the images of false Gods.


Theo. It is but lost labor, to reason with such wranglars. Have not I mainly
proved that this precept expressly forbids the Image of the true God to be
made or bowed unto? Why then take you up those shifts again, which be false
and refuted?


Phi. If we may not bow to holy images as unto things that be superior and
better than man, We must not bow but to that which is better than our selves.
yet we may embrace and love them, as things which we like, and that both by
the use of the Greek tongue and speech of the scripture is called adoration,
as Tharasius the Patriarch of Constantinople in his Habetur Nicen. Synod. 2.
act. 7. What cunning was used in the 2. Nicene Council to have Images adored.
epistle to Irene the Empress and her son does largely confirm.


Theo. You put me in mind, what cunning was used in the second Nicene council
to save your poppets upright, and to set a color on their ungodly decree that
images should be worshipped. When they saw themselves not able to prove by
Scripture or father that images should be reverenced and adored, and they had
pronounced him Tharasius Ibidem.
accursed that doubted of the adoration of images, your wise and worthy Bishops
thought it safest to shroude their wicked resolution under the doubtful and
equivocate sense of the word adoration: because (...), in greek did signify
not only to bow for devotion and religion, but also to embrace for love and
affection, as friends and familyars when they happen to meet.

So Tharasius and the whole Synod defend the conclusion which they made in that
council. Nicen Synod. 2. act. 7. epist. Tharas. and totius Synodi ad Constant.
and Irenem.
For showing whose images they would have to be received: they add, Sunt hae
adorandae etiam, id est exosculandae and amandae. Idem enim haec significant
iuxta antiquam Graeciae dialecton. Nam (...), and (...) and (...) significat.
quod quis (...), id etiam (...): and quod (...), id omnino (...). These images
(of Christ and his Saints) are also to be adored, that is to kissed and
loved. These words are all of one force. To adore does signify both to
embrace and to love. For that which a man A man by this shift may adore his
horse, and be no Idolater.
loves, that he adoreth: and that which he adoreth, that he earnestly loves.
The natural affection and love which we bear toward our friends do witness
this. For so two (friends) when they meet (embrace and salute each other.) And
^^ing some places of the scripture where adoration is taken for a reverent and
lovely salutation: as when Genes. 33.
Jacob bowed himself before Esau, and Genes. 23.
Abraham before the people of Heth, and 1. Reg. 20.
David before Luke. 14.
Jonathan and the Pharisees were noted by our Savior for * loving such
magistrall obeisance, they infer; Has quoque adorandas and salutandas
putamus. We think images are (in like manner) to be adored and saluted:
pretending it to be a matter of faith and christian piety to adore images: and
when they come to the vpshot concluding nothing but an external and civil
kind of embracing or kissing, Were not these bishops well occupied to make
this conclusion?
such as a man may give to the coat which he wears, to the meat which he
eats, to every thing that he loves, without respect of religion or thought
of devotion.


Phi. Then you should the sooner grant, that images may be adored, since they
mean that kind of adoration which is without al danger of idolatry.


Theo. A right Stratagem of Satan first to bring in adoration of Images with an
ambiguitie of words, then to set the people to adore them in plain deeds.
Then you be wise divines, to make adoration of images a point of catholic
doctrine, since the Bishops of Nice, whose acts you would seem to follow,
interpret adoration to be but a familiar and friendly kissing or saluting:
such as men might yield to the manger where Christ lay swathed: to the howsen
which he entered: to the waters on which he walked: to the hills, deserts,
highwayes, and cities where he prayed, preached, iournied or suffered: the
adoration of which things and places I trust you will not make a part of the
Catholic faith.


Phi. Compare you an image with a manger?


Theo. It is the comparison of your own council in the very same epistle:
Nicenae Synodi 2. act. 7. epist. Tharasij and ^o^ius Concilij.
alleging these words of Gregory the divine, justify their adoration of
images: Worship Bethleem, adore the manger. If the stable and manger where
Christ lay must have the same adoration that images have; yea that the cross
has whereon Christ died: how shamefully is your church fallen not only from
God, but even from her own councels, in allowing the very same honor to
images, that is due to Christ himself?


Phi. The cross they did flatly adore: as their own words witness, which
presently ensue. Ibidem.
Crucem tuam adoramus Domine. We adore thy cross O Lord. And that, Ibidem.
as it should seem, was a part of the church service. For they say,
Cu^vinificam crucem salutamus, conuenienter canimus: when we salute the cross
that procured us life, Ibidem.
we do well to sing: thy cross, Lord, do we adore.


Theo. Ibidem.
So did they the spear which pierced his side. The next words are, The spear,
To kiss was a sign of favor and love: to bow a sign of subjection. The
popish Doctrine touching Images agrees not with the Council which they would
seem to follow.
which opened thy sacred and lifegiuing side, we adore. But what they meant, by
that adoration they straightway expound: which adoration is nothing else but a
salutation, or an embracing, if you so rather like to call it, as is hereby
declared, for that we touch those things with our lips.


Phi. Yet this is a kind of adoration.


Theo. But not such as your church and schools afterward defended and yielded
unto material images, and crosses. For you in plain words require (...), that
is divine honor for the wodden cross and image of Christ; whereas the second
Nicene council in this epistle does wholly renounce that, as a manifest and
wicked error. And therefore you do nothing less than accord with that Council
which is so much in your mouths, they decreeing but a reverent salutation, and
you giving divine adoration to the image and cross of Christ: which be
doctrines mightily repugning each to other, if you note them well, though the
word adoration be used in both.

And did you consent with the^ as you do not, neither their resolution, nor
yours is catholic: Two sensible chaunges in the adoration of Images.
they ventering farther than either scriptures or fathers before did lead them,
and that upon the doubtful accepcion of the word adoring, and blind
presumption that external reverence (which they meant thereby) might be given for
love, fear, favor or courtesy without impairing the honor due to God: and you
being deceived by the heat of their speech, and taking adoration for a
religious and devout submission of body and soul, such as belonged to the
person himself represented by the image: and that in our Savior is divine and
heavenly honor.


Phi. Should not the cross of Christ have divine honor?


Theo. The cross being taken for his death and passion, as the scriptures use
the word, Christ's Cross, that is his death must be adored, but not the wood
on which he hung.
must be adored as the true and only mean of our redemption and salvation:
but the wood, on which he hung, may not, much less the sign of it, as you
now abuse it. You heard Saint Ambrose say, that to adore the wood, on which
the Lord died, was an heathenish error, and vanity of the wicked: And before
him Arnobius made this answer for all Christians: Cruces nec columus, Ambros.
de obitu Theodosij. Arnob. adversgentes, lib. 8.
nec optamus: vos plane, qui ligneos Deos consecratis, cruces ligneas vt Deorum
vestrorum parts, forsitan adoratis: Crosses we neither worship, nor wish for:
you that dedicate wooden Gods, you happily adore wooden crosses, as parts of
your Gods. But what need I farther refell that council as not catholic which
was presently rejected and pithily confuted by the Bishops and churches of
the West: whose labors are extant at this day, brought to light by men of your
own religion, and saved from the moothes which you meant should consume them?
Thither we send you, there you shall find both your adoration of images
disclaimed as vncatholike, and the reasons and authorities of your second
Nicene council, thoroughly skanned and scattered, almost 800. years before our
time.


Phi. That book we receive not; as thinking it to be rather some late forgerie
of yours than a monument of that antiquity.


Theo. If you receive not the books that were safe in your own keeping, You
reject the books that were in your own keeping, and will have us receive what
you list at your hands though it be never so false.
and published by your nearest friends, how should we trust the corruptions
that are framed to your purposes and no where found but in your own libraries?


Phi. Since you distrust our written records, why do you not believe the
faithful report of the church, which is the pillour of truth, and can not be
corrupted?


The. Nay since forgeries be so rise, that no father is free from them, and so
gross that every child may discern the^, why do not you believe the report of
God himself, the founder and builder of the church; and that witnessed in his
word, of which there is no suspicion, and against the which there is no
exception?


Phi. As though we did not.


Theo. Then for adoration of images, which you defend, show what president you
have in the word of God.


Phi. We need not.


Theo. We know you cannot.


Phi. And I reply that we need not.


The. Does it concern the christian faith and Catholic religion which the
godly must profess, or no?


Phi. It does.


Theo. It can be no point of faith that may not be proved by the scriptures.
Then must you show some authority for it in the sacred scriptures, or else they
must repel it as impious.


Phi. We have it by tradition from the Apostles.


Theo. You would have wrested so much out of S. Basil, but that your cunning
failed you.


Phi. From them we had it.


Theo. We say you had no such thing from them: and further we add, that if it
be a matter of doctrine and belief, as you make it, you must have it testified
in their writings, and not concealed among their traditions


Phi. They may soon be Catholic if they forge as fast as they have done, and
then measure Catholicisme by those forgeries.
No Sir, we believe many things (whereof this is one) that are not written, but
were delivered us by secret succession.


Theo. The greater is your sin, and the vnsounder is your Creed. In matters
of faith you should believe nothing but that which is expressly warranted by
the scriptures. And therefore in this and other points of your Romish devotion
now brought to trial, if you want the foundation of true faith and religion,
in vain do you seek to make a show of catholicisme with such patches and
pamslets, as Monks and Friars have forged and colored with the names of
fathers. The catholic church of Christ never received nor believed any point
of faith upon tradition without the Scriptures.


Phi. The Rhemish Testament upon the 2. These. 2.
We have to the contrary plain Scriptures, all the fathers, most evident
reasons, that we must either believe traditions, or nothing at all.


Theo. We know you can brag; but you have neither Scripture, father nor
reason to impugn that which we affirm. How largely the word Tradition is
taken amongst the fathers.



Phi. For traditions we have.


Theo. Tradition is any thing that has been delivered or taught, by word or
mouth or by writing, touching the grounds of faith, or circumstances and
ceremonies of christian Religion. And therefore when you muster the fathers to
disprove the scriptures, and to establish an unwritten faith under the credit
of traditions, you corrupt the writers, and abuse the readers.


Phi. How can we do that, when we bring you the very words of the Authors
themselves?


Theo. H^w can you choose but do it, when you force the fathers to speak
against themselves?


Phi. Do we?


Theo. The Rhemish Test. fol. 559.
Your Rhemish translators, perceiving the weight of their whole cause to lie on
this, have marshalled nine fathers in a rank, namely: S. Chrysostom, S.
Basil, S. Hierom, S. Augustine, S. Epiphanius, S. Ireneus, S. Tertullian, S.
Cyprian, and Origin; but to what purpose, can you tell?


Phi. To prove that we must either believe traditions or nothing.


Theo. Believe them, as articles of our faith, or exercises of our profession?


Phi. Why make you that distinction?


Theo. Because the very same fathers, that say traditions must be received
besides the Scriptures, avouch likewise, as I before have showed, that no
matter of faith or of any moment to salvation must be received or believed
without scriptures. This is their manner of aleaging fathers throughout their
Rhemish Testament.
Now choose whether you will grant a flat contradiction in them, or conclude
with us, ergo the traditions which they mean, be no parts nor points of the
christian faith. And so these nine fathers, on whose credits you thought to
plant your late found faith, hold nothing with you, but rather against you.


Phi. How make you that appear?


Theo. Uiew them once more. We have their plain confession that all things
necessary to salvation are comprised in the scriptures. You produce them to
witness that your traditions be not comprised in the scriptures: Ergo by your
own deponents we conclude that your traditions be neither necessary to
salvation, nor points of the catholic faith, without which we can not be saved.
Look well to this issue they must either dissent from your religion, or from
themselves.


Phi. Your mayor is not yet proved.


Theo. Yes, with firm and surer authorities, than those be which you bring; let
the places be skanned, which I before rehearsed, and the matter left to the
judgment of the reader; Or if you be loath to look so far back, examine
shortly th^se that follow. Athanas. contra gentes.
The holy Scriptures inspired from heaven, are sufficient for all instruction
of truth, says Athanasius. Chrysostom. homil. 1. ad Titum.
The Gospel, says Chrysostom, contains al things: Idem opera imperfect in
Mat. homil. 41.
whatsoever is requisite for salvation, all that is fully laid down in the
Scriptures. In the two Testaments, says Cyril, Cyril. in Leuit. lib. 5.
every word (or thing) that pertains to God may be required and discussed.
Ambros. Hexamer. lib. 1. ca. 6.
Sufficient to us for salvation is the truth of (Gods) precepts says Ambrose.
And Augustine, August in Joan. tract. 44.
There were chosen to be written, such things as seemed (to the holy ghost)
sufficient for the salvation of the faithful. Vincentius Lirinensis; who^ you
greatly boast of, but without all cause, agrees with the rest, that Vincent,
aduers haeret.
The Canon of the Scripture is perfect and sufficient and more tha^ sufficient,
to al things. And again, Not that, says he, Ibidem.
The canon alone is not sufficient for all things; as it were taking great heed
least he should seem to deny the fulness of the scriptures which you purposely
impugn under a color of catholicisme by his writings.

Now cite not only nine, All that the Jesuits can infer out of these fathers
is this, that their own traditions be not necessary to salvation.
but nines kore fathers if you will, for traditions, and the more you stir,
the worse you speed. For the traditions which they mention be either points of
faith or not. If they be, then by the general confession of all antiquity, they
must be warra^ted by the scriptures, or else we must reject the^* If they be no
parts nor consequents of the christian faith, then do not those fathers weaken
our assertion, when we say that all points of faith must be proved by the
scriptures, and this we gain besides, that the traditions which you make ye
grou^dwork of al your religion, as they be not written, so be they not
necessary to salvation.


Phi. The faith it self is proved by tradition. Tradition is good if it
consent with the scriptures.



Theo. That doctrine which the Apostles delivered by word of mouth, the very
same they put afterward in writing yt it might be the touchstone and trial of
truth in times to come: but this is nothing to such unwritten verities as be
different from the scriptures. Teach what you will by tradition, so it accord
with the written word of God; we be not against it: but you may not build any
point of faith upon tradition, except the scriptures confirm the same.


Phi. This is an error of yours, which you seek to bolster against the church.


The. You give us words, we give you proofs; The Jesuits doctrine depends on
tradition of their own making.
this which you call an error of ours was taught and received in the primative
church for a catholic truth; and except you ca^ show some points of faith which
the fathers believed upon tradition without scriptures, the world will suspect yt
you make traditions but a cloak for your heresies.


Phi. The Rhemish Testament. 2. These. 2.
S* Augustine often writes that many of the articles of our religion and points
of highest importance, are not so much to be proved by scriptures, as by
tradition.


The. You belly so many, that it is no news for you to belly S. Austen. Where
says he so?


Phi. The Rhemish Test. Ibidem.
Namely auouching, that in no wise we could believe that children in their
infancy should be baptized, if it were not an Apostolik tradition. De genesis ad
lit. lib. 10 cap. 23.


Theo. But where does S. Austen write this often and that of many articles of
religion and points of highest importance? The Rhemish Test. Ibidem.
Of so many high points you should have showed two at least.


Phi. Tradition caused him to believe, that the baptized of heretics should not
be rebaptized, notwithstanding S. Cryprians authority and the manifold
scriptures aleaged by him, though they seemed never so pregna^t. de bap. lib.
2. cap. 7.


Theo. Your heads be so full of traditions, that you can not report a father
without corruptions. S. Augustine refuteth rebaptization by Scripture. ^Aug.
epi. 203.
It is not true that Tradition (and nothing else) caused him to believe this
against Cypria^s authority: he was armed with scriptures and reasons invincible
as himself both shows and says. Provoking a Donatist to confer with him
about this error, Ratione agamus, di^inarum scripturarum authoritatibus
agamus, Let us discuss this matter, says he, by argument, by the authorities
of the divine scriptures. And repeating a reason yt was expressed in the
Princes edict forbidding rebaptizatio^, he makes the rebaptizers this offer:
Faciant mill Concilia Episcopi vestri, Aug. epi. 166.
huic vni sententiae respondeant, and ad quod volueritis consentimus vobis. Let
your Bishops assemble a thousand councels, and answer but this one sentence,
we yield to you at your pleasures. And therefore he doubted not to say of
Cyprian, Contra Crescon. lib. 2. cap. 31.
though otherwise he did honor him very much, Aliter sapi^t quam veritas
diligentius considerata patefecit. He was of an other opinion than that which
the truth upon more diligent consideration reueiled And when Cypria^s epistle
in this case was objected, he replied: Contra Crescon. lib. 2. cap. 32.
Augustine refused Cyp^. authority as dissident from the Scriptures.
Cyprians epistles I esteem not as canonical but I consider them by the
canonical (scriptures:) and that which in them agrees with the authority of
the divine scriptures I receive with his praise: that which does not agree, by
his leave I refuse. The general custom of the c^u^ch revoked him from following
Cypri^^s authority, though it were great, and brought him to the deeper
debating of the question, but he which says that S. Augustine in all his
conferences and writings aleadgeth nothing against rebaptization but
tradition, may be rebaptized, if his christianity be no more than his cunning.


Phi. Aug. de Genes. ad literam, lib. 10. cap. 23. All the show the Ies. have
for this matter is one, t, too much in S. Austen.
For baptizing of infants his words be plain. It were not at al to be believed,
if it were not an Apostolic tradition.


Theo. I see the words well enough; but the meaning of the speaker in this
place, and the likeness of the same speech in other places, make me to think,
that a letter too much is crept into these words, as through the injuries of
times, and variety of scribes many thousand deprauations and diverse lections
were and are yet in the works of S. Augustine, and other fathers not only by
the judgment of the learned but by the very sight of their margins.


Phi. A letter to much? which is it?


Theo. You read Nec omnino credenda nisi Apostolica esset traditio: I think it
should be Nec omnino credenda nisi Apostolica esse traditio. Esset for Esse.
Esset for esse is a scope in writing soon committed, but a matter of some
moment in altering the sense.


Phi. And therefore you may not correct it without apparent proof.


Theo. I may suspect it, though I take not upon me to correct it, but leave it
to the indifferent reader.


Phi. You must be led thereunto with very good reason.


Theo. First the very course of the sentence leads me so to think. Aug. de
Genes. ad literam, lib. 10. cap. 23.
Saint Augustine in these three distunctiues, Nequaquam spernenda, neque vllo
modo superflua deputanda, nec omnino credenda, The custom of (our) mother the
Church in baptizing (her) infantes is neither to be despised, There is no
Gradation in these words except you read Esse which Saint August^ment to make.
nor any way to be counted superfluous, nor at all to be believed, did not
mean to contradict him-sel^e, but by steps to increase the credit of this
custom: and the third part, Nec omnino credenda, Not at all to be believed
does rather euert all that went before, than give you any farther commendation
to that Tradition. For Not at all to be believed, is as much as to be despised
and counted superfluous, which is repugnant to the words precedent. But
reading Esse ^or Esset, the parts are consequent each after other in better
order, and the last is the same that Saint Augustine in other places does
often utter in the very like manner and kind of speech that here is used. The
custom of (our) mother the church in baptizing (her) infants, is neither to
be despised, nor by any means to be accounted superfluous, nec omnino
credenda nisi Apostolica esse traditio, nor at all to be thought to be any
other than an Apostolic tradition. So speaking elsewhere of the very same
matter, he says, De Bapt. co^trae Don^t. li. 4. cap. 24. The very same phrase
in the very same matter is here used
Non nisi authoritate Apostolica traditum rectissime creditur. It is most
rightly believed to be none other than a tradition of the Apostles. Where we
find not only the same purpose, but the very same phrase and force of speech
that were used before. And so again of that and such like: De Bapt. co^tra
Donat. lib. 2. cap. 7.
Many things are not found in the (Apostles) writings nor in the Councels of
those that came after them, and yet because they be observed of the universal
Church, Non nisi ab ipsis tradita and commendata creduntur, they are thought to
have bin delivered and commended by none but by them.


Phi. This sense is not amiss, If the Jesuits read Esset, it is both against
themselves and also against S. Austen.

The Jesuits tradition, be not all Apostolical.


if the words would bear it, but the text is Esset as we translate it.


Theo. The sense which you urge is first against your selves, next against S.
Austen himself in other places, and lastly (which is it that you shoot at) it
overthrows not our assertion.


Phi. It requires some pains to prove all this.


Theo. Not so much perhaps as you think. For will you confess that no
custom of the church must be received or believed, except it be Apostolic?
Admit this, and see whether we will not presently cast off the most part of the
precepts and customs of your Church, as not descending from the Apostles, and
therefore not at all to be believed by your own verdict.

And as for Saint Augustine, if you think he would say that The custom of
the (universal) Church is not at all to be believed, except it be Apostolik,
read this resolution better and you will leave that misconstruction of his
words. August. epist. 118.
Those things which we keep, says he, not written but delivered by tradition,
the which the whole world observes, must be conceived to have bin commended
and ordained, vel ab ipsis Apostolis, vel plenarijs concilijs quorum est in
ecclesia saluberrima authoritas, either by the Apostles themselves, or else by
general councels, whose authority in the church is most wholesome. The custom of
the church he says must be retained, though it be not Apostolic, but decreed
by others of later age and mean^r credit than the Apostles, if their assemblies
and synods were general. And again, August. epist. 86.
In hijs rebus de quibus nihil certi statuit scriptura diuina mos populi Dei,
vel instituta Maiorum pro lege tenenda sunt. In those things where the divine
scripture appoints no certainty, the custom of the people of God and
ordinances of forefathers must be held for a law. Esset, makes S. Augustine
contrary to himself.
If the custom of Gods people and the ordinances of elders must be kept for a
law, then the custom of the church in baptizing her infants might not be
rejected though it were not Apostolic, and so S. Austen with your esset clean
crosses himself.

This place makes least of all against us.

A tradition may be written.


Lastly where you think to give us the foil with pressing this place, we
easily grant you that The custom of the church in baptizing her infantes were
not to be believed, if it were not in Apostolic tradition. You have your own
reading, what are you the better?


Phi. Ergo some points of faith are believed without the scriptures and besides
the scriptures.


The. Sir, I deny your argument.


Phi. This is believed by tradition, ergo not by scripture.


Theo. A tradition it may be and yet written in the scriptures. S. Paul calls
the Lords supper a tradition, and yet it is written, 1. Cor. 11.
Ego accepi a Domino quod and tradidi vobis, I received of the Lord, that which
I delivered unto you. The death and resurrection of Christ he likewise caled a
tradition confirmed by the Scriptures. 1. Cor. 15.
Tradidi vobis inprimis, quod and accepi: I delivered unto you first of all
which I also received, that Christ died for our sins according to the
Scriptures, and was buried and rose the third day according to the
Scriptures. And in plainer, words to the Thessalonians. 2. These. 2.
Hold fast, says he, the traditions which you have learned, either by
speech or Epistle of ours, calling those things that be written in his
epistles his traditions.


Phi. But the fathers use the word otherwise, for that which is not written.


Theo. Sometimes they do, sometimes they do not. S. Cyprian says, Whence is
this tradition? Cyp. ad Pompei^^m contra epist. Stephani.
Whether does it descend from the Lords authority and the Gospel, or comes
it from the precepts and epistles of the Apostles? If it be commanded in the
Gospel, or contained in the Epistles or Acts of the Apostles, let this holy
tradition be observed. And so S. Basil, Our baptism is according to the
tradition of the Lord, Basil. contra E^nomium. li. 3.
in the name of the father* the Son and the holy Ghost. Ireneus, Tertullian,
Hierom, Augustine and others call the short rehearsal of the christian faith,
which is our common Creed, an old and Apostolik tradition, and yet no part of
the creed is without or besides the warrant of the Scriptures.


Phi. I know it may be a tradition, and yet reuokeable to the Scriptures and
proueable by the Scriptures, but the baptism of infantes Saint Augustine
says has no witness in the scriptures.


Theo. Where says he so?


Phi. In many places. August. de Bap. contra Donat. lib. 5. cap. 23.



Theo. Name but one.


Phi. There be many things which the universal Church observes, and for that
cause they be well thought to have been commanded by the Apostles, though
they be not found written.


Theo. How prove you this to be one of those many?


Phi. Because we find it not written, but only delivered by tradition.


Theo. You say so: but where does S. Augustine say so?


Phi. In the words which we first alleged It were not to be believed if it
were not an Apostolic tradition. If it were written it must be believed though
it were no Tradition.


Theo. You deal with the fathers, as you do with the scriptures. S. Austen
does not say the baptism of infants were not to be believed, The custom of
the church in baptizing her infants were not sufficient if the tradition were
not Apostolic.
but, The custom of the Church in (a matter of so great weight as) the
baptizing of infants were not to be trusted if the tradition were not
Apostolic. The church might not have presumed to baptize infants if the
Apostles had not begun it: what gain you by that? Thereby you may prove that
the Apostles did it, and that the Church of her self and her own authority
might not do it, more you cannot prove.


Phi. But does S. Austen any where say that the baptism of Children is
contained in the scriptures?


Theo. What if he went not so far in words, because the matter was not in
question whiles he lived, is that any ground for you to conclude that it is not
allowed by the Scriptures?


Phi. If he keep silence, S. Augustine proves it needful for infants to be
baptized: whether it were lawful was never doubted in his time.
it is a shrewde sign that it is not.


Theo. So long as no man did impugn it, there was no need he should defend it;
the question in his time was not whether it were lawful for infants to be
baptized, but whether it were needful for the^ or no. The Pelagians held it to
be superfluous, for y^ infantes were void of original sin: which was their
error. That he mightily reproves by manifest Scriptures and shows that
infants as well as others be excluded from the kingdom of God, if they be not
baptized. Farther he waded not, as being not farther urged, and troubled
enough besides with refuting other heresies; and yet as occasion served he
brought more than Tradition for the baptizing of children. August. de baptism.
contra D^n^t. li. 4. ca. 24.
If any man, says he, se^ke for divine authority in this matter, we may
truly conjecture by circumcision, what effect the Sacrament of baptism has
in infants, using a very forcible argument in this case, that if children might
receive the seal of the former covenant under Moses, why not of the later
established in the blood of Christ?


Phi. He says we may conjecture it, but he does not say we may prove it.


Theo. He repeateth the reason with Veraciter conijcere possumus, We may very
truly conjecture, and a true conjecture is no untrue persuasion: but as I said
it was not then in doubt, and therefore no marvel if that Learned father
labored not that question to the depth. Had it been denied, as in our days
it is, he would have found the same scriptures to confirm it that we do.
And to say the truth his evident illations out of the Scriptures that baptism
is needful for Infants, make sufficient demonstration that baptism is lawful
for Infants, else it would follow that no child might be saved; which is an
heinous and monsterous error, directly fighting with the manifest scriptures.
For where without baptism they cannot be saved, by reason original sin is not
remitted but in baptism as S. Austen concludes out of the words of our
Savior S Augustine urges Baptism to be needful against the Pelagians, who
thought it superfluous, not against those that were prevented with inevitable
necessity.
Except a man be borne of water and of the spirit he cannot enter the kingdom
of God; If children be excluded from baptism, they be consequently excluded
from the kingdom of God; which is flatly repugnant to the word of God.


Phi. It is no meaning of ours to exclude children from baptism, but to let
you understand that you cannot show by the Scriptures that children were
baptized.


Theo. I grant we cannot, and add, we need not. The Scriptures we say
contain al matters of faith, not of fact. That children were baptized we prove
by the practice of Christ's Church and not by the scriptures. John 3.

The fact is not expressed in the Scriptures, the cause is.


That children may be baptized we prove not only by the Tradition of the
Apostles, but also by the sequel of the Scriptures themselves.

Our Savior says of Children, Mat. 18.
It is not the will of your father, which is in heaven, that one of these little
ones should perish. Now choose you whether they shall be saved without
baptism, or perish for lack of baptism. Again the Lord says, Mat. 19.
Suffer the little children and forbid them not to come unto me: for the
kingdom of heaven belongs unto such. They must enter the kingdom of God
before they can possess it, and John 3.
enter it they cannot until they be newborn of water and the holy Ghost. Now
say, will you exclude them from that which God has provided for them: or will
admit them to be heirs with Christ before they be engraffed into Christ by
Baptism? The Apostle says to the great comfort of all Christian Parents; The
1. Cor. 7.
unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife (that believes,) and the
unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband (that believes:) else were your
children unclean, but now are they holy. This is spoken not of the secret
election of the faithful, which is neither common to all nor known to any,
but of their Christian profession whereby they be 1. Cor. 1. 2. Tim. 1.
called to be Saints, that is an 1. Peter 2.
holy and peculiar people unto God. For all things be holy that be dedicated to
his use, and this kind of holiness S. Paul deriueth from the root to the
branches, Romans 11.

If Children be holy because their parents are holy, then they have no better
holiness than their parents: and in all Christian parents there is not inward
sanctification.


If the root be holy so are the branches. If then Infants be partakers of the
same vocation and holiness with their parents, and without baptism (which is
the seal of Gods covenant with us, in the blood of his son) neither we nor
our children can be holy, surely the children of Saints if they be excluded
from baptism, are as unholy and unclean as the children of Infidels which
utterly subuerteth saint Paul's Doctrine. If to avoid this place you suppose
holiness to be meant of the inward satisfaction of Gods spirit; besides that
children draw inward corruption not holiness from their Christian Parents,
yet this way we also conclude that Children must be Baptized: for where the
spirit of God is precedent, the service of man must be consequent, as saint
Peter teaches. Act. 8.
Can any man forbid water that these should not be baptized, which have
received the holy Ghost? So that, take which you will and say what you can, our
conclusion is immovable. And since children be defiled by Adam, if they may
not be washed by Christ, the disobedience of man shall be mightier unto
condemnation, than the grace of God and obedience of Christ unto justification,
which the Romans 5. verse. 15.17.21.
Scriptures reject as a wicked absurdity.

Wherefore the church absolutely and flatly may not assure salvation to
children unbaptized, lest they seem naturally innocent or generally sanctified
without baptism: albeit their Parents desiring and seeking it, if they be
prevented by mortal necessity we must leave them to the goodness, August. de
baptis. lib. 4 cap.
and secret election of God not without hope: because in their Parents 22.
there wanted no will, but an extremity disappointed them: and in the children
the let was 23.
weakness of age, not wickedness of heart: and so the sacrament omitted, not for
24.
any contempt of religion: but by strictnes of time: in which cases S.
Augustine confesses the want of baptism may be supplied, if it so please God:
mary they may not challenge it, nor we promise it.

Much more might be said, but I content my self with the former reasons till
you refute them. And having the certain practice of the Apostles in baptizing
Infants witnessed by the Church of Christ, and delivered unto the Church for
the confirmation of those things which we allege, The scripture proves that
Children may be baptized and must be, if we will have them to be saved,
tradition proves they were Baptized.
we count them irrefutable.


Philand. Neither do I mislike the thing, but I muse why Saint Augustine
claymed wholly by Tradition, if so much Scripture might be brought for the
matter.


Theoph. Express precept to baptize infantes or plain example where they were
baptized, the scripture has none: and therefore Saint Augustine did well to
reverence the Tradition which he saw was Apostolic, and if any man urge us
to prove that children were baptized we must flee to the same Tradition with
him: But if it be impugned as a thing unlawful and dissonant from the
Scriptures, we must then lift the ground of that Tradition by the scriptures,
because it touches the salvation or condemnation of Christian Infants: And so
would S. Austen have exactly and learnedly done, we doubt not, if that point
had been controuersed in his time.


Philand. He would you say: but he did not we know, and that causes us to
take it for an unwritten Tradition.


Theoph. A tradition we grant, but agreeable to the Scriptures. And though
Saint Austen do not say so, that is no reason for you to conclude it is not
so; silence is no proof. Nay if he had called it an unwritten Tradition, as
he does not, that were no let but it might be confirmed by the scriptures, as
it is: for the precept is not written, though the causes and consequents may
be justified by that which is written. One and the same tradition both
vnwritte^ and yet warranted by the Scriptures.
And this is not strange with Saint Austen to call that an unwritten
Tradition, which himself confesses may be warranted by the scriptures.


Phi. What have we here? One and the same Tradition confessed by saint
Augustine to be both written and unwritten?


Theoph. One and the same Tradition, I say confessed to be written, and yet
warranted by the Scriptures.


Phi. That were news.


Theo. None at all. Go no farther than your second example of rebaptizing, and
you shall see it to be true.

S. Augustine calls it an unwritten Tradition or Custom of the church in
many places. De baptis. co^tra Donat. li. 2. c. 7.
He says expressly of it, Quam consuetudinem credo ex Apostolica Traditione
venientem, sicut multa non inueniuntur in Literis eorum etc. Which custom I
think came from the apostles, as many (other) things (that) are not found in
their writings. De baptis. co^tra D^nat. li. 5. ^. 23.
And again of the very same, Apostoli nihil quidem exinde praeceperunt. The
Apostles in deed commanded nothing in that case: as also there be many
things which the whole Church observes though they be not found written.


Phi. That we know to be true, never spend more time about it, but let us
hear where S. Austen says this Custom is also warranted by the scriptures.


Theo. You can not miss it, if you read the very same books where the other
is witnessed.

De baptis. li. 1. cap. 7.

Rebaptizatio^ against the Scriptures.


Now, says he, lest I seem to dispute this matter by humane reasons, because
the darkness of this question drove great men, and men endued with great
charity, the bishops that were in former ages of the church before the schism
of Donatus to doubt and strive, but without breach of unity, ex euangelio
profero certa Documenta quibus Domino adiuuante demonstro: Out of the Gospel I
bring sure grounds by Gods help to make proof (thereof.) And having disputed
it a while, We De baptis. lib. 4. cap. 7.
follow that, says he, which the custom of the church has always observed,
and a plenarie council confirmed. And the reasons and testimonies of scriptures
on both sides being thoroughly weighed I may say, we follow that which truth
has declared. De baptis. lib. 5. cap. 4.
And repeating the evidence of his side, he says it may be understood by the
former custom of the Church, by the strength of a general council that
followed by so many and so weighty testimonies of the holy scriptures, by
manifold instructions out of Cyprians own works and very plain arguments of
truth. And therefore drawing to an end he says, De baptis. lib. 6. cap. 1.
It might perhaps suffice that (our) reasons being so often repeated and diversely
debated and handled in disputing, and the Documents of the holy Scriptures
being added, and so many testimonies of Cyprian himself concurring, iam etiam
cord tardiores quantum existimo intelligunt, by this time the weaker and
duller sort of men as I think understand that the baptism of Christ can not
be violated, by no perverseness of the party that gives it or takes it,
and therefore must not be iterated. Thus in one and the selfsame work you
see S. Austen auouching it to be a Tradition not written, and yet confirmed by
manifest scriptures.


Phi. I hear him say so, but I see not how it can be.


Theo. You will not, for fear you should see your selves convinced of an
error, it is otherwise plain enough. The thing it self is not written, but
received by Tradition, mary the grounds of it be so laid in the scriptures,
that it may thence be rightly concluded. The like we say for the baptism of
infants, How the same thing may be written and yet unwritten.
the precept it self is not written, nor any example of it in the scriptures,
but it was delivered unto the church by tradition from the Apostles: mary it so
depends on those principles of faith, which be written, that it may be
fairly deduced from them and fully proved by them.


Phi. By Tradition only, he and other condemned Heluidius the heretic for
denying the perpetual virginity of our Lady. The Rhemish Testament 2. These. 2.



Theo. Your stoare fails you when you flee from faith and hope in GOD to
examine Joseph and Marie that you may pick out somewhat between them to
impeache the perfection of the Scriptures. That Christ was borne of a virgin
undefiled, is an high point of faith and plainly testified in the Scriptures.
That after the birth of her Son she was not known of her husband, is a
reverend and seemly truth preserved in the Church by witnesses worthy to be
trusted, but no part of faith needful to be recorded in the Scriptures.


Phi. Saint Augustine says it is. That Mary was not known of her husband
after the birth of our Savior is a reverend truth but no point of faith.

De Eccl. dogmatibus cap. 69.


Integra fide credendum est, With an upright faith we must believe that blessed
Mary the mother of God and Christ was a virgin in conceiving, a virgin when she
was delivered, and remained a virgin after the birth of her son. And we must
beware the blasphemy of Heluidius which said, she was a virgin before, but
not after the birth (of Christ.)


Theo. Grate not on these things which were better to be honored with
silence, than discussed with diligence. The book which you bring is not S.
Augustines. It was found Vide Erasmi censuram in eundem librum.
under Tertullians name as well as under Augustines, though Tertullian himself
be Cap. 4. Ibidem, cap. 69.
twice there noted for an heretic, and challenged the first time for that very
error which S. Augustine in his true book of heresies does acquit him from.
And yet these words, Credendum est Mariam virginem concepisse, virginem
genuisse, and post partum virginem permansisse, We must believe that the
mother of Christ was a pure virgin when she conceived, when she brought forth
his son, and after she was delivered, do not touch your question as they are
defended by S. Augustine in his undoubted works to be part of our faith, but
only that she was a pure virgin after his birth, Enchirid. ad Laurens. ca. 34.
notwithstanding his birth. And therefore he says, Quisi velper nascentem
corrumperetur eius integritas, iam non ille de virgin nasceretur. If Christ's
birth even when he was borne should have violated the virginity of his
mother, Christ's mother was a Virgin as well after his birth as after his
conception.
then had he not been borne of a virgin. So that as she conceived the Lord,
and was still a virgin, so she was delivered of him, and her self yet a
virgin, that is, not only without the knowledge of man, but also without all
hurt of her body: she remaining after she was delivered of her child as
perfect a virgin in body, as she was before she conceived him. And this to be
the right meaning of those words, Post partum virgo permansit, she remained a
virgin after the birth of her child, when her virginity must be urged for a
point of faith, the sermons extant under the name of S. Augustine do clearly
confess. De Tempore sermo. 123.

How she forbear the company of her husband is no matter inco^prehensible.

Ibidem sermo. 10.15.17.18.25.


Nec dubites Mariam virginem mansisse post partum, quia qualiter hoc factum
sit, non humanus sermo, neque sensus potest comprehendere. Never doubt but
Marie remained a virgin after the birth of her child, although neither man's
speech nor wit can comprehend how it was done. And again, Virgo cum
parturit, virgo post partum. Vacuatur vterus, infans excipitur, nec tamen
virginitas violatur. She was a virgin when she was delivered, and a virgin
after. She was delivered, her child borne, and If you list to conclude, and so
remained to her death, you may for us; but that is no point of faith,
whatsoever the former be.
she for all that a virgin. The like we find in sundry other of those sermons.


Phi. But Heluidius was noted as an heretic by S. Augustine and others for
saying that our Lady was known of Joseph her husband after the birth of our
Savior.


Theo. The Fathers might reject him as an heretic for his impudent abusing the
Scriptures to build a falshoode upon them which was not contained in them; and
if they detested it as a rash and wicked slander for him against manifest
truth to blemish that chosen vessel which the holy Ghost had ouershadowed,
and the son of God sanctified with his presence, we neither blame them, nor
mislike their doings. But yet they never charged the Scriptures with
imperfection as you do.

S. Hierome purposely writing against Heluidius uses the fulness of the
Scriptures as his best argument to defend her virginity. Vt haec quae scripta
sunt non negamus, Hieron. aduers. Heluidium.
ita ea quae non sunt scripta renuimus. Natum esse Deum de Virgin, credimus,
quia legimus. Mariam Nupsisse post partum non credimus, quia non legimus. As we
deny not those things which are written, so we reject those things which are
not written. That God was borne of a Virgin, we believe, because we read.
That (the same virgin) Mary became a wife after the birth of her son, we
believe it not, because we read it not. S. Augustine alleges Scripture for
it, August. de S. Virginit. cap 4.
with what success I will not judge. If neither of these quiet your
contentious spirits; our answer shall be that when you make just proof that this
is a poinct, not of truth, which we grant; but of faith, which you urge; then
will we not fail to show it consequent to that which is written.

The Papists would have the holy ghost hold his diuini^ie by tradition.
You were wont to object other points of Religion as proved by tradition and
not by Scripture: amongst which you set the Godhead of the holy Ghost and his
proceeding from the Father and the Son: But I trust by this time you be
either stilled in them or ashamed of them.


Phi. Not so neither. For Harding against the Apology of the English Church,
part. 2. cap. 1.
As we acknowledge this article to be most true, so we are sure you have no
express Scripture for it.


Theo. Are you well advised, when to spite us, you teach the people, that the
highest mysteries of their faith cannot be warranted by the Scriptures?
Perceive you not what a wrong it is to the spirit of GOD to hold his
Divinity by Tradition, and not by the word of God? What ignorance is this, if
it be no worse, to say that Athanas. de communi essentia Patris, Filij. and
S^iritus sancti. Dydimus de spiritu sancto. Basil. contra Eunomium and de
spiritu sancto. Nazianzen. orat. 5. de Theolog. Ambros. de spiritu sancto.
Cyril. de Trinitate, lib. 7. and lib. de spiritu sancto. August. de Trinitate.
Athanasius, Dydimus, Basil, Nazianzen, Ambrose, Cyril and Augustine in their
special Treaties of this very point have alleged no Scriptures to confirm the
Godhead of the Holy Ghost?


Phi. We speak not of them but of you.


Theo. As if in a common case of faith the Scriptures were not common to us
with them. If they had Scriptures for it, we have; if we have none, than had
they none.


Phi. Express Scripture they had none.


Theo. Do you play with idle words in so weighty matters of Christian
faith? The fathers assured themselves they had express Scripture for the
godhead of the holy Ghost.
Evident and plain scriptures they had where the holy Ghost was called God:
what is express Scripture if that be not?


Phi. They had no such scripture.


Theo. Had they not? Turn your book a little better, you shall find they had.
August. epist. 66.
Glorificate Deum and portate in corpore vestro. Quem Deum nisi spiritum
sanctum cuius corpora nostra dixerat esse Templum? Glorify God, says the
Apostle, and bear him in your body. What God but the Holy ghost whose Temple
before he called our bodies? And again, Idem. qu. est. supra Exodus lib. 2.
quaest. 59.
When (Peter) had said, durst thou make a lie to the holy Ghost? (Ananias)
thinking he had lied unto men, Peter shows the Holy Ghost to be God by and by
adding, thou have not lied unto men but unto God. These two places the same
father urges against the Arrians as very plain scriptures. Contra Max. lib. 3.
cap. 21.
Glorificate ergo Deum in corpore vestro. Vbi What is Dilucide, but plain
Scripture?
dilucide ostendit Deum esse spiritum sanctum, glorificandum scilicet in
corpore nostro. Et quod Ananiae dixit Petrus Apostolus: Ausus es mentiri
spiritui sancto? Atque ostendens Deum esse spiritum sanctum, non es, inquit,
hominibus mentitus, sed Deo. Glorify therefore God in your body, says Paul.
Where very manifestly he shows the holy Ghost to be God which must be
glorified in our body as in his Temple. And that which Peter the Apostle said
to Ananias: Durst thou lie unto the holy Ghost? And declaring the holy Ghost to
be God, thou have not lied unto men, says he, but unto God.

Ambrose takes them for evident scriptures. Ambros. de Spiritus Sancto, lib.
3. cap. 10.
Quod praemiserit Spiritum and addiderit, non es mentitus hominibus sed Deo,
necesse est in spiritu sancto vt vnitatem diuinitatis esse intelligas. Ibidem
lib. 3. cap. 11.

Is not euide^ter evident Scripture?


Nec solum in hoc loco euidenter sancti spiritus (...), id est, diuinitatem
Scriptura testatur, sed etiam ipse Dominus dixit in Euangelio quod Deus
spiritus est. In that (Peter) first named the Spirit, and presently said,
thou have lied not unto men but unto God, we can not choose but understand the
holy Ghost to be God. Neither in this place only does the Scripture evidently
witness the Godhead of the holy Ghost, but also in the Gospel the Lord
himself says that the spirit is God.

Nazianzen says these and such like be express scriptures, and that if you
doubt thereof, you be very gross headed. Nazian. de Theolog. orat. 5.
They which knew the only blasphemy which is uttered against the Spirit to
be irremissible, and gave Ananias and Saphira that horrible reproach for lying
unto the holy Ghost, The spirit openly professed in the Scriptures to be God,
and expressly so recorded.
what do they seem to thee, openly to profess the Spirit to be God or no?
How dull headed art thou, and without al sense of the spirit, if thou doubt
thereof or need farther teaching? By so many names, so forcible and expressly
recorded in the Scriptures the holy Ghost is called: Amongst those express
names numbering this for one of the chiefest and clearest, that the holy Ghost
was called God, as the words before directly witness.


Phi. His proceeding from the Father and the son cannot be proved by
scripture, though his Godhead may.


Theo. How then came it first to be believed, by Tradition or by scripture?


Phi. Certainly not by scripture.


Theo. Your tongues be so used to untruths, that your certainties be little
worth: the Church of Christ received her faith concerning the proceeding of the
Holy Ghost from the father and the son, not by Tradition, but by scripture.
Saint Augustine says, De fide ad Petrum, cap. 11.
Firmly believe and no whit doubt the same holy Ghost which is one Spirit of
the Father and the Son, to proceed both from the Father and the Son. For
the Son says, when the spirit of truth comes which proceeds from the
father. Where he teaches us the spirit to be his also because himself is
truth. And that the holy ghost proceeds likewise from the son, the Is this
no Scripture?
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles does deliver unto us. For Esaias says of
the son, He shall strike the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the
spirit of his lips, he shall slay the wicked. Of whom the Apostle also says,
Whom the Lord Jesus shall slay with the spirit of his mouth. Whom the only
Son of God, declaring to be the Spirit of his mouth, breathing on his
Disciples after his resurrection says; receive ye the holy Ghost. And John in
his Revelation says that out of the mouth of the Lord Jesus himself there
proceeded a sharp two edged swoorde. He therefore is the Spirit of his mouth,
he is the sword which proceeds out of his mouth.

Idem de Trinit. lib. 15. cap. 26.
And again: By many testimonies of the divine Scriptures it is proved that he
is the spirit of the father and the son, which is properly called in the
Trinity the holy ghost. And that he proceeds from both it is thus proved:
because the son himself says (the spirit of truth) proceeds from the
father. And when he was risen from death and appeared to his disciples, he
breathed on them and said, Receive ye the holy ghost, to show that the spirit
proceeded from him also. And that (spirit) is the virtue which came from him,
as we read in the gospel, and healed all men. What you think of these places
we know not, but sure we are S. Augustine himself says of these and the like,
Idem de Trinit. lib. 15. cap. 27.
Cum per Scripturarum sanctarum testimonia docuissem, de vtroque procedere
Spiritum sanctum: When I had showed by the testimonies of the Holy scriptures
that the holy ghost proceeds from both, (the father and the son.) And if it
be the natural and distinct propriety of the Spirit to proceed, as it is
of the son to be begotten, which I win you will not deny, then is it as
evident by the Scriptures that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and
the son, This reason may suffice any Christian man.
as it is that the son was begotten of the father. For as the second person
in Trinity was begotten of him whose son he is, so the third Person
proceeded from them whose spirit he is, but he is the Spirit of them both
as the Scriptures expressly witness, Ergo he proceeded from them both.


Phi. The doctrine is true, but the scripture is not express.


Theo. What mean you by your express scripture?


Phi. Those very words, He proceeds from them both are not found in the
scriptures.


Theo. Alas good Sirs, is that your quarrel? Do the scriptures, I pray you,
consist in spelling or in understanding? Never read you what S. Hierom says?
Hierom. in epist. ad Gal. cap. 1.
Nec putemus in verbis Scripturaru^ Euangelium esse, sed in sensu: non in
superficie, sed in medulla: non in sermonum folijs, sed in radice rationis. The
sense and consequents are scriptures as well as the words.
Let us not think the Gospel to lie in the words of the scriptures* but in
the sense: not in the rind, but in the pith: not in the leaves of speech, but
in the ground of reason (and truth.) If by express scripture you mean the
plain and (...) sense of the word of God, we have evident and infallible
proofs thence for the proceeding of the holy ghost from the father and the
son: But if you stick on the syllables and letters which we speak, you do
but wrangle with us, as the Arias did with the Nicene fathers, Expostulating
why the Bishops that met at Nice used these words, substance and
consubsta^tial, which were nowhere found in the Scriptures Athanas. in tract.
quod Nicen. Synod. congruis and pijs verbis vsa sit.
and our answer to you shall be the same that theirs was to them. Ibidem.
These words though they be not found in the Scriptures, yet have they the same
meaning and sense which the Scriptures contain. And that we count to be
express scripture. For otherwise as Hilarie says, Hilar. ad Constant.
Al (heretics) speak Scriptures without sense and Hierom aduer. Luciferianos.
the devil himself, as Hierom no^eth, has spoken some things out of the
scriptures, but that as they both witness in the very next words, Ibi^em.
The scriptures consist, not in reading, but in understanding.

And yet I see no cause why this point should be denied to be express
Scripture, for so much as S. John describing the son of God with a sharp two
edged ^word Reuel^t. 1.
proceeding out of his mouth (which is the Sea Esa. 11. and 2. These. 2.
Reuelat. 1. and 19.

The spirit proceeds from the son.


rod of his mouth wherewith he shall smite the earth, and the spirit of his lips
wherewith he shall slay the wicked as Esaias prophesied he should, and Paul
declares he would) uses the very same word (...) twice, which our Savior
before spoke of his father (...), the spirit, which proceeds from the father.
So that you were foully ouerseene, when you objected this point of our christian
faith as wanting express scripture.


Phi. If you take not only the words but also the sense ^or scripture, we will
not greatly gainesay but all points of faith may be derived out of these words,
The Jesuits can show no point of faith that the fathers believed without
scripture.
or out of the sense of that which is written.


The. Derived as you do pardons, pilgrimages, pena^ces and purgatory? But we
say that al points of faith must be plainly concluded, or necessarily collected
by that which is written. And for our so saying we have not only the scriptures
and fathers, but also your selves, which being so often required and urged to
show what one point of faith the primative church of Christ believed without the
scriptures, could never show any.


Phi. We could show many if that needed and we were disposed.


The. I know not what account you make of it; but to our simple conceiving it
is the groundwork of al religion, and crazeth ye very heart of your unwritten
verities. And if to satisfy the people of God and disburden your selves of an
error, you be not all this while disposed to do what you can, we must leave
you for curious and dainty men, and think you can not.


Phi. Tertullian was of that mind that we are, when he willed the christians
not to appeal to the scriptures for the trial of their faith. His words are,
Ergo non est ad scripturas prouocandum nec in ijs constituendum certamen,
Tertul. de praescrips. aduers. haeret.
in quibus aut nulla aut incerta victoria est. We must therefore not appeal to
the Scriptures, nor place the trial of our cause in those (writings) in which
the victory is either none or not sure.


Theo. You do both the truth and Tertullian wrong. Tertullia^ does not say that
in matters of faith some things should be believed without the Scriptures; In
vain to convince them by the scriptures, which receive not the scriptures.
no man is flatter against that than Tertullian in this very book which you
bring: but he would not have the heretics of his time challenged nor brought to
the Scriptures, because they received not the books as they lay, but with such
additions, alterations and expositions as they listed. And this he makes to be
the very reason of his Rule, in the words that go next before it.

The conference with them in the Scriptures can do no good: but either to
stir a man's stomach, Tertull. de praescriptic. aduers. haereticos.
Tertullian speaks of those sects which were in his time, as Valentinus,
Martion and others, who either denied the scriptures or turned them all to
monsterous alegories
or disquiet his brain. This brood (of heretics) receive not certain
Scriptures, and if they receive any, they frame them to their purpose with
adding and taking from them: and those that they receive, they receive them not
whole, and if they suffer them to stand whole they mar them with their forged
expositions. Their adulterating of the sense hurts the truth as much as
their mayming of the sentences. Diverse presumptions hold them from
acknowledging the (places) by which they be convinced: they rest on those which
they have falsely corrupted, and ambiguously wrested. Thou shall loose nothing
but thy voice in striving with them, thou shall gain nothing but the moving of
thy choler to hear them blaspheme. And showing that the hearers get less by
such contentions, he infers, Ergo non ad scripturas prouocandum est, we must
therefore not provoke (them) to the scriptures nor appoint there the conflict
(with them) where the victory is none, or not sure, or skant sure enough.

Ireneus not long before him gave the like report of the^, for they both had to
do with the selfsame sorts and routs of heretics. Iren. ^ib. 3. ^ap. 2.
When they are reproved by the scriptures, they find fault with the scriptures
themselves, as though many things were amiss in them, and the books of no
authority and doutfully written, and truth could not be had out of them if a
man be ignorant of Tradition. And again when we urge them to come to that
Tradition which is kept in the Churches down from the Apostles by the
successions of Bishops, they use to say, that they, as wiser not only than the
Priests, but also than the Apostles, have found out the sincere truth, and
that the Apostles did mingle certain points of the law with the words of our
Savior, Of these men spoke Tertullian.
and not the Apostles alone but Christ himself speak (sometimes earthly,
sometimes heavenly, sometimes mixely) but they undoubtedly, in defiledly and
sincerely know the hidden mystery. The which is nothing else but most
impudently to blaspheme their maker. And so it comes to pass that they
acknowledge neither the Scriptures, nor Tradition. Such they be with whom we
deal.

What marvel then if Tertullian gave counsel that such heretics should not
be provoked to the Scriptures, The reasons of Tertullians speech.
not that the Scriptures be defective in matters of faith, but for that the
sectaries of his time denied, corrupted and maimed the Scriptures: and in deed
no victory can be hoped out of Scriptures where they be neither received nor
reverenced as scriptures. And therefore Tetrullian had good cause to speak
these words, in respect of the persons yt were thus impudent, not in respect of
the scriptures, as if they were vnsufficie^t. That error of all others
Tertullian was farthest from, and no where farther than in this very place
which you quote. Aliunde scilicet loqui possent de rebus fidei nisi ex literis
fidei. Tertull. de praescriptio. aduers. Haeretices.
As though they could speak touching matters of faith out of any other than
out of the books of faith. And obiecting to the^ this very point which we now
strive for: Sed credant sine scripturis, vt credant aduersus scripturas, Let
(heretics,) says he, Ibidem.
believe without Scriptures, that they may believe against the scriptures. To
believe without scriptures, is heretical as well as to believe against the
scriptures, Basil. de spiritu sanct. cap. 27. Basils place for traditions
examined.
and the next step unto it as Tertul. here places the^: and therefore defend
not the 1. lest you fall to the 2. which is the ruin of all religion.


Phil. S. Basil is plain with us if Tertul. be not: Of the doctrines which
are taught in the Church, we have some laid down in writing, some again we
have received by tradition from the Apostles in a mystery, that is in secret.
Whereof either has like force to godliness, neither does any man contradict
them that is but meanly acquainted with the laws of the church. For if we go
about to reject those customs which are not written as of no moment, before we
be ware we shall condemn those things which This very place grants things
necessary to salvation to be in the Gospel. Ibidem, cap. 29
are in the Gospel necessary to salvation, yea rather we shall bring the
preaching of faith to a naked name. And not long after in the same book, If
nothing else has been received without scriptures, neither let this be
received: but if we have received many secrets without writing, Many things
received with out scriptures but no matters of faith. The book shamefully
corrupted.

Erasmus censure upon this book.

Epist. Erasm. dedicatoria ad episc. Culmens. praefixa. cap. 17.

Erasm. calls them Patches and dregs.

This place of all others cries corruption. Basil. de spiritu sanct. cap. 27.


let us also receive this amongst those many. I think it Apostolic to cleave
to traditions not written.


Theo. The book which you allege has S. Basils name to it, but the later
part thereof whence those patches are taken, have neither S. Basils style,
learning, spirit, nor age; which Erasmus perceived and confessed when he
translated the book. After I was past half the work, says he, without
wearines, the phrase seemed to declare an other writer and to savor of an
other spirit: sometimes the style swelled as unto the loftines of a trage^ie,
sometimes it calmed even unto a common kind of speech. Many times there appeared
some vanity in the author, as it were showing that he had learned Aristotle's
predicame^ts and Porphiries 5. predicables. Besides he digressed very often
from the purpose and returned vnhandsomly. Last of al many things seemed to be
here and there added, which made little to the matter in question. And some
things, such as by their face show their father, to wit, the same that has
interlaced the most learned books of Athan. concerning the holy ghost, with his
babbling but trifling co^ceits.


Phi. We care not for Erasm. judgment.


The. You must care for Erasmus reasons, unless you ca^ disprove the^.


Phi. How prove you these places to be those that Erasm. means?


The. If Erasmus had said nothing these places betray themselves. Look to the
beginning and ending of your first allegation, and you shall see that the
middle fitteth them as well as ^atemeale does oysters. The words next before
are these, It remains that we speak of the syllable, with, whence it came,
what force it has, and how far it agrees with the Scriptures. Mark the
cohere^ce of this place.
Then your forger as a man suddenly ravished and utterly forgetting what he
purposed, enters a vain discourse of thre^skore and fifteen lines clean
besides the matter, not so much as once mentioning that which he first
promised; and ends in a worse maze than be began, with a conclusion more
dissident from the middle, than the middle was from the preface: Dictum est
igitur ea^dem esse vim vtriusque proloquij. Ibidem, cap. 27.
So then we have showed that both propositions have the same sense: whereof he
spoke not one word in all that large discourse that went before. And so he
solemnly proposes one thing, digresseth abruptly to an other, and concludes
absurdly with a third, which oversight in any bore were not sufferable. A very
learned and witty discourse forsooth.


cap. 29.
Your later allegation is grounded on the former, and conuinceth your author to
be but a young father in respect of S. Basil. For where S. Basil died before
Meletius, your bastard Basil rehearses Meletius as a Bishop of ancient memory
dead long before his time. Basil. de spiritu. sanct^, cap. 29. This place
makes Basil alive some ages after he was dead.
In super and Meletiu^ illu^ admirandu^ in eade^ fuisse sententia narrant qui
cu^ illo vixerunt. Sed quid opus est vetera co^memorare? Immo nu^c qui sunt
Orientales, Moreover Meletius that admirable (Bishop) was of the same opinion,
as they that lived with him report. But what need I repeat ancient times?
The East Bishops which are at this day, etc. Now the true S. Basil not only
lived at the same time with Meletius, but was Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 26.
made Deacon by him, and wrate Basilij epist. 56 57.58.89.
many letters to him, and departed this life before him, as the church story
witnesses, affirming that Helladius, S. Basils successor and Meletius were
both present at the second general council at Constantinople under Theodosius,
Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 8.
and that must needs be when S. Basil was dead.


Phi. You did well to discredit the place: it were otherwise able to overthrow
all your new doctrine. This place, if it were Basils, does the Jesuits no good.



Theo. Then you do not well to build the antiquity of your religion on this
and such other apparent forgeries; but were the places not forged, they could
do you no such service as you spoke of, in the question which we now handle:
yea rather they confirm that which we affirm, that Things necessary to
salvation are (comprised) in the Gospel.


Phi. Many traditions were received from the Apostles without writing, which
are not in the Gospel.


Theo. You must also prove those traditions to be necessary to salvation before
you can conclude out of this place any thing against our assertion.


Phi. As though the Apostles delivered things which were not necessary to
salvation.


Theo. The christian faith they delivered in writing: the rest they left
unwritten, because those things which were no parts of faith, were delivered to
the church of Christ for decency, not for necessity. Their forged Basil
speaks of the ceremonies not of Doctrine.

I hope these traditions be no points of faith.





Phi. For decency? what a cavil that is?


Theo. The Traditions which your counterfeit Basil here rehearses as
descending from the Apostles are no such deep mysteries of religion as he
pretends. That the people should every sunday and likewise between Easter
and Whitsuntide pray standing, is that any point of faith or help to save their
souls? The words of invocation at the Lords supper, and the prayers before and
after, which the Greek church used, have you not long since left them, or to
say the truth, did you ever accept them for catholic? Singing with the
cross, turning to the East, thrice dipping him that is baptized, and
anointing him after with oil, be these essential parts of Baptism, or
rather external Rites declaring the power and virtue of that Sacrament? Your
author himself will tell you, they be not within the compass of that faith
which is common to all Christians, and must be rightly believed of all that
will be saved. For showing the cause why they might not be written, Basil. de
spirit. santi. cap. 27. Ibidem.
What things, says he, such as were not baptized might not behold, how could
it be fit they should be publicly carried about in writing? And again, The
Apostles and fathers which prescribed certain rites in the first beginning of
the church, reserved to these mysteries their dignity by silence and secrecy.
For it is This ergo was no Doctrine nor point of faith, which must be open to
all the people.
no mystery, which is open to the ears of the people and vulgar sort. Now
things necessary to salvation must openly be preached to the people and be
fully conceived of them, and steadfastly pro^essed by the^ before they can be
saved. These things therefore be not of that sort, but are rather excluded from
necessity, because they were delivered under secrecy.


Phi. But S. Basil or whosoever he be that wrote that book, says, vtraque
parem vim habent ad pietatem: Ibidem, cap. 27.
Things unwritten have equal force to godliness with things written. And prayers
of the Church and the creed have force to godliness: which are here reckoned
amongst traditions.



Theo. He says not that all things unwritten, but, vtraque both sorts have
like force to godliness, not that dumb ceremonies or outward gestures have
equal force with the word of God to lighten the mind, convert the soul, and
cleanse the heart, it were arrogant blasphemy so to say: but amongst things
unwritten he numbreth the prayers of the church proportioned by the word* and
having in them the very contents of the word, and also the Creed and
profession of the faith it self, whereby we believe in the Father, the Son
and the holy ghost, in truth and godliness equivalent with the scriptures and
in substance the very same that is witnessed by the scriptures: Both these
your Author in that place counts for things unwritten, and these we grant
have equal force to godliness with those things that are written. The papists
when they want Scripture to prove any point of their Doctrine, run by and by
to tradition: and tradition they prove by certain forgeries of their own.

Our faith must depend on no man's word, but only on gods.





Phi. In effect they be all one with those things that are written.


Theo. That makes his spe^ch the truer, which otherwise were absurd and
ungodly.


Phi. Is it not a w^lie shift, that sometimes you will admit no traditions, and
at other times when you be hardly pressed, faith, scriptures and all shall be
traditions with you?


Theo. Is it not a wilier, that having framed to your selves a religion without
the scriptures, you would now fortify the same by tradition against the
scriptures? But, you may not so prevail. We have the warrant of Saint Paul
and the catholic consent of Christ's Church, that our faith should depend on
the word of God: and since God speaks not now but in his scriptures, it is
evident that our faith in all points must be directed and ruled by the
scriptures. Stand not brabling with us about the word Tradition which is very
doubtful, and diuersely taken amongst the fathers: Bring some fair and true
demonstration for that which you hold, as reason is you should, to
counterp^i^e so many proofs in a matter of such importance, or else admit our
assertion to be true.


Philand. If they could not boudly call themselves Catholics, they could do
^^le.
That we can do, and yet not hurt our cause.


Theophil. We know you can do much. You can bouldly call your selves
catholics, though you be unshamefast heretics: and tell the people you teach
nothing but antiquity, when the chiefest points of your religion be mere
novelties and barbarous absurdityes.


Philand. You can exemplify a lie the best that ever I heard.


Theophil. Keep that praise as proper to your self, I will not disturb your
profession. Touching the matter in question whether I speak ought that is
untrue, let the reader judge.

You will have your religion and doctrine to be Catholic: that is, confirmed
by the Scriptures, and professed in all places, of all persons, at all times,
even from the first beginning wheresoever the Church of Christ has been
received. And when we come to see the specialities, we find you to swerve
not only from the sacred Scriptures and ancient Fathers, but even from those
later ages and Churches which you would seem to follow; and to have gotten
you a religion of your own without Council, Canon; antiquity, or Authority
to witness the same.

For example; the worshipping and adoring of Christ's Image with divine honor,
Their adoration of Images never taught in the Church, but by themselves
concluded in your Schools and practiced in your churches, is it not a wicked
and blasphemous invention of your own, against all Synodes and Fathers, Greek
and Latin, old and new, that ever assembled or taught in the church of God,
besides your selves? The second Nicene Council, which first began that
pernicious pastime of saluting and kissing Images, did they not in plain
words condemn this error of yours, when they said: Epist. Tharasij and
Concilij ad Co^stantinum act. 7.
(...) vni Deo tribuimus: divine honor we give to God alone, and not to
images? And again, Eiusdem Concilij, act. 3. Constantinus Constant. Episc.

Jonas Aurelianens. episc. de eultu Imaginum, lib. 1.

Adoration of Images openly detested in the west Church by such as took upon
them the defense of Images.


I receive and embrace reverent images: but the adoration which is done with
divine honor, called (...), I reserve to the supersubstantiall and quickening
Trinity only, and to no image. Jonas Bishop of Orleans that wrote against
Claudius Bishop of Turin in the defense of images 50. years after the second
Nicene council, did he not mightily detest your adoration of images, as a
most heinous error, and was not the whole church of France by his report, of
the same mind with him? Suffer, says he, the images of the Saints and the
histories of holy actions to be painted in the church, not that they should be
worshipped, but that they may be an ornament (to the place) and bring the
simple to the remembrance of things past. Creaturam vero adorari, etque
aliquid diuinae seruitutis impendi, pro nefas ducimus, huiusque scel^ris
patratorem detestandum and anathematizandum libera voce proclamamus. But that
any creature (or Image) should be adored, or have any part of divine honor we
count it a wickedness, and with open voice proclaim the committer of that
impiety (worthy) to be detested and accursed.

And proving by manifold authorities of scriptures and fathers that neither
image neither any thing made with hands should be adored, Ibidem.
he adds: That which you say the worshippers of images answered you for the
maintenance of their error; (we think no divinity to be in the image which we
adore, but only in honor of the person whose image it is, we worship it with
such veneration:) that (answer of theirs) we reprove and detest as well as you:
and because they do know, there is no divine thing in the image, they be the
more blame worthy for bestowing divine honor on a weak and beggarly Image,
the self same answer many of the East (church) entangled with this heinous
error give to such as rebuke the^: Inf^rmo and egeno simulachro.
the Lord of his mercy grant, that yet at length both these and those may be
drawn from this superstition (of theirs.) France See leratissimo mancipantio
error^.
has Images and suffers them to stand for the causes which I before
rehearsed: but they count it a Ibidem.
great detestation and abomination to have them adored. This was after your
Nicene Council 50. years.

The schoolmen kept the words of the 2. Nicene council and refelled their
meaning with a far wickeder resolution then the former.




In this opinion stood the west Churches a long time, till your schoolmen
started up, and ouer-ruled Religion with their sophistical distinctions and
solutions: and they keeping the words of the later Nicene Council, and not
marking their drift, controled that which they concluded and brought in a
lewder and wickeder kind of adoring of Images with the same honor that is due
to the Principal.

The chief actor in this was your glorious Saint and Clerk, as you call him,
Thomas Aquin, who rejecting all that was decreed at Nice inferred against them,
that no reverence could be exhibited to the Image of Christ, in that it was a
thing graven or painted, because reverence is due to none but to a reasonable
creature: and alleging Aristotle's authority, that the motion to the Image and
original is all one, he resolves in these words, Cum Christus adoretur
adoratione latriae, Thomas part. 3. quaest. 25. ari. 3*
consequens est quod eius imago sit adoratione latriae adoranda. Since then
Christ is adored with divine honor, it follows that his Image must likewise
be adored with the self-same Here the Devil showed himself in his likeness.
divine honor.

Bonauenture an other of your Romish Saints, canonized by Sixtus the fourth,
goes after Thomas with full sail. Quin Imago Christi introducta est ad
repraesentandum eum, Bonauen. in. 3. lib. senten. did. 9. quaest. 2.
qui pro nobis Crucifixus est, nec affert se nobis pro se sed pro illo, ideo
omnis reuerentia, quae ei offertur exhibitur Christo: and propterea Imagini
Christi debet cultus latriae exhiberi. Whereas the Image of Christ represents
him that was crucified for us, and offers it self unto us, not for it self,
but for him; in that respect all the reverence which is given to it is done to
Christ: and therefore the Image of Christ must be honored with divine
adoration. Holcot. in lib. Sapientiae lect. 58.
Holcote and Gerson. de probatione spirit. part operum 1
Gerson somewhat disliked this assertion and disputed against it, but the
pronesse of the people to follow such fancies, and the greedines of Priests
and other religious persons to keep and increase their offerings, and the
credit of Thomas, his learning, Sainctship and sectaries bare such a sway in
the Church of Rome, that the rest could not be regarded nor heard; and so the
common opinion and resolution of your Churches and schools, They say they make
not Images their gods: but to whatsoever they give divine honor, that they
make their God.

To give Christ's honor to an Image in respect of the Original is a seely
shift.


as the fortress of your faith confesses, was that the image of Christ should
be worshipped with divine honor, which you would feign shrink from in our
days, the doctrine being both strange and wicked, if you could tell how, but
that the words are so plain that no pretense can color them.

Your school doctrine therefore of adoring images with divine honor, not
only prohibited by the law of God, and abhorred of all ancient and Catholic
fathers; but even renounced in the second Nicene council, as repugnant to
truth, and shunned in the West church for a thowsande years after Christ and
upward as a most wicked error, how could it on the sudden with a silly
distinction of sundry respects become catholic? what greater wickedness can
there be than to give the honor of God to stocks and stones, and to say you do
it not in regard of the matter, but of the resemblance which the image has to
the original? as though it could be an image unless it had some resemblance,
either in deed or in our opinion, to the thing it self? or man were not a
truer and better image of God, and yet in no respect to be adored with divine
honor? or as if God prohibiting all images made with hands to be adored, To
adore the Image in respect of the Original, is in sum the very same answer
that all the Pagans gave when they were reproved for their Idolatry.
had not included as well their resemblance as their matter? Why may not any
Pagan by this evasion worship what creature he will, and say he beholds and
honoreth in it not the matter, but the wisdom and power of the Creator? And
what other conceit is this, than that which the Jewish and heathenish
Idolaters, when they were reproved, answered; that they adored not the things,
which they saw but conveyed their adoration by the image to him that was
invisible? If such profane speculations may be suffered in Gods cause, we may
soon delude all that GOD has commanded with one respect or other.

The determination of the second Nicene council that images were lovingly to
be saluted, embraced and kissed (for so themselves expound the word Adoration
which they use) was less pernicious than the former, as tending rather to
superstitious folly, Adoration of Images never hard of in the church before
the 2. Nicen Council, which was 790. years after Christ.
than to that sacrilegious impiety which after reigned in your schools: and
yet that decision of theirs was nothing less than catholic; no council or
father before them for the space of 790. years ever decreeing or defending any
such thing in the church of God: and the Bishops of England, Germany, France
and Spain forthwith contradicting and confuting their presumption as
vncatholike: and your own schools reuersing their assertion as void of all
truth, for that no reasonlesse creature is capable of reverence, which yet that
council had allowed unto images.

Painting of stories in the church is somewhat ancient, Painting of stories in
the Church is a matter somewhat ancient, but yet not catholic.
but neither Apost^lik, nor catholic. It was received in some places, upon
private men's affections, as an ornament for their churches, but used as
altogether indifferent, that is, urged on no man as a matter of religion: and
not only the whole church some hundredth years after Christ (which yet was
catholic) wanted all such pictures: but learned and godly Bishops without any
suspicion of e^rour or innovation traduced and repelled such paintings, as
things either superfluous or dangerous, or both.

What account the council of Eliberis, Eusebius, Epiphanius, and Augustine made
of pictures, These fathers were Catholic, and yet repelled painting in
Churches.

Nicenae Synodi 2. actio 6.

The 2. Council of Nice deluded the fathers that were alleged against them.
Epiphanius pretended, to be forged, but without all cause.

Ibidem.


you heard before: how Chrysostom, Amphilochius, Asterius, and others esteemed
them, you may read in your own books of Councels: where the wicked and
superstitious vpholders of Images refute the Counsel of Constantinople, but
with shyfting and lying most fit for the cause they took in hand.

To Epiphanius exhorting the Emperor not to bring Images into the Church, no
nor to tolerate them in private howsen, and adding this reason, non enim fas
est Christianum per oculos suspensum teneri, sed per occupationem mentis, it is
not lawful for a Christian to stand gazing with his eyes, but to have his mind
occupied; they answer that this epistle was forged in Epiphanius name, and that
Epiphanius himself would never have been so bitter against Images. The first
is easily said, and the second is falsely supposed without any proof; this
epistle was avouched to be his in a Synod of 330. Bishops not long before: and
Epiphanius is sharper against Images in his epistle to John of Jerusalem which
S. Hierom translated, than he was in this, which they disliked.

Eusebius dissuading the Empress from regarding the painted Image of Christ
with these words, Eusebius condemned by them for an heretic, but falsely.
Quis igitur gloriae eiusmodi and dignitatis splendores lucentes and
fulgurantes, effigiare mortuis and inanimatis coloribus and vmbratili pictura
posset? who can resemble in deed and lifelesse colors, and with the shadow of
a picture the shyning and glittering brightness (of Christ's) glory and
dignity, is rejected as an heretic and condemned by those that lived many
hundred years after him, Nicenae Synodi 2. act. 6.
and were in credit or learning no way comparable to him.

Chrysostomes assertion, Nos per scripta sanctorum fruimur praesentia, non sane
corporu^ ipsoru^ sed animaru^ Imagines habentes; we by writing enjoy the
presence of the saints, not having any Images of their bodies, but of their
minds: Amphilochius protestation, Non enim nobis sanctorum corporales vultus
in tabulis coloribus effigiare curae est, Ibidem.
quoniam hijs opus non habemus: we have no care to resemble in colors the
bodily visages of the saints, because we have no need of them: and Asterius
admonition, Ne pingas Christum in vestibus, sed magis sumptu illo and impensis
pauperibus subueni: paint not Christ in clothes (or colors) but rather relieve
the poor with that expe^ce and charge: Ibidem.

Chrysostom. Amphilochius and Asterius plainly shifted off by the Council of
Nice. Contra Celsum, lib. 7.


they avoid as spoken by way of comparison, and not of illation, as if me^ in
their comparisons did not speak truth, and affirm both parts as well as in
their conclusions. This was the skill and esming of your late Nicene Synod to
cry corruption on others when they themselves were most corrupt, and with a
shyft of words to decree that as Catholic which was repugnant to the plain
precepts of God and general judgment of their forefathers in all ages and
places before them.

For our parts we say with Origin, Bowing to Images condemned.
Non igitur fieri id poterit vt and Deum quis nouerit and simulachris vt
supplicet. It can not be that a man should know God and bow him self to
images: and with Austen, August. de vera Religio. cap. 55.
Let it be no Religion of ours to worship the works of men's hands; because the
workmen that make them are the better (of the twain) whom yet we may not
worship. The Law of God is so direct, forbidding us to bow to any Image,
similitude or likeness of any thing, that no distinction can help you. Hieron.
in 6. cap. Daniel.
Nota^da proprietas: Deos coli, Imagine^ adorari; quorum vtru^que, seruis Dei
non conuenit. Note says S. Hierom the propriety (of the speech,) Gods are
worshipped, Images are adored (or bowed unto:) whereof neither is fit for the
servants of God.

If you trust not the ancient fathers, one of your own friends will tell you
the same. Gerson. in compendio Theolog. de 10. praeceptis.

Some of their own church have condemned bowing to Images as contrary to the
law of God.


Non adorabis, neque coals. Inter quae distingue. Non adorabis scilicet
veneratio ne corporis, vt inclinando eis, vel genuslectendo. Non coals,
scilicet affectione mentis. Ad adorandum igitur and colendum prohibitur
Imagines fires. Thou shall not adore them, nor worship them. Which are thus to
be distiguished. Thou shall not adore them, that is with any bodily reverence,
as bowing or kneeling to them. Thou shall not worship them with any devotion of
mind. Images therefore are prohibited to be either adored or worshipped. Thus
your own fellows were not so blind but they perceived the strength and force
of Gods commandment to be such, as we defend at this present against you.

And though he labor to shift off the matter with a rule of S. Augustine, that
the honor passes from the sign to the thing signified: yet he both missed
himself, Saint August. abused to make for Images.
and misconstred his author. For S. Augustine in that place puts a manifest
bar against Images, and precisely and purposely excludes them out of the
number of signs which he meant to treat of, when he gave this rule. His words
are, Qui veneratur vtile signum diuinitus institutum, cuius vim
significationemque intelligit, August. de doctrine. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 9.
non hoc veneratur quod videtur, sed illud potius quo talia cuncta referenda
sunt. He that reuerenceth a profitable sign ordained by God, the force and
signification whereof he well understands, does not renerence that which he
sees but rather that to which al such signs are to be referred.

Things ordained by God must have their reverence though they be but creatures,
marie adoration they must not have.
This rule reaches to no signs, but to such as are ordained by Gods own
institution, which Images are not, and therefore are clean without the co^pas
of S. Augustines speech. Again the veneration here touched, is not any
worshipping or adoring the creatures which God uses for signs, but a reverent
estimation and regard of them that they be not despised or abused although they
be but signs. So that water in baptism and the creatures of bread and wine in
the Lords supper (which are the two examples here August. lib. eodem, cap. 9.
de doctina. christian. lib. 3. c. 5.
mentioned) are to be reverenced as things that be sacred by the word and
ordinance of God, but not to be adored and honored for the things themselves,
whose signs they are; that were a miserable servitude, or rather the right
death of the soul, as Austen notes. And that the first teachers of truth
removed al Images as unprofitable signs to serve God with, the words before do
plainly show. For speaking of the difference between the Jews and the Gentiles
when they should be converted unto Christ, he says, cap. 8.
Christian liberty finding the Jews under profitable signs (to wit the rites
and Ceremonies of the Law) did interpret the meaning of them, and so by
directing the people to the things themselves, delivered them from the
servitude of the signs; but finding the Gentiles under Images unprofitable
signs and not ordained of God.
unprofitable signs, (for that they cap. 7.
worshipped Images either as Gods, or as the signs and resemblaunces of Gods)
cap. 8.
ipsa signa fru^trauit remouitque omnia, she wholly removed and frustrated the
signs themselves, that is she would not suffer them to serve the true God
with any such signs as bodily shapes and Images were.

Your honoring of Images is reproved as you see and not relieved by S.
Augustines Rule. The law of god condemns bowing unto Images, which precept
the Church must obey without all shifts or other respects
And since the Law of God expressly and ^treitly charge you not so much as
to bow your bodies or knees to the likeness of any thing in heaven or earth,
which is made with hands, consult your own consciences, whether you may with
your respects frustrate, or with your routes ouerbeare the distinct and direct
voice of God himself in his own Church. And if you be not given over into a
reprobate sense, you will say no. Now that which is against the Law of God can
neither be Christian, nor Catholic: Your Doctrine therefore of bowing and
kneeling to Images is repugnant both to the precepts of God, and to the
general and ancient resolution of Christ's church: your adoring them with
divine honor is a sacrilegious and flagitious, as well novelty as impiety.


Phi. You must not look that we should defend the sayings and doings of all
that have taken part with the church of Rome. If Thomas waded too far in
worshipping Images, if Gerson mistook S. Augustine, if the later Council of
Nice denied or strained some of the ancient Fathers, you must not challenge us
for their ouer^ightes.


The. We challenge you for vaunting your selves to be Catholics when in deed
you do nothing but smooth and sleike the corruptions and inventions of later
ages against the right and ancient faith of Christ's church.

The descent of Images with their adoration, how late it began, how often it
varied, how far at length it swarued from the Primative and original profession
of the christian and catholic faith; we have spent sometime to examine. Let us
now approach to your prayers in a strange tongue, Praying in a strange tongue.
which have a great deal less show of catholicism tha^ images had, and yet are
as egerly defended by you as images were.


Phi. In the Latin tongue we have prayers, in a strange tongue we have none: you
rather that have turned scriptures, church service and secrets for your
pleasures into the English tongue, make your prayers in a strange and unwonted
speech to catholic eares^


The. To English me^ the English tongue is not strange.


Phi. I know they understand it, but I call it strange because they were not
wont to have the public prayers of the Church in their mother tongue.


Theo. In cases of religion, Custom without truth is the rottennes of error.
we must respect, not what men have, but what they should have been used to.
Cyprian says well, Cypr. ad Pompei. contra epist^ Stephan.
Consuetudo sine veritate, vetustas erroris est. Custom without truth, is but
the long continuance of error: and so Tertullian, Tertull. de virgin. veland.
Quodcunque aduersus veritatem sapit hoc erit haeresis, etiam vetus consuetudo.
Whatsoever is against the truth, it must be counted heresy, though it be an
old Custom. The Council of Carthage where Cyprian was, resolved thu^: Ex
sentent. Council. Carthag. inter ^p^^a Cyprian.
The Lord says in the Gospel, I am truth, he said not I am custom. Truth
therefore appearing let custom yield to truth.


Phi. That council erred in neglecting the old custom which the church observed.


Theo. But yet their general assertion, which I allege, was so strong, that
S. Augustine says to those very words: August. debap. contra Donat. lib. 3.
cap. 6.
Plane respondeo, quis dubitet veritatis manifestae debere consuetudinem
cedere? I plainly answer, who doubts but that custom must yield to the
truth appearing?


Phi. Neither do we doubt of that, but how prove you this to be a manifest
truth, that the people of this Land must have their divine service in the
English tongue?


Theo. It is the manifest precept of him that said, I am truth and witnessed
in the Scripture which is the word of truth. John. 14. Ephesians. 1.



Philan. In what place there?


Theo. Make not your self so great a stranger in the Scriptures, as if you
knew not the place.


Phi. You mean the 14. Chapter of the first epistle which S, Paul wrote to the
Church of Corinth.


Theo. I do; what say you to it?


Phi. Mary this we say, The Rhemish Test. upon the 1. Cor. 14.
The reader may take a taste in this one point of your deceitful dealing,
abusing the simplicity of the popular by perverse application of Gods holy
word, upon some small similitude and equiuocatio^ of certain terms, against
the approved godly use and truth of the universal Church, for the service in
the Latin or Greek tongue: which you ignorantly or rather wilfully pretend to
be against this discourse of S. Paul touching strange tongues.


Theo. And he that marketh your shifting and facing in this one point, shall
need no farther taste of your dealing.


Phi. If you like not that which we say, refel it.


Theo. Can your selves tell what you say?


Phi. You shall well find that when we come to the matter.


Theo. First then hear what the Apostle says, and after you shall have leave
to say what you will.

1. Cor. 14.

The place of S. Paul to the Corinthians against praying in a strange tongue.


Instructing the Church of Corinth thus he says, And now brethren if I come to
you speaking with (strange) tongues what shall I profit you? If a trumpet give
an uncertain sound, who will prepare himself to the battle? So likewise you by
the tongue except you utter words of easy understanding, how shall it be known
what is spoken? For you shall speak in the air. There are for example so many
kinds of tongues in the world and none of them is without sound. Except I
know the power (and signification) of the speech, I shall be to him that
speaks barbarous, and he that speaks shall be barbarous to me. Wherefore
let him that speaks a (strange) tongue pray that he may interpret. For if I
pray in a tongue (not understood) my spirit prays, but mine understanding is
without fruit. What is it then? I will pray with the spirit, but I will pray with
the understanding also: I will sing with the spirit, but I will sing with the
understanding also. Else when thou blessest with the spirit, how shall he that
occupies the room of the unlearned say Amen, at thy giving of thanks, seeing
he knows not what thou say? Thou verily give thanks well but the other
is not edified. I had rather in the Church to speak five words with mine
understanding tha^ I might also instruct others, tha^ ten thousand words in an
unknown tongue. When ye come together, let al things be done to edification. If
any man speak in an (unknown) tongue, let one interpret: but if there be no
interpreter, let him keep silence in the church: God is not the author of
confusion but of peace: so (I teach) in all the Churches of the saints. If any
man seem to be a Prophet or to be spiritual, let him understand that the
things which I write unto you are the commaundeme^ts of the Lord. Thus far S.
Paul: which I rehearse at large, that it may lie for the ground of the whole
dispute that shall follow. What answer you to this commandment of God and
doctrine of his Apostle?


Phi. No one place of scripture, is more diversely or easily answered than
this. First you and your tra^slatio^s corrupt this chapter by putting your own
words to y Apostles text. For where he says tongue, you ad (strange, unknown,
not understood) which are not in S. Paul. Secondly you The Jesuits labor
toothe and nail to shift off this place.
misconster ye whole passage of S. Paul: for by edifying y^ church, and
understanding the power of ye voice, he means not y bare signification of y^
words only, but the This is the sum of all their declaration upon the 1. Cor.
14. in their Remish Testament.
increase of faith, true knowledge and goodlife: and in that sense we say, Our
forefathers were as much edified with the latin service that is, as w^se, as
faithful, as devout, as fearful to break Gods Laws, and as likely to be saved
as we are (with) all our tongues, translations and English prayers. Thirdly by
strange tongues the Apostle means not the Latin, Greek, or Hebrew. Fourthly
that he speaks not of the Churches service is proved by invincible arguments.
Fifthly the Catholic people are taught the contents of their prayers, and
understand every Ceremony, and can behave them selves accordingly. Sixthly it
is not necessary to understand our prayers. Lastly the service has been
always in Latin throughout the west Church. And to dispute thereof, as though
it were not to be done, since the whole Church does practice and observe it
throughout the wordle, is most insolent madness, as S. Augustine says in 118.
epistle. I saw by your looks, you thought we could not answer it.


Theo. I knew you had stoare of answers, such as they be: but from such
interpreters God defend us and all that be his.


Phi. Speak to the matter, let the men alone.


Theoph. Then to the matter; this is a right pattern of your Rhemish
annotations stuffed with The two virtues of their Rhemish annotations.
impertinent allegations and The two virtues of their Rhemish annotations.
impudent sophistications, of purpose to defeat and frustrate the scriptures
that are against you.


Phi. You fall to railing, when you faint in reasoning.


Theo. How can we but kindle when we see you fray the people of God from the
sweet and wholesome food of their souls, and delude them with your husks and
hogwash?


Phi. First discharge your selves of your shameful adding to the Scriptures,
The words strange or unknown put into the text in an other print for the
opening of Saint. Paul's mind.
and then you may the better examine our answers.


Theoph. To the text of the holy Ghost we add not: only for the better
conceauing of the sense, in an other print we enterpose that special
limitation of the word, tongue, which the drift of the whole chapter
necessarily enforces, which the Apostle himself directly expresses, and the
learned and ancient fathers expounding this place do euerywhere insert as the
right construction of the scripture.

S. Paul did not speak either of tongues in general, or of such tongues as
were known and well understood of the Corinthians; Saint Paul's words are
most absurd, if they be understood of known toungs^
nothing can be more absurd nor more against sense and nature tha^ so to apply
the Apostles reasons, but of such tongues as were unknown and not understood
of the hearers, and in that case his assertions are very true and his
illations very strong, which otherwise are ridiculous, if not monsterous. For
who well in his wits will make the Apostle speak so falsely and absurdly as to
say, He that speaks a (known) tongue, speaks not unto men, but unto God:
If I come to you, speaking with (known) tongues, what shall I profit you? He
that speaks a (known) language edifieth (but) himself: when thou blessest
with the spirit (and in a known tongue) how shall he that is unlearned say,
Amen? The text cannot stand, except you add the word (unknown) to it.
These speeches have neither ryme nor reason in them; but turn them to the
contrary and limit them to an unknown tongue, and then they be very
substantial and sensible assertions.

And so S. Paul in that chapter very often expounds himself. Saint Paul so
expounds himself.
For these be his own additions, Verse. 9.
How shall it be understood what is spoken? 11.
Except I know the power of the speech I shall be barbarous to him that
speaks. 16.
He knows not what thou say. And citing a place of the Prophet Esaias to
confirm his intent he says, by men of other tongues and of other languages
will I speak to this people. What is an other tongue and another language but
in manifest terms, a strange tongue and a strange language?

An other tongue is a strange tongue which is all one with an unknown tongue.

Chrysostom. in 1. Corinthians. 14.


Chrysostom and Ambrose commenting upon this chapter deliver S. Paul's mind in
those very words which we do. Si peregrina lingua gratias agas: If thou give
thanks in a STRANGE tongue, says Chrysostom, the common man can not answer
Amen. And speaking in S. Paul's person, The fathers interpreting Saint Paul,
add those words which we do.
Linguas inutiles esse dico, quantisper sint ignotae: I say tongues are
unprofitable so long as they are UNKNOWN. Ibidem.
Nam quae vtilitas ex voce non intellecta potest esse? For what profit can
there come by a speech that is NOT UNDERSTOOD? Ambrose like wise, Hoc est quod
dicit, qui loquitur incognita lingua, Deo loquitur. This is it the Apostle
says, he that speaks in AN UNKNOWN TOVNG, speaks unto God and not unto
men. And again, Ibidem Ambros. in 1. Corinthians. 14.
Docere nemo poterit, nisi intelligatur. No man can instruct, except he be
understood. And therefore the Apostle Ibidem.
warns, says he, that they should not seem barbarous each to other by AN
UNKNOWN TOVNG. Ibidem.
Non competit fidelibus audire linguas quas non intelligunt, sed infidelibus.
It is not for the faithful to hear tongues which they understand not, but for
infidels. Qui loquitur linqua] subaudis incognita and peregrina. He that
speaks with a tongue) thou must understand, says Haymo, an unknown and
strange tongue. And again, Ibidem. Haymo in 1. Cor. 14.
Si orem lingua] subaudis incognita. If I pray with a tongue) to wit, an
unknown tongue, the understanding of my soul is without any profit, because I
understand not what I speak. And so S. Augustine disputing of this place says,
Ibidem. August. de Genes. ad literam, lib. 12. cap. 8.
Quia lingua, id est membro corporis quod monemus in ore cum loquimur, signa
vtique rerum dantur, non res ipsae proferuntur, propterea translato verbo
linguam appellauit qua^libet signorum prolationem priusqua^ intelligantur.
Because by the tongue, I mean that part of the body which we move in our mouths
when we speak, the signs of things are delivered and not the things
themselves, therefore (the Apostle to the Corinthes) by a kind of translation
calls any uttering of signs (or words) Mark what a tongue is by Saint
Austens interpretation.
before they be understood, a toungue


Phi. In deed S. Paul speaks of tongues not understood when he says they
neither profit nor edify: but he that thinks S. Paul speaking of
edification of man's mind or understanding, The Rhemish Test. 1. Corinthians 14.
means the understanding of the words only, is foully deceived. For what is a
child of five or six years old edified or increased in knowledge by his Pater
noster in english? It is the sense therefore which every man can not have
neither in English nor latin, the knowledge whereof properly and rightly
edifieth to instruction: and the knowledge of the words only often edifieth
never a whit, and sometimes builds to error and destruction: as it is plain in all heretics and many curious persons besides.


Phi. As we should show our selves to be mad, if we should say that English
prayers do edify children before they come to the years of discretion, He
that knows not the sense is not edified, but he that knows not one word,
as in a strange tongue is a thousand times l^sse edified.
or that the very hearing of their mother tongue does sufficiently instruct
English men, though the sense of that which is spoken be never so dark,
obscure, parabolicall, and mystical: for then we should cross the very
Principles of nature and the whole discourse of the Apostle (who mainely
teaches, that no man is edified, except he understand: and means by
understanding both the knoweledge of the words that enter our ears, and of the
sense that affects our hearts: so are you worse than mad to defend that men
may be edified by speech whereof they understand not so much as one word, to
confute so shameful an absurdity, we need neither Scriptures nor Fathers:
Speak to children in a strange tongue, and they will either fly from you for
fear or laugh you to skorne.
Children of six years old will tell you, they be no whit the better for all
your pains, if they understand not your words. What will you not say, that
will say this? And when you that be masters in Israel, are so blind, how great
must the blindness of others be, that take their light from you? You resist
not only God, and his truth, but you force your own tongues to speak
against your own hearts. For say your selves; if a man speak Welsh or Irish
to you, that understand it not, what will it profit you, or which way can you
be edified by it?


Phi. Welsh or Irish would do us no good, but Greek or Hebrewe would. Hebrew
does edify no more than Irish if a man understand neither.



Theo. What difference between Hebrew and Irish to him that understands a
word of neither? When the heart conceiueth not the sense of the words, nor so
much as distinguishes the tongue, whether it be Hebrewe or Irish, for lack of
knowledge, how can the Hebrewe or greek tongue, though the one be sacred and
the other learned, instruct the hearer, or help his understanding more than
Welsh or Irish can?

The Apostles Rule, De Genesis ad lit^. lib. 12. cap. 8.
If I come to you speaking with tongues (not understood) what shall I profit
you? ^s generally true of all tongues. Nemo edificatur audiendo quod non
intelligit: No man, Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. 14.
says Augustine, is edified with hearing that which he understands not.
Ambros. in. 1. Cor. 14.
Linguas loquens seipsum edificat, quod quide^ fieri non potest, nisi quae
loquatur norit: He that speaks with tongues edifieth himself: which is not
possible, except he know what he says, as Chrysostom notes. And Ambrose,
Si vtique ad edificandum Ecclesiam conuenitis, ea dici debent, quae intelligant
audientes; If you come together to edify the Church, those things must be
spoken which the hearers may understand. If then there be no edification,
where nothing is understood; Nothing does edify except it be understood.
a strange tongue, be it Hebrewe, Greek, Welche or Irish, cannot edify the
hearer that is ignorant of them; by reason the heart perceives not the words,
much less the sense of that which is spoken.


Phi. We say, the simple people, and many one that think themselves some body,
understand as little of the sense of diverse Psalms, lessons and Oraisons in the
vulgar tongue as if they were in Latin. The Rhemish Testament, 1. Corinthians. 14.



Theo. And we say you do nothing now but cavil, A wretched cavil of the
Jesuits because the people understand not every mystery of the Psalm^^ or
lessons, to say they were as good not understand a word.
which in matters of truth is not tolerable. For what if the vulgar sort
understand not the perfect sense of every verse or word that is read in the
Church, will you thence infer; that the divine service in a known tongue
does not edifi^? Your selves, step out the prowdest of you, understand not
every line and letter that is written in the old and New Testament; Do the
Scriptures therefore not edify; or blame you the holy Ghost for writing them,
because you do not every where reach to the depth of them? What teacher can be
so plain; but in debating matters of faith and salvation he shall be many
times forced to pass the capacity of rude and ignorant men? Will you therefore
conclude against S. Paul, that neither Prophets, nor Preachers edify? In the
epistles (and so no doubt sermons) of Paul himself there are (and were) some
things hard to be understood. 2. Peter 3.
Were the Preachings and writings therefore o^ the Apostle unprofitable?


Phi. If the Psalms and lessons do not edify, the word of god does not
edify.
We reason against your service, not against the Scriptures.


Theo. As though the Psalms and lessons in our service, were not parts of the
sacred Scriptures. If therefore our divine service do not edify in respect of
the psalms and lessons there song and read, then the Scriptures themselves do
not edify, and consequently S. Paul was ouershot when he said, whatsoever
things are written, were written for Romans 15.
our instruction; and the Holy Ghost deceived when he witnessed, that the whole
Scripture is 2 Timoth. 3.

The rest of our prayers are so plain that no man can pretend lack of
understanding them except he be a natural.


profitable to teach, correct and instruct. Or if the spirit of God be truth,
as there is no question he is, then are you void both of his spirit and of
truth also to say that diverse psalms and lessons do not edify.


Phi. You be very snappish: we speak of your prayers, as well as of the Psalms
and lessons: Neither do we say the Psalms and lessons do not edify, but y^
the simple understand not diverse of them no more than if they were in Latin.


Theo. They must be very simple that understand not our prayers. They contain
nothing besides the confession of our sins to god, the rendering of thanks
for his graces and mercies bestowed on us in Christ his son, They be mad
Christians and of your making, that understand not these things.
and the asking of such things at his hands as his wisdom sees to be
needful and his goodness thinks expedient for us and all mankind. And these
things if any man understand not, being distinctly and daily pronounced in his
mother tongue, you may beg him for a natural and do him no wrong.

As for the Psalms and Lessons, since they be Gods not ours, the question must
not be whether every ladde or less, prentise and ploughman exactly understand
every word that is written, This is a wise jest of the Jesuits because the
people understand
but whether they edify the church of Christ or no; that is, whether they have
in them many things fruitful to be known, and easy to be learned if the
hearers will be diligent and delight in the law of God as they ought, and are
bound to do. And in this case masters, you be not only snappish but very saucy
with God himself, that will not suffer him to speak in his Church by the mouths
of his Prophets and Apostles, if you find any sot or sim^le idiote in the
company that happily understands not every word which the holy Ghost utters.

Were you Surgions of the body, and had some in cure, that could not see with
one eye, to remedy that imperfection, would you put out both, and make them
stark blind?


Phi. A wise similitude. Compare this similitude with the Jesuits objection,
and tell me what they differ.



Theo. As wise as your illation against our divine service. For where some be
so dull and ignorant, that they conceive not diverse things in the Psalms,
Lessons and prayers, to help that, you would take from them the rest which
they do understand, and so fill their ears with the strangeness of an
unknown tongue, that their hearts perceive just as much of your prayers, as
blind men ^o of colors.

And see you not that your assertion strangleth it self, and clearly
conuinceth the unfruitfulness of your latin prayers? For if the people be so
simple that they understand not the sense of many things in their mother
tongue, If service in ^ known tongue do not ^difie, what does service in an
unknown?
how many think you among them understand the same or any thing else in the
latin tongue? If the Scriptures must be enjoined silence in the Church because
they speak some things which the ruder sort can not easily attain, what place
can be left for your latin Mass, Mattines and service, of which the people
understand not one word: and the knowledge of so much, as one sentence thereof,
before they can get, they must be not only Divines, which you say they are not,
but good Grammarians, which in their education is not possible? The Jesuits
way to edify is to let the people not understand a word of their prayers.
What else is this but to put out both their eyes, and where before they
understood many things that were both fruitful and needful for them, so to
mure up their ears and choke up their hearts with a barbarous sound of unknown
speech, that neither the simpler, nor wiser sort of them perceived any line or
letter of your service?


Phi. Call you the latin tongue barbarous?


Theo. Not in it self, but in respect of the hearer, which is not acquainted
with it. And so S. Paul calls any language that is not understood, barbarous
to him, Every tongue barbarous to him that understands it not.
that understands it not. 1 Corinthians. 14.

The Rhemish Testament

1 Corinthians. 14. Act. 2.


If I know not the power (or signification) of the speech, I shall be
barbarous to him that speaks, and he that speaks shall be barbarous to me
(that understand him not.)


Phi. You are deceived. There is here no word written or meant of any other
tongues but such as men spoke in the primative Church by miracle.


Theo. Did not the twelve Apostles, that were Hebrews borne, speak Greek and
Latin by the miraculous gift of the holy Ghost, descending on them in the
likeness of cloven and fiery tongues, as it is specified in the second of the
Acts?


Phi. I think they did: because the Romans are there named amongst those
that heard, every man their own language at the Apostles mouths: The Rhemish
Testament

1. Corinthians. 14.


Mary though the Hebrew, Greek and Latin might be given by miracle and
without study, it being known to the Jews, Romans or Greeks, in every
place, they be not counted among the differences of barbarous and strange
tongues here spoken of.


Theo. Barbarous, that is, which is not understood, what tongue soever it be.
S. Paul does not here like a Rhetorician, as you would have him, distinguish
the tongues which be most eloquent and oratoricall in themselves: that was
far from the Apostles mind or purpose: but only shows that every tongue
not understood, be it Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Persike, Arabike, or what
language you list, seems not without just cause to be barbarous to him that
knows not the force and signification of the speech. And so he limiteth the
word barbarous; when he says: If I know not the power of the voice, 1. Cor.
14.
I shall be barbarous to him that speaks (and he likewise to me.) Hieron.
in
Omnis sermo qui non intelligitur barbarus iudicatur. Every tongue that is not
understood, is deemed, says Hierom, to be barbarous. 1. Cor. 14.
And Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in 1. cor. 14. hom. 35.
He shall be barbarous to me, and I to him. Non vtique ob naturam vocis sed ob
imperitiam, not by the nature of the tongue, but by the unskillfulness (of the
hearer.) Ibidem.
Non enim barbarus, inquit, ero: sed loquenti barbarus. Et rursus, non qui
loquitur barbarus est, inquits sed mihi barbarous. For (S. Paul) says not, I
shall (simply be a barbarian, but barbarous to him that speaks. And again,
he that speaks shall not be (absolutely) a barbarian, but barbarous unto me,
says the Apostle.


Phi. This we say was not meant of any of the three learned toungs, namely not
of the Latin, Greek nor Hebrew.


The. That is one of your oracles in your Rhemish obseruatio^s, but we would
hear your reasons and not your fancies, why the Latin tongue, if it be not
understood, may not be counted barbarous to the hearer.


Phi. The Rhemish Testament 1. Corinthians. 14.
Know you that nothing (in this chapter) is meant of those toungs which were the
common languages of the world, or of the faithful, understood of the learned
and civil people in every great city, and in which the scriptures of the old
and new Testament were written.


Theo. This is pride, to affirm what you will your selues^ it is no reason to
confirm that which is now in question betwixt us: And yet that which you
affirm is either not true, or not much to the matter. For first in latin no
Scriptures were written; but the Apostle writing to the Romans wrate in the
Greek tongue and not in latin, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, were not understood
of the civil people in every great City.
which argues that the la^ine tongue was nothing so much esteemed, or so
generally dispersed as the Greek. Next that the learned and civil people in
every great city had the knowledge of the Hebrew, Greek and latin, is an
other of your Iesuitical truths, avouched by no man but by your selves, and no
way possible to be proved, but by your magistrall surmises.

The Hebrew was hard and neglected of all men saving of the Jews, whose
peculiar tongue it was; the greater cities despising as well the Nation as
their language, til Christ was ascended; and between that and the preaching of
the Gospel in the greater cities the people though they were civil had neither
time, capacity nor means to learn a new tongue, and so difficult a tongue
both to pronounce and understand as the Hebrew is.

The Greek tongue was in high price and farther spread, before the birth of our
Savior, not only by reason of the Monarchy which was amongst the Grecians
before it came to the Romans, but specially for that all liberal studies,
arts and exercises were handled and perfited either wholly or chiefly by the
Grecians, the Romans affecting rather the enlarging of their Empire with arms
and triumphs than the furnishing of their city with scholasticall and
academicall ornaments.

The Latin tongue came in last, and though in the West parts between this
and Rome it somewhat prevailed by reason of the Empire, and no better tongue
nearer; yet in the East it was little regarded and seldom used, yea the
Grecians in comparison of their tongue neglected it as barbarous.


Phi. Barbarous? The Gretians accounts the Latin tongue to be barbarous in
respect of then own.

Plautus in prolog. Asinariae.

Strabo Geographiae lib. 1. Romans 1.


who ever called the Romans Barbarians, or the Latin tongue barbarous?


Theo. The Grecians disdained the Roman tongue as barbarous in respect of
their own, and did not stick to number the Romans amongst the barbarians.
Plautus the father of the latin tongue translating a Comedy out of the Greek
into Latin, says: Marcus vertit barbare: Plautus translated it into the
barbarous tongue (of the Romans.) Strabo confesses that many dividing the
whole world into Greeks and Barbarians put the Romans in the second rank
amongst the Barbarians; which partition dured to the Apostles time, and is
inserted in the first beginning of his Epistle to the Romans. I am debtor to
the Greeks and to the Barbarians, and therefore am ready to preach the
Gospel to you also, that are at Rome. He is a debtor to both and by that
means to the Romans: the Romans therefore by S. Paul's own mouth (since they
were not Grecians) are numbered amongst the Barbarians.

Mary this is not material to our purpose, We despise not these tongues as
barbarous in themselves; but show what Saint Paul means by this word.
the Grecians in their proud conceit thought every Nation barbarous that wanted
any thing of the da^^tinesse of their speech, and delicatenes of their life;
where in deed no Nation may justly be counted barbarous, except it be void
of all humane civility and society, which the Romans then were not, and
infinite Nations now are not. But S. Paul in this place, which we reason of,
uses barbarous for that which is not understood of the hearer, though the
tongue in it self be never so learned, or eloque^t. Those are his very words
in this chapter uttered for the better declaration of his meaning: and the word
bears this sense even among profane writers as when the Poet that was a
Roman, and vanished into Pontus, said, Tristium lib. 5. elegia. 11.
Barbarus hic ego sum, quia non intelligor vlli. I am here a barbarian, because
no man understands what I speak. And you shall never prove he spoke not of
them; in the mean time the Apostles words he indifferently for all tongues.
Even so the Grecians and Hebricians by Saint Paul's resolution are barbaria^s
to him that knows not what they say.


Phi. You shall never induce me to think that S. Paul spoke of any of those
three tongues, which were after a sort sanctif^^d in our Saviors cross.


Theo. What you will be led to we greatly pass not, the Scriptures depend
not on your dreams, we search for the sense of Saint Paul's words, which
being general may not be restrained to what you list without some surer
authority than your own. There are, says the Apostle, for example sake, so
many kinds of tongues In the world) and none of them be general speeches
extending to all the toungs that are.
in the world, and Chrysostom. in 1. Corinthians. 14.
none of them is without sound (or signification.) Yet if I know not the
virtue of the voice, I shall be barbarous to him that speaks (in any of them)
and he that speaks shall be barbarous to me. In all toungs he that is not
understood, is barbarous to the hearer.
There are so many kinds of voices in the world. That is, says Chrysostom, so
many tongues and languages; to wit, the Scythian, Thracian, Roman, Persian,
Mauritanian, Indian, Egyptian, and of thousand other nations besides these.
Therefore if I know not the power of the voice, I shall be barbarous to him
that speaks. Neither would I have you think it to come to pass in us only,
you may see the like in Chrysostom. Ibidem
all. And concluding him that prayed in latin, if he understood not his own
speech, to be barbarous to himself by this very rule of the Scripture, he
says: If a man should presently speak in the Persian tongue, or in any other
strange tongue, and not understand what he speaks, he shall be barbarous even
to himself, not only to an other that knew not the power of the language.
There were at the first many that prayed and gave a sound with the voice, using
the Persian or Roman tongue, which understood not what they said. The Apostle
therefore hence teaches that our tongue ought to speak, and our mind withal
understand the words. Which except we do, there must of Chrysostom
exemplifieth Saint Paul's words twice together by the latin tongue.
necessity follow a confusion.

Though we pray in latin or what tongue whatsoever.
S. Ambrose exemplifieth the Apostles discourse in none other tongues but in the
Greek and Hebrew. Ambros. in 1. Corinthians. 14.
If I pray with the tongue, my spirit prays, but mine understanding is
without fruit. It is manifest that the mind of man is ignorant, when he
speaks with a tongue which he understands not, as latin men use to sing
Greek, delighted with the sound of the words, but not knowing what they say.
And showing who they were that the Apostle reproves in this whole chapter, he
says: Ibidem.
Hij ex Hebraeis erant, qui aliquando Syra lingua, plerumque Hebraea
intractatibus aut oblationibus vtebantur ad commendatione^: They were Hebrews
who to commend themselves used sometimes the Syrike, By Saint Ambrose judgment,
the Apostles spoke principally of those that used the hebrew tongue in their
Sermons and prayers, when the people understood them not.
most times the Hebrew tongue in their Sermons and (prayers) at the oblation.

Haymo likewise brings the Greek and Hebrew tongues to declare the Apostles
meaning. If I know not the power] or understanding, [of the voice] which I
hear [I shall be barbarous to him that speaks: and he that speaks shall be
barbarous to me]. For example, I am a Grecian, thou an Hebrew: if I speak to
thee in Greek, I shall seem barbarous: Likewise if thou speak to me in
Hebrew, thou shall seem barbarous. And, that as well in praying as preaching.
Haymo. in 1. Corinthians. 14. Haymo. Ibidem
An idiot is he that knows that only tongue wherein he was borne and bred.
If such an one therefore stand by thee, whiles thou do solemnly celebrate the
mystery of the Mass, or make a sermon, or give a blessing* how shall he say
Amen at thy blessing, when he knows not what thou say? for so much as he
understanding none but his mother tongue, can not tell what thou speak in
that (strange and) barbarous tongue (barbarous not in it self, but in respect
of him that understands it not.)

You say the Apostle by strange tongues means not the latin, Greek or
Hebrew: S. Chrysostom and S. Ambrose do verify the Apostles words of those
toungs namely and chiefly: yea S. Ambrose says the occasion of all this
offense, were certain Jews that in their prayers at the Lords table, and
exhortations to the people, (to show them selves) used for the most part the
Hebrew tongue. They affirm that which you deny: and they deny that which you
affirm. Surely you or they must needs be foully deceived.


Phi. That S. Paul speaks not of the Church service, The Rhemish Testament,
1. Corinthians. 14.
is proved by invincible arguments. It is evident that the Corinthians had
their service in Greek at this same time, and it was not done in these
miraculous tongues. Nothing is meant then of the Church service. Again, the
public Service had but one language: in this exercise they spoke in many
tongues. That he speaks not of Church service, is proved by inui^cible
arguments.
In the the public Service every man had not his own special tongue, his
special interpretation, special Revelation, proper Psalms: but in this they
had. Again, the public Service had in it the ministration of the holy
Sacrament principally: which was not done in this time of conference. For into
this exercise were admitted Catechumens and Infidels and whosoever would: in
this women, before S. Paul's order, did speak and prophecy: so did they never
in the ministration of the Sacrament. With many other plain differences, that
by no means the Apostles words can be rightly and truly applied to the
Corinthians Service then, or ours now. Therefore it is either great ignorance
of the Protestants, or great guilefulnesse, so untruly and peruersly to apply
them.


Theo. Before I reply, let me ask you a question.


Phi. With a good will.


Theo. Are you not a Priest?


Phi. I am, or I should be.


Theo. I will not oppose you after what order, Aarons being abolished, and
Melchizedecks not imparted to any mortal man: But by virtue of your priesthood
are you not bound to catechize as well as to baptize, that is, to preach the
word as well as to minister the sacraments?


Phi. So we do, as time and place require.


Theo. If I should urge you, that you and your fellows never preach, because
every holyday and sunday you say Mass, and massing is apparently no preaching,
what would you answer?


Phi. I would answer that you made a very childish and foolish argument. For
though the one be not the other, yet we may do both at one time and in one
place successively before we depart. And if you doubt of this, the meanest
parish clarke in Christendom may be your master.


Theo. You pull not me, Saint Paul by preaching does not exclude praying but
severally mentions them both.
but your self by the nose, Philander, and mark it not. Your invincible
arguments, whereby you would prove, that S. Paul in this whole Chapter spoke
nothing of the Church service in Corinth, are such ridiculous toys of all the
world, as this, which I brought for example to try your patience with.


Phi. You shall not defeat the force of our reasons with such a jest.


Theo. Neither shall you delude the Apostles doctrine with such a shift. The
Church in her divine service must have both preaching and praying.

Roma. 10




The Church of Corinth had then, as al other Churches now have, (or should
have) both praying and preaching annexed and adjoined to the ministration of
the Lords supper. Both these yet are, and ever were the means which God
ordained to prepare us to be fit ghests for that Table. How shall they, says
the Apostle, call on him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they
believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a
Preacher? Hearing is the nurce of faith, and faith is the fountain of prayer:
and without prayer we may not approach to God, nor to the Sacrament of
thanksgiving, which by the very name it bears, puts us in mind what duty
we must yield to God when we are partakers of it.

The word engenders faith, and faith produces prayer.

Act 2.


By this it is evident that teaching in the church of God does not exclude
praiing, but is rather the mean that God has appointed to direct and incite
the minds of the faithful to make their prayers unto him in such sort as they
ought when they are gathered together in Christ's name, to serve God the father
in the spirit of his son. And so the holy Ghost describes the church that
was at Jerusalem upon the first spredding of the Gospel: from whence we must
take the form of Apostolik churches. They continued, says the Scripture, in
the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking of bread, and prayers;
noting These three were the public exercises of Christ's Church under the
Apostles.
doctrine, prayers, and brotherly communion at the Lords table to be the
public exercises of christians in their assemblies where the Apostles
themselves were present in their persons to guide and govern those meetings.


Phi. If the Church service consisted of these three, then were they all three
parts of the church service.
You come not yet to the point.


Theo. I will not long be from it. These prayers, exhortations and instructions
which the faithful had in their assemblies, were they not parts of the
service which they yielded to God?


Phi. Yees, but not of the church service.


Theo. What service was there in the church besides this that I mention?


Phi. The ministration of the Sacrament.


Theo. If you mean the order and fashion of administering the Sacrament, Saint
Paul received that of the Lord and delivered it to the church of Corinth in
such manner and form as we find expressed not many leaves before in the 11.
of this Epistle. But there is no church service prescribed or named; only the
elements and actions of the Lords supper are particularly remembered and
committed to the church as her chiefest jewel, in her husbands absence,
until he come.


Phi. The Church in the Apostles time had no set order of public prayer as the
Jesuits dream.
Think you they had no set Rites, Collectes, nor prayers delivered them from
the Apostles for that holy action?


Theo. You presume they had: and upon that false imagination you ground the
most part of your headless arguments, that the Apostle speaks not of the
Church service.


Phi. Had they no special form of prayer prescribed in their churches whiles
the Apostles lived?


Theo. Had they say you?


Phi. Else they had nothing but confusion in their churches. In the primative
Church the pastors and ministers prayed and gave thanks at the spirit directed
their hearts and lips.



Theo. Blaspheme not so fast. The power of the holy Ghost miraculously
supplying all wantes, and inspiring the Pastors and Elders in every Church
how to pray, was no confusion.


Phi. Do you think they changed their prayers in every place and at every
meeting as pleased the minister?


Theo. You may well perceive by the Apostles words that they had neither
Sermons nor Service prefixed nor limited in his time: but when the Church came
together, the Elders and Ministers instructed the people and made their prayers
by inspiration.


Phi. I know they did so, but this was not the Church Service.


Theo. This was all the church Service they had: to which they added the
celebration of the Lords supper, but without any settled or prefined order of
prayer, except it were he Lords prayer which they observed in all places as
coming from the mouth of Christ himself, their Sovereign Lord and Master.


Phi. Mary Sir that were even such service as you have at this day, where every
blind Minister bableth what he lists.


Theo. Jest not at God, except you will be Julian.


Phi. I jest at your disorder, which you would seem to derive from the
Primative Church of the Apostles.


Theo. In deed we have not so many turns and touches, bowtes and becks as
you have in your Masses: other disorder in our Service I know none, unless it
be that we do not God regards not these solemnities of the Jesuits which
they suppose to be the highest points of godliness.
swinge the Censers, rince the chalice, toss the Masse-booke, play with the
host, and sleep at Memento, as you do, with a number of like toys throughout
your service.


Phi. Do not you now jest at our Service?


Theo. At your stage-like gestures I may without offense, but you iested at the
miraculous gift of the holy Ghost guiding the Pastors and prophets of the
primative church in their public prayers and exhortations, and called it a
confusion, and resembled it to our babbling in the church at this day, which you
think to be very disordered.


Phi. I see no proof that the Pastors of the Church in the Apostles time made
their public prayers as you say, All things were done in the first Church by
the miraculous working of the holy Ghost.
by miraculous instinct of the spirit.


Theoph. Do but open your eyes when you read this chapter, and you can not
choose but see it. Both this and the twelfth chapter treat wholly of the gifts
of the spirit. Where you find that to one (was) given by the spirit the word
of wisdom, to an other the word of knowledge: to an other faith: to an other
gifts of healing by the same spirit: 1. Corinthians. 12.

The gifts of gods spirit at the first erection of the Church.


to an other operation of wonders: to an other, prophecy: to an other,
discerning of spirits: to an other, diversities of toungs: to an other
interpretation of toungs.


Phi. Here is not the gift of prayer numbered amongst them.


Theo. But in the fourteenth it is, where showing them how they should behave
themselves in the Church, when the congregation was assembled, he lays this
down as a rule for them to follow. 1. Corinthians. 14.
I will pray with thee spirit, but I will pray with the understanding also: I
will sing with the spirit, but I will sing with the understanding also. Else
when thou blessest with the spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of the
simple (or common) person say Amen at the giving of thanks, seeing he knows
not what thou say?

To pray, sing and bless, With the spirit] is with the miraculous gift of the
spirit.

The presence and consent of the people makes the prayer public.


with the spirit in this place, can be nothing else but to be guided and led
by the spirit in their prayers, Psalms and thanks as they were in their
doctrines, interpretations and exhortations: which was by miracle on the
sudden, not by learning or study. This was done in the church when al ye
faithful were present, and to these prayers, psalms, and tha^ksgiuings, the
people were to say Amen as the Apostle shows, which is the end sign and
proof of public prayer, among christians. What is church service, if this be
not? or what other Service could the Church have besides hearing the word and
offering their common supplications unto God by the mouth of one man, the rest
understanding what he said, and confirming his prayer with saying Amen?


Phi. How shall the simple man say Amen, that is, any simple man?
The Apostle speaks of one man (supplying the place of the vulgar) and you
stretch it to the whole people.


Theo. If the prayers of the Church concerned some of the people, and not all,
you might make that objection with some show: but now it has no color, when S.
Paul asks 1. Corinthians. 14. Romans 4.
How shall the simple man say Amen: he means not this or that man, but any or
every. And so the indefinite signifies generally, throughout the Scripture.
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin: that is, Blessed is
every man to whom the Lord imputes no sin. Deutero. 27.
Cursed be the man that observes not all the works of the Law, to do them,
that is, by S. Paul's own exposition, Cursed is Galat. 3. Chrysostom. in 1. Corinthians. 14.

By the common or vulgar person Saint Paul means the people.


every man that continues not in all things which are written in the book of
the Law, to do them. The whole Scripture is full of the like. And therefore
Chrysostom notes, Indoctum, promiscuam plebem vocat, monstratque non leave
incommodum esse, si Amen dicere non possit. The unlearned he calls the vulgar
people, and declares it to be no small inconvenience if they cannot say Amen.


Phi. I see they did pray, sing and bless with the spirit, and that the
people said Amen; The form of the Lords institution was certain, but the
prayers made and thanks given at the Lords table, were left to the discretion
of the minister.
but had they no special nor usual prayers reserved for the ministration of
the Sacrament, which might not be varied?


Theo. You think belike they had your Introite, Grail, Tract, Seque^ce,
Offertorie, Secrets, Postcommunion, Pax, and Ite missa est.


Phi. Sure they had some precise form of service, though we know it not.


Theo. And since you know it not, why should you make it the anchor hold of all
your exposition upon S. Paul?


Phi. Had they no order for their service?


Theo. What a stir here is for that which the Apostles never did? Had they
set an order for the service of the Church, durst any man after have broken it?


Phi. S. James mass is yet extant.


Theo. And so are a number of other foolish forgeries as well as that. Mass
forged in the Apostles names. Iacobi Missa.

Iacobi Missa.





Phi. Do you think it forged?


Theo. Which of S. James masses do you mean?


Phi. There are not so many that you should ask which.


Theo. Two there are under his name, the one nothing like the other, and yet
both fathered upon him.


Phi. We have but one, and that set in order of church service, with mutual
prayers and answers for Priest and People very perfectly.


Theo. And the other you shall find in the Constitut. Apost. lib. 8.

a cap. 15. ad cap. 24.


eight book of Clemens Apostolic constitutions, where vide Constitut. Apost.
lib. 6. cap. 14.

lib. 8. cap. 15


the fourteen Apostles (for so you have increased their number as well as
their constitutions) take precise order what prayers, answers and actions shall
be used at the mystical sacrifice; their first prescription being this, that
Two Deacons shall be on both sides of the altar, with tuffs of pecocks tails in
their hands to drive away gnats, left they light in the Chalice: a grave
consideration for Christ's Apostles to meet together to make flappes to catch
flies.


Phi. That I grant, is a matter of small respect, but yet not enough to refute
the book.


Theo. It is sufficiently refuted in that neither the Church of Christ nor your
selves ever esteemed it. Clemens book of Apostolic constitutions never
received in the Church.
Had this book been Authentik it must needs have been taken into the canon of
the Scriptures. For if that which any one Apostle wrate be Canonical, much more
that which all the Apostles, with common consent decreed and ordered. Again had
the Apostles prescribed an exact form of divine service for the Lords table,
what man would have, altered it, or what Church refused it? How would either
Basil or Chrysostom have presumed to make new forms of Church service, if
those liturgies be theirs, and not rather forced on the^, as this is on the
first and chief Apostles of Christ? Why did the Latin Church and the Church
of Rome her self neglect that service if it were Apostolic, and prefer the
prayers of one Grego. lib. 7. epi. 63.
Scholasticus as worthier to be said over the divine mysteries, the maker being
so obscure a man, that his name is not known in the church of god? why were
the Bishops of Rome 600. years and upward patching and piecing the mass
before they brought it to any settled form, as your own fellows Polidor. de
invent. rerum lib. 5. cap. 10.
confess, and yet then Rome had one form of service, Polidor. de invent.
rerum lib. 5. cap. 10.
Millan an other which they keep at this day, France a third? Why did
Gregory when he was consulted by Augustine the monk, what form of divine
service he should comme^d to the Saxons, will him to bind himself neither
Gregorij responsio ad 3. interrogat. Augustini.
to Rome nor to any church else, but to take from every place that which he
liked best, and deliver that unto the English?

To cut off al ambiguities we have the plain testimony of Gregory the great,
Gregor. lib. 7. epist. 63.
that the Church of Rome 600. years after Christ knew nothing of those
constitutions and Church services which are now obtruded under the Apostles
names. No prayers used by the Apostles at the Lords table but only the Lords
prayer.
Mos Apostolorum fuit, vt ad ipsam solummodo orationem (Dommicam) oblationis
hostiam consecraret. This was, says he, the manner of the Apostles to
consecrate the sacrifice, with saying no more prayers but the Lords prayer. In
vain therefore do you dream of a settled form of prayer for the Lords
supper, where as the Apostles have none, but left that to the direction and
disposition of the holy Ghost inspiring the ministers and elders in every
Church, when the faithful were assembled, to make their prayers unto god with
the people; and to render him thanks for all his mercies, as the spirit gave
them utterance. This Chrysostom calls In 1. Cor. 14. Tertul. in apologet.
Precandi domum, the (miraculous) gift of prayers whereof S. Paul speaks in
this place, and Tertul. seems to mention the same in his Apology for the
Christians as during in the Church unto his time. To pray by heart dured a while
amongst the Christians.
We, says he, looking up to heaven with our hands stretched out as being
innocent, bareheaded, as not ashamed, sine monitore, quia de pectore, oramus,
make our prayers without any prompter as coming from the (free) motion of our
own hearts.


Phi. Our arguments convince that S. Paul spoke not of the Churches service:
and till those be answered, we cannot change our minds. The Jesuits will have
the ordering of S. Paul's words whether he will or no.



Theo. That which I have already said, opens your error, in mistaking or
else perverting the words of S. Paul, choose you whether: if that content you
not, repeat your reasons as they stand in rue, that we may see their force.


Phi. It is evident the Corinthians had their Service in Greek at this same
time, and ^t was not done in these miraculous toungs. Nothing is meant then of
the church service.


Theo. If Saint Paul in this place did not speak of the Church service, how
can the Jesuits prove the Corinthians had their service at this time in Greek?
To us it is out of question that the Corinthians had their public prayers and
exhortations in the Greek tongue: because the common people of that City
understood none other: and the tongue which they understood not, might not be
used in the Church by S. Paul's rule: but you that deny S. Paul to speak of the
Church service in this place, how prove you the Corinthians had their Service
in the Greek tongue?


Phi. Do you think they had not?


Theo. For our parts, as I told you, we are resolved: because S. Paul would
neither have preaching nor praying in the Church but such as might edify: and
adds, that an unknown tongue profits nothing to edificatio^: mary you are
otherwise minded, and therefore I see not how you can prove that they had
their service in the Greek tongue, which you affirm to be evident.


Phi. Had they their Service, trow you, in an unknown tongue?


Theo. In your opinion, that is no such absurdity. The Jesuits thwarted with
their own principles.



Phi. They could not understand it, except it were in Greek.


Theo. This is contrary to your own Principles. For the Hebrewe, Greek and
Latin as you told us even now were understood of the cyuill people in every
great City: and were that untrue, as I know it is, though you avouched it for
an advantage, yet is it not necessary to understand our prayers, as your
selves defend in this your declaration upon S. Paul, and following the path
that you lead us in your Rhemish observations, Except they take hold of Saint
Paul's reasons here used in this chapter, they shall never prove the service at
Corinth in Saint Paul's time was in Greek.

It is true they had their service in greek, but the ^esuits cannot prove it
but by overthrowing their own conclusion which they would infer: and so their
an^cedent choketh their consequent.


we say you can not prove the Corinthians had their service in the Greek
tongue.


Philand. In what tongue else could they have it?


Theoph. Rather in Hebrewe than in Greek, for that tongue was sacred, and
natural to the Jews who first spread the Gospel, and planted the Churches.


Phi. The Apostle requires the people should understand the prayers of the
Church, otherwise they reap no profit by them; and to speak Hebrewe in the
Church to them that understood nothing but Greek, were no reason.


Theo. Are you there at host now? Can you plea thus on both sides when you be
urged? You are making invincible arguments, that the Apostle speaks nothing
in this place of the Churches service, and before you can justify the first
proposition which you bring, you be feign to take hold of this very place to
prove, the Corinthians had their Church service in Greek.


Phi. Nay without this place it is evident they had their service in greek.


The. Set this chapter aside, and if you prove the Corinthians had their
service in Greek at this very time when the Apostle wrate, we give you the
cause.


Phi. You be resolved they had, and yet you put us to prove it, as if it were
in doubt.


Theo. I tell the reason. It is evident they had their service in a known
tongue by that which the Apostle here writes, otherwise it is not evident by
any other proof that you can make. And since you will have the Apostle to
speak nothing of the Church Service in this chapter, why should we not put
you to prove that which you lay for the ground of your misconstring Saint
Paul's text?


Phi. A truth it is, Their antecedent being granted their co^seque^t does not
follow.

A wise reason, because Saint Paul had set an order to have their service in
the tongue which they knew, therefore some might not inuert that order.


what proof soever may, or may not be brought for it.


Theo. Let it stand for truth, what will you conclude?


Phi. Nothing is meant then of their Church Service.


Theo. Why so?


Phi. That was in Greek, and well understood of all the people.


Theo. A worthy sequel. As if it were not possible for some vain men to
disturb the Church of Corinth notwithstanding the Apostle had left general
direction that al things should be done in the church unto edification. The
Lords supper was rightly delivered them: was it therefore not abused by some
amongst them? The like say we for their prayers in the church. No doubt Paul
ordained at Corinth as he did in all other churches of the Saints, that the
people should say Amen to every blessing and thanksgiving that was used in the
Church. Might not therefore some of their Elders and ministers, to venditate
themselves and the gift which they had of God, sometimes bless and make their
prayers at the Lords table in a tongue not understood of the whole multitude?


Phi. Were they strangers or inhabitants?


Theo. It skilleth not whether; they might be either.


Phi. Inhabitants there would use none other tongue than their own, and
strangers might not minister Sacraments in other men's Churches. This disorder
might come either by strangers, or by such as were fastened to their cures.



Theo. Some of their own might be so vain glorious, as in making their prayers
at the Lords table, (which was then done by heart and not after any prescribed
order or form) to show the gift of tongues, which they received of the holy
Ghost, to an other end, and not to commend themselves without edifiing the
hearer. Strangers also if they were in place were suffered both to teach and
bless in the Church, as well as others that were tied to their Cures by reason
that many were sent by the Apostles and by the holy Ghost to visit the
Churches and comfort the Christians as they traueled, and such were, according
to their knowledge and gift, not only permitted, but also desired to exhort the
people and give thanks to God in other men's charges.


Philand. This might be: but how prove you this was the fault which the Apostle
reproved?


Theo. I need not prove that. If this which I speak might easily come to
pass, then your invincible arguments be sensible follies, and corelude utterly
Yet was it some cunning to set a good face on the matter.
no such thing as you imagine. Your argument cannot be impregnable til your
consequent be inevitable: and since so many cases may be put, though your
antecedent be admitted to repel your conseque^t, what wisdom was it to make
such vaunt of your forces not only before the victory, but when you see your
selves so void of al good artillery? The Rhemish Testament, 1. Corinthians. 14.

Neither antecedent nor consequent true.





Phi. Again the public service had but one language: in this exercise they
speak with many tongues.


Theo. Again you can neither verify your antecedent, nor justify your
consequent. Set order of public service they had none in the Apostles time;
the Pastors and ministers prayed by heart, as the spirit of God guided them.
This gift of prayer some turned to their own praise and ostentation, when they
were admitted to give thanks to God in the congregation of the faithful, and
made their prayers in such tongues as they preferred, or would seem endewed
with, though the people understood them not, for which attempt the Apostle
controlleth them.


Phi. These are your conceiuements.


Theo. Were they no man's but mine, your reasons are weak and even
contemptible, which you proclaimed for invincible: but as you heard, S. Ambrose
did inform you, Ambros. in 1. Corinthians. 14.
that these men, whom S. Paul here touches, used sometimes the Syrian, and
most times the Hebrew tongue, in tractatibus aut oblationibus, in their
discourses (to the people) or ministration of the Sacrament, as they pleased.


Phi. The Rhemish Testament, 1. Corinthians. 14.
In the public service every man had not his own special tongue, his
special interpretation, special revelation, proper Psalms: but in this they
had.


Theophil. In the public service of the church, the ministers and Elders which
were many both trauelers and there dwellers, And why might not every pastor
and minister have his Psalms, his thanks giving as well in praying as in
preaching?
had every man his Psalm, his instruction, his tongue, revelation, or
interpretation as the spirit of grace thought it most expedient, for the
setting forth of Gods glory and the edifieng of their faithes that were
present, and other order of divine service in the Apostolic and primative
church we read for certainty of none, besides the action of the Lords
supper, which the Apostles, and so no doubt their churches always used in the
end of their publik meetings, but with not set prayers save only the Lords
prayer as Gregory confesses; the rest of their prayers, blessings and
thanksgiuinges were in every place made by the gift of the holy Ghost inspiring
such, as were set to teach and govern the church. And though you have long
since their time framed a Liturgy in James name, whereon you seem to ground
all the cauils, that here are urged as invincible arguments: yet for so much as
the church of Christ did not acknowledge it, and the words of Gregory directly
impugn it: we return that home to the forge whence it came, and your arguments
back to you as wanting both truth and strength to bear out your cause.


Phi. The Rhemish Testament, 1. Corinthians. 14. Why may not doctrine, prayer, and
the Lords supper follow each other in one continual action though they be
things different in themselves?
The public service had in it the administration of the holy Sacrament
principally, which was not done in the time of this conference.


Theo. Though the Lords supper was not ministered at that instant when the
Pastors and people were intending for doctrine, yet did it follow immediately
upon this exercise finished, and due thanks offered to God by the whole church
for the redemption of the world in the blood of his son: neither besides your
bold and bare negative do we see any cause why the singing, blessing, and
thanksgiving which S. Paul speaks of, should not be understood, to be the
prayers and Psalms that were used before, after, and at the Lords table: this
I am sure, S. Paul wills Cor. 14. All must be done to edification, e^go
Church service.
all things to be done to edification, and all must contain the church
service and ministration of the Sacrament, as well as Psalms or any other
exercises of the church. So that if the special discourse did not touch the
ministration of the Lords supper, the general direction does comprise it: and
so much the more, because the whole church as well the people as the Preachers,
as well women as men have equal interest in the Lords supper, to be thereat
fed, and thereby stirred to give thanks to God for the richesse of his mercy
in the death of Christ. And if you think that understanding and consenting is
more needful for the people in any other prayers than in those, that are made
at the Lords Table, you err not of ignorance, but of wilfulness; and care
not what you say, so you may entertain the simple with somewhat for the saving
of your credit.


Phi Into this exercise were admitted the Catech^mens and Infidels, The Rhemish
Testament 1 Corinthians. 14.
and whosoever would: in this weomen, before S. Paul's order, did speak and
prophecy: so did they never in the ministration of the Sacrament. With many
other plain differences, that by no means the Apostles words can be rightly
and truly applied to the Corinthians Service then, or ours now.


Theo. You should close up the matter with the strongest argument you have;
Saint Paul in this chapter speaks both of the sermons where Infidels might
be, and of the prayers and blessings where they might not be.
and this is the weakest. At their prophesies that was at their sermons and
exhortations Infidels and nouices not yet baptized might be; at their
mysteries they might not be, but were sent away, and the doors shut, when the
faithful approached to the Lords Table. Hence you may conclude that every
hearer of the word may not be partaker of the divine mysteries; but that the
one did not presently follow the other in the Service of the Church, or that
S. Paul did not mean them both, you shall never conclude: yea rather the
sending them away that might not be present, argues that the rest which were
left did forthwith address themselves to the participation of the Lords
Table, and that all which was done in the Church before, both exhorting and
praying, was referred to this end, to make them meet comers to that heavenly
banquet.


Phi. That may be: but S. Paul speaks of the one, and not of the other.


Theo. That you should prove, if you could tell how.


Phi. We have already proved it by invincible arguments.


Theo. Marie that you have; if blind surmises and loose sequeles may stand for
arguments; otherwise what have you said, that has any show of proof, I
will not say, of invincible proof?

Your maine foundation is a dream of your own, The Jesuits invincible
arguments are grounded upon nothing but their own false surmises.
that the Church of Corinth had a prescribed number and order of prayers
pronounced by some one Chaplin, that said his lesson within book, and might
not go one line besides his Missale for any good. This you imagine was their
Church Service; all other prayers, Psalms, blessings, and thankes-giuings
though they were used openly in the congregation, and the whole people bound to
say Amen, you will not have to be called Church Service. And where S. Paul by
precept from God commanded all things in the Church, both praying and
preaching to be done in such sort as the people might understand, say Amen,
and be edified thereby: you conster that of certain voluntary prayers which
some private men made in the Church without commission; and of the public and
necessary prayers of the Church you hold opinion, the people need not
understand them, nor say Amen, nor look to be edified by them. And because S.
Paul speaks of preaching as well as of praying, you use the one as an
argument to exclude the other, which is very bad logike, and worse divinity.
You were as good make this for a reason as I warned you in the beginning;
Christians in their Churches have sermons, ergo they have neither prayers, nor
Sacraments, which your self censured for a very childish and foolish argument.
The loosnes of their last argument.



Phi. That is no conclusion of ours.


Theo. Weigh it well and you shall find it the very same that you make. For
where the Christians under the Apostles had in their assemblies, first
prophesying, that is the declaring of Gods will and revealing of his word, at
the which Infidels, and new conuerts not yet baptized might be present, and
next prayers and Psalms to celebrate the goodness and kindness of God, and to
prepare their minds for the Lords table, to the which all the faithful came
with one consent of heart and voice, giu^ng thanks to God for their redemption
in Christ, and blessing his holy name for all the rest of his graces, mercies
and compassions on them; and this was done by the mouths of such Pastors and
ministers as it pleased the holy ghost to direct and inspire for that function
and action: One part of the churches exercise does not exclude but rather
employ the other.

Church prayer is Church service; and that Saint Paul speaks of. Saint Paul
speaks of all the words that were to be used in the Church, either at the
Lords table or otherwise, but not of the actions because they are not performed
with the tongue. Divine service is p^operly that which is done with the mouth,
and not h^nds or gestures.


the people hearing, understanding and confirming their prayers and thanks
with saying Amen, and other divine Service than this they had none: you take
one part of the Churches exercise whereat Infidels might be, which was
preaching and declaring the word of God; as a strong inference that Saint Paul
in that whole chapter, though he expressly name the public prayers, psalms,
blessings and thankesgiuings of the Church, means no part of the Church
service: which if you well consider, you shall perceive to be captious, if not
ridiculous sophistry.


Philand. Though Saint Paul speak of many things, yet he speaks not one
word of Church-seruice, which is the point that we stand on.


Theo. I pray you what is Church-seruice but Church prayers, Psalms and
lessons: which because Saint Paul so distinctly recites, he can not choose we
say, but mean the Church-seruice, unless you can show, what service the
church had or has, besides these which he names.


Phi. The ministration of the sacraments is none of these which you specify,
and yet the chiefest part of the church-seruice: and so are other rites which
you omit.


Theo. In the Church-seruice actions may be necessary, and Rites may be
seemly: of which Saint Paul speaks not, because the abuse, which he
reproved, was in their tongues and not in their hands: but the Church-seruice
is properly that which is done with the mouth; for GOD is not served with
moving or using the hands, but our lips show forth his praise, and with
our voices we call upon him, and this is more rightly termed divine service,
which is all one with Church-seruice, than any corporal ac^ions or outward
gestures though they be lawful, and some of them neede^ull, as those for
example which Christ commanded.

And even in the ministration of the Lords supper, words are essential as
well as elements or actions, and without words it is both a dumb action, and a
dead element. In all sacraments the word that is spoken, is far superior to
the creature that is seen: and in this Sacrament by the first institution of
our savior, Words in the Lords supper as essential as elements; or actions,
and those the people must understand.

Al things must come to edification and therefore Church service.


thanksgiving is as requisite, as eating or drinking. Wherefore if S. Paul
took order for the prayers, psalms, blessings, and thanksgiving used in the
Church, that they should be understood of the people, as well as the Doctrines,
Revelations, and expositions of scriptures, which were an other and a
necessary part of the Churches exercise. S. Paul, we conclude, required that
all Church service should be pronounced in such ^ort and with such speech, as
the hearers might be edified and say Amen, which they can not to a tongue that
they know not. Or if that illation seem not strong enough, S. Paul in plain
words commands as authorized from God, that all things, and therefore Church
service, should be done to edification: and no man is edified by that he
understands not, which is the fault that we find with your Latin Service in
our Churches, where the people understand no tongue but English.


Phi. Yeas sir, The Rhemish T^st. ^. Cor. 14. O miserable understanding.
the pople in every Country understands our service. For by the diligence of
parents, Masters and Curats, every Catholic of age almost, can tell the sense
of every Ceremony of the Mass, what to answer, when to say Amen at the
Priests Benediction, when to confess, when to adore, when to stand, when to
kneel, when to receive, what to receive, when to come, when to depart, and all
other duties of praying and serving, sufficient to salvation.


Theo. He that has no better stay must leave to a broken staff, The Jesuits
as men in a maze defend sometimes that the people need not understand their
prayers: sometimes that they do understand them though they can neither spel
nor speak one word of Latin.
or lie in the ground. You feared to be convinced as withstanders of S. Paul's
Doctrine, and therefore you bethought your selves of an other shift, which is
as bad as the former. The Apostle proves the prayers of the Church must be
understood of the people, because they must say Amen: thereby teaching us, that
no man may say Amen, except he both perceive what is said, and also confess
it to be true: for otherwise Amen is both a mock and a lie, to no worse person
than to God himself. He that swears or affirms any man's speech to be
true, when he knows not what he said, is a liar: And he that gives a sound
with his mouth, his heart not knowing what he asks, makes a jest of prayer,
and forgets himself to be a man. And for that cause S. Paul urges it as a
manifest absurdity for the people to say Amen to that, which they understand
not, though the ministers speech in it self be never so good and godly.

This you saw was so apparent, that though you cauiled about Church service,
and craked of your invincible arguments: Yet the clearnes of saint Paul's words
would reach home to the unfruitfulness of your Latin service in this Realm. For
his words are, How shall (the vulgar man) say, 1. Cor. 14. Nothing so absurd
which the Jesuits will not defend.
Amen at thy thanksgiving (in the Church) seeing he knows not what thou
say? And therefore you resolved since you were over the shoes in
absurdities, to go up to the shoulders, and south^astly to say that in every
Country every Catholic, of age, (almost) can tell the sense of every
ceremony of the Mass, what to answer, where to say Amen at the Priests
benediction, and all other duties of praying and serving sufficient to
salvation.

Your memory did not serve you to ioyn Mattins, Euensong and Dirges to your
Mass, A new kind of Grammar for the simple to understand the latin tou^g in
one half hour.
(which you might have done with as good reason and as much truth:)
otherwise, we had had all the Papists in Christendom promoted by one sentence of
your Testament, to so sudden and perfect knowledge, that they were able to
understand al your Latin service. That you found would seem a wonder in the
eyes of all men learned and unlearned: and therefore you restrain the
understanding, first to the Mass, then to the ceremonies of the mass, then to
the sense of these ceremonies, This is perfect ware.
as when to stand, when to kneel, when to confess, when to adore, when to
come, when to depart; and all this no farther than may suffice for salvation,
and not in all of them, but almost, in every Catholic; or to say the truth,
you know not in whom.

Surely this is a deep insight that al your Catholik^ (if they be not learned)
have in your mass: to confess (if they could tell what) when they see the
Clerk kneel by the Priests side; to adore, when they see the host and chalice
over the Priests head; to stand, when the Priest changes his deske from one
end of the altar to an other (if they chance too see him,) to kneel, A noble
kind of understanding how unwise was Saint Paul not to foresee this method to
edify with all.

Is this all the understanding that priest or clark for the most part had?

1. Corinthians. 14.


when the sau^ce bell ringeth; once a year to come to receive, when mass is
done and the priest in his Albe: and at other tunes to depart, when he whippeth
off his vestiment. This is the best cunning that your formallest and forwardest
Catholics have, if they be not learned in the Latin tongue: The rude and
simple people of your side, they do as they see their neighbors, and that is
all the skill they have in your ceremonies; as for answering and saying Amen,
they must pray for those that can, your parish Clerk can keep his kewe by
often use, otherwise neither he, nor the most of your Priests understand what
they say. This is all the edification, your mass brings to the unlearned
hearers, and if this suffice for salvation, S. Paul was out of the way to
prefer five words spoken in the church with understanding before ten thousand
in a (strange and unknown) language.


Phi. If the people say Amen, it is enough,


Theo. If they know not what is said, they may not say Amen.


Phi. That is your error.


Theo. We are content to hold that error, 1. Corinthians. 14. Amen to the
saunceb^l, is even as good as to that they understand not.
so long as we have the precise words of S. Paul for it. How shall he that
supplieth the room of the unlearned, say Ame^, seeing he knows not what thou
say? It is not enough to mark the gestures of him that says mass, nor to
hear the saunce bell ring, nor to follow the Quire when they sing Amen, the
people must know what is said, before they may give their consents; and
therefore, except they understand the prayers of the Church, well they may
kneel, and stand, come and go as often as they li^t, but Amen by S. Paul's
Rule they may not answer.


Phi. They could not in those days answer Amen so well as our hearers can, for
that they had no such rites to direct them, The heart must understand and
consent before the lips say Amen
when to say Amen; as we have.


Theo. As though it had been an hard matter for the Apostle to have willed the
speaker to hold up his finger, or give some other sign at the end of his
prayer, and all the people to say Amen: save that the holy Ghost would
prescribe not gestures for men to gaze at, as on stages; but words for them to
hear, and understand, that the heart might be joined with the lips in praying
unto God, and perceive the truth of that which was spoken before the tongue
pronounced Amen.


Phi. I tell you, A position of the Jesuits which I think the Turk^ the^ selves
would be ashamed to defend.
it is not necessary to understand our prayers.


Theo. I tell you, that if Satan himself were clothed in a friars weed, he
could not lay a fairer foundation for impiety and Apostasy than this is.


Phi. Never think to fray us with words, we be no children, nor fools.


Theo. If you were, your sin were the less, but now you are without excuse.
It is the commandment of God, it is the Apostles Doctrine, it is our
Christian duty; without it, the prayers, which we make, be fruitless, vain
and barbarous; and yet you say; it is not necessary.

S. Paul having prescribed this Rule to the Churches of Corinth that nothing
should be done at their meetings, The heart does not pray without
understanding 1. Cor. 14. Ephesians. 5.
neither in preaching, nor praying, but that which might profit and edify
even the vulgar and simpler sort, adds, If any man think himself to be
spiritual, let him acknowledge, that the things which I write unto you, are
the commandments of the Lord. The Ephesians he teaches to be filled with the
spirit, and to sing and tune Psalms in (their) hearts to the Lord. Now the
heart does not sing, except it understand. For the sound (or voice) of the heart
is understanding as S. Augustine very well observes co^menting upon the psalms
of David. Aug. in Psalm. 99.
Beatus populus qui intelligit iubilationem, Curramus ergo ad hanc
beatitudinem, intelligamus iubilatione^, non eam sine intellectu fundamus.
Blessed is the people that understand what they sing. Let us hasten to this
blessedness, let us understand what we sing, let us not pour forth songs that
we understand not. To To great purpose the Jesuits say.
what purpose is it, to sing and not to understand what we sing; that our voice
should chant it, and not our heart? Sonus enim cordis est intellectus. The
sound (or tune) of the heart is understanding.

And showing that this is not only a Christian duty, which is a sufficient
necessity, but even the plain condition of our Creation, Aug. in Psalm. 18.
exposis. 1.
that we be not like the beasts which sing they know not what, he says: And
therefore duty. The Jesuits prayer is like the chatte^ing of bird^ in S
Austen^ judgment.
Having besought the Lord (by this Psalm) that he would cleanse us from our
secret (faults,) We ought to understand what this means, Vt humana ratione,
non quasi auium voce cantemus; that we may sing with reason as men, and not
chatter, like birds. For Owsels, Parrets, Crows, Pies, and such other birds
are often taught by men to sound that they know not marie to know what they
sing, is by Gods will given not to birds but unto men. Therefore dear brethren
that which we have soung with one consent of voice, we ought to know and
perceive with a clear heart. So Chrysostom, Chryso^t. in 1. Corinthians. 14
I will pray with the spirit says (Paul) but I will pray also with
understanding; I will sing with the spirit, but I will sing also with
understanding. Hereby the Apostle Is that necessary or no?
teaches that we ought (in our prayers) to speak with our tongue, and with
all to have our minds understand what is spoken. And Ambrose, If (the end of)
your meaning be to edify the Church, such things Ambros. in 1. Corinthians. 14.
ought to be spoken (in your prayers and blessings) as the hearers may
understand. For what profit comes by this^ that any man should speak in a
language which he alone understands, Ought and must do not set us at liberty.
and he that hears, is no whit the better for it? Therefore such an one must
keep silence in the church, and let them speak, that may profit the hearers.

Cassiodor. in Psalm. 46.
Idly is that spoken, which is not understood, says Cassiodorus. Non solum
cantantes, sed etiam intelligentes Psallere debemus, Nemo enim Sapienter
quicquam facit quod non intelligit. We ought to sing the psalms not only with
tune of voice, but also with understanding (of heart*). For no man does any
thing wifely, which he understands not. The Bishops of France and Germany
assembled in Council at Aquisgraine 816 years after Christ under Ludouike the
Godly confess the words of S. Paul bind us to understand the Psalms which we
sing in the Church. Council. Aquisgranens sub Ludouico pio cap. 123.
Those that sing to the Lord in (his) Church ought to have their understanding
go with their voice, that the words of the Apostle may be verified, I will
sing with the spirit, but I will also sing with understanding. And, Ibide, ca.
133.
Let such be appointed in the Church to read and sing, that with the sweetness
of their reading and singing can affect the learned, and instruct the
unlearned; and let them seek rather the edification of the people, than the
popular and vain ostentation (of their voices.)

If they ought the^ had they need so to do.
These Catholic fathers affirm the people ought to understand the psalms and
prayers of the church, you say they need not. Between these two doctrines
there is as much difference as between daylight and darkness, and yet you will
be Catholics whosoever say nay: yea God himself commands that neither
exhortation nor supplication be made in the church, but such as may edify the
hearers, and be understood of the people: you both do and teach the contrary,
and yet you would be christians.


Phi. The Rhemish Testament 1 Corinthians. 14.
The simple sort can not understand all Psalms, nor scarce the learned, no
though they be translated or read in known tongues men must not cease to use
them for all that, when they are known to contain Gods holy praises.


Theo. Are you hired to betray your own folly, or is the force of truth so
great, that minding to convince us, The Jesuits overthrow their own positions.
you confute your selves? The simple understand not all Psalms, nor scarce the
learned: we think you speak right: yet must not men cease to use the^, since
they contain the praises of God; as true as the Gospel; but now Sirs, if the
learned must use them, when they scarce understand them, why may not the simple
hear them, though they conceive not all the mysteries of them?


Phi. As good not hear them, as not understand them.


Theo. All parts of the Psalms they do not understand; yet some they do. Why
then do you bar them from all, since you dare not ^uouch them to be
ignorant of all? Again by continual hearing them read, The people barred by
the Jesuits from that they know, and from the means to (...).
alleged and expounded in the Church, they that are willing may easily
increase their knowledge: why then do you cut the people not only from that
they know, but also from that they might know, and from the means whereby to
learn which is the high way to keep them in ignorance, the mother of all
errors?


Phi. They will learn but little, Were they not better let the fault be in
others and not in themselves as now it is?
God knows.


Theo. Grant they would learn nothing* yet are you bound to follow that
means which God has left to instruct them if their dulnes and peruersenes of
heart be such that they will not learn, the fault is theirs; not yours, their
blood shall be on their own heads, you are discharged: where now by taking the
comfort and instruction of their prayers from them, you force them to neglect
al as never likely to come by the knowledge of any one word, and confirm them
in their blindness to your own destruction, and their imminent danger, if God
be not the more gra^ious to them.


Phi. Prayers are not made to teach, The Rhemish Testament 1. Corinthians. 14. How
do our mouths offer our hearts to God when we understand not what we say?
or increase knowledge, but their special use is to offer our hearts, desires
and wants to God and this every catholic does for his condition, whether he
understand the words of his prayers or no.


Theoph. Who told you that prayers are not made to teach, or increase our
knowledge? The Psalms of David, what are they but prayers and praises offered
unto God, and yet what Christian was ever so void of sense as to say, they do
not teach nor increase knowledge, or that they were not left us to this end
and purpose, that they should teach and instruct us in things pertaining to
our salvation? The prayers of the Godly throughout the scriptures, though they
were uttered in their wants and necessities, yet were they Prayers are very
needful instructions especially for the simple that cannot direct themselves in
making their prayers to God.
written for our instruction. And if you were not as destitute of grace, as you
be of truth, you would soon perceive that religious and Godly prayers do
mightily teach both learned and unlearned their duties to God, and his mercies
to them.


Phi. In our prayers we speak to God and not to men: and that leads us to
^ay they were not made to teach or increase knowledge.


Theo. The end of prayer in him that makes it, is to ask at Gods hands that
he lacks, and to render thanks unto God, Romans 15. Do not the Fathers often
draw their arguments to persuade the people from the very prayers of the
Church? See S. Aug. ad Bonifac. li. 4. ca. 9.

They be no prayers when the tongue speaks with out the heart and the voice of
the heart is understanding.


for that he has received; but that the public prayers of the Church do not
first teach us how to pray, and next instruct us in many and most points of
truth, what to believe and confess unto God, were meeter for Turks and
Infidels to defend, than for such as you would seem to be, I mean both
learned and Christian men.

Howbeit the pitch of our question is this, whether they may be called prayers
which we make with our mouths and not with our hearts: and if they may not,
whether our hearts can pray without understanding. These be the matters that
here we strive for; and of these, the first is proved by the whole course of
the Scriptures: the second as well by the nature of man, as by the word of God.

That God rejects the mouth without the heart, as hypocrisy and no piety,
our Savior tells you when he says: Mat. 25. Mark. 7.
O hypocrites Esaias prophesied well of you in saying, this people draws near
to me with their mouth, and honors me with the lips, but their heart is
far from me.

That our heart joins not with our mouth, when our understanding wants is
evident, not only by the scriptures which take the heart of man for his
understanding, but by the education of our nature David resembling those me^,
that have not understanding, (what they say or do,) to the Psalm. 31.
horse and Mule: and ^usten allowing them, when they pray they know not what,
no better place than among Aug. in Psalm. 18. Where understanding wants man
differs not from a beast.
parrets and pies, which is no place for men, much less for those that would
seem to serve and honor God. And what can be plainer than that understanding
is the proper action and first motion of man's heart, which wanting in any thing
that he does or says, his heart is also wanting, since not an heart but an
understanding heart does make the difference betwixt man and beast.


Philand. That is if they understand not their own words when they pray;
but they may be ignorant of the Priests words, and not be parrets.


Theo. You defend both; as well the private prayers of rude and simple men in
the Latin tongue, as the public prayers of the Church in the same language,
though the people understand not a word, either what themselves, or what the
Priest speaks.


Philand. The Rhemish Testament, 1. Corinthians. 14.

It skilleth not in what tongue the service of the Church was, so the people
understood it.

The Rhemish Test. 1. Cor. 14. Gregor. moral. lib. 27. cap. 6.


The West Church has always had her service in the latin tongue.


Theo. It forces not in what tongue she had or have her service, so the
people understand it.


Philand. In Latin, we be sure, she had it.


Theo. Then may you be sure, the people understood it.


Phi. The one we can prove, and so can not you the other.


Theo. Prove you the one, and we will not miss much of the other.


Phi. It is well near a thousand years, that our people which could nothing
else, but barbarum frendere, did sing Alleluia, and not praise ye the Lord.
And longer ago since the poor husbandman sang the same at the plough in other
Countries. Hieron. tom. 1. epist. 58. And Sursumcorda, and kyrie eleyson, and
the Psalms of David sung in Latin in the service of the primative Church have
the ancient and flat testimonies of Saint Cyprian, Saint Augustine, Saint
Hierome, and others. Gregor. lib. 7. cap. 63. Cyprian. exposit. oration.
Dominica^, number. 13. August. ca. 13. de bono perseuerant. and de bono viduitat.
cap. 16. and epistola. 178. Hieron. praefat. in Psalm. ad Sophron. August. de
Catechiz. rud. cap. 9. de Doctrine. Christia. lib. 2. cap. 13. See epist. 10.
August of Saint Hieroms Latin translation read in the Churches of Africa.


Theo. Are you not out of breath with alleging so much?


Phi. Not a whit. You buzze in the peoples ears that our service in Latin is
not ancient: and that in the primative Church the people always understood
the tongue, wherein the Priest spoke: look here to your utter shame, how we
reprove you, and convince you for liars.


Theo. Will you not sit down with us, and take such part as you bring?


Phi. Keep your courtesy till we need it.


Theo. You well deserve it, though you will not have it, as shall appear
before you depart.

You bring us eleven fathers to prove that divine Service has been always in
the latin tongue throughout the West Church: Eleue^ fathers abused by the
Jesuits at one clappe.
if not one of them all prove any such thing, are you not worthy to have the
whetstone?


Phi. I say they do.


Theo. I say they do not: and did they prove it, as they do not, the greatest
doubt is yet behind, and that is, the people might understand the Latin
tongue, and if that were true, you are farther off, for all these allegations,
than ever you were.


Phi. To save your selves you will imagine any thing, be it never so unlikely
or incredible. Nine of those fathers speak of such countri^s as understood
the latin tongue and the other two speak not one word of the latin service.
For trow you that all the West parts understood the Latin tongue?


Theoph. In those places, where the Fathers whom you name, lived and preached,
the people understood the Latin tongue very well.


Philand. Some perhaps, that were trauelers or merchants.


Theo. The common people of those Countries I say understood it.


Philand. The ciuiler sort might have a taste of it.


Theoph. The basest and rudest that were amongst them understood the Latin
tongue as well as their own, if not better.


Phi. I thought you would have some such miraculous if not monsterous refuge.


Theo. It is neither miracle nor monster, but a plain and certain truth. In
Italy where Hierom and Gregory were you doubt not but the vulgar people spoke
Latin, as we do English.


Phi. It was their mother tongue.


Theoph. Then might plough-men, crafts-men, yea weomen and children well sing
the Psalms, and hear the Scriptures read in the Latin tongue because it was
their native tongue, which they could not choose but understand.


Philand. But Africa, where Saint Cyprian and Saint Augustine were, had an
other tongue of their own, and therefore they could not do the like.


Theo. It was the Romans policy to bring the barbarous Countries which they
subdued, and were near them, as much as was possible to use the same Laws and
speak the same tongue which themselves did, that they might the better like
of their regiment. The latin tongue was understood in Africa where Cyprian and
Augustine preached.
And so had they done in Africa before S. Austen was borne: and the people of
those parts about Carthage and Hippo, where Cyprian and Augustine were
Bishops, though they were not so exquisite in accents, declinations and
constructions, as the Italians were, yet understood they the Latin tongue
better than they did their own, by reason their own was little used, and the
other wholly taken up to be spoken, as well as understood, by the meanest and
youngest, amongst them, yea to be taught their Infants even in the Nources
arms.

Of himself, Saint Augustine confesses that he learned the Latin tongue in
Africa where he was borne, August. cofess. lib. 1. cap. 14.
when he was dandled of his nource, and among the pastimes of those that
played with him, and laughed at him, whiles as yet he was learning to speak:
and that the common people which never went to school to learn, perfectly
understood Latin, not only his sermons made to them, Aug. Retract. lib. 1.
cap. 20. The rudest among the people in Africa understood the Latin tongue.
and his Psalms made for them against the Donatists in the Latin tongue do
clearly convince, but very often in teaching the people he gives testimony
that they all understood the Latin better than the Punike tongue. Minding,
says he, to have the cause of the Donatists known to the basest, most
ignorant, and the simplest among the people and by our means to stick in
their memories I made a Psalm, according to the number and order of the Latin
letters to be sung by them, beginning thus, Omnes qui gaudetis. And showing
that they understood Latin better than their own Country speech, which was
Punike, he says: There is a known proverb in the Punike tongue, which I will
utter to you in Latin, because you do not all understand Punike, August. de
verbis Apost. sermo. 26.
thereby noting that they all understood the Latin, but not the Punike, which
yet was their Country language.


Phi. We will deal liberally with you for once: we grant you this; what
gain you by it?


Theo. We gain nothing, but you loose more than you think, The Jesuits heap
up fathers in their Rhemish Testament to no purpose but only to amaze the
simple.
and as much as we would wish.


Phi. The loss is so great that I feel it not.


Theo. You will time enough. Your Rhemish Testament to astonish the simple
cites nine authorities in a cluster that the service was always in Latin
throughout the West Church. Gregory, li. 7. epi. 63. Cyprian. exposit. oration.
Dom. Hieron. praefat. in Psalm. ad Sophro. and six places of Augustine. Will
it please you to take these nine back again, as no way material or pertinent
to that purpose, for which you bring them.


Phi. You cast them back in heaps, which is no course to answer them.


Theo. In heaps they came, and in heaps let them go: they need no farther
answering. Gregory speaks of the City of Rome, Hierom of the Linguae meae
hominibus.
men of his tongue, Cyprian and Austen of the service in Africa where the
people perfectly understood the Latin tongue: or else of those places and
Churches where the Latin tongue was understood, not naming any nor including
all the West parts, as you misreport them: but indefinitely speaking of such
as used and understood the Roman language.


Phi. None of these Fathers which they allege speak of all the west Countries
or Churches.
That is it which we say, the Roman language was used throughout the West
Church.


Theoph. But none of these Fathers say so besides you. They do not specify in
what Countries or parts of the West it was used: but speak indistinctly of
such as used it.


Phi. That, we say, was throughout the West Church.


Theo. If you were as able to prove it as you be to say it, you might do
your selves some good.


Phi. We are.


Theoph. You are not.


Phi. Gregory said of Greg. moral. in Job lib. 27. cap. 6.
our people which could nothing else but barbarum frendere, that a thousand
years before out days, they did sing Alleluia, and not praise ye the Lord. And
longer ago the poor husbandmen Hieron. to. 1. epist. 58.
sang the same at the plough in other Countries.


Theoph. Is Alleluia latin?


Philand. No, it is Hebrewe, and signifies in English as much as, Praise ye
the Lord: but yet in this Realm at that time they sang Alleluia, Alleluia is
no proof for the Latin service. Alleluia is a better argument for the Hebrew
than for the Latin service.
and not Praise ye the Lord.


Theo. That has some show of an argument for the Hebrewe service, to have
been then used in this, and other Countries, but not for the Latin.


Phi. As though the Saxons understood Hebrewe.


Theo. Even as well as they did Latin, and in Gregory's words there is some
appearance of proof for the Hebrewe, for the Latin there is none; except you
will reason thus, they sang Alleluia, ergo all the rest of their service was in
Latin.


Phi. Alleluia is no English: ergo they had not their Service in the English
tongue.


Theo. And Alleluia is no Latin, ergo, by your own logike, they had not their
service in Latin.


Phi. You err of ignorance. The Latin Church retained Amen, and Alleluia,
notwithstanding they were Hebrewe, in her divine service.


Theo. God grant you err not of malice. Did no Church else besides the Latin
retain those Hebrewe words in their public Psalms and service?


Phi. None but Greek and Latin. And since those whom Gregory sent to
convert the Saxons could themselves no Greek, we conclude they delivered the
Saxons their Church-seruice in Latin.


Theo. Your conclusion is like your antecedent, that is not one true word in
either. Did not all Nations in their divine service keep those two words
Amen, and Alleluia?


Phil. They did; for so Saint Epist. 178.
Augustine avouches, but all nations besides the Hebrews had their
Church-seruice in Greek or in Latin.


Theoph. Does Saint Augustine auouche that?


Phi. That is apparent without any proof.


Theoph. It is apparent folly, to presume that which you should prove, to
be manifest without any proof.


Phi. Can you show the contrary?


Theo. Who taught you that order of reasoning, when you fa^le in proving your
premises, to cast the burden upon others to disprove that, which you should
prove?

And yet go no farther than this very place of Saint Augustine which your
selves allege; August. epist. 178. The Barbarians in their tongues used
Alleluia, as well as the Romans or Grecians.
and you shall see that all other Nations preserved these two words in their
barbarous languages, as well as the Romans did in theirs. Saint Austens report
is this, Sciendum est, Amen and Alleluia, quod nec latino, nec barbaro licet in
suam linguam transfer, Hebraeo cunctas gentes vocabulo decantare. We must
understand that all Nations do sing Amen and Alleluia in the Hebrewe tongue,
which (words) neither the Latin, nor the Barbarian may change into their
tongues, If the Barbarians might have no part nor word of the divine Service
in their several tongues, as you say, what needed a special exemption of
these two words ( and no more) as unlawful to be translated into their
languages? In that these might not, it imports the rest might and were: and
also that each Country, (in what tongue so ever, Roman, or barbarous, they
had their Service,) kept these two Hebrewe words Amen and Alleluia untouched
and Why these two words were not translated into any tongue. See Hieron.
Ma^cel. epist. 137.
untranslated for a certain significance in the words themselves, and a
reverence to the tongue whence they were taken.


Philand. That the Saxons sang Alleluia we be sure by this report of
Gregory, but that they had their service in the Saxon tongue, you shall never
prove. Alleluia used in this land by the Saxons that could no Latin. Grego.
moral. in Job lib. 27. cap. 8.



Theoph. Much less can you prove by this place of Gregory, which is your
intent, that they had their Service in the Latin tongue: for thus he says,
not in the sixth chapter as you note, but in the eighth of his seven and
twentieth book upon Job. Ecce lingua Britanniae quae nihil aliud nouerat quam
barbarum frendere, ^amdudum in diuinis laudibus He^raeum caepit Alleluia
resonare. Behold the tongue of Britannie, which could do nothing but ye all
out a barbarous noise, now of late has begun in the praises of God to sing the
Hebrewe Halleluia.

If you take the tongue of Britanie for the speech of the Saxons, then
inhabiting this land, as it may well signify, since there is good difference
between the tongue of Britannie, The Britans that could speak no Latin, sung
the praises of god: in what tou^g then if not in their own?
and the tongues of the Britanes; and lingua Britanniae is very hard latin for
linguae Britannorum: then it is clear by Gregory's confession that the
British tongue was used of the people even at that time to sing the praises of
God in their Churches: the Hebrewe Hallelu ia (and not the Latin service) being
preserved amongst them in their barbarous language, as it was amongst all other
Nations by Saint Augustines testimony, were they Grecians, Romans, or
Barbarians. If you will have it stand not for the speech of the country but
for the mouths and lips of the men themselves, Hallelu ia, they learned,
because it might not be changed; the rest of the Latin service, neither they
could learn, as knowing no tongue but their own: nor the Romans could
teach, as having no skill in the Saxon tongue: and therefore if the people sang
any praises at all unto God, as Gregory says they did, they must sing them in
their mother tongue, for other tongue they had none.


Philand. Could they not learn Latin, as well as Hebrewe?


Theoph. Both a like; but that one word, as Amen, or Hallelu ia, is soon
learned, the Latin Psalms and service are no way possible for them to learn
or remember. Hieron. tom. 1. epist. 58. Hierom misconstered by the Jesuits.



Philand. Saint Hierom says the poor husbandmen sang it at the plough in
other Countries.


Theoph. What are his words?


Philand. Quocunque te verteris, arator stiuam tenens Allelu ia decantat.
Whither soever thou turn thy self, the husbandman holding his plough, sings
Allelu ia. Why did you doubt of them?


Theo. Because I find them not tom. 1. epi. 58. as you quote them, except you
have quotations, as you have religions, by your selves.


Philand. Well, these be Saint Hieroms words.


Theoph. I know they are, but you are as wide from the true constering as you
were from the true quoting of them, if you be not wider.


Phi. How can that be?


Theoph. What Countries spoke Saint Hierom of when he said, Quocunque te
verteris, whither soever thou turn thy self?


Philand. Of other Countries.


Theoph. Of what other Countries?


Philand. Of all other Countries, and specially of the West parts, where the
latin service was.


Theoph. So you would enforce his words, but you do him the more wrong.


Philand. Are not his words plain, Quocunque te verteris, turn whither thou will, the husbandman holding his plough, sings Allelu ia?


Theoph. In deed his words are plainly perverted by you. For Hierom
speaks not of the West, but of the East; not of Countries, but of a poor
village; not of Latinists, but of such as were borne and bred in Jury, where
the natural speech of the place was Hebrewe.


Phi. Prove that to be S. Hieroms meaning.


Theoph. They be his words both before and after, and those so plain, that
I marvel you could miss them. Hieron. in 1. Epist. 17 ad Marcel. Hierom
speaks of the plough men in Bethleem where Christ was borne.
In Christi vero (vt supra diximus) villula, tota rusticitas, and extra Psalmos
silentium est. Quocunque te veteris arator stiuam tenens decantat Aallelu ia.
Sudans messor Psalmis se auocat, and curua attondens vite falce vinitor aliquid
Dauidicum canit. Haec sunt in hac prouincia carmina. In the village of Christ
(as we have said before) there is nothing but rusticitie, and silence, except
it be in singing of psalms. Turn whither you will (in this village) the
husbandman holding his plough (continually) sings Allelu ia. The mower when
he sweateth (and is weary) refreshes himself with psalms. The Gardener as
he dresseth his vine with his hook, has some piece of David in his mouth.
These are the songs of this province (or place.) What word or title is here
for the service in the latin tongue, except you think that as the Pope
claims to be Lord of the whole world, so every Country throughout the
world spoke then nothing but Latin; which were a merry conceit to make
sport with, if there were nothing looked for at your hands but laughter.


Phi. In sifting our authorities you take hold of every nice and curious point,
which with good conscience we did and may despise.


Theo. Call you that a good conscience to muster out eleven authorities ( as
ancient and flat testimonies) for defense of your error against the woordr of
God, and the church of Christ, and not one of them any way respecting that
which you should and would seem to prove? That no Nation in the Primative
church, East, West, North nor South, had their divine service in a tongue not
understood of themselves, is our assertion. It is easy to allege nine skore
fathers in any matter to no purpose.
You show that in Italy and Africa (where the people perfectly understood the
Roman tongue) they had their service in Latin, and that the barbarous of this
Realm, and husbandmen of Bethleem sang Allelu ia, which S. Augustine says,
all nations did, yea the Barbarians as well as the Romans, without translating
that, or Amen, into their barbarous languages. Hence you collect, the service
always in Latin throughout the West church, and paint that note by the side
of your book to make the simple believe, those places which are found in your
text to prove it to be true, though not one of the^ whom you cite, affirm or
mention any such thing. God grant it be but ignorance in the Jesuits to cite
fathers in this sort.
Whether this be (to use your own words) great ignorance (of Jesuits) or
greater guilefulnes, so untruly and peruersly to wrest the fathers, and whether
you can be catholics, that have no better ground for your Latin and unknown
service within this Reame, let the Reader judge.


Phi. Augustine our Apostle brought into (this Realm) the service in the
Latin tongue: The Rhemish Testament 1 Corinthians. 14.
and there are well near a thousand years past since he came. And therefore
S. Bid says, ( lib. 1. hist. Ang. cap. 1.) that being four diverse vulgar
languages in our Country, the Latin was made common to them all.


Theo. You thought it long belike before you made up the full dozen of perverted
and misconstered authorities. You abuse Bid as you do the rest, and no
marvel to see you so bold with him when you have ventered on so many.


Phi. Does he not say this Island had four diverse languages of their own, and
the Latin (which was the fifth) was made common to them all? The Latin tongue
was common not to all, but to such as could meditate the Scriptures in this
Land.



Theo. Not by having their service in Latin, but by meditating, and searching
the Scriptures, a number in every of those four Nations had gotten the
knowledge of the Latin tongue.


Phi. Then the Scriptures were not in any of those languages, and consequently
neither the Psalms, nor Lessons which are necessary parts of the Church
Service.


Theo. Reason better or hold your peace, you do but wast time about trifles.
Bedes words are: Beda. Histor. Angl. li. 1. ca. 1.
Haec in praesenti, quinque gentium linguis vnam eandemque summae ver^tatis,
and verae sublimitatis scientiam scrutatur and confitetur, Anglorum videlicet,
Britonum, Scotorum, Pictorum and Latinorum, quae meditatione Scripturarum
caeteris omnibus est facta communis: This Island at this present searches and
confesses one and the very same knowledge of the hiest verity and truest
sublimitie with the tongues of five Nations, to wit, the Saxons, Britons,
Scots, Picts, and Latins, whose tongue by the meditation of the scriptures, is
become common to all the rest.

Meditation of Scriptures does not signify the prayers of the Church.
Meditation of the scriptures in all men's ears save yours, is the diligent and
often perusing of them to get the right understanding of them, and not the
Church Service as you would secretly infer: neither does Bid deny that the
Scriptures were heard or read in the other four tongues, which were proper
to the four Nations of this Island, but rather affirms it when he says this
Country searched and confessed one and the very same knowledge of the highest
truth, with the tongues of five Nations: four of them being the British,
Saxon, Scottish and Pi^tish tongue, If they searched the truth with five
tongues, then did they read or hear the scriptures in four toungs besides the
Latin.
in which also they searched and confessed the knowledge of the true God,
though the deeper and better learned of them in every of those Nations, for an
exacter kind of meditating and studying the Scriptures, gate them some skill
in the Latin tongue: wherein the Scriptures were more sincerely written, and
more substantially handled than they could be in any of the other tongues
amongst the Saxons, Scots or Britons in that raw and rude world, so soon
upon their conversion to the faith, and long desolation before of learning,
religion and good manners.


Phi. The Latin tongue was common to them all. The Latin tongue was common to
those that were learned in those four Nations.

Let them take Bid how they will, he makes nothing for their Latin service in
the words which they bring. The Italian Monks, which understood not the Saxo^
tongue, might have the Latin service in their Abbey, but that the people had it
in their parish Churches cannot be proved by any place of Bid.





Theo. Not to every particular man amongst them, but to some special men in
those four Nations that were willing and able to meditate the Scriptures. And
had it been common to them al, that is to every one of them, as you would
press it, that construction helps you nothing at al. For then the people of
this land, being able to meditate the Scriptures in the latin tongue, might
very well have their s^ruice in the latin tongue, because it was a known
tongue and such as they readily understood: but I think the other of the
twain the more likely, and therefore I rest on it as on the truer, though
neither damnifie us, as touching this question, the worth of a dodkin.


Phi. It were absurd to think that every of the vulgar sort understood the
Latin tongue.


Theo. Then is it more absurd, when Bid says The Latin tongue was made
common to all the other (four) tongues (of this Land) by the meditation of the
Scriptures: to interpret that of the vulgar sort, and to refer it to the
church service as you do.


Phi. You have skanned our proofs at your pleasure: but where all this while
are yours, that any christian Nation had their public Service in a barbarous
tongue? I count all tongues barbarous besides the three learned toungs, which
are Latin, Greek, and Hebrew.


Theo. In what tongue each Nation had their Service, is now hard to be known
so many hundrethes years after, and needless to be discussed. For when we
once found it a rule laid down by Saint Paul that All things (in the
Church) should be done to edification, as well praying, singing, and
thanksgiving, as preaching and expounding the word, which he calls
prophesieng; and that no man is edified by that he understands not: Having
Saint Paul's Rule that the people should understand the prayers that are made in
the church we need not search in what tongue each Nation had their seruic^.
and also that the service in those two places and churches, whereof we have
any records left, was common to Priest and people, and parted between them, by
verses and respondes, the whole people, men, women, and children, singing the
Psalms, answering to every part of the service, and saying Amen to the prayers
that were made in all their names: and lastly that the catholic fathers in
their several times and cures taught the people should, and witness the people
did understand the public prayers of the church; what need we seek further
for barbarous Nations and tongues, whereof we have no monumen^^, and wherein no
famous or learned men wrote, whose labors are come to our age or knowledge?


Phi. I thought you would shrink when we came to the quick: you love to
pick holes in other men's coats, but not to show your own. Belike it is so
rotten it will not endure the handling.


Theo. Let the coat alone and come to the case. We have the flat
commandment of God that all things (in the Church) should be done to
edification: and the Apostles inferment that the simple man is not edified,
when he understands not what is said. Your shifts were, that S. Paul spoke
not of the church prayers, nor of the learned tongues. Those we have refelled,
and are now come to the practice of Christ's church: which taking her
direction from S. Paul's doctrine in this place, These shifs of the Jesuits
being refelled Saint Paul's text is clear for us.
framed her public prayers in such order that the Pastor and people with
jointly and interchangeably blessed and prayed each with other and either for
other: not houlding it enough for the simple to say Amen they knew not to
what, but requiring and appointing their devout, distinct and intelligent
answers, confessions, blessings and thankesgiuinges as well in the
ministration of the Lords supper, as in other parts of their public service.
The service of the primative Church manifestly confirms our construction of
Saint Paul.


The manner of their service, where the whole church did with one heart and one
voice, sing praises to God, and make their common supplications unto him, is
the best exposition that may be brought for the true construction of Saint
Paul's words: and therein the ancient and Catholic church of Christ, goes
expressly with us and directly against you, as appears by all the fathers
that ever wrate of these things, by the very sight and view of their
liturgies, by your own authorities which here you abuse, yea by the parts and
prayers of your Masse-booke prescribed for the people to requi^e the priest
with, and yet remaining in force and daily use amongst you.

In your Apostolic constitutions, written by no worse man, as you say, than by
Clemens successor to Peter and fellow labourer in the Gospel with him; What
order the Apostles took for Church service, as the books which they most
esteem, do testify.

Constit. Apost. lib. 8. cap. 16. The Church service divided between the bishop
and the whole congregation.


this order of service at the Lords table was prefixed to the whole Church,
were they Hebrews, Greeks, Romans, Barbarians or whatsoever if they were
Christians. The Bishop shall say, the grace of almighty God, the love of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and the communion of the holy spirit be with you al. And all
(the people) shall answer with one voice, And with the spirit. Again let the
Bishop say, Lift up your hearts, and all let answer, We lift them up unto the
Lord. And again the Bishop: Let us give thanks unto the Lord, and all shall
answer, It is meet and right so to do. And at the end of that prayer it
follows, Et omnis populus simul dicat, and let all the people with one voice
say, holy, holy, holy, Lord of hosts: The heaven and earth are full of thy
glory: blessed art thou for ever, Amen. And Cap. 18.
so after. Let the Bishop say, the peace of God be with you all. Let all the
people answer, and with the spirit. Cap. 20. The people could not make these
answers except they understood the tongue that the Bishop spoke in.
Let the Bishop admonish the people with these words, holy things for holy
persons. And let the people answer, one holy, one Lord, one Christ be blessed
for ever to the glory of God the father. Osanna to the son of David. Blessed
is he that comes in the name of the Lord: the Lord (our) God and has
appeared unto us. Osanna in the hiest. If in every Church the people were to
know when and what to answer in their divine service, and with many full and
whole sentences to confirm and requite the Bishops prayers and blessings: it
is evident they were to understand their own and the Bishops speech: which
in a strange and unknown tongue, such as is used in your churches, it is not
possible for simple men and women to do.


Phi. You impugned these constitutio^s but even now, as none of the Apostles.


Theo. But you receive them and urge them as Apostolic, and therefore against
you such proofs are pregnant.

The liturgies of James, Basil, and Chrysostom prescribe like aunswers for the
people in the prayers of the Church.

That which we allege out of these liturgies has the true and undoubted
testimo^ies of the Fathers.


And so are the Liturgies, that is, the church prayers which are under the names
of James, Basil, and Chrysostom: in which the like order of praying and
blessing, by course is appointed both for Priest and people. Let the places be
seen; if they be not obuious to every man's eyes, let me be rebuked of a bold
untruth.


Phi. Your selves admit not those Liturgies.


Theo. We do not think that either Basil or Chrysostom would take upon them
to make a new form of church service, if S. James the Apostle had done it
before them: neither^ was the Greek church to seek of her service till their
times, or to^ change it at their pleasures: yet the things which we allege
out of these Liturgies have the manifest testimonies as well of Basil and
Chrysostom, as of other catholic Fathers, both Greek and Latin in their
vnforged and vndistrusted writings.

Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in 2. Cor. in him. 18.

Mark the form of public prayer in Chrysostom^ time.


expressing the manner of the church in his time, says: Even in the prayers (of
the church) a man may see the people (help or) offer much together (with the
priest) for those that are possessed with wicked spirits and for the
repe^tants. Co^munes enim preces a sacerdote and ab illis fiunt, and omnes vnam
dicunt orationem. For the priest and the people make their prayers in common,
and they all utter the same words in their petitions to God. Again when we
have excluded them out of the church that may not be partakers of the holy
table and fall a fresh to prayer, we all prostrate our selves together, and all
rise up together. When peace is to be imparted we all salute one an other. In
the very same dreadful mysteries the priest prays for the people, and the
people pray for the priest. For their answer, And with the spirit, has none
other meaning. Ea quae sunt Eucharistia, id est, gratiarum actionis communia
sunt omnia. The prayers of the Eucharist, that is of the thanksgiving (at the
Lords table) Can they have plainer words?

Basil. hexam. homil. 4.

Men, weome^ and children singing and praying in the Church service. Justin.
Martyr. Apol. pro Christianis. 2.


are all common. For the priest does not only give thanks, but Can they have
plaine^ words?

Basil. hexam. homil. 4.

Men, weome^ and children singing and praying in the Church service. Justin.
Martyr. Apol. pro Christianis. 2.


all the people. Out of the which number were none excepted neither men, women,
nor children, as Basil shortly but fully decribeth the sound of the whole
church praying together. If the sea be good and beautiful in the sight of
God, how much more beawtifull is such an assembly of the church as we have
here, in which the mingled sound of men, women, and children making their
(common) prayers ascends unto our God, as the noise of waves beating against
the banks.

The Latin church observed the same, as Justinius reporting the order of the
christian assemblies in his time witnesses. On the day which is called sunday,
all that are in towns or villages meet together in one place where the
writings of the Apostles and Prophets are read, as the hour permits us:
when the reader cease the pastor warns and exhorts us to imitate the
good things that have been read unto us: Then rise we all and jointly make
our prayers: after the which ended, bread and wine with water are brought (to
the place) and he that is chief among us makes his prayers and gives thanks
in the best manner he can. Ibidem.
Perfectis precibus and gratiarum action, populus omnis qui adest benedicit,
dicens, Amen; At the end of his prayers and thanks, all the people that are
present, do bless and say Amen: Amen in Hebrew signifies as much as God
grant it may be so.

S. Augustine noting the use of the church in his days, says: Aug. in. Psalm.
54.
We call upon one God, we hear one Gospel (read,) we sing one psalm, we
answer one Amen, we sound out one Hallelu ia. Ambros. hexam. lib. 3. cap. 5.
The Church, says Saint Ambrose, is often very fitly compared to the Sea:
which at first rusheth in the prayers of the whole people, as it were in the
flowing of her waves, and then sounds with the respondes of psalms, and with
the singing of men, women, maidens and young boys, much after the roaring of
(mighty) waters.

The reason of this general joining in prayer among the christians Leo well
declares in these words, Leo. sermo. 3. de ieiunio. 7. mensis The public
prayer of the whole people more available with God than the prayer of the
pries^ alone.
Most full forgiveness of sins is obtained, when the whole church pronounces
(every man) the same prayer, and the same confession. For if the Lord have
promised to perform that which two or three of the godly consenting together
shall ask, what shall be denied to an assembly of many thowsands beseeching in
one spirit with one accord? which was Tertul meaning long before, when he said
of al christians: We meet in companies and assemblies, that coming Tertul. in
Apologet.
as it were an army (or in troops) unto god, we may e^e^ urge him with our
prayers. Haec vis Deo grata est: this force is acceptable unto God. In this
sort it continued 600. years as appears by Isidore. Oportet vt quando
psallitur, psallatur ab omnibis; cu^ oratur, o^etur ab omnibus: qua^do lectio
legitur, facto sile^tio aeque audiatur ab omnibus. Ideo and diaconus clara voce
silentiu^ admonet, vt sieve du^ psallitur sieve dum lectio pronunciatur, ab
omnibus vnitas co^seruetur, vt quod omnibus praedicatur, ab omnibus equaliter
audiatur. This must of necess^ty be kept (in the church service) that when they
sing, al sing: when they pray, al pray: when the lesson is read with silence,
it be heard alike Quasi manu facta.

Isidor. de eccle. officiis lib. 1. ca. 10. de lection.

That al shuld^ pray and sing in the church is a duty and therefore a
necessity.

Legum Francie lib. 1. cap. 66.

De eccles. diuer. capitulis Constable. 123.


of al. For therefore the deaco^ commands silence that whether they sing ^^
read, al may do the like, and that which is spoken to al should equally be
heard of al. Yea Charles ye great 800. years after christ took order by his
laws not only that ye people should say certain parts of y^ service with the
priest, but that the pastors should preach it to be necessary for the simple
to understand their prayers, y^ every man might know what he demanded a^ the
haudes of God. Glory be to the father, (and to the son and to the holy ghost,
etc.) shall be sung of al me^ with all honor; and the priest with the people of
God shall sing with one voice, as the angels do, holy, holy, holy. Lyra says if
the people understand the priests prayer and benediction they be b^t^er
affected to god ward, and answer Amen with more devotion.
(Lord God of saboth) The bishops shall diligently look that the priests
thoroughly perceive the prayers of their mass, and both themselves understand
the Lords prayer and preach that al must understand it, that every man may know
what he asks of god.

So Iustinia^ before him could command that al Bishops and priests (within the
Roman Monarchy) should celebrate the sacred oblatio^ (of the Lords supper) and
the prayers used in baptism; not in secret but with a (loud and) clear
voice, that the minds of the hearers might be stirred up with more devotion to
express the praises of the Lord God. For so says he, the Apostle teaches 1. Corinthians. 1 Corinthians. 14*

Justinian applies S. paul's place to prove that the people should be edified
and stirred by the priests words to confess with their mouths the praise of
God in his church.


If thou bless with the spirit, how shall he that keeps the place of the
private (or lay) man, say Amen at thy thanksgiving unto God: because he wotteth
not what thou say? Thou give thanks well, but the other is not edified. And
in his epist. to the Romans With the heart we believe unto righteousness, and with
the mouth we confess unto salvation. For which respects it is fit, that those
prayers which are used in the sacred oblatio^, as well as others, should be
pronounced by the bishops and priests with a clear voice: and let the religious
bishops and priests know that if they neglect so to do, they should yield an
account in the dreadful judgment of the great God for it, and we having
information of them will not leave them unpunished.

But what need we elder or other testimonies? your Masse-book, which at this
day you depend so much on, The p^iaers and speeches of their Mass book at
this day prove the people should understand and answer the Priest in the
chiefest parts of their Church service.
co^uinceth that the people at first did, and still should understand the
prayers which y^ priest makes eue^ at the very altar and sacrifice it self,
those being things of the greatest secrecy and most sublimity that you have.


Phi. Can you persuade us that our Masse-book makes with you?


The. Choose whether you will be persuaded or no: but you must needs be abashed
to see the words of your own book fight against your error.


Phi. Faith then our luck is bad.


Theo. It is even so bad if it be not worse: that is, if your hearts do not bark
against you for upholding this unfruitful prayer.


Phi. I am glad you come now to hold by the Missale.


Theo. We hold by the precept of the living and everlasting God, and yet we may
prove by your own footsteps that you tread awry.


Phi. We will believe it, when we see it.


The. You shall soon see it: if that will suffice you. When you speak to men do
you not wast your words in vain, if they understand not what you say? He that
speaks to men that which they cannot understand, mocketh and deludeth the^.

August. de Doct. christia. li. 4. cap. 10.





Phi. In our prayers we speak to God, and not to men, and therefore we see no
reason why every man should look to understand that we say.


Theo. But when you speak to men, and not to God, do you not both abase your
tou^gs and delude their ears if they understand you not?


Phi. If we speak to them, I grant they should understand us, or else we loose
our labor, and they no whit the wiser.


The. S. Auste^ will tell you, There is no cause at al why (you) should speak,
if they understand not what (you) say, for whose sakes (you) speak. The end of
your speaking unto me^, is to let them understand what you would advise or
advertise the^ of: that if they do not, you speak in the air, 1. Corin. 14.
as S. Paul says, and do them no good.


Phi. I think so.


Theo. Your priest is appointed by the canon of your Mass, to say before he
ascend to the altar, Ordinarium Missae secu^dum vsum Sarum.
I confess to God almighty, to blessed Mary, to al Saints and to you
(brethren) that I have sinned very much in thought, deed and word. Ideo
precorvos fratres orate pro me.
Therefore I beseech holy Mary, al Saints of God, and Orate fratres and sorores
pro me.
you (brethren) to pray for me. When he comes to his sacrifice he is likewise
to say, Pray ye brethren and sistren for me, that my sacrifice and yours may
be acceptable to the Lord our God: and every where when he prays he must
say, Dominus nebiscu^. Oremus.
The Lord with you, let us pray.

To each of these the people have their answers prescribed them what they must
say, which even at this day are parts of your service, to the confession they
must answer, Ordinarium Missae secundi^ vsum Sarum.
Almighty God be merciful unto thee, and forgive thee all thy sins, deliver
thee from al evil, preserve and confirm thee in that which is good, and bring
thee to life everlasting. To the oblation they must reply, The grace of the
holy ghost lighten thine heart and thy lips, and the Lord receive in good part
this sacrifice of praise at thine hands for our sins and offenses. Before
consecration, when he bids them, Lift up their hearts, their answer must be*
we lift them up unto the Lord: Sursum corda habemus ad Dominum.
and when he says, Let us give thanks to the Lord our God, they must
pronounce, it is meet and right so to do. The priest blessing, the Lord be with
you, the people must requite with the like, in answering, and with thy spirit.
Et cum spiritu tuo.


And though you have excluded the people and set a Parish Clerk to make these
answers, and willed the Priest for very shame to say some of them Sac^rd. se
ver^ens ad populum tacita voce dicat, Orate fratres and sorores prome.

O mockery to desire the people to pray for him: and yet so to speak it, that
no man shall hear it.


closely: yet know you that these words remaining yet in your Masse-bookes are
manifest witnesses against you before God and man, that the prayers of the
church should be common to Priest and people, and so were, when your Mass
was first ordained: and that not only the prayers made by the whole
Congregation are more available with God, than the private devotion of any
Priest (which of a certain pride in your selves you will not now acknowledge)
but that you mock the people of God, and with your own toungs condemn your
own doings, when in your Service you will them every where to pray with you and
for you, and yet utter it in such a tongue, as they can neither understand what
you or themselves do say.


Phi. By the gestures and actions which we use, the people understand our
meaning. The Papists have turned edification into gesticulation.

It is the people and not God that needs the Priests voice in the church
prayers.





Theo. Then should your Mass have consisted of nothing, but of actions and
gestures: where now your speaking unto them, when they understood you not, is
very ridiculous.


Phi. We speak to them but seldom; and if they do not, as we will them, for
lack of understanding us, the rest of our service may not be misliked, for so
much as therein we speak to God and not to men.


Theo. The whole is superfluous, if not injurious to God and man.


Phi. Why so?


Theo. In all your public prayers, though you direct your words unto God, yet
you utter them for their sakes that be your hearers. God needs not your
voice, he searches, and therefore understands the very secrets of your
hearts, and you pray most effectually to him, when your hearts Psalm. 27.
speak, and your lips keep silence. God, says Augustine, Aug. de magi^^ro.
cap. 1.
seeks not to be instructed or remembered by our speech, to give us that which
we desire. Where think thou is offered the sacrifice of righteousness, but
in the temple of the mind, and chambers of the heart?


Phi. That is true, but yet we may use our mouth in praying as well as our
heart.


Theo. You may if you will, but you need not, except you list.


Phi. Yeas, the Priest is the mouth of the church: and therefore he must
speak. Speech necessary in respect of the people: which if they understand
not, silence would do the^ as much good.



Theo. The church needs neither mouth, nor speech to God. He knows every
man's heart as well as ones: but in respect of themselves, speech is necessary
that they may be kindled, directed and confirmed, each by others voice in their
common prayers and supplications unto God.


Phi. The Priest offers their prayers unto God for them.


Theo. God will not have us believe or pray by a substitute, but in our
persons, we are not too good to do him that service.


Phi. If it be needful for the Priest to speak in the Church service, it is as
needeful for the people to understand what he says.
The people pray, but by the Priests mouth.


Theo. Then must he speak: or else he can not be their mouth.


Phi. He must: otherwise how shall they know whether he pray or no?


Theo. And when they understand him not, they be no surer what he does, than
if he kept silence.


Phi. When they hear his voice they suppose he prays, though they know not
what he says.


Theo. They may well suppose it, for they know it not, and so may they do, when
the Priest keeps silence. Supposals are soon made, if God required no more
at our hands.

But by your confession that the Priest must speak in the prayers of the
Church, we prove, the people must understand what is spoken. For GOD needs
not any man's speech: The end of speaking is that others may understand: if
ther^ore that want, the first is superfluous

August. de magistro. cap. 1.


the end why the Priest speaks, is to guide the peoples hearts in their
petitions to God, and to have their consentes that the prayers of the church
may proceed from them all. If that end want, as in a tongue not understood it
does, in vain does the Priest speak, and the people hearken unto that which
they no way conceive, or have knowledge of. What needs speech, that is, the
sound of words, says Augustine, when we pray, unless perhaps, as the priests
do for the signification of their minds: not that God, but that men should
hear, and through (their) rehearsal by consenting (to their words) be
stirred (or moved) to depend on God.

The Priest therefore in his church service, The Priest at his Mass utters
every word, as if the people did understand him and join with him in prayer.
though he direct his heart to God, yet does he open his mouth for their
sakes that are present, that they may be both kindled and guided by the sound
and sense of his words to join with him, in offering to GOD one agreement of
heart and voice, which is the cause why public prayer was ordained. And even
at this day in your Mass the Priest speaks not one word in his own person,
but in every prayer both warns the people to pray with him, and speaks in
their persons as well as in his own. Oremus. Gratias agamus. Quaesumus.
Offerimus. Laudamus. Benedicamus. Adoramus.


For example: Let us pray, let us give thanks, we beseech, we offer, we
praise, we bless, we adore, which argues that at the first institution of
your own service the people did, and were bound to mark and understand the
Priests words, and with answering Amen to acknowledge and conf^^m his prayers
to be their desires and requests unto God, though now you shut up their ears
and mouths that they can neither understand you, nor know what to answer
you, but only open their eyes to behold your gestures, as if it were not a
place for prayer, but a stage for dumb shows, to delight the senses.


Phi. You make certain petite reasons against us for the service in the vulgar
tongue: but had they been sufficient, do you think the church of Christ would
have taken up the contrary custom for these fifteen hundredth years?


Theo. I think she would not, and by her church service, I prove she did not.


Phi. You prove the people understood the service, and by course answered, and
consented to that which was said in the church, but this does not prove that
the prayers were in any other tongue besides the Latin, Greek or Hebrewe,
which is our assertion.


Theo. This is it which I told you before, that finding the people did
understand the divine service in the Primative church: Al toungs are alike to
God.
and that no prayers were counted public, unless they had the consent and
answer of the whole multitude: we need not care in what toungs this was done:
The Hebrew, Greek Latin, God no respecter of persons, much less of toungs.
Armenian, Indian, Persian, Syrian, Gothian tong^es, are they not all alike to
God? Must not barbarous Nations be edified by their prayers as well as the
ciuiler or learneder sort of men? There is no respect of persons with God, is
there of tongues?


Phi. The three learned tongues were dedicated in our Saviors cross, the rest
were not.


Theo. Pilates act is not so good a reason for the latin service; as Caiphas
prophecy was for the Popes infallible judgment: and yet either is very
foolish.
Who set up those titles on the cross: the Lord which suffered, or Pilate which
condemned him unjustly to death?


Philan. What though Pilate set them up?


Theo. If Pilate were a wicked Pagan and his fact wickedder in procla^ming the
Son of God for a Traitor and an aspirer to the Crown of Jury, in Hebrewe,
Greek and Latin letters, what reason can this be why God will not, or should
not be served in any other tongue, but in one of these? Have you no better
examples than Caiphas to uphold the Popes Tribunal; and Pilate to commend your
Latin service?


Phi. Yeas, we have the church of God.


Theo. Then why conceal you that, and bring forth Pilates impiety to
prescribe a rule in the church of God against the Apostle?


Phi. The tongues were good, though his fact were evil.


Theo. And dare you say that any tongue in the world is not good?


Phi. Good they be all, but not so good as any of these to serve God in.


Theo. Recoile you back again to that error, that God is an accepter of
tongues?


Phi. You call it an error.


Theo. So is it: and that a very gross error. For God accepts the zeal of
the heart, not the sound of the mouth: and though to us there is some
difference in the perfection and pleasantness of the speech; to God in
devotion of prayer there is none. Origin. contra Celsum. lib. 8.
He, says Origin, that is Lord of all tongues, hears those that pray in any
tongue. For God the governor of the whole world is not as one, that has
chosen the Greek, or some other barbarous tongue, All tongues are fit for
prayer.
and is ignorant of the rest, or neglects those that speak unto him in any
other tongue. And since he has made all tongues, and requires not the sound
of our mouths for himself, but for our selves, it is wilful folly to say
that prayers be sanctified or accepted to God in one tongue, and not in all
tongues alike.


Phi. Still I say The Rhemish Test. 1. Cor. 14.
the Church of God has no such custom: which Saint Paul himself lays down
for a sure direction in all church matters.


Theo. Take you the negligent abuse of late years in some places for the
custom of Gods church? Or do you think it piety to pretend any custom of
your own against the commandment of God?


Phi. Any thing which the whole Church does practice and observe throughout
the world, The Rhemish Test. 1. Cor. 14.
to dispute thereof, as though it were not to be done, is most insolent
madness, as S. Augustine very notably says in his 118. epi.


Theo. S. Augustine does not say, that you may prefer custom before the
Scriptures: or change the ancient custom of Christ's church in making her
prayers in a vulgar and known tongue, with a newer order of your own in tying
the people to a strange and unknown language: either of those by the verdict
of Augustine in this very place is that most insolent madness which you would
seem to fasten on others.

And yet you miserably rack this place of Augustine. For of two parts, you
dissemble the first, S. Augustine rackt by the Jesuits from his right meaning.
that you may pull the second to your purpose: and in the second you leave out
two conditions which your Author adds: and were the text truly cited, your
application is so false in the sight of all men, that none but mad men would
venture on so desperate an assertion, as you have done. For that the whole
church of God throughout the world ever had, or at this day has her service in
an unknown tongue, or in Latin, well you might utter it in a dream: but
never sober man said it being broad awaked, and well advised.

The words of S. Augustine, being consulted of the rites and ceremonies of the
Church, August. epist. 118. cap. 5.
not of the doctrine or faith of the church, are these: If the authority of
the Divine Scripture prescribe in any of these (rites and ceremonies) what is
to be done, I answer there may be no doubt, but that we must do as we
read. Similiter si quid horum, tota The word should be hodie.
die per orbem obseruat Ecclesia. The like I say if any of these (rites) be
observed of the whole church thoroughout the whole world (at this present day),
for to dispute that we should do otherwise: It is madness to break the custom
of the universal Church in things indifferent.

The Jesuits defend a new custom against the ancient and general order of
Christ's Church: are they not mad by S. Augustines rule?

Lyra. in 1.

Cor. 14.

Johan. Eckins in locis communibus.

The south India^s ever had and yet have their service in their mother tongue.


is most insolent madness. The scripture is first to be respected and obeyed:
if that prescribe no certainty, the custom of the universal church is to be
followed, in those rites which are neither against the faith, nor good manners,
for that is his maine restriction: and not every custom which in time to come
might, or should happily be newly devised by some parts or members of the
church, but such as the whole church far and near without contradiction
retained then, when he spoke, as descending from the Apostles or Apostolic
men. And so the word ( hodie) does import, though your Monks have left out the
first syllable, and written ( die) for ( hodie) as the course of the sentence
does plainly declare.

If then to dispute whether the ancient custom of the universal church may be
altered, be madness, yea most insolent madness, what degree of frenzy will fall
to your lot, that erect and desend a particular and late grown custom,
against the plain precept of God himself, against the Apostles prescription,
against the general and ancient usage of Christ's church, yea against the
nature of man, and true intent of your own service which you would seem to
make most account of?


Phi. All this is untrue.


Theo. Bethink your self better, and you shall find it truer than you would
wish.


Phi. Had ever any Nation their church-seruice in a barbarous tongue before our
time?


Theo. Make you that such a wonder, which your own friends confess was so
common in the primative church? Lyra says, In primatiua ecclesia benedictiones
and caetera coi^a (or else leaving out the c, which seems to be added by the
negligence of the Printer) oi^a siebant in vulgari. In the primative church
blessings, and (al other or) other common (prayers) were made in the vulgar
tongue (which the people understood.) Eckius says, Non negamus tamen Indis
Australibus permissum, vt in lingua sua rem diuinam facerent, quod clerus eorum
hodie obseruat. We deny not but the south Indians were suffered (in the
primative church) to have their divine service in their mother tongue (which is
neither Greek, Hebrew, nor Latin) which also their clergy at this day
observes. An Sigismund. liber in rerum Moscouit arum Commentariis, cap. de
d^cimis. So have the Moscouites and Armenians.
other of your friends says of the Moscouits, Totu^ sacru^ seu Missa Ge^tili
ac vernacula lingua apudillos peragi solet. The whole service or mass is said
with the^ in their native and mother tou^g. The epi. also and the Gospel of the
day are read to the people with a loud voice out of the cha^cel, for their
better understanding. Pet. Belloni says. As Petrus. Bello. de moribus
Armeniorum.
many as are present with the priest singing mass Armenia, answer him in the
Armenian tongue. For all, that stand by, understand the Armenian tongue which
the Priest uses (in his service.)


Phi. All Africa, Asia, and the North parts of (...) and bar^arous tongues.
These be schismatic and disordered Churches.


Theo. In deed they know no part of your holy Fathers religion nor dominion:
Yet are they Christians, and nearer the truth by many degrees than the church
of Rome. It is no schism to be free from him, to whom they were never
subject, and some obseruances though they have, which are both superstitious
and erroneous: yet that is no reason to dispraise them in that wherein they
follow the example of the true and sincere church of Christ, and retain that
custom which they received from the beginning.


Phi. We may dislike them for this as well as you may for other things.


Theo. Whether you like them or no, so they do and so have they done ever
since they were planted in Christ, even to this our age.

And this their constancy you can not dislike, but you must also dislike the
Apostle that first taught it, the primative church that continued it and
adjudged it to be necessary; yea your holy Father himself, that not only
would permit it, when he was requested: but strictly command it when it was
not asked. Cyrillus that converted the people of Russia and Morauia, Aeneas
Syluius hi^^. ^ohem. cap. 13.

God from heaven decided that the Russians and Morauians should have their
service in their native tongue though it were barbarous.


made request to the Bishop of Rome, as Pope Pius the second reports, that
he might use the Sclauon tongue in saying divine Service to them, whom he had
baptized. And when the matter came to be handled in the sacred Senate (or
council chamber) a number contradicting it, he says there was heard a voice,
as it were from heaven, speaking these words: Let every spirit praise the
Lord, and every tongue confess him: and that upon the hearing thereof,
Cyrillus had his petition. The blindness of your holy father and his Cardinals
was reproved by a voice from heaven for having their Service in an unknown
tongue: and yet you bear men in hand, to dislike the late custom of your
Romish Synagogue: or so much as to dispute thereof, as if it were not to be
done, is insolent madness.

Innocentius though he were the first that brought Transubstantiation,
Auricular confession, and deposition of Princes to be confirmed in open
council 1215. years after Christ, yet durst he not bind the West church to
the Latin service, throughout, as you do: but gave streit charge rather to
the contrary, that such as were of diverse languages, should have the prayers
and sacraments of the church in their several and sundry rites and tongues:
as appears in the council of Lateran assembled under Innocentius the third
of that name. Because Council. Lateranens. sub Innocent. 3. ca. 9.
in many places within the same city and Diocese there be mingled in plerisque
partibus. Populi diuersar. linguaru^.
people of diverse toungs, having under one faith sundry rites and customs: we
straightly command that the Bishops of such cities and Dioceses provide fit men
which may celebrate divine service, and minister the church Sacraments unto
them, Secundum diuersitates linguarum.
according to the diversities of their rites and la^guages.


Phi. In diverse tou^gs he says they shall have their service, but not in any
barbarous tongue.


Theo. And he that says they shall have their service in diverse tongues
confesses there were more tongues used in the West church than one: and taking
order that service should be said unto them according to the diversities of
their tongues, Mo tongues used in the west Church than the Latin tongue.
he saw some cause why the people should understand what was said in the
church: and if that be needful or expedient for one nation, why not for other
in like manner? And yet I see no restraint in the words, but that the
Moscouites, Morauians, and others were provided for by this Canon, to have the
church service in their proper and native tongue, as well as the Grecians.


Phi. If it were so: we account it lawful, for that the church of Rome did
permit it.


Theo. Then do we account our service in the English tongue much more lawful,
The general use of the primative Church confi^meth the service in the English
tongue.
chiefly for that it is warra^ted by the word of God, as I have showed; and
secondly for that it wants not the general use and order of Christ's church
in her sincerest and purest state to confirm the same.


Phi. Have you the general and ancient custom of Christ's church to insure
your service in the english tongue?


Theo. We have, for that tongue which the people understand, be it English,
Scottish, or what other speech you will.


Phi. That any Nation prayed in a barbarous tongue, you have no president in
the Primative church.


Theo. This is not the first time that your teeth could not rule your tongue:
The Primative church of Christ used and allowed all tongues, as well barbarous
as learned, for the people to make their prayers in. All tongues allowed in the
primative Church for men to make their public prayers in.



Phi. You say not truth.


Theo. If I do, you know your reward. You must be catholics of the second
edition, when men began to fall from truth to Apostasy. For with the right
and ancient faith of Christ's church, your Romish errors have no fellowship.


Phi. And what have yours, that were never heard of before Luthers time?


Theo. How chances then, our doctrine is confirmed by the scriptures, and
witnessed in all the Fathers, where yours is not?


Phi. Not ours?


Theo. Not yours.

Your praying in a tongue not understood of the hearers: your single and
solitary Masses, where no man eats besides the Priest: your decurted
communions, where wants one half of Christ's institution, The Jesuits are so
Catholic that they have not so much as one Father for the greatest points of
their religion.
I ask not how you prove these points to be catholic, that would trouble
your brains too much: but what one Father have you for them, lest you seem to
derive your religion you know not from whom? Catholic should have all the
Fathers, we demand you but one: If you come short of that, what hope ca^ you
have to recover the rest?


Phi. The doubt is not of our faith, but of yours: you must show, by what
title you claim your church, which was in our possession before you were borne.


Theo. The walls you had: for those we strive not: The faith which is the
foundation of the church you never had: for that we stand. The walls of the
Church were theirs, but not the faith of the Church.



Phi. But who stands with you besides your selves?


Theo. I have told you: the word of God, and clear consent of that church,
which you dare not deny to be both ancient and catholic.


Phi. First then where is your antiquity for praying in a barbarous tongue?


Theo. That, which I have said, might seem sufficient, you bringing against
it neither reason nor authority but only Pilates that put Christ to death.
Pilates authority is all the hold the Jesuits have for their latin service.



Phi. That the people did understand the prayers which were made in the church
you show some proof: but those we say were in Hebrew, Greek or Latin. Marie
that the primative church permitted any Nation to make their prayers in a
barbarous tongue, for that as yet I see no proof.


Theo. Reuiew that which is already said, and you shall find, that not only
the people did sing the Psalms and answer the prayers that were made in the
church, but also they were taught, The prayer is not public except the people
understand it and confirm it.
it was a point of their christian duty so to do, and that neither the Priests
voice was needful, nor the prayer public, except the whole multitude did
both conceive the meaning, and confirm the blessing of their Pastor and
Reader: which in a strange tongue they can not: and therefore the conclusion is
infallible, that in the Primative church no tongue was used but such as the
people understood, and in a barbarous nation of necessity that must be a
barbarous tongue.


Phi. But we require some testimony that a barbarous tongue was used in
prayer: for it may be that all the nations in the world understood Hebrewe,
Greek or Latin; Pilate wrate the superscription of the cross not for all the
persons in the world but for all the strangers that were at Jerusalem.
else why did Pilate set the title on our Saviors cross in those three
tongues, but that al nations might read it: and that they could not, except
they understood one of those three tongues, which I conjecture they did.


Theo. A conjecture fit for the cause you have in hand. Pilate did not set up
the title for all the men, women and children in the world to see or read as
you suppose: but for those that were gathered out of all Countries to Jerusalem
at the time of his execution: and that strangers as well as Jews might know
the cause why Christ was adjudged to die, the superscription was written in
Hebrew, Greek and Latin, All the world understood not the three learned
tongues.
without the knowledge of one of the which tongues no stranger used to frequent
those countries, least he should be forced as dombe me^ are, to work with
signs, which in travelers or ligers, that have any business, is mere madness
without some interpreter.

Had all men understood one of those three toungs as you imagine, what needed
the holy Ghost to have bestowed any more tongues on the Apostles, when they were
sent to preach to al nations, but the Hebrewe, Greek and Latin? What needed
the gift of mo tongues, and where was the division of tongues which God
inflicted for building the tower of Babel, if the whole earth had gotten to be
of three tongues?
for the whole world as you say, spoke and understood those three. You may do
well to control the holy Ghost, and with your monsterous and false surmise to
say the gift of more tongues than these three, was not needful. And where is
then the division of toungs which God inflicted on the Sons of men, if the
whole earth had recovered her self to be of three tongues? Or how could any
Nation be barbarous, if each could naturally speak some one of the learned
tongues? Yea why might not the offspring of Adam have gotten from three tongues
to one with more easy and quicker speed, than from an infinite variety of
tongues to three, and so frustrate the judgment and wisdom of God in
confounding their speech? The primative Church prayed in barbarous tongues.



Philand. I do not avouch it for a certainty.


Theophil. Look better unto it, and you will reject it not only for an
impossibility, but even for an impiety. And yet were you so absurdly and
wickedly bent, you hurt not our assertion. For we can prove that the primative
church allowed and used prayers by precise ^ermes in barbarous tongues. Origin
says, Origin. contra Ce^sum. lib. 8. Every nation prayed in th^^ native and
mother tongue.
The Grecians name God in the Greek tongue, the Romans in the Latin: and
singul^item natiua and vernacula lingua Deum precantur, and laudibus pro se
quisque extoll^t, and every (Nation) in their native and mother tongue make
their prayers to God and yield him his due praises. S. Hierom describing the
solemn funeral of Paula, that died at Bethleem in Jury says: Hier. in
epitaphi^ Paul. ad Eust^chium. Prayer in the Syrian tongue
Hebraeo, Graeco, Latino, Syroque sermon psalmi in ordine personabant, non
solum triduo donec s^bter Ecclesiam, and iuxta specum Domini conderetur, sed
per omnem hebdomadam. The Psalms were sung by order in the Hebrewe, Greek,
Latin and Syrian tongue, not only those three days, til she was laid in
earth within the church, and near to the sepulcher of our Savior, but that
whole week.

And least you should think this order of singing in diverse tongues was used
but once, commending the very same place for the great concourse of Nations
far and near, thither resorting and there leading their lives, he makes
Paula then alive give this report to Marcella. Paula and Eustochium ad
Marcellam vt commigret Bethleem. Hier. tom. 1. epist. 17.

Prayers in as many tongues al-most as there were nations in Bethleem.

Every one of these nations had not sufficient to make a quier, or else some of
these nations spoke the one the same tongue that the other did as diverse of
these spoke the greek tongue.


Quicunque in Gallia fuerit primus huc properat: diuisus ab orb nostro
Britannus, si in religione processerit, dimisso sole occiduo quaerit locum fama
tantum and Scripturarum relatione notum. Quid referamus Armenios, quid Persas,
quid Indiae, quid Aethiopum populos, ipsamque iuxta Aegyptum fertilem
Monachorum, Pontum, Cappadociam, Syriam Caelen, Mesopotamiam, cunctaque
orientis examina? Vox quidem dissona, sed vna religio: tot pene Psallentium
Chori, quot Gentium diuersitates. Whosoever is the chiefest in France, hither
he hasteneth. The Britane divided from our world, when he comes to any
forwardness in Religion, seeks for (this) place which he knows only by
hearesay, and by relation of the Scriptures: what shall I speak of the
Armenians, Persians, Indians, Ethiopians: of Egypt, that is hard by, and has
such stoare of Monks: or of Pontus, Cappadocia, Caelesyria, Mesopotamia, and
all the swarms of the East? They have diverse languages, but one religion.
There are (here) almost as many Quires that sing the Psalms (in their several
tongues) as there be diversities of nations.

Saint Augustine urges this which you defend (that GOD should not be
praised in a barbarous tongue) as a manifest inconvenience against them, that
would not have the word (...) used to express the nature and substance of
the Trinity. August. epist. 178.

S. August. takes it for a thing confessed that prayers should be used in
barbarous tongues.


If one substance of the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost may not be
uttered in the Greek tongue: ergo neither is it fit that God should be
praised in a barbarous (tongue:) but if the later be used, why not the former?
And that the later was used he shows in these words, August. Ibide^. What
is this but praying in barbarous tongues?
Vna rogatur vt misereatur a cunctis Latinis and Barbaris vnius Dei natura, vt
a laudibus Dei vnius, nec ipsa lingua barbara sit, vt Latinis aliena. The one
nature of one God is prayed unto by all the Latins and Barbarians to be
merciful (to them,) in so much that the very barbarous tongue is not excluded
from the praises of one God, as belonging to the Latins (more than to the
Barbarians.) In Latin we say, Domine miserere. Then belike this mercy ought
to be asked of that one God the father, the Son and the holy Ghost, but
only in the Hebrewe or Greek tongue, or at least in the Latin tongue, and
not in any barbarous tongue. Marie if it be lawful not only for the
Barbarians in their language, but for the Romans (conquered and compelled by
the Goa^hes to learn their speech) to say sihoraarmem: The service in the
Gothia^ tongue.
which is as much as, Lord have mercy (on us,) why should it not be lawful for
the councels of the Fathers that were assembled in the Land of Grecia to call
one substance of the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, in their own tongue
homousion? Thus much S. Augustine confessing that God was and might be praised
and prayed unto in a barbarous language, as well as in Hebrew, Greek or
Latin: and repeating a piece of the church service in the Gothian tongue,
which not only themselves used, but the Romans were forced to receive in
steed of Domine miserere, when their city was taken and surprised by the
Goths, for Kyerie eleison, Kyrie eleison was not used in the church of Rome in
S. Augustines time.
which Gregory two hundred years after borrowed of the Grecians, was not as yet
in Saint Augustines time used in the Church of Rome.

The very savage people that offered unto Devils, when they were converted unto
Christ, were not denied to have their Psalms and prayers in their rude and
unpolished tongues, as S. Hierom reports of the Bessians and others. Hieron.
ad Heliodorum in ^pita. Nepotia^.
The passion and resurrection of Christ, the tongues and letters of all Nations
do sound. I speak not of the Hebrews, Greeks and Latins, which Nations the
Lord did dedicate in the title of his cross: that the soul is immortal, and
has his being after the dissolution of the body, the Indian, the Persian, the
Goth, the Egyptian can largely discourse. The wild Bes^ians and they which go
clothed in beasts skins (for lack of other apparel) sacrifised men to the
Ghostes departed, The barbarus Bessians had the melody of the Cross in their
own tongue.
stridorem suum in dulce crucis fregerunt melos, have turned their barbarous
and fearful noise into the sweet melody of the cross.

Other particulars might be brought, but the report of Saint Basil shall
suffice for the general order of praying and singing, observed, as he says,
in all the churches of God, and therefore in those Nations and Countries where
the common people could no Latin, Greek nor Hebrew: but of force were driven
to use their natural language, though it were barbarous, before they could
either utter their own minds or understand what others said. Basil. epist. 63.
ad Cleri^. Neo^. This order of service was used in all Churches where the
people understood neither Hebrew, Greek, nor Latin.
The people with us rising in the night go to the house of prayer, and with
continual tears making their confession to God, and at length rising from
prayers, they set themselves in order to sing Psalms. Where being divided
into two parts they sing by courses (each side after other) and so with
variety of Psalms, and prayers interserted, they spend the night: as soon
as the day breaks all of them in common, as it were with one mouth and one
heart, offer to the Lord a psalm of confession, every one of them making the
words of repentance proper to himself. In respect of this (order) then if
you refuse us, you must also refuse the Egyptians, the people of either (...)
Lybia, The south (...) Indians the (...) Arabia^s, the (...) Syrians, the (...)
Armenians and (...) Babylonians speak neither Hebrew, Greek nor Latin.
Basil. Ibidem. This order was observed in all Churches, ergo amongst the
Barbarians which could none of the learned tongues.
Thebais, Palestine, the (...) Arabians, Phoenicyans, (...) Syrians, the (
Armenians, Babylonians and other) (...) borderers on Euphrates, and generally
al with whom vigils, prayers and common psalmodies are esteemed.

And that this order of singing the Psalms was general throughout the whole
Church of Christ, were the people Jews, Grecians, Romans, or Barbarians, the
words immediately before do witness. To that accusation wherein we are
blamed for the psalmodies, I have this to answer, that the manner and fashion
(of singing Psalms) which is here with us, is agreeable and consonant to all
the Churches of God. If these words be true: then not only the Egyptians, South
Indians, Arabians and Syrians, whom this Father names; but the Persians, East
Indians, Armenians, Iberians, Scithians and all other Nations had the same
order of praying and singing in their Churches by the mouths and voices of the
simple and unlearned people. And consequently either all the Christian men,
weomen and children in the world could speak and understand one of the three
learned tongues, which is a ridiculous, false, and impious imagination, or else
each nation had their public prayers and Psalms in their several and
barbarous tongues: which is the point you would needs have proved, before we
passed any farther.


Phi. That was then the manner of the Church, but since this which we use, The
Rhemish Test. 1. Cor. 14.
has been thought by the wisest and godliest to be most expedient, and it is
certainly seen to be nothing repugnant to S. Paul.


Theo. You lack good neighbors to help you, that you be forced so
shamefully with your own mouths in godliness and wisdom to prefer
yourselues before the learned and Catholic fathers of all antiquity. Mark
this pride of the Jesuits where they make themselves wiser and godlier than the
primative church.
We show you the ancient and universal custom of Christ's Church
proportioning her prayers by the rule of S. Paul, and directing them wholly to
edify the vulgar and simple people, as much as might be, by plain precept
from God himself, as they conceived the Apostles speech: you tell us that you
have not only changed that order of your own authorities: but that you have
conferred with some godlier and wiser personages than those famous and worthy
Pastors that observed this course in the Church of Christ many hundreths
before you were borne: and find it most expedient to continue your unfruitful
manner of praying in a tongue not understood, though the precept of God, the
Doctrine of the Apostle, and the practice of the primative Church be
expressly against it. O mouths prepared to stick at nothing that may any way
serve to hoodwinke your hearers! In this and many other points of your Religion
you run headlong against the clear testimonies of the sacred Scriptures, and
general consent of the Catholic fathers, and yet you will be Catholics.


Phi. You be very rife with your reproaches.


Theo. I might justly give you some oftener remembrances, but that I more
respect the seemelynes of the cause, which is Gods, than the sinnefulnesse of
your attempts, who neglect Scriptures, Fathers, Councels, Canons, Church and
all, that is to follow the decrees you know not of whom: and yet will have
it insolency and madness in us to dispute of your actions.


Philand. You do but slander us.


Theoph. We have hitherto slaundered you with matters of truth, if the rest
prove like, we shall do you no wrong, though we fawn on you less.

Their Mass not Catholic.
Your Mass, which this Realm has now rejected, what has it in it, either
Catholic or Apostolic, or any way concordable with Christ's ins^itution?


Philand. You could never light on a worse match. Of all the rites,
obseruances, and Sacraments which we have, none is more Apostolic, more
Catholic, more conformable to Christ's order and example than our Mass; The
Rhemish Testament, fol.
and your profane Supper 4^4.
has nothing agreeable to the Apostles or Christ's institution, but all clean
contrary: yea your 448.
communion is the very table and cup of devils, and your 228.
Caluins bread and wine, like at length to come to the sacrifice of Ceres and
Bacchus.


Theo. Tie up your doggish, if not devilish eloquence: you shall have no
praise, The Friars have served Ceres and Bacchus so long, that now they can not
choose but talk of them.
though you take some pride in broching these blasphemies. Your poysonfull
tongues and vnblushing faces may injury the ordinance of God, but you can not
overthrow his truth. If we had devised any thing of our own brains as you
have done the most part of your Religion, you would have kindled I see to some
choler that spare us such speeches for following the very samplar and original
which Christ did institute, as exactly, as we possibly might.


Phi. You follow no part of Christ's institution.


Theo. It is easy for your side to say what you list: you were no right
Friars, if you could not speak for your selves: but leave your scoffs and
vaunts at home, and bring forth your proofs.


Phi. The Rhemish Testament fol. 451. nu. 20.
I will begin with the name, and so proceed to the rest of the circumstances.
You have small reason to name the holy sacrament rather the Supper of the Lord,
than after the manner of the primative Church, the Eucharist, Mass, or
Liturgy. But belike you would bring it to the supper again, or Evening
service, when men be not fasting, the rather to take away the old estimation
of the holiness thereof.


The. The Jesuits cannot abide the name of the Lords supper.
If you leave not so much as the name untouched, I hope you will not conceal
any weighty matter of more importance.


Phi. You may swear for that, and keep your oath.


Theo. Then if all your quarrels being discussed, you be found to have uttered
nothing against us but your sharp and eger stomachs, and notwithstanding your
vagaries and resaliries to and fro, your Mass be neither Catholic nor
Apostolic, deserve you not to bear back your own burden, and to have
Bacchus, Ceres and the rest of your infernal saints to the shrines whence you
brought them?


Phi. When that falls out, which will be never. But you delay the time, for
fear you take the foil.


Theo. If your arguments be as quick, as your appetites, we shall soon
dispatch; but bring us not drippings, and say they be deinties.


Phi. S. Ambrose in hunc locum, The Rhemish Testament, 1. Cor. 11.
and most good authors now think this which (the Apostle) calls Dominicam
Caenam, is not meant of the blessed Sacrament, as the circumstances also of the
text do give, namely the rejecting of the poor, the rich men's private
devouring of all, not exspecting one an other, gluttony and drunkenness in the
same, which cannot agree to the holy Sacrament. And therefore you have You
have smaller to resist that name.
small reason (as I said) to name the said holy Sacrament rather the Supper
of the Lord, than after the manner of the primative Church, the Eucharist,
Mass, or Liturgy.


Theo. Malice bursteth out at your tongues ends, What names the Lords supper
is called by in the Scripture.
when you cannot abide the words which we use, though the Scriptures did
first authorize them, and the fathers for their parts continue them. The
Sacrament which the Lord ordained at his last maundie has sundry names that
we find authenticallie written in the word of God: as the 1. Cor. 10.
Lords table, the breaking of bread, and cup of thanksgiving, the Communion of
the body and blood of Christ, and as we thought till this time, 1. Cor. 11.
the Lords Supper. You begin to tell us S. Ambrose is of an other mind; and
b^ca^se your hold in him was very small, you add that the most of your
selves also do now so think. A worshipful catch, that fifteen hundredth
years after Christ you come in with your own verdict, in your own cause, and
look to have it current.


Phi. We mean not our selves.


Theo. You can mean none, The Jesuits al^edge themselves and their fellows
for good authors to discredit the fathers.
but your selves, or your fellows. For you say, most good Authors now think
so; of our side I am sure you will not agnise that any be good authors, as you
call them, or that the most of us are of that opinion; and therefore you mean
your selves and your own adherents: who, were you not partial, yet are you too
young to bid Augustine, Hierome, Chrysostom, Theodorete, and others, rise from
their chaiers, and give you place.

Augustine repeating the very words of S. Paul, when you come together, this
is not to eat the Lords supper, says August. epist. 118.

The fathers expound the Lords supper in S. Paul to be the Sacrament.


hanc ipsam acceptionem Eucharistiae Dominicam Caenam vocat; the Apostle
calls this very receiving of the Eucharist the Lords Supper. Hierome
commenting upon the same words: when you come together this is not to eat the
Lords Supper, adds: Hier. in 1. Corinthians. 11.
Now is it not the Lords Supper (as you use it) but man's, in as much as you
seem to meet rather to fill your bellies, than for the mystery. For the
Lords Supper ought to be common to all, because he delivered the Sacraments
equally to all his Disciples that were present. And a Supper therefore it is
called, for that the Lord at Supper delivered the Sacraments. Chrysostom
affirms the same. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. 11. hom. 27
The Apostle touches them more dreadfullie with these words, This is not to
eat the Lords Supper, sending them to that night in which Christ delivered
the wonderful mysteries. Therefore he calls it a Supper; for that Supper had
all (that were present) sitting together in common; (that is at one time and in
one place) * As Ibidem.
often as you shall eat, you shall show forth the Lords death; this is that
supper. And in an other place. Chrysostom. in illiud Paul^, oportet esse
haereses. tom. 4.
This is not to eat the Lords Supper. He means that Supper which Christ
delivered (before his passion) when all his Disciples were with him. For in
that Supper the Lord and all his Servants sat together.

Theodorete Likewise, Theodor. in 1. Cor. 11.
The Lords Supper he calls the Lords Sacrament. And so Photius, He Citatur ab
Occumen. in 1. Cor. 11.
calls it the Lords (Supper) after the imitation of that dreadful and
mystical (Supper) when the Lord sat together with the disciples, as if he
should have said the (Supper) which the Lord disposed and ordained. Bid to
expound this place cites the words of Augustine that went before. Beda. in 1.
Cor. 11.
The very receiving of the Eucharist he calls the Lords Supper. Haymo
mentions both opinions, but concludes plainly with us. Haimo. in 1. Cor. 11.
Sacramentum igitur corporis Christi a communione Caena appellatur. The
Sacrament then of Christ's body is called a Supper by reason of the communion:
Or if you will have one place insteede of all, S. Aug. in one short sermon
calls the Sacrament the Lords Supper twenty times.
read S. Augustine de verbis Domini secundum Lucam: Sermo. 33. and you shall
find him not only call the Sacrament a Supper and the Lords Supper twenty
times in one short Sermon, but also bring you the authority of Christ himself
for it, when he said in the fourteenth of Luke, a Luk^. 14.
certain man made a great Supper.

And therefore you were more angry than wise, to check that term as having
small reason, The Jesuits will not hear of the Lords Supper which is the
usual speech of the fathers, but of the Mass which in 600. years they find
but six times, and that neither in the fathers nor to this purpose.
which had so good testimony both of Scriptures and fathers; and in lue of it
to offer us the name of the Mass, a word that the greek Church never used, as
your selves know, and is found in the works of all the Latin fathers that be
theirs, but six times in six hundredth years, (set Gregory aside who lived
about that time and uses the word somewhat oftener than any of the rest) and
yet not in that sense, nor for that thing which you intend. For never father
called the Sacrament or Eucharist the Mass: And in that point if we have but
small reason to speak as we do; you have utterly no reason great nor small
to call the Sacrament the Mass as you do: but that rage in you many times
over rules reason, and then you pushe out your violent and vnmastered passions.


Phi. We have S. Ambrose for our Author, when we denied the blessed Sacrament
to be called a Supper, and for the name of the Mass in plain words we have
not Ambros. epist. 33.

The Rhemish Testament fol. 447.


him only, but also August. sermo. 251.91. Council. Carthag. 2. cap. 3.4. cap.
84. Mileuit. ca. 12. Leo epist. 88.81. cap. 2. Grego. lib. 2. epist. 9.93. etc.


Theo. S. Ambrose does not say, that the ministration of the Sacrament may not
be called the Lords Supper; but he would not have us think it to be a Supper
provided to fill our bellies. And in that sense he says, Ostendit Ambros. in
1. Cor. 11.
illis mysterium Eucharistiae inter caenandum celebratum non caenam esse. The
Apostle shows them, that the mystery of the Eucharist was celebrated as the
(disciples) were at Supper, and not to be the (whole) Supper (which they had:)
and thereuppon groundeth that which he noted before, that in the Church,
Ambros. Ibidem.
vnitatis and mysterij causa conuenitur, non dissentionis and ventris, they
must assemble for the celebration of the mystery and observation of unity,
not for dissension and the belly. The Rhemish Testament, fol. 451.



Phi. The circumstances of the text, namely the rejecting of the poor the
rich men's devouring of all, not expecting one an other, gluttony and
drunkenness in the same can not agree to the holy Sacrament.


Theo. The world wants such skillful interpreters of Scriptures as you are;
you would easily prove if you were let alone, that a man has no head, because
he has two feet, or two arms, and those are not his head. The Jesuits
demonstrations be m^re delusions.



Phil. Would you make us so foolish as to think a man may not have feet,
arms and head: though the parts in themselves be different in proportion,
position and action?


Theo. But in boulting S. Paul's text, you reason as if he could not. For of
two things, that were used both together, you urge the one to exclude the
other; and as if that were some mighty collection, you say that we and all the
fathers who took it otherwise have small reason for our doings.


Phi. We speak of you, not of the fathers.


Theo. You thrust them to the hearts through our sides. For if we following
their full consent in expounding this place, have small reason, they had as
little, who began it unto us, and went that way before us; we tredding but their
steps after them.


Phi. We meant not to disgrace them.


Theo. The sequel of your words does, whatsoever your purpose was.


Phi. We give you the reasons of our exposition, and those in our judgment
very clear.


Theo. As clear follies as any can be.


Phi. Disprooue them then.


Theo. The christians you grant had their common feasts in the Church at that
time for their relieuing of the poor, The Church in S. Paul's time had the
Lords supper and their brotherly feasts one at the end of the other.
and retaining of brotherly unity.


Phi. They had as we note unto you out of Tertullian, Apolog. ca. 39. Clemens
Alexand. S. Iustine, S. Augustine contra Faustum lib. 20. cap. 20.


Theo. And that they had therewithal the Lords Supper, (for so I must call it,
till you bring some better reason against it) I think you doubt not.


Phi. At or about the same time they had; but whether before or after I know
not.


Theo. To this purpose it shall not skill.

The faults for which S. Paul reproved them were these; the dividing themselves
into factio^s, These faults n the Corinthians either immediately before or
after the Lords supper made them unfit ghests for the Lords table.
inso much that they would not expect one an other, (no not at the Lords table)
their shaming the poor (with whom (as it seemed) they took skorne to sit at
the same table,) and abusing the church of God to excess of eating and
drinking. The two later enormities might be committed at their ordinary
feasts in the Church: and so might also the first; yet because those brotherly
repastes did either end or begin with the Lords Supper, they could not
divide themselves each from other, and disdain the poor at their common
meats, but they must offer the same abuse at the Lords supper, which was
ministered to them as they sat at their tables immediately before, or after
their usual and corporal refreshings.

By S. Paul's words, It should seem by Saint Paul, their feasts were before the
ministering of the Sacrament.

1. Cor. 11.


it should appear the Communion was distributed to them after meals, for so
the Apostles received it at their masters hands the night that he was betrayed,
and S. Paul not only notes the time when Christ did it (...), after they had
supped, but to cut off dissension, drunkenness and contempt of their poor
brethren in the Church, (which were the vices then grown amongst them) he
requires a precedent examination before they did eat, not an answerable
conversation after they had eaten. He says not, let every man remember at
whose table he has eaten, and whose cup he has been partaker, 1. Corint. 11.
but, let a man examine himself, and so eat of this bread and drink of this
cup; that is before he eat of this bread and drink of this cup, and he
shall find that contentious and riotous persons, (such as they were in their
feasts,) be no sit ghestes for that heavenly Supper. And yet to us it is all
one whether it were before or after: at their bankers and feasts, it was
ministered and eue^ served at their tables, as S. Augustine notes in these
words. (Non debent fratres) mensis suis ista miscere, August. ep. 118.
sicut faciebant quos Apostolus arguit and emendat. (The brethren ought not) to
have these (mysteries) served at their tables, as they did whom the Apostle
reprooueth and refourmeth.

The rehearsal of Christ's institution needed not if it had not bin first
abused with unworthy coming to it.
And had not the Lords Supper been abused among them, what needed the
rehearsal of the first institution: to the which because the Apostle recalleth
them, it is evident they were fallen from it. Now abuses in this place S. Paul
mentions none but drunkenness, dissension and defrauding the poor: and
since drunkenness and deceiving the poor, as you auouche, can not agree to
the Sacrament, it follows that dissension was the thing which defaced the
Lords Supper among them, in that they would neither at common meats nor at the
Lords Supper sit al together, but sort them selves in factions and companies,
as they favored and friended each other.

This was the fault which S. Paul first rebuked, when he began to redress
the things that troubled the Church of Corinth. They contended about Baptism,
1. Cor. 1.
saying, I am Paul's and I am Apollos, and I am Cephaes; and their dissension so
increased, and came to that sharpnes, that they would have their tables in the
Church and even the Lords Supper also each company by them selves. Ambros. in
1. Cor. 11.
The false Apostles, says Ambrose, had sown such discord among them, that
they stood striving for their oblations. Hierom says, Hiero. in 1. Cor. 11.
In ecclesia conuenie^tes oblationes suas separatim offerebant. Meeting in the
church they delivered their oblations to several companies (according as every
man fansied the parties.) And again, Ibidem.
Nemo alium expectabat vt communiter offeretur: No man expected one an other,
that the oblation might be common. And S. Paul, as Chrysostom thinks, brought
the Table and Supper where the Lord himself was, and at which sat all his
Disciples, even Judas the Traitor, for an example, to show them: that, that is
rightly judged to be Chrysostom. in illud Pauli, oportet esse haereses.
The Lords Supper, quae omnibus simul conuocatis concorditer and communiter
sumitur, which is received in common, and with one consent of all assembled
together. Yea S. Augustine affirms that August. epist. 118.
The Apostle speaking of this Sacrament says, for which cause brethren when
you assemble together to eat, expect one an other.

The circumstances of the text may agree to the Lords supper.
Your observations therefore are first false, when you say, these circumstances
can not agree to the holy Sacrament. For even these which you name, as most
unlikeliest, are applied by the fathers to the Lords Supper. Expecting one an
other, you heard S. Augustine refer directly to this Sacrament. Devouring of
all by the rich, and drunkenness S. Hierom expounds likewise of the very
same mystery. (The Apostle) Hieron. in 1. Cor. 11.
says one is drunk, and an other hungry: for this reason. Quia
superuenientibus mediocribus, and volentibus sumere Sacramenta deerant, quoniam
ab illis qui obtulerant oblationes, in communi conuiuio fuerant cuncta
consumpta. Because the meaner sort coming after (the rich) and mynding to
receive the Sacraments, there was nothing left, (to minister the Sacrament
withal;) they that brought the oblations devouring all in their common banquet.
Haymo says, Haymo in 1. Cor. 11.
One is hungry, that is he which for poverty is not able to bring wheaten
bread and wine to be consecrated for the Communion: [an other] to wit the
rich and wealthy man [is drunken] and surfeyteth as well with other meats,
as with the sacraments of the body and blood of the Lord.

Next did some of them not agree to the sacraments of the Lords table, Some
circumstances may well agree though others did not.
as surfeyting, devouring and drunkenness: yet other circumstaunces, as
schisms, not expecting one an other, may and do very fitly serve for the
Lords Supper, as you see by the judgment of those Fathers whom I have named.

Thirdly did no circumstaunces of their disorders agree to the right
institution of the Sacrament, Saint Paul reproved the^ because their disorders
did not agree to the right institution of the Sacrament.
yet so long as Saint Paul refelleth their doings in the Church as unseemly
for the sacred mysteries there prepared and received: what reason have you to
deny that Saint Paul means the sacrament, where he says, when you come
together (if you fall to filling your bellies, and despising the poor, as you
do in your feasts) (...), You can not, (or this is not the right way to) eat
the Lords Supper. For this is plain to him that has but half an eye, that
Saint Paul checketh them as unworthy partakers (by these their abuses of the
mysteries of Christ, S. Paul checketh them for their unworthy coming to the
Lords table, ergo his words belong to the Sacrament.
) and interprets the plagues which some of them felt, to be Gods scourges
for their loosenes in that behalf, and therefore with great reasons might he
begin to reprehend them as vn^it approchers to the Sacrament, and utter so
much in these words, when you come together, this is not (the way) to eat
the Lords Supper, or to have access to his table, to make schisms at your
feasts in the Church with excess in your selves, and reproach to others.


Phi. If you will needs have the Sacrament called the Lords Supper, The name
of the Mass is no way Catholic.
keep you that name, and we will keep ours, as more ancient and Catholic
by the testimony of Saint Augustine, S. Ambrose and the rest whom I cited
before for the antiquity of the blessed Mass.


Theo. He that will boldly deny a truth, will easily affirm a falsehood. S.
Augustine in all the works that be undoubtedly his, never so much as once named
the Mass. S. Augustine never used the word Mass.
The Sermons de tempore, which you produce, are collected out of other men's
writings as well as his, and many of them Eras. censura in tomum decimum
August. and in sermo. de tempore.
found under the names of other authors, and favor little either of Austens
learning or phrase, as Erasmus confessed when he first surueyed them.

S. Ambrose has but one in all his writings, and that is missam facere, which
is not to say Mass.
S. Ambrose has the word once, and so have two Provincial Councels of
Africa; Leo has it twice; which is all that you can find in six hundredth
years till Gregory the first came, and used the word somewhat oftener: yet
none of these call the Sacrament or Sacrifice by that name, as you would have
it, but rather express by that word the ancient order of the primative
church, in sending away such as might not be partakers of the Lords table, as
in place where I noted before. Missa in the fathers is the sending away of
those that might not be partakers of the Lords table.
And that Missa with the fathers does signify not the Mass, but leave to
depart before or after the communion, your own fellows will instruct you, whom
you may not well distrust as being with you, though you trust not us that are
against you.

Polydore repeateth and allows the same with these words: Polyd. de invent.
rerum, lib. 5. cap. 11.
Mihivero prior ratio probatur vt magis apposita. The former diriuation (of the
word M^ssa) pleases me better, as the likelier: and not that it should
signify a sacrifice and be derived from the Hebrew word Missa as Reuchline
would deduce it. And therefore he says, Polidor. Ibidem.
Idem igitur mos a nostris etiam seruatur, vt peractis sacris, per Diaconum
pronuncietur, Missa
Ite, missa est: quod idem est, ac ilicet, id est ire licet. The same manner is
observed of our men, that at the end of divine service, the Deacon should say,
ITE, MISSA EST, which is as if he said, YOU MAY DEPART. And that missa was
usual for missio, he shows out of Cyprians epistles, where he says remissa
for remissio.

Rhenanus another of your friends gives the like observation in his notes
upon the 4. book of Tertullian against Marcion. Beati Rhenani annotationes in
4. lib. contra Marcionem.

Missa in the fathers does as much signify the Mass as excommunication does
signify the communion.


Hodie in fine Sacri Leuita pronunciat, Ite, missa est, id est, missio est,
quod olim in initio dicebatur, antequam inciperentur videlicet ipsa mysteria.
Hinc iuxta vulgi consuetudinem, Ambrosius missas facere dixit. Proprie missa
erat tempore Sacrificij quando Cathecumeni for as mittebantur. At this day the
Priest pronounces at the end of his service, Ite, missa est, that is, go, you
have leave to depart, which in the primative church was said in the beginning,
before they came to the celebration of the Sacraments. Thence Ambrose used the
word missam facere, according to the vulgar custom (of those times.) For
properly missa was when the conuerts not yet baptized, were sent away in the
time of the sacrifice, that is at what time the rest addressed themselves to be
partakers of the Lords table. And that missa was common for missio; he proves
by Tertullian and Cyprian in his book de bono patientiae, and epist. 14.

And lest you should think this to be a fantastical assertion of his
without all ground or authority, such as the most of your observations are,
he tells you that, this mystery of antiquity is related in Isidores
Lexicon. And in deed so it is. For Isidore says, Isidor. Originum, lib. 6. de
officiis.

Missa in the fathers directly opposite to the sacrifice: are not the Jesuits
then wise me^ by these autorities to prove it to be the name of their sacrifice?


Missa tempore Sacrificij est, quando Cathecumeni for as mittuntur, clama^te
Leuita, si quis cathecumenus remansit, exeat for as, and inde missa, quia
sacrame^tis altaris interesse non possunt qui nondu^ regenerati nascuntur.
Missa was about the time of the sacrifice, when the learners and such as were
not yet baptized were sent out of the Church, the Leuite crying, if any
Cathecumene be here, let him depart, and thence is the word missa, because
they can not be present at the Sacrament of the Altar, which are not yet
regenerate. And I think for very shame you would not seem to be so foolish as
to take Council. Carth. 4. cap. 84.
missam Cathecumenorum, which the fourth council of Carthage does mention in
the place alleged by your selves, and likewise S. Austen in those very
sermons, which you cite as his, for your Mass or Sacrifice. For how can, Sermon.
de tempore. 237.
fit missa Cathecumenis, stand either for the sacrament or sacrifice, since the
persons named were not baptized, and consequently not to be admitted to any of
the Church mysteries?

So that grant the word missa were found oftener in the Fathers than it is, you
can thence conclude nothing for your Mass: which you rudely and unadvisedly
think to be all one with their missa, This is a right pattern of the rest of
their religion wherein they have kept the words of the ancient fathers, and
quite perverted their meaning.
or missarum solemnia, where in deed it is as contrary to that which they
spoke of, as poison to an wholesome potion. For missa with them did signify
the sending away of such as might not communicate with the rest at the Lords
table: the mass with you is the real and actual sacrificing of the son of
God to his father; and the setting of the people to gaze on the Priest whiles
he alone deuoureth all, and falsifieth the very words and actions of Christ's
institution.


Phil. Nay you falsify both the words and deeds of Christ's institution: and
though you gather out of Isidore and others that Missa in the ancient Fathers
was the demising of such as might not be present at the Sacrifice; and missa
Cathecumenorum by no means can be our Mass, yet touching our Saviors
institution of the blessed Sacrament, we come nearer to this example than you
do; you missing it in most points that be essential, and we following all his
actions, that are imitable.


Theop. What essential points do we miss?


Phil. Almost all.


Theop. Reason you named some.


Phil. You do not imitate Christ in blessing the bread and wine, The Rhemish
Testament.

1. Cor. 11.


nor in unleavened bread, and mingling water with wine, nor in saying the words
of consecration over the bread and wine; you use no confession before, nor
adoration of the blessed Sacrament at the receiving of it. A number of like
defects there are in your communion, which cause it to be no sacrament, but
common bread and wine. Therefore Though they curse, yet thou will bless, says
David to God in his 109. Psalm.
imperet vobis Deus, and confound you, for not discerning his holy body, and
for conculcating the blood of the new Testament.


Theop. Keep your burning and cursing devotion for your selves; your
manquelling and masse-mongring rage has as much affinity with Iud. epist.

He that curses us for keeping Christ's institution, curses Christ that
ordained it, and God that commanded us to observe it.


Michaels prayer beseeching God ye devil might be restrained, as fiercenes and
fury has to patience and piety. If we have altered any part of Christ's
institution, curse on in Gods name, and let your curses take effect. But if the
celebration of our mysteries be answerable to his will and word that first
ordained them, you curse not us, whom you would hurt, but him, that your
cursed toongs can not hurt, which is God to be blessed for ever; and whose
everlasting curse will take hold of you, if you relent not the sooner, for your
proud defiance and stately contempt of his truth in respect of your massing
revels and mummeries.


Philand. Nay you are contemners of his true body and blood in this Alhaile
master quoth Judas when he gave him a kiss, and had sold his life for earthly
gain.
reverent, blessed and holy sacrament, and breakers of his institution, and
therefore his curse will light on you.


Theop. Uaine speech does but spend time, show first wherein we break Christ's
institution, and for the truth of his presence in this Sacrament, if we teach
otherwise than the Scriptures and Fathers do warrant us, we are content to
hear and bear the curse, which blind zeal has wrested from you.


Philand. We showed you even now what things they were wherein you swarued from
Christ's institution.


Theoph. You must both repeat them, and divide them, that we may the better
discuss them.


Phil. I will.

Christ took bread into his hands, applying this ceremony, action and
benediction to it, and did bless the very element, used power and active words
The Rhemish Test. 1. Cor. 11. Upon it and over it, are the chiefest points the
Jesuits can pick out of Christ's institution. O, this is a terrible narration.
upon it, as he did over the bread and fishes which he multiplied: and so does
the Church of God: and so do not (you) if (you) follow (your) own book and
Doctrine, but (you) let the bread and cup stand aloof, and occupy Christ's
words by way of report and narration, applying them not at all to the matter
proposed to be occupied: and therefore howsoever the simple people be deluded
by the rehearsal of the same words which Christ used, yet consecration,
benediction or sanctification of bread and wine (you) profess (you) make none
at all.


Theoph. Christ, you say, took bread into his hands, and did bless the very
element: What mean you by blessing?


Philand. He used power and active words upon it, as he did over the bread and
fishes which he multiplied.


Theoph. Why walk you thus in clouds? Blessing with us is the giving of
thanks unto God: with you it is the making of a cross in the air with your
two forefingers. What kind of blessing Christ did use.
Which of these twain do you mean?


Philand. That Christ blessed the bread; we be very sure: that he gave thanks
to the bread, you dare not say.


Theo. Thanks he gave to God, and not to the bread.


Phil. But he blessed the bread: and therefore blessing is not taken in
Christ's institution for thanksgiving as you misconster it.


Theoph. If a man should put you to the new Testament in Greek, can you spell
it?


Philand. Yea Sir, and conster it as well as you.


Theoph. Then I trust your cunning will serve you to know Matthew. 26. Mark. 14.
Luke 22. 1. Corinthians. 11.
(...), (which word the holy Ghost uses to express the Lords action and
benediction at his last Supper) does infer that our Savior gave thanks to
God, and made no cross with his hand over the bread.


Philand. Mark. 14.1. Cor. 10. The Gospels do not differ, and therefore they
must all agree in this, that Christ gave thanks to God his father.
But S. Mark says that our Lord brake the bread, (...), having first blessed
it, and Saint Paul does not stick to refer that word to the cup it self,
and not to God. (...), the chalice of benediction, which we bless, is it not
the communication of the blood of Christ?


Theo. Do you think S. Mark reproves S. Luke, and S. Matthew; or that S. Paul
is contrary to himself?


Phil. No: I think the one expounds the other, and all their reports meet
full in one congruence.


Theoph. And otherwise to say or think, is apparent blasphemy against the
spirit of God, who never halteth in his tale, nor dissenteth from himself in
any thing, much less in a matter of so weighty moment as this is.


Philand. He can be no Christian that doubts thereof.


Theop. Then (...) is all one with (...), and since children in Grammar
schools do know that (...) is to give thanks with words, These two words be
equivalent.
and not to cross with fingers, we conclude that this is a childish error of
yours to think that Christ gave not thanks to God, but blessed the very
element. Yea, no word plainer conuinceth your puerilitie than that which you
have brought to relieve your self. Of the twain (...) is the plainer to
reprove the Jesuits crossing.

The Rhemish Test. us supra.


For (...) does more evidently refell your crossing with fingers than (...): as
being compounded of (...), which in Greek imports speech uttered by month,
and by no means drawing or crossing the fingers.


Phil. Let the word signify what you will: that which Christ did, were it with
hand or mouth, he did it over the bread, and upon the bread, and so do not
(you) but let the bread and cup stand aloof and occupy Christ's words by way
of report and narration, applying them not at all to the matter proposed to be
occupied.


Theop. This is the right behavior of your Rhemish translatours, to wrangle
and trifle about phrases and ambiguities, as if they were the precepts and
commandments of God. Our Savior you affirm blessed the very element, that
is, used power and active words upon it or over it.

Blessing is a word that is diversely used in the scriptures. What it is to
bless God.
To bless God, is to praise him, and to give honor to his name: and for that
cause you shall find both those words joined together as words of like force,
as when S. Luke says, the disciples Luke 24.
continued in the temple praising and blessing God.

To bless men, What it is for one man to bless an other.
if it be done by men, (for of their blessings we speak, and not of Gods) is
to pray for them: and to beseech God that he will bless them, that is, defend
them, prosper them, and be merciful unto them. So Genesis 27.
Isaac blessed Jacob, and Genesis 48.
Jacob the sons of Joseph, and so were the Priests appointed by God himself
to Number. 6.
bless the children of Israel: and a form of prayer for that purpose
prescribed them.

We may also bless the time, What it is to bless time and place.
place and means, in which, or by which God shows his favor toward us:
that is, we may pronounce them blessed for our sakes, and our selves bound to
bless God for them. So David said to Abigail, 1. Samuel. 25.
Blessed be God that sent thee this day to meet me: Blessed be thy speech (or
counsel) and blessed be thou, which have kept me this day from going to (shed)
blood: where he blesses God, as the author, the woman as the means, her words
as the persuasions and occasions, that kept him from using the bloody revenge,
which he determined against Nabal and his family. And so said Solomon,
Sapient. 14.
blessed is the tree whereby righteousness comes. So on the contrary Job. 3.
Job and Ierem. 20.
Jeremy What it is to bless the meats and things which we use.
cursed the days wherein they were borne, and would not have them to What it
is to bless the meats and things which we use.
be blessed. We must likewise bless the meats which we eat, and the things
which we use for the maintenance of this mortal life: that is, prayer must be
made unto God, that they may be healthful for us, and we thankful for them:
by which means our food, and al other succors of this life are sanctified, to
his pleasure and our comfort.

Since then the Scriptures not only permit, but also command that we should
bless one another, How we are said to bless the elements at the Lords table.
and so the creatures which nourish our bodies, we make no doubt but it is both
lawful and needful for us to bless the sacraments which are the seals of
Gods everlasting promises, and therefore we readily receive S. Paul's adiection,
when he says, the cup of blessing, WHICH WE BLESS, is it not the communion of
Christ's blood? Mary blessing in that place we take not for How the Jesuits
bless the cup.

How we bless it.


crossing or charming the cup with a How the Jesuits bless the cup.

How we bless it.


set number and order of signs and profers as you use at your mass, but for
the How the Jesuits bless the cup.

How we bless it.


making of our ernest and humble prayers to God, that our unworthiness do not
hinder the working of his sacraments, but that by his goodness and mercy, they
may take their due effects in us according ^o his sons institution for the
pardoning of our sins, the incresing of his grace and our faith, the quikning
of our inward man, and preserving both body and soul to eternal life. And this
the force of the word (...), the manner of blessing all other things and persons
directed by the scriptures, Our blessing is consonant to the words and rules of
the scripture, theirs is not. Their massing gestures over the cup.
the very principles of prayer and piety do approve and co^firm, whereas your
houering and blowing over the Chalice, your crossing and hiding it, your
rubbing of fingers for fear of crumbs, your first thwarting, and then lifting
of arms, your ioining and vnioining of thumb and forefinger, with twenty such
nicefinities and curiosities, have neither foundation nor relation to Christ's
action nor institution, nor to his Apostles doctrine nor doings, who knew their
masters meaning, and continued their masters example with words and gestures
reverent and sufficient to satisfy his heavenly will and precept for this
matter.


Phi. You do not so much as use any words upon the elements, but let the bread
and the wine stand aloof, as if you were afraid to touch them.


Theo. In deed we bless with our hearts and voices, Prayer blesses the cup,
and not our fingering or breathing on it.
not with our fingers; and therefore we make our account that our prayers are
as forceable and as effectual at six feet length as at six hairs breadth.
And to deal friendly with you, that blessing with mouth takes no place, except
the hand be also winding and turning the patene and chalice after your manner,
we can not believe it before we see some reason for it: sorcerers and coniurers
have such circumstances, but we hope you be not of their Seminaries.


Phi. Did not Christ take the bread and likewise the cup into his hands?


Theo. Christ took bread to give it, and gave it out of his hand before he
spoke the words of consecration.
Yes verily. He could not BREAK it with his hand, unless it were in his hand,
neither could he GIVE it out of his hand, before he TOOK it into his hand.


Phil. Then Christ TOOK the bread and so the cup into his hands before he did
consecrate, and so you do not.


Theo. You would say before he did distribute. For breking and giving which were
the ends of his taking, are parts of distributio^ not of consecration.


Phi. What blasphemy have we here? did Christ distribute, before he did
consecrate the bread?


Theo. You be so busy about blessing the host and the chalice, that you charge
the son of God in his doings, and the evangelists in their writings with
blasphemy.


Phi. Nay we charge you with blasphemy for saying, that Christ gave
unconsecrated bread and wine to his disciples.


Theoph. Does not the Scripture say the same? Matthew. 26.
Jesus taking bread and giving thanks brake (it) and gave (it) to (his)
Disciples and said, take ye, eat ye, this is my body. And taking the cup and
giving thanks, he gave (it) to them saying, drink ye all of this: for this is
my blood of the new Testament, Christ did consecrate when the bread was in his
disciples hands: what did he then over or upon the bread can you tell?
etc. He took bread, brake it and gave it to his disciples, bidding them take
it and eat it before he said this is my body. Now if these words, this is my
body, be the words of Consecration, ergo distribution went before
Consecration, and when Christ did consecrate, the bread was in his disciples,
and not in his own hands.


Phil. But he blessed, as we call it, or as you term it, he gave thanks,
before he brake it.


Theop. That thanksgiving or benediction, was not consecration, as your selves
confess, and would seem to prove by an whole Fol. 452. Number. 24. [This is.
heap of fathers: and therefore in spite of all that you do or can say, Christ
did consecrate by word of mouth when the disciples had the bread and cup in
their hands.


Phi. Would you have the priest then not at al to touch the elements?


Theo. When we divide them, we cannot choose but touch them, as Christ did:
Mary they may be sanctified by prayer and made Sacraments by repeating the
words of Christ though at that instant we touch them not. And therefore your
unsound quidities that Christ blessed the very element, Consecration takes
effect from Christ's words, not from our fingers or gestures.

The Rhemish Test. page 452. These words this is my body, must be applied by
way of rehearsal what Christ said.


and used power and active words upon the bread and over the bread, which (we)
do not, but let the bread and wine stand a loofe, and occupy the words of
Christ by way of report and narration, applying them not at all to the matter
proposed, these nice and new found quddities I say be mere fooleries; since
the words of Consecration take their effect not from our fingers or gestures,
but from Christ's mouth and commandment that we should do the like.


Phil. You never apply these words (this is my body) more than the whole
narration of the institution, nor recite the whole otherwise than in historical
manner, and for that cause you make it no Sacrament at al.


Theo. Can you tell what you say?


Phil. Why doubt you that?


Theo. Because it is a wicked and blasphemous lie for the priest to say, this
is my body, otherwise than by way of rehearsal what Christ said. And
therefore your brains be more than distempered if you would have us or any
other Christian ministers to say it otherwise than by report, what Christ
said, and commanded us to do in remembrance of him.


Phil. Do you think we mean the priest should say of his own person, If the
priest say of himself, this is my body, he blasphemeth most horibly: and
therefore he must speak them by way of report what Christ said.
this is my body?


Theo. If you do mean it, Bedlem is a fitter place for you than either Rhemes
or Rome.


Phil. You may be sure we do not.


Theo. Why then reprove you us for repeating the words of Christ by way of
rehearsal what he did and said?


Phil. You should apply them to the matter proposed.


Theo. How? By prayer precedent and consequent, or by glozing and interlacing
Christ's words with ours?


Phil. You should actiuely and presently apply them to the elements of bread
and wine.


Theo. I must ask you the same question that I did before. The words were
spoken by Christ in his own person, and cannot actiuely and presently be
pronounced by any priest, but by way of report what Christ said, without
apparent and horrible blasphemy. And therefore the application of them in our
words must either go before them or after them, Here is much ado with actiuely
and presently, and yet the cunning sophists never tell what is required to
active and present application.

This application the Jesuits may do well to tell us which way it must be
made. The words of their Mass book are distinct, secret, and attente.

If they take breath in pronouncing Christ's words their application is quite
marred: for they must do it vno spiritu, nulla pausatione interposita.

A wise objection when both the elements and our prayers witness for us in the
eyes of God and the whole church why we repeat the words of Christ, you
Jesuits cannot tell whether we jest or no.


and not exactly with them, much less to be comprised in them.


Phil. We tell you, you do not apply them actiuely and presently.


Theo. We tell you, you know not what you say. The words of Christ (this is my
body, this is my blood) mauger all the devils in hell must be pronounced in no
man's person, but only by way of repetition what Christ at his last supper said
in his own person; and your Iesuitical novelties of actiuely and presently be
so far from the soundnes of faith and substance of truth, that your selves are
not able to expound what you speak.


Phil. Yes that we are.


Theo. So it should seem by the readiness of your answer.

What then is the present and active application, which you strive for, or
which way is it made? By word of mouth, or intention of heart? The Priest when
he says, this is my body, cannot jointly with those words utter any other
words of his own to apply them. Intention of heart cannot alter the sense of
the speech, but only direct before God the purpose of the speaker. And unless
the meaning of the Priest be to recite the words of Christ by way of
repetition, I see not how you can excuse either the Priests heart or mouth from
outrageous and monstrous impiety.


Phil. We have a present and active application of the words, which you have
not.


Theo. What is it?


Phil. The Priest intends to do as Christ did, and therefore utters the
words distinctly and advisedly over the elements that are in his hands and
under his eyes, which you do not.


Theo. What you list to do is no care of ours; if you can show us any thing in
Christ's institution, which we have not, we will give you the hearing: otherwise
to ad your ceremonies to his commandments, we mind it not. We know you cross
the creatures at benedixit, and hold your noses ^o near the bread when you
say, hoc est corpus meum, that the breath of your mouths even warmeth the
host, but our belief is, that his mighty word, not your vnpausing speech or
intentive looks performs the Sacrament. And therefore your blowing Christ's
words upon the bread is rather a magical incantation, than any effectual
application of them to the elements; and if you hold that his word is too weak
to endue the visible sign with invisible grace, except it be backed by your
blowing and crossing, we say you be proud disciples, no right appliers of his
heavenly word and power.


Phil. We do not help his words as if they were of themselves weak: but we
apply them to the elements in this present and active manner, which you do not:
for when you recite the words, a man cannot tell whether you speak them, to
try your memories, or to consecrate the mysteries, you be so far from using
any gestures or action that should import application.


Theop. The purpose of our hearts well known unto God, and made open unto men
when we call them to the Lords table; the prayers which we make before we come
to the words of Christ, directly and plainly tending to that end; the placing
of the bread and the cup in our and their sight; the mentioning of Christ's
institution and commandment that we should follow his example, and continue
that remembrance of him; the duetifull and reverent rehearsing the words which
he spoke, as the holy Ghost did pen them; this demonstration and supplication
that we receiving THESE THY creatures of bread and wine according to thy Son
our Savior Jesus Christ's institution in remembrance of his death and passion
may be partakers of his most blessed body and blood, used immediately before we
repeat the words of Christ; the breaking and giving of the bread, and so
likewise the cup, immediately after they be sanctified, and offering them to
each communicant in remembrance of Christ's body that was broken, and blood
that was shed, to purchase the remission of their sins, thereby to preserve
them body and soul to everlasting life; If this be not application, we would
gladly know what it is.
the prayers I say precedent, the preparation evident, the direction adherent,
the distribution consequent are signs enough to him that has but ears or
eyes, that we presently, purposely, publicly execute Christ's institution; and
other hooking and haling of Christ's words to the elements by crossing,
crouching, gaping and blowing on them, as your manner is, we acknowledge none
to be required or expressed in the Lords Supper.


Philand. It is no Sacrament, but (as Saint Augustine says) when the words
come, that is to say, actiuely and presently be applied to the elements.


Theoph. We know that to be most true which S. Augustine says, The Rhemish
Testament page 452. nu. 24. [this is. Tract. 80. in Johan.
Accedit verbum ad elementum, and fit Sacramentum, when the word comes to the
element, the Sacrament is perfect: but what have your terms (actiuely and
presently) to do with Saint Austens speech? yea what place could you choose
more repugnant to your fancies than this which you bring? The element without
the word, is a weak and corruptible creature: put the word to it, and then it
becomes a Sacrament.


Philand. You mark not the force of the verb Accedit: The word comes to the
element when it is seriously pronounced, and religiously believed.
which signifies the word must come so near, that it must even touch the
element.


Theoph. Can you tell us how words may touch elements?


Philand. What else? By active and present application.


Theoph. This is your old song, which we would have you turn to some plainer
note. What kind of application mean you? with the breath of your mouths,
motion of your hands, or cogitation of your hearts? You may blow upon the
bread and wine, but there is some difference between the sound of your voice,
Application is made with heart and not with breath or fingers.
and the breath of your loongs, if you look a little but to Aristotle's
Predicamentes, and therefore your breath may touch the elements, your words
can not. Much less can your fingers apply your speech either actiuely or
presently to the elements: you must run to the inward intention of the mind,
and that may direct your purpose in speaking, as it does ours, but not
actiuely apply your speech to come nearer the elements in your mass than in
our communion. And so the coming of the word to the element in Saint Austen,
to perfect a Sacrament, helps you to prove your real and manual
application of Christ's words in your Mass as much as chaulke does to make
cheese, when curds are wanting.

Yea rather if you read on but four lines, you shall find your follies flatly
refuted by Saint Augustine, and a clear resolution for us that not uttering
but believing the words of Christ gives force to the Sacraments. In the water
(of Baptism) says he, August. in Johan. tracta. 80.
it is the word that cleanses. Take away the word, and what is water but water?
Then comes that which you cite, Accedit verbum ad elementum, and fit
Sacramentum. Put the word to the element and then is it a Sacrament. Vnde ista
tanta virtus aquae vt corpus tangat and cor abluat, nisi faciente verbo? non
quia dicitur, sed quia creditur. Nam and in ipso verbo aliud est sonus
transiens, aliud virtus manens: The rehearsing of the word is necessary to
ground our faith on his promise, but faith makes application.

This negative overthrows the Jesuits active application.


Whence has the water this virtue to touch the body, and wash the soul, but
by the power of the word? not in that it is spoken, but in that it is believed:
for in the word it self the sound passing is one thing, (and that little
worth) the virtue remaining is another thing. If the word of Christ do not
work in that it is spoken, much less in that it is actiuely or exquisitely
spoken with square conueiance and nimble gestures, the lack of which is the
greatest fault you can find with our Sacraments.


Philand. This is no small fault, but yet not the greatest.


Theoph. You should have laid forth in writing what circumstances are required
to your active application of Christ's words, and then you might have been
answered with more perspicuitie. Whereas now your obiecting unto us the breach
of Christ's institution in certain metaphysicall and supermysticall terms,
The Jesuits knowing that we would charge them with the breach of Christ's
institution which they cannot answer, thought best to charge us with the
like, though the points be neither material nor proved by them to have been
used by Christ. The Rhemish Test. fol. 452. nu. 23. [bread.
neither opened by your selves, nor understood of others, is but a Jesuitical
devise to make a brable about words, and to get the simple in the mean time to
mistrust somewhat in our doctrine and doings, though they nor you see no just
cause to mislike: But to be short with you, if the repelling of your active and
slipper gestures and hauiours that we might embrace the will and commandment
of the high and mighty God, be a fault, we have committed many foul faults in
this and all other parts of our profession; otherwise in pride and presumption
you mingle your fancies with the precepts of Christ: and when we reject the
one, as we lawfully may, you charge us with contempt of the other, which we
exactly follow, and this you utter in such dark and doubtful speech, that it
is harder for us to understand you than refute you.


Philand. Do we not speak plain enough, when we say you imitate not Christ
neither in unleavened bread, nor in mingling water with wine: as he did?


Theoph. You deal now plainly, if you dealt also truly, but that you do not.
In what bread Christ ministered the Sacrament, may perchance be coniectured; but
no such thing is expressed in the Gospel, much less prescribed for us to
follow. Since the Scripture says, he took bread, and makes no distinction
what bread he took, nor limiteth what bread we should take, we be left at
liberty, so we take bread, to take either leauened or unleavened, as occasion
serves us. This conclusion Gregory the first confesses to be most true.
Greg. in Regist.
Tam azimum quam fermentatum dum sumimus, vnum corpus Domini saluatoris
efficimur: Whether it be leauened or unleavened bread that we take, we are made
one body of (our) Lord and Savior. The whole Church of Rome not yet an. 150.
years ago confessed as much in the council of Florence. Council. Florent.
sess. vltima in literis vnionis.
Their words are: Item in azimo sieve ferme^tato pane triticeo corpus Christi
veraciter confici, Sacerdotesque in altero ipsum Domini corpus conficere
debere, vnumquemque scilicet iuxta suae ecclesiae sieve Occidentalis, sieve
Orientalis consuetudinem. We define the body of Christ to be truly consecrated
in wheaten bread, whether it be unleavened or leauened, and that the Priests
are bound to consecrate the Lords body in either of the twain, every man
according to the custom of his Church, be it West or East.


Phil. That custom you break. For where the west Church did always
consecrate in unleavened bread, and the East Church in leauened, you renounce
the order of the west Church in which you live, and to spite the supreme Pastor
of the west parts, We profess our selves to be at liberty for using either,
and the rather because he would tie us of his authority to the one. The
Rhemish Test. fol. 452. nu. 23. [bread.
yea rather of the whole world, you follow the manner of that Church, which is
many thousand miles distant from you.


Theoph. We are reasoning of Christ's institution, not of customs or Churches:
and your holy Father himself affirms that to be no breach of Christ's
ordinance, which you have noted against us in your Rhemish observations as a
transgression of the first and original institution of the Lords supper. And
so whiles you egarly and rashly pursue us, to trippe us in somewhat, your own
Churches and Councels condemn you for wranglers.


Phil. In the other part of the Sacrament you contemn Christ and his Church
much more impudently and damnably. For Christ and all the Apostles and all
Catholic churches in the world have ever mixed their wine with water, for
great mystery and signification, specially for that water gushed together with
blood out of our Lords side. This our Lord did (says S. Cyprian epist. 63. ad
Cecilium, nu. 4.7.) and none rightly offers, that follows not him therein.
Thus Irenaeus (lib. 5. cap. 1.) Iustine (Apol. 2. in fine) and all the fathers
testify the Primative church did, and in this sort it is done in all the
Masses of the Greeks, S. James, S. Basils, S. Chrysostomes: and yet (you)
pretending to reduce all to Christ, will not do as he did, and all the Apostles
and churches that ever were.


Theo. Their faces must be well steeled that are harder than yours; the whore
of Babylon that hatched both your frierly profession and religion, has taught
you long since to leave off blushing, and fall to bragging.

We mingle not water with the wine which we consecrate: this is impudently and
damnably done say you. You need more water with your wine, your toongs burn
so hot with your impudent lies and damnable lies, that an whole stream will
skant cool them.


Phi. Christ and all the apostles, and all catholic churches in the world have
ever mixed their wine with water: you will not of very frowardnes: do you not
deserve to have hoate words?


Theop. The delaying of the wine with water in the Lords cup began first for
sobriety, not for any mystery.
We forbid no man to temper his wine with water, if he find either himself
annoied with the use of mere wine, or the wine of it self to be headie and
strong: yea we rather wish all men, if the wine provided for the Lords table be
hot and fuming, to delay it, that it may be mild and temperate, least that
which is taken to sanctify the soul, happen to distemper and hurt the body:
and we greatly commend the wisdom of Christ's Church in former ages, where
the wines were fiery, and communions daily (as in the noblest and chiefest
parts of christendom in those days) for delaying her wine with water, It
cannot be proved that either Christ or his Apostles used water with their
wine, by any good record.
that the very element might serve for sobriety, as well as ye word for
increasing of sanctity: But ye Christ, or his Apostles used water with the wine
which they hallowed, or commanded others to mingle both wine and water in this
mystery, or that the Church of Christ ever taught it to be a necessary part of
this Sacrament, that we deny: That if you prove, we will acknowledge and amend
our error, which as yet we take to be none, by reason we find it a thing
lawful, but not needful to be done, and esteem it in them as a matter
rather of temperance, than of conscience.


Phil. They did it for great mystery and signification, as Cyprian in an whole
epistle teaches you: and they took their pattern from Christ himself, of
whom Cyprian says. Cypr. epist. 63. ad Caecil.
This our Lord did, and none offers rightly that follows not him therein.


Theop. You pervert Cyprian, as you do all things else that come through your
hands. Cyprian does not allege Christ's institution for water, but for wine.
Cyprian intends not in that epistle to prove that Christ had water in the
cup, when he delivered the same to his disciples, but he refuteth the Aquarij,
that ministered the communion in water alone; and against them he proves that
Christ had wine and not water for the Sacrament of his blood: and then
infers, to that effect which you allege, This the Lord did (that is he
took wine to resemble his blood) and none offers rightly that follows not
him therein.


Phil. Nay Cyprian has plain words, that Christ mingled wine and water both
together. His words are, At enim non mane sed post coenam mixtum calicem
obtulit Dominus. Cypr. epist. 63. ad Caecil. Ibidem.
Our Lord offered (his) chalice mingled (with water and wine) not in the
morning but after supper. And again, Qua in part inuenimus calicem mixtum
fuisse, quem Dominus obtulit. By which part (of Christ's speech) we find the
chalice that our Lord offered, was mingled (with wine and water.)


Theop. Cyprian proves that the Lords cup must be mixed with wine.
We doubt not that Cyprian calls the cup, which Christ offered, mixtus calix,
but his meaning, we say, was to express that Christ had wine, in the cup which
he gave, and therefore if any man minister the Lords cup not mingled with wine,
he follows not the Lords steps.


Phil. Cyprian says there must be water as well as wine.


Theo. But when he alleges Christ's example that the cup must be mingled, he
means the mixture of wine and not of water. And so he expounds himself very
often in that epistle. Cypr. li. 2. epi. 3. ^d Caecil.
Calix, qui inebriat, vtique vino mixtus est: the cup which makes drunk no
doubt is mixed with wine. And again, Ibidem.
A Domino admoniti and instructi sumus, vt calicem Dominicum vino mixtum,
secundum quod Dominus obtulit, offeramus. We be taught and instructed by the
Lord that we should offer the Lords cup mingled with wine according as the Lord
did offer it. Cyprian urges Christ's example for wine: which he calls a
mixture by reason it was both lawful and then used to temper it with water.
So that the commistion which Cyprian requires by virtue of Christ's
institution, is not of water which at that present was not in question, but of
wine, which by the old Testament he proves, was foretold of Christ, that he
should offer; and by the new he shows that he did offer in the cup which he
delivered to the twelve Apostles. You therefore abuse Cyprians words, when you
bring them to prove that Christ had water as well as wine, and that if we leave
out either, we follow not Christ's example, for he namely urges Christ's action
for the use of wine, and that if we omit, we violate the Lords institution.


Philan. Cyprians reason will declare that he speaks of both; and his words
to that end are so manifest that we marvel you will stand in it. Thus he says,
Epist. 63. ad Caecil.
In sanstificando calice Domini offerri aqua sola non potest, quomodo nec vinum
solum potest. Nam si vinum tantum quis offerat, sanguis Christi incipit esse
sine nobis: si vero aqua sit sola, plebs incipit esse sine Christo. In
sanctifying our Lords chalice, water alone may not be offered, as also not
wine alone. For if a man offer wine alone, the blood of Christ begins to
be there without us. And if water alone, (be offered) the people begin to
be (in the cup) without Christ. And therefore he resolves, Ibidem.
Quando in calice vino aqua miscetur, Christo populus adunatur. When water is
mixed in the chalice with wine, then the people is united unto Christ.


Theo. Sir we never denied that Cyprian spoke of water in one part of the
Sacrament, and to continue the use thereof alluded to the mystical
interpretation of water, which Saint John makes in his Revelation, when he
says, Revel. 17.
The waters, which thou saw where the whore (of Babylon) sits, are
peoples, multitudes, Nations and tongues; but it is one thing to allege
Christ's institution for the necessity of having water in the sacred cup, which
Cyprian did not, and an other thing to play with figures and allegories as
Cyprian does, Cyprian allows water in the Lords cup, and shows what it may
signify: but he does not derive it from Christ's example.
when he shows what water may signify. That Christ mixed water with wine at
his last Supper, no Scripture reports, and the Gospel keeping silence, no
man can justly prove it: And therefore Cyprian neither did, nor could avouch
any such thing: but that water was and might be used in the Church of GOD, and
in Saint John's vision of the whore of Babylon was parabolically taken for
nations and countries, this we can grant both to you and to Cyprian without
any prejudice.

And yet I must let you understand that neither this kind of proving by
parables is alwais sound, nor this collection, yt without water ye people is
not figured in the Lords cup, is any needful point of christian religion. For
Cyprian himself elsewhere shows that wine alone in the Lords cup, though no
water be added, resembles the people united to Christ far better than water,
and that resemblance is alleged and subscribed unto by S. Augustine, the other
is not. Cypr. lib. 1. epist. 6. ad Magnum.
When the Lord called his body, bread, that is made of the kneading together of
many corns, he declares the union of our people whose burden he bare. And when
he called his blood, wine, which is pressed out of many kernels and clusters of
grapes, and gathered into one liquor, he signifies also our flock coupled
with the permixtion of a multitude conioined. And this way he says, Ibidem.
the Lords sacrifices declare the unity of Christians knit together with firm
and inseparable charity: whose words S. Austen repeateth and commends Aug.
de Baptis. lib. 7. ca. 50.
writing against the Donatists. And uses the very same in a Sermon of his own
concerning this matter. Ex sermo. ad Infantes. Citatur a Beda in 1. Cor. 10.
Ibidem.
As to make the visible kind of bread, many corns are kneaded into one (lump
of dough) so also of the wine, brethren call to your memories how it is made
one. Many grapes hang in the cluster, but their juice runs into one liquor.
Whereupon he concludes that the Lord has consecrated at his table the mystery
of our peace and unity.

The wine signifies the people better than water does.

The Jesuits themselves receive not the saying of Cyprian.


This similitude is grounded on the nature of the elements, and signification of
the Sacraments, the other is not: and that the faithful be not joined to
Christ their head in this mystery, but by mingling water with wine, this
doctrine is neither safe, nor true, by the confession of either side, yours and
ours: especially yours, for you exclude the people not only from the water, but
also from the wine, and yet by the bread alone you suppose them to be coupled
and united to Christ their head: and we for our side confess, that both parts
alike do knit us unto Christ, as well the bread as the cup, and that not the
mixing or tempering of either element, but the due receiving of both does
incorporate us into Christ.


Phil. Then you refuse this saying of Cyprians as untrue.


Theo. We can give Cyprian leave to dally with allegories, and to allude to the
mingling of water and wine then used in the Church: but we can not give you
leave to derive it from Christ's institution, and to make it an essential part
of the Sacrament. And yet you cross Cyprians authority more than we do. For
where the mixing of water with wine is required by Cyprian, that the people and
not the Priests only, might be joined with Christ in that part of the
mystery, you retain the action, and frustrate the signification, by taking
both wine and water from the people of God: and thereby show that your mixture
is wholly superfluous as not directed to that end, which Cyprian speaks of,
but rather to the contrary.

Can the Jesuits tell how the people are in the cup after consecration?
And of all others you may least endure Cyprians comparison, for he says, that
after consecration, as Christ is in the wine, so the people is in the water:
and if you transubstantiate the water into the people, as you do the wine into
Christ, and bring them within the compass of your chalice, you had need of a
chalice as wide as the church, or else you shall shrewdly throng them together.
Your doctrine therefore rejects the meaning and saying of Cyprian, more than
ours; and with more pride: we having the gospel for our discharge when we say
that Christ commanded no mixture in his last Supper: Their own schools are
against them.
and your own Schools with one consent to affirm with us, that water is no
necessary part of this Sacrament.

The Gospel in plain speech reports of our Savior, that he drank the
fruit of the vine. His own words are, Mat. 26.
I say unto you I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine:
Chrysostom. in Mat. homil. 83.
which surely, says Chrysostom, yields wine and not water. Your own
Schools conclude flatly with us against you. Thom. part. 3. quaest. 74.
articl. 7.

Scotus in 4. senten. distinct. 11. quaest. 6. and Innocen. de officio missae
part. 3. ca. 4. affirm the same.


Non est aqua vino miscenda de necessitate Sacramenti. To mingle water with
wine is no necessary point of (this) Sacrament. Water by the position of your
own Schools is not necessary, then of consequent arbitrary: that is every
church has full liberty to use wine alone, as Christ did, with out danger of
departing or dissenting from the primative church, though they for some
respects delaied their wine with water and the Sacrament is as perfect, and as
consonant to Christ's institution without the mixture of water, as with it.


Phi. That Christ used wine we do not deny, but we avouch that he also mingled
it with water.


Theo. We know you avouch it, but we would see you prove it.


Phi. Cyprian says it.


Theo. Cyprian says it not; he says rather the contrary. Cypr. lib. 2. ep. 3.
Inuenimus vinum fuisse quod sanguinem suum dixit. We find it was wine, Ibidem.
which (the Lord) called his blood. And again: Cum dicat Christus, ego sum
vitis vera, sanguis Christi non aqua est vtique sed vinum. Whereas Christ says,
I am a true vine, surely the blood of Christ is not water but wine. And again
he says, Ibidem.
that Noe typum futurae veritatis ostendens, non aquam sed vinum biberit,
foreshewing a figure of the truth that should follow drank not water, but wine.


Phi. Not water alone, but mixed with wine.


Theo. Then all that Cyprian either pretends or alleges Christ institution
for, is the having of wine, and not of water: and though he use the words
mixtus and miscere very often, yet his meaning is to prove by scripture the
adding of wine, not of water to the Lords cup.


Phi. He names both wine and water as I have showed you.


Theo. And as I have answered you, both were lawful, and then used in the
church: but Christ's institution is urged by him for wine and not for water: and
though he call the cup (mixtus) mingled, because there might be and were then
both in use, yet the scriptures which he cites concerning this Sacrament, and
the figures which he brings make clearly for wine, Cyprians proofs are all
for wine.
and not for water: And therefore that Christ mingled water at his last Supper,
or commanded us so to do, can not be proved by Cyprian, nor any other learned
and ancient father: but that the church of Christ tempered her wine with water
(though not in all places, nor at all times as your boasting vain serves you
to affirm) that we grant may be proved by Cyprian and others, and was ever
confessed by us: mary that is not our question. You charge us with the breaches
of Christ's institution, in which and in every part of which, The question is
not whether water was then and now may be used, but whether it were a part of
Christ's ordinance.
there is an absolute necessity, that you should prove if you could tell which
way to do it, but your lofty words and weak proofs have no coherence; you
speak it in state, as if it were more than Gospel, and when you come to bring
forth your proofs, you wrest a poor place of Cyprians, and so take your
leaves.


Phil. We bring you S. James Mass, which in express terms affirms that
Christ after Supper taking the cup and mingling it with wine and water,
sanctified it, blessed it, and gave it to his Disciples.


Theop. Of James Mass, Iacobi Missa.
I have spoken before: In such rotten records, neither received nor regarded in
the Church of Christ, The Church of Rome proves the most part of her religion
by such forgeries.
till error and ignorance grew so great, that the Pastors could not or would
not discern fables from truths, and forgeries from sincerities, lies the
sum of your late Rhemish religion; but take back your Monkish corruptions,
and let us have likely testimonies for that you say, or none; you may allege
S. James Gospel which is yet extant, with as good credit, as S. James Mass:
and so the Gospels of Nicodemus, Thomas, Did. 15. Sancta Romana.
Andrew, Barnabas, and Bartholomew, or if those like you not, the Acts of
Peter, Philip and Andrew, and the Revelations of Paul, Steven, and Thomas;
Many things forged in the Apostles names, and yet rejected by the church of
Christ.
for these be of the very same mint and stamp, that James Mass, and the
Apostles canons and constitutions are; but know you Sir, that as Heretics and
other idle persons forged these things in their names, so the Church of Christ
ever rejected them as false and heretical, and suffered no christians to
ground their actions or doctrines on such corruptions.


Phil. Saint Basils Mass confirms the same. The words are: Likewise taking
the cup of the fruit of the grape, Basilij Missa.
and mingling it, and giving thanks, and blessing, These three Masses be all of
one sort.
and sanctifieng it, he gave it to his holy Disciples.


Theoph. A pigge of the same sow. They that would offer to broach their fancies
in the Apostles names, would never stick at the Fathers works. It is easy to
put Ambrose, Austens, Basils and Chrysostoms names to any thing; and yet the
word which is used in Basils Liturgy does not convince the mingling of water
with wine, and Chrysostoms Liturgy does apparently show that water was mingled
with wine for the people long after consecration, and yet before distribution,
which argues my saying to be most true, that they delaied their wine for
sobriety, they did not mix it for any mystery.


Phil. Saint Basil, I am sure, says Miscens: Christ mingling (the wine) gave
it to his disciples.


Theo. The Greek word for miscens does not ever import the mixture of water.
The Greek words for miscens and mixtus, if they come from (...), do not always
signify ye mingling of water with wine, but generally the tempering or pouring
out of wine for him that shall drink, though none other kind of liquour be
added to it. Erasmus gives that observation upon the word (...); and Saint
John so uses it when he says, Apocal. 14.
He shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, (...), which is mixed (or
poured) without mingling into the cup of his wrath: where (...) being without
mixture, is said to be (...), that is, mingled or rather infused into the cup
of Gods wrath. Upon which speech Erasmus notes. Graecis (...) dicitur quod
infunditur in calicem bibituro, etiamsi non aqua diluatur aut alio potus
genere. The Grecians call that (...) when (any thing) is powered into a cup for
him that shall drink, Eras. annotat. in 14. Apoc.
though it be not delaied with water, or any other kind of liquour. In this
sense many of the Fathers that wrate in Greek may use (...), and yet no
mingling with water can be inferred upon those words, as your interpreters over
greedily imagine.


Phil. You pare the words of Saint Basils Liturgy, but Saint James Mass is so
manifest for Christ's mingling water with wine, that you are feign to deny the
work.


Theo. If the Church of Christ did receive it, I will not deny it: but if they
knew no such monument, why should you be suffered now to sort us out what
forgeries you list for Apostolic labors?


Phil. The sixth general council under Justinian, received the Council. in
Trull. sub Iusti. cap. 32.

James his Mass never received nor used in the Church as his.


Mass of S. James and S. Basil as authentike: and proved by their Council. in
Trull. sub Iusti. cap. 32.

James his Mass never received nor used in the Church as his.


authorities against the Armenians using wine alone in the mysteries, that
Christ had both water and wine in his sacrifice.


Theo. That council, which you cite, was neither the sixth general, nor any
general council at all. It was celebrated 700. and odd years after Christ,
by which time it may be, James his Liturgy was gotten into some credit
amongst them: and yet they allege neither of them for Christ's institution,
but only that delivering the Church service in writing (...), Ibidem. cap. 32.
they taught that order to perfect the sacred cup with wine and water in the
divine ministration.


Philand. Call you the credit of that council also in question?


Theo. I might well do it, Laurent. Surius to^ Council. 2. admonitio ad lectorem
de Canonibus qui sixtae Synod. dicuntur.

Ibidem.


if I would but follow the judgment either of your nearest friends, or of
those that lived next to the time when this council was called. Surius the
great Soultan of your side says, that some of those are thought to be
Supposititij vel Graecorum temeritate deprauati: either forged, or depraved by
the rashness of the Grecians. And Theophanes who wrate not long after the
keeping of the council, says that those are falsely said to be the canons of
the sixth council, and gives this hard judgment of them: vt enim in caeteris
omnibus falsitatis arguuntur, This council is provincial and late, and
vehemently suspected by themselves.
ita in hac re quoque mentiuntur: as in all other things they be taken tardie
with falsehood, so in this also they make a lie: But for our parts we see no
reason to deal so rigorousely with them. They were but a provincial council,
if they were any council at all: for we have nothing left but the canons and
those contradicted by name. Next the makers lived more than 700. years after
Christ, and might soon be deceived by the titles and shows of these
Liturgies: Lastly, what corruptions have crept since either into the canons or
into the Liturgies we know not, and in those cases which the Gospel exactly
reports as it does the Lords Supper, we believe no man against or without
the Gospel.

And that in Chrysostoms Liturgy water was mingled long after consecration for
the people to drink, Chrysostoms Liturgy mingleth water with wine after
consecration for the people to communicate.

Chrysostom. Missa.


the book it self will show you: where the words of Christ's institution
being repeated three leaves before, when the time for the Priests and people to
communicate approached, it is said, Accipiunt Diaconi sacros calices
praestolantes cum feruente aqua venientem Subdiaconum. Tunc infundit aquam
calidam quantum sufficit. Deinde sumit corpus Dominicum. The Deacons take the
sacred cups or chalices, expecting the Deacon that brings water (that has)
boiled. Then he powers in (to the chalices) warm water so much as suffices,
Sodde water poured into the wine after consecration, could be no mystery. The
translation which their own men have set forth, has the words which I cite.
and after receives the Lords body. Now Sir with all your cunning tell us for
what signification and mystery, water that had sodde, was powered into the
chalice after consecration, if not to temper and delay the headiness of the
wine before the priest or people did drink of it: and if your brains be not
mingled with too much melancholy, you will perceive, that could be no part of
Christ's institution.


Phi. We find no such thing in Chrysostoms Mass.


Theo. It were marvel that I should find it, and not you.


Phil. Read his Liturgy translated by Erasmus, and if you find it I will give
you this hand.


Theo. Your hand will do me no good: I had rather you should confess a truth
than hazard a joint. Read Chrysostoms Liturgy which Leo Thuscus translated
into the Latin tongue, and Claudius de Saints, a man of your Religion has set
forth of Plantines Press 1560. and if you find not the words, as I repeat
them, return the^ to me for masterlesse creatures, which I would be loath you
should.


Phil. But mention is made in the very beginning of the same Liturgy, that the
priest mixed water with wine before consecration.


Theo. It may be the priest did temper that which himself should drink,
before consecration. But after consecration, before the rest of the Clergy or
the people did communicate, they delaied it with water in such sort as I tell
you: what the cause was, judge you.


Phil. Why this was done, I can not so well say, but this I know, that all
catholic churches in the world have ever mixed their wine with water.


Theo. No marvel to see the Church of Christ mix her wine with water at her
daily communions when the people were fasting, since the soberer sort of
heathens in those countries durst not drink those strong wines without some
delaie. Polyd. de inuentoribus re^um lib. 5. ca. 9.
Had they so done, yet so long as they did it for sobriety, not for necessity,
it nothing concerns Christ's institution, which we labor to restore, nor
binds any man as a matter of religion or conscience: but now your flanting
humor swells above truth and measure when you say all Churches in the world
have ever observed the same.


Phil. Name one age or place that has not done it.


Theo. That is the way indeed to cast the burden on other men's shoulders, which
your selves should bear: and yet we can soon choke you with an instance, and
that by the very confession of your own fellows.

The seventh Bish* of Rome from Peter first mingled water with wine at the
Lords table.
Alexander septimus a Petro Pontifex conse^raturus primus aquam vino miscuit,
instituitque vt ex azimo, non fermentato vt antea consueuit fieret pane.
Alexander the seventh from Peter, was the first, says Polydore, that mingled
water with wine at consecration, and ordained that the oblation should be of
unleavened bread, and not of leauened, as till that time was used. Lo Sir the
whole church of Christ in all ye Apostles times used wine alone, and an hundred
years after Christ began the first admixtion of water with wine, and use of
unleavened bread in the Lords supper; which you with forgerie under James name
would father on Christ himself; though he in the Gospel with his own mouth
deny it.

For countries we can give you the like. The Armenians for 1145. years after
Christ died leauened bread, and mingled no water with their wine at the Lords
^akle. See the report of Otho Frisingensis in whose time they began to hearken
to the church of Rome. Their Metropolitan had under him The Armenians for a
1000. years and upward mixed no water with their wine.
a thousand Bishops: and in some things agreed, in some things dissented from
the Greek church. Where amongst other things, he says of the whole country
of Armen^a: Otho. ^risingens. lib. 7. cap 32.
Ponunt fermentatum panem sicut illi: aquam autem, vino non miscent, sicut nos
and illi. They use leauened bread (in the Lords supper) as the Grecians do:
mary they mingle no water with their wine, as both we and the Grecians do.

These be your famous objections which you exaggerate, as if they were some
mighty breaches of Christ ordinance, wherein to let pass the hold which we
have in the Gospel, Their objections be so far from truth that their own
schoole^ go clear with us against them.
being thereby cleared from your pelting quarelles in the eyes of all men that
ever read the words of Christ, if your own Schools in either or any of
these things which you oppose, go not clear with us, that they be no parts
of Christ's institution, we will yield to the fault and correct that
oversight. If they do, then let your friends conceive what truth there is in
your m^uthes, and what credit is to be given to your wrangling observations
sent us lately from Rhemes, wherein without all shame and care, you refute, not
us, but your selves and your own conclusions, that you might say somewhat
against us, before the simple and unlearned, were it otherwise never so false
or foolish, and even contrary to your own Principles.

But you did well to begin first: you saw how plainly you were to be
taken tardie with many wilful and ine^cusable breaches of Christ's
institution, and therefore you thought it safest to make the salie first on us,
The Jesuits Testament is as full of poiurie as it is of heresy.
that whiles we were occupied in defending our own, we should desist from
impugning your Mass, which is now nothing else but an heap of sinful
devises and abuses invented by Satan, and broached by Antichrist, to deface and
frustrate the Lords supper.


Phi. Who can abide your blasphemies against the blessed Mass?


Theo. Call you that bl^ssed, where besides your These be 5. as deep wounds in
the word of Christ as ever the Jews made in his flesh.
fruitless prayers and These be 5. as deep wounds in the word of Christ as
ever the Jews made in his flesh.
superstitious ceremonies: your prin^^e and half comm^nion subuerte^h ^he
Lords inst^tution, your These be 5. as deep wounds in the word of Christ as
ever the Jews made in his flesh.
sacrifice derogateth from his death and bloodshedding your These be 5. as
deep wounds in the word of Christ as ever the Jews made in his flesh.
adoration of bread and wine conuinceth you of heinous and open Idolatry?


Phi. Th^se words declare your fury.


Theo. Those deeds show forth your pie^^e.


Phi. You can not prove so much as one of these things which you object.


Theo. If we move not every one of them; we will acquit you from them all


Phi. That shall you never do.


Theo. So must you say though it be never so plain: but to the point.

The Priests sole receiving. Mat. 26. Mark. 14. Luke 22. 1. Cor. 11.

As needful to give as to break the bread.


Where learned you, tha^ ^he Priest might celebrate the Lords Supper openly in
the church, wit^^^^ any man to communicate with him, the people standing by,
and gasing on him? The Gospel is against you: for Christ took bread, and when
he had given thanks he brake it, and gave it to the Disciples: you break
the bread in your private Mass for fashions sake, but to whom do you give it?
Giving is a part of the Lords supper, as well as breaking. If it be needful
to break the bread, because Christ did so: we conclude it as needful to give
the bread, because he did both: and the bread is August. epist. 59.
broken, as Augustine affirms, to be divided: In vain then is it broken if
it be not given.

This the words that next ensue, confirm. Accipite, edite, take ye, eat ye.
The words be plural: ergo they be neither truly repeated, nor duly
followed, These words be spoken in the plural number and of other men's
persons.
except others receive with the Priest. For his person and action is wholly
singular, and so perforce you must either change the words of Christ's
institution, which is no way lawful: or increase the number of communicants,
which euerteth your private Mass. 1. Cor. 10.
We are all partakers of one bread, says Paul, describing thereby the Lords
Supper: and with you no man is partaker besides the Priest. 1. Cor. 11.
When you come together to eat (the Lords supper) tarry one for an other, that
ye come not together unto condemnation, which the Apostle Epist. 118.
spoke of this Sacrament, as you heard out of Augustine. To li^le purpose stay
you for them, which shall eat nothing when they come. Hieron. in 1. Cor. 11.
The Lords supper ought to be common to all, because he gave the Sacraments
equally to all his Disciples, that were present: and your Mass is private to
the Priest alone. Call you this an imitation of the Lords Supper, or a
perfourmance of his will, when you frustrate the very words which he spoke,
and neglect the chiefest thing which himself did at his table? Luk 22. 1. Cor.
11.
Do this, says Christ, in remembrance of me: that is neither omit, nor
alter you this institution, but in all points do that, which I did before
you: which you do not, and therefore as yet we see not how you can excuse your
selves from a plain contempt of Christ and his ordinance.


Phi. Is this all you can say?


Theo. This is more than you yet have answered, or, as I think, can for all
your crakes.


Phi. It is answered with a word.


The. Such a word it may be, that it will work miracles; but in the mean time
how keep you Christ's institution?


Phi. The Rhemish Test. sol. 451. nu. 23. [in the night.

Christ's actions and words are necessary, though the circumstances be not.


All the circumstances of time, person and place, which in Christ's action are
noted, need not to be mitated. As that the Sacrament should be ministered at
night, to men only, to only twelve, after supper and such like: because (as S.
Cyprian epist. 63. nu. 7. and S. Aug. epist. 118. nu. 6, note) there were
causes of those accidents in Christ, that are not now to be alleged for
us.


Theo. That which you say is true, but it serves not your turn. The
circumstances of time, as whether at night or in the morning: of place, as
whether in church or in chamber: of person, as whether men or women: twelve, or
any other number: these things we grant be wholly in different. The reason is.
The Lord neither in his speech, nor in his actions which he commanded us to
imitate, did comprise any of these particulars. Matthew. 26.
He took bread, he gave thanks, he brake it, and eat it, saying, this is my
body. The cup likewise he took, and when he had given thanks he gave it them,
drink ye all of this, this is my blood of the new Testament. Luke 22.
Do this in remembrance of me. These things be essential parts of the Lords
supper commanded by him to be followed of us. These if you neglect, you
neither obey his precept, nor celebrate his supper, but profanely and wickedly
thrust his ordinance out at doors that your own devises may take place.


Phi. His words, The sanctification of the meat is performed by those words,
but the use and end of the supper is directed by the other. The precept that
Christ gave us to follow him preciselie concerns his actions.
this is my body, this is my blood of the new Testament, etc. are essential
parts of this mystery, and so are the elements: for in these two consist the
matter and form of the sacrament.


The. And what are his ac^ions? be not they likewise essential parts of his
supper?


Phi. What actions mean you?


Theo. Giving thanks, breaking, giving, eating, drinking; without which it is not
the Lords supper.


Phi. These be certain accidents which our Savior then used, they be not of the
essence of the sacrament.


Theo. With what words did he command us to continue this memorial of him?


Phi. Do this for a commemoratio^ of me.


Theo. Let it be, in remembrance of me, or for a co^memoration of me, whether
you will, so you take not commemoration for Dirges: which Christ needs not,
since he lives and reigns in the glory of God his ^ather; the Greek is
(...). For the remembrance of me: but the first part of the sentence is (...),
Do ye this.


Phi. It is so, what then?


Theo. He that charged his Apostles and in them all others, to do what he did,
taught them that his actions were essential to his Supper as well as words. He
did not will them to say this, but to do this in remembrance of him.


Phi. Do you not think the repeating and using of his words to be necessary
in the celebration of the Sacrament? The Rhemish Test. fol. 452. nu. 24. [take,
eat. To what end is meat if it be not eaten?



Theo. Yeas, but I add that his actions are as necessary.


Phi. There is difference between the making of a medicine or the substance
and ingredience of it, and the taking of it.


Theo. There is: but when the medicine is never so well made if it be not
ministered to the patient, the making of it is utterly vain.


Phi. Yet the making of it, is not the ministering of it.


Theo. The one is the end of the other, and therefore without the ministering the
making is superfluous. The The. Test. Ibidem. Eating and drinking are not
essential parts of the Sacrament, but of the supper they are.



Phi. Then taking and eating is not the substance, or being, or making of the
sacrament or sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, but it is the use and
application to the receiver, of the things that were made and offered to God
before.


Theo. Neither did I say that eating and drinking were the substantial parts
of the sacrament, but of the Lords institution.


Phi. As though the sacrament were not our Lords institution.


Theo. Christ's institution contains as well the use as the matter or form
that must be used. A supper is not only the meat provided, but also the act of
eating that which is provided; and so the Lords institution or Supper imploieth
the use and action as well as the word and elements.


Phi. The use of it is to be a sacrifice, as well as a sacrament: and in a
sacrifice, offering is rather required than eating.


Theo. That is the way to correct the son of God, who said not, The Jesuits
neglect that ^^ich Christ (...), and busy (...) which he did (...).
take this and offer it, but take this and eat it. Eating which Christ
commanded, you neglect; offering which ^e did not command, you esteem; and
yet you would be followers of Christ.


Phi. Did not Christ* say to his Disciples Do this?


Theo. You know we press you with that saying of his.


Ph^. Do this, that is A^^ that is (...) by the Poet Vi^gil c^m faciam vitula.
offer this.


Theo. So you say, but where says Christ so?


Phi. Doubt you whether this be a sacrifice?


Theo. We talk not what names the Lords supper may be called by, but what
words Christ used.


Phi. H^ s^ide Do this.


Theo. To wit that which he did before, for so the demonstratiue bindet^ the
sense.


Phi. And what if Christ sacrificed himself, as he sat at table?


Theo. (...) must come to that issue, or else your sacrificing is clean
without Christ's commanding.


Phi. Christ himsel^e seems to mention some such thing, when he says, 1.
Cor. 11. Mat. 26.
This is my body, which is (not which shall be) broken for you. And this is my
blood O^ige. in Matt. tract. 35. and Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. ho. 27. read the very
words of Christ in the future tense.
which is shed (not which shall be shed) for many for remission of sins. If
this were not a sacrifice, what was it?


Theo. It was the forete^ling of that which was then at hand presently to ensue.


Phi. Christ used the present and not the future tense.


Theo. And yet the suffering, which he specified by the breaking of his body,
and shedding of his blood was not present, but the next day on the cross. If
you teach that Christ's blood was really shed at the table for rem^ssion of
sins, you must put him twice to death, and make the later death which was on
the cross to be utterly idle. For Hebr. 10.
where remission (of sin) is, there needs no more sacrifice for sin. If the^
remission of sins were obtained by the actual shedding of Christ's blood at his
last supper, his death and cross the next day were superfluous. If forgiveness
were not obtained over night, but that the Lord the next day was to shed his
blood for our sins, then spoke he before hand of that which the next day
should follow: and his speech in the present tense notes nothing but that he
had even then given himself over to death for our sakes, which imm^d^atly
they should beheld.

No act of Christ's therefore at his last supper imports any real sacrifice
that he then made, Christ ordained a Sacrament to be divided, not a sacrifice
to be offered.
but he did institute a Sacrament of thanksgiving, and commanded us by eating
and drinking to be partakers of his body that was wounded and blood that was
shed the next day for the remitting and pardoning of our sins. So that you
must either retain eating and drinking at the Lords table, or else renounce
both the bene^it of his passion, and memorial of his death, with an open
neglect of his last Will and Testament.


Phi. We do retain it, and as you know, by our canons we bind all priests
that consecrate to De consecrat. did. 2. Relatum est. They bind the Priest to
communicate.
communicate in both kinds.


Theo. Let the decrees of men alone, do you bind them to it by the words of
Christ?


Phi. We do, though the punishment be expressed in the canons, and not in the
Scriptures.


Theo. It in punishment enough to be guilty of the body and blood of Christ,
a greater you can not impose, make your canons as severe as you will.


Phil. Yet you see we bind them to communicate.


Theophil. You should break Christ's institution, if you should do otherwise.


Philand. And therefore we do that which I tell you.


Theophil. Then eating and drinking are necessary parts of Christ's
institution.


Philand. Of his action they are parts, but not of the Sacrament.


Theophil. Neither do I say that they are parts of his body and blood, but
of his example and ordinance.


Philand. We grant.


Theo. And the neglecting of those actions which Christ in his person
performed before us, is a breach of his institution as well as the changing or
omitting of his words. The Priest charged to do as Christ did.



Philand. In the Priest it is.


Theo. Of the Priest we speak: for Christ charged him, and not women or
laymen to do as he did.


Phi. Then we agree to your last position, that if the Priest do not observe
Christ's actions as well as Christ's words he transgresses Christ's
institution.


Theoph. Then your Priests are all guilty of violating Christ's institution.


Phi. Do they not eat and drink at the Altar, as he did?


Phi. That Christ himself did eat and drink at the ministration of the
Sacrament, The words of Christ rather bind him to distribute tha^ him self to
communicate.
is not expressed in any part of his institution, though some words that
follow after declare he drank of the same fruit of the vine which the rest
did, but the whole course of his actions and speeches stood in delivering the
mysteries unto others. He took bread, that he might break it: he brake it,
that he might give it: he gave it, that they should eat: and so his words
declare which are both plural and spoken to others, take ye, eat ye, not
singular or to himself. Though therefore your Priest take and eat for his
part, The Priest in every private Mass does make a mock of these words take
ye, eat ye.

The Rhemish Test. fol. 451. nu. 23. [in the night.

The Church must not choose what she will follow but rather obey that which
Christ commanded. The primative Church knew not what Private Mass meant.


yet since Christ brake the bread that it might be divided among others, and
bid them take and eat, it is certain your Priests neither do as Christ did,
nor as he commanded his Apostles to do, nor as the very words of Christ,
which he repeateth, do specify. For Christ said, take ye, eat ye, which in
their private Masses your Priests do not, and for that cause every such
Mass is a manifest contempt of Christ's words and deeds confessed and
rehearsed by your own mouths, at the altar, as parts of his institution.


Phi. The Catholic church only, by Christ's spirit can tell, which things
are imitable, which not, in all his actions.


The. When himself has appointed what actions of his he will have to be
followed; the church is bound to obey, and not licenced to make her choice: But
in this case the church of christ has faithfully done her duty. For she
always observed these actions of Christ her Lord and master, and verified his
words, till Antichrist with pride and power came to take up his seat in the
midst of her, and to proportion all religion to his unsound and deceived
affection.


Phi. Is the catholic church in this point with you?


Theo. Yea and against you mightily. The canons, as you term them,
Apostolical, prohibit your private Mass. Apostol. can. 9.
Whosoever of the faithful enter the church and hear the scriptures read, if
they stay not out prayers and receive the sacred communion: let them as
peruerters of ecclesiastical order be put from the communion. Which words the
Contil. Antio^. ca^on 2.
council of Antioch repeateth and confirms as agreeable to Christian
discipline in their days.

Read the church service which (as you tell us) James, Basil, and Chrysostom
composed, you shall find them public communions not private masses; read what
Dionysius S. Paul's sch^ler (as you bear men in hand) and Justinius the martyr
report of the ^^^^tration of the Lords S^pper in their days. Dionys. ecclesi.
hi^rarch. cap. 3.
This is the general and catholic description and order of the divine
mysteries, says Dionysius, that first the minister himself receives and then
imparteth the same to others. Iusti. Apol. 2.
Toward the end of our prayers, ^aith Justinius, we salute one an other with a
kiss after that bread and a cup of wine delaied with water are brought to him
that has charge over his brethren, which he takes and gives thanks to the
father of all through the son and holy Ghost; They delaied their wine with
water lest mere and strong wine should annoie any of the communica^ts.
his prayer and thanks all the people standing by confirm with answering
Amen: then those which are called with us Deacons give every man that is
present of the bread and wine tempered with water, and carry the same to such
as are absent. This I trow resembles our communion not your private mass, and
this without controversy was the catholic and Apostelike manner of solemnizing
the Lords Supper in the Primative church.

Yea the church of Rome which you would seem so much to reverence withstood
this your profanation of the Lords supper a long time with marvelous zeal. De
cons. did. 2. peracta.
Consecration ended, says Pope Calixtus, let all communicate that will not
stand excommunicated: for so the Apostles determined, and the holy Roman
church observes. The manner of the whole church in Pope Gregory's time 600.
years after Christ was for a Deacon to cry to the people, Greg. Dialog. lib.
2. cap 23.
Si quis non communicet, det locum, he that minds not to communicate let him
avoid. Pope Martine willed him to be De cons. did. 2. Si quis.
cast out of the catholic church, which entered the church of God, and with
held himself from the communion of the Sacrament. Charles the Emperor 800.
years after Christ gave commandment vt ^eg. Franciae, lib. 1. cap. 132.
omnes fideles communicent, and ad Missas perexpectent sine al^a
depraedicatione, that all the faithful should communicate, and look at mass
so to do without other warning. What need we farther proof in a case so
manifest? your own fellows confess no less: Rationaie di^^no officio. lib.
4. cap. 53.
In the primative church, says Durandus, all that were present at the
celebration of the Mass did every day communicate. Their oblation was a great
loaf sufficient for all, which the Grecians are said to continue to this day.
No private Mass in the primative Church by their own confession.
So that both the words of Christ's institution, and the tradition of the
primative church directly refute your private Masses and prove the communion
now used in the church of England to be good and catholic.

The Chry. hom. 27. in 1. Cor.
Lords supper, says Chrysostom, ought to be common. For such things as are
the Lords belong not to this or to that servant, but are common to all. If then
it be the Lords, as in deed it is, thou should not take it as thine own to
thy self, but propose it to all in common, as being the Lords. Thou do not
suffer it to be the Lords, when thou do not suffer it to be common, but
eatest it thy self. Idem hom. in dictum Pauli oport^t haereses esse.
Paul calls it the Lords supper, which is received in common, with one
consent of all assembled together, for until all communicate and be partakers
of that spiritual food, the mysteries once set forth are not taken away, but
the priests standing still stay for all, yea for the poorest of all. So
Theodoret: The Theod. in 1 Cor. 11.
Lords table is equally proposed unto al me^: of that supper all are partakers
alike. And Haymo: Haym. in 1. Cor. 11.
The Sacrament of christ's body is called a supper by reason of the communion,
because it ought to be common to all the faithful and just.

If this doctrine be true, as there can be no question of it, then are your
private Masses far from Christ's institution, and as far from the catholic order
of Christ's church, which suffered no man to be present at the time of the
divine mysteries but such as would and did participate, sending the rest away
that could not be partakers of* the Lords table. The very name of the Mass,
as all ancient writers use it, impugneth their private Mass.
And this the very name of your Mass as I have proved, does show, signifieng
the demising of all such as might not communicate; which if you should do in
your private Masses you should leave an empty church, yea the priests must take
pains to serve and answer himself, since no man besides the priest has any
part of that banquet, which Christ provided for all: and bequeathed unto all to
be the monument of his passion, and pleadge of their salvation.

With like rashness you take from the people when you do admit them once a year
to their rightes (as you call it) the cup which should be to them, The Lords
cup ras^ly taken from the people.

Mat. 26. Luke 22.


the communion of the Lords blood, Drink ye all of this, says our Savior,
and divide it among you. These words you repeat for a show, but you falsify
them in sense. For you suffer no layman to taste of the Lords cup, as if one
part of this mystery were sufficient, the rest superfluous; or you might
dispense with christ's institution at your pleasure.


Phi. Christ spoke that to such as were Priests and not unto the lay people.


The. Does your conscience serve you Philander to play the wanton in so great
and deep mysteries of christian religion? To whom then were these words
spoken, take ye, eat ye? not to the selfsame parties to whom it was said
Drink ye? The cup was delivered at the same time to the same persons with the
bread, ergo both or neither pertain to the people.
If none may drink but priests, because the disciples which drank were
Priests: then by the same logike none should eat but priests, because neither
time, place, nor persons were changed between these two precepts eat ye,
drink ye, but in all respects the cup was delivered at the same time, to the
same persons, when the bread was. So that you must either exclude the people
from both, which I trust you dare not, or admit them to both which is the very
point that we press you with.

Hear what a man of your side thinks as well of this consequent, as of your
half communion. G^r^rd. Lorich. de missa publica ^r^rog^nda.
There be some false catholics that fear not to stop the reformation of the
church what they can. These spare no blasphemies, least that other part of the
Sacrament should be restoared to the lay people. For say they, Christ spoke
drink ye all of this, only to the Apostles: but the words of the Mass be
these, take and eat ye al of this. Here I would know of them whether this were
spoken only to the Apostles: then must laymen abstain likewise from the
element of bread, If your own ^^mpanions (...) tell you (...), take (...) to
your (...) consciences.
which to say, is an heresy, yea a pestilent and detestable blasphemy. It is
therefore conseque^t that both these words (eat ye, drink ye) were spoken to
the whole Church. I will not take this advantage, that your own fellow does
proclaim you for false Catholics, heretics and horrible blasphemers, God
give you grace to see whither you be fallen and whence: This for your lives you
cannot shifte, but these two precepts eat ye, drink ye, by the tenor of
Christ's institution must be referred to the same persons, and so both or
neither pertain to the people.

Surely the words which our Savior used in delivering the cup, are more
general and effectiue than when he gave the bread, Mat. 26.
Drink ye all of this, and Mark. 14.
they all drank of it: Luke 22.
take it, divide it among you. This cup is the new Testament in my blood which
shall be shed for The blood of Christ was shed for the people as well as for
the Priest: the cup therefore belongs to the one as well as to the other.
you. Now the Lord shed not his blood for the Priest only, but also for the
people, neither was the new Testament established in the blood of Christ for
the Priests sake but as well for the redemption of the people. Then as the
fruits and effects of the blood of Christ are common to the people with the
Priest, so should the cup also which is the communion of his blood shed for the
remission of the peoples sins, be divided indifferently between the Priest and
people. Chrysostom. hom. 18. in 2. Cor.
There is, says Chrysostom, where the Priest differs nothing from the
people, as when we must receive the dreadful mysteries. For it is not here,
as it was in the old Law, where the Priest eat one part and the pleople an
other, neither was it lawful for the people to be partaker of those things
which the Priest was, One cup proposed to all both people and Priest.
but now it is not so, but rather one body is proposed to all, and one cup.


Phil. The church then might like that the people should have the cup, as the
church after did mislike it for many and weighty causes, but how prove you
that Christ's precept extends unto the people?


Theo. We can have no better interpreter of Christ's speech than his Apostle,
that was best acquainted with the true meaning of our Savior. 1. Cor. 2.
We have, says he, the mind of Christ: and 1. Cor. 11.
that which I delivered you, I received of the Lord. So that he did not
correct, but only report the Lords ordinance, and in delivering both kinds
to the whole church of Corinth, priest and people without exception the teacher
of the gentiles did neither swerve from the first institution, nor right
intention of Christ his master. 1. Cor. 10.

S. Paul extends Christ's words, drink you al of this, to the whole Church.


The cup of tha^ksgiuing which we bless, is it not the communion of Christ's
blood? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of Christ's body? Ye
can not drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of devils. Ye can not be
partakers of the Lords table and of the table of devils. Can you frame us a
reason out of these words of Saint Paul, to dissuade the Corinthians from
eating and drinking such things as the Gentile there sacrificed to Idols, and
not confess that they drank of the Lords cup? It is not possible. For this is
Saint Paul's argument: You can not drink both the Lords cup and the cup
of devils: the cup of thanks giving which we bless (and you all drink of)
is the communion of the Lords blood, therefore you may not drink of the cup
of devils.

YOU CANNOT DRINK BOTH, The people of Corinth by S. Paul's instruction received
from Christ himself, were partakers of the Lords cup.
infers they did, and should drink one, which was the Lords cup, not the
cup of devils: else Paul should have said, you may drink neither: not the cup
of devils, for they might have no fellowship with devils; neither the Lords
cup, for that is reserved for the Priest by your doctrine: but both, says
Paul, you cannot drink, ergo they must drink one which was not the cup of
devils. Again the cup which they drank not, could to them be no Communion.
For nature teaches us that to be partaker of a cup, is to drink: but the
Lords cup was to them the communion of his blood, ergo they drank of the
Lords cup.

My collection is so clear, that the vulgar translation, which you are tied to
by the Council of Trent, puts these very words in the text, Omnes de vno
pane, and de vno calice participamus, we all are partakers of one bread, AND OF
ONE CVP. In 1. Cor. 10. The latin fathers received those words, we all are
partakers of one cup, into S. paul's text.
Ambrose, In 1. Cor. 10. The latin fathers received those words, we all are
partakers of one cup, into S. paul's text.
Hierom, In 1. Cor. 10. The latin fathers received those words, we all are
partakers of one cup, into S. paul's text.
Bid, In 1. Cor. 10. The latin fathers received those words, we all are
partakers of one cup, into S. paul's text.
Haymo, and others found it so consequent to S. Paul's former words, and
coherent with his maine reason, that they stick not to keep this addition
(and de vno calice) in their very terts, on which they comment. So that out of
question Paul taught the Church of Corinth to distribute the Lords supper to
the Christians in both kinds, and that as he says, he received of the Lord.

And who^ that has any shame or sense left, reading the next Chapter that
follows, where Christ's institution is fully proposed and largely debated
by S. Paul, will or can doubt, but the Lord at his last Supper ordained both
kinds for all the faithful? 1. Cor. 11.

Did S. Paul speak these words to the Priests alone, or to the people also?


As often (says Paul to the whole Congregation) as ye shall eat this bread
and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death till he come. Whosoever shall
eat this bread and drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of
the body and blood of the Lord. Let a man therefore (not speaking of this or
that man, but of every man) examine himself, and so let him eat of this
bread, and drink of this cup. And least you should want a general affirmative
to justify this our exposition, take these words of S. Paul and quiet your
self. 1. Cor. 12.

We all as well the people as the pastors.


By one spirit are we all Baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or
Grecians, bond or free, and WE ALL HAVE DRVNKE into one spirit. Can you look
for directer or plainer words? All Jews and Gentiles, bond and free not
only drank, but by drinking were made partakers of one and the same spirit,
uen as by baptism they were grafted into one body.

Then if Christ himself delivered both kinds at his last Supper with a strait
and general charge for the cup, The Jesuits cannot take the cup from the
people without subuerting these maine places of Scripture and parts of Christ's
institution.
drink ye all of this; and Paul receiving his instructions from Christ his
master, proposed the same to the Lay men of Corinth no less than to the
ministers, excepting none, Jews nor Gentiles, bond nor free, from this
precept, how dare you Philander and your late Conuents restrain the people
from drinking of it? The (Lords) cup is the new covenant, which he has made
with all believers: do none believe but Priests? For the remission of sins;
are lay men no sinners? as a memorial of his death; may the people loose
that remembrance? It is, says Paul, THE COMMUNION OF HIS BLOOD, and the
partaking of his spirit; have the people no right to the blood of Christ, that
was shed for them; or will you claim his spirit as peculiar to Priests,
which is common to all the children of God?


Philand. The Church I warraunt you did ponder and consider these reasons, The
Catholic Church ministered the communion to the people in both kinds.
when she took this order, and finding them insufficient, she decreed with
us that the cup was not necessary for the Lay people.


Theoph. What Church I pray you? The primative and ancient Church of Christ,
where catholicisme should begin? We can assure you no. They ministered in
both kinds to Priest and people, men and women without exception. DIONYSIVS.
Dionys. eccles. hierarch. ca. 3.
The bread that was whole being broken into many parts, and ONE CVP DIVIDED
AMONG ALL, the Bishop in these (twain) perfiteth the holy Sacrifice. The
sacred Communion of one and the same bread AND COMMON CVP, binds
(Christians) to divine concord and likeness of manners, as being nourced up
together. IGNATIUS. Ignat. ad Philadelph^ens.
There is but one flesh of the Lord Jesus, and one blood that was shed for us:
there is also but one bread, that is broken for all; and ONE CVP THAT IS
DIVIDED AMONG ALL. ATHANASIVS. (If those be his expositions which you have set
forth in his name) Athanas. in 1. Cor. 11.
The dreadful cup was delivered (by the Lord) TO ALL MEN ALIKE. CYPRIAN:
Cyprian. lib. 1. epis..2.
How do we prepare (the people) for the cup of martyrdom, if we do not first
admit them in the Church to DRINK THE LORDS CVP BY RIGHT OF COMMUNION?
AUGUSTINE: August. quaest. super Leuiticum, li. 3. cap. 57.
Not only no man is forbidden but rather ALL MEN that seek for life ARE
ENCOVRAGED TO DRINK. And again speaking to the people De conse. did. 2. quia
passus.
simul bibimus, quia simul viuimus, WE DRINK TOGETHER (at the Lords table)
because we live together. CHRYSOSTOM as before. Chrysostom. hom. 18. in 2. Cor.
One body is proposed to al and one cup. GREGORY. De cons. did. 2. quid sit
sanguis.
The blood of Christ is now not powered into the hands of unbelievers, but into
the mouths of the faithful. THEOPHILACT. Theoph. in 1. Cor. 11.
How happens thou drinkest alone, whereas this dreadful cup was delivered to
all men indifferently? HAYMO: Hay. in 1. Cor. cap 10.
The cup is called a communion (by Paul) because all men are partakers of it.
PASCHASIVS: Paschas. de corpo. and sa^gui.

Dom. cap. 43.

Their half communion is so Catholic that the master of their sentences 1200.
^eres after Christ knew it not.


Christ gave the cup, and said, Drink ye all of this, as well the Ministers,
as the rest of the believers.

Infinite are the places which might be brought to make faith, that for a
thousand years in the Church of God, the people were not deprived of the
Lords cup. The master of your sentences who lived very near twelve hundred
after Christ knew not this maiming and paring of Christ's institution which
now reigns in your churches. Sentent. lib. 4. did. 1^.
Therefore is the Sacrament, says he, celebrated in two kinds, that in Christ
the taking of soul and flesh, and in us the redeeming of them both might be
signified. For the flesh of Christ is offered for our flesh, and his soul for
our souls. It is taken under both kinds which profits both parts. If it
should be received in one kind only, that would declare, that it auayled for
the safeguard of one part only, soul or body, not for both jointly. De
cons^^ist. 2. comp. Glos^ sa ibidem.

1300, years after Christ there was no communion in one kind, but in case of
necessity.


The gloze that followed an hundred years after, rests himself on the same
reason with the same words, and shrinketh not from the communion in both
kinds, but in the danger of sickness, or point of necessity. Insirmus vel sanus
in necessitate potest sumere corpus sine vino: a sick man (whom the drinking
of wine might hurt) or an whole man in case of necessity (where he can not
choose) may receive the body without the wine. Then in the Church where
provision might soon be made for all, and no necessity could be pretended,
it was not as yet counted lawefull for the people to receive the Sacrament in
one kind.


Philand. But if the Church after upon good deliberation, As though the Church
could have cause or power to change Christ's ordinance.
saw sufficient cause to change that order, who made you controllers of
Christ's spouse?


Theoph. That unshamefast harlot, which fourteen hundred years after
Christ's ascension would both alter her husbands will, and defraude his
children of that portion, which their Lord and Savior had allotted them, did
prostitute her self and bastardize her offspring as much as lay in her, and is
no way worthy to have the honor of a mother, or name of a spouse, though
she paint her self never so freshly with youthful colors: And the reasons
which moved her so to do, Rationale diuinor. officio. lib. 4. cap. 42.

Two weighty reasons for their communion in one kind.


were as ridiculous, as the fact was impious. Durandus says, Non esset decens,
tantum sanguinem conficere, nec calix capax inueniretur: It would not be
decent to consecrate so much blood (as must serve the people) neither can there
so big a chalice be gotten. Gerson beats his brains to justify that,
which the council of Constance did, in taking the Lords cup wholly from the
people not yet nine score years ago: and when he has all done he comes
in with these toys: Gerson tract* contra haeresin de communione Laicorum sub
viraque specie.

The Catholic considerations for which the the Church of Rome abolished
Christ's institution.


THE length of Laymens beardes, the lothsomnes to drink after others, the
costlynes of so much wine, the difficulties first of getting, then of keeping
wine from sowring, freezing and breeding of flies, the burden in bearing and
danger in spilling it, last of all, the peoples vnwoorthynes to match (Messere
magnifico) the Priest in the receite of this Sacrament. Be not these valiant
inducements for you to change the last Will and Testament of Christ Jesus, and
abrogate that which was orderly kept in the church for a thousand years and
upward? And yet these were the grauest and profoundest considerations that your
friends had to lead them to this attempt: and these you know be very
miserable.

Gerson I grant shifteth what he can to bring other proofs, that both kinds
are not simply needful, but why the council of Constance took the cup clean
from the people, (which violence before was never offered them,) of this I say,
Gerson a chief agent in that council laboring purposely to show the reason
of their doings, neither does, nor could, yield any better or weightier
occasions than these which I now repeated, and the reader shall find blazed
with great confidence in the second part of the foresaid treatise.

O deintie fathers and sleeke divines which for long beardes, and unsweet
breathes, for a little pains, and no great charges, for frostes in winter, and
flies in summer thought best to correct Christ's institution, and not only to
forsake the full consent of all ages and Churches in expounding the same, but
also to chase the people by terror of secular power and ecclesiastical curse
from the cup of their salvation, from the communion of Christ's blood, To
follow Christ's institution is adjudged to be heresy and accursed with our
late Romanists.
and fellowship of his holy spirit. Such fathers, such fancies. What is mockery,
what is injury to God and man, if this be Religion or piety?

The Church of Rome, you will say concluded with them. That increases her
sins, and excuses not their follies. If an Angel from heaven had conspired
with them, our duty binds us to detest both him and them as accursed, What
the ancient Church of Rome thought of this mangling the communion.
if they step from that which the primative church received from Paul, and Paul
from Christ: How much more then ought we to reject that which the church of
Rome presumes not only besides, but against the sacred scriptures? And yet to
speak uprightly the ancient church of Rome makes wholly with us in this
cause. For no church ever resisted your mangled communions with greater
vehemency than the church of Rome did, till covetousness and pride blinded
her eyes, and hardened her heart against God and his son.

De cons. did. 2. Cum omne.
Pope Julius, that lived under Constantine the great, made this decree. We hear
that certain led with schismatic ambition against the divine ordinances,
and Apostolic directions do give TO THE PEOPLE the Eucharist dipped in wine
for a full communion. They received not this from the Gospel, where Christ
betook his body and blood to the Disciples. For there is recited the
delivering the bread by it self, and the cup by it self. The people must have
the bread and the cup delivered them severally and asunder in both kinds.
Let therefore all such error and presumption cease least inordinate and
perverse diuises weaken the soundnes of faith. If the communion be neither
perfect, nor agreeable to Christ's institution, and Apostolic prescription,
except the people receive both kinds several, and asunder, the bread from the
cup, and the cup from the bread, as Christ ordained, and the Gospel declares:
Ergo your excluding the people clean from the cup is altogether repugnant to
the manifest intent of our Savior, and right imitation of his Apostles.

And what if the first authors of your dry communion were the Manichees, are
you not wise men, and well promoted to forsake the precept which Christ gave
you, the president which Paul left you, the course which the christian world
for so many years observed, and follow so pestilent and pernicious a sect of
heretics, reproved and long since condemned by the church of Rome, for that
very fraud and abuse in the Sacraments, which you be now fallen unto? The
Manichees, Leo sermon. 4. de quadragessima.
says Leo, to cover their infidelity, venture to be present at our mysteries,
and so carry themselves in the receiving of the Sacraments, for their more
safety, that they take the body of Christ with an unworthy mouth, but in any
wise they shun to drink the blood of our redemption. The Man^ch^es the first
auth^^s of the (...).
Which I would have your d^uoutnes (speaking to the people) learn for this
cause, that such men might be known to you by these marks, and when their
(...) in them as (...).

^^ cons. did. 2. Co^perimus.

To ^nstaine from the Lords cup is sacrilege.


sacrilegious simulation is found, they may be noted and bewrayed by the
Godly, that they may be chased away by the priestly power.

Against this disorder of Manichees wrate Pope Gelas^^, as your friend Master
Harding confesses. We have intelligence that certain men receiving only a
portion of the sanctified body abstain from the cup of the sacred blood: who
for that it appears, they be entangled with I know not what superstition let
them either receive the whole Sacraments, or be driven from the whole: because
the dividing and parting of one and the same mystery can not be without
grievous sacrilege. The sense is plain. To take the Lords bread, and not
drink of the Lords cup, is a seuering and distracting of this mystery, which
by the judgment of these two Popes is open sacrilege: ergo neither Catholic
or christian.

What shift n^we Philander, to save your selves from sacrilege? Artic. 2.
contra I p^s^. Sar^^.
Spoke Gelasius of the Manichees as Master Harding resolves? Grant it were
so. Then what was sacrilege in them, can it be catholic in you? If that
ancient church of Rome condenmed this in the Manichees, how comes your late
Church of Rome not only to suffer, but also to command the same? Can you
turn dark^nes to light, and sacrilege to Religion? To forbear the Lords cup
is sacrilege in all persons, and ages as well as it was then in the Manichees.
That were a marvelous alteration. But Si^s your minds may change we know:
Christ's institution can not chang^; The contempt thereof, in Manichees, in
Papists: as then, so still, was and will be sacrilege.

Spoke Gelasius not of the Manichees but of certain Priests that receiving
the bread at the Lords table neglected the cup? Yet Leo speaks of the
Manichees by name, and those Laymen, Leo speaks of Lord (...) though Gelas^us
di^^^nt, and calls it sacrilege in them to reframe the Lords cup.

Mat. 26.


and mingled with the people, and calls their forbearing the Lords blood a
sacrilegious slight: and reason were you should prove that only Pries^es are
meant in this place of Gelasius, and not suppose what you list at your
pleasures, as the gloze does and others of your side, that stand on this
answer. The words are indefinite, and touch as well people as Priest: but
let us imagine that Gelasius spoke of Priests, first then you commit sacrilege
in restraining all Priests from the communion of both kinds, except they say
Mass thems^lues. Next if it be sacrilege in the Priest, why not in the
people? The precept of our Savior, drink ye all of this, compriseth all, both
Laymen and Priests. His Apostle 1. Cor. 11.
extends the same to the whole Church of Corinth. Chrysostom says Chrys^st.
^^mi. 18. in. 2. Co^.
the Priest differs nothing from the people in receiving the mysteries, but
one cup is proposed to al: De c^^. did. 2.. qu^a passus.
In Chalice nobiscum vos estis: You (says Austen to the people) are in the
(Lords) cup no less than we. The^phil. in 1. Cor. cap. 11.
The cup was delivered to all men (Priest and people) with like condition, as
Theophilact affi^meth. Paschas. de ^^rpore and sa^g. Dom. cap. 43.
Drink ye all of this, that is, says Paschasius, as well other beleuers as
Ministers. Hence we frame you this argument. The cup was by Christ delivered
to Priest and People with like condition, and like precept: If it be sacrilege
in the Priest, it is no less in the people.
the refusing of the Lords cup is sacrilege in priests by the position of
Gelasius and the confession of your friends: it is therefore no less than
sacrilege for the people to refrain the same. What then is it, for you to pull
the Lords cup out of their hands, by rigor and force, for so trifling
respects as you pretend, but apparent, violent, and wilful sacrilege?


Phi. They would have it to be sacrilege to withstand their fancies, and to
follow Christ's commandment.
It was sacrilege then for the people to refuse or refrain the cup, because the
church was content to admit them to it: But now the church is otherwise
resolved, it were sacrilege to expect, or demand it.


Theo. What shall the man of sin and son of perdition when he comes, (if
he be not already come, and you his supporters to hold up his seat in the
temple of God) say more than you now say; that you at your lists may break the
commandments of the great and everlasting God, and alter his ordinances; and
to blame you for it, or recall you back from your enterprise, is sacrilege?
Esa. 5.
Woe be to you that call good evil, and evil good, which set darkness for
light, and light for darkness, and put bitter for sweet, and sweet for
bitter. Woe be to you that are (so) wise in your own eyes, and (so) prudent
in your own conceits, that you prefer your own Counsel before the
wisdom of God.


Philand. Nay you prefer your wits before the whole Church of GOD: you
would not other-wise take upon you to control your forefathers and teachers
in such sort as you do.


Theoph. If they forsook their fathers, yea GOD himself, We may well forsake
them that forsook both God and their fathers before them.
why should we not renounce them rather as parricides than resemblance of
their ancestors?


Philand. They were Catholics, and so are we.


Theoph. You leave the steps both of Christ and his Church, and yet you must
and will be catholics.


Philand. We follow them better, than you do.


Theoph. So it appears by your half communion, which they condemned for
sacrilege, and you embrace for Religion.


Phi. Here is such a stir about eating and drinking, as though all consisted
therein, The Jesuits can not hear of eating and drinking at the Lords table
on the peoples behalf, because they have discharged them from both.

1. Cor. 11. 1. Cor. 10. Joan. 6.


and in the mean while you neglect and abolish the holy and unbloody
sacrifice, which is far more Catholic, than your communion.


Theo. You need not make so light of eating and drinking at the Lords table.
There depend greater promises and duties on that, than on your unbloody
sacrificing the son of God. As often as ye shall eat this bread and drink
this cup, ye show the Lords death till he come. Without eating and drinking
therefore the Lords death is not showed. The bread which we break, (to be
eaten) is it not the communion of Christ's body? The cup of blessing which we
bless (that all may drink of it) is it not the communion of Christ's blood?
If we refuse eating the one, or drinking the other, can we be partakers of
Christ or his spirit? He that eats my flesh, says our savior, and drinks
my blood, dwells in me and I in him: and except you eat the flesh of the
son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. These be the
fruits, and effects of religions and worthy eating and drinking at the
Lords table: show us the like for your sacrificing, and we will think you
had some occasion though no reason to turn the Lords Supper into an offering.


Philand. This one Sacrifice has succeeded all other, The The. Test. fol. 447.
n^. 21. ^you can not drink.
and fulfilled all other differences of Sacrifices, and has the force and
virtue of all other, to be offered for all persons and causes that the others,
for the living and the dead, for sins and for thanksgiving, and for what
other necessity soever of body or soul. Be not these as great and good
effects of our Sacrifice, as those which you now rehearsed for eating and
drinking at the Altar? The sacrifice of the Mass.



Theo. They be great, if you had as good authority for the one as we have
for the other.


Philand. We have better.


Theo. We must give you leave to say so, but you shall give us leave not to
believe you.


Phi. All the fathers with one consent stand on our side for the Sacrifice.


Theoph. Were it so, that yet is many degrees beneath the credit of our
conclusion. You bring us the speeches of men, we bring you the word of God:
I trust you will aguise some difference betwixt them.


Phi. As though we could not bring you Scriptures as well as fathers for the
sacrifice of the Mass.

Melchisedec by his oblation in bread and wine did properly and most singularly
prefigurate this office of Christ's eternal Priesthood, The The. Test. fol.
447. Ibidem.
and sacrificing himself under the forms of bread^ and wine: which shall
continue in the Church throughout all Christian Nations in steed of all the
offeringes of Aarons Priesthood, Their proofe^ for the Sacrifice of the Mass.
as the Prophet Malachie did foretell, as Saint Cyprian, Saint Iustine, Saint
Irineus, and others the most ancient Doctors and Martyrs do testify. Cyprian
epistola 63. number. 2. Justin. dial. cum Trypho. post med. Iren. libro 4. capit.
32. And Saint Augustine libro 17. cap. 20. de ciuitat. Dei. and libro primo
contra aduers. leg. and prophet. ca. 18. and lib. 3. de baptism. ca. 19. S. Leo
sermon 8. de passione: avouch that this one sacrifice has succeeded all
other, and fulfilled all other differences of Sacrifices, etc.

Yea in S. Paul's epistle to the Church at Corinth the first and tenth chapter:
The The. Test. Ibidem.

They will prove their sacrifice by S. paul himself.


We may observe that our bread and chalice, our table and altar, the
participation of our host and oblation, be compared or resembled point by
point, in all effects, conditions, and properties, to the altars, hosts,
sacrifices, and immolatious of the Jews and Gentiles. Which the Apostle would
not, or could not have done in this Sacrament of the altar, rather than in
other Sacraments or service of our Religion, if it only had not been a
Sacrifice and the proper worship of God among the Christians, as the other were
among the Jews and heathen. And so do all the fathers acknowledge, calling it
only, and continually almost, by such terms as they do no other Sacrament
or ceremony of Christ's Religion: The Lamb of God laid upon the table:
Council. Nicen. The unbloody service of the Sacrifice, In Council. Ephesin.
epist. ad Nestor. page 605. The sacrifice of sacrifices: Dionys. Eccles.
Hieronym. cap. 3. The quickening holy sacrifice: the unbloody host and
victime: Cyril. Alex. in Council. Ephesians. Anat^. the propitiatory sacrifice both
for the living and the dead. Tertul. de cor. Milit. Chrysostom. ho. 41. in 1. Corinthians. ho. 3. ad Phil. Ho. 66. ad pop. Antioch. Cypr. epi. 66. and decaena.
Do. nu. 1. August. Euch. 109. Quaest. 2. ad Dulcit. to. 4. Ser. 34. de verb.
Apost. The sacrifice of our mediator: the sacrifice of our price: the sacrifice
of the new Testament: the sacrifice of the Church. August. li. 9. ca. 13. and
li. 3. de baptist. ca. 19. The one only inconsumptible victime, without which
there is no Religion. Cyprian. de caen. Do. nu. 2. Chrysostom. ho. 17. ad Hebr.
The pure oblation, the new offspring of the new Law: the vital and impolluted
host: the hono^r^ble and dreadful Sacrifice: God grant you may have eyes to
see your follies. Not one of all these scriptures or fathers makes for the
Sacrifice of their Mass.
the Sacrifice of thanksgiving or Eucharistical: and the Sacrifice of
Melchisedec. This is the Apostles and fathers doctrine. God grant you may find
mercy to see so evident and invincible a truth.


Theo. You be now where you would be; and where the fathers seem to fit your
foot: But if your sacrifice be convinced to be nothing less than catholic,
or consequent to the Prophets, Apostles or Fathers Doctrine, what say you then
to your vanity in alleging, if not impiety in abusing so many Fathers and
Scriptures to proppe up your follies?


Phi. Be not these places which we bring you for this matter, undeniable,
unavoidable, indefeatable, unanswerable?


Theo. In any case lay on load of terms: You have made us so many in your
late Rhemish testament, that now you must not seem to lack. But what if all
these places need neither denying, avoiding, defeating nor answering? What if
not one of these fathers, whose works you cite as thick as hops, ever spoke or
heard of your external and real sacrificing the son of God afresh for the
sins of the world, but they using the words Sacrifice and oblation to an
other purpose, you force a private and peculiar sense of yours upon their
speeches against their meanings?


Phi. This is ever your wont, when the words be so plain that you can not
deny them, to fly to the meaning.


Theo. In deed this has been not the least of Satan's sleights in conueying
your Religion from step to step and point by point, to keep the speech, The
general order of the Romish Religion is to keep the fathers phrases, and to
change their faith.
and change the sense of the learned and ancient fathers, that what with the
phrases which were theirs, and the forgeries which were not theirs, and yet
carried their names, he might make the way for Antichrist to set up his visible
Monarchy of error and hypocrisy.


Phi. This is the way to rid your selves of all objections.


Theoph. And the other is the way to drown your selves in the deapth of all
corruption: but so long as we hold their faith and doctrine, which were the
lights and lamps of Christ's church, we can spare you their phrases here and
there skattered in their writings, and you no whit the nearer the truth of
their belief.


Phi. You hold not their faith in this or any other point of your Religion.


Theo. The greatest boasters be not always the greatest conquerours: Let it
therefore first appear what they teach touching the Sacrifice of the Lords
table, How the Lords supper may truly be called an oblation and a Sacrifice.
and what we admit: and then it will soon be seen which of us twain has
departed from them.

The fathers with one consent call not your private Mass, that they never
knew, but the Lords Supper a Sacrifice, which we both willingly grant and
openly teach: so their text, not your gloze may prevail. For there besides the
sacrifice of prayer and thanksgiving, which we must then offer to God for our
redemption and other his graces bestowed on us in Christ his son: besides the
dedication of our souls and bodies to be a reasonable, quick, and holy
sacrifice to serve and please him: besides the There are four kinds of
Sacrifices in the Lords supper, and not one of them is the popish Sacrifice.
contribution and alms then given in the primative Church for the relief of
the poor and other good uses: a Sacrifice no doubt very acceptable to God: I
say besides these three sundry sorts of offerings incident to the Lords
table, the very Supper itself is There are four kinds of Sacrifices in the
Lords supper, and not one of them is the popish Sacrifice.
a public memorial of that great and dreadful sacrifice, I mean, of the death
and bloodshedding of our savior, and a most assured application of the merits
of his passion, for the remission of our sins, not to the gazers on, or
standers by, but to those that with faith and repentance come to the due
receiving of those mysteries.

The visible sacrifice of bread and wine representing the Lords death S. Austen
enforces in these words: August. de side ad Pe^^. cap. 19.
Hold most firmly, neither doubt of this in any case, that the only begotten
son of God taking our flesh offered himself a sweet smelling sacrifice to
god, to whom with the father and the holy ghost, the Patriarks, Prophets, and
Priests under the old law sacrificed brute beasts, and to who^ now, in the time
of the new Testament, with the (same) father and holy spirit, the holy
Catholic Church throughout the world does not cease to of^er the sacrifice of
bread and wine in faith and charity. In those carnal Sacrifices there was a
figuration of the flesh of Christ, which he should offer, and blood which he
should shed for the remission of our sins: In this sacrifice there is a The
Catholic Church offe^eth bread and wine to God for a thanksgiving in
remembrance of his sons death. Our Sacrifice is the giving of thanks and
remembering of his death.
thanksgiving and remembrance of the flesh which he has offered and blood
which the same god has shed for us. With him agrees Ireneus: Christ Irineus,
lib. 4. cap. 32.
willing his Disciples to offer unto God the first fruits of his creatures
(not that god needed them, but lest they should be found unfruitful or
unthankful) took the creature of bread and gave thanks saying this is my body.
And likewise he confessed the cup which is a creature amongst us to be his
blood teaching the new oblation of the new Testament, which the Church
receiving from the Apostles offers to God throughout the world. Ibidem. cap.
34.

The Church offers to God of his creatures with thanksgiving: and sanctifying
that which the faithful receive at the Lords table.


We must the^ offer to god, and in all things yield thanks to god the maker with
a pure mind, unfeigned faith, steadfast hope, and fervent love, offering the
first fruits of his Creatures: and this oblation the Church only sacrifices in
purity to the creator, offering to God of his creatures with thanksgiving. And
this we offer to him not as if he stood in need (of these presents) but
rendering him thanks for these his gifts, and sanctifieng the creature.

This oblation of bread and wine for a thanksgiving to God, and a memorial of
his sons death was so confessed and undoubted a truth in the church of
Christ, till your Schoolmen began to wrest both Scriptures and Fathers to
serve their quiddities, that not only the Liturgies under the names of
Clemens, Basil, and Chrysostom do mention it: ( Clemens. Apost constitutio.
lib. 8. cap. 17.
We offer to thee our king and God this bread and this cup according to thy
sons institution: Liturg. Chrysostom. and Basil.
tua ex tuis offerimus tibi domine, we offer thee O Lord these thy gifts of
thine own (creatures.) Which sense Irineus Lib. 4. cap. 34.
urges against valentine,) but also the very Missals used in your own Churches
at this day do confirm the same. These be the words of your own Offertorie:
Offertorium Missae.

Their own Masse-booke is against the sacrifice which they defend to be in
their mass.


Receive holy Father, God everlasting, this undefiled host, which I thine
unworthy servant offer to thee my king and true God, for my sins,
negligences, and offenses innumerable, for all standers by, yea for all faithful
christians as well living as departed this life, that it may help me and the^
to attain eternal life. Ibidem.
We offer to thee O Lord this cup of salvation, entreating thy goodness that it
may be taken up into thy sight, as a sweet smell for the saving of us and the
whole world. Ibidem.
Receive blessed Trinity this oblatio^ which we offer to thee in remembrance
of the passion, resurrection, and asce^tion of Christ Jesus our Lord. Ibidem.
We humbly beseech thee most merciful father through Jesus Christ thy son our
Lord that thou accept and bless these gifts, these prese^ts, these holy
undefiled sacrifices, which we offer to thee first for thy Church, holy and
catholic etc. For all true belieuers etc. For all here present etc. For the
redemption of their souls, and hope of salvation.

By their own books it is evident that they do not sacrifice Christ, but the
creatu^es of bread and wine.

Mark this contradiction in their masse-booke to the sacrifice which the
Jesuits pretend.


Certainly you speak these words long before you repeat Christ's institution,
your Masse-booke does apparently prove that which I report, if I mistake the
secrets of your mass, let the shame be mine. What then offer you in this
place? Christ, or the creatures of bread and wine? By your own doctrine Christ
is not present, neither any change made til these words, This is my body, this
is my blood, be pronounced, ergo before consecration the creatures of bread and
wine keep their proper and earthly substance, when notwithstanding your selves
offer the^ to God in your masses for the remission of your sins, redemption of
your souls, and to profit the quick and the dead by that oblation. You teach
the people that nothing is offered by the priest to god the father for remission
of sins, but Christ his son: Your mass, where this should be done, conuinceth
yt you sacrifice not Christ, but the creatures of bread and wine. Be you not
more tha^ blind which see not that the prayers which you daily frequent refute
ye sacrifice which you falsely pretend?


Phi. As though the ancient fathers did not also say that Christ himself is
daily offered in the church.


Theo. Not in the substance which is your error, but in signification, which is
their doctrine and ours. Take their interpretation with their words and they
make nothing for your local and external offering of christ. Aug. ad Bonif.
epist. 23.

Christ is offered not in substance but in a Sacrament or representation of his
death.


Was not Christ, says Austen, once sacrificed in himself? and yet in a
sacrament is he offered for the benefit of the people, not every Paschal feast
only but every day. Neither does he lie, that when the question is asked him,
answers, Christ is offered (daily.) For if Sacraments had not a certain
similitude of the things, whereof they be sacraments, they should be no
Sacraments at al. And by reason of this similitude they usually take the names
of the things themselves. Christ is offered daily: this is true, says Austen,
but how? The communion is a sacrament of the Lords death; and sacraments have
the names of the things them selves from a certain resemblance that is between
them. This doctrine differs much from yours, and yet must Austen stand for a
christian and Catholic father, when you by your patience shall go for
vpstarts.


Phi. S. Augustine spoke this not of the lively flesh and blood of Christ which
we sacrifice to god the father by the priests hands for the sins and
necessities of me^: Christ slain for our sins is the true sacrifice of the
Lords table.
but of his death and passion represented at our mass by the holy mysteries.


The. In deed S. Augustine spoke of yt he knew: as for your conceit of
sacrificing the lively flesh and blood of Christ in substance under the forms
of bread and wine by ye priests hands; neither he, nor any good author was ever
acquainted with it. And to say the truth the very spring and root of your
error is this yt you seek for a sacrifice in the Lords supper, besides the
Lords death. Mark well the words of Cyprian. Cypr. li. 2. ep. 3.
The passion of the Lord is the sacrifice which we offer: Of Ambrose, Ambros.
in 10. ca. epist. ad Heb.
Our high priest is he that offered (on ye cross) a sacrifice to cleanse us: the
very same we offer now; which being then offered cannot be consumed; this
Sacrifice is a sa^plar of that, we offer that very sacrifice for ever: Of
Eusebius, Eusebius. de demonst. Euang. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Christ after al things (ended) offered a wonderful oblation and most excellent
sacrifice (on the cross) for the salvation of us al, and gave us a memory
thereof in stead of a sacrifice: we therefore offer the remembrance of that great
sacrifice in the mysteries which he delivered us. Of Chrysostom. Chrysostom. in Mat.
hom. 83.
Bringing these mysteries we stop the mouths of those that ask, how we prove
that Christ was sacrificed (on the cross.) For if Jesus were not slain, whose
sign and token is this sacrifice? Of Austen, Aug. contra Faust. l. 20. c. 21.
We sacrifice to God in that only manner, in which he commanded we should offer
to him at the revealing of the new Testament: the flesh and blood of this
sacrifice was yielded in very truth when Christ was put to death: after his
ascension it is now solemnized by a Sacrament of memory.

The very elements and actions of the Lords Supper convince no less. The
actions and elements of the supper resemble his death.
The bread which we break, what else does it represent, but the Lords body
that was broken for us? The cup, which we drink, what else does it resemble
save the Lords blood that was shed for our sakes? De cons. did. 2. cum
frangitur.
When the host is broken, and the blood poured out of the cup into the mouths
of the faithful, what other thing, says Prosper, is thereby designed, than
the offering of the Lords body on the cross, and the shedding of his blood
from his side? 1. Cor. cap. 11. As Christ is crucified in the mystical supper,
even so is he offered.
As often as you shall eat this bread and drink of this cup, you show forth
the Lords death till he come: says Paul. There can be no question of this,
the spirit of god has spoken it. Then if the death of Christ be the sacrifice
which the church offreth, it is evident that christ is not only sacrificed at
this table: but also crucified: and crucified in yt self same sort and sense
that he is sacrificed: but no man is so mad as to defend that christ is really
put to death in these mysteries: ergo neither is he really sacrificed under the
forms of bread and wine: which thing your selves have lately ventered and
rashly presumed without al antiquity.

The catholic fathers I can assure you say, christ is offered, and christ is
crucified in the Lords supper indifferently. So Ierom, Hier. in ps. 95.
Christ is every day crucified to us. So Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in acta Apost.
hom. 21.
The death of christ is here performed. So Gregory, De cons. did. 2. quid sit
sanguis.
Christ dies again in this mystery, and his flesh suffers for the salvation
of the people: so to conclude, Austen, Aug. Euang. quaest, l. 2. ca. 38.
The gentiles now through the whole world taste and lick the passion of Christ
in the sacraments of his body and blood. If you can expound this you shall not
need to stagger at the rest. The church has no Sacrifice propiciatorie
besides the death of her Savior, and therefore as she does kill him, so she
does offer him in her mysteries. If you can not, learn by the direction of
your own decrees, what doctrine was taught in the primative church, and even in
your own church for 1300. years touching this matter. De cons. did. 2. hoc est
quod al^imus.
The offering of the (Lords) flesh, by the Priests hands is called the passion,
death, and crucifying of Christ, Non rei veritate, sed significante mysterio,
Not in precise truth, but in a mystical signification, or it your gloze delight
you rather, Glossa de cons. did. 2. quid sit sanguis.
In this mystery Christ dies, that is his death is represented; his flesh
suffers, that is his passion is represented.

In this very sense Christ is offered daily. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in 10. cap.
epis^ ^d Hebr.
Do we not offer every day? we do: but a memorial of his death. We do not offer
an other sacrifice, but ever the same or rather we continue the remembrance of
that sacrifice. Ambrose, Ambr. in 11. ca. epist. 1. ad Cor.
Because we were delivered by the Lords death, we bearing that in mind do
signify with eating and drinking the flesh and blood that were offered for us:
It is a memorial of our redemption. Eusebius, Eusebale demonstra. Euangelic.
lib. 1. ca. 10.
Christ offered a wonderful sacrifice for the salvation of us al, and we have
received a memorial of that most sacred oblation to be performed at the Lords
table according to the rule of the new testament. Augustine, August. 83. quaest.
cap 61.

Christ is offered at the table, that is a sacrament and similitude of his
death is celebrated.


Christ is our high priest after the order of Melchisedec, which yielded
himself a slain sacrifice for our sins, and gave us a similitude and image of
that oblation to be celebrated for a remembrance of his passion, in so much
that we may see that, which Melchisedec offered to God, now sacrificed in the
church of Christ throughout the world.

Emissenus, De cons did. 2. quia corpus.

This is Christian and comfortable doctrine.


Considering that Christ was to take his body from our eyes and place the same
in the heavens, it was requisite he should institute the sacrament of his body
and blood for us at his last supper, that it might always be continued in a
mystery, which was once offered for a ransom, and because the work of our
redemption did never fail, the sacrifice of our redemption might be perpetual,
and that everlasting oblation (of Christ on the cross) might remain fresh in
memory and present for ever in grace.

Theod. in cap. 8. ad Hebr.
Theodorete, If Christ (by his own sacrifice on the cross) brought to pass,
that other sacrifices should be superfluous, why do the Priests of the new
Testament execute the mystical Lyturgie or Sacrifice? It is clear to them
that are instructed in our mysteries, that we do not offer an other sacrifice,
but continue the memory of that one and healthful Sacrifice. For so the Lord
himself commanded us, do this in my remembrance, that in beholding the
figures, we should remember the pains which he suffered for us, and bear a
loving heart toward him that did us so much favor, and expect the receiving
of good things to come (which he promised.)

Theoph. in 10. cap. ad Hebr^os.
Theophilact, Do we then offer unbloody sacrifices? No doubt we doe^ mary by
being a remembrance of the Lords death. He was once offered, and yet we offer
him always, or rather we celebrate the memorial of that oblation, when he
sacrificed himself (on the cross.)

Receive this addition which they make; and we grant you that oblation, which
they teach. Christ is offered, or rather a memorial of his death and oblation
is celebrated. What sacrifice the fathers taught, and offered.
This later correction does expound and interpret their former assertion. You
can require no plainer, nor sounder doctrine. They piese not Christ with their
hands, they shroud him not in accidences, they pray not for him, that God
Canon Missae supra propitio ac sereno vultu.
will vouchsafe to respect and accept him as he did the gifts and (external)
sacrifices of Abel, Abraham and Melchisedec, as you do in your Masses: they
never told us the very fact and intention of the Priest were meritorious;
these be your absurdities and blasphemies: They did offer an Liturgia Basilij.
unbloody sacrifice not of flesh but of Spirit and mind, Cypr. li. 2. epist.
3. and August. 83. quaest. ca. 3.
the selfsame which Melchisedec did two thousand years before Christ took
flesh, and therefore not the flesh of Christ: a Dionys. eccles. hierach. cap. 3.
figurative sacrifice, to wit, Signs, Samplars, Similitudes and Memorials of
his death and bloodshedding. So that Christ is offered daily but Mystically,
not covered with qualities and quantities of bread and wine; for those be
neither mysteries nor resemblances to the death of Christ: Paschal. de cons.
did. 2. iteratur.

The true exposition of the Sacrifice at the Lords table.


but by the bread which is broken, by the wine which is drunk, in substance
creatures, in signification Sacraments, the Lords death is figured and
proposed to the communicants, and they for their parts, no less people than
Priest, do present Christ hanging on the cross to God the father, with a
lively faith, inward devotion, and humble prayer, as a most sufficient and
everlasting Sacrifice for the full remission of their sins and assured
fruition of his mercies. Other actual and propitiatory sacrifice than this the
church of Christ never had, never taught.

You believe not me. Well, what if your own fellows and friends teach the
same? What if the master of your Sentences, what if the Glozer of your decrees,
what if the Ringleader of your Schoolmen make with us in this question, and
euince, that for twelve hundred years after Christ your Sacrifice was not
known to the woorlde: How long the Church was without their kind of sacrifice.

Sententiarum. lib. did. 12.


will you give the people leave to bethink themselves better, before they call
you or account you catholics? Then hear what they say: Peter Lombard in his
4. book and 12. distinction. I demand whether that which the Priest does be
properly called a Sacrifice or an oblation, and whether Christ be daily
offered, or else were offered only once. The master of the sentences is against
the Jesuits in the sacrifice of their Mass.
To this our answer is brief: that which is offered and consecrated by the
priest is called a sacrifice and oblatio^, because it is a memory and
representation of the true sacrifice, and holy oblatio^ made on the altar of
the cross. Also Christ died once on the cross, and there was he offered
himself, but he is offered daily in a sacrament, because in the Sacrament there
is a remembrance of that which was once done. Now what this means, Christ is
offered in a sacrament, we need no fairer interpretation tha^ that which your
own gloze often repeateth: Glossa. de cons. did. 2. semel.
Christ is offered in a sacrament, that is, his offering is represented, and a
memory of his passion celebrated. in Christo.
It is the same oblation which he made, * that is, a representation of the same
passion. Iteratur.
Christ is offered every day mystically, * that is, the oblation which Christ
made for us is represented in the sacrament of his body and blood.

Thom. part. 3. qu^est. 83. art. 1.
With these concurreth Thomas of Aquine. Because the celebration of this
Sacrament is a certain Image of Christ's passion, it may conveniently be
called the sacrificing of Christ. The celebration of this Sacrament is termed
the immolating of Christ in two respects: First, for that, as Austen says,
resemblances are wont to be called by the names of those things whose
resemblances they are; next The latter schoolmen since Thomas mistaking the
former, turned these words to opus operatum, and taught the Priests act to be
the right mean to apply Christ's death to the quick and the dead.

Can their doctrine be Catholic that so lately was unknown to their own
fellows?

24. places cited by the Jesuits in their testament to no purpose, and so 14.
by the maker of their Apology.


for that by this sacrament we be made partakers of the fruit of the Lords
passion. Here find you no real, local, nor external offering of Christ to
God his father by the Priest for the sins of the people; which is your
opinion at this day; you find that the celebration of the Lords supper may
be called an oblation, first, for that it is a representation of Christ's death,
and sacraments have the names of the things which they signify; next, because
the merits and fruits of Christ's passion are by the power of his spirit
divided and bestowed on the faithful receivers of these mysteries.

Now boast of your Catholic doctrine, that your prattling Sophists and
wandering Friars invented but yesterday; now call for your sovereign Sacrifice
not only repugnant to the sacred Scriptures and ancient fathers, but
rejected by the Mint-master of your sentences, refuted by the conclusions of
your Seraphicall Doctor, shunned by your rude Gloze-maker, and clean thwart to
the Canon of your ordinary Mass. If you speed no better in the rest of your
causes, a worse name than fugitives will become you and your companions well
enough, without peril of slander or breach of charity.

These foundations lying sure; to wit, that the creatures of bread and wine are
offered to God for a thanksgiving, when they be sanctified and received
according to his sons institution, and that Christ himself is daily offered
and crucified in a mystery, because the breaking of his body, and shedding of
his blood on the cross are proposed and renewed by the bread which we eat,
and cup which we drink at the Lords table; these conclusions I say standing
good we receive the four and twenty places which here you huddle, and the
fourteen which the Penman of your Apology has shufled into his sixth
chapter, (being for the most part the same that these are, and the rest weaker
than these;) and affirm that not one of them teaches any other sacrifice
than we have showed and confessed, and that is no such offering as you avouch
and defend at this day to be in your Mass. For you will have a real,
external and corporal kind of offering the live fle^^ of Christ by the
Priests hands, under the forms of bread and wine to God the father for the
sins of men: Their real and actual sacrifice must needs be made with
hands, and so the gestures of the Priests hands is all the sacrifice the
Jesuits have.
and this manual service or act of the Priest you avouch to be meritorious and
propitiatory for those that can purchase the Priests good will to be mindful
of them in his memento.

This is, we say, a wicked invention of yours, not the assertion of any
father: They celebrated and solemnized the Lords death by sanctifying the
creatures as Christ ordained, and by dividing them to such as were faithful
and thankeful to God for the redemption of the world in the blood of his son:
and this their incitation and provocation of all men to faith, prayer, thanks
and obedience was the acceptable service and Sacrifice of the new testament. To
this we would recall you, by telling you that God cares not for the Priests
hands, What Sacrifice it is that God regards.
but for the peoples hearts, and that he requires not one man's crossing, but
the whole Churches calling on him with one heart and one mouth, that he may be
honored, and we comforted in the death of his son. And this was it that
Malachie foretold, and not the Priests holding up the Chalice, or clenly
conueighing the paten, as he must in your Sacrifice.


Phi. The Prophet Malachie did plainly foretell (our Sacrifice) as S. Cyprian,
The Rhemish Test. fol. 447. Malac. 1.
S. Iustine, S. Ireneus, and other most ancient Doctors and Martyrs do
testify.


Theo. Why? What said the Prophet Malachie?


Phi. I have no will to you, says our Lord of Saboth (to the Jewish Priests)
and a gift will I not receive of your hands. For from the rising of the sun to
the setting thereof, my name is great among the Gentiles, and in every place A
CLEAN OBLATION IS OFFERED AND SACRIFICED TO MY NAME.


Theo. Malachie does not say it shall be offered at the Altar, or by the Priests
hands, or under the forms of bread and wine: The prophesy of Malachie
discussed.
but a pure oblation is offered unto my name.


Phi. And what oblation can be so pure, as the body and blood of Christ?


Theo. Neither says he, the purest, but a pure oblation is offered,


Phi. What other oblation has the new Testament, but only that?


Theo. Sacrifice for sin it has none, but that which the son of God made
on the cross: mary yet the new Testament teaches us other oblations besides
that: though I confess all our words and works, and even our selves must be
washed and sanctified in that sacrifice: before we, or any thing that we say or
do can be acceptable unto God.


Phi. What oblations does the new Testament teach us besides that?


Theo. You have not forgotten, I dare say, what Peter says. 1. Pet. 2.

What sacrifices the new testament teaches us to offer unto God.


And ye as lively stones be made a spiritual house, and an holy Priesthood, to
offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable unto God by Jesus Christ.


Phi. Why may not S. Peter speak that of the anointed Priests, and their true
sacrifices?


Theo. So he does, but he means all Christians, and not your shauelings.


Phi. You would pick a quarrel to holy oil: but you be not yet at rest from
the sacrifice. Why may not S. Peter I pray you speak of the blessed Mass?


Theo. Because he speaks to al both men and weomen: and tells them of a
blesseder matter than your mass, that is of the true spiritual sacrifices, in
which god takes more pleasure than in your mumbling of fruitless Masses.


Phi. What are those?


Theo. S. Paul utters two of them almost in one sentence. Hebr. 13.

The Sacrifice of praise.

Of mercy.


Let us therefore by him offer the Sacrifice of praise always to God, that is,
the fruit of lips confessing his name. To do good and distribute forget
not: for with such sacrifices God is pleased; which liberality else where he
calls Phil. 4.
a sweet smelling odor, and a sacrifice acceptable and pleasant to God. A
third kind of Sacrifice is that which he mentions to the Romans. Romans 12. Of
our selves.
I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God, that you give up your bodies a
living SACRIFICE, holy and acceptable unto God (which is) your reasonable
serving of God.


Phi. These were Sacrifices of the old Testament as well as of the new. For
David says, Psalm. 115.
To thee will I sacrifice the offerings of praise, and call upon the name of
our Lord: and of the next, Eccles. 35. Psalm. 50.
He that shows mercy, offers a Sacrifice: and so of the third, These be
the sacrifices of the new testament, which God requires at our hands, and of
which Malachie speaks.
A sacrifice to God is a spirit, afflicting himself with penance.


Theo. Keep your penances to stuff puddings. The sacrifice to God is a
troubled (or a broken) spirit. We will not now strive for words. These you see
be Sacrifices of the old Testament as well as of the new.


Theo. And therefore the truer and purer Sacrifices. For the rest were
shadows, these were none: and so those were abolished, which these were not.


Phi. But Malachie speaks of a new Sacrifice that was never before.


Theo. He speaks of the true Sacrifice, which from the beginning and so to
the end, was and shall be more acceptable to God than the bloody and external
sacrifices of the Jews: Of a new Sacrifice, that never was before he speaks
nothing for ought that I can see.


Phi. The sacrifice which Christ made of himself under the forms of bread and
wine, was a new sacrifice.


Theo. Uerie new, if any such were made.


Phi. Of that Malachie speaks.


Theo. Who told you so?


Phi. S. Cyprian, S. Iustine, S. Ireneus, and others.


Theo. You might do well to speak more directly for now we know not
whether you allege them to expound the Prophet Malachie, The Jesuits in
alleging the fathers use such cunning that a man ca^ hardly perceive to what
end they name them.
or whether you make them Prophets to tell what shall continue in the Church
throughout all Christian Nations in stead of all Aarons offerings.


Phi. They will tell you the meaning of Malachie.


Theo. They will in deed: but you neither quote them right, nor apply them
right, if you cite them to show that your Massing Sacrifice was forespoken of
by the Prophet Malachie.


Phi. No? why?


Theo. Cyprian in that epistle makes no mention of Malachie, nor of his
words: Three fathers abused by the Jesuits to pervert the words of Malachie
Justinius and Ireneus allege him; marie not for the Priests act in offering
the son of God, nor for Christ's secret lodging under the forms of bread, but
for the prayers and thanks that all the faithful give to GOD, when they come
to be partakers of this mystery.


Philand. They say Malachies words are performed in the Eucharist.


Theo. Not by the Priests hands or gestures, but by the peoples hearts and
voices.


Philand. Those be your shyftes.


Theoph. Go to, you shifters: is it not enough for you to beguile the simple
with empty soundes, shows, and names, but you will resist a manifest truth
when you are sure to have it proved to your faces?

Cyprian in that place which they cite does not so much as speak of Malachie.

Cyp. ad Quirinu^ lib. 1. cap. 16.


Cyprian in his 63. epistle meddleth not with Malachies words, but if you
would in deed learn what he thought or wrate of that prophecy, and what
he counted to be the Sacrifice that Malachie foretold, turn to his
instructions given to Quirinus against the Iewest, he first book and 16.
chapter, where he proves that the old sacrifice should be abolished, and a
new succeed: and there you shall find him expound it to be Sacrificium laudis
and iustitiae: the Sacrifice of praise and righteousness, and that by no worse
man's authority than David's.

Justinius I grant alleges the words, and says, God (in that speech) does
witness, that all the sacrifices, which Christ Jesus appointed to be done in his
name, at the Eucharist of bread (and wine) are acceptable to him. But what
Sacrifices they were, which Christ delivered and prescribed in the Eucharist
for his, to do, the words of Justinius that presently follow do perfectly open.
Iustin^^n Dial. cum Tryphone aduers. Iudaeos.

Justinius restrains the words of Malachie to prayers and thanks: other
sacrifice he acknowledges none in the Lords supper.


Preces quidem and gratiaru^ actiones bonorum perfectas solas esse and Deo
gratas hostias ego quoque concedo. Haec enim sola facienda acceperunt
Christiani in aridi humidique sui cibi commemoratione, in quo, mortis quam per
se perpessus^ est Deus Dei filius memoria re colitur. That the prayers and
thanks of the good are the only perfect sacrifices and pleasant to God I
confess. For these only (sacrifices) have the christians received to be done
in the celebration of that their (Eucharistical) food and liquor, in which the
memory of the death of the son of God, who himself was God, is renewed. You
should have spared the very quoting of this place by mine advise: for if all
the Preachers in England would have laid their heads together in words to
cross your actual and corporal sacryficing the flesh of Christ, they could
not have done it in quicker and smarter speech.

Ireneus makes even as much for you, as Justinius did: for he not only
subuerteth your real sacrificing of Christ, when he teaches that the church
offers the creatures of bread and wine in token of her thankfulness unto
God: but the very words of Malachie he expounds by S. John's authority for
the prayers of the Saints. Irenae. li. 4. ca. 33
Been ait, and in omni loco incensum offertur nomini meo, and sacrificium
purum. Incensa autem Johan. in Apocalypsi orationes ait esse Sanctorum. Ibidem.
cap. 34
Et ideo nos quoque offerre vult munus ad altar frequenter sine intermissione.
Est ergo altar in coelis. Ireneus expounds Malachies words of prayer,
obedience, and thanksgiving as we do.
Illuc enim preces nostrae and oblationes nostrae diriguntur. Well says God
(by Malachie) In every place incense is offered to my name and a pure
sacrifice. Now incense John in his Apocalypse calls the prayers of the
Saints. And therefore (God) will have us offer a gift at (his) altar
continually without intermission. The altar is in heaven. Thither are our
prayers and oblations directed.


Phi. Yet S. Irenens applies the words of Malachie to the Eucharist.


Theo. He does, but that sacrifice he says is the offering unto God the first
fruits of his creatures for a thanksgiving: and with that restriction he
limiteth the word offerimus which he often uses: Iren. lib. 4. ca. 34,

Ireneus teaches not the offering of Christ to his father but of creatures for
a sign of tha^kfulnes.

Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34


Offerre igitur oportet Deo primitias eius creaturae. Offerimus einon quasi
indigenti, sed gratias agentes donationi eius, and sanctificantes creaturam.
We must offer to God (but) the first fruits of his creatures. We offer to
him not that he wants, but giving him thanks for his bountifulness, and
sanctifieng the creature. Here is a sacrifice of thanksgiving for his mercies,
and not Christ, but the creatures of bread and wine offered unto God with
prayer, and other christian duties which he names, as clean thoughts, faith
without hypocrisy, firm hope, fervent dilection: these are the sacrifices of
the new Testament and of the Lords table, not proper to the priest, but common
to the people: nor finished with the hands, but performed with the spirit of
man, which is the true service of the second covenant.


Phi. You turn and wind the Scriptures as you please: but sure the Prophet
Malachie directly touches our Sacrifice. The rest of the fathers interpret
Malachies words after the same manner.



Theo. You dream so earnestly of it, that all the Fathers in Christ's church
can not pull you from it. What Cyprian, Iustine, and Ireneus write of this
prophecy you do or may understand by that which is said; if the number be
too small you may have more, to assure you that the Prophet never thought of your
real and corporal sacrificing of Christ's flesh to God the Father by the
Priests fingers.

Tertullian alleging the very words, Tertul. aduer. lud. eos.
Et in omni loco offerentur munda Sacrificia nomini meo. In every place shall
there be brought clean Sacrifices unto my name: adds, Indubitate, quod in
omni terra exire habebat praedicatio Apostolorum. Undoubtedly (the Prophet
Malachie means) that the preaching of the Apostles was to be spredde over
all the earth. Against Marcion he says, Tertul. aduer. Marc. lib. 4.
Et in omni loco Sacrificium nomine meo offeretur, and sacrificium mundum,
scilicet simplex oration de conscientia pura. In every place shall there be
offered in my name a sacrifice, and that a clean sacrifice, to wit, sincere
prayer from a pure conscience. So Eusebius. Eusebius. de demonst. Euang. lib. 1.
cap. 6.
Where (Malachie) does say, that incense and sacrifice are offered to God in
every place, what else means he but that (it is done) in every Country and
in all Nations, which in deed were to offer to the most high God the incense
of prayer and sacrifice which is called clean, no longer by blood, but by
godly works. Now what those works were, Cyrill will teach you. Cyril. contra
Iulia^^m ^i. 10.
We use sacrifices, but of the spirit and mind. For we have a precept that
leaving the gross service (of the Jews) we should yield a subtle, fine
and spiritual sacrifice. And therefore we offer unto God for a sweet smell,
all sorts of virtues, faith, hope, charity, justice, continence, obedience,
mildness, perpetual praises, and other (such) virtues. So Hierom. Hie. in
Zachariam lib. 2. ca. 8.
Incense is offered to the name of the Lord in every place and a clean
sacrifice not in the oblations of the old Testament, but in the holiness of
Evangelical purity, of which incense we read in other places (as when David
says,) Let my prayer be directed as incense, in thy sight, and the lifting
up of mine hands (as) an Evening sacrifice. So Augustine: August. contr.
liter. Petilia. li 2. cap. 86.
Hear ye (Donatistes) the Lord saying (thus) by his Prophet, In every place
shall incense be yielded to my name and a pure sacrifice. With this sacrifice
of your brethren, which God (most) respects, you show your selves, by your
cauilling, to be grieved, and if at any time you hear the name of the Lord to
be praised from East to West, which is the lively sacrifice, whereof it is
written, Offer to God the sacrifice of praise, your cou^tinances hang as did
that homicides (which slew his brother.)


Phi. This nothing infringeth our assertion.


Theo. But this declares the meaning of Malachie.


Phi. Our oblation is a sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving.


Theo. Had you kept your selves there and not run farther to fancies of your
own framing, and Uictimes (as you call them) of your own presuming, you might
have offered that clean sacrifice foretold by Malachie, which now you do
not.


Phi. You will not have his words pertain to the Eucharist.


Theo. You will never speak truth so long as you may shift with facing.


Phi. Confess you the^ that Malachie spoke of the Eucharist? We strive not for
the word sacrifice which the Jesuits very diligently prove, but for their
kind of sacrifice, which they cannot prove by the testimony of any one father.



The. With all our hearts.


Phi. You be now over the shoes in your own cestern.


The. But it does me no hurt, for I feel no wet.


Phi. You grant the Eucharist to be a sacrifice which your fellows will be
angry with you for.


Theo. Neither they, nor I, ever denied the Eucharist to be a sacrifice. The
very name inforceth it to be the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, which
is the true and lively sacrifice of the new Testament.


Phi. I thought you would back again.


Theo. I am now as farfoorth as ever I was, or as any of these ancient fathers
are, which have expounded the words of Malachie.


Phi. Then you must affirm it to be a sacrifice.


Theo. Leave this foolish repeating and often inculcating that which neither
benefiteth you, nor annoyeth us. In what sense the Lords supper is both a
Sacrament and a Sacrifice.

Our duties to God, are our sacrifices.


The Lords table in respect of his graces and mercies there proposed to us is
an heavenly banquet which we must eat, and not sacrifice: but the duties which
he requires at our hands when we approach to his table, are sacrifices, not
sacraments: as namely to offer him thanks and praise, faith and obedience,
yea our bodies and souls to be living, holy, and acceptable sacrifices unto
him, which is our reasonable serving of him.


Phi. This must be done when we receive the sacrament, but this is no part
of the Sacrament. From these sacrifices the Eucharist has his name*



Theoph. These be the conditions without which God will not have us come to
his Table, and for these respects the Eucharist has his name, thereby to put
us in mind of our duties.


Phi. We do not deny these sacrifices to be good and holy, and then most
requisite, when we draw nearest unto God, as at his table, but we add that
the very sacrament it self is a sacrifice, and the celebration thereof is a
continuance of that oblation which Christ made in his own person on the Altar
of the cross.


Theo. This we grant to be most true in that sense which Saint Augustine
and other ancient and Catholic Fathers do avouch it: that is, because
Sacraments have the names of those things whose Sacraments they are. This
sacrament has the similitude, and therefore the name of Christ's death and
passion*
And since this is the Sacrament of the Lords death and a passion, we do not
stick to say that Christ is daily crucified and sacrificed for the sins of
the world: mary not really, or corporally, but by way of a mystery; that is
his cross and bloodshedding are proclaimed and confirmed in the eyes of all
the faithful by these signs of his death, and seals of his truth, by which
he first witnessed that his body should be broken, and his blood shed for
the remission of our sins.


Philand. Why then refuse you the fathers expressing their opinion of this
sacrifice? The Jesuits are very plentiful in heaping impertinent allegations.



Theo. Nay, why do you abuse their words, to support your errors: and
wheresoever you find the names of sacrifice and oblation in them referred to
the Lords supper, why allege you the places with such confidence as if the
fathers were at your commandment, to mean nothing but your real sacrificing
the son of God under the forms of bread and wine?


Phi. What other meaning could they have?


Theo. I have already showed you by their own writings what other meaning
they had.


Phi. You say, they call it a sacrifice, because it is a sign and memorial of
his death on the cross.


Theo. That is sufficient to show their meaning.


Phi. But their words are so weighty, that a cold and naked signification,
does not answer the force of them. The The. Test* page 447.
The Lamb of God laid upon the table: conc. Nice. The quickening holy
sacrifice: the unbloody host and victime. Cyril. Alex. in conc. Ephesians. Anath.
11. The only inconsumptible victime, without which there is no religion. All
these fathers speak of Christ's body broken and blood shed on the cross which
are resembled in this sacrament.
Cypr. de caen. Dom. nu. 2. Chrysostom. hom. 17 ad Heb. The sacrifice of our price.
Aug. confess. lib. 9. cap. 13.


Theo. What a patching you keep to no purpose?


Phi. Dare you attribute these speeches to the creatures of bread and wine?


Theo. Dare you attribute them to the Priests external gestures? Is his act
the lamb of God, or the price of our ransom, or the holy and quickening
sacrifice?


Phi. No, but the flesh and blood of Christ are, which the Priest offers, as
we say, to God for the sins of the people.


Theo. The power of Christ's death the Jesuits attribute to the Priests act.
To what end then allege you these places for the Priests act, which show
the worthiness of Christ's sacrifice, and the power of his death?


Phil. Our sacrifice works those effects.


Theo. And so does ours.


Phi. Then you be of our opinion.


Theo. As though we did resist you touching the thing that is offered, and not
touching the manner of offering. That Christ is the lamb of God laid on the
Lords table before the eyes of our minds, that his flesh wounded and blood
shed for our sins are an holy quickening, and ever during sacrifice, and the
most sufficient price of our redemption, we urge this against you, you need
not urge it against us, we fully and faithfully teach it: The question
between us, is how this sacrifice once made on the Cross is daily renewed in
our mysteries.

The Jesuits sacrifice.
You will have a real, corporal, and local profering of Christ's flesh to God
the father under the forms of bread and wine made by the Priests external
actions and gestures for the sins of such as he lift: this is we say a wicked
and blasphemous mockery. His passion is the true oblation of the church: his
flesh wounded and blood shed are the only sacrifices for sin: which
oblation that it might be always in our hearts and sights, he has commanded
us to continue in his church, by a memorial of his own erecting: and to
apply the same to our selves by a steadfast hope in his mercies and humble
prayer unto his holiness as often as we approach to his table to be partakes
of his death and merits. How the death of Christ is both offered and applied.
And therefore the Priests act can no way be auailable for those that stand
by and look on, and neither communicate with him in prayer or in the
participation of the mysteries. And your alleging four and twenty places of
the fathers for this kind of sacrifice, of which they never thought, shows
what fidelity and sincerity you have used in the rest of your Rhemish
observations, which you sent over but to occupy men's heads, whiles you were
working an other feate.


Phi. What feat could we have in hand, Your feate was to prepare the people
against a day.
but the testifieng of truth to our Country men, and that we have done to
the utter confutation of your heretical doctrine?


The. You must needs confute us, for besides abusing of scriptures, which you
wind like a with about your fingers: where the Fathers will not serve your
turns, you will force them even by skores t^ depose what you list: and though
they use but general and indifferent words, yet you will by and by quote them
to be of your opinion. A man may soon pe^uer^ the fathers by skores, as the
Jesuits have done in their Testament.



Phi. Where have we so done?


Theo. Omit the places that are past in this beadrole of Fathers which here are
brought, show but one that ever mentioned your kind of sacrifice, we will
trouble you no farther, you shall set up your Mass again.


Phi. What we shall not.


Theo. I will help you the best I can.


Phi. Any of the places which we bring, is sufficient to justify our
sacrifice.


Theo. As well every, as any. They call the Lords Supper ministered according to
his institution, an OBLATION and SACRIFICE, or as your pen runs, an HOST and
a VICTIME: what then?


Phi. Then we say truth when we teach it to be a sacrifice, and not only a
sacrament. What sacrifice it is the Jesuits would establish.



The. Then you lie the more, when you say that you really and corporally
sacrifice the Son of God under the forms of bread and wine: and that the
Priests act, though the people neither understand what he says, neither know
what he does, but gaze on him whiles he alone murmureth to himself in a tou^g
unknown, and makes that private to one which should be common to al by Christ's
institution: is notwithstanding very profitable before God, for such as hire
his pains, or please his humor: to be had in mind, when he rubbeth his
memory.


Phi. You pervert our doctrine.


Theo. It may be my terms do not please you, They produce the name of
sacrifice used by the fathers and understand thereby their own fancies.
but I tell you the things which we reject in your sacrifice. Leave your
presumptuous and meritorious application of Christ's death as pleases the
Priest, leave your real and corporal enclosing of Christ under accidents and
shows of bread and wine, confess the Lords Supper to be a public actio^ and
pertinent to the whole church as it was ordained, and let your prayers instruct
and direct the hearts of the simple and have their open and evident assent, and
as for the name of sacrifice and oblation, it shall not offend us.


Phi. The chief occasion of your hatred against the daily sacrifice is this,
that you do not acknowledge the real presence of Christ in this sacrament, and
that makes you neither to offer him, The reason why we do not use the word
sacrifice so often as the fathers do.
nor to adore him as we do: yea skant to abide the fathers words wherein they
witness that he is offered, and must be adored under the forms of bread and
wine.


Theo. We hate your follies, we hate not their speeches; and yet there are
reasons why we do not think our selves bound to take up the frequent use
of their terms in that point, as we see you do. For first they be such
words as Christ and his Apostles did forbear, and therefore our faith may
stand without them. Next they be dark and obscure speeches wholly depending on
the nature and signification of Sacraments, which the simple do hardly
conceive. The fathers phrases beguiled the Jesuits whiles they were too eger on
them.
Thirdly we find by experience before our eyes, how their phrases have
entangled your senses, whiles you greedily persued the words, and omitted the
rules that should have mollified and directed the letter. These causes make us
the warier and the willinger to keep to the words of the holy Ghost, though
the fathers applications, if you therewithal take their expositions, do but
in other terms teach that which we receive and confess to be true and
sincere.


Philand. The name of sacrifice has no warrant in the Scripture.
Would you make us believe that the sacrifice of the Altar has no warrant in
the Scripture?


Theo. Show me the place where it is so called, and then will I grant that
in the word I was deceived.


Phil. First you heard the word OBLATION in Malachie.


Theo. I did, but I hear him not apply it to the Sacrament. The The. Test
fol. 447.



Philand. Melchisedec by his oblation of bread and wine did properly and most
singularly prefigurate this sacrifice.


Theo. But the Scripture does not say, that either Melchisedec did sacrifice
bread and wine, or that Christ at his last supper did imitate Melchisedec.


Phi. He was a Priest according to the order of Melchisedec.


Theo. Saint Paul shows in what things Melchisedec resembled Christ, as in
that he was the king of righteousness and peace, Heb. 7.
without father, without mother, having neither beginning of his days, nor
end of his life, (and) remaining a Priest for ever, without partner or
successor: but of sacrificing bread and wine, as you say Melchisedec did,
Saint Paul says nothing.


Phil. The Fathers do, almost every one of them.


Theo. I do not deny, the resemblace to be both tolerable and usual among the
fathers, but I say the scriptures have no such thing.


Phil. Saint Paul himself makes an whole discourse to prove the Sacrament to
be the Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood in the church.


Theo. Where? In his Apocalypse, A man shall find many things in the Rhemish
observations which are not the text of the Scripture.

The The. Test. fol. 447.


which your law mentions?


Phi. No Sir, I allege his canonical writings.


Theo. Where may a man seek to find it?


Phil. Look our observations upon his 10. chapter of the first to the
Corinthians.


Theo. Nay in your observations I know we shall find many things that are
not in the scriptures: they were purposely made, that where your religion stood
not in the text, at lest it might stand in the gloze: but I would hear Saint
Paul say so much, or but half such a word, and then I were answered.


Phi. The Jesuits would prove if they could tell how that S. Paul calls the
lords Supper a Sacrifice.
In all that discourse you may observe that our bread and chalice, our table
and Altar, the participation of our host and oblation, be compared or
resembled point by point in all effects, conditions, and proprieties to the
Altars, hosts, sacrifices and immolations of the Jews and Gentiles: Which the
Apostle would not, nor could not have done in this Sacrament of the Altar,
rather than in other Sacraments or service of our religion, if it only had
not been a Sacrifice and the proper worship of God among the Christians, as the
other were among the Jews and Heathen.


Theo. Tell me not what I may observe, but what you can conclude. Is the word
sacrifice attributed to the Lords Table in that chapter?


Phi. By resemblaunce and comparison it is.


Theophil. Speak first whether so much be expressed by the Apostle in plain
words; and then after we will examine what may be collected.


Philand. In plain words it is not, but This point by point is not worth a
blew point.
point by point it is compared in all effects, conditions and proprieties to
the altars, hosts, sacrifices and immolations of the Jews and Gentiles.


Theo. Where is this resemblaunce of your bread and Chalice, table and altar,
host, and oblation point by point in all effects, conditions and proprieties
to the altars, hosts, sacrifices and immolations of Jews and Gentiles?


Phi. In S. Paul.


Theophil. I see no such thing.


Philand. You will not for fear you should be driven to confess that S. Paul
calls our host a Sacrifice.


Theo. Let us then examine S. Paul's purpose, that we may see both what he
says, and to what end he says it.

The christians at Corinth in respect of aquaintaunce or alliance with others
that were Heathens in that city, Their misconstering of S. Paul examined.
did not stick, if they were invited, to go to the banquetes and feasts of
the Pagans, which they kept in the Temples of their Gods, when they did
sacrifice unto them, and at which they spent such cates and wines as they had
then offered to their Idols. The fault which the Apostle reprooueth in the
Corinthians.
The pretense which the christians had for their resorting to the Pagans
feasts was this, that they knew the idol was nothing, and therefore giving
thanks to God for his creatures, they did eat of all things without scruple
of conscience, howsoever it had been used, or to whomsoever it had been
offered.

This Saint Paul reproves them for: and shows that though the Idol in it
self be nothing, yet since the Gentiles did offer those things, which were
at their idols feasts, not to God but to devils, the christians could not sit
at the same tables with the Pagans, This was partaking with Idols and
dishonoring of God.
rejoicing, triumphing, and feasting in the names of their idolles, but they
must needs be partakers of their idolatry. Now how that could stand with
their coming to the Lords table, where they professed to serve him, and none
but him, he wishes them to consider.

The reason which he draws from the Lords table, (you call it a comparison
point by point, in all effects, conditions and proprieties, to the altars,
hosts and sacrifices of the Heathen) may be either a comparison or an
opposition, but liker of the twain to be rather an opposition than a
comparison. For so Saint Paul knitteth up his argument. You can not drink
(both) the Lords cup, and the cup of diuelles: you can not be partakers (or
eat) of the Lords table, and of the table of devils. S. Paul's reason against
it by way of comparison or opposition*
The one you are partakers of: as you know. For the cup of thanksgiving, which
we bless, is it not the communion (or participatio^) of Christ's blood? The
bread which we break is it not the communion of Christ's body? You cannot there
fore have any fellowship with the table or cup of devils, but God will surely
revenge it, as the forsaking of himself and serving of his enemy. This may
the whole drift of S. Paul stand good and his reason forcible without your
point by point or your effects, conditions, and proprieties of altars, hosts
or Sacrifices.

Though Saint Paul's reason be ^ramed by way of compar^son, yet the Jesuits
illation is not necessary.
If any list to make it a comparison, he may for me; and yet that way I see no
cause why you should so proportion Christ's mysteries to the devils sacrifices,
that point by point they must answer one an other in all effects, conditions
and proprieties of Altars, hosts and immolations. For this suffices S. Paul's
intent, that where the christians thought it a matter indifferent, and lawful
to eat and drink in the temples and at the tables of Heathen Idols, he by
examples both of christian and Jewish religion shows them that though they
did not sacrifice: and so took themselves to be free from Idolatry: yet
seeing they rejoiced and feasted with the men and meats that were addicted and
consecrated unto Idols, they were partakers of their wickedness. And therefore
the thing which S. Paul urges in this comparison of Christian, Jewish and
heath^nish religion is not offering or sacrificing, but in plain words eating
and drinking at the same table with men of any profession, where their rites
and ceremonies, be they good or bad, Eating of things consecrated unto Idols
is fellowship with diu^l^, though they be not sole ^^elie sacrificed unto them.
are used, as well as their offeringes and immolations: and in that sense the
conclusion holds on either side, though the things be not really sacrificed
unto God or the devil, but dedicated or consecrated to either of them, or
frequented in either of their names. For as he that eats and drinks at the
Lords table, partaketh with him and his; so he that does the like at the
devils table, linketh himself in the like fellowship with the devil and his
adherentes, though the meats that are set on the table be not first solemnly
sacrificed to the devil but blessed either in his name or with his ceremonies,
who being a wicked spirit affects to be honored in like sort and equal ^tate
with the true and mighty God.


Phi. S. Paul says the Gentiles did sacrifice their meats to the devil.


Theo. So much the worse for those Christians that did eat them, yet that does
not infer that the creatures at the Lords table were, point by point, in all
effects and conditions used and sacrificed to him as the heathens cates were to
their Idols. The Jesuits prove by the devils sacrifices that their Mass is
a sacrifice.
And to draw your argument from the devils table to prove that the bread and
wine at the Lords table be sacrificed is a strange kind of divinity, if it
be not worse. Certainly not the sacrifice, but the Sacrament ordained by
Christ to be taken and eaten from his table, does make us members of Christ:
and joins us all in one fellowship of his mystical body: the Priests
sacificing of Christ's flesh does not help the matter, for ought that we know,
or you prove, but by such sleeuelesse, No man partaker of their sacrifice
besides the Priest because n^ man eats of it but the Priest.
I will not say witless conceits as these be.

And yet your own comparison overthrows your own oblation. For if in Pagan,
Jewish, and even in Christian religion, as you say, they which eat of the
Sacrifice be partakers of the sacrifice, we infer that in your private masses
where the Priest alone ^ateth and no man eats with him, the people have no
part in that sacrifice: and so your oblation, if it be any, avails no man but
your selves, because no man eats of it besides your selves, which is more
against your profit, than the name of sacrifice would do you good, if you could
^uince it by S. Paul.


Phi. God help you masters: ye be so addicted to the belly, that you think
of nothing, ^ut of eating and drinking. The sacrifice you admit not, the
sacrament you adore not: but if you may eat and drink, then are you safe.


Theo. This divinity will better become the devils table whence you lately fet
your sacrifice, To eat and drink at Christ's table is Christ's ordinance: to
sacrifice is not.
than the Lords sacraments or the servants of Christ. To eat and drink at
his table is not our invention but his institution: and therefore no point of
gluttony, as you leu^ly surmise, but of piety, which you skant believe: as
appears by your abolishing that order which Christ left, and devising an
other of your own without any warrant from him. For where Christ said, take
ye, eat ye, you like not that, but have changed it into Look ye, adore ye,
telling the people they do God good service when they give his divine honor to
dead and ^^slesse creatures.


Phi. No Sir, we teach them to adore Christ and not the creatures of bread and
wine. Adoration of the sacrament.

The Jesuits pretending to adore Christ, adore the creatures of bread and wine.





Theo. You first imagine the creatures to be Christ, and then you give them
divine honor, as if they were Christ: but if they be creatures still, how does
your false imagination excuse you from idolatry?


Phi. We be sure they be not. For Christ said of them This is my body, and
this is my blood; and therefore honoring that which the Priest holds in his
hands, and lifts up after consecration, we be sure we honor Christ and not
the creatures of bread and win^.


Theo. So S. Paul said, The rock was Christ, and yet to worship that visible
rock with divine honor, had been idolatry.


Phi. The speeches be nothing like. No difference between these two speeches:
the Rock was Christ, and this is my bod^e.



Theo. Then tell us the difference.


Phi. Christ spoke the one actiuely and presently: the other was but a
collectio^ of things past long before made by S. Paul. And again the one is in
the new Testament the other in the old.


Theo. You might have added that the one was stone, the other bread: the one in
the desert, the other in the city.


Philand. Keep your trifling distinctions for your selves.


Theo. They will no way but be joined cheek by cheek with yours. Christ, you
say, spoke the one; and who spoke the other in Paul but Christ? Paul said of
himself that 2. Cor. 13.
Christ spoke in him: and Christ says of his Apostles, Mat. 10.
It is not you that speak but the spirit of your father that speaks in you.
And therefore you must receive that which Paul sp^ke 1. These. 2.

We have plainer word^s that the Rock was Christ than they have that the bread
is Christ.

Paul's speech does interpret Christ's words.


not as the word of men, but, as it is in deed, the word of god: and that
cannot went truth because the word of God is truth.


Phi. We do not deny but he spoke truth.


Theo. Then have we plainer proof that the stony rock in the desert wa^
Christ: than you have that the bread on the Lords table is Christ. For Christ
does not say in precise terms that the bread was his body, but only, this is my
body. And as for the diversity of the two testaments, that makes nothing to
this issue. For if the rock of the old test. were Christ, the bread of the new
Test. can be no more: and therefore divine adoration was as due to the rock
then, as it is to the bread now.


Phi. By no means. For the rock was not transubstantiated into Christ as the
bread is.


The. If Paul's words be true without cha^ging the rock into Christ, why may not
the words of Christ be likewise true without turning the substance of bread
into the substance of his body?


Phi. We tell you the reason. The one is substantially converted into Christ's
flesh, and so was not the other.


Theo. This is your fancy, to dream of a difference where none is: the
affrmations be like, why should not the adorations be like? And if you could
not worship the rock, without committing idolatry though the rock were Christ,
how can you give divine honor to the bread and wine since they be Christ even
after the same sort that the rock was?

Why do they not adore the Priest as well as the pixe?
Or, if that comparison do not please you, why do you worship the pixe wherein
the bread is, and so the chalice wherein the wine is, and not the priest that
by your doctrine does create and eat Christ?


Phi. We worship neither the pixe, nor the chalice, but Christ that is
contained in them both.


Theo. And is not the same Christ that was contained in them both, enclosed in
the priests body when he eats and drinks your sacrifice? That which was
contained in the pixe is enclosed in the Priests body.



Phi. Yeas.


Theo. And as really contained in his body, as in your golden box or gilden
chalice?


Phi. But yet we adore not the flesh of christ after it is once entered the
mouth of man.


Theo. You do not I know, but why should you not? Why suffer you Christ in any
place to be without the honor, that is due unto him? Will you serve him where
please you, and ourskip him at your discretions?


Phi. Should we adore him, when we know not where he is?


The. You be as sure he is in the Priest as in the pixe: for you see him in
neither: Why then do you adore him in the one, and not in the other?


Phi. Christ must not be adored at our discretion, but at all times and in all
places.
I think you would not have us adore our savior.


The. I would not have you adore him when and where you only list, much less
to adore a piece of bread in his steed: be first sure you have him and then
adore him wheresoever you find him.


Phi. So we do.


Th. You do not. You adore him not in the priest.


Phi. We see him not.


The. Will you not adore him till you see him? How then do you see him in the
chalice, or in the pixe?


Phi. There we be certain he is.


Theo. You be as certain of the other.


Phi. The fathers will us to adore the flesh of Christ in the mysteries, but not
in other men's bodies.


The. Do they will you to adore the mysteries themselves, I mean the mystical
and sacramental signs?


Phi. Not the signs themselves, they be but accidents and not to be adored,
but the sacrament it self they teach us to adore.


The. With divine honor?


Phi. With what else?


The. Adoration, if it be attributed in any father to the mystical signs is
that kind of reverence which we yield to things that be sanctified for Gods
use, and not godly honor.


Phi. I smell a rat.


The. If a rat should eat the host, it would make a foul work among the
Jesuits.

No father teaches that the Sacrament should be adored.


You were best then look to your host: for that of all others, that is a most
dangerous beast to your devotion.


Phi. Why?


The. I will tell you that anon, in the mean time what was it, that troubled your
wits?


Phi. With a sly distinction of twofold adoration you think to slip the fathers
which we will bring against you for the worshipping of the blessed sacrament.


The. Is that al your fear?


Phi. That is a way to wrangle, and to make the people believe our doctrine
touching adoration of the sacrament is not catholic.


The. Set aside one father, whom your selves shall not deny but that he
speaks of the substance of bread and wine: and in the rest, which you bring
we will use no such advantage.


Phi. What will you not do?


The. We will not choke you with that second acception of adoration: show that
the fathers adored the sacrament, or taught the people to so do, we require
no more.


Phi. That I will presently.

S. Austen says ep. 118. c. 3. that it is he that the Apostle says shall be
damned, The The. Test fol. 453. nu. 29. [not discerning the body.
that does not by singular veneration or adoration make a difference between
this meat and al others. And again in Psa. 91. No man eats it before he adore
it. And S. Ambro. li. 3 c. 12. de spi. sanct. We adore the flesh of Christ in
the mysteries. S. Chrysostom. hom. 24. in 1. Cor. We adore him on the altar, as
the Sages did in the manger. S. Nazianzene in Epitap. Gorgon. My sister called
upon him which is worshipped upon the altar. Theodoret. Dial. 2. In co^fes.
Half this would serve if any part of it were to the purpose.
The mystical tokens be adored. S. Denis this Apostles scholar, made solemn
invocation of the sacrament after consecration. Eccl. Hierar. ca. 3. part. 3.
in princip. and before the receiving, the whole church of God cries upon it,
Domine no^ sum dignus, Deus propitius esto mihi peccatori. Lamb of god, that
take away the sins of the world, have mercy on us. A smoothe tale of Robin
Hoode will prove the adoration of the sacrament as well as this that here
ensues.
And for better discerning of this divine meat, we are called from common
profane houses to Gods church: for this, we are forbidden to make it in vulgar
apparel, and are appointed sacred solemn vestments. Hier. in Epitap. Nepot.
and li. 2. adv. Pel. ca. 9. Paulinus ep. 12. ad Sever. Io. Diac. in vit. D.
Greg. li. 3. ca. 59. For this is the hallowing of Corporals and chalices. Ambr.
2. off. ca. 28. Nazian. Orat. ad Arianos: Optatus li. 6. in initio. For this
profane tables are removed and altars consecrated. Aug. Sermon. de temp. 255. For
this, the very priests themselves are honorable, chaste, sacred, Hier. ep. 1. ad
Heliodor. ca. 17. li. 1. adv. Iouin. ca. 19. Ambr. in 1. Tim. 3. For this the
people is forbidden to touch it with common hands. Nazian. orat. ad Arian. in
initio. For this great care and solicitude is taken that no part of either kind
fall to the ground, Cyril. Hieros. mystag. 5. in fine. Orig. ho. 13. in ca. 25.
Exodus For this sacred provision is made that if any hosts or parts of the
Sacrament do remain vnreceiued, they be most religiously reserved with all
honor and diligence possible, and for this, examination of consciences,
confession, continency, and (as S. Augustine says) receiving it fasting. Thus
do we catholics and the church of God discern the holy body and blood by S.
Paul's rule, Epist. 118. ca. 6
not only from your profane bread and wine (which not by any secret abuse of
your Curates or clearkes, but by the very order of your book, the Minister,
if any remain after your Communion, may take home with him to his own use, and
therefore it is no more holy by your own judgment than the rest of his meats)
but from al other either vulgar or sanctified meats, as the catechumens bread,
and our usual holy bread.


Theo. I had thought we should have had adoration of the sacrament proved, and
here comes The Pharisees and the Jesuits meet just in this kind of holine^*
hallowing of coapes, corporals, chalices, Altars, priests, pixes, and (not at
al, or last of al) the hallowing of souls, which in wisemens account deserved
to go alone or at least first in the Calendar. For your often and curious
clensing of the outsides of coats, cups, stones, hands and such like
implementes sauoreth of the Pharisees holiness, who supposed then as you do now,
that God is highly served with such solemn provision and sacred solicitude,
though this be more than ever Christ at his last supper had care for, or mind
of, for ought that we find by report of the Gospel. Mary this is not our
purpose. You must prove your adoration of the sacrament, let hallowing of
Uestments and Altars alone till an other time: and pursue that which is denied.


Phi. So we do. Have you not here S. Austen, S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S.
Nazianzene, This number is sufficient if they speak to the matter.
Theodorete, and S. Denis, that the sacrament should be adored?


Theo. Theodorete is not in your books, that he is not sainted with the rest:
yet is he an ancient and learned writer: but take your pleasure: The rest well
deserve it, and therefore I am not angry with it, though S. Paul extend the
name saint to the hearers as well as to the ^eachers, and to the living as well
as to the dead.


Phi. You would be saints.


The. God grant us to be his servants.


Phi. You must change your faith first.


The. Why? We worship no creatures in steed of Christ, They suppose creatures
to be Christ: and then at all adventures they adore them in his stead.

All these fathers are impertinent to this purpose. Not one of them besides
Theodoret speaks of the external Sacrament.

It is one to adore Christ which is in the mysteries, and an other to adore the
mysteries themselves which no father teaches. The Rhemish Test. sol. 453.
Epist. 118. ca. 3.


as you do.


Phi. Will that lying never be left?


Theo. Would God for your own sakes it were a ly, but I fear it is (...) true.


Phi. Christ we adore, creatures we do not.


Theo. The sacraments you adore, and those be creatures: as in Baptism the
water, in the Lords supper, the bread and wine.


Phi. We adore the B. sacrament of the Altar, as we learned of the catholic
fathers: creatures we adore none.


Theo. Of what fathers did you learn it?


Phi. I have told you, of S. Austen; S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S. Nazianzene,
Theodorete, and S. Denis.


Theo. Set Theodorete aside (who writing in greek uses the word adoration for
an external regard and reverence, such as we give to the books and vessels
that are sanctified to divine uses, though more amply to the sacraments
ordained by God himself: and says that the mystical signs themselves
remaining in their former (and earthly) substance are adored, that is
reverently and religiously handled, as becomes so great mysteries:) I say set
him aside, and not one of the rest so much as touches that which you should
prove.


Phi. They say the sacrament must be adored.


Theo. They say Christ must be adored.


Phi. Yea, but in the mysteries, and on the altar.


Theo. So Christ is to be adored, in heaven, in his church, and most of al in
our own hearts and bodies: will you thence collect that either heaven, or the
Temple, or our selves are to be adored?


Phi. But neither heaven, nor the temple are sacraments.


Theo. Yet Christ is adored in them, though they be not in like sort with him,
and so may Christ be adored in the mysteries, though the mysteries themselves
may have no such honor.


Phi. S. Auste^ says, It is he that the Apostle says should be damned that
does not by singular veneration or adoration make a difference between this
meat and all others.


Theo. S. Austen in that place speaks not one word of adoration. He says:
The Apostle affirms it to be unworthily received of the^, qui hoc non
discerneba^t a caeteris cibis veneratione singulariter debita, which did not
discern it from other meats with the veneration (that was properly or)
singularly due (unto it.)


Phil. S. Augustine perverted by the Iesui^s. Aug. ^e Do^tr. Christ. li. 3. ca.
9.
Uery well. Singular veneration is al one with divine adoration.


Theo. In your corrupted judgments.


Phi. What else is it?


Theo. Veneratio^ is a word that S. Austen fourdeth all the signs and
sacraments of the old and new Testament, adoration he reserueth only to God. Of
veneratio^ he says, Qui veneratur ^ignum vtile diuinitus ins^itutum, non hoc^
veneratur quod videtur and transit, sed illud potius, quo talia cuncta
referenda sunt. He that reuerenceth a sign that is profitable, and ordained
by God, reuerenceth not the thing which is visible and transitory, but that
rather, to which all such (signs) are referred. And so concludes namely of
baptism and the Lords Supper. Ibidem.
Quae vnusquisque cu^ percipit qu^ referantur imbutus agnoscit, S. Aug.
allows veneratio^ but not adoration to this or any other Sacrament.
vt ea non carnal^ seruitute sed spirituali potius liberate veneretur. Which
(two Sacraments) when every Christian receives, he knows, being once
partaker of them, whither to refer them, that he may reverence them with a
spiritual liberty, rather than with a carnal servitude.

And least you should not understand what difference he puts between the
corporal creature and the heavenly brightness in this, and so in other
sacraments, he says farther: Ibidem. li. 3. cap. 5. Not to distinguish the
signs from the things is a miserable servitude of the soul. August. de vera
Religio. c. 54. Adoration due only unto God.
Ea demum est miserabilis animae seruitus signa pro rebus accipere, nec supra
creaturam corpoream oculum mentis ad ^auriendum aeternum lumen leuare non
posse. That is a miserable bondage of the soul, to take the signs (or
Sacraments as you do) for the things themselves, and not to be able to lift
up the eye of the mind above the corporal creature to perceive the eternal
brightness.

Of adoration he says, Recte scribitur hominem ab angelo prohibitum ne se
aedoraret, sed vnum Deum, sub quo esset ei and ille conseruus. It is very well
recorded in the Scriptures that a man was prohibited by an angel to adore him,
but only God, under whom he himself was a fellow servant unto God. And
therefore he says, Ibidem.
Ecce vnum Deum colo, Behold I worship (and adore) none but God* and thence he
deriueth the name of religion, Ibidem.
Quod ei vni religet animas nostras. Because it relieth our souls on him
alone. So that veneration you may give to sacraments, adoration you may not,
and yet you finely convey the one into S. Augustines text jointly with the
other, as if they were both found in his words which they are not.


Phi. He says singular veneration.


Theo. You say so, but he says not so: His words are, Veneratione
singulariter debita, with that veneration which is due (only or) singularly to
this Sacrament.


Phi. And what is that but adoration? August. ep. 118.

What veneration is due to this Sacrament.





Theo. If you might be judges it should be nothing else, but S. Augustine
says, Not to be contemned, is the veneration due unto it. Contemptum solum non
vult cibus ille: that meat misliketh onele contempt: that is either to be
daily received without regard, or to be still refused upon pretense of
unworthiness. And that being the case of which S. Augustine disputes, your
cunning serves you, in steed of examining themselves, before they receive it,
which S. Augustine means, to set the people not at all to receive it but to
fall down and adore it with divine honor in Christ's place, which is as
wilful a contempt of his ordinance, and as shameful an abuse of his
sacraments as can be committed.


Phi. The same father in an other place says of the Sacrament, In Psalm. 98.
No man eats it before he adore it.


Theo. Are you not desperately set, that to defile your selves with open
idolatry, will force the Fathers to fit your ^umours against their own
speeches? S. Augustine says of Christ's flesh which he took of the virgin
Marie, Nemo illam carnem manducat nisi prius adorauerit. No man eats that
flesh of Christ unless he first adore it: you make no more bones at the
matter but strike THE FLESH (of Christ) out of Saint Augustines words, What
S. Aug. spoke of Christ's flesh, the Jesuits turn to their host.
and refer adoration to the corporal creature, which the Priest holds in
his fingers. Is not this, trow you, sound dealing in the greatest mysteries
of our salvation, and imminent peril of your damnation, purposely to shut your
eyes least you should see the truth or agnise the rashness of your new
found adoration? What have Saint Augustines words to do with your adoring
the mystical signs, when he directly names the flesh of Christ, which is
both eaten with the spirit, and adored in the spirit: yea the very eating of
it is the adoring of it, since it is not eaten but by believing, The true
eating of christ's flesh is all one with the adoring of it.
hoping and rejoicing in it, which are the chief branches of Gods divine honor.


Phi. As though the flesh of Christ were not really closed in the form of
bread, and corporally eaten with the mouth of man?


Theo. One error must needs draw on an other, The ground of all their errors
and abuses in the Mass is their real presence.
or rather your real and carnal presence is the groundworke of all your
errors and abuses in the Mass.


Phi. The denial of it is the high way to all your heresies and blasphemies
against the doctrine of the church: and for our parts, till you leave that,
we look for no better at your hands.


Theo. Look to your own feet, least whiles you watch our hands, your legs
slip into the pit of destruction.


Phi. We be past all fear of that.


Theo. And so be those, that are past all recovery: but yet for the saving of
other men's souls if not of yours, we will first weigh the proofs of your
adoration, and after not stick to suruay the parts of your
Transubstantiation. Go on therefore with your former authorities.


Phi. S. Ambrose says, De spir. sanct. lib. 3. cap. 12.
We adore the flesh of Christ in the mysteries.


Theo. Uerily and We adore Christ in the^: we adore not the mysteries
themselves.
so do we, but the mysteries and sacraments themselves we do not adore,
neither did Saint Ambrose ever teach any man to adore them.


Phi. I see you mistake us. You think we adore the forms of bread and wine:
where in deed we do not, but rather we adore Christ the son of the living
God, and second person in Trinity in those mysteries as Saint Ambrose says,
or as we speak more usually under those The accide^ts of bread and wine be
absurdities, they be no mysteries.
forms of bread and wine.


Theo. I mistake you not, I know you adore that which is locally and really
enclosed within the compass of your host and chalice, supposing it in matter
and substance to be the glorious body of Christ, apparelled with accidents of
bread and wine, as whiteness, roundnesse, sweetness, moystnesse, and such
like proprieties of bread and wine; but your foundation we say is false, and
therefore your building must needs be ruinous. Christ is present in the
mysteries not by the material substance of his body closed within the forms
of bread and wine, How Christ is present in the mysteries.
but by a divine and spiritual virtue and efficience, not mixing (...), but
entering the h^rt^ of the faith^ull, and nourishing them with his spirit and
grace to eternal life, the elements abiding in their proper and former
essence and substance. And therefore when you adore them, as if they were
Christ in nature and substance, which in truth they are not, you worship not
Christ, This is not to adore Christ but the creatures.
but give his honor to creatures, and in steed of washing your sins away by
the death and blood of Christ, you kindle the wrath of God against you, by
mystaking his son, and adoring the elements with divine honor in lue of
Christ.


Phi. Tush, we regard not these words of yours: we have assurance from Christ
himself that it is his body, and so long we pass not for any thing that you
can allege or object against us. The misconstruction of Christ's words
leads them to this Idolatry.



Theophil. But if you misconster his words to make a dead and corruptible
creature to be the second person in Trinity, and give it that honor, which
is due to the glorious and immortal God, what assurance can you have that
Christ Jesus will put up this reproach at your hands, and not avenge himself
on you, as on proud idolate^s?


Phi. Are you well in your wits to urge us so often with open Idolatry, where
as we show you so plain proofs of our defense?


Theo. Plain quoth you? Christ is adored in the mysteries though he be not
locallie enclosed in them.
In good faith they be such as no mean Scholar would stumble at. Christ, you
prove, is adored in the mysteries and on the Altar. Why should he not be
adored in all places, and in all his gifts, and for all the monumentes of his
grace and mercy bequeathed us in this life, that he may prepare us for the
next? And if this rule be general, how great cause have we to ad^re him in
the water, where he cleanses us from our sins: and at the table, where he
feeds and strengthens our souls and spirits with their proper nourishment,
which is the precious ransom that was paid to recover us from death and hell,
and to bring us to his immortal light and bliss? What Christian heart
recounting his abundant goodness and fatherly readynesse with his own
stripes to heal us, with his own blood to wash us, with his own death to
quicken us, will not be resolved into prayers and tears, to yield all honor
and adoration to him that does offer us these treasures at and on his table?


Phi. These be goodly words to bleare men's eyes, We shut him not up in the
compass of the host, but by faith we behold and enjoy his presence at his
table.
where in deed you deny him to be present either at, or on the Altar.


Theo. We confess him to be there present with all his gifts and blessings
to him, that will behold him with the eye of faith, and reach out the hand of
his soul to apprehende him, in greater might and majesty, than you do, when
you shroude him with your forms of bread and wine, and pale him round with a
pixe as it were with a sepulcher. Mary local dimension or inclusion within the
compass of the host or chalice we appoint him none: His truth is annexed to
the Sacraments, and his power united to the creatures after a wonderful and
inspeakeable manner, This presence is fruitful and effectual, theirs is not.
by the mighty working of the holy ghost, but yet we must not direct his
divine honor and service to any part of the Altar, or circumference of the
visible creatures: we must rather Lift up our hearts as the faithful were
always admonished in this sacrament, We must lift up our hearts not to the
host, but unto heaven.
and take heed that we do not basely bend our eyes on the bread or wine to
seek Christ in them, and underneath them, much less worship them in steed
of him, which is the next way to dishonor him, and deifie them against the very
rules and Principles of our faith.


Phi. But S. Chrysostom says, We adore him on the altar, as the Sages did in
the manger: Chys. in 1. Cor. homil 24. Nazianz. in epitaph. Gorgoniae.

Christ is honored and served on the Altar, though he be not corporally
fastened to the host.


and S. Nazianzene says of his sister Gorgonia, she called on him which is
worshipped on the Altar.


Theo. What words soever Chrysostom and Nazianzene use to express the place
where Christ is served and adored, yet this is evident, that they attribute
adoration not to the visible element or sacrament but unto Christ, who may well
be said to be worshipped on the Table or altar, for so much as there is the
fruit, force and e^fect of his heavenly grace and truth proposed unto all,
and from thence the prayers and thanks of all are offered unto him by the
religious heart and voice of the Pastor that stands at the Lords table to
be the mouth of al, and yet you deal untruly with both those fathers as you
do almost with all the rest of the writers that pass your pen.

Chrysostom corrupted by the Jesuits.
Chrysostomes words are, Tu non in praecepe id, sed in Altarivides. Thou see
(his body) not in a manger but on the Altar. Now between seeing and adoring
there is good difference, if you be not so blind, that you can see nothing.


Phi. He speaks it to that end, that we should adore it, as the Sages did
when they found him in a manger.


Theo. He has some words tending to this end, that we should adore the body
of Christ, since the wicked and barbarous Magi did yield him that honor, but
he joins no such words together as you cite: he says not, we adore him on
the altar, but let us that be citizens of heaven, at least imitate those
Barbarians.


Phi. That is in adoring Christ.


Theo. As if we doubted of that? But where is, on the altar, which you have
added of your own, Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. hom. 24. We must get up to heaven with
the wings of faith before we can rightly adore Christ, as Chrysostom would
have us to adore him.

We may behold the host with less ado, if that had been Chrysostoms meaning.


without your authors consent?


Phi. He says, thou see him on the Altar.


Theo. But neither with corporal eyes, nor under the forms of bread and wine.
And that well appears in the very same place when he says, Ascend igitur ad
coeli portas, and tunc quod dicimus intueberis. Climb up to the gates of
heaven, and then thou shall see that which we now say. To which end he told
them before that becoming Eagles in this life they must fly up to heaven it
self or rather above the heavens. For where the carcas is (says Christ) there
will the Eagles be. The Lords body (is) the carkas in respect of the death
(which he suffered.) Eagles (Christ) calls us to show us that he must fly
on high, which will come to this body, and ever mount upward, and have the eye
of his mind most bright, to behold the son of righteousness: He that teaches
you to ascend to the highest heavens there to adore Christ never meant you
should adore the h^st in the Priests hands in steed of Christ: and as he
never meant it, so he never spoke it, though you have played some ligier de main
to make his words sound to that sense.


Phi. Nazianzenes sister called on him that (is) worshipped upon the altar.
Nazianz. in epitaph. Gorgoniae.



Theo. She did so: but when she made her prayers to Christ there was neither
Priest by, nor pixe there, that you should dream she made her prayers to the
host. Christ is truly said to be honored on the altar, because his mercies
are thence delivered unto us and our prayers from thence offered unto him
sitting in heaven.
Nazianzene says she went to the Church (...) in the dark of the night, and
kneeling close to y^ altar she did invoke, (...), him that is honored
thereon: not meaning the host, which at that instant was not on the Altar, but
Christ who is truly said to be honored on the altar or Table, because his
mercies are there laid forth in the mysteries, and the prayers and
supplications of all the faithful offered chiefly from that place unto him,
though he sit in heaven according to the material substance of his humane
body.


Phi. He is honored on the Altar; that is say you the Altar is the place whence
honor is given unto him, what sleights you have to avoid the fathers?


Theo. Have you no worse to enforce them, and you shall do them less wrong than
you do. When the woman of Samaria said to Christ, Joan 4.
Our fathers worshipped (God) in this hill, did she mean that God was in the
hill, or that the worship was there d^ne unto him? When it was said to Moses,
Exodus 3.
Ye shall serve God upon this mountain: was that mountain before hand allotted
to God, or to his service? So Christ is honored on earth, Christ is honored on
earth, and yet that does prove him to be personally on earth.
though he be in heaven, because the earth is the place where he is honored
and served. And yet we doubt not but Christ himself is also present even in
the mysteries and on the Altar or Table of the Lord, albeit not in that
corporal and carnal manner which you conceive. And therefore though the
words carry a double sense, yet we admit them both, so you adore Christ and not
the creatures of bread and wine in his steed, which Nazianzene was far from
allowing, and his sister from doing.

For speaking in the same place of the mystical elements, Nazianzens sister
had the Sacrament about her, which she did not adore, but him that was served
on the sacred table.
which you would have the people to adore as Christ, he says, (...). If any
where (about her) she found part of the figures of the sacred body and blood
which her hand had laid up in stoare, watering that with tears (not adoring
it with divine worship) she departed presently cured of her disease. That
which you affirm to be the real and natural flesh and blood of Christ, she
had about her, as many men and weomen used in the primative church to carry the
same about them, and yet she did not adore that which she had in her hand, but
him that is served and honored on the Altar or table of the Lord.


Phil. You pare these places with certain circumstances I know not how. But S.
Denis the Apostles scholar, Eccles. Hierarch. cap. 3.
made a solemn invocation of the Sacrament after Consecration in these
words: But thou, O divine and most holy Sacrament, show (thy self) plainly
to us, and brighten the eyes of our mind with thy singular light that can not
be covered. You ask proof for adoration of the Sacrament, We will show you
where you have corrupted this father in express words.
we show you where the Apostles scholar prayed to the blessed Sacrament in
express words, and higher adoration than prayer there can be none. What
would you more?


Theo. We would have you regard if not your consciences before God, yet your
credites before men.


Phi. Do we not so think you; when we join with Saint Paul's scholar, and
teach the people to do as he did?


Theo. O wicked and wilful corruption!


Phi. Corruption? Why? What? Wherein?


Theo. The prayer which he makes to the son of God, you wrest to the
corporal and external creatures.


Phi. No sir, that shift will not serve. If these be not his words, then you be
furiously bent to forge.
His words be, But thou O divine and most holy Sacrament, which he spoke
(after consecration,) and yet you will not acknowledge them, you be so
furiously bent against the blessed Sacrament.


Theo. You never read them once.

The Jesuits say this inuocaetion of the Sacrament was made after consecration,
as if Diony^ius had been mumbling a Mass, and not writing a book. If the
Greek word had been (...), as it is not, that was no cause for you to wrest
it to the Sacrament.


After consecration what is that? Was he at mass when he made this prayer?


Phi. He made this invocation of the Sacrament after Consecration.


Theo. Did ye ever read the words?


Phi. Twenty times.


Theo. Where was the host, when he made this prayer?


Phi. What can I tell? To the host he made it.


Theo. Was he praying at the Altar, or writing in his study when he uttered
these words?


Phi. What is that to us?


Theo. You say, he prayed to the host, and that after Consecration: where he
good man was busy at his book, and beseeching God to lighten his
understanding that he might write the truth.


Phi. Wheresoever he was, he says, O thou divine and most holy Sacrament.


Theo. Did he write in Latin or in Greek?


Phi. In Greek. What then?


Theo. The word Sacrament is not Greek.


Phi. No. (...) is the Greek word: but that in Latin is the Sacrament.


Theo. Grant the Greek word were (...), are there no mysteries besides the
Sacrament?


Philand. Yeas. There are mysteries that are not the Sacrament.


Theoph. You shall otherwise not only enlarge the limits of your mass to
contain your seven Sacraments, but also multiply the number of your seven
sacraments, to seven thousand times seven. For all secrets and wonders in
heaven, earth and hell, which pass the reach or knowledge of the natural or
regenerate man, be mysteries.


Phi. In deed a mystery is a secret, as well as a Sacrament.


Theo. And that in evil things as well as in good. As 2. These. 2.
the mystery of iniquity, Apoc. 17.

There are many mysteries which are not the sacrament of the Altar.


the mystery of the woman and beast, on which the whore of Babylon sat.


Phi. All this is true.


Theo. And as in evil, so in good things, Saint Paul says often, The
mystery of God and of Christ. As when he signifies to the Colossians his
care for them to Colos. 2.
know the mystery of God even the father, and of Christ, and so the 1. Tim. 3.
mystery of faith, Ephesians. 6.
of the Gospel, 1. Tim. 3.

The divine and humane natures of Christ are most wonderful mysteries.


of Godlynes, and such like.


Phi. Uery well.


Theo. As these be mysteries because they be secrets above our natural
capacity though reueiled unto us by God in his word, so is the nature of God a
most incomprehensible mystery, namely the mystery of the blessed trinity,
which is neither expresseable in our words, nor conceiueable with our hearts.


Phi. This we doubt not of.


Theo. So is there the mystery of Christ's incarnation, of his death and
passion, of his resurrection and ascension, and of a thousand such, which
Christ calls the Mat. 13.
mysteries of the kingdom of God, and Paul means when he says, Let a man so
esteem us as the Ministers of Christ and disposers of Gods 1. Cor. 4.
mysteries. And for that cause the whole Gospel is called 1. Colos. 1.
a mystery hid since the world began and from all ages, but now made manifest
to his Saints.


Phi. This is not to our purpose.


Theo. I think it be not: you have utterly perverted the words of Dionysius,
(if that be his work, and those were his words which you allege,) and now
you are loath to see it.


Phi. Convince us before you condemn us.


Theo. What other conviction need we than your own conclusion? Dionysius
speaking to Christ says, at lest as you suppose, Thou divine and most holy
mystery, replenish the eyes of our souls with (thy) singular and
vnextinguished light. You, because the word mystery when it is applied to
corporal and external creatures does sometimes signify a sacrament, have
robbed Christ of his honor, The Jesuits ignorance in wresting Dionysius.
and given it to the element of bread, and slaundered that writer, whatsoever
he was, for an open Idolater like to your selves. Are not the people well
help up to trust such gamsters as you be, that lead them to so dangerous
impiety with such manifest impudency?


Phi. Your railing vain is come upon you.


Theo. And what vain is come on you that will rather make a shipwreck of your
own and other men's saluations, than you will seem to relent from your errors?
The Jesuits means to defend their errors, be as wicked as their errors.



Phi. It is no error.


The. It is an impious and heinous error: and you bolster it up with as evil
and wicked means, that is by corrupting and forcing other men's writings to
bear out your doings.


Phi. Dionysius in that whole chapter treats of nothing but of the Sacrament.


Theo. And the Sacrament consisting of two parts, He may treat of the
Sacrament, and yet speak to Christ because Christ is the truth and perfection
of the Sacraments.
an earthly and an heavenly: the heavenly part of the sacrament is Christ. Why
might he not therefore make his prayer unto Christ to direct his pen, before
he assayed to treat of those mysteries?


Phi. So he did, but yet intending to pray to Christ, he speaks to him in
the Sacrament.


Theoph. It is one thing to pray to the sacrament as you though falsely say S.
Denis did, and an other thing to pray to him that is every where present in
that he is God and has a special kind of operation by the power and grace
of his flesh and blood in the sacred mysteries as he is man united in the same
person with God. And yet these words do not import him to be in the
sacrament. Certainly Christ's divine and humane nature were most wonderful
mysteries before this Sacrament was ordained: and all the words that your
author uses if they were, Do you no^ pervert the words when you force them for
adoration of corruptible creatures against the authors m^^ning?
as you cite them, are only these, Thou divine and most holy mystery, which
agree to Christ without any respect of the Sacrament, more properly and truly
than to your host or chalice.


Philand. Yet they may be taken as spoken to the sacrament: and therefore we
did not pervert them, we did but prefer that construction before the other.


Theo. That is, where divine honor was given to christ, you derive it from him
to the host.


Phi. Not from him, but finding him truly and corporally present in the
sacrament, there we honor him where we find him.


Theo. Your doings we know: but Dionysius words have no such sense.


Philand. They may have, and that suffices us.


Theo. But if by them you will prove so great a matter as this is, which we
now have in hand: they must necessarily enforce your exposition and not
indifferently bear an other as well as yours or rather better.

This answer might suffice, if Dionysius had used the word (...), as you
suppose he did: but now his text is, (...) But O most divine and holy expiation
(or Sacrifice) reueiling the enigmaticall couerings, which are figuratively
adjacent unto thee, be opened clearly unto us: Or if any man like rather to
have it an Apostrophe, A second exposition of Dionysius his words.
to a thing lacking life, such as the learned are well acquainted with, and the
Scriptures often use: he may interpret it nearer to the right signification of
the word (...), and say, but O most divine and sacred rite or institution,
referring it to that manner and order of celebrating the Lords supper, which
Christ first ordained, and may properly be called (...). Dionysius
distinguishes the elements from that which he speaks to. Ios. 10. 3. King.
13. Esa. 1. Psalm. 24.

The imperative mood is no prayer except the person be^ such as we may not
otherwise speak unto but by prayer.


Howsoever it is evident he makes no invocation of the host or chalice, nor
speaks to them, but, calls them (...), aenigmaticall vayles or integuments
figuratively adherent or annexed to the perfection of the mysteries.


Phi. Run you for refuge to the Rhetoritians?


Theo. As though the scriptures were not full of the like speeches? Joshua
said, Thou sun stand still in Gibeon, and thou moon in the valley of Aialon.
And so the man of Judah, O Altar, Altar, thus says the Lord, behold. And Esai
himself began his prophecy with, Hear O heavens, and hearken O earth.


Phi. Those were speeches, not prayers; as this is.


Theoph. They be all imperative moodes, as well as this, and so is that saying
of David, Lift up your heads, ye gates, and be ye lift up, you everlasting
doors, and the king of glory shall come in; which yet is no prayer to the
doors. The mood of it self is not precatiue except the person be such, as
we must not command but only entreat: and being used to things without
life it shows the desire of our heart touching them, not any supplication
unto them. And therefore you do not only the divines but also the Grammarians
wrong, when you conclude an invocation of the Sacrament out of Dionysius
words, because the verbes be imperative. For the word (...) contains the
whole action, institution, and celebration of the Lords Supper, Christ is not
reallie covered with the vailes of bread and wine, but figuratiuelie
represented and truly received by them.
yea the inward grace as well as the outward elements: and Dionysius might
say to Christ's ordinance (...), be opened unto us, without invocation of the
host or Chalice, as well as David said, (...), be you lifted up, to the gates:
and yet made them no Gods.


Phi. Yet by this place you see, Christ is covered with the forms of bread and
wine, as with garments, and that is word for word our opinion.


Theo. Add (...), figuratively as your author does, and then both your real
presence is overthrown, and the doctrine which we teach clearly established.
For we confess that Christ works in us, and presents himself unto us in
these mysteries, as it were in certain vayles and couerings. Which mystically
by way of signification and spiritual operation contain and clothe his grace
and truth: but not really nor by material or corporal inclusion, as you
affirm: Dionys eccles. hierar^h. cap. 3.
and so himself expresses his mind in this very chapter, (...). The reverent
(or venerable) signs, by which Christ IS SIGNIFIED and emparted unto us, being
set on the Altar: Christ is signified and received by these signs and figures,
and to him, not to the sacrament spoke Dionysius (if that were his work,) but
that Christ is locally or substancially closed within the forms of bread and
wine, or that he prayed to the host and Chalice, Dionysius has no such sense
nor words.


Phi. To Christ he spoke, we doubt it not, mary when he was covered with
signs and figures of bread and wine.


Theo. Signs and figures the ancient fathers do not take for shows and
accidents as you do, but for substantial and usual creatures, such as you may
not adore.


Phi. We say no.


Theo. Of that anon: in the mean time, well you may think that had you been
in Dionysius place you would have prayed to the Sacrament, but his words
import no such matter.


Philand. Why should not he as well as the rest of the godly? The The. test.
fol. 453.
The whole Church This is right Jesuitical religion to cry thus upon a dumb
and dead creature. No blasphemy.
cries upon it, Domine non sum dignus, Deus propitius esto mihi peccatori:
Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world, have mercy on us.


Theo. Whom mean you by the whole Church; your selves, or all the Godly since
Christ?


Philand. Never ask that question: they did as we do, and we do as they
did.


Theo. If you speak of your selves, then here is the witness of your own
mouth, that you CRY UPON IT (I mean on your host which in substance is a base
and corruptible creature,) O Lord, O God, O Lamb of God that take away the
sins of the world, have mercy on us. Iere. 2.
What greater sin did they commit which said to a stock, thou art my
Father, and to a stone, thou have begotten me; whom the holy Ghost has
traduced for a memorable and yet detestable crewe of Idolaters? The Jewish and
heathen Idolaters were never so gross
Whether it is greater to be a father, or to be a God? to beget, or to take
away the sins of the world? They said the one, you say the other: who can
forbid the banes but that you should be coupled with them, if not preferred
before them as more outrageous in dishonoring God than they were?


Phi. Do we not this to Christ, and is he not worthy of it?


Theoph. Why then do you cry on it, and not on him?


Philand. We be persuaded that when we call on it, we call on him.


Theo. So were they that took a stock for their father, and a stone for their
maker. They thought they worshipped God, and not the Image.


Philand. But we be sure that Christ made this to be himself, when he
said, this is my body.


Theo. He said, I am the door, I am the vine, and yet neither door, nor vine
are really and personally the son of God.


Philand. He spoke those things in parables, and by way of resemblance: this
he spoke in plain truth without all figures: If it be a figurative speech as
anon shall be proved, you shall cough me the ranckest Idolaters that ever were
on the face of the earth.
and therefore this must be substantially turned into Christ, though that be
not.


Theoph. You make your real and corporal presence a refuge for your erroneous
and absurd assertions: But if that be false as well as the rest, then are you
plunged over head and ears in the mire and sink of sin and heresy.


Phi. If God be not in heaven, we shall never come there: but if he be, we
can not miss our way. For has the whole Church think you lain in sin and
heresy till your new doctrine came lately from Geneua?


Theo. In deed I think this reason is even as good as the most of those which
your friends have freshly sent us from Rhemes; but abuse not your selves with
such stately follies: GOD may well be in heaven and is no doubt; and yet you
never come there for refusing the right way thither.


Philand. The Jesuits crake they have the whole church with them, when they
have not so much as one father for the greatest points of their religion.
We go the same way that the whole church since Christ's time went before us.


Theoph. This pride so bewitcheth you, that you can not see how far you be
fallen from the faith of Christ's Church, which was in ancient and uncorrupted
ages.


Philand. As though we did not join with them in this and all other points
of Religion.


Theoph. You join with them as darke-night does with daylight.


Philand. Have we not their full consent for those things which you impugn?


Theoph. As namely for adoration of the sacrament, where you pretend the whole
Church, and show not one man that ever taught of the Sacrament that It should
be adored.


Philand. Was not the whole Church taught to say unto It, and cry upon It,
Domine non suum dignus, Lord I am not worthy?


Theo. Prove that this or any other invocation or adoration was used TO IT as
you say: and you shall go free for all. The The. test. page 21. nu. 8. Domine
non sum dignus.



Phi. Origin, ho. 5. in diverse. When thou eatest, (says he) and drinkest the
body and blood of our Lord, he enters under thy roof. Thou also therefore
humbling thy self say, Lord I am not worthy. So said Liturg. S. Chrysostom.
Graec. sub finem. Origin and Chrysostom abused for invocation of the
Sacrament.
S. Chrysostom in his Mass.


Theoph. This they were taught to say, but to what were they taught to say it?


Philand. To the Sacrament.


Theo. Who says so besides you?


Phi. Origin and Saint Chrysostom.


Theoph. Perhaps they taught the people that kind of prayer when they did
communicate at the Lords Table: but did they teach the people to say so to the
Sacrament?


Philand. Even thus to cry UPON IT, and thus to say UNTO IT, Lord I am not
worthy.


Theo. Look the places when you will, and you shall find it to be otherwise.
We would gladly hear that of their own mouths, we trust not yours.


Philand. Look the places and you shall find it to be as we say.


Theo. We have viewed the places and find you to be Liars.


Phi. Are not those Origens words which we rehearse?


Theo. Origin has the words, which you cite, but he teaches not the people to
direct them to the Sacrament.


Philand. To whom then?


Theoph. To whom, but to christ the son of God?


Phi. And he is in the sacrament.


Theo. Their assertions, not your additions, are the things we ask for. That
these and all other parts of divine honor are due to christ, no christian may
doubt; but that the same may be directed and applied to the host, that is your
blasphemy, no father ^uer taught it.

Origin discussing the Centurions fact and faith tells his audience that
Christ enters under the roofes of all believers two ways; How Christ at this
day enters our roof. Orig. hom. 5. ad. diverse.
first by his ministers, then by his mysteries. Intrat and nunc Dominus sub
tectum Credentium duplici figura vel more. The Lord even at this day enters
the roof of those that believe after two sorts or manners. For when holy and
acceptable pastors of the Church to GOD enter our howsen, even then and there
the Lord enters by them, and be thou so affected, as if thou receiuedst the
Lord himself. An other way is, when thou receiuest that holy meat, Christ
enters the soul and not the mouth of man.
and eatest and drinkest the body and blood of the Lord, for then the Lord
enters thy roof also. Thou therefore humbling thy self, imitate the
Centurion and say: Lord I am not worthy, that thou should come under my
roof.

This must be said, as well when the preacher enters our house, as when we
receive the sacrament: for it is plain by Origin that christ comes under our
roof in both these cases, We must say Lord I am not worthy, to Christ, and
not to the Sacrament: for the Centurion said it to Christ's person. Christ is
more truly and substantiallie in us than in the Sacrament.

That Christ dwells reallie and corporally in us, See Chrysostom homil. 83.
in Mat. Cyril. in Johan. lib. 10. cap. 13. and li. 11. ca. 26. Hilarious de
Trinitate lib. 8. but that he dwells so in the Sacrament the Jesuits shall
never prove.


and we are not worthy in either of them or in any other case, that the son
of God should come under our roof. As then it were madness to deifie the
Preacher, because Christ voutsafeth to come in him and with him, or to salute
him with the divine honor due to christ and to say to a mortal man, Lord I am
not worthy: so can it be no less impiety to say to the dead creatures in
which or with which we receive christ from his table, Lord I am not worthy.


Phi. Do you think that Christ is none otherwise in the Sacrament, than he is
in a mortal man?


Theo. He is more truly, reallie and naturally in those men that be his
members than he is in the elements that be used at his table.


Phi. O shameful heresy! Is any mortal man transsubstantiated into Christ,
as the elements are by power of consecration?


Theo. That which I say is most true; men are the members of Christ, bread is
not: Christ abides in them and they in him, in the bread he does not: he
will raise them in the last day, the bread he will not: they shall reign with
him for ever, the bread shall not. And therefore take back your shameful
error of transsubstantiating the elements into christ, since he is more really
in us than in the pixe or the chalice, and yet we are not substantiallie
converted into him.


Phi. I will never believe this whiles I have a day to live.


Theo. Neither do I mean in this place to enter that discourse: yet for the
confirmation of it, I send you to Chrysostom, Cyrill, and Hilarie, who will
teach you so much in plain words, that christ is in us reallie, naturally,
corporally, carnally, substantiallie, which of the Sacrament you shall never
be able to prove. For the sacrament is no part of his mystical body, as we
are, and therefore we are knit unto him even by the truth of his and our
nature, flesh, and substance, as members of the same body to their head, the
Sacrament is not, but only annexed as a sign to the heavenly grace, and
virtue of Christ mightily present, and truly entering the soul of every man
that is fi^lie prepared with faith and repentance to receive and lodge so
worthy a ghost.


Phil. The Sacrament is turned into the real and natural flesh of Christ, and
so are not we.


Theoph. If that were true, when the Sacrament is turned by natural digestion
into the nourishment of our bodies, the flesh and blood of Christ must likewise
be converted into the substance of our bodies: Christ enters not our mouths,
when he comes under our roof.
but that is so blasphemous and impious that you dare not abide it; and
therefore Christ enters not our mouths, when he comes under our roof, but
possesses our souls and replenisheth them with his heavenly presence and
power of grace and life: neither must we say to the Sacrament, Lord I am not
worthy; since that is an earthly and corruptible creature: but to Christ
himself who has promised in his Gospel that he and his I^an. 14.
father will come and dwell with us, and perfourmeth the same by the hearing of
his word, and receiving of his Sacraments, by which means he comes and
^phes. ^.
dwells in our hearts by faith, as S. Paul affirms, and not in our mouths
or bellies by any local and real comprehension as you imagine.


Phi. We do not deny that Christ comes by his word unto us; but the
Sacraments have a special presence of his, which the word has not.


Theo. The sacraments take their force only and wholly from the word, neither
is the word any whit the stronger or better for the visible signs, but our
weakness is stayed and supported by them and they endued with power and virtue
by the word to sanctify the receiver, where it is believed. And therefore
Christ comes and dwells in us, as truly by his word as by his sacraments,
and if you compare them, more truly by his word, than by the signs and
seals of his word.


Phi. We eat his flesh and drink his blood in the sacrament, in the word we do
not.


Theo. Christ dwells in us as truly by his word, as by his sacraments
We eat his flesh and drink his blood more truly in the word, than in the
Sacramental and mystical signs. S. Hierom says, Hier. in Psalm. 147.
Ego corpus Jesus Euangelium puto: and quando dicit, qui non commederit carnem
meam, and biberit sanguinem meum licet and in mysterio possit intelligi, tamen
verius corpus Christi and sanguis eius sermo Scripturarum est. The body of
Jesus I think to be the Gospel, and when he says, he that does not eat my
flesh and drink my blood though this may be understood of the Sacrament, The
flesh of Christ is eaten more truly in his word than in the sacraments.
yet the word of the Scriptures is more truly the body and blood of Christ.
S. Austen says: De Cons. did. 2. vt quid paras.

August. de ciui. (...). 21. ca. 25.


Believe and thou have eaten: to believe in him, is to eat the lively bread:
and that he calls of the twain the truer kind of eating the flesh and
drinking the blood of Christ. For repeating these words of our savior, he
that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, abides in me and I in him, he
says, Ostendit quid sit non Sacramento tenus sed reuera co^pus Christi
manducare. Christ shows what it is to eat his flesh, not by way of a
Sacrament, but in deed, (or truly.) So that the flesh and blood of Christ are
MORE TRVELY in the members and words of Christ than in the Sacraments; and yet
your selves teach no man to say to the Preacher, or the Scriptures, Lord I am
not worthy.


Phi. Chrysostom in his Mass said the very same words, to the Sacrament.


Theo. How know you what he said, that died so long before you? No such
words are found in Chrysostoms Liturgy.



Phi. You shall find them in his Liturgy.


Theo. Well we may hereafter, when you have put them in; but as yet we find no
such words at all in his Liturgy.


Phi. The Greek exemplar has them.


Theo. Not those which either Erasmus or Leo Thuscus had when they translated
it into Latin: if you have gotten new copies contrary to the old, reason is
you publish them, and prove the credits of them before we regard them.


Phi. So we will.


Theo. And with all you must show that he speaks these words to the
Sacrament: otherwise they conclude nothing for you, The words may be there,
and yet not spoken to the sacrament.
no more than Origens words did in the like case, when he taught men to say
them to Christ at the sacred communion.


Phi. That is your evasion: for both Origin and S. Chrysostom said it to the
Sacrament.


Theo. That is your intrusion: for neither Origin nor Chrysostom has any such
reference.


Phi. See the books.


Theo. Never appeal to the sight of the books, but produce the words. This
is your cunning in your Rhemish Testament to bid us often Page 21. l. n. 12
page 463. lin. 11.
( See) the fathers, and Pa. 452. li. 30. The Jesuits bid us see the fathers,
but they do not tell us what we shall find there.
( so the rest) but we have seen them, where you come in thickest with them,
and there find nothing for your false and erroneous fancies. And therefore
either allege their words, when you use their names, or say you saw them
not: we list not at your bidding to go seek for oysters in the Ocean.


Philand. You fear to be confounded by them, and that is the cause you will
not ( See) them.


Theoph. They be not our, but your allegations, and did they make for you, we
should soon have tidings of you: mary now their words coming short of your
assertions, to bear out the matter you send the reader to the names and works
of many Fathers, where he must pick out what he can at his fingers ends, It
is not enough to will us to see the fathers: they must say to what end they
allege them.
and in the mean time not be able to charge you with corrupting them, since
you bid him ( See) them, but told him not what he should find in them. This
is a way to quote what authorities you list, be they never so impertinent, and
yet to amaze the simple with the number, and weary the learned with not
expressing what words you take hold of, and what they seek for: which in
questions of faith were very needful.


Phi. They say we tell you, Chrysostom prays to Christ in heaven, not to
the sacrament.
avoid it how you can.


Theo. They say no such thing: and though Origin, as you have heard be far
enough from it, yet Chrysostom in the place which you cite is farther off, I
mean, from directing his prayers to the sacrament.

Making his supplications to God after consecration, he says, Liturg Chrysostom.
Ipse Domine caelitus respice ad seruos tuos inclinantes tibi capita sua. Thou
Lord look from heaven on thy servants that bow their necks unto thee. And
again, Attend Domine Jesus Christ Deus noster de sancto habitaculo tuo, and
de throno gloriae regni tui, Ibidem.
and veni ad sanctificandum nos qui in excelsis vna cum patre seeds, and hic
nobiscum inuisibiliter ades. Behold Lord Jesus Christ, our God, FROM thy holy
habitation, He would have Christ behold the people from heaven, not from the
sacrament.
and FROM the throne of the glory of thy kingdom, and come to sanctify us,
who sit in the heavens with thy father; and art here with us inuisibly. He
desires the son of God to behold his servants from heaven, not from the
sacrament, and from thence he looks for sanctification, not from the patent
or Chalice.


Phi. He says that Christ is also present with us here on earth, though after
an invisible manner, which we take to be under the forms of bread and wine.


Theo. That Christ is present with us here on earth, we firmly believe, to
our great comfort. Where two or three, says our Savior, are gathered together
in my name, Mat. 18. Mat. 28.
I am in the midst of them: and again, Lo^ I am always with you until the
end of the world: but that he is corporally present under the forms of
bread and wine, that is neither avouched by Chrysostom, nor admitted by us; it
is your vain and fruitless fancy. How Christ is present with us.



Phi. How can his body be present but bodily?


Theo. These words of Chrysostom infer not, that Christ's body is present,
but that Christ is present. And since Christ consists of two natures, the
divine may be present though the humane be not. Christ absent, says Austen,
is also present. For unless he were present, August. in Johan. tract. 50.
he could not be held of us our selves. But because it is true that he
says, Lo I am with you for ever unto the end of the world, he is both
departed, and yet here. He is returned (whence he came) and has not yet
forsaken us. His divinity is present with us.
For his body he has carried into heaven, but his (divine) majesty he has
not taken from the world.

Neither is his divine power only present with us, but also we have his
humane nature many ways with us in this world. Idem Ibidem.
Habes Christum in praesenti and in futuro. In praesenti per fidem, in
praesenti per signum Christi, in praesenti per Baptismatis Sacramentum, His
humanity present with us many ways, though not in substance.
in praesenti per altaris cibum and potum. Thou have Christ, says Austen, in
this world, and in the next. In this world by faith, in this world by the
sign of Christ, in this world by the Sacrament of baptism, in this world by
the meat and drink of the altar. By these things we have him in this world
not really, locally, or corporally, but truly, comfortably and effectually, so
as our bodies, souls and spirits be sancti^^ed and preserved by him against
the day of redemption, when we shall see him and enjoy him face to face in
that fullness and perfection which we now are assured of by faith, and
prepared for by cleanesse and meekness of the inward man.

The whole Church therefore never The The. test page 453.

The ancient Church did exactlie distinguish the sacrament from Christ.


cried upon the Sacrament, Lord I am not worthy, Lord be merciful to me a
sinner: Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world have mercy on
us: You do sinnefully slander them, they did exactly and precisely
distinguish the corruptible creature from the eternal creator, and taught all
men to lift up their hearts from the elements, which were before their eyes, to
him that is in heaven, and shall come from thence and from no place else to
judge the world.

Saint Austen will have the rude ones to be taught that the Sacraments, are De
Catech. rudibus. cap. 26.
Signacula rerum diuinar^m visibilia, sed res inuisibiles in eis honorari:
Visible scales of things divine, but the things visible to be honored in them.
And as if the case were so plain that no man could well doubt thereof, he
says, De Baptis. lib. 3. cap. 10.
Si ad ipsas res visibiles quibus Sacramenta tractantur, animum conferamus,
quis nesciat eas esse corruptibiles? Si autem ad id quod per illas agitur, quis
non videat, non posse corrumpi? If we look to the visible things (or elements)
by which the Sacraments are performed, who can be ignorant that they are
corruptible? But if we look to that which is done by them, who does not see,
that that can not be corrupted? Saint Ambrose says, Ambr. de Sacrament. li.
4. cap. 3.
Venisti ad Altar, vidisti Sacramenta posita super Altar, and ipsam quidem
miratus es creaturam. Tamen creatura solemnis and nota. Thou came to the
Altar and saw the Sacraments placed on the Altar and maruelledst at the very
creature: yet is it an usual and known creature. Origin purposely creating
what part of the Sacrament did sanctify the receiver, says; Orig. in 15. Matt.
Ille cibus qui sanctificatur per verbum Dei and obsecrationem, iuxta id quod
habet materiale in ventrem abit and in secessum eijcitur. Nec materia panis,
sed super ^llum sermo est qui prodest non indigne Domino commedenti illum. Haec
de typico Symbolicoque corpore. The meat which is sanctified (at the Lords
table) by the word of God, and prayer, as touching the material (parts) which
it has, goes into the belly and so forth by the privy: neither is the matter
of bread it, that profits the worthy receiver, but the word rehearsed over
it. This I speak of the typical and figurative body.

For this cause the great Council of Nice directed the whole Church to lift up
their understanding above the bread and wine which they saw; The whole Church
cried on the people to lift up their hearts.
and by faith to conceive the lamb of God slain for the sins of men and
proposed and exhibited on the Lords table in those mysteries. Their words
be Council. Nice.
(...). Let us not baselie bend our minds on the bread and cup, that are set
before our eyes (at the Lords Supper) but lifting up our thoughts let us by
faith behold (...) signifies in as well as on.
on (or in) the sacred table the Lamb of God taking away the sin of the
world. Which admonition the Church ever after observed by crying upon the
people to lift up their hearts, not to the Sacraments which they saw, but from
them to him that lived and reigned in heaven; whom they adored in equal
degree with the father and the holy Ghost; and whom they beheld and touched
with the eyes and hands of their faith, but not with their corporal limbs or
senses.

August. in Johan tract. 50.

Christ is both seen and touched by faith.


Quomodo in caelum mittam manum vt ibi sedentem teneam? Mitte fidem and
tenuisti. How shall I send up my hand to heaven, to reach (Christ sitting
there? Send thy faith (says Austen) and THOU HOLD HIM (fast enough. Ambr.
in Luc. li. 6. ca. 8. de filia princ. Synag. vesi^^ci.
Fide Christus tangitur, fide Christus videtur: non corpore tangitur, non
oculis comprehenditur. By faith (says Ambrose) Christ is touched, by faith
Christ is seen: he is not touched with our body, not viewed with our eyes.
And therefore Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. hom. 24.
He must fly (not to the Sacrament, but) on hie that will come to this body:
Ibidem.
even to heaven it self, or rather above the heavens: for where the body is,
there also (will) the Eagles (be.)


Phi. Christ is on the table, because his death is solemnized in the mysteries
on the table.
The council of Nice says, The Lamb of God is on the sacred table: where then
did they seek him or made they prayers unto him, but on the Altar?


Theo. They lifted up their hearts to him that sat in heaven, and from heaven
look down upon them, and their prayers, before they could please God, were
directed to the same place and person that their hearts were. You must
therefore either fasten their hearts and faiths to the Sacrament, or suffer
their prayers together with their affections to ascend to heaven Colos. 3.
where Christ sits at the right hand of God, and Phil. 3.
from whence we look for (our) Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ.


Phi. All the places which are yet alleged against you, you have shyfted off,
by referring the speeches to Christ himself sitting in heaven, and as you say
not in the sacrament: But Theodorets words are so clear, that no shift will
^erue. He speaks of the very mystical signs and Sacraments which are seen
with eyes, and touched with hands, Theod. dial. 2.
and of them he says: Intelliguntur ea esse, quae facta sunt, and creduntur,
and adorantur vt quae ill^ sint, quae creduntu^. The Sacraments, are understood
to be the things which they are made, and are believed and ADORED as being the
same which they are believed.


Theo. Not one of the fathers which they bring speaks of the external
sacrament save only Theodoret.
Only Theodoret of all the fathers that ever mentioned adoration spoke of the
Sacrament it self. The rest direct their words to Christ reigning in glory,
not to the host or Chalice in the Priests hand. He in deed speaks of the
mystical signs, which the rest did not.


Philand. Then yet there is one Father for the adoration of the Sacrament: you
said we had none.


Theo. Would you prove so high a point of Religion, as this is, to be
Catholic by one only Father, and such an one as you think not worthy to be
called a Saint?


Phi. These exceptions are but dilatorie, and quite besides the matter. The
mystical signs must be adored, but not with divine honor.
Do you grant that he says the mystical signs must be adored?


Theo. He says so.


Philand. And such vpstarts as you are, would be credited against him, when
you say the Sacrament is not to be adored.


Theoph. We reason not about our credit, but about your conclusion.


Philand. That is too plain for your stoare.


Theo. Why do you then conceal it so long?


Phi. These men ca^ play with shadows very prettily.
You shall soon hear it, and have your belly full of it. The mystical tokens
be adored says that ancient Father Theodorete. Mark now how nimbly we
come within you, and overthrow you in plain field. If you deny it, we have here
antiquity for it: If you grant it, then are you worse than miscreants for
holding all this while against it.


Theo. With such weapons I think Alexander the great did conquer the world.


Phi. When you come to a non plus, then you fall to idle talk. But leave
digressing, and give us a short and direct answer, which we know for your
hearts you can not.


Theo. You know much; but if you knew your selves and your own weakness it
were better.


Phi. Did I not tell you, this place would overthrow you?


Theo. Because he says the substance of bread and wine must be adored.


Phi. He says no such thing; The mystical tokens remaining in their former
substance must be adored.
but the mystical tokens must be adored. And what are the mystical tokens but
the mysteries themselves, which are all one with the Sacrament?


Theo. Can you take the top and the tail, and leave out the myddle so
cunningly?


Phi. We leave out nothing.


Theo. Theodorets words are, Theod. Dial. 2.
Neque enim sigra mystica post sanctificationem recedunt a sua natura. Manent
en^m in priore substantia, and figura and forma: and videri and ta^gi possunt
sicut and prius: Intelliguntur antem ea esse quae facta sunt, and credu^tur and
adorantur vt quae illa sint, quae creduntur. The mystical signs after
consecration do not depart from their own nature. For they remain in their
former substance, and figure and form, and may be seen and touched as they
were before: but they are understood to be those things which they are made,
and are believed AND ADORED as being the things which they are believed.

The mystical signs, If they will adore the substance of bread, Theodorets
words will help them forward, but not otherwise.
not departing from their own nature but remaining in their former substance
are adored. By this you may prove; if you be so disposed, that the creatures
of bread and wine must be adoren, which perhaps in your Church is no fault,
because it is so often: But the Church of Christ abhors it as a wicked
impiety to adore any dead or dumb creature. And therefore you must be driven
as well as we, to seek for an other, and farther meaning in Theodorete:
otherwise you will shake the foundation of your own faith with your own
antiquity, more than you shall do ours.

Our answer is easy. Adored is sometimes as much as ^eue^enced.
The mystical signs, he says, are adored, but not with divine honor: and
adoration with the Grecians as also with the Scriptures, when it is applied to
mortal men or creatures, signifies only a reverent regard of their places or
uses.

Your own Law says: De cons. did. 3. venerabiles in glossa. cultu.
In hoc sensu possumus, quamlibet rem sacram adorare, id est reuerentiam
exhibere. In this sense we may adore any sacred thing whatsoever, that is give
it (due) reverence. So that you utterly overthrow both your adoration and your
Transubstantiation, when you brought Theodorete to tell us that the substance
of bread is adored (that is reverenced) and yet remains after Consecration.
For if it remain, what adore you but the substance of a dead creature? The
Jesuits authorities for adoration of the Sacrament prove no such things
And that if you do, how many steps are you from open Idolatry? Thus
though we crake not of our conquests as you do, we return your authorities
for adoring the sacrament as either impertinent or insufficient, and give us
cause to consider that your worshipping it with divine honor is no catholic
or ancient verity, but a pernicious and wicked novelty.


Phil. Is it wickedness to worship Christ?


Theop. You defile the name of Christ, The real presence.
and spoil him of his worship, by giving them both to senseles creatures.


Phi. How often shall we beat this into your dull heads, that we give this
honor to the Sacrament, and not to senseles creatures?


Theo. And how often shall we ring this into your deaffe ears, This is my
body, does not infer the real presence.
that the Sacrament in corporal matter and substance is a senseles and
corruptible creature?


Phi. Did not Christ say this is my body?


Theo. You must prove the speech to be literal, as well as the words to be
his.


Phi. Is not the letter plain, this is my body?


Theo. The letter is so plain, that it kills the carnal interpreter; and
has driven you whiles you would needs refuse the figurative and spiritual
constructions of Christ's words, to these absurdities and enormities, which have
even overwhelmed your Church.


Phi. Not the words, but the exposition of the words is the thing that we
strive for. The Jesuits may soon bring a thousand authorities for this
point, and not one to the purpose.
Can you wish for plainer words than these, this is my body?


Theo. I could wish that in expounding these words you did rely rather on the
catholic fathers, than on your vncatholike fancies.


Phi. All the fathers with one voice toyne with us in this doctrine.


Theoph. You do but dream of a dry Summer. Not one of the ancient fathers
ever spoke of your real presence, or the literal sense of these words, on
which you buyld the rest.


Phi. Will you have a thousand places for that purpose; or if variety of
writers do rather content you, will you have three, or four hundredth several
fathers, all ancient and catholic in diverse ages and countries that shall
depose for our doctrine in this point?


Theo. I can enter a course to save you pains, and to make a readier dispatch
if you will be ruled by me.


Phi. What is it?


Theo. Bring us but one father for 800. years that ever taught your
transsubstantiation, and we will count it catholic.


Phi. What talk you of one? You shall have one hundredth of as ancient and
catholic writers, as any were in the Church of christ for a thousand years
after his ascending to heaven.


Theo. You were best take it, when you be well offered. One fair and sufficient
authority shall please us better, than a cartloade of names abused, and places
perverted.


Phi. It is as easy for us to bring them by whole hundreds. A man that once
supplied the same room which you do now, The papists in this question think
to conquer with number if not with strength of places.
has produced two hundredth of them in his Diacosion Martyrion: Vernierus, an
other of our side, has alleged 318. several and sundry writers: as many as
there were Bishops in the great Council of Nice: Garetius, a man of singular
reading has gathered four hundred forty five good and substantial Authors,
even from Melchizedech, to this present age, besides Poets, women, Councels,
Miracles, visions, Jews, Ethnicks, and heretics, which all bear witness to our
doctrine. And if you have not seen the books, I will lend you them for your
instruction: I could be content I tell you to be at any cost to win a soul,
and wish to you no worse than to my self.


Theo. Your kindness without cause, is but service without thanks. I have seen
your Diacosion Martyrion, your great and universal Council militant touching
the truth of the most divine sacrament of the Eucharist assembled by Vernierus
and your nine orders and Rancks of I know not whom, digested by Garetius:
besides the labors and travels of many others your adherents: The papists beap
up places for their real presence by hundreths, and not one to the purpose.
And reading them all, I find not one father that ever dreampt of your material
and corporal conversion of the elements into christ for 800. years and upward.
Hyperbolical speeches I find in Chrysostom, and some hard similitudes in
damascene and others: but a manifest testimony for the real and carnal
presence, which you defend, I find none: and as for the fathers which be any
thing ancient they go clearly and exactly with us in this question.


Phi. With you? By this a man may perceive you never saw them, or at lest never
read them. My self can allege you 500. places, whereof you shall not answer
one, It were more wisdom for them to vnde^sta^d what they allege, than to
allege they know not what.
but by mere shifts and iestes and of tropes and figures and such like
mockeries.


Theo. It were pains better bestowed for you to understand what you allege,
than to allege that which you understand not. You may wrest and misuse 500.
places of ye fathers, as your friends before you have done, in this point, and
your selves in other questions have showed the like actiuitie. But that the
substance of the bread vanished by consecration, and the substance of Christ's
body really succeeds under the same dimensions and accidents of bread and
wine, and enters our mouths locally comprised within those forms; for this
you shall never show us any one father greek or latin, within the compass of
800. years after Christ.


Phi. A thousand authorities can we bring you with a wette finger that shall
clearly convince the presence of Christ in the sacrament.


Theo. And not one of them shall conclude that manner of presence which you
maintain. We strive not for Christ's presence in the mysteries, but for the
manner of his presence.



Phi. As for the manner of his being there, it forces not much, so you grant
him to be really and verily present.


Theo. His presence there can do you little good, except the manner of his
presence be likewise expressed and avouched by the places which you would bring.


Phi. If he be present, ergo the substance of his flesh is present: and that
must needs be corporally and locally comprised in the forms of bread and wine.


Theo. What father says so besides your selves?


Phi. They al say, he is present.


Theo. And so do we.


Phi. In words you say it, but when you come to the push, you deny the truth
and effect of his presence. The presence which the Jesuits hold the fathers
never hea^d of.



Theo. We do not look you should understand us that understand not your
selves. You have framed of your own heads a certain manner of Christ's
presence in the supper without the direction or consent of any learned or
ancient father: and that of al others the grossest and absurdest that could be
devised: and now you no sooner hear the name of Christ's body or blood in the
mysteries, Garetius, Vernierus, and the rest, if a father do but name the body
of Christ, bring him in by and by for a witness on their side, and then they
muster them by hundreths.
but you straightway grow to a special conceit, that your real and carnal
presence is there confirmed and confessed. And this made your builders of
Babel, as they posted through the Fathers, to note every place and person, that
did but mention The body of Christ as a witness for Transubstantiation: where if
it would have pleased you and your fellows to have weighed the rules and
cautions of the fathers together with their speeches and exhortatio^s and not
to have hunted after your own fancies in their phrases, but marked and
remembered their instructions, how they would be taken and understood, when they
speak of ye christian mysteries, you should have saved a great deal of labor,
which now you should have saved a great deal of labor, which now you have
spent to no purpose, and gained security from this difficulty, which has
s^tted your schools and churches with a most pernicious and yet a monsterous
error.


Phi. And we say that you be so blinded with presumption and rebellion
against the Church of God, that you will not yield to all the fathers that
ever wrate of this matter since Christ's time, but because they now and then
speak of signs and figures, you You turn all f^^m the thing, themselves to
the signs, and that is the cause of your error.
turn all to tropes and metaphores, as if neither Christ himself, nor any of
his Apostles, or their successors, the Godly teachers and Pastors of his
church had ever spoken properly or plainly of this sacrament, but al in clouds
and riddles, such as neither Priest nor people, that should come after, could
possibly conceive, and none to this day had understood, till you came lately to
trouble the world with heresy and in^quitie.


Theo. Take your pleasures, your tongues be your own, who can tame them if
you will not contain them? You have learned of your fathers to Psalm 64.
whet them like swords, and to Ierem. 18. Wisd. 1.
smite with them: and to shoot forth your arrows, even, bitter words; but
the mouth that rages with lies (and slanders) as the wise man forwarneth,
destroys the soul; and in the mean time your errors are nothing diminished
or excused by your taunts or teeth-gawles.

As touching the matter it self, Sacraments of their own nature, and by their
first and chief erection are visible signs of invisible graces; so that if
they be no signs, they be no sacraments: and though the signs must be
diligently distinguished from the things, yet for good causes in teaching and
writing do the signs bear the names of the things them selves, These ^wo
rules must be observed in reading the fathers touching this matter, else we
shall infinitely err.
whose signs they are, in so much that no father speaking or writing of the
bread or wine after they be once made sacraments, gives them any other name,
than the body and blood of Christ; not that in earthly matter or essence they
be really converted into those divine things, as you falsely gather, but for
that remaining in their former and usual both nature and substance, they have
in them, and carry with them the fruit, effect, and force of Christ's flesh
wounded, and blood shed for the remission of our sins. And because the people
should regard not the creatures which they see, but the graces which they
believe, therefore the Fathers every where without exception call the elements
by the names of the inward and heavenly virtues, that are annexed to them, and
conferred with them by the truth of his word, and power of his spirit. This is
ye first rule, which you should have observed.

To mistake the signs for the things themselves, must needs bread a
monsterous error.
The next is that whenever they teach and propose the dignity, propriety or
efficacy of the Sacrament, they mean not the creatures, which our eyes and
tastes do better judge of, than their tongues or wits can teach us, but that
other divine, lyfe-giuing and soule-sauing part of the sacrament, which our
hearts by faith take hold on, and possess more really and effectually, than
if it were chammed in our mouths, or buried in our stomachs, as you grossly
conceive of those things which be most high and heavenly. These two Rules
remembered, a very mean scholar may soon discharge the burden of all your
allegations. For either you mistake the one part for the other, A^l their
allega^^ns are answered with the^e two observations.
supposing that to be corporal which in deed is spiritual: or else you urge
the name which the sign bears for similitude, as ^arn^stily to all intents
as (...) were were the thing it self, which causes you to (...) so many
tex^es, and to straie so far from truth, that no sound can recall you.


Phi. Away with your new found observations: The catholic church has the
spirit of truth promised for her direction, and therefore the will none of your
wise inventions to qualify the fathers speeches. Learn you rather at her
hands to believe the words of Christ, The literal pr^ssing of those words
is the g^ound of al^ their error.
who first appointed this Sacrament, and pronounced it to be himself, without
sign or figure, when he said, this is my body, and this is my blood, not
spiritual or metaphorical, but the same body, which was broken, and the same
blood which was shed for remission of sins: and that I trust you will
confess was his natural, and local, has body and blood.


Theo. The question is not, Christ did make the bread a God, but added grace to
the sign that it might become a sacrament.
whether that were his natural body, which suffered on the cross, but when
he said of the bread, this is my body, whether he substantially changed the
dead element into himself, and made the creature become the creator, or
whether he annexed his truth to the sign, and grace to the Sacrament which
required both the word of Christ, to make the promise: and his power, to
perform the speech. And therefore we believe and acknowledge the words of
our Savior to be very needeful in ordaining this Sacrament, even in such
manner and order as they were spoken: that the signs might have the fruits
and effects of his body and blood: But that he changed substances with the
bread and wine or deified the creatures, that his speech does not infer: and
that as yet we do not believe, except you can show us how the flesh of
Christ, which was first made of a woman, is now become to be made of bread,
and a dead and senseless creature exalted to be the son of God.


Phi. We do not say the bread is substantially converted into Christ, If bread
be not made the son o^ God, then sure the bread is not made Christ.
or made the son of God: but the bread is abolished, and in the place thereof
comes the glorious flesh of our Lord and Savior, who is the Son of God.
And in that sense we hold the creator is now where the creature was: but the
dead element is not made the Son of God: you would feign catch us at such an
advantage.


Theo. How you can avoid it, If the bread be Christ it must needs be made
Christ: for before it was not Christ.

Christ does not say, this is changed for or with my body, but this is my
body.


I yet perceive not: for if the bread be now Christ, which before it was not,
ergo the bread is made Christ, and by consequent a dead element is now become
or made the Son of God, which I think will hardly stand with the very first
grounds of Christian religion.


Phi. You press the letter against both reason and truth. For the one is said
to be converted or changed into the other, because the one displaceth and
succeeds the other: and so is it a change rather of the one for the other,
than a conversion of the one into the other: if you take conversion properly,
as the Philosophers do.


Theo. Christ d^eth not say, where the bread was, there is now my body, but
this (bread) is my body. And since before consecration it was not his body, and
now by repeating the words, is become his body: the conclusion is evident,
that by your opinion the bread is made Christ, and so become the son of God.


Phi. You think to snare us with schoole-trickes: but setting your sophismes
aside, we plainly believe the Sacrament is Christ.


Theo. You must believe the bread is Christ, which as yet the Articles of our
Creed will not suffer us to do, If the bread be Christ, ergo it is God: for
he is God.
I mean, not to think that a dead and dumb creature may be God.


Phi. Do we say the bread is God?


Theo. You must auerre it, if you stick to the letter of Christ's words, for he
said of the bread, as you enforce it, this is my self: now, he was God.


Phi. I thought I should be even with you at Lands end. Christ did not say
this bread is my body, THIS in Christ's words must needs note somewhat.
but this is my body, where now is the force of your argument?


Theo. Even where it was.


Phi. Why? Christ said, this is, not meaning bread, or any other creature.


Theo. That this must be somewhat, else nothing was the body of Christ, and so
you loose not only the bread, but also the body,


Phi. Nay he said, this is, and that must needs be somewhat, it can not be
nothing.


Theo. It is well you have found it. I said so before you. Then this is my
body. What this? Was it bread that he spoke of: or something else?


Phi. He spoke of that, This must be this somewhat, and not this nothing.
which he had in his hands.


Theo. You mean, not long before.


Phi. In deed you say he had at that present, when he spoke the words,
nothing in his hands, and so you would have nothing to be his body.


Theo. Hinder not our course with matter impertinent to this place. The
demonstratiue THIS notes that which Christ then gave to his Disciples, as well
as that which (you think) he then held in his hands. Choose whether you will,
of force the thing must be all one. For that which he held, that he gave, and
of that which he first held and after gave, The Jesuits be loath to tell us
what is me^t by this in the words of Christ.
he said, this is my body.


Phi. He did so.


Theo. What was it?


Phi. Somewhat it was, whatsoever it was.


Theo. What somewhat do you say it was?


Phi. What if I cannot tell?


Theo. Then must you seek farther for your changing of substances: The words
of Christ, if you know not whereof he spoke, prove no conversion of the bread
into his body. For unless THIS be taken to import the bread, the bread by
those words can not be changed: and if not by these, then surely by none.


Phi. I see your drift: you fet about to force me to confess that by the
strict coherence of our Saviors words This indeed is the right literal
sense of our saviors words, and since that is apparently false, the
figurative sense must take place.
the bread is Christ: and since that proposition in precise speech is untrue,
you would come in with your figures.


Theo. And your drift is as open, that having devised a real and carnal
presence to your selves by color of Christ's words, and perceiving the same
to be no way consequent to the letter, which you pretend: least you should
be disproued to your faces, you will not admit the perfect and plain context
of Christ's words: but stand houering about other sophistical illusions,
which will not help you. For we have the full confession of scriptures and
fathers against you, that the pronoune ( THIS) in Christ's words must be
restrained to the bread and to nothing else.

The Lord took bread, and when he had given thanks he brake (no doubt the
bread that he took) and gave to the Disciples (the selfsame that he brake)
saying, Matthew. 26. The connection of the gospel re^erreth THIS to the bread in
the words of Christ.
take ye, eat ye (this that I give you) This is my body. What THIS could our
Savior mean, but, THIS that he gave, THIS that he brake, THIS that he took,
which by the witness of the Scripture it self was bread? If you suppose that
he took bread, but brake it not: or brake it, but gave it not: or gave it his
Disciples to eat, but told them not this, which he gave them, but some other
thing besides that was his body, you make the Lords supper a merry jest, THIS
of it self infers nothing, and therefore must be guided by the
circumstances of the text.
where the later end starteth from the beginning and the middle from the both.
The pronoune THIS of it self infers nothing, and therefore except you name
the bread which Christ pointed unto, when he spoke these words, you confirm
not the faithes, but amase the wits of your followers.

S. Paul proposing the Lords Supper to the church of Corinth expresses that
very word which we say the circumstances of the Gospel import. As 1. Cor. 11.
often as ye shall eat (says he) This bread, and drink this cup, you show
forth the Lords death till he come. The 1. Cor. 10.
bread, which he brake, is it not the communion of Christ's body? 1. Cor. 11.
Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread and drink of
that cup: for whosoever shall eat this bread and drink the cup of the Lord
unworthily shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. Saint Paul in
plain speech ioyneth^ THIS to the bread All the fathers refer THIS to the
bread.
So that as well by the cohere^ce of the former words in the description of the
Lords supper, as by the manifest adiectio^ which S. Paul puts to the
demo^stratiue, we conclude our savior pronounced of the bread, that it was his
body.

The referring of THIS to the bread all the catholic fathers that ever wrate
with pen in the church of God, acknowledge with one consent. Justinius, Just.
Apol. 2.
We be taught, that the sanctified food (which nourishes our flesh and our
blood) is the flesh and blood of that Jesus. Tertullian, Tertul. aduer. Iedaeos.
So Christ taught us, calling bread his body, and discussing the words of the
supper, Idem li. 4. contra Marcione^.
Why, says he, does (Christ there) call bread his body? Austen, De cons.
did. 2. qui ma^ducas.
That which your faith requires to be taught, the bread is the body of Christ,
and the cup his blood. Cyprian, Cypr. de vnctio. Chrismat.
Our Lord at his table gave (to the Disciples) with his own hands bread and
wine: on the cross he yielded his body to the soldiers hands to be wounded,
that (his Apostles) might teach (all) Nations) how bread and wine were (his)
flesh and blood. Ireneus, Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34.
How shall it appear to them that the bread (on which they give thanks) is
the body of their Lord, and the cup his blood, if they grant not Christ to be
the son of the creator of the world? Idem. li. 4. c. 57
How did the Lord rightly, if an other were his father, taking bread of this
condition, that is usual amongst us, confess it to be his body? Hierom,
Hier. ad Hedibiam. quaest. 2.
Let us learn that the bread which the Lord brake and gave to his disciples, is
the Lords body, himself saying to the^, take ye, eat ye, this is my body.
Athan. or at lest the co^mentary that is exta^t in his name, Athan in 1. Cor.
cap. 11.
What is the bread? the body of Christ. Epiphan. Epiph. in Anchorato.
Of that which is round in figure and sensles in power, the Lord would say by
grace, this is my (body.) Cyrill, Cyril. catechis. mystag. 4.
Christ thus avouches and says of the bread, this is my body. Theodorete,
Theod. ^ial. ^.
In the very giving of the mysteries, he called bread his body.

The Jesuits loose all hope of their transsubsta^tiatio^, if THIS in the
words of Christ do not note the bread.
And of all others your selves may not shrink from this resolution of Christ's
words: the surest hold of your real presence, though it be not much,
stands only on this settle. For what words have you besides th^se, to prove
that the bread is changed from his former substance? Uerily none. Then if in
these words, which should work the change, there be no mention at all of
bread: how can that, which is no way comprised in them, be changed by them?
So miraculous a change can not be wrought by silence, but rather (if any such
be) by the power of Christ's words, and in those words must the thing at least
be named, that shall be changed. Again the demonstratiue THIS must needs note
that which was there present on the Lords table, before the words of
consecration were wholly repeated: and the flesh of Christ could not be present
under the likeness of bread without or before Consecration: ergo the pronoune
infers not Christ, but the bread, which by your own positions is not
abolished, but De can^ dis^. 2. ante benedictio^e^, Gl^ssa ibidem.
in vltimo instanti prolationis verboru^, in the very last end and instant of
uttering these words. And therefore remain in his own nature when the first
word was pronounced.

Which some not the meanest men of your side foresaw very well howsoever you
since have taken other counsel, and therefore they say: Gerson. contr. Floretum
li. 4.
Dicendum est, quod hoc demonstrat substantiam panis, We must behold, says
Gerson, that the pronoune THIS, does demonstrate the substance of bread: and
Steven Gardener: Guard. contra diabolic. sophist.
Christus ait euidenter hoc est corpus meum demonstrans panem: Christ says
plainly this is my body, pointing to the bread. Notwithstanding afterward he
changed his mind in this, as in many other things and came to In his Marc.
Antoni. Consr.
Indiuiduum vagum: as if Christ had said THIS (what is it, I can not tell, but
it must needs be somewhat) is my body.

Occam and other profound fellows of your side bethinking themselves how your
opinion might best agree with the words of Christ, say the pronoune THIS must
be referred to the Occam. in 4. s^ntent. did. 13.
body of Christ: as if our Savior had said, this (my body) is my body. To
make all cocksure, the coronell of your scholmen, I mean the gloze resolves
the doubt on this wife: De cons. did. 2. tim^rem Glossa ibidem.
Solet quaeri quid demonstretur per pronomen hoc, It is a common question what
is meant by the pronoune THIS: whether bread, or the body of Christ? Not bread,
for that is not the body of Christ: nor yet the body of Christ, for it
appears not, that there is any transubstantiation, till the words be all
pronounced. To this demand I say that by the word THIS, Then have the Jesuits
small hold in the literal sense of Christ's words for their transsubstantiatio^.
nothing is meant, but it is there put materially (without any signification at
all.) Thus you turned and tossed the words of Christ so long till you brought
all that the Lord did and said at his last supper to plain NOTHING. With such
unchristian toys were your schools fraughted, That this is the right purport
of Christ's words it cannot be doubted.
and the world deceived: such monsters you hatched when once you left the
direction of the Scriptures and Fathers, and fell to broaching your own
gesses. But you must either admit our explication ( this bread is my body) for
the right ordering and perfitting of Christ's words, or else dissent from the
manifest Scriptures, from all the catholic Fathers, and with shame enough from
your own fellows and fancies.


Phi. We stick not so much at the filling up of the words which Christ
spoke, as at the constering and expounding of them. You delude them with tropes
and significations, So long as the letter is true we may not fly to figures:
but if that be false we kill our souls except we ^lie to figures.
as if Christ had been speaking parables, and not ordaining sacraments. We
say there must be a real truth and active force in them to perform the
letter as it lies. For in Scripture so long as the letter may possibly be
true, we may not fly to figures.


Theo. In that you say right. We must embrace the sense which is occurant in
the letter before all others, if it agree with faith and good manners: but if it
cross either of them, we must beware the letter, lest it kill: and seek for
an other and deeper sense which must needs be figurative. That direction S.
Augustine gives to al men, when they read the Scriptures. Aug. de d^^tr.
Christiana lib. 3 cap. 10. When the speech must be figurative. The literal
coherence of these words (this bread is my body) is impossible, blasphemous
and barbarous.

To reprove the misconsterer is to reverence the speaker.


Iste omnino modus est (locutionis inueniendae propriane an figurata sit) vt
quicquid in sermon diuino neque ad morum honestatem, nec ad fidei veritatem
proprie referri potest, figuratum esse cognoscas. This is the perfect way (to
discern whether a speech be proper or figurative) that whatsoever in the word
of God can not be properly referred either to integrity of manners or verity of
faith, thou resolve thy self, it is figurative.


Phi. That prescription is very sound: but it furthereth not your figurative
sense. For the letter of these words, which we stand for, is neither against
faith nor good manners.


Theo. The literal acception of these words as they lie, this (bread) is my
body, is first impossible by your own confession, next blasphemous by the
plain level of our Creed, and lastly barbarous by the very touch and
instinct of man's nature.


Phi. Charge you Christ with so many foul ouersightes in speaking the words?


Theo. The words which Christ spoke, be gracious and religious we know: but
where there may be brought a double construction of them, a carnal or a
spiritual: a literal or a Sacrame^tall, the literal construction, which you
will needs defend to deface the other, is we say reproved as no part of our
Saviors meaning, by those three bars which we proposed.


Phi. You propose much, but you prove little.


Theo. I should prove even as much as you do, if I should prove nothing: but
that which I proposed, shall not want proof.

The first your own friends will help me to prove. Your Law says, De
cons. did. 2. panis est in Altari. Glossa ibidem. Not possible by their own
confession, that bread should be the body of Christ.

To say that bread is christ in proper speech is horrible blasphemy.


Hoc tamen est impossible, quod panis sit corpus Christi: Yet this is
impossible, that bread should be the body of Christ. Why strive you then for
that which your selves grant is not possible to be true? Why forsake you the
mystical interpretation which is possible? what greater vanity can you show
than to cleave to that sense, which you see can not stand? If it be bread, how
can it be Christ? If it be Christ, how can it be bread?

The second is as clear. For if bread in proper and precise speech be the
flesh of Christ, ergo bread is also the feed of David: ergo bread was fastened
to the cross for our sins: ergo bread was buried, rose the third day from
death, and now sits in heaven at the right hand of God the Father: nay, no
question, if bread be Christ, then is bread the Son of God, and second person
in the sacred Trinity: which how well your stomaks can digest we know not, in
truth our hearts tremble to hear an earthly, dead, and corruptible creature, by
your literal and carnal devotion, advanced to the Lord of life and grace,
the maker of heaven and earth, yea the living and everlasting God: and yet if
bread be truly and properly Christ, these monsterous impieties you can not
avoid.

Thirdly what could you devise more injurious and odious to christian mildness
and manners, To eat flesh in proper speech is against nature and far from all
piety.
than the letter of these words: eat you (this is) my flesh, drink you (this
is) my blood. Had you bin willed in as plain terms to cruci^ie Christ, as you
be willed to eat his flesh, you would not I trust have presently banded
your selves with the Jews to put him to death, but rather have staggered at
the letter, and sought for some farther and other meaning: Ye be now willed to
eat his flesh and drink his blood which is a precept far more heinous and
horrible in christian behavior and religion, if you follow the letter: as
Auste^ affirms. August. contra aduers. legis and Propheta. lib. 2. cap. 9.
It appears more horrible to eat man's flesh than to kill it, to drink man's
blood than to shed it. And again, ( The Capernites) Idem contra eundem. lib.
1. cap. 14.
were more excusable, that could not abide the words of Christ, which they
understood not, being (in deed) horrible (in that they were spoken) as a
blessing, not as a cursing: Cyril. in Johan. lib. 4. cap. 22.
They thought, says Cyrill, Christ had invited them to eat the raw flesh of a
man, and drink blood, which things be horrible to the very ears. Why then
press you the letter, which is heinous, and forget that the speech can not be
religious except it be figurative?

Uerily S. Austen concludes the speech to be figurative for this only reason.
August. de doctr. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 16.

To eat flesh is an heinous act: ergo Christ's words are figurative This is S.
Austens reason, if the Jesuits can re^ure him, let them.


If the scripture seem to command any vile or ill fact, the speech is
figurative. Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood,
you shall have no life in you: facinus velflagitium videtur iubere, Christ
seems to command a wicked and sinful act: figura est ergo, It is therefore a
figurative speech, commanding us to be partakers of the Lords passion and
sweetly and profitably to keep in mind that his flesh was crucified and wounded
for us. If then the real eating of Christ's flesh with our mouths, and actual
drinking of his blood with our lips be wicked and heinous, why press you the
letter of these words eat you, this is my body: drink you, this is my blood,
against truth, against faith, against nature, neither possibility, nor
christianity, nor common honesty suffering your exposition to be good, and S.
Austen in plain terms concluding, It is therefore a figure of speech.


Phi. Sir, you be misconstered all this while. The verb, which coupleth both
parts of the proposition together, Where Christ said, this bread is my body:
the Jesuits say, this must be no bread before it can be my body.
does not here signify this to be simply that, but this to be really changed
in that, as if our Lord had said, THIS (bread) is (now become) my body, that
is substantially changed into my body.


Theo. Sir you shuffle the words of Christ to serve your dreams, and yet you
escape not the rocks which you thought to shun. If the bread must be changed
in substance, that is become no bread, before it be the body of Christ, ergo
bread is not the body of Christ, and so your construction is a plain
contradiction to the letter which you would interpret. For Christ said, this
(bread) is my body: that cannot be true, say you, unless the bread loose first
his substance, and cea^e in deed to be bread: and so where Christ said
(this) bread is my body, you expound his words in this sort, that it must
first be no bread, before it can be his body.

Besides in absurdity there is no difference whether you say, It is as great
blasphemy for the bread to be turned into Christ, as to be Christ.
bead is Christ, or bread is made Christ, and changed into Christ. For that
which is made Christ, without all question, is Christ: and so the same
blasphemies are consequent to this exposition, that were dependant on the
former.


Phi. Well, yet the bread may be abolished, and Christ's body succeed in the
place where the bread was, without any of these inconveniences.


Theo. Thither are you feign to fly, when you be hardly pressed with the
sequeles of the literal sense: The Jesuits would feign shift to have the
letter stand true, but it will not be.
but in the mean time you forget that you be clean gone from the words of
Christ, which you pretended to follow. He said this is my body, you, to expound
his speech say THIS must first vanish away and then my body shall succeed in
the same place, and be covered with the same accidents, though THIS neither in
show, nor substance, The Jesuits urging the letter st^ppe fardest from the
letter.

It is a world to see their Schoolmen toss the words of Christ from post to
pillo^: and at length to leave them as men in a Maze.


be my body.


Phi. This is sophistry, which the catholic fathers were never acquainted with.


Theo. If it be any, it is yours and not ours: you first forsook the
exposition of Christ's words which the learned and godly fathers with one accord
witnessed and and delivered: and then stu^bling at the letter, you hatched your
carnal and local presence against Scriptures and fathers: and when the words
of Christ would not sit your fancies, you racked and wrenched them til you
brought both them to nothing, and your selves to a maze, that you knew not what
you said: where as if you had continued their interpretation, you had cleared
the words of Christ from all perplexities, inioyed the fruits of the Lords
table without peril of Idolatry or impiety, eased your selves of those
absurdities, which you be now plunged in up hard to the ears.


Phi. What interpretation mean you?


Theo. That which the Fathers generally believed and publikly taught in the
church of Christ.


Phi. And what exposition was that, Not one of the ancient fathers ever
affirmed the words of Christ to be literal.
but the same which we now urge, and you resist?


The. Show but one ancient father that ever affirmed the words of Christ, at
his last Supper were properly spoken, or literally to be taken, and we will
receive your sense.


Phi. What? you will not?


Theo. What need you repeat it, when you hear us offer it?


Phi. Not a father, that ever avouched these words of Christ, this is my body,
to be properly spoken, or literally taken?


Theo. Not a father, that is ancient.


Phi. How would you lie, if you might be let alone? I can name you presently a
good number of them that in exquisite terms shall affirm the words of Christ
to be literal. Those later grecians that pre^le the letter do it to far other
purp^ses than the Jesuits do.



Theo. Shall they be ancient?


Phi. I can not tell what you mean by ancient, you would have them belike
before Christ was borne.


Theo. As though there were not difference both in the ages and credites of
those writers, that have gone before us in the church of Christ.


Phi. They shall be ancient.


Theo. Damascene perhaps and Theophilact.


Phi. Yea Epiphanius, Euthymius and many others.


The. Many others: is a note above ela: These four affirm that Christ did not
say, this is the image or figure of my body: but this is my body: which we
confess was needful for the first ordayner and institutor of the Sacrament
to say: Mary by those words our Savior did not mean to abolish the substance
of bread, or wine, but to Why Christ was to say this is my body, and not
this is the figure of my body.
unite the force and fruit of his flesh crucified, and blood shed for our
sins, to the elements, that receiving the one, we might through faith, be
partakers of the other, by the working of his spirit, and power of the word
which he then spoke: much less did these later writers (the eldest of them
being more tha^ 700 years after Christ) intend to gainesay the fathers that
were before them of greater judgment and deeper knowledge: howsoever in show
they seem loath, that Christ's words should be recalled to a bare and naked
figure, which for our parts, we do not.


Phi. All the ancient fathers with one consent affirm the words of Christ to
be figurative.
A bare figure? nay they will have no figure in the words of Christ: and to
that end they urge the very letter, as excluding all tropes and figures which
you now take up in a spleen to frustrate our proofs.


Theo. Did the Fathers mean to frustrate your proofs, when they took up
this doctrine many hundrethes, before you or your real presence were heard of?


Philand. Do they teach the words of Christ, eat, this is my body, to be
figurative?


Theo. I have showed you causes sufficient to fray the godly from the letter,
which does rather kill than quicken the carnal interpreters, yet am I content
to forgo them all, if in expounding the words of Christ figuratively, the
catholic and ancient fathers do not make expressly with us and against you
directly.

Tertullian. Tertul. lib. 4. contr. Marc.
The bread, which was taken and given to the Disciples, Christ made his body by
saying, this is my body, that is, the figure of my body. Why does (Christ)
call bread his body? (Marcion) understands not this was an old figure of the
body of Christ speaking by Jeremy: they laid their hands together against
me, saying, come, let us cast wood on his bread, that is, the cross on his
body. Therefore the lightner of antiquities in calling the bread his body,
fully declared what he would then (at his last Supper) have the bread to
signify. Augustine discussing the words of Moses, the soul of all flesh is
his blood. Aug. in Leuit. quaest. 57.
The thing, says he, that does signify commonly takes the name of the thing,
that is thereby signified: as it is written, the seven ears of corn (which
Pharao dreampt of) be seven years, he said not they signify seven years: and
the seven kine be seven years and many such speeches. So was it said (by Paul)
the rock was Christ: he said not, the rock did signify Christ, but as if
it had been the selfsame thing, which by substance it was not, but by
signification. Even so the blood because it signifies the soul, is after Idem
contra Adimant. cap. 12.
the manner of Sacraments called the soul. The manner of Sacraments is to
have figurative speeches.
I can interpret this precept to consist of a sign (or figure) for the Lord
did not stick to say, this is my body, when he gave the sign of his body.
And speaking in Christ's person, he says, Idem in psalm. 98.
This body which you see, you shall not eat, neither shall you drink the
blood, which they that crucify me, shall shed; I have commended a Sacrament
unto you: that (Sacrament) spiritually understood shall quicken you. Idem de
doctr. Christ. li. 3. c. 16
It is therefore (as you heard before out of the same Father) a figure) of
speech) commanding us to be partakers of the Lords passion. For the Lord at
his supper, says he, Idem in psa. 3.
commended and delivered to his disciples the figure of his body and blood.
Cypria^, Cypr. de vnctio. Chrisma^.

The Lord taught his disciples at his last supper how the signs and the
things might have the same names.


The Lord at his last supper gave bread and wine with his own hands, on the
cross he gave his body to be wounded by the soldiers hands, that sincere
truth secretly printed in his Apostles might teach the Nations, how bread and
wine were (his) flesh and blood, and how the causes agreed with their effects,
and different names and kinds might be reduced to one essence, and the
(signs) signifieng and the things signified might be called by the same names.

Origin, Orig. in Leuit. hom^^. 7.
There is in the very Gospel a letter that does kill: not only in the old
Testament is there a deadly letter found, but in the new Testament there is a
letter that does kill him, which does not spiritually conceive the things
that be spoken. For if you take this saying, (except ye eat my flesh and
drink my blood) according to the letter, this letter kills. And again* Idem
in cap. 15 Matthew.
Not the matter of bread, but the word recited over it, does profit the worthy
receiver. This I speak of the typical and figurative body. Ambrose, Ambros. de
iis qui initia^tur mysterii^ cap. 9.
It was the true flesh of Christ that was crucified and buried, this therefore
is the Sacrament of that true flesh. The Lord Jesus himself says, this is my
body. Before the blessing of (these) heavenly words it is called an other kind
of thing, after consecration the body of Christ is (thereby) signified. Idem in
1. Cor. 11.
In eating and drinking (at the Lords table) We signify the body and blood (of
Christ) that were offered for us. Idem de Sacramentis lib. 4. cap. 5.
The new Testament is confirmed by blood, in a figure of which (blood) We
reciue the mystical cup. The priest (in the church service) faith, Make this
oblation ascribed reasonable and acceptable for us, which is the figure of the
body and blood of our Lord Jesus. Hierom, Hyer. in 26. Matthew.
When the Pascal lamb was eaten Jesus takes bread which strengthens the
heart of man, and goes to the true sacrament of the passover, that as
Melchisedec had done offering bread and wine in a profiguratio^ of him, so he
likewise might represent the truth of his body and blood. Idem in 14. Marci.
For Jesus took bread and giving thanks brake it, transfiguring his body into
the bread. Chrysostom, Chrysostom in psalm. 22.
This table has he prepared for his servants, that he might every day for a
similitude of the body and blood of Christ, show forth in a Sacrament unto us
bread and wine after the manner of Meschisedec. Idem ad Caesarium Monachum.
Before it be sanctified, we call it bread, but the divine grace once
sanctifieng the same by the ministry of the priest, it is delivered from the
name of bread, and counted worthy to be called the Lords body, though the
nature of bread continue there still. So that Author. operit imperfect. in Mat.
homil. 11.
in the sanctified vessel, there is not the true body of Christ, but a mystery
of his body is there contained. Nazianzene, Nazianz. in oration. de pasch.
Let us be partakers of the passover, figuratively notwithstanding as yet:
though this Passover be more manifest than the former.


Theodoret. Theod. dial. 1. Our Savior at h^s last supper changed the names,
not the substances of the elements: the^ must needs the speech be figurative.
Our Savior in deed changed the names, and called his body by the name of the
sign, and the sign by the name of his body. The reason whereof is manifest to
those that are acquainted with the divine mysteries. He would have the
receivers of these heavenly mysteries, not look to the nature of the things,
which are seen: but hearing the alteration of names, believe the change which
is there made by grace. For he that called his natural body wheat and bread,
and named himself a vine: the same Lord honored the signs and elements of
bread and wine) which we see, with the name of his body, and blood, not
changing the nature (of the signs) but casting grace unto nature. Prosper, De
consecrat. did. 2. hoc est. Prosper.
The divine bread, which is the flesh of Christ, is after a sort called the
body of Christ, being in deed (but) the sacrament of Christ's body. Which words
your own law thus expounds. The Glossa Ibide^.
divine bread which truly represents the flesh of Christ, is called the body
of Christ, but improperly: wherefore it is said after a sort (which is) non rei
veritate, sed significante mysterio, not in exactnes of truth, but in a
mystery of signification. So that this is the meaning, it is called the body
of Christ: that is (the body of Christ is thereby) signified. Bid, Beda in
Luca^, cap. 22.
The solemnities of the old Passover being ended, Christ comes to the new,
which the church is desirous to continue in remembrance of her redemption, that
in steed of the flesh and blood of a lamb, he substituting the sacrament (or
sacred sign) of his flesh and blood in the figure of bread and wine, might
show himself to be the same, to whom the Lord swear and will not repent, thou
art a Priest after the order of Melchisedec. Druthmarus, Christ. Druthmar. in
Mat.
The Lord gave his disciples the sacrament of his body for the remission of
sins, that being mindful of his deed, they might always in a figure do
that, which he was to do for the^, and not forget his love. This is my body,
that is in a sacrament. Wine makes glad and increases blood, and for that
cause the blood of Chirst is aptly figured thereby. Bertram, Bertram de corp.
and sang. Dom.
That bread and wine is figuratively the body and blood of christ: the manner
thereof is in a figure and representation: in mysterio, non veritate: in a
mystery, not in truth and plain speech.


Phi. You think to win the spurs, but you may chance to loose boots and
all. These places, which you bring, have a show before the simple, but there is
no pith nor substance in them: and with one puff we can blow them all away.


Theo. Though the Jesuits have not one ancient father for their literal
sense, yet they will help the matter with bragging.
It must be such a puff then, as wherewith you first blew away christ and his
gospel, and brought in your own decrees, to ouerrule both God and man with the
breath of your mouths.


Phi. You scoff: my meaning is that I can cross them all with one answer.


Theo. If they were sprites, you might drive them away with crossing, but being
ancient and godly fathers they will tell on their tales to your reproof,
cross you what you will or can, in their ways.


Phi. I will not cross it in their way, but in yours.


Theo. When you will: wherefore serve my feet but to toss it out of the way,
or at lest to step over it, that it hinder not my way?


Phi. Al these fathers affirm, the bread to be a sign and figure of Christ's
body: The Jesuits will have the figure and the truth to be al one.
This we grant, and thereto add, that it is both a figure, and the truth it
self. You may be gone, you have your errand. Did I not tell you, I would soon
dispatch you?


Theo. You be very pleasureable whatsoever the matter be: but had you no better
skill to dispatch men of their lives, than you have to defeat us of ou^
authorities, many a thousand should now live, that you have slain.


Philan. You would run to by-quarrels; but I must hold you to the stake.


Theo. In deed that was always the surest answer, that you gave us. The rest
was nothing: no more is this.

For first it is apparently false that in Sacraments the sign and the truth
may be all one thing. Though the figure might be also the truth, as it cannot,
yet a figurative speech can no way be proper.
Next if that might be, yet does it not disappoint any one of these
testimonies. For they do not only witness that the bread is a sign of christ's
body, but also that christ's words were figurative, and that in delivering
the mysteries he called the bread his body, by way of signification,
similitude, representation, after the manner of Sacraments, in a sign not
according to the letter, but in a spiritual and mystical understanding, and
if you respect the precise speech, improperly, and figuratively. Will it please
the Jesuits to learn that the speech is figurative, ^rgo not proper.
And though the sign might happily be one thing with the truth it self, as you
affirm without al truth; yet may not a figurative speech be properly taken, nor
ye letter urged against the spiritual meaning, least that which was spoken to
quicken the inward man, subvert the faith and endanger the soul, which in
mistaking a figure of speech must needs ensue, as S. Augustine shows. De
doct. Christiana li. 3. ca. 5.
In principio cauendum est ne siguratam locutionem ad literam accipias. Ad hoc
enim pertinet, quod ait Apostolus, litera occidit, spiritus autem viuificat.
Cum enim figurate dictum sic accipitur tanquam proprie dictum sit, carnaliter
sapitur. Neque vllamors animae congruentius appellatur. The first thing that
you must beware is this: To take a figurative speech according to the letter
kills the soul.
that you take not a figurative speech according to the letter. To that
belongs the Apostles admonition, the letter kills, the spirit quickneth.
For when we take that which is figuratively spoken, as if it were properly
spoken, it is a carnal sense: Neither is there any thing more rightly called
the death of the soul.

In vain then do you think to shift off the matter with this foolish
conceit, that one and the same thing may be both a truth and a figure. For
were that so, yet can not a figurative speech be literally taken without
killing the soul: and the Fathers which I produced affirm the mind and
speech of our Savior, in calling the bread his body, was spiritual,
figurative and mystical by way of signification, such as is used in
Sacraments, not literal nor carnal according to the strict s^und and order
of the words: The sign in no sacrament can be the thing it self.
Marie now your answer, besides that it is altogether idle, is utterly false.
For in this sacrament as in all others, there is great difference betwixt the
signs and the things themselves, and the distinct properties of each are so
sensible, that if your wits be not laid up for holy days, you can not but
perceive the^. The signs are visible, the things invisible; the signs are
earthly, the things heavenly the signs corruptible, the things immortal: the
signs corporal, the things spiritual. The sign and the truth must be two
things.
The signs are one thing, the truth is not the same, but an other thing, and
even by plain Arythmetike, they be two things, and not one.

The Eucharist, as Ireneus teaches, Ire. li. 4. ca. 34.
Consists of two things, an earthly and an heavenly. De cons. did. 2. hoc
est.
This is it that we say, this is it that we seek by all means, says Austen,
to approve (to wit) that the sacrifice of the church is made of two and
consists of two things, sacramento and re sacramenti: of the sacred sign:
and the thing it self. For sacraments are August. contra Maximinum li. 3. ca.
22.
signa rerum, aliud existentia, aliud significantia, signs of truths, being
one thing in themselves, and signifieng an other. Chryso. in Genes. hom. 35.
It were no figure, says Chrysostom, if all things incident to the truth
were to be found in it: much less if it were the truth it self. Aug. epist.
23.
Sacraments have a certain similitude (but no identitie) with the things
whose signs they be. If therefore De doct. Christiana, lib. 3. cap. 5.
To take the signs for the things be a miserable servitude of the soul, as
Austen notes, what is it to affirm the signs to be the things themselves but
a wilful blindness of heart, choosing rather to rush into any brake with
danger both of credit and conscience, than to acknowledge the truth once
disdayned and refused?


Phi. I have yet an other answer in stoare.


Theo. If that be no better than this, your stoare is little worth.


Phi. The sixth of S. John's Gospel directs the words of Christ at his last
supper.
The most part of the Fathers which you bring, speak not of Christ's words,
when he did institute the Sacrament, but declare his meaning in the sixth of
Saint John's Gospel when the Capernites stumbled at his doctrine.


Theo. You may keep this still in stoare for the goodness of it. Tertullian,
Austen, Cyprian, Ambrose, Hierom, Chrysostom, Theodorete, Prosper, Bid,
Bertram, Druthmarus and your own law speak directly of the sacrament: and so
does Origin, when he calls the bread on the Lords table, the typical and
figurative body: only that place of his mentions the sixth of John, where he
says, If you take this saying according to the letter, this letter kills.


Phi. Mary Sir that place is the chiefest: and how closely you could convey it
in amongst the rest, to make men believe he spoke that of the sacrament, which
is nothing so.


Theo. Why? does not the 6. of S. John foretell and declare the same kind of
eating Christ's flesh and drinking his blood, which was after performed by
Christ at his last supper when he said, This is my body, this is my blood?


Phi. Does it say you?


Theo. I do not say, Christ speaks in the sixth of John of the material
elements of bread and wine, The 6. of S. John does not teach the eating of the
signs at the Lords table, but the eating of the things themselves.
which were then first ordained to be pledges of his invisible graces, when
the Supper was first instituted: and therefore not spoken of before that time:
but this is it which I affirm, and in this the learned and ancient Fathers
agree with me, that where this mystery consists of two parts, an earthly
matter, and an heavenly virtue: the sixth of Saint John treats not of the
signs, but of the things themselves: not of the figures representing, but of
the truth represented: not of that which is corporally proposed, but of that
which is Ghostly received in the Lords supper, which is the better and diuiner
part of this Sacrament: and that the Disciples there learned, in what sort
themselves and all the faithful after them should eat the Lords flesh and
drink the Lords blood at his table, to be thereby quickened, norished, and
incorporated with him, The things themselves that are proposed and received at
the Lords table were fully declared by our Savior in the 6. of S. John.
as members of his mystical body. So that if any doubt arise, not touching the
creatures of bread and wine, but touching the flesh and blood of Christ,
which are the Principal parts of this mystery, the solution and explication
of every such doubt must be fet from the place, where the Lord first revealed
this secret, rebuked the Capernites for the misconstruction of his words, and
taught his Disciples how they should be both fruitful partakers of his flesh,
and rightful interpreters of his speech.


Phi. You would feign have it so: but we mean to bar you that chance.


Theo. You cannot bar us, The fathers are all of that opinion.
but you must bar Chrysostom, Cyprian, Cyrill, Austen and others, that confess
the same truth before us.

Chrysostom. hom. 83. in Mat.
How chanced, says Chrysostom, the (Disciples) were not troubled when they
heard this: take, eat, this is my body? Because (their master) had debated the
same matter largely and profoundly before. The same matter before debated.
For at first when he spoke of these things many were offended at the very
words. So Cyprian, Cypr. de caenae Domini.
To the sons of Abraham doing the works of Abraham the high Priest brings
forth bread and wine saying this is my body. There arose before this, The same
speech handled in the 6. of John.
as we read in the Gospel of John, a question touching the nouelty of this
speech, and at the doctrine of this mystery the hearers were amazed. So
Cyrill, Cyril. in Johan. lib. 4. cap. 14.
The (Capernites) before they believe, question busily with him. Therefore the
Lord did not tell them how that might be, but exhorts them to seek for it
with faith: mary to the believing disciples, he gave pieces of bread, saying:
take ye, eat ye, this is my body: Likewise the cup he delivered round,
saying: drink ye all of this. Thou see, that to those which asked without
faith, he did not open the manner of this mystery, but to those which
believed, yea when they did not ask, he declared the same: And Augustine:
August. contra aduers. legis and Prophet. lib. 1. cap. 24.
When Christ spoke of the Sacrament of his body and blood, they said this
speech is hard. Who can hear it?

You see by the constant opinion of these Fathers, that our Savior in the sixth
of John taught his Disciples what manner of eating his flesh and drinking his
blood they should expect at his last Supper, and that they therefore started
not at these words this is my body, because they learned of him before what to
look for, and well remembered his interpretation of himself, when the
Capernites staggered at the like speech. Then perforce what sense the words of
Christ in the sixth of John do bear, the same must the words of the supper
retain: but there Christ teaches the spiritual eating of his flesh by
faith, his words be figurative: ergo the Lords supper does not import any
corporal eating of his flesh, nor literal exposition of his words. And why?
The performance may no way differ from the promise. The promise made by Christ
in the sixth of John (the bread which I will give is my flesh) was figurative:
If the flesh of Christ be ^aten in the Lords supper as he taught it should be
in the 6. of John, then must the words of the supper be expounded by the 6. of
John: and the one being figurat^iue, the other cannot be literal.
The words then of the Supper THIS (which I now give) is my body perfourming
the same must likewise be figurative. For Seals do not alter or infringe, but
strengthen and confirm that which was promised. The creatures of bread and
wine Christ ordained at his last Supper to be Sacraments and Seals of his
former promises uttered in the sixth of John, ergo they change not his meaning
expressed before: That was spiritual and figurative: therefore the words of
the Supper can not be corporal nor literal. And the words of Origin
expounding the sixth of John, are a just proof, that if in the words of the
Supper you follow the letter, that letter kills.


Phi. This can not be. Christ in the sixth of John, you say, teaches a
spiritual and figurative kind of eating his flesh, and in delivering the
Sacrament we be sure he spoke of a corporal not of a spiritual eating his
body. For when our Lord said take, eat, this is my body, did he not mean
they should take it with their hands, and eat it with their mouths? And
therefore either the one place does not serve to expound the other, The bread
must be eaten corporally at the Lords table though the flesh of Christ cannot
be eaten there or elsewhere but only spirituallie.
or else in both places is prescribed a real and corporal eating the flesh of
Christ, and drinking his blood: which we rather embrace as the likeliest.


Theo. In those words take and eat, spoken at the last Supper, he meant, no
doubt, the corporal taking and eating of that creature which he gave them:
and when he added this is my body, which he told them before they must eat,
if they would have any life in them, he recalled to their minds, as Chrysostom
notes, the doctrine he had taught them of eating his flesh and drinking his
blood: in which because they were well instructed by the Capernites error and
their masters declaration of himself ( that the words, which he spoke, were
spirit and life) they neither started nor stumbled at his speech, The bread
must be eaten corporally: and the flesh of Christ spirituallie: ergo the bread
is not his body but by a figure of speech usual to this and other sacraments.
but presently perceived the Lord was ordayning a Sacrament to confirm their
faith, and not hiding his flesh under accidents or any other couerts to enter
their mouths, for which grossenes the Capernits were before reproved.

Christ's exposition therefore in the sixth of John, was purposely made to
confute the carnal Jews, who when they heard of eating man's flesh and drinking
blood, dreampt of no kind of eating and drinking but with their bodily jaws
and lips, and for that cause murmured, as if they had been invited to some
barbarous and brutish act: and next to teach the disciples that endured his
words, in what sort they should look for a diuiner and purer kind of eating
the flesh of Christ, and drinking his blood, The Lords Supper adds Seals
and assurances to the promise made in the sixth of John, but alters not the
doctrine.
by believing, hoping and rejoicing in his flesh, that was wounded, and blood
that was shed for their sins. This he assured, and ratified unto them, by
ordaining afterward a Sacrament, which they should visibly see, but inuisibly
understand: and corporally receive, but spiritually interpret: in believing
the same by the power of his word and spirit to have in it, and carry with it
the fulness of his truth and mercy, openly sealed with those pledges of his
promises, and instruments of his grace, lest their faith should faint by reason
of his departure and absence from the^, or their hearts fail them as if they
were destitute of his protection and favor, amidst so many troubles as should
enclose them.


Phi. If you You must needs have it so, except you will dissent from all your
fellows and from the fathers.
will needs have the sixth of S. John to pertain to the Sacrament: then is
there, say we, a real and corporal kind of eating established in that
chapter. For Christ in plain speech says, Joan. 6.
my flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed.


Theo. It is well that you bethink your self at last: you were about to
dissent both from the fathers and from your own fellows. For the fathers, as I
have showed you, confess that the Disciples were by the words of Christ in
this place instructed how they should eat his flesh and drink his blood, even
in the sacrament: The Papists very greedily tie the 6. of John to the
sacrament, little thinking it would overthrow their real presence.
and that made the^ understand him when he said, take, eat, this is my body,
drink ye al of this, this is my blood; and as for the men of your side, they
run all to this issue, that the sixth of John not only treats of the
sacrament, but also strongly concludes your real presence, and external
eating of Christ's flesh with bodily parts, as with teeth, throat, and such
like: in so much that if you go that way, which you were about, you go alone.

Your friend Master Harding with a present courage, as his manner is, says:
Artic. 5. diuis. 2. contra episcop. Sarunt.
We can not find where our Lord performed the promise which he made in the
first chapter of John: the bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will
give for the life of the world, but only in his last supper. Steven Gardener
his Master uttered even the very same words before him. Part. 3. object. 1. In
Marco Constantio.
Promisit Dominus se daturum nobis in pane carnem suam, dicens, panis, qu^m ego
dabo, caro mea est, quam ego dabo pro mundi vita. Sed quod promisit Christus,
no^ legimus cum praestitisse nisi in coena. That Christ performed this promise
ONLY in the supper, is as false, as it is true that he did there perform it.
The Lord promised that he would give us his flesh in bread, when he said, the
bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the
world. But that which Christ promised we do not read that he performed,
except it were in the Supper. And though they both ouerlash, when they say he
performed it only in the supper, yet in this you may not vary from them, that
he performed that promise of his, and verified that doctrine of his in the
supper. For so the fathers said before them as I have proved: and so your late
Testament upon the sixth of S. John says of al their side, The The. test. fol.
236. nu. 53. [you shall have no life.
The catholics teach these words to be spoken of the sacrament.


Phi. We do so.


The. Then what exposition the learned and ancient fathers made of Christ's
words in the 6. of John, If the 6. of John be figurative, then the words of
the supper are also figurative: but the 6. of John is figurative: ergo.
Clemens. Alex. (...) lib. cap. 6 Te^tula^^ resu^rectis. carnis.
the same they intended and referred to the words of the supper: But the words
of christ teaching us in the 6. of John that we must eat his flesh and drink
his blood, before we can have my life in us, are by the common consent of all
the fathers Allegorical, mystical and figurative, ergo the figurative
interpretation of Christ's words in the supper is catholic.


Phi. Think you we are so foolish as to beleeu that ye fathers were the autors
of your figures?


Th. Choose whether you will believe us or no, we speak no more tha^ we mean to
prove.

Clemens Alexan. The Lord in the gospel of John when he said, eat ye my flesh
and drink ye my blood, he called that by an alegory, meat and drink, which is
evidently me^t of (our) faith and (his) promise. Tertul. He pronounced his
flesh to be that heavenly bread, urging the^ al along (that dicourse) with an
allegory of needful foodes to remember their fathers that preferred the bread
and flesh of Egypt before the divine vocation. Origin, Orig. in Leuit. hom. 7.
Our Lord and Savior says except you eat my flesh, and drink my blood, you
shall not have life in you My flesh is truly meat and my blood is truly
drink. He that can no skill of these things may perhaps turn his ear from
them, as they did which said: how can he give us his flesh to eat? who can
hear it? and they departed from him. But you, if you be the children of the
church, if you acquainted with mysteries (and Sacraments) of the Gospel
acknowledge the things that we say, The figurative sense is the spiritual
sense: the literal is carnal.
they be the Lords. Acknowledge that there be figures in the divine books, and
therefore examine the^ as spiritual men, not as carnal, and understand what
is said. If you conster these things as carnal men, they hurt you, they do
not nourish you. Chrysostom, The words that I speak to you are spirit, that
is, spiritual, having nothing that is carnal in them. If a man should
carnally take them he should gain nothing. Chrysostom. in I^han. homil. 46.
What is carnally to understand the^? Simply as they be spoken, neither to seek
any farther. To understand the words simply as they lie is to understand
them carnally.
For the things that we see, must not so be judged of, but all mysteries (and
Sacraments) must be considered with the inward eyes, that is spiritually.


Phi. Spiritually we grant we must understand them, but not figuratively.


Theo. What is spiritually, but figuratively? Eating and drinking are corporal
actions, not spiritual; and properly performed with the parts of our bodies,
not with the powers of our souls. The words in S. John. are figurative
because eating and drinking are referred not to the bodies but to the souls of
the faithful.
Since then by the constant confession of all the fathers, the Lord throughout
this chapter did not refer eating and drinking to the bodies of his Disciples,
but unto their souls: and meant their faith, and not their teeth: it is
apparent that the words of our Savior are allegorical and figurative, I
mean translated and derived by an allegory from the body to the mind, from
chamming to believing, from swallowing to remembering, to be short, from the
flesh of his Disciples to their spirits, and in that respect called
spiritual. The manner of eating there specified is spiritual, the words
there used are mystical, to wit, not literal but allegorical: and so the
Fathers mainly teach.

Basil, Basil. in psalm. 33.
Taste and see how sweet the Lord is. We have often marked that the powers of
the soul are called by the same names by which the members of the body are.
Because then our Lord is the true bread, and his flesh is meat indeed, it
must be that the sweetness of that delicious bread be felt of us by means of
spiritual taste. The inward man eats the flesh of Christ.
There is a certain mouth of the mind and ^oule within man, which is
nourished by the word of life, the bread I mean which came from heaven. Origin,
Orig. in cantica canticorum homil. 2.
To every part (or power) of the soul Christ becomes euerything. Therefore
he is called the true light, that the eyes of the soul may have wherewith to
be lightened, therefore the word, that the ears (of the soul) may have what to
hear, therefore the bread of life, that the taste of the soul may have what to
relesse. The soul must relesse the bread of life.
Tertullian, Tertul. de res^^rect. carnis.
The words that I have spoken to you, be spirit and life. Making his word to
quicken by reason his word is spirit and life: he called the same word his
flesh, because the word was made flesh, and so for the procuring of life was to
be desired (yea) TO BE DEVOVRED WITH HEARING, CHEWED WITH UNDERSTANDING, AND
DIGESTED WITH BELIEVING. This way Christ is eaten, and not with teeth and
jaws.
Cyprian. Cypr. de caen^ Domini.
The master of this ordinance (and feast) said that except we did eat (his
flesh) and drink his blood, we should have no life in us; directing us with a
spiritual instruction and opening our wits for the conceiving of so great a
matter, thereby to let us understand that our abiding in him is eating and
(our) drinking is as it were an incorporating with him in that (mutual)
services are yielded, wills joined, and affections united. What it is to eat
Christ.
The eating therefore of this flesh is a certain coveting and desiring to
abide in him. Athanasius. Athan. in hec quicunque dexerit verbum in ^ilium
hominis.
Therefore does he mention his ascending into heaven, to pull from them their
corporal cogitations (and thinking on his flesh,) and that they might
thenceforth learn that the flesh of which he spoke, was celestial food from
heaven, and spiritual nourishment which he gives. Augustine. August. tract.
in Johan. 25.
Why preparest thou thy teeth and thy belly? BELIEVE AND THOU HAVE EATEN.
Ibidem tract. 26.
To believe in him, this is to eat the living bread. HE THAT BELIEVES EATS.
He is inuisibly fed, because he is inuisibly regenerated. He is inwardly a
babe, inwardly new. In what part he is renewed, in that part is he nourished.
Bernard that in respect of antiquity lived but yesterday can teach you the
meaning of this place. Bernard. in psalm. qui habitat. sermo. 3.
When they heard him say, except you eat the flesh of the son of man and
drink his blood; they said this is an hard speech, and departed from him. And
what is to eat his flesh and drink his blood, but to communicate with his
passions, and imitate that conversation which he led (here) in flesh?

The text it self does in sight convince so much: The very text confirms
the fathers speeches Iohannis sexto,
The Lord often times expounds his own words purposly to this effect, verse.
27.
Work not for the meat which perishes, but for the meat which dureth to
eternal life, verse. 29.
and this is the work of God, that you believe in him whom he has sent. verse.
35.

Non ambulando sed credendo ad Christum currimus. August tract. 26. in Johan.


I am that bread of life, he that comes to me (not by walking but by
believing) shall not hunger, he that believes in me shall never thirst. Hunger
and thirst are no way quenched, but with eating and drinking. Then how can the
believer but still hunger, and still thirst, except we grant that he, which
believes, both eats and drinks? verse. 53.

Believing proved to be eating.


Verily verily I say unto you, except you eat the flesh of the son of man,
and drink his blood you have no life in you. He then which has life* per
consequence eats the flesh of christ and drinks his blood: but he that
believes has eternal life, as our Savior affirms in the same place with
no less vehemency, verse. 47.
Verily verily I say unto you, he that believes in me has everlasting life;
ergo he that believes eats the flesh and drinks the blood of Christ. For
if eating and drinking in this place were referred, to the mouth and teeth, how
could Judas, or any other of the wicked that is once partaker of the Lords
table, perish? The words of Christ be plain. verse. 51.
Your fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness, and are dead: If any man eat of
this bread he shall live for ever: verse. 54.
whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has eternal life. But the
wicked notwithstanding the corporal chamming of this Sacrament die the death of
sinners, The wicked do not eat though they grind with their teeth and
swallowe with their jaws never so fast.
ergo they neither eat the ^lesh of Christ, nor drink his blood, not because
their teeth or jaws fail them, but by reason they want faith which is the
right and proper instrument of spiritual eating. Since then man Romans 10.
believes with his heart unto righteousness, as Paul teaches, not with his
jaws nor lips; ergo the soul of man, which only believes, only does eat
the flesh of Christ; and our bodies which have no means to believe, can
neither eat nor drink in that sort and sense that our Savior there speaks
of.

You cannot with honesty step from so manifest, both Scriptures and Fathers,
as these be that I have brought; or if you can dally with so good and grave
witnesses in so weighty matters, I trust the Godly will be fully resolved
that the manner of eating Christ's flesh and drinking his blood, The manner of
eating Christ's flesh is spiritual by faith and understanding the words
expressing it be allegorical.
which the Lord himself first proposed in the sixth of John, was not LITERAL
NOR CORPORAL, as the Capernites understand him and were deceived, but
ALLEGORICAL AND SPIRITVALL. ALLEGORICAL in respect of the words which be not
there precisely taken in their usual signification for grinding with the
teeth, and straining down the throat, but figuratively spoken, and import as
much as confessing and embracing with heart and inward affection. SPIRITVAL,
because not our mouths, but our minds, not our bellies, but our spirits are
nourished with the flesh and blood of Christ, and that not by chewing or
swallowing, but by remembering and believing that his body was wounded, and his
blood shed for our perfect and eternal redemption.

If the Supper be correspondent to the doctrine of our Savior in the 6. of
John, the manner of eating Christ's flesh must be spiritual by faith, not
corporal with teeth, and the words, this is my body, figurative.
Now the Lords Supper is correspondent not contrary to the first of John, as
we saw before by the verdit of the fathers, and confession of your selves:
therefore the Lords table teaches no literal nor carnal, but a spiritual and
mystical eating of the ^lesh of Christ and drinking of his blood: which you
cannot observe so long as you press the letter of these words: Take, eat,
this is my body. For taking and eating in the Supper be corporal actions,
even as breaking the bread and delivering the cup are. Then if the words this
is my body be literal, the consequent is inevitable that the flesh of Christ
is really taken with hands, actually bruised with teeth, corporally lodged in
the belly: But this error the Lord in his own person confuted, and the
Catholic fathers refell as impious, irreligious and heinous, ergo the words
of the Supper this is my body, be not literal, but rather aunswerable to the
doctrine proposed in the sixth of John, which is nothing less than literal.


Phi. You make but a double manner of eating Christ's flesh, where you should
make a triple. A carnal, spiritual, This is a poor shift: for sacramental
eating is no more but eating the sacred sign of that heavenly food.
and Sacramental. A carnal, which the capernites dreampt of, when they
supposed they should have eaten raw flesh to sight and taste as they did other
meats. A spiritual, by faith and understanding; in which sort, every good man
may eat the flesh of Christ and drink his blood at any time without the
mysteries. A Sacramental, as when we eat the flesh of Christ under the
forms of bread and wine: though we neither see nor ^ast flesh or blood. Of
these three sorts the sixth of S. John's Gospel refelleth only the carnal,
which the Capernites grossly fell to, when they heard our Savior speak of
the Sacrament.


Theo. I blame you not, if you be loath to be counted Capernites. They were
reproved by our Savior as gross mistakers of his speech; The Jesuits would
feign g^t from the Capernites if they could tell how.
and lewd forsakers of his fellowship: but would God you were as willing to
leave their error, as you be to refuse their name.


Phi. We be farther, than you from their opinion. And you be rather Capernites:
that ask how can he give us his flesh to eat, and will not believe any eating
of Christ's body with the mouth, except your eyes and tongues may first
discern and taste the same.


Theo. We ask not him, how he can do any thing that he will; but we ask
you, how you know that both his will and his word are changed since he rebuked
the Capernites for their grossenes?


Phi. We do not say that either his will or his word are changed.


Theo. Then the doctrine of eating his flesh and drinking his blood, which he
del^uered in the sixth of John, remains in the same force and strength, that
it did at first, when he revealed it to his disciples.


Philand. It does.


Theo. And the same exposition of his words, which he then annexed to them,
abides good for ever.


Phi. What else?


Theo. And he, that deuiseth^ or teaches any other manner of eating his flesh
or drinking his blood at his last Suppper, What Christ spoke of the soul the
Capernites understood of the body: let the Jesuits therefore dress and hide
the ^lesh of Christ how they can from their ^ight and taste, so long as they
will eat it with teeth and jaws they shall be Capernites.
than is there declared and confirmed by himself, is either a Capernite or
worse.


Phi. He is.


Theo. But that eating which he there taught, was by faith and understanding;
and they that murmured at him and departed from him thought he had meant eating
with the mouth and teeth: What l^ck you then of the Capernites error, when you
affirm that the natural and substantial body of christ is really eaten with
teeth, and locally discendeth into the stomach, which is the way that all
other meats do pass, when they nourish the body?


Phi. We defy both you and them: we do not incline to their error. We eat
christ in a mystery by faith: and though we taste and see nothing, but bread
and wine, yet do we prefer the truth of his promise before the judgment of
our senses, which you do not. And therefore you falsely slander us, when you
charge us with the carnal opinion of the capernites.


Theoph. I can yield you no freer choice, than if you like not their company,
to leave their error. You must not look to misconster the words of christ as
they did, and take skorne to be called as they were.


Phil. I tell you, we do not tear the flesh of christ with our teeth, as
they thought they should.


Theo. You hold that the flesh of christ enters your mouths, It skilleth
not how Christ's flesh be covered, but with what part it is eaten soul or body.
and is really bruised (though somewhat favorably) with your teeth, and
locallie discendeth down your throats into the closet of your bellies. What
differ you now from the capernites? what kind of eating were they rebuked for,
if not for this?

Man has but two kinds of eating as him self consists of two parts: for
each part one.
More kinds of eating, than by mind or by mouth, with faith or with teeth, that
is, corporal, or spiritual, you cannot imagine. Man has no mo parts but a
soul and a body, therefore he can use no kind of eating, but either with his
soul, or with his body. You must new frame men, which is past your reach,
before you can challenge this division as insufficient: each part has his kind
and sort of eating. Now which of these twain did the Capernites fasten on; the
spiritual or the corporal kind of eating the flesh of Christ? Not the
spiritual, for they John. 6.

Which of those twain will the Jesuits choose, but they must either forge
their corporal eating with teeth, or join arm in arm with the Capernites.


believed not as the Scripture says of them, and they which lack faith, lack
the right and true means of spiritual eating. Besides, our Savior went about
to teach them the spiritual eating of his flesh and drinking of his blood, for
so does himself expound his own words, and his whole Church after him did
testify that his meaning. If then the Capernites lighted on the same manner of
eating, which christ proposed to them, they deserved rather praise than blame:
but they mistook the words of christ, and were rebuked of him, ergo they
thought on the corporal eating of christ's flesh with teeth and jaws, which is
the self same point that you affirm in your doctrine.


Phi. We neither Then you differ from the Capernites in seeing but not in
eating the flesh of Christ. Whether a man may not carnally eat that which he
neither sees nor tastes: let the Jesuits consult the Cooks.
see nor taste the flesh of christ, which they dreampt they should, and
therefore we be most free from their madness.


Theo. You cham the flesh of christ actuallie with your teeth and swallowe the
same d^wne your throats: and these be the proper actions and right
instruments of external and caperniticall eating, your eyes and your taste be
not: else blind men and such as by reason of sickness can taste nothing, by your
divinity can eat nothing: and meats so devised and handled by art that we
can neither by sight nor taste discern them, if your Rule be good, be neither
corporally taken nor eaten, which is so false that we need not refute you,
cooks and Pastlers will laugh you to scorn. Grinding with teeth and
swallowing down the throat that it may descend to the stomach is the very
definition of carnal eating: and since you concur with the capernites in
those two points, notwithstanding you vary from them in sight and taste, yet
your opinion establishes a corporal eating of christ's flesh and a literal
perverting of his words no less than theirs did.

And which of the learned fathers I pray you, did ever put this difference
between the words of christ and the capernites error, that where they thought
they should have both eaten and seen his flesh, the Lord meant that indeed they
should as they thought eat the same with their teeth and jaws, marie they
should not see nor taste it. Was this the meaning of our Savior when he said,
The words that I speak to you be spirit and life? Did his Church after him
so conster his words? Athan. in illud quicunque dixeris verbum in filium
hominis.
The things that he spoke were not carnal but spiritual, says Athanasius.
Chrys^n Ioha^. homil. 45.
They were spiritual having nothing in them that was carnal, as Chrysostom
and Theophilact witness. Orig. in Leuit. hom. 7.
Examine them as spiritual men, says Origin, not as carnal. Theophi. in 6.
Iohannis.
The letter does kill him that does not spirituallie weigh the things that are
spoken. Cypr. de caena Domini.
Christ gives us a spiritual instruction, says Cyprian: and Austen, August.
in psalm. 98.
Understand you spiritually that which I have spoken. Oecume. in 6^ Iohannis.
Christ here calls the spirit, the spiritual understanding of those things
that he spoke, says Oecumenius. Beda. in 6. Iohannis.
What is spirit and life, says Bid? They must be understood spiritually. What
is now left for you and your fellows but either to be coupled with the
Capernits for your literal pressing the words of Christ and corporal eating
of his flesh, If Christ me^t the soul of man should eat his flesh by faith,
they be capernites that bring their mouths to eat it, though they neither see
it nor taste it.
or else to prove, which you can hardly do, that your teeth and jaws be not
carnal as the Capernits were, but spiritual. Your mouths and bellies I trow
be flesh and not spirit; members of the body, no parts of the mind; in them
consists neither faith nor devotion, and therefore unless you can
transubstantiate your souls into your jaws, and your hearts into your
throats, your receiving of Christ in at mouth, and chamming his flesh with
teeth that it may pass to your stomachs, is neither spiritual nor mystical,
but a carnal and right Caperniticall kind of eating.


Phi. Why do you twite us with the Capernites whom we so often have
disclaimed? They feared lest they should eat raw flesh: we have no such fear.


Theo. The flesh of Christ, which you eat, can not be real if it be not raw:
and therefore your stomachs may be stronger to digest it than theirs were, but
you eat the flesh of a live man with your mouths which they feared they
should, and were deceived.


Phi. They thought they should have eaten Christ by piece meal.


Theo. And is your opinion any whit the better, because you eat him whole at
one morsel?


Phi. This is profane scoffing.


Theo. Take heed that yours be not worse than profane eating of that which
is divine and holy. There may be many differences in eating, but al eating the
flesh of christ with teeth and jaws is Caperniticall.



Phi. We eat his flesh in a mystery.


Theo. What mystery lies in your mouths and bellies?


Phi. Is it not a great mystery that Christ is eaten under the forms of
bread and wine?


Theo. None at all, if you set your teeth and jaws on work to eat him as the
Capernites thought they should, when they perverted the words of Christ.


Phi. They supposed they should have seen and tasted man's flesh, which is
horrible.


Theo. Eating as I have showed you, does consist not in seeing or tasting, but
in chamming and swallowing: and since you therein consent with the Capernites,
though you could allege twenty diversities between their manner of eating
and yours, yet both are corporal and contrary to that doctrine which Christ
delivered in the sixth of John^ For that, as I have proved, was intended and
referred to the souls and spirits of men, not to their throats or entrals: and
therefore well in covering the body of Christ, and deluding your senses, you
may differ from the Capernites: but in preparing your teeth and jaws for the
flesh of Christ, and in drawing his words from their mystical and figurative
sense, you join with the Capernites against all the Catholic Fathers that
ever wrate in the Church of Christ.


Phi. Have we, think you, Not one that is ancient.
no fathers with us, as well for the literal construction of Christ's words,
as for the For that you misconster some that be ancient, but their true
meaning is against it.
corporal eating of his flesh in the Sacrament? Corporal I call it, not
because we see it or taste it, as we do other meats, but because we be sure it
enters our mouths when we receive our rightes, and is really contained in
our bodies.


Theo. You may abuse some fathers to make a show: but otherwise you have no
ground in them either of your literal understanding Christ's speech, or
corporal eating of christ's ^lesh.


Phi. Have we not? Mo Saints than ever were in the Calendar.
S. Damascen, S. Epiphanius, Theophilact, Euthymius and others earnestly press
the literal construction of christ's words against your signs and figures: and
as for eating the flesh of Christ with our very mouths, S. Austen, S.
Chrysostom, S. Leo, S. Gregory, S. Cyril, Tertullian and others are resolute,
who^ I trust you will not condemn for Capernites. By this way the simple learn
what to look for at your hands, that will outface so plain a truth.


Theo. He that will be good at outfacing let him study your Testament, and he
need none other teacher: but what truth is it that we outface?


Phi. Never father, you said, avouched the literal sense of Christ's words.


Theo. Four late grecians urge the letter, but to no such end as the Jesuits
do.
I said, no ancient father; of which number I do not account these late Grecians
to be. And therefore if they did contradict that which Tertullian, Austen,
Origin, Chrysostom and others did teach long before them, we would not regard
them: but as yet I see^ no such thing proved by them.


Phi. Damas^ib. 4. cap. 14.
The proof is easy. S. Damascene rehearsing the words of Christ, This is my
body, immediately adds, not a figure of my body, but my body; not a figure of
my blood, but my blood. S. Epiphanius likewise, (Christ) said, take, eat, this
is my body. Nice^. Synod. 2. actio. 6.
He said not take, eat the Image of my body. And Theophilact, Theophil. in
26. Matthew.
Bread is the very body of our Lord and not a figure correspondent. For he
said not this is a figure, but this is my body. And so Euthymius, Euthymius in
Matthew. cap. 64.
Christ said not these are signs of my body, but these are my body. These be
manifest places: and yet such is your impudency that you affirm no father
ever urged the literal force of Christ's words.

And so for the corporal eating of Christ's flesh with our mouths: S.
Augustine says, Aug. ^pist. 118.
It has pleased the holy Ghost that in the honor of so great a Sacrament, our
Lords body should enter into the mouth before other meats. And S.
Chrysostom, Chrysostom. homil. 29. in 2. Cor.

De cons. did. 2. quid sit.


Our mouth has gotten no small honor receiving our Lords body. And S.
Gregory, (The blood of the lamb) is sucked not only by the mouth of the
heart, but also by the mouth of the body. And S. Leo, Leo. sermon. 6. de ie^^io
7. me^sis.
That is received by the mouth which is believed by the heart. And Tertullian,
Tertul. de resurrect. carnis.
(Our) flesh does feed on the body* and blood of our Lord* And S. Cyril,
Cyril. lib. 4. cap. 14. in Iohan^
It was needful that this rude and earthly body should be recovered to
immortality by touch, taste and food of the same kind with it self. You ask
for fathers: here they be both many in number and ancient in time to discharge
us that we be no Capernites: and to refell your foolish vaunt, that all
antiquity were of the very same mind that you are now. It may be you never
understood them.
It may be you never heard the places before: If you did not I will pardon your
ignorance so you repent your rash^es.


Theo. Yeas sir, I have seen them, and ^^ may be weighed them better than
ever you did. And notwithstanding your magnificence, it will appear you be not
free from ignorance, whatsoever you be from impudency.


Phil. I will burn my clothes to my shirt if ever you answer them.


Theo. But save your skin from the fire, though you spare not other men's
blood nor bones.


Phi. We It is no s^ame for us to suffer as Christ did, nor glory for you to
do as Judas did.
use you but as heretics should be used.


Theo. If it be heresy for us to serve god according to the Gospel of his
son, what is it for you to serve him with your own medlees?


Phi. You would fly the field rather than your life, but I must keep you to
it.


Theo. You run so fast from God and your Prince that you may soon ouer-goe
us, if we would fly, but as yet I see no cause.

Damascene, Theophilact, and Euthymius press the letter of christ's speech not
to derive thence your carnal and gu^tural eating of christ's flesh, The meaning
of Damascen and others after him in pressing the letter.
nor to control that which Tertullian, Austen, Origin, Chrysostom, and others
(men of far greater learning and authority than these) taught long before
them in the church of God, but to show, that bread and wine be not only tokens
and bare signs of christ's flesh and blood but also carry with them and in
them the virtue power and effect of his death and pass^on. Euthymius in Matthew.
cap. 64. He urges the words lest the signs should seem to be without virtue.
Euthymius, Christ said not these be the signs of my body and blood, but these
are my body and blood. We must therefore NOT LOOK TO THE NATVRE of the gifts
which are proposed, BUT TO THE VERTVE. Against them which defend, that this
Sacrament does only figure, not offer: signify, not exhibit grace: the letter
may well be forced to prove the divine power and operation of the mystical
elemenets: Against us which hold the visible signs in substance to be
creatures: in signification mysteries: in operation and virtue the things
themselves, whose names they bear^, this illation concludes nothing. Yet for
the better explication of him self and others using the like kind of speech:
Theophilact adds this word ONLY. Mark that the bread which is eaten of us
in the mysteries, Theophil. in 6. Iohannis.
Non est TANTVM figuratio quaedam carnis Domini, is not an only figuring of the
Lords flesh, but the Lords very flesh. For he said not the bread which I will
give, is a figure of my flesh, Not a figure only, that is not an idle sign
without fruit and effect.
but is my flesh. Their meaning was as we see by their own words to teach more
than idle signs, or ONLY figures in the Lords supper, because together with
the name go the vert^es and effects of Christ's flesh and blood, united in
manner of a Sacrament to the visible signs. And this their assertion neither
troubles our Doctrine, nor strengthens your error.

Again these writers may very well say the Sacraments of the Gospel BE NO
FIGVRES but TRVETH IT SELF, No figures of things to come.
in that respect, as figures be taken for samplers of things to come. Such
were the figures of the law, which did premonstrat the coming of christ in
flesh, All figures abolished by the coming of Christ in flesh.
and ceased at his coming. And so the mysteries of the Lords table were not
figures of things expected, but evidences of the truth there sitting in person,
and the next day to be nailed to the cross, thereby to fulfill and abolish al
figures: and our sacraments are now not signs of farther promises, but
memorials of his mercies already performed. Do this says christ, (not in figure
of an other truth to come) but in remembrance of me (which am come:) for
memory you know stretches only to things past and done: and in this sense
the letter may be safely pressed, and your carnal conueyance nothing relieved.

The defe^ders of Images would not have the sacramen^ called an Image of Christ.
I find a third cause that might induce them to force the letter in this sort,
and yet no way confirming your gross supposall, which is this. When the Greek
church fell at variance for Images, they which held that Christ ought not to be
figured after the likeness of our bodies, amongst other reasons alleged this
for one, that the Lord at his Supper Extat in 2. Synod. Nicen. actio. 6.
for a true and effectual Image of his incarnation, chose the whole substance
of bread, not any way like the proportion of a man, lest it should occasion
Idolatry. The defenders of Images, whose side Damascene took, pressed with
this objection durst not flee to your annihilation of the substance of bread
and adoration of the Sacrament, with divine honor: which no doubt they would
have done with great triumph, had those two points of your Doctrine been then
counted catholic, but yielding and by their silence confessing, that the
substance of bread remained in the supper, The cause why the Gretians pressed
the letter is nothing near the Jesuits real presence. Damasce. lib. 4. cap.
14.

This Epiphanius was as earnest for painted and carved Images as the elder was
against them.


and was not adored (for so the contrary part opposed) at length for very pure
need came to this shift: that the mystical bread was not ordained to resemble
and figure Christ's humane nature, nor so called by christ at his maundie who
said not, this is a figure of my body, but my body; nor a figure of my blood,
but my blood: and when Basil and Eustathius were produced affirming the bread
and wine to be figures and resemblances of Christ's flesh and blood, the
Patrones of Images replied that was spoken always before, never after
consecration. Wherefore Damascene first began this myncing and straining the
words of Christ, not to build on them any real or corporal conversion of the
bread into the flesh of christ, but in favor of his artifical pictures and
Images he could by no means abide that the mysteries should after consecration
be called Images, and figures of Christ's body.

The next that traced this path after Damascene was Epiphanius: not that
ancient and learned Bishop of Cyprus, but a prattling Deacon in the bastard
Council of Nice, whose furious and fanaticall answer to the Council of
Constantinople, (that made this objection) declares more tongue than wit,
more face than learning. Nicen Synod. 2. actio. 6.
Christ did not say take ye, eat ye the Image of my body. Read whiles thou will (says he) thou shall never find that either the Lord or his Apostles, or
the Fathers called that unbloody Sacrifice, which the Priest offers, AN
IMAGE. Thus does he braie forth This Epiphanius might have been a Jesuit for
his lusty craking.
defiance to the whole world without truth, without shame. For Chrysostom
says, Chrysostom. in Matt. hom. 83
If Jesus were not once dead, whose image and sign is this Sacrifice? This
Idem hom. 17. in epist. ad Heb.
Sacrifice is an image and samplar of that Sacrifice. And Gelasius, Gelas.
consra Eutichen.
Surely the IMAGE and resemblance of the body and blood of Christ is
celebrated in the action of the mysteries. We must therefore so think of the
Lord Christ himself as we profess and observe in his IMAGE. And likewise
Theodoret. Ortho. Theod. dial. 2.
The mystical signs which are offered to god by his Priests whereof do
thou call them signs? Eranist, Of the body and blood of the Lord. Ortho: It is
very well said. Confer then the image with the pattern and thou shall see
the likeness. Dionysius calls it both an Dyonis. ecclesiast. hierach. cap 3.
image and a figurative sacrifice. Nazianzene excusing himself, Naz^anz. in
Apolog^^^^. ^. Apost^l. cons^^^. li. 6. ca. 3.
How should I, says he, presume to offer unto God that external sacrifice;
the image of the great mysteries? Clemens, Offer you in your churches the image
of the royal body of Christ. Macarius, Macar. h^ 27.
In the Church are offered bread and wine the images of his flesh and blood.

The (...) ^a^hers keep the same word and the same sense. Ambrose, Am^r^s.
d^n^f^^ie. E. 1. ca. 48.
In the law was a shadow: in the Gospel is an image, in heaven is the truth.
Before was offered a lamb or a calf, now Christ is offered, here in an image:
there in truth where he entreats his father as an advocate for us. Auste^,
August. o^^ogintarum quae^ionum. cap. 61. The sacrament is an Image of Christ's
death and passion.
Christ gave an image of his burnt offering to be celebrated in the church for
a remembrance of his passion. The rest say the like: but what need we farther
refutation of so ridiculous and unshamefast a brag, such causes, such
councels: such poppets, such Proctors. The very children in the church of God
know that the divine mysteries by the general definition of a Sacrament be
visible signs of invisible graces, and as Augustine interprets the word De
cons. did. 2. Sacrifi^ium. Sigebert. in an. 885.

Regino li. 2. an. 868.

Chrono. Can^^^. If these Grecians had been of the Jesuits opinion the matter
had not been great, but now they are not.

How the late Grecians that press the letter may be understood.

The Jesuits trust more to their practices then to their authorities,
otherwise their hold were very slender.


Sacramentum: id est, sacrum signum, a Sacrament, that is a sacred sign. So
that unless they be signs they can possibly be no sacraments, and neither
sacraments nor signs can they be without or before consecration which this
stout champion had not yet learned, and therefore his verdict in matters of
religion, except his cunning were greater, may be well refused.

As Damasene and your prating Epiphanius were more than 700. years after
Christ, so Theophilact and Euthymius are far younger. The first of them was
Bishop of the Bulgarians, who were converted to the fa^eth 868. years after
Christ: the second your own chronology places after Gracian and Lombard
1100. years short of Christ. Were then these later Grecians wholly with you,
what gain you by them? If you would oppose them to Tertullian, Origin,
Cyprian, Austen, Gelasius, Thedorete and others of purer times and sounder
judgments, you could win nothing by that bargain: the choice were soon
made, which to take, which to leave; but in deed you do them wrong to return
them for transsubstantiators: they never knew what it meant. They say the
mysteries of the Lords table be not only figures but have the truth annexed: No
figures (of grace differed) but seals of mercy performed in Christ and
inioyed of us: no called figures or images of Christ's flesh after
consecration, but bearing as well the names as the fruits and effects of the
things themselves whose sacraments they be. This makes nothing for your
local enclosing of Christ under accidents, neither for your corporal mingling
of his flesh with your flesh, which are the two points that we chiefly detest
in your real presence.

Thus the greatest storm, from which you thought, no roose could rescue us, is
half ouerpast, and no hurt done: if the rest fall as fair besides us, it will
be high time for your to leave disputing, and fall to practicing, as the rest
of your fellows do, which be lurking at home to infuse a rebellion, or
stirring abroad to boil it up to his highth. Your kingdom will never reflorish
by pen and paper: you must lay more plots, and make new marriages: Your time is
short, your rage great.


Phi. When you be confuted by reason, then begin you to charge us with
treason: but answer the places which we bring you, or I will leave you, I have
somewhat else to doing.


Theo. I think it be the truest word you spoke this month; but an answer,
if that be all you look for, you shall not lack^.

The fathers abused that are all^adged for the ^e^. eating the fle^h of christ
with teeth and ^awe^.
The fathers whom you allege for eating the real and natural flesh of Christ
and drinking his blood with your mouths and throats, are fowly abused, and
their words ignorantly misconstered, if not purposely perverted.


Phi. Are you there at host? I see by your winding, you will run to their
meaning.


Theo. What wrong is that, if by their own rules, I recall you to the right
conceiving of their word^?


Phi. If you may make rules for religion, we shall have some wise work of it,
I dare undertake.


Theo. If themselves made rules to direct their hearers least their words
should happily be mistaken, you show both your religion and wisdom in refusing
the same.


Phi. We refuse the^ not, if they be theirs.


Theo. If they be not, you may the sooner repel the^.


Phi. Well then, what are they?


The. There shall not be many of them: one will serve this turn.


Phi. That one then what is it?


The. The signs have the names of the things themselves, and therefore out of
the places which you have brought you may not conclude, that the natural flesh
of Christ is actually eaten with teeth, The rule in interpr^teth all the fathers
that seem to say the flesh of Christ is eaten with our mouths. This Rule for
the signs to bear the names of the things themselves, is proper to Sacraments.
or his blood really drunk with your lips, but rather that the visible signs
and elements which are corporally received into your mouths and stomachs have
the virtues of those things whose names they bear after consecration.


Phi. I thought we should have some such shift: but trust me, this of all
others is the fondest and absurdest that you could make. For what ground of
faith shall persist unshaken, if you give men this scope, to confess the n^m^s,
but not the things? So the Jew may reply, when Christ is proved to be the true
M^ssias, that he is so called, but not so in deed. So any heret^k may delude
the whole scriptures, if words shall stand as empty sounds, without their sense.
See to what misery you be driven, whiles you withstand the blessed Sacrament,
how far better were you to adore the same with us cathol^ks than to run into
such heretical briers?


The. Your sumptuous exhortation is but a ridiculous Iudification of your
selves and others. We do not say that in matters of doctrine words may be
received without their natural and due signification: but in Sacraments we
say, the signs remaining in their former substance are called by the names of
the things themselves, and therefore you must take good heed that you do not
rashly conclude that of the one which was spoken of the other: least you fall
into that servitude and sickness of the soul, which S. Austen warned you of
before.


Phi. Would you appoint, when the fathers words shall be cons^ered of the signs,
Their own rules in all reason are to limite their own speech.
and when of the things?


The. Neither we nor you: themselves are the ^ittest men to limit what they
spoke of the signs, and what of the things.


Phi. And do they say, they spoke this, which I allege, of the signs?


The. They do.


Phi. ^f I should stay here til that be proved, I should never go hence.


Theo. The matter is not so hard to be proved as you make it. This must be
vnde^stood of the s^gnes and not of the things themselves o^ else there is a
cont^adiction in the ^athers.
For if they mainly teach that Christ's flesh, is not eaten with teeth, not
swalowed with jaws, not received into the compass of the belly, they must
eith^r contradict themselves, which they do not: or those speeches which you
bring, must be understood of the signs called by the names of Christ's flesh
and blood, though in truth they be not those things, but sacraments of them, as
they by their own cautions will instruct you.


Phi. I can not abide this going about the bush.


Theo. Indeed madme^ will through the midst, though they tear their flesh to the
boanes for their labor.


Phi. Do you think us mad?


The. It is greater madness to s^ea your own souls with the rigor of other men's
phrases, when they give you warning to the contrary, than to wound your own
bodies with the sharpnes of any thorns.


Phi. We press not their speeches against their prescriptions, you rather
would frustrate their meaning with your figures.


The. Let them tell their own tales, Three things that may be doubted of in
the sacrament.

The names of the elements changed after con^ecration.


what they teach concerning the parts of this Sacrament, and then it will soon
be seen whether you or we pervert them. There be three things in the bread
and by like proportion in the wine that may be douted of, the name, the
substance, the power and operation. When we see which of these three be
changed, and which unchanged, the mist of error will soon^ be scattered.

The name we prove to be changed by the general confession of all the
fathers, Theod. dial. 1.
Our Savior, says Theodoret, changed the names and called the sign by the
name of his body. Christ Tertul. aduer. I^daeos.
called bread his body, says Tertullian. Cypr. de vnct. Chrismatis.
The signifying (elements) and the things signified are called by the same
names, says Cyprian. Ambr. de Sacramentis lib. 5. cap 4.
Before the words of Christ, says Ambrose, that which is offered is called
bread, when once the words of Christ be rehearsed, it is now called not bread,
but (his) body. De consecrat. d^st. 2 hoc est quod.
The bread, says Prosper, is called the body of Christ being in truth the
Sacrament (that is the sacred sign) of Christ's body. Chrysostom, Chrysostom.
ad Caesar. M^n^^l.
After sanctification it is discharged from the name of bread, and counted
worthy to bear the name of the Lords body, notwithstanding the nature of
br^ad still remain. Rabanus, Rola^. de Ins. cl^ri^. lib. 1. cap. 31.
Because bread strengthens (our) bodies, therefore is it ^itly termed the
body of Christ. Bertram. B^rtram. de corp. and sa^g. Dom.
The signs be called the Lords body and blood by reason they take the name of
that thing whose sacraments they be.

The general rule is plainly set down by the famous Clarke S. Austen in these
words. August. ad Boni^ac. epis^. 23.

Can there be a plainer rule to keep us from ras^ mista^ing the fathers?


If Sacraments had not a certain likeness and resemblance to the things, whose
sacraments they are, they should be no sacraments at all. And for his
similitude they commonly bear the names of the things themselves. As therefore
the Sacrament of christ's body is after a sort the body of christ, and the
sacrament of christ's blood (after the same sort) the blood of christ: even so
the sacrament of faith (meaning thereby baptism) is says. We he buried, says
Paul, with christ through baptism into his death. H^ says not we signify that
(his) burial, but he says plainly we (...). The sacrament of so great a thing
he would not call but by the (...) thing it self. Upon this very ground be
concluded, Contra Adimant. cap. 12.
as you heard (...) L^^d doubted not not to say, this my body: when he gave the
sign of his body. What ma^uell then if the catholic Fathers used often the
names of the body and blood of Christ, where the material elements of bread
and wine must be understood, since this is the certain rule of al sacraments,
and the common order of all ancient divines writing of the Lords supper, The
fathers after consecration never called the bread by any other name tha^ the
body of Christ, though the substance of bread still remained.
to call the gifts proposed at the Lords table the body and blood of Christ.
The wilful contempt of which observation has miserably snared and hampered
you and your fellows every where referring and forcing that to the natural
flesh of Christ, which by the learned and godly fathers was spoken and meant of
the visible signs called by the names of the body and blood of Christ.

The second thing that you stick at, is the substance of bread, which we say
remains and abides as well after consecration as before. You will have it
either vanish to nothing, or else to be turned and converted into the very
flesh of Christ there present God and man under the whitenes, roundnes and
such like shows and appearances of bread, The bread remains after
consecration in his proper and former nature and SVBSTANCE
left only to content the sight and palate, least the raw flesh of Christ
should displease your eyes or offend your taste. This is your doctrine, and this
we say is not catholic. The church of Christ never held, that the substance of
bread perished or ceased after consecration, it is a late devise: you can bring
no father that is ancient for this assertion: they never taught, they never
heard, they never dreampt any such things. They taught that the mystical
signs were creatures well known, not strange and miraculous accidents, that
the substance of bread was not changed, but remained still after consecration:
and this they taught in as plain words as heart can imagine, or tongue
express: let the Reader be judge, if I ^aye not the truth.

Gelasius an ancient Bishop of Rome, for his antiquity reverenced of us, for
his place not to be refused of you, writes thus against Eutiches, Gelas.
contra Eutichen.
The sacraments, which we receive, of the body and blood of Christ, are a
divine thing, and by them are we made partakers of the divine nature, and yet
for all that cease not the substance or nature of bread and wine to be.
Theodoret, Theod. dial. 2.
The mystical signs do not after sanctification depart from their own nature,
for they remain in their former substance, figure and form. Ambrose, Ambros.
de sacramentis. lib. 4. cap. 3.
Thou came to the altar, and ^awest the sacraments thereon, and wonderest at
the very creature: yet it is a ^olemn and known creature. Ireneus, I^en. li. 4
c. 32.
Christ counseling (or willing) his disciples to offer to God the first fruits
of those creatures, took that bread, which is a creature, and gave thanks
saying, this is my body. Et cap 34.
We must therefore in all things be found thankful to God the creator,
offering the first fruits of those creatures, which be his: and this oblation
the Church only makes in purity to the creator, offering to him of his own
creatures with thanks giving. Origin (The Lords bread) according to the
material (parts) thereof goes into the belly, Origin. in 15. Matthew.
and thence to the draught: (so that) it is not the matter of bread that does
pro^itte the r^ceiuer, but the word rehearsed over it. Epiphanius, Epipha. in
Anchora^o.
That which our Savior our took in his hand, and said this is my (body,) we
see to be neither proportional nor like to his image in flesh, nor his
invisible Deity: for this is of a round figure, and has no power of sense: but
our Lord we know to be wholly sense, wholly sensitive. Cyprian, Cypr. de
Caenae Domini.
Since the Lord said, do this in my remembrance, this is my flesh, and this is
my blood: as often as with these words, and this faith we do (that he did) this
substantial bread and cup sanctified with a solemn blessing is profi^able for
the life and safeguard of the whole man: being both a medicine to heal our
infirmities, and a sacrifice to cleanse our iniquities. Chrysostom, After
consecration Chrysostom. ad Ces^r. Monach.
it is delivered from the name of bread, and reputed worthy to be called the
Lords body, nothwithstanding the nature of bread still remain. Austen, Aug.
sermon. ad infantes.
These things are therefore called Sacraments, because in them one thing is
seen, and an other thing understood. That which is seen, speciem habet
corporalem, has a corporal shape (or kind:) that which is understood has a
spiritual fruit. Idem de doctr. Christ. li. 3. ca. 5.
This is of al other a miserable servitude of the soul to mistake the signs
for the things themselves, and not to be able to lift up the eye of the mind
above the corporal creature, to behold the light that is eternal. The
council of Constantinople, Extat in 2. Synod. Nicen. actio. 6.
Christ commanded the whole substance of bread, chosen for his image, to be
set on his table, least if it resembled the shape of a man, idolatry might be
committed. Bertram, Bertram de corp. and sanguine.
The signs, as touching the substances of the creatures, are the same after
consecration, which they were before.

Can you look for plainer or directer witnesses? Do they not all join
together in one profession and succession of truth, that the mystical signs
after consecration be known, corporal, and senseless creatures, abiding in
their proper and former, yea their whole nature and substance? We our selves
can speak no plainer words than the fathers did before us against the Jesuits
error.

The power and operation of the signs.

Their power and operation changed, causes the change of their names though
their substance remain.


Be not these words significant and pregnant, directly con^uting your real
enclosing and corporal ea^ing of Christ under the shows and accidents of
bread and wine?

The third thing that I said was to be considered in the elements of bread
and wine, is their power and operation. For since the substance of the
creatures is not changed, the signs could not justly bear the names of the
things themselves, except ^^e virtue, power, and ^ffect of Christ's flesh and
blood were adjoined to them, and united with them after a secret and
unspeakable manner by the working of the holy Ghost: in such sort that
whosoever duly receives the sign, is undoubtedly partaker of the grace:
offered unto all, but inioyed only by those that with faith and repentance
cleanse the inward man from that corruption of flesh and spirit which Christ
abhors.

Cyprian of Sacraments in general writes thus. Cypr. de vnctio. Chrism^^.
To the elements once sanctified, not now their own nature gives effect, but
the divine virtue works (in them) more mightily: the truth is present with
the sign, and the spirit with the Sacrament: so that the worthiness of the
grace appears by the very efficiencie of the things. Of the Lords Supper in
special thus he says. b There is given the food of immortality, differing
from common meats: Corporalis substantiae, etmens speciem, retaining the kind
(or truth) of a corporal substance (for your shows, without substance were not
yet known) but by secret efficiencie proving the presence of the divine virtue.
This common bread changed into flesh and blood, procures life and grows to
our bodies, and so by the usual course of these things, the weakness of our
faith is succored, and ^aught by a sensible argument, that the effects of
eternal life is in the visible Sacraments, and that we be vnit^^ to Christ no^
so much by a corporal, as by a spiritual transitio^. Ambrose, Ambr. de
sacramentis lib. 6 cap. 1.
Perhaps t^ou wilt say, I ^ee the likeness, I see not the truth of blood. But it
has a resembla^ce. Ibidem. li. 4. cap. 4.
For as thou tookest a resemblance of his death, so do thou drink a
resemblance of his precious blood, to this end that there should be no horror
of blood, and yet it might work the price of our salvation, and the grace of
our redemption might remain. Ibidem. lib. 6. cap. 1.
Therefore for a similitude thou receauest the Sacrament, sed ver ae naturae
gratia^, virtute^que consequeris, but thou obtainest (thereby) the grace and
virtue of the true nature. Gelasius, Cel^s. contra E^tichen.
By the sacraments (which we receive) we be made partakers of the divine
nature: they truly represent to us the virtues and effects of that Principal
mystery. Hilarious, Hilar. de Tri^it. lib. 8.
These things tasted and taken bring this to pass, that Christ remains in
us: this is Idem in psalm. 127.
The virtue of that table to quicken the receivers. Leo, Leo de cons. dis^. 2.
^ in quibus.
In that mystical distribution of the spiritual nourishment that is given,
this is taken that receiving the virtue of the heavenly meat, we may be
changed into his flesh, who was made flesh for us. Chrysostom, (...) hom. 83.
in M^^^h.
Let us come to the spiritual dugge of this chalice, and suck (thence) the
grace of the spirit. August. tra^t. in ^^^an. 26.
Austen, The Sacrament is one thing, the virtue of the Sacrament is an other
thing. I^em de cons. did. 2. qui manducat.
Every man receives his part, whereby grace itself is called parts, and where
Idem. in psalm. 77.
the Sacraments were common to all, grace was not common to all, which is the
virtue of the Sacraments. And again, The (Capernites) Idem. t^act. in Johan.
27.
thought he would have given them his body, but he told them he would ascend
to heaven: no doubt he meant whole. When you shall see the son of man
ascending^ where he was before, surely then shall you see that he does not give
his body that way which you imagine, surely then shall you perceive that his
grace is not consumed with biting. Euthymius, Euthym. in Ma^^. cap 64.

We must not look to the substance of the signs, but unto the virtue of them.


He does change these things unspeakably into his very body, that quickneth,
and into his very precious blood, and into the grace of them both^: We must
therefore not look to the nature of the things proposed (at the Lords table)
but unto the virtue of them. Wherefore Theodoretes words are most true, The
^d. dial. 2.
The signs which are seen, Christ did honor with the names of his body and
blood; not changing the nature (or substance of them) but casting grace unto
nature. And so did Ambrose mean when he said: Ambros. de sacra^en^is. ^ib.
4. cap. 4.
If there be so great strength in the word of the Lord Jesus, that all things
began to be, when they were not: how much more shall it be of force, that
(the mystical elements) should be the same they were before, and yet be
changed into an other thing? The same in earthly matter and substance which
they were before, changed in virtue, power and working, whereby we see they
bear not only the names, but also the fruits and effects of those things,
whose Sacraments they be.

This is their doctrine touching the visible part of this Sacrament, The
natural and true flesh, of Christ is eaten with teeth.
which is seen with eyes, felt with hands, and ^rused with teeth: of that
there is no doubt but it enters our mouths and rests in our bowels: and
that, for the causes which I before rehearsed, a^^er consecration is eu^ry
where called by them the Lords body: but that the natural flesh of Christ,
which is the other and inward part of the Sacrament, enters the mouth, or
abides the teeth, or passes down the throat, or lo^geth in the stomach:
this is a position wholly repugnant both to Fathers and Scriptures.

Mark. 7.

Nothing can enter both the heart and the belly.


Do you not know, says Christ, that whatsoever thing from without enters
into a man* can not defile him: because it enters not into his heart, but
into the be^lie. Then by the judgment of our Savior nothing can enter ^oth
the h^a^t and the b^lly: but the flesh of Christ enters into the heart, ergo
(...). Cor. 6.
The belly, says Paul, is for meats and meats for the belly, and God will
destroy both it and them: the body of Christ G^d w^ll not destroy, it is
therefore no meat for the belly. If not for the ^^lli^, then not for the
mouth, Mat. 15.
because eue^ie thing that enters the mouth goes into the belly, and so
forth to the ^raught. But so basely to th^nk of the flesh of Christ is
apparent and (...) wickedness: e^go the flesh of Christ neither fill^th our
bellies, nor ^nt^r^th ou^ mo^^^^: Mark 7.
For nothing that enters the mouth, can either defile (or sanctify) Meat^s,
1. Cor. 8.
says Paul (which pass by the mouth) do not commend us unto ^od, neither
does the king^om of God (which is our sanctification^ con^^^ of m^ats, and
drinks: Rom 17.
but Christ Heb. 13.
with his blood does sanctify the people: and Io^ 6.
he that ^at^th my flesh and drinks my blood, says ^e, remains in me and
I in him, and has eternal life, ergo neither his flesh nor ^^s blood enter
ou^ m^uthe^. To be short, Ephesians. 3.
Christ dwells not in bellies by local comprehension, but in our hearts by
faith: his fl^he seedeth not ^ur bodies for a ti^e, but our souls for ever:
his words were spoken not of our mouths, which be^le^ue not: ^ut of our
spirits, which have no flesh nor boanes: and consequently neither teeth to
grind, nor jaws to swallow, but only ^aith and understanding.

Let all this be ^^^de, if the learned and ancient Fathers do not conclude
the same. Chrysostom, Ch^^sost. hom. 43. in lo^n.
Care not for the nourishment of the body, but of the spirit. (Christ is the
bread) which ^ee^^th not the body but the soul, and Idem ex variis (...) in
Mat 9.
fills not the belly, but the mind. Ambrose, Ambros. de ijs qui ^^steriis
(...).
Christ is in that sacrament, because it is the body of Christ. De consecrat.
(...) 2 ^ non es^a^is.
It is therefore no bodily, but Ghostly meat. NOT THIS BREAD, which enters
into the body, but the bread of eternal life is it that vpholdeth the
substance of our soul. Cyprian, Cyprian. de Caena Do^^.
As often as we do this we when not our teeth to bite, but we break the
sanctified bread with a sincere faith. Cyril, Cyril. lib. 3. in I^han. cap. 28.
Let us therefore (as our Savior says) labor not for the meat, which goes
into the belly, but for the spiritual food, which confirms our hearts and
leads us to eternal life. Austen, Aug^le cons. did. 2. verum sub sigma.
It is not lawful to devour Christ with teeth. Idem de verbis Domini in
E^^^g. L^c^^, sermo. 33.
Prepare not your jaws, but your hearts. We take but a morsel, and our heart is
replenished. Therefore not that which is seen, but that which is believed, does
feed. Idem. tract. in Johan. 25.
Why prouidest thou thy teeth and thy belly? Believe and thou have eaten.
Be^tra^, At the Lords table Bertram. de corp. and sanguine Domini. Christ is
pressed with teeth swallowed with jaws, or received into the belly. Their own
law de^esteth it for an heresy.
we look not on that which is broken in pieces, which is pressed with teeth,
which feeds the body, but only that which is taken spiritually by faith.
Does the meat (which the faithful receive in the church) as touching that
which is corporally taken, that which is chammed with teeth, that which is
swallowed with jaws, that which is closed in the compass of the belly, put us
in assurance of eternal life? This way (no question) it feeds our flesh,
which shall die, neither yields us any kind of incorruption. For this, which
the body receives, is corruptible: that which faith beholds feeds the
soul, and perfourmeth us everlasting life.

If these fathers be not able to remove you from the corporal eating of christ's
flesh with teeth and jaws, hear in how plain terms your own Law does check
this grossenes of yours. De cons. did. 2. non isle panis. and ^ribus gradibus.
Glossa ibidem.
The flesh of Christ is not incorporated with us, descends not into the
stomach, passes not into the nourishment of the body, for it is the food of
the soul, not of the body. And where Pope Nicholas drove Berengarius in his
recantation to say, that the flesh of Christ was truly cha^med between the
teeth of the faithful: Your Gloze could forebear no longer, but cried out, De
cons. did. 2. ego Berenganius. Glossa ibidem.
Nisi sane intelligas, except thou take good heed to these words, thou shall
fall into a greater heresy than ever Berengarius held. Then blame not us
Philander for saying this your assertion is not catholic, the Provost
Mareschall of your own side, not long since, said it was heretical.


Phi. Have you done?


Theo. I have if you list to begin.


Phi. What a stir is here to bring beggars to the stocks, and al not worth a
straw?


Theo. In deed Friars are the nearest kinsmen that beggars have: they both
live by shifting, and gain by dissembling, save that Friars are always within
doors, when beggars are without: But what is it that does so much offend you
in my speech?


Philan. You run along with Scriptures and Fathers, as if all were yours.


Theophil. I show you a truth confirmed by the Scriptures, avouched by the
Fathers, and confessed by your own fellows: If that displease you, your mouth
is out of taste.


Philand. Have you the truth? so has the Devil: for you be his members in
that you be Heretics.


Theo. This is but a iades trick, when you feel the spurs, to fling out
behind. The more you reason the more you find that you have run the race of
your own devises without the fathers: and now you can not resist, you fall to
reuiling and cursed speaking.


Phi. We can with one lift lay all your authorities in the mi^e. You must not
only answer, but your answers must be sound and good.



Theoph. Your can is great, but your liquor small. I dare promise for you, that
you will struggle what you can to be rid of the burden.


Phi. With three bare words I will answer your three parts, and all your
proofs.


Theo. They may be so bare, they will do you no good: but at adventure what
are they?


Phi. That the signs after consecration carry the names, and effects of the
things themselves: I grant it to be very true, but it answers not the places
which I did object: And as for the substance of bread remaining, which some
Fathers seem to affirm, we say substance is there taken not for the very
substance it self, which is really changed into the body of Christ, but for
some other thing.


Theo. What other thing?


Phi. Not for that which you mean.


Theo. Let my meaning alone, and speak you to their assertion that say the
bread and wine remain after Consecration in their former and proper nature
and substance. A man may better take hot for cold and ^ower for sweet, tha^
substance for accidents.



Phi. Substance is there taken for nature.


Theo. Nature is so general that it compriseth both the substance and accidents
of every thing. If then the signs remain in their former nature, they must
retain both their former substance, and their former accidents.


Phi. Their substance they do not: their qualities they do, as sight, taste,
bigness and such like properties.


Theo. But the places which I cite, affirm, they retain both; and namely
their proper and former substance.


Phi. That is, their former qualities.


Theo. Does substance signify qualities?


Phi. In these places And so chalk does signify cheese.
it does.


Theo. Why more in these than in others?

Substance in all learning is divided against accidents: how then comes
substance by your learning to be taken for accidents?


Phi. It is so. For otherwise those sayings were all one with heresy, if
substance should be taken in his proper signification.


Theo. Yea marie: now you come to your right colors. If the fathers words
should not be violently wrested from their perpetual and natural
signification, you cannot possibly avoid, but they taught that doctrine for
Catholic, which you now reject for heresy.


Phi. First their words be plain: and their meaning is plainer, as shall
appear when we come to the drift of their conclusion.

Never Catholic father said the substance of bread was abolished by
consecration as the Jesuits say.


They never taught it.


The. Themselves be dead, and do not speak: their words in which they spoke,
whiles they lived, make as directly for us, as we can spoke any: unless you
turn all that ever they said, the vpside down, and take figures for truths,
substance for accidents, creatures for shows, teeth for faith, and heaven for
earth. Which privilege of interpreting scriptures and fathers clean contrary
to the sense, if you can procure or justify, I will be your surety, all the
Protestants in Christendom shall never touch the least hair of your heads, in
all the follies, which you defend.


Phi. We do not force them against their meaning. Then show your exposition to
be true by other points of their doctrine, and parts of their writings, which
must infallibly force you to that construction.


Phi. So we do.


Theo. With places as shamefully abused as these.


Phi. No by inumerable and inevitable authorities.


Theo. Bring but one father that shall say the substance of bread and wine is
ceased or abolished by consecration, and you shall have free leave to do what
you will, with all the rest.


Phi. We can bring infinite.


Theo. You may the sooner choose out one.


Philan. You would put us to bring other proofs, before you have answered
those that are already produced. I brought you sir fathers affirming the
fl^she and blood of Christ were received with our mouths: you would leap to
new matter, and shake them off at your fingers end: but I will none of that.
First make even with the old scores before you enter on a new reckoning.


Theophi. You were the cause of that digression, and not I. You replied to my
proofs and persued not your own.

And yet you need not say your places are unanswered, your self have
confessed the weakness of your own authorities, and yielded them as
insufficient to bear the weight of your conclusion, what other answer would
you have? If the signs b^a^e the n^mes of the things themselu^^: ^hen the
le^^^s auth^^^ties are vn^u^ficient to con^lude that Ch^^st is eaten wi^h our
teeth.



Phi. Have I dissabled mine own proofs?


Theo. Your own conclusion you have.


Phi. Would you make me so mad?


Theo. I think you were more sober then, than now. For then you ag^ised a
truth, and now you resist it again.


Phi. What did I agnise? Do you think I was a sleep, that I would con^u^e my
self?


Theo. No the clearenes of truth was such, that you could not shadow the
beams of it, and therefore in a bravery you did admit it, though now you
would to your owlelight again.


Phi. This is counsel to me: I know not what you mean.


Theo. D^d you not confess it to be very true that in this sacrament the
signs after consecration did carry the names and effects of the things
themselves?


Phi. Yeas, I did.


Theo. Reca^t you that?


Phi. I do not.


Theo. Then are the places, which you brought for the re^l eating of Christ's
flesh with your mouths and teeth, returned back without your conclusi^n. For
the signs which are called after consecration by the names of ^hrists body
and blood, We must asc^nd to heau^n before we eat Christ: which with our
mouths we cannot.
do enter our mouths, and pass our throats, the true flesh and blood of
christ do not, but ^re eaten at the Lords table only of the inward man by
faithful deu^tion and aff^cti^n preparing the heart that Christ may lodge there,
and dw^ll there, where he d^light^th, and not in the mouths and ^awes of men
which is no place for him, that sit^eth in heau^n, whither we must fly with
the spiritual wings of our souls and spirits, before we can be pa^takers of
him.


Phi. You shall not so del^de me. The Rule ^ granted was very true: but how
prove you that these speeches mu^t be so const^^ed? If the fathers of ^^ne that
Christ is not eaten with teeth as they do ^hen these pl^^es must be ^nderstood
of ^he signs and no^ of the th^^gs thems^l^es.
In other cases it may be true, though not in this.


Theo. If the Rule which I laid down be very true, then your places can
in^erre nothing, ^or so much as the words which you brought may be spoken as
well of the signs, as of the things themselves: and in that case the promises
receiving a double cons^^uction, by your own confess^on, how can your
conclusion stand go^d, importing that sense which is not only most doubted, and
least proved, but ^la^ly denied by the same fathers in other places, as I have
showed?


Phi. Tut^e: I will not be mocked wi^h such i^stes: you shall answer them place
by place, as I cite them, or else I will not speak one word more.


Theo. You importune me to spend time, which now waxes short, but it will
be the worse for your self: your egernes without truth will be your own
discredit: and the more pa^ticularly, the more plainly it will appear.


Phi. I have As many as the^e be ^^^es in the ball of mine eye.
advantages in their words against your evasion, (...). ^18
which I will not omit.


Theo. In Augustine, (...) 23. and
Chrysostom, and Tertullian you have utterly none. Austen says that in honor
of so great a Sacrament (as this is) it has pleased the holy Ghost, that (the
sacred and sanctified bread) which after a sort is called the Lords body
(though indeed it be the sign and Sacrament of his bodie^ should enter the
mouth before other meats that s^^ue only to feed and nourish ou^ flesh^.
Chrysostom says, (...) a ^dimant. cap. 12.
It is no small honor that our mouth has gotten, by receiving (the sanctified
bread after consecration (...). 29. (...). 2 Cor.
count^d worthy to be called) the Lords body ( Id^^ a^ C^sar. M^nach.
though the nature of bread still remain^) And indeed so is it no small both
comfort and honor, that God has vou^sa^ed to confirm and ^eale his mercies
unto us with these elements, that are c^nuerted into our f^^sh: to show us that
we are as reallie inu^sted, and strengthened with his grace and ^rueth, as our
bodies are nouris^ed and increased with the s^gn^s and Sacraments of his grace.
And to that end Tertullian says, Our ^
flesh seedeth on the (bread which Id^^. contra (...) l^b. 4.

The Iesu^^s have no hold in these ^athers, but only because they call the^
signs by the names of the things, which is as common with them as sand with
the Sea.


Christ called his) body (and has in it the ^ff^cts of his body): that our
souls might be replenished with God.


Phi. These be your corrections o^ their speeches, they be not their intentions.


Theo. Look better to them, and you shall find that I have added no words
but such as them selves in other places have del^uered to declare their own
both meaning and speaking.


Phi. The rest do make for us.


Theo. Cyril says nothing, but that as the soul has faith and grace to cleanse
it, and prepare it to eternal life: so Cyri^l. lib 4. cap. 14. in I^h.

By cognato tacti^, (...), and ci^o, Cy^il means the su^stance of bread and
wine, and not of Christ's body.


it was needful that our rude and ^arthlie body should be brought to
immortality by (corporal and earthly) food (that) our bodies touching,
tasting and feeding on creatures like themselves might take them as pledges of
our resurrection.

Gregory comparing the two Passeouers, the Jews, and ours, and alluding to
the story of theirs ^aith, De cens^ ^r^t. ^ist. 2. quid sit.
The blood (of our Passover) is sprinkled on both Posts, when it is drunk
not only with the mouth of the body, (as the cup is, which after the manner
of Sacraments is the Communion of Christ's blood) but also with the mouth of
the heart, (which is the true drinking of Christ's blood).


Phi. We will none of that, by your leave: you must grant that in As ^^ough in
strict and (...) any thing could be dru^k both by the soul and the body.
strict and precise speech according to the words, the blood of Christ is
drunk by the mouth of the body, as well as by the mouth of the soul.


Theophil. Has the soul a mouth in strict and precise speech? or has she
lips to drink according to the letter?


Phi. Would you make me such a fool as so to think?


Theo. Then if one part of the sentence be figurative, why not the other? If
that which he does most urge, be not literal, why shall the letter be eracted
in the harder and vnlikelier part of the comparison? If the whole be but an
allusion, why eract you that strictnes and precisenes of the speech in either
part? It is not possible that one and the same thing should be reallie drunk
by the mouth of the body, and the mouth of the soul. If it be corporal, how
can it enter the soul? If it be spiritual, how can it enter the mouth? And if
those be Gregory's words, which your own^ Law assigns to him in the very
same homily: his exposition shakes your real presence, more than all the
authorities, you can bring, shall settle it. De cons. did. 2. species in hom.
Pascha.
Quidam non improbabiliter exponunt hoc loco carnis and sanguinis veritatem,
ipsam eorundem efficientiam, id est peccatorum remissionem. Some not amiss do
expound the truth of Christ's flesh and blood in this place to be the very
efficience of the same things: that is, the remission of sins. Take this
construction with you, and bring out of Greg. or Leo, what you can, it will not
help the tight of a barely corn.


Phi. S. Leo says, ^eo de ieiunio 7. mensis sermo. 6.
You ought so to communicate at the sacred table that you doubt nothing of the
truth of the body and blood of christ. Hoc enim ore sumitur, quod fide
creditur and frustra ab illis Amen respondetur, a quibus contra id quod
accipitur disputatur. For Leoes words examined.
that is received with the mouth which is believed by our faith, and in vain
do they answer Amen, which dispute against the thing that themselves receive.
O noble Lion, and such as all the heretics in Europe will never encounter.


Theo. You speak like a Lion, but the spite is your ears are too long to be
taken for a beast of that metal. You foolishly pervert the meaning of Leo: and
if you did but understand the right course of his reason, you would suppress
both his voice and your vaunt for very shame.


Phi. He that will trust your sayings, shall have many false fires, when he
should not.


Theo. And he that will credit your doings shall feel many quick flames, when
he would not.


Phi. You be better at quipping, than at answering.


Theo. You are loathe we should encroch on your common. But return to Leo. Can
you tell against whom he wrote?


Phi. Against such as you are, that denied the truth of Christ's body and
blood in the Sacrament.


Theo. Were they men without names, or names without men?


Phi. Mock not: they were But Eutiches against whom Leo spoke, imagined that
Christ's body had neither shape, quantity nor circumscription, and so do the
Jesuits dream of Christ in the Sacrament. If Leo refel Eutiches, he must also
refel the Jesuits, for they spoil Christ of the natural conditions of a body
as Eutiches did.
your auncetours.


Theo. They say it is a wise child that knows his own father. Do you? But
in sadness whom did Leo traduce in that sermon?


Phil. Mary Eutiches and such like heretics.


Theoph. You say well: for Leo names him but a little before in that sermon,
and against his opinion he reasons.


Philand. I am content with that.


Theoph. What was his error?


Phi. He denied the truth of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament.


Theo. Who told you so?


Phi. I gather it by those that refute him.


Theo. By them you shall learn his error: but this it was not.


Philan. What was it, say you?


Theo. Eutiches affirmed that Christ's humane nature and substance was not
only glorified by his ascension, but consumed and turned into the nature and
immensitie of his Godhead. Against him wrate Theodorete, Gelasius, and others:
and one of the cheifest arguments which they bring against him, is that which
Leo here touches in a word or two.


Phi. That argument clean confounds your sacramentarie Sect.


Theo. Yours or ours it must needs confound: By this argument it is evident in
what sense Theodoret and Gelasius use the word substance when they say the
substance of bread remains.

The Jesuits reject the mayor, minor, and conclusion of the ancient fathers
against Eu^iches: be they not then quarter masters in his ship?

Gelas. contra Eutich.


for this it is. As the bread and wine after consecration are changed and
altered into the body and blood of Christ, so is the humane nature of Christ
converted into his divine after his resurrection and ascension: but the bread
and wine are not changed neither in substance, nor form, nor figure, nor
natural proprieties, but only in grace and working: ergo Christ's humane nature
is not changed into his divine EITHER IN SVBSTANCE, circumscription, or form,
but only endewed with glory and immortality.


Phi. This is no Catholic reason, but sauoreth altogether of your heretical
poison.


Theo. They which first framed and urged this reason against Eutiches, in your
opinion were they heretics?


Phi. No father ever used it.


Theo. If they did, must not they be doubbed for heretics as the first
proposers of that reason, or at least you for affirming now the quite
contrary? For you reject both their assumption and conclusion against Eutiches
as stark false, and whose ancetour then is Eutiches but yours?


Phi. They do not use it, as you report it.


Theo. Look you offspring of Eutiches, whether Gelasius, Theodoret and
Augustine do not urge it in those very points and words which I repeat.

Thus Gelasius framed his reason against Eutiches. An image or similitude of
the body and blood of Christ, is celebrated in the action of the mysteries. It
is therefore apparent and evident enough, that we must hold the same opinion
of Christ the Lord, which we profess, celebrate and receive in his image: That
as those (signs) by the working of the holy Ghost pass into the divine
substance, and yet remain in the propriety of their own nature: Even so that
very principal mystery it self, (whose force and truth (that Image)
assuredly represents) does demonstrate one whole and true Christ, If Christ
consist of two substances divine and humane, the sacrament likewise consists
of two substa^ces an heavenly and an earthly.

Theod. dialog. 2.


to continue the (two natures) of which he consists, properly remaining. And
lest you should not understand what he meant by this, The signs still abide in
the propriety of their own nature: he expounds himself an says, Non
desinit esse substantia vel natura panis and vini. The substance or nature of
bread and wine cease not, or perishes not.

When Theodoret had made an entrance to the very same reason by laying this
foundation, Oportet archetypum Imaginis esse exemplar: the Original must be
answerable to the Image: the heretic caught the words out of his mouth and
said: It happened in good time, that you did mention the divine mysteries: for
even thereby will I prove the Lords body to be changed into an other
nature. As then the signs of the Lords body and blood are other things
before the invocation of the Priest, but after they are changed and become
other (than that they were:) so the Lords body after his assumption is
changed into his divine substance. If the sacrament be tra^ssubstantiated, so
must the humanity of Christ be like^wise changed*


The mayor being good, and such as Gelasius and Theoderet did both avouch; that
as the signs were changed after consecration, so was Christ's humanity after
his assumption: if your opinion had then been taught in the church that the
substance of bread and wine were changed by consecration, the conclusion had
been infallible for Eutiches error, that the substance of Christ's humanity
had been changed by his ascension into his divinity: and not only both these
Fathers had had their mouths stopped, but Eutiches error had been in^ol^ble,
as being grounded on a Mayor that was a confessed and famous truth, and on a
Minor that was (as you think, the undoubted says of the Church. Mary the
Minor in deed was apparently false, though you now defend it for Catholic
Doctrine, and with the plain denial of that as a manifest untruth, Theodoret
infers the contrary: Theodorets conclusion against Eut^ches.
that because neither the Substance, nor natural proprieties of the bread and
wine are changed by consecration, as the whole Church then believed and
confessed: therefore neither the substance, nor shape, nor circumscription of
Chris^es humane nature were changed by his ascension: but his body remains in
the ^ame substance, quantity, and form, that he rose from death, and ascended
up withal: and with the very same form and substance of flesh shall come to
judge the world. These are his words.

Theod. dial. 2. If Christ's humane nature in heaven keep his former substance:
so does the bread which is an Image of that mystery. Both their Seminaries
cannot answ^re this a^gume^t but by condemning Gelas^us and Theodoret for
here^ikes or at least themselves.
Thou art caught (says Theodoret to the heretic) with the same nets that thou
laiedst for others. The mystical signs after sanctification do not depart
from their own nature. For they remanie in their former substance, and figure,
and form etc. Confer then the Image with the original and thou shall see
the likeness (between them). For the figure must be like to the truth. That
body (therefore of christ in heaven) has his former shape and figure and
circumscription, and to speak al at once, (his former) substance.

Lay all your heads together: and granting the Mayor (which the whole Church
held) avoid the conclusion of Eutiches without the denying the Minor as
Theodoret did, (which yet is your faith and belief at this day) and we will
grant you to be Catholics and our selves heretics: If you cannot, see how far
you be fallen from the doctrine of Christ's church, and that in no less point
than the greatest and chie^es^ Sacrament, on which you have wickedly founded
your adoration, oblation, half communion, private mass and barbarous prayers,
without example, without warrant of God or man.


Phi. Theodoret has set you up in your Ruff, but I would you knew it: in
this case we care neither for Theodoret, nor you: if that were his opinion, as
it is yours.


Theo. And who has put you into your ruff: that you not only despise that
learned and ancient Bishop, but the whole Church in him, which then so
believed, and you cannot avoid at this day, except you will be Eutichians?


Phi. The Mayor is not altogether so s^und as you think it.


Theo. Yet did Gelasius and Theodoret confound that error with that comparison:
De consecrat. distinct. 2. and hoc est quod dico.
and S. Augustine long before them did urge the same. This is it that we say,
this is it that by all means we labor to confirm, (to wit) that the
Sacrifice of the Church consists of two things: the visible kind of
elements, and the invisible flesh and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ: the
Sacrament, and the thing of the SACRAMENT: even as the person of Christ
consists of God and man; Ther^ must be two different substanc^s in the
Sacrament as there are in the person of Christ.

Leoes words w^r^ intended against the Eutichians.


for so much as every thing contains the nature and truth of those things of
which it consists. By which rule it is certain there mus^ be in the
sacrament the nature, tru^th and substance of bread and wine, even as in
Christ's person either nature has his truth and substance, without confusion
or distraction.


Phi. We have fathers to the contrary, if the time did serve to produce them,
as anon I will: In the mean while what is this to Leo?


Theophil. Leo in few words abbridgeth the sum^ of this reason: and says the
followers of Eutiches do in vain with their mouths rece^ne the Sacrament,
since with their hearts they do not believe the t^ueth of Christ's humane
nature: and answer Ame^ to no purpose, so long as they dispute against that,
which they would se^m to enjoy by receiving the seal and pledge thereof in
the church with others.


Phi. This is your Commentary bes^des the text: his words are, The self same
(body) which we believe with faith, Hoc: does not signify the self same
body, but the selfsame pointe^ of ^aith, or propo^tion of the image and the
original.
is received with mouth. Which you cannot interpret to be m^ant of the bread.
For the bread is not believed with heart: and against the truth of Christ's
body, not against the bread did the followers of Eutiches dispute.


Theo. Does Leo ^aie the sel^ same (body)?


Phi. He says Hoc ore sumitur quod fide creditur: that is received with the
mouth, which with (our) faith is believed, and that cannot be the bread.


The. Much less may it be the natural body of Christ. For then Leo had
mightily confirmed, and not confuted Eutiches opinion. His error was that the
humanity of christ after his ascension was swallowed up of his divinity, and
so changed that it was now no natural body. Against this if Leo should have
oppos^d your real presence in the Sacrament where Christ's body is without
quantity, The real presence had been the next way to help Eutiches error.
shape, circumscription, distinction of parts and all other conditions of a
natural body: he had been a Proctour ^or Eutiches impiety, not a confuter of
it. Neither could Eutiches himself have wished a better defense for his
heresy than the confess^on ^f such a bod^e as you imagine in the sacrament,
and therefore you ha^k that HOC ilfauouredly, when you make Leo rather a
consenter with Eutiches, than a disprouer of him, with your fantastical
presence: which is an approbation and no refutation of Eutiches error.


Phil. What a slander this is, that the real presence should be a refuge for
Eutich^s error?


Theoph. Such a slander as with all your cunning you shall never wipe away.


Phi. Do we not affirm the The substance of it you affirm in words, but you
spoil ^t of all natural shape, quantity, and circumscription.
substance of Chris^es humane flesh to be in the Sacrament?


The. Such a substance, as Eutiches him self imagined, having neither
proportion of shape, nor position of parts, nor repletion of place, nor any
condition incident to a natural body: but the godly fathers were far from
urging such a substance against Eutiches. They pressed him with the bodily
shape, circumscription, extension, and perfe^^ion of Christ's flesh, as well in
all other requisites as in substance: and to prove this amongst other
arguments, they brought, as I have showed, the Sacrament for a resemblance and
demonstrance of both natures in Christ: that as the bread after consecration
keeps his quantity, quality, shape and substance, notwithstanding it be
united, and annexed to the heavenly grace, that works in the sacrament: so
the body of Christ after his assumption retains his former perfection,
proportion, figure and substance, loosing no poin^^ nor part of his humane
nature, but only replenished with immortal glory.

Christ's body in the Sacrament is even such a body as Eutiches did imagine.

Leo does not say that Christ's body was enclosed in the host: but they ought
to believe that of Christ's body in heaven, which they saw in the elements
received with their mouthe^, to wit, the perfect continuance of their former
substance.

We do not interpret the fathers as pleases us, but we take heed that we
subvert not their maine doctrine by some of their phrases which by their own
rules may be revoked to a good sense.


This must be Leoes Hoc, if he will do any good with alleging the Sacrament
against Eutiches, as I have proved by Austen, Gelasius and Theodoret: Otherwise
if he do but mention your real presence he opens the gappe and leuelleth the
way to Eutiches fury, and runs headlong against the rest of his fellow
servants and successors, that used the same argument to confute Eu^iches with
a manifest contradiction of your real presence.


Phi. I bring you Leoes words.


Theo. Leoes words have nothing in them to cross that sense which I
establish. Hoc signifies any thing, and has no relation to Christ's flesh in
the sacrament: but to the proportion rather between Christ and the sacrament:
in that they believed no other thing of Christ than they saw with their eyes,
and received with their mouths in the Sacrament; to wit, the perfect shape and
substance of bread after Consecration: and consequently they must hold the
same opinion of Christ's humanity after his ascension.


Phi. If you use this trade: you may pervert all the fathers writings, and make
what sense you list to their sayings.


Theo. Pervert them no more than we do, and you shall never euert the maine
doctrine as you have done. We measure their words by their own warrant, and
suffer not a phrase here and there, which may be well revoked to their rules,
to undermine the chief grou^des of their faith.


Phi. No more do we.


Theo. Why then rage you, to hear v^ say, that these few places, which you
have brought for eating christ's body with your mouths and jaws, may be
referred to the signs called by those names, as well as to the things
themselves?


Phi. You take upon you to be Judges and to pronounce at your pleasures, when
the word^s shall belong to the one, and when to the other: so that no father
shall say any thing against your heresy, but yet will by and by turn it and
wind it I know not whither.


Theo. Nothing more hinders the search for truth than a desire to lie. We
show you the general admonition of the fathers themselves, that after
consecration they call the visible signs no longer by their woonted names, but
by the names of those things whose signs they are, and whose virtues they
have. This Rule we say is then to take place, when the speech which we find in
a father, if it should be referred to the things themselves, would be both
absurd, and repugnant to the rest of his Doctrine and to himself in other
places. This is not to turn the fathers whither we will, but to take heed we
fall not into the pit, which they If this be not lawful in expounding the
fathers, I marvel what is.
warn us to avoid.


Phi. If you would never use that rule but in that case, you were not so much
to be blamed: marie your pretenses be very fair when your perfourmances be
far unlike.


Theo. Do you lack eyes to see, or tongues to speak when we tread awrie?


Phi. Trust to it: we do not.


The. We would not you should. Our dealing in Religion must be such as not only
you may not ^^spr^^^, but God may nor dis^ike.


Phi. Th^s sh^^^ng and (...) of Fathers, neither God nor man can like.


Theo. A lower sai^e were ^^^er ^or your sm^ll bott^m: (...) you gath^r so much
wind and weather that yo^ can never g^t ^o sho^re.


Phi. ^ou speak parables.


Theo. ^ can (...) ^n^erprete. The ^^ni^y o^ your (...) o^ your hearts is such,
that you can not so^e^ly discuss and (...) any (...)


Phi. Who can ^e ^a^ent, and see so much (...) pl^y ^^^ered?


Theo. (...) to t^ke w^^g, wh^^soeu^r you be to offer (...).


Phi. ^s (...)?


The. You must t^l us what, before we can redr^ss^ it.


Phi. I alleged six^ Fathers to prove, that the flesh of Chr^s^ is eaten in
the sac^ament corporally with our mouthe^. You come in with a new trick of
Tren^hmore, and tell us they spa^ of the signs called by t^ose names after
consecration, not of ^he things themselves.


Theo. Is this such wrong?


Phi. I promise you it You are angry because the fathers do not serve your
follies no better.
moves me to the very heart to see you so delude them.


Theo. I blame you not. You thought you had some great hold in the Fathers for
your corporal^ eating of Christ with your teeth: and I remember you would burn
all to your shirt if ever they were answered: It cannot be now mista^i^g they
have so often been told of their error, and they still defer^d it as they did
before.
and now the w^ight of them is seen, they are but gr^sse mystakinges, if not
peruertinges of the Fathers: and you must seek for an other pedigree. Your
real coue^ing of Christ with the shows of bread and wine, and corporal eating
him with your teeth has no deduction from ^he ancient Fathers.


Phi. If you may be suffered to gloze them, as you do.


Theophil. How often must I tell you, it is their own gloze, and not mine?


Philand. The rule is theirs, but why do you apply it to these places?


Theo. I have told you that also, because they should otherwise contradict
both themselves, and others. Vide supra fol. 760.

This is spoken of the things the^s^lues: ergo the Iesuit^s places must be
meant of the signs called by ^he names of Chr^sts body and blood, ^r el^e
there is a mani^^st contradiction in the fathers We^e we not wisely occupied to
follow the Jesuits in this point^





Phil. Contradict? why?


T^eophil. The self same Fathers a^ouch, that the flesh of Christ enters
not the body, is not bitten with teeth, fills not the belly: they say it is
not piety to eat him with teeth: we must not prepare teeth, jaws, or
bellies for him: your own ^awe says: he descends not into the stomach,
and the West church for 800. years conf^ssed that Christ is not corporally
taken of us, not chamme^ with teeth, not swallowed with jaws, not closed in
the compass of the bell^e, our Savior himself decideth that nothing can
enter both the heart and the belly: and that the flesh of Christ enter^th the
heart, and feeds the soul, he c^n be no christian that doubts. This
apparent negative not w^thstanding, when they sometimes, trea^ing of other
m^tters, happen to say, Our mouth receives the body of Christ: the substance
of our flesh is increased and consists o^ his body and blood: you would have
us interpret these sayings of the very same things which they denied to pass
that way, and not of the signs, which in the perpetual use of speech amongst
all Divines after consecration were called by th^se names and none other: and
leaving their own direction which they give us, to charge them with a flat
contradiction, and hay^ous assertion as themselves ag^ise: if the letter be
urged, and the speech not mollified with a spiritual and mystical exposition.


Phi. Nay Sir, we do not say, that the substance of our flesh is increased
or consists of Christ's body and blood: that were a wicked assertion in
deed, the body of Christ is glorious and impassible: and not reallie mixed
with our flesh, much less converted into the substance of our bodies: as that
speech imports.


Theo. But yet the Fathers that affirm the one, affirm the other, and
certain it is that nourishing is the principal end of eating: Eating is in
vain without nourishing. If then Christ's flesh do enter our mouths it must
nourish our bodies.
so that eating the flesh of Christ is utterly superfluous, if we be not
thereby norished.


Phi. Our souls are norished, not our bodies, with that heavenly food.


Theo. Then must our souls eat it, and not our bodies.


Phi. Our bodies eat it, that our souls may be nourished by it.


Theo. Eating, digesting and nourishing be consequent and coherent actions: and
therefore they must all three be either corporal, or spiritual. If the soul
be nourished, the soul must eat, and digest that which is eaten. If the body
eat, the body must digest and be norished by that food.


Phi. Would We would not have it so: but if you understand the fathers when
they say the one, why do you pervert them in the other?
you have our bodies norished and substantially increased with the flesh of
Christ?


Theop. The Fathers I say avouch the one, as well as the other: If then you can
expound the one, why do you pervert the other?


Phi. What do they avouch?


Theophil. That the substance of our flesh is increased, and consists of the
body and blood of Christ.


Philand. Prove that. By your leave I think you use multiplication with the
Fathers.


Theop. Then when I produce them, I trust you will come forth with your
division.


Philand. Let me hear them.


Theophil. You shall.

Justinius, Just. Apol. 2.
(...). The food sanctified, (of which our blood and flesh are nourished by
conversion) we are taught to be the flesh and blood of that Jesus which took
our flesh on him. Ireneus, Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34.
Quomodo d^cunt carnem in corruptionem deuenire, and non percipere vitam, quae
a cortore Domini and sanguine alitur? How say they that our flesh shall perish
and not be partaker of life, since it is nourished of the very body and blood
of our Lord? And again, Idem lib. 5.
Fit Eucharistia corporis and sanguinis Christi, ex quibus angetur and
co^sist^t carnis nostrae substantia. There is made the Eucharist of the body
and blood of Christ: of which the substance of our flesh is increased, and
consists. And therefore he concludes: Ibidem.
Quomodo negart carnem cap^cem esse donationis Dei, qui est vita aeterna, quae
corpore and sanguine Christi ^^tritur. How do they deny our flesh to be
capable of the gift of God who is eternal life, since it is So Cyprian says,
panis in carnem and sanguine^ mutatus (...) vitam and incre^entum corpori^^^.
no^^shed of the body and blood of Christ. And after so Chrysostom.


Phi. Repeat no more. If I believe not this: that which comes after,
whatsoever it be, will not prevail.


Theo. How think you? must this be referred to the natural and true body and
blood of Christ, or else to the signs bearing those names when once they be
sanctified?


Philand. No doubt to the fignes.


Theop. And were it not open madness to avouch it to be really true of the
things themselves whose signs those are?


Philand. It were.


Theophil. Why then, since corporal eating serves only for corporal
nourishing, A man would think this were plain enough for far younger
scholars, than the Jesuits would seem to be.
and has a continual and natural coherence with it, do you confess the
truth in the later, and not as well in the former part of that action? why do
you not expound them both alike?


Philand. To say the immortal flesh of Christ is converted and turned into
the quantity and substance of our mortal flesh, is an horrible heresy.


Theophil. And so say that his flesh is eaten with our mouths and ^awes, and
l^^th in our stomachs, is the very pathway and right introduction to that
heresy, or at least to as brutish and gross an erour as that is.


Philand. The Fathers affirm that his body is eaten with our mouths.


Theophil. And so they affirm, Our resurrection does not depend upon the
touching of Christ's flesh with teeth, for then the wicked should ^ise to
eternal life.

Council. Nicen. 1.


that his body and blood do increase and augment the substance of our
mortal and sinful bodies.


Philand. But that can not be.


Theophil. No more can the other.


Philand. How shall our bodies rise at the last day, if Christ's body be not
in them?


Theophil. Our resurrection depends not on the act of eating his flesh, but
of nourishing our flesh with his, as Ireneus tells us: and the things which
we eat, are not the causes, but as the great Nicene council admonishes, the
pledges of our resurrection: Their words be (...): we must believe, these to
be the signs or pledges of our resurrection.


Philand. S. Chrysostom earnestly inforceth the eating of Christ's flesh. And
says we do not only eat it, but even Hom. 45. in Iohannem.
* fasten our teeth in his flesh.


Theo. In deed he says so, but if you did not auert both your eyes, and
ears from the truth, you would perceive by that very sentence, both the
manner of his and other Fathers speeches of that Sacrament, and the right intent
of their Doctrine in those cases. His words are, Chrysostom. hom. 45. in Johan.

As Christ is seen and touched, so is he eaten and digested.

Both these speeches: the flesh of Christ enters our mouths, and increases
the substance o^ our flesh, have o^e and the sel^esame construction.


Non se tantum videri permittens: desiderantibus, sed and tangi, and manducari,
and dentes carni suae infigi, and desiderio sui omnes impleri. Christ suffering
himself not only to be seen of those that are desirous, but to be touched,
and eaten, and our teeth to be fastened in his flesh, and all to be satisfied
of their longing after him?


Phi. Lord, me thinks these words be very plain words. He suffers our
teeth to be fastened in his flesh*


Theo. Uerie plain they be, but very false also, unless you either take the
flesh of Christ for the sign called by that name: or else refer teeth, and
biting to the soul and faith of the ^^ward man a^ well as you do the eyes and
hands wherewith we see him and touch him.


Phi. Look what an ^^^sion you have since gotten.


Theo. Nay look what a subversion of all truth and says you be since fallen
to.


Phi. Does not this Father say, we fasten our teeth in his flesh?


Theo. Does he not also say, We see him with our eyes and touch him with our
hands?


Phi. That is referred to our faith: as S. Ambrose teaches. Ambros. in 9.
Lucae li. 6. and (...) vir cui nomen Iairus.
Fide Christus videtur, side Christus tangitur. By faith Christ is seen, by
faith Christ is touched.


Theoph. And why shall not the next (which is more unlikely to be true,) be
referred to faith as well as the former? Saint Ambrose likewise saying, Idem
in precati^. praepara^t. ad M^ssa^^.
Comedat te cor meu^: panis sancte, panis viue, panis munde, veni in cor meum,
intra in animam meam. Let mine heart eat thee: O holy bread, O living bread, O
pure-bread, come into my heart, enter into my soul; and Cyprian calling it
Cypr. de caena Domini.
the proper norishment of the spirit: besides infinite others that for a
thowsande years taught that doctrine in the church of God and not your
gutturall eating of Christ with teeth and jaws.


Phi. That eating of Christ in the Sacrament which we teach the Church held
for a 1000. years: theirs is not yet agreed on amongst themselves.

What manner of eating Christ in the Sacrament the fathers taught.


Was your manner of eating Christ's flesh which you defend in the sacrament,
taught in the church for a thowsande years?


Theop. Even ours was: and when yours came first to be proposed, your
schoolmen ran every man his way, fighting and scratching one an other ^ho
should fall fastest and farthest from the truth.


Philand. Blush you not to avouch two such monsterous lies?


Theop. A liar will easily suspect any man, as knowing himself to delight in
lies: but GOD be thanked, that lies with you be truethes with us, and with
all that have any knowlegde of GOD or care of his truth. The things which I
affirmed be manifest truethes, and such as you will blush at for very shame,
if you be not sworn to your holy Father against Christ, as well as you be
against your Prince.

Origin commenting upon these words of the Supper, this is my body, this is
my blood: Origin. tract. 35. in 26. Mat.
this bread, says he, (which Christ) confesses to be his body, is the
word that nourishes our souls: and this drink which he confesses to be
his blood, is the word that moysteneth and passinglie cheereth the hearts of
such as drink it. Thou which art come unto Christ, Idem in Leuit. hom 9.
stick not in the blood of (his) flesh, but rather learn the blood of (his)
word, and hear him saying to thee, this is my blood, which shall be shed
for the remission of your sins. Idem tract. 35. in 26. Mat.
He that is partaker of the mysteries knows the flesh and blood of the word
of God. For the bread is the word of righteousness, which our souls eating
are nourished with: and the drink is the word of the knowledge of Christ
according to the mystery of his birth and death. The blood of the Testament is
poured into our hearts for the remission of (our) sins. Athanasius, Athana.
in illud quicunque dixerit verbu^.
How few men would his body have sufficed, that this should be the food
of the whole world? Yea therefore does be warn them of his ascension into
heaven that he might draw him from thinking on his body, and they thereby
learn, that the flesh, which he spoke of, was celestial meat from above, and
spiritual nourishment to be given by him. The (words) which I spoke to you
are spirit and life, which is as much as if he had said: this (body) which
is in your sight and delivered (to death) for the world, shall be given you
for meat, that it may be Not corporally lodged in the stomachs, but
spiritually distributed to your souls.
spiritually distributed in every one of you, and be an assurance and
preservative to raise you to eternal life. Cyprian writing of the Lords
Supper, Cypr. de caena Domini.

This nourishment is proper to the spirit, ergo not common to the body.


Eating and drinking, says he, be referred to the one and same end: with
the which, as the substance of our bodies is increased and preserved, so the
life of the spirit is maintained with his proper nourishment. What food is to
the flesh, that faith is to the soul: what meat is to the body, that the
word is to the spirit, working everlastingly with a more excellent virtue
that which bodily meats do for a time and until a season. Ambrose
approaching to the sacred communion which you entitle a prayer preparing to
Mass, amongst other things speaks thus to Christ himself. Ambros. in
oration. praeparan. ad Missam 1.

How happened S. Ambrose had quite forgotten his mouth and his jaws in all this
long prayer before his approaching to the mysteries?


Thou Lord saydst with thine holy and blessed mouth, the bread which I will
give, is my flesh (given) for the life of the world. He that eats me,
shall live through me, he abides in me, and I in him. I am the living bread
which came down from heaven, if any man eat of this bread he shall live for
ever. Most delightful bread heal thou the taste of my heart, that I may feel
the sweetness of thy love. Let mine heart eat thee, and with thy present
relesse let the bowels of my soul be replenished. Angels eat thee with full
mouth, let man that is a pilgrim (on earth) eat thee as his weakness will
suffer him, that he faint not in the way, having this provision for his
journey. Holy bread, living bread, beautiful bread which came from heaven
and give life to the world, come into my heart, and cleanse me from all
filth of flesh and spirit. Enter into my soul, heal and sanctify me within
and without.

No man earnester in this point than S. Austen Aug. in psalm. 103.
This visible bread confirms the stomach, confirms the belly. There is an
other bread which confirms the heart, because it is the bread of the heart.
There is a wine that does rightly cheer the heart and can do nothing but cheer
the heart. Not the stomach nor the belly.
Therefore understand so of the bread, as thou do of the wine, inwardly
hunger, inwardly thirst: blessed are they which hunger and thirst after
righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. That bread is righteousness: that
wine is righteousness, is truth: and Christ is the truth. I am says he
the living bread which came from heaven: and, I am the vine, you are but
branches. Idem. tract. 26. in Johan.
To believe in him, this is to eat the living bread, he that believes
eats. Man is inuisibly fed, because he is inuisibly regenerated. He is
inwardly (in soul) a babe, inwardly (in mind) renewed. (Look) in The body
is not regenerated: the body therefore is not fed with the true flesh of Christ.
what part man is new borne, in that part is he fed. The (unbelieving)
Jews were far from this heavenly bread, neither knew they how to hunger
for it: the jaws of their hearts were dull, and this bread requires the
hunger of the inward man. Take heed brethren: eat you this heavenly bread
spiritually, bring innocence to the altar. Idem. in sermon. de corp. and
sa^guine Domini. Ci^^tur a Beda in 1. Cor ca. 10.
Eat life, and drink life. For then is the body and blood of the Lord life
to each man, when that which is visiblie taken in the Sacrament, is in very
truth spiritually eaten, spiritually drunken, A^st. in sermon. de verbis
Euangelij. Citatur a Beda ibidem.
When Christ is eaten, life is eaten; neither when we eat him, do we make
pieces of him. In deed in the Sacrament it is so: and the faithful know how
they eat the flesh of Christ: every man takes his piece. Wherefore grace it
self is termed pieces. Christ is eaten by pieces in the sacrament, and yet he
remains whole in heaven, he remains whole in thine heart. Idem in Euang.
Luc. sermon. 33.
Provide not your jaws, but your heart. Thence is this Supper commended.
Behold we believe in Christ, we receive him with our faith. In taking we
know what we should think: we take him but a little, and our heart is
replenished. Macarius, Macar. ho. 27.
In the church is offered bread and wine the samplar of his body and blood,
and they which are partakers of the visible bread, do spiritually eat the
Lords flesh. Emissenus, Eusebius. Emissenus. de cons. did. 2. quia corpus.
When thou go up to the reverend Altar to be filled with spiritual
meats, by faith behold, honor and wonder at the sacred body and blood of
thy God: touch it with thy mind: take it with the Not with the hand of thy
body.
hand of thine heart, and chiefly provide that the What shall the mouth have,
if the inward man must swallowe the whole?
inward manne swallowe the whole.

This Doctrine continued eight hundredth years after Christ. Bertram then
living is witness sufficient. Bertram. de corpor. and sang. Domini.
The body and blood of Christ, if thou consider the outward appearance, is a
Not accidents without a subject.
creature subject to mutation and corruption: but if thou weigh the virtue of
the mystery, it is life performing immortality to those that receive it.
Ibidem.
As touching the visible creature (the mysteries) feed the body, but by the
virtue of a mightier substance, they feed and sanctify the souls of the
faithful. Ibidem.
What we should eat and what we should drink the holy Ghost expresses by the
Prophet. Taste and see how sweet the Lord is. Does that bread corporally
tasted, or that wine sipped, show how sweet the Lord is? whatsoever taste
that has, it is corporal and pleases the jaws. He does therefore inuit
us to use the relesse of our spiritual taste, and in that bread and drink to
dream of no corporal thing, but to conceive all to be spiritual. Ibidem.
This meat confirms our heart, and this drink cheereth the heart of man,
says the Prophet. By the which it is evident, that nothing in this meat,
nothing in this drink must be corporally taken, but the whole spirituallie
considered. For the soul which is meant by man's heart in this place, is not
fed with corporal meat or drink: but is refreshed and nourished with the
word of God. Ibidem.
Faith believes that, which is not seen: and spiritually feedeeth the soul,
and cheereth the heart, and gives eternal life, whiles we mark, not that
which feeds the body, The flesh of Christ then is neither pressed with teeth
nor broken in pieces.
not that which is pressed with teeth, not that which is bruised in pieces: but
that which is spiritually taken with faith. Ibidem.
For this is a spiritual food, and a spiritual drink, spiritually feeding
the soul.

Paschasius comes after Bertram in age, but joins with him in the same
confession of truth. Paschas. de corp. and sang. Domini. ca. 9.
The divine mysteries our inward man receives through the grace of Christ
with understanding, and by them is he made one body with Christ through the
power of faith. Cap. 11.
The flesh and blood of Christ, because they be things spiritual, are
fully received by faith and understanding. Cap. 12.
It is not lawful to eat Christ with teeth. Cap. 14.
Christ is the meat of Angels, and this Sacrament is truly his flesh, and
his blood, which (flesh and blood) man eats and drinks spirituallie. And
so by Do the Angels eat flesh? or have they teeth?
what food the Angels live, by that also man lives: because in this that man
receives, all is divine and spiritual. We drink spiritually, and we eat
the spiritual flesh of Christ in which is believed to be eternal life. Cap.
29.
All that we eat is spiritual. Cap. 38.
The power of faith and understanding, which doubts nothing of Christ, does
taste, and relesse the whole spiritually. Cap 19.
Otherwise but for faith and understanding, what find they, which taste these
things, besides bread and wine? Cap. 46.
The visible quantity must not be esteemed in this mystery, but the power of
the spiritual Sacrament. We must not respect how much (of the quantity) is
pressed with our teeth, but how much is received through faith and love.
Therefore my son when thou come to the participation of this mystery, Not
the widenes of thy mouth to receive Christ, but the bosom of thy soul, that is
thy says.
OPEN THE BOSOM OF THY MIND, cleanse thy conscience, and receive thou not what
a morsel contains, but AS MVCH AS THY FAITH APPREHENDS.

Fulbertus a thousand years after Christ treads the same path. Fulbertus in
epist. ad Adeodatum.
That which appeared outwardly to be the substance of bread and wine is now
made the body and blood of Christ That is not by local inclusion, but by
mystical operation.
inwardly. Taste therefore, and see how sweet the meat is, but learn before
what manner of taste it has. It bears the taste of Angels food, having in it
a mystical and pleasant relesse, which thou can not discern with thy
mouth, but may understand with thine inward affection. Hold ready the
This is the mouth that receives Christ: and not the bodily mouth as the
Jesuits hold.
mouth of thy faith, open the jaws of hope, stretch out the bowels of love,
and take the bread of life (which is) the nourishment of the inward man: Taste
I say the sweetness of this heavenly banquette, but loathe the smatche of the
earthly fruits. For from the faith of the inward man comes the tasting of
the divine juice, whiles by the taking of the healthful Eucharist, CHRIST
FLOWS INTO THE BOWELS OF THE SOVLE OF THE RECEAVER, AND THE RELIGIOUS MIND
ADMITS HIM INTO HER CHASTE AND INNERMOST ROOMS.

There shall need no long discourse to prove that these Catholic Fathers
teach in the Lords Supper a spiritual kind of eating the flesh of Christ by
faith and understanding, The spiritual eating the fathers taught: the
corporal they did not teach.
as we do: not a corporal with teeth and jaws, as you do: The places be
many, the words plain: you can not shift them unless you will desperately
take flesh for spirit, body for soul, chamming for believing, earth for
heaven, yea a dumme and dead creature for the living and everlasting son of
God: which were not only sensible blindness, but in excusable madness.


Phi. The spiritual eating we do not deny, but we Your adding that which you
should not, is no warrant for us to believe it. John. 6.
add to that a corporal, because the soul may be partaker of Christ by
faith, notwithstanding the mouth receive the very flesh of Christ under the
forms of bread and wine.


Theo. This is your only refuge that is left: and this will not help you. For
examine this answer a while, and you shall soon see the weakness of it. My
flesh is truly meat, Christ is not meat for both the parts of man: and that
which is eaten is meat.
says Christ, and my blood is truly drink. He that doubts of this, we
hold him accursed, you do the like: thus far we agree. Mary for what part
of man, soul or body, this meat was provided, in this we dissent. You say
for the body, no less than for the soul: we say for the soul, and not for
the body. So said Chrysostom before us. This meat feeds not the body, but
the soul. So said Ambrose. Chrysostom. homil. 43. in Johan.
It is no bodily, but Ghostly meat. So said Augustine: Prepare not your
jaws, but your hearts: thence is this super commended: so said Cyprian, This
is Ambros. de iis qui initiantur mysteriis, ca. 9.
the proper nourishment of the spirit, and not common to the flesh. Now that
which is eaten is meat. And therefore if Christ be no meat for the body,
but only for the soul, assuredly Christ is not eaten of our bodies, but of
souls only.

Aug. de verbis Dom. in Lucam sermon. 33.
Next you confess that the mortal and sinful bodies of men may not be
substantially nourished with the glorious and immortal flesh of Christ: and
eating is altogether in vain (even of the flesh of Christ it self) without
norishing, Cypr. de Caena Domini.
and all the fathers with one consent teach this to be the end of caring the
flesh of Christ, For what part christ is meat, that part he nourishes: which
the Jesuits dare not confess to be true of the body.
that we should be thereby norished to life eternal. Why then strive you for a
corporal eating where your selves dare not defend any corporal norishing? Why
distract you eating from norishing, by referring them, one to the body, and the
other to the soul, which the Fathers always joined and applied to one and the
self same part of man? Many mothers, says Chrysostom. delivered their infants
when they are born to other norces: which he would not do, but norisheth us
with his own body. And in the same place where he says, Chrysostom. hom. 83. in
Mat. and 45. in Joan.
Ipsum vides, ipsum tangis, ipsum comedis, thou see him, thou touchest him,
thou eatest him: adds, Ibidem.
Ea namque re nos alimur quam Angeli videntes tremunt. For we are nourished
with that thing, which the Angels tremble when they behold. And so the rest of
the Fathers call it not only meat to eat, Chrysostom. in Matt. hom. 83.
but ( Cypr. de cae 11 Domini.
nutrimentum and I^^. did. 2. d^ consec. In quibus]
alimoniam) norishment and food, to keep the receiver in plight and good
liking. So that that part of man does not eat the flesh of Christ, which is
not norished with it: And since you dare not avouch that our bodies are really
nourished with the flesh of Christ, why should you hold that our mouths do
reallie eat him?

Lastly with what one meat can you fit both the bodies and souls of men? That
which enters the body must be local and corporal. Athana in illud
quicunque dixerit verbu^.
That which feeds the soul must be spiritual and intellectual. The soul
has no local receites, nor corporal instruments for her kind of eating,
but only faith and understanding. Chrysos^. in (...). 83. No one (...) the
bod^e and the so^l.
So that if the flesh of Christ in this mystery be material and local, how
can it feed the soul? If it be spiritual and intellectual, how can it
be chammed with teeth, or closed in the streites of the stomach? Local not
local, corporal not corporal be plain contradictions, and by no means
incident to the natural flesh of Christ. One it must needs be, both it cannot
be: though you would sweat out your hearts with wrangling.

And that Christ is not eaten with teeth or mouth, John. 6. He that abides not
in Christ does not eat christ by the manifest resolution of Christ himself.
John. 6.
the Gospel in plain words avouches with us. Whosoever eats my flesh and
drinks my blood has eternal life: my flesh is meat indeed, my blood is
drink in deed: he that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in
me, and I in him, says our Savior. The wicked live not by Christ, neither
abide in Christ, and therefore by the very determination of the Lord
him-self, they neither eat his flesh, nor drink his blood. Run now to
your distinction of corporal and spiritual eating when you will, but so long
as these words stand written in the Gospel, he that eats me, even he shall
live by me: the Godly will soon conclude, that SVCH AS LIVE NOT BY CHRIST, DO
NOT EAT CHRIST: Such as live not by Christ do not eat Christ.
and so that corporal eating of Christ's flesh, which you would erect, common
to the faithful and faithless, to be no kind of eating at al, notwithstanding
they receive the material and external elements of this mystery.


Phi. In spite of all your places and proofs, A sacramental eating has in it
both the corporal eating of the signs with teeth, and the spiritual eating
of Christ by faith.
there is a Sacramental eateing of Christ's flesh, with mouth and jaws,
besides your spiritual eating it with faith and spirit: which you could not
do unless it were really present: and therefore you do not well to beguile
the simple in this sort with refuting one truth by an other, whereas the
fathers confessed both.


Theo. In spite of all your late devises and euasions, the flesh of Christ is
not truly eaten with Capernites teeth or Jesuits jaws: neither do the fathers
avouch any such thing, save in that sense which I last declared, that the
signs so called are eaten of the wicked with their mouths and throats: but
of the flesh it self and blood of Christ, they plainly affirm the contrary.

S. Augustine expounding the words of our savior, he that eats my flesh
and drinks my blood, remains in me and I in him: says, Aug. de ciui^. Dei.
li. 21. c. 25. To eat christ in a sacrament is not so much, as to eat him
indeed.
Ostendit quid sit non Sacramento tenus, sed reuera manducare corpus Christi,
and eius sanguinem bibere. (The Lord) shows what it is to eat the flesh of
christ and drink his blood: not by way of a sacrament, but in deed. As if he
had said, he that remains not in me, and in whom I do not (likewise)
remain, let him never say nor think that he eats my flesh or drinks my
blood. That which here he calls Sacramento tenus, before in the same Chapter
he called solo Sacramento: opposing against it, reuera ma^nducare, and proving
that neither heretics, nor wicked Christians do in deed eat the body of
Christ, but only the Sacrament, that is the sacred sign of his body. Ibidem.
They rightly understand that he must not be said to eat the body of christ,
which is not in the body of christ: as heretics be not, and of wicked livers,
though they keep in the Church, he says, Ibidem.
Nec isti dicendi sunt manducare corpus Christi quia nec in membris computandi
sunt Christi. Neither are these (that live wickedly) to be said to eat the
body of christ, since they must not be counted the members of Christ.


Phi. Not spiritually but Sacramentally they do eat the body of Christ,
though they be wicked: and so Saint Augustine teaches.


Theo. Keep the words and sense which S. Augustine has, and you shall be
free from this error, which now you are in. Augu^. (...) Joan. tract. 26. The
sacran^e^tali eating of Christ is the eating of the sacred sign whereby he is
figured.
He that remains not in Christ, and in whom Christ abides not, without all
doubt does not spiritually eat his flesh, nor drink his blood, though
carnally and visibly he press with his teeth the Sacrament of Christ's body
and blood. Sacramental eating is the carnal and visible pressing with teeth
the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood: it is not the real eating of Christ
himself.


Phi. The Sacrament is Christ we say.


Theo. But so said not Saint Augustine. He diligently distinguishes,
Sacramentum and rem Sacramenti: the Sacrament and the thing (which is the other
part) of the Sacrament, interpreting the Sacrament to be Contra. ad^ers. leg.
and Pr^phe^ lib. 2. cap. 9. and de ciuit. Dei. li. 10. cap. 5.
Sacrum Signum: a sacred Sign: and the thing it self to be the body of
Christ. The De cons. did. 2. hoc est. The sacrament is not the body of Christ
but after a so^t, that is by a myste^e of signification.
Sacrifice of the Church consists of two (parts) Sacrament^ and re
Sacramenti, id est corpore Christi: of the sacrament, and the thing of the
Sacrament, which is the body of Christ. There is therefore the Sacrament, and
the thing of the Sacrament, to wit, the body of Christ.

Of the Sacrament, he says. August. in Johan. ^ract. 26.
It is received at the Lords table of some to life, of some to destruction.
Res vero ipsa, cuius and Sacramentum est, omni homini ad vitam, nulli ad
exitium quicunque eius particeps fuerit: But the thing it self, whereof that
is a Sacrament, (is received) of all men to life, and of none to death
whosoever is partaker of it. The rest join with him in that assertion. Hier.
in Ose. cap. 8.
( Heretics) says Hierom, do not eat his flesh whose flesh is the meat
of the faithful. Ambros. de iis qui initiantur mysteriis. cap. 8.
Whosoever, says Ambrose, eats this bread, he shall not die for ever, and it
is the body of Christ. Cypr. de caena Domini.
None is partaker of this lamb, says Cyprian, that is not a right Israelite.
Orig. in Mat. cap. 15.

The wicked eat the Sacrament, but they eat not Christ.

Christ enters and abides where he is received.


The word, says Origin, was made flesh, and true meat: the which whosoever
eats shall live for ever, Quem nullus malus potest edere, whom no wicked
person can eat. The Sacraments, that is the sacred signs of Christ's body
and blood the wicked do eat: Christ himself they do not. And why? The
Sacraments are carnally pressed with teeth, which they are partakers of as well
as the Godly; but Christ himself is not eaten with teeth, and therefore the
wicked wanting both spirit and faith by which he is received, cannot possibly
eat his flesh, or drink his blood: though they come to his table never so
often.


Phi. If Christ be really contained in the visible Sacrament, how can they
receive it, but they must receive him also?


Theo. If he were locally and substantially there enclosed, it could not be
avoided, but receiving the one into their mouths, they must needs also receive
the other into the same passage: but because neither he is eaten with teeth,
nor enters the bodies of the wicked, (as where he abides not,) therefore
we rightly conclude that he is not corporally covered with the accidents of
bread and wine, as you grossly conceive.


Phi. The lamb of God lies on the Altar, by the very profession of the first
Nicene Council: Council. Nicen. 1.
we ask you now where and how, if not under the forms of bread and wine?


Theo. The best handfast you have in fathers or Councels for this cause, is a
few speeches wrested and forced from the inward man to the outward, and from
the soul which they meant, to the body, which you urge: thereby to settle your
real and bodily presence, but all in vain. For as we doubt not that Christ is
always present on his table in truth, How Christ is present on the table.
grace, virtue, and effect, if we open the eyes of our faith to behold him,
and mouth of our spirits to receive him: so the local and corporal hiding of
his humane substance under the shows of bread and wine was never taught by
any Catholic father or council: least of al by the first Nicen Synod:
exhorting us in those mysteries: or Council. Nicen. Ibidem.
on that sacred table by faith to consider the lamb of God that took away the
sins of the world: Which if any do not both profess and perform, he is
not worthy to be counted a Christian.


Phi. How, says S. Chrysostom, will thou stand before the tribunal of Christ,
Chrysostom. ad Po^i^. Antioch. hom. 61.
which inuadest even his own body with wicked hands and lips.


Theo. This is not the way to seek for truth, but to shadow the same with
phrases of speeches. With these two points of cunning the Jesuits perue^t all
the fathers they bring for this matter.
And yet in these and al other your allegations out of Chrysostom and others,
you commit these two gross ouersightes. You understand that of the sensible
creatures in the sacrament, which was spoken of the insensible grace: and you
refer that to the visible parts of our bodies, which was intended to the
invisible powers of the mind, and with these false fou^dations you run along the
fathers, perverting every place that you quote, as a mean divine may soon
perceive.


Phi. These be your shifts to avoid the fathers which we bring, because you
will not acknowledge the real and corporal presence of christ in the sacrament.


Theo. First prove that Christ is really and corporally present under the forms
of bread and wine, and then reprove us if we do not ^cknowledge it.


Phi. Doubt you that?


Theo. Can you prove that?


Phi. What? That Christ is present in the sacrament?


Theo. Is that the thing which we deny?


Phi. For ought that I see, you grant not so much.


The. God forbid we should deny that the flesh and blood of christ are truly
present, and truly received of the faithful at the Lords table. It is the
doctrine that we ^each others, and comfort our selves with. We never doubted,
but Cypr. de vncti^. ^hrysma^is.
the truth was present with the sign, and the spirit with the sacrament, as
Cyprian says. Ambros. de iis qui initiantur mysteriis. cap. 3.

We confe^se a more mighty fruitful, and heavenly presence of christ in the
Sacraments than the Jesuits do.


We knew there could not follow an operation, if there went not a presence
before. Set a side your carnal imaginations of Christ covered with accidences,
and his flesh chammed between your teeth, and say what you will either of his
inui^^ble presence by power and grace, or of the spiritual and effectual
participation of his flesh and blood offered and received of the faith-full by
this Sacrament for the quickening and preserving of their souls and bodies to
eternal life, we join with you: no words shall displease us, that any way
declare the truth or force of this mystery. Your local compassing of Christ
with the shows and fantastical appearances of bread and wine, your real
grinding of his flesh with your jaws, these be the points that we deny to be
Catholic: these do the fathers refute as erroneous, and in these your own
fellows be not yet resolved, what to say, or what to hold.


Phi. Be not we resolved what to hold of Christ's real being in the Sacrament,
and the corporal eating his flesh with our mouths?


Theo. How you be secretly resolved, I know not: your judgments laid down to
the world in writing are clean contrary.


Phi. Ours?


Theo. Whose said I but yours?


Phi. Howsouer in other things we retain the liberty of the Schools to
dispute pro and con, yet in this you shall find us all together.


Theo. Together by the ears as dogs for bones.

Infinite are the contentions of their Schools about these and such other
points of their real and carnal imagination.
Omit your contentions, what the pronowne H O C supposes; what the verb E S T
^ignifieth, when and how the bread is abolished, whether by conversion or
annihilation: what body succeeds, and whether with distinction of parts and
extension of quantity, or without: what subject the accidents have to hang on,
whether the air or the body of Christ: what it is that soureth and putrifieth
in the forms of bread and wine: whether it be the same body that sits in
heaven: and if it be, how so many contradictions may be verified of one and the
same thing: Omit, I say, these with infinite other like contentions, the
corporal eating of christ with your mouths, are you all agreed about it?


Philan. We are.


Theo. Your two Seminaries are perhaps, because they hearken rather for
sedition in the realm, The cheifest Papists are together by the ears for
their corporal eating of Ch^istes flesh with teeth and jaws.

The gloze makes it an heresy to say that Christ's fle^h is betwixt the teeth


than for Religion in the Schools: But the great Rabbis of your side are they
in one opinion concerning this matter?


Phi. Great and small consent together against you.


Theo. Against truth they do, but in their own fantastical error they do
not. The cheifest Pillours of your church, when they come to that point (which
is now in handling) wander in the desert of their own devises, as men
forsaking and forsaken of truth.

Your Gloze is content, if a man gape wide, that the body of christ shall enter
his mouth, but he holds it for an heresy, that the teeth should touch the
same; and therefore when the jaws begin to close, he dispatcheth away the
body of christ in post toward heaven. De cons. did. 2. tribus gradibus. In
Glossa.
Certum est, It is (no conjecture but) certain, that as soon as the forms of
bread be pressed with the teeth, tam cito, presently the body of christ is
caught up into heaven.

Durandus is more favorable to the teeth, and will have christ Durand. in
rationali diuinor. officior. lib. 4. Rubr. de 6. part. Canonis.
present in the mouth, chamme he that list, till his ^awes ache, but he is as
strait laced against the stomach as the glozer is against the teeth, and will by
no means have the body of christ to pass thither, building himself on these
words of Hugo, Christ is Ibidem.

Durandus will have it in the mouth, but no farther.


corporally present in visu and in sapore, whiles we see or taste (the
sacrament). Ibidem.

Durandus will have it in the mouth, but no farther.


As long as our bodily senses are affected, so long his corporal presence is
not removed: but when once the senses of our body begin to fail (that we
neither see nor taste the forms) then must we seek no longer for a corporal
presence, but retain the spiritual: because christ passes from the mouth
(neither to heaven as the Gloze said, nor to the stomach as the rest affirm)
but to the heart. And better it is that he go straight to the mind, than
descend to the stomach.

Others is whom Bon^^em. in 4 sen^em. did. 13. ^rtic. 2. quae^^a.

Bonauenture will have Christ in the belly, but th^n^e he shall not stir^e.


Bonauenture more inclines, will no way, but Christ must take up his lodging
as well in the stomach as in the mouth: ma^y thence they suffer him not to
wagge, neither upward nor downward, whatsoever become of the accident^l forms
of bread and wine. And lest it should be ^hought as Durand and Hugo say, that
the body of Christ goes to the heart, he rep^ie^h that, Ibi^em. T^e^s^lues
conf^s^e their own variety of ^pa^^n^, touching the co^porall eating of
Christ: and grant it hard to judge what to hold.
Quantum ad substantiam (corporis) certum est quod non vadit in me^tem, sed
vtrum sic vad^t in ventr^m, dubium est propter diuersitatem opinionum: as
touching the substance (of his body) it is clear that he passes not to the
mind, but whether he so come (that is in the substance of his body, from the
mouth) to the belli^, this is yet in doubt, by reason of the diue^sitie of
opinions: and in so great variety, what to hold is hand to judge. Yet he
likes not, that Aut Ibid^m.
mus in ventrem traijceret, aut in cloacam descenderet: the body of Christ
should go into the belly of a mouse, or be cast forth by the draught, because
the ears of well disposed persons would abhor that, and sidiceremus,
haeretici and infideles deriderent nos, and irriderent, and if we should defend
that, the heretics and infidels would jest at us, and laugh us to scorn.

This notwithstanding Alexander de Hales in spi^e of al heretics and infidels
^entereth on it: Alex. de Ha^^s. part. 3. quaes^. 45.
If a dog or an hog, says he, should eat the whole consecrated host, I see
no cause but the Lords body should go therewithal into the belly of that
dog or hog. Thomas of Aquine sharply reprou^th them which think otherwise:
Thom part. 3. quaest. 80. ar^ic. 3.

The Thomists will have Christ in the bellies of mice and hogs if they eat
the Sacrament.


Some have said that as soon as the Sacrament is taken of a mouse or a dog,
straight way the body and blood of Christ cease to be there: but this is a
derogation to the truth of this Sacrament. In ^auour of Thomas, Petrus de
Palude, Ioannes de Burgo, Nicolaus de O^bellis, with the whole sect of Thomists
(neither few in number, nor mean in credit with the church of Rome) defend the
same: yea where the master of the sentences seemed to shrink from this
loathsome position. Senten. lib. 4. did. 13.
It may well be said, that the body of Christ is not receined of brute beasts:
the faculty of divines in Paris with full consent gave him this check, here
the master is refused.

And for fear lest the field should be won without him, in steppeth Antonius
Archbishop of Florence, and recompenseth his late coming with his lewd
writing. First he tells, how Petrus de Palude dressed the Gl^ze for saying,
Anton. part. 3. tit. 13. cap 6. 3. de ^^fectibus Mis^ae.

Here is the perfection of their real presence and corporal ^a^ing of Christ's
flesh with their teeth.


that Christ is caught up to heaven as soon as the forms of the sacrament are
pressed with our teeth, Quod dicere est haereticum: which to say is heretical.
And therefore they join both in this, that the body of Christ may not only be
eaten of a Mouse, but also it may be vomited up by the mouth and purged down
by the draught: say Bonauenture what he will or can in detestation of their
folk. These be their words, Ibidem.
Igitur corpus Christi and sanguis tam diu manet in ventre and stomacho vel
vomitu and quocunque alibi, quamdiu species manet. Et si specie^ incorruptae
euomu^tur (illa autem q^andoque non corrupta em^ttu^tur vt in habentibus
fluxum) ibi est vere corpus Christi: Therefore the body and blood of Christ
remain in the belly an^ stomach or in vomit and in whatsoever course of
nature, so long as the shows of bread and wine remain. And if they be vomited
or Behold christian reader the just reward of error, and learn to reverence
the truth of God.
purged, before they be altered (as sometimes in those that are troubled with
the flux) even there is the true body of Christ. O filthy mouths and
unclean spirits! What Capernite, what heretic, what Infidel was ever, I say
not so carnal and gross, but so barbarous and brutish? Is this the reverence
you give to the sacred and glorious flesh of Christ? Is this the corporal
presence that you strive for? Shall For this the Jesuits strive.
Mice, Dogs, and Swine have eternal life, that you bring them to eat the
flesh and drink the blood of our Savior? The rest of your sluttish divinity
no religious heart can repeat, no Christian ears can abide: let your nearest
frindes be judges whether this kind of eating do not match not only the
Capernites, but also the Canibals.

This grosnes is so wicked that they are ashamed of i^, but they cannot avoid
it.
This vile and wicked assertion, you will bear men in hand, you did ever
detest, and so think to discharge your selves: but you cannot escape so: The
church of Rome, whose factours and attournies you be, must answer to God and
the world for suffering, admitting and strengthening this sacrilegious
blasphemy. For when these things were first broched, what did she? Did she
control the doers, and condemn the filthiness of their error? Did she so much
as note the men, or mislike the matter? No Philander: she proposed the question
in her sentences. Senten. lib. 4. did. 13.
Quid igitur sumit mus, vel quid manducat? What then does the mouse take, or
what does he eat? And with her cold and indifferent answer, Deus nouit, God
knows, she set the school men on work, she laid up the ashes of those mice,
next her altars for relics, she favored, advanced and canonized the spredders
of it. Thomas of Aquin was her only Paramour, Hugh of Cluince who commended a
Priest for eating the sacrament which a leaper had cast up Cum vilissimo sputo,
To Canonize and promote the men was the next way to spread their errors.
was Saincted of her: she made Antonius no worse man than an Archbishop.
What? Call you this the quenching or kindling, the suppressing or increasing of
heresies? No marvel if you reckon Rebels for Martyrs, your holy mother the
Church of Rome has the cunning to make saints of blasphemers.

Return, return for shame to gravity, truth and antiquity: Learn to
distinguishe that which is seen in this Sacrament from that which is believed,
I mean the visible creature, from the grace which is not visible. Chrysostom. in
Mat. hom 83.
HAD THOU BEEN, says Chrysostom, WITHOUT A BODY (Christ) WOULD HAVE
GEEVEN THEE HIS INCORPORALL GVIFTS NAKEDLY (that is without any conjunction of
corporal creatures:) BUT NOW BECAUSE THY SOUL IS COVPLED WITH A BODY,
THEREFORE IN THINGS THAT BE SENSIBLE, THINGS INTELLIGIBLE ARE DELIVERED THEE.
Cyril. catechis. mys^ago. 4.
AS BREAD, (says Cyril of this sacrament) SERVES FOR THE BODY, SO THE WORD
SERVES FOR THE SOUL. It is neither nou^ltie nor absurdity to say that the
bread of the Lord, as touching the material substance, may be devoured of
beasts, digested of men, and will of it self in continuance mould and
putrify: The creatures may many ways miscary: the flesh of Christ because
it is not locallie inclo^ed, can not.

The flesh of Christ not subject to any uncleanness or corruption.


Such is the condition of all creatures that serve to nourish our bodies, and
this is a creature well known and familiar to our senses: But the word of God
which is added to the corporal elements, the grace which is annexed to the
visible signs, and the flesh of Christ which quickneth the soul of man by
faith, these things I say be free from all violent, and vndecen^ abuses, and
injuries. For they be no corporal, mortal, nor earthly creatures, but
spiritual, eternal and heavenly blessings, and therefore in no case subject
to the greedines of beasts, uncleanness of men, or weakness of nature. Ambr^s. de
sacramenti^, lib. 1. cap. 5.
The element is one thing, says Ambrose, the operation is an other thing. Idem
de iis qui initiantur mysteriis. cap. 3.
That which is seen (in all Sacraments) is temporal, that which is not seen
is eternal. August. de ^ap^^. contra Donati^^. lib. 3. cap. 10.
If we look to the very visible things, wherein Sacraments are ministered,
who is ignorant, says Austen, that they be corruptible? But if we consider
that which is wrought by them, who does not see, that that cannot suffer any
corruption? Of the Lords Supper Origin affirms that the bread as Orig. in
15. Mat.
touching the matter or material (parts) thereof goes into the belly and
forth by the draught, but the prayer and blessing, which is added, does
lighten the soul according to the portion of faith. Rabanus. de i^st.
Cl^ricor. lib. 1. cap. 31.
The sacrament (that is the sacred element) is one thing, says Rabanus^ the
power of the Sacrament is an other thing. The Sacrament is received in at the
mouth, with the virtue of the Sacrament, the inward man is filled: the
Sacrament is turned into the nourishment of the body, by the virtue of the
Sacrament we attain eternal life.

This do^trine your schoolmen either wilfully rejected, or foolishly
perverted to make Christ substantiallie present in your Masses, and for that
only cause fel^ they to the local shutting of him within the forms of bread,
and the corporal eating his flesh with their teeth. Which grossenes once
prevailing in your Church of Rome, The schoolmen were driven to this
b^u^ishnes by the very sequel of their real presence.
Thomas, Alexander, Antonius and the greatest Clerks of your side were by the
consequent of your real presence forced to con^^sse that the flesh of Christ
might be subject to the teeth and jaws as well of beasts, as of unbelievers.
For wickedness is worse than sluttishnes; and the bodies of sinful men God
more detesteth than he does the bowels of unreasonable creatures. Since then by
the general consent of your Church Christ does not refuse the bellies and
intralles of faithless persons: why say they should he not be verily contained
in the capacities and inwardes of brute beasts, if by mischaunce they devour
the Sacrament? This hold fast your gloze lays hands on. De cons. did. 2. qui
been. Glossa ibidem*

The Jesuits at this day cannot avoid that filthy doctrine, but by gross and
apparent mockeries.


Si dicatur quodmus sumat (corpus Christi) non est magnum inconueni^ns, cum
homines sceleratissimi illud sumant. If it be said that a mouse takes the
body of Christ, it is no great inconvenience, seeing most wicked men do
receive the same: and this Bonauenture sets down for the chiefest motive to
that vile assertion.


Phi. To tell you truth I like not that position.


Theo. So long as you defend Christ's humane substance to be locally present in
your host, you cannot for your heart avoid it, but either by mocking your
s^lues, and deluding your senses, or else by feeding mice with miracles, and
lea^ing me^ in man^^^^ danger ^^^pen Idolatry. For what is it, say you, that
mi^^^^^, ^hen they l^ght on your host? what answer make you to this question,
that your master proposed, and your pewfellowes strive for?

Will you say with Thomas Walden tomo 2. qui de sacramentis est. c. 46.

They might as well defend they be n^ mice, or bi^d^ that ^ouch the Sacrament,
but Angels in those snapes.


Gui^mundus and Thomas Walden tomo 2. qui de sacramentis est. c. 46.

They might as well defend they be n^ mice, or bi^d^ that ^ouch the Sacrament,
but Angels in those snapes.


Walden, two principal vpholders of your new found presence, that when mice
gnaw the Sacrament, it is but a trick of deceptio visus, we think they do
so, but in deed they do not so, she poor mice be otherwise occupied, our
sight is deceived? They must needs be very loving and devout chickens of
Antichrists broad, that will suffer you to pull out their eyes, and ^elce^e that
you say, though they see the contrary. To such men you may soon persuade what
Religion you list, but the wise reader will never be led with such monsterous
fancies.

Will you take part with Innocentius and others that De cons. did. 2. qui
been: Glossa Ibidem.

This is a sure way to keep m^ce from eating Christ, but themselves are in
(...) great d^unger to ^^^e ^im, as the mice. They have but the two fo^^^^r
(...).


statim desinit esse Sacramentum, ex quo a mure tangitur, it cease to be a
Sacrament as soon as any mouse (or other ^east) touches it, and the body of
Christ leaves that host for ever? Then besides that you prou^de miracles to
fa^te mice, and nour^sh them with empty shows, you must (before you may
worship any such host, as has been reserved, which is common with you:) you
mus^ I say ca^l beasts, birds, worms and flies co^^m nobis, and examine them
by Commission, whether any of them touched your sacrament. Else how can you be
su^e that Christ is there present? For if your Sacrament were but pecked by
some bird, or m^l^d by some ^^^se, Christ is departed, and the shape of bread
is adored by you with divine honor as if it were the son of God, which is
palpable and indefensable (...) ^^^ry.

Like you neither of these bold and blind ghesses? Indeed they be rather
sick^^^ dreams than grave men's answers^ yet if these please you not you must
(...) of (...) be driven to say with Al^xander and Antonius, that the flesh of
Christ descends into the bellies of my^^, dogs and swin^; as well as into
the bod^es of wicked and ungodly ^eceiuers, which whether it be worse tha^
carnal and caperniticall let the sober and discree^e ^eader pronounce for
(...).


Phi. You may not doubt in (...) church but some things are am^sse.


Theo. It goe^h hand wi^h your church when these (...) amiss. Far otherwise
did the learned and ancient fathers think and speak of this mystery. They
taught christ to be present not in ^^^sh, but in grace: not in real and
corporal existence, but in spiritual and fruitful ^ff^cience. They prepared
for ^^m not their jaws and bellies, Where Christ sits in the glory of God
the father far from the injuries and abuses of men or beast^.
but their minds and hearts. They fe^ him not down from heaven to spread him on
a patene, and shroud him in a pixe, but exalted all men to mount al^ft with the
wings of faith, and there above in heaven (not here below in earth) to behold
the brightness of his glory, and taste the sweetness of his mercy. In proposing,
urging and repeating which doctrine, we find them most careful and diligent,
most earnest and vehement; and that, if nothing else will serve to convince
your novelties. For as that part of man, which eats the flesh of Christ,
euerteth your real presence: because no local or corporal substance can
enter or seed the soul^; and the truth of Christ's flesh in this mystery by
the general consent of all ages and churches does enter and feed the soul:
so the place, whither we must ascend, before we can eat the Lords flesh does
clearly confute the same.

Where Christ is present thither must our hearts be directed, No teeth nor
jaws can reach to Christ, but only faith that enioyet^ him in the heavens.

The Christians were never taught to turn their hearts to the host.


when they are prepared to eat Christ: But the church of God in her public
prayers, and the catholic Fathers in their writings never taught the
faithful to s^t their affections on the things before them, but to lift up
their hearts from the Lords ^able to the highest heavens where Christ sat at
the right hand of his Father: Ergo neither she believed, nor they professed
that Christ was really closed under the forms of bread and wine. Which point
dislike you Philander, or which think you best to deny? Should our hearts be
turned from the place where Christ is present? I trust you be more respectfull
of God and your christian duty, than to say, that the minds and hearts of
christian men may be turned from Christ, or from the place where Christ is.
Should the people turn their hearts to your host and chalice, looking there to
find Christ? Why then did S. Paul teach us to Coloss. 3.
seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of
God, and to set our affections (on heavenly things) not on things which are
on earth, as where Christ is not to be found? Why did the primative church in
this sacrament always cri^, August. de bono viduitatis. cap. 16.
Sursum corda, Lift Up to heaven, to the Priests hands. Whither we must lift
up our hearts to seek f^r Christ.
up your hearts, and the rest answer, habemus ad Dominum, we lift them up
unto the Lord? Why did the learned and ancient Fathers teach the godly not to
regard the things proposed on the Lords table, but to mount above the skies
with the spiritual wings of faith, there to fasten on the Lords flesh as
Eagles, and there to receive the cup of the new Testament? Were the flesh of
Christ really placed on your altars, as you tell us; why should they skip him
there corporally present, and lead the people to seek for him so far, that
their bodies by no means could attain to the place, but only their minds
and spirits?

Ambrose, Ambros. in 1^. Luc. lib. 8. de duobus in vno lecto. etc.
There is a body of which it was said, my flesh is meat in deed. About this
body are the true Eagles, which houer about it with spiritual wings. The
souls of the righteous are therefore compared to Eagles, because they fly
high, and leave these places (or things) below. Idem lib. 10. in 24. cap. Luc.
de hora Dominicae resurrect.
We touch not Christ with corporal handling, but by faith. Therefore neither
on the earth, nor in the earth, nor after the flesh ought we to seek Christ, if
we will find him. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in 10. cap. 1. Cor. hom. 24.
That dreadful sacrifice does lead us to this, that in this life becoming
Eagles we should fly up to heaven, or rather above the heavens. For where the
carcass is, thither will the Eagles. Now the Lords body is the carcass by
reason of his death. Eagles he calls (us) to show that he which comes to
this body Which dogs and mice cannot do.
must fly aloft, and have nothing to do with the earth, but ever mount upward,
and behold the (bright) sun of righteousness with the piercing eye of his mind.
This table is for Hi^r. H^dibi^e quaest. 2.
agles, not for ^houghs. Ierom, Let us ascend with the Lord into the great
parlour d^cked and clean, and above (in heauen^ receive at his hands the cup
of the new Testament, and there keep our passover with him. Paschasius:
Paschas. de corp^re and sanguin. Dom. cap. 52.
If we be willing to receive these things with Christ, let us ascend above into
the parlour of life. Let us mount upward because they which stay below (on
earth) drink not sweet wine with Christ, but the poison of Dragons unhappily
with Judas. Therefore, says Paul savor you those things which are above, not
the things which are on earth. For this cup of the new Testament is not any
where received but above (in heaven.) Where the carka^^e is, August. qu est.
Euang. lib. 1. cap. 42.
thither will the Eagles resort, that is, says Austen, into heaven, whither
from hence (Christ) carried with him the body, which he took in the nature of
man.

Had we no better ground to refuse that your corporal cating and real
presence, this were sufficient. If Christ be absent in body from the earth,
how can his flesh be really present in the host?
For where without question the flesh of Christ must be locally present in
your host before it can be really pressed with teeth, the sacred scriptures
and catholic fathers affirm, that the true flesh of Christ is absent from
earth, and verily present in heaven, whither we must and may send our hearts and
faithes to be partakers of him, our hands and mouths we can not send: and
therefore your late devised doctrine must needs be dissident from the
scriptures, and unknown to the former and purer church of christ. Act. 7.
I see, says St^uen, the heavens open, and the son of man standing at the
right hand of God: Act. 3.
whom the heavens, says Peter, must contain until the time that al things be
restored.


Phi. As though he might not also be in earth?


Theo. Being ascended into heaven, The flesh of Christ is not on earth.
he is no more in earth, if that be true which the Angels said to his
Disciples. Act. 1. When he ascended he was taken up from us.
This Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come, as you have
seen him go into heaven: ergo when he ascended into heaven he was taken up
from them, and not left with them: and so the Lord himself before had taught
them. John. 16.
I came forth from the father, and came into the world, now contrariwise I
leave the world, and go to the father. So that his ascending to the father was
the leaving of the world, and his abiding with the father imployeth his absence
from the world. John. 12.
The poor you always have with you, but me, says he, you shall not always
have. Now am I no more in the world, but come to thee holy father: John 17.
Christ going to his father is no more on earth.
ergo now Christ being with his father is no more in the world, but remains
in heauen^ and as touching his humane nature is absent from the earth, which
not only the scriptures pronounce, but also the fathers with one voice
profess.

Tertullian, Tertul. de resurrect. carnis.
In the very palace of heaven to this day sits Jesus at the right hand of
his father: man, though also God: flesh and blood, though purer than ours:
nevertheless the very same in substance and form in which he ascended.
Augustine, August. in Euang. Johan. tract. 50.
Let us show the Jews at this day where Christ is, would God they would hear,
and take hold of him. He was slain of their fathers, he was buried, he rose
again, and was known of his Disciples, and before their eyes ascended into
heaven, and there now sits at the right hand of the father. Let them hear
this, and lay hold on him. Perhaps he will say, whom shall I take hold of?
him, that is absent? how shall I reach my hand up to heaven, to take hold on
him sitting there? What means we have to take hold of Christ now absent in
heaven.
Send thy faith, and thou have hold of him. Thy fathers held him in the flesh,
hold thou him in thine heart. He is both departe^ and present, he is return^d
whence he came, and has not left us. His body has he carried to heaven, his
majesty has he not withdrawn from the world. Ibidem.
Me shall you not always have. He spoke this of the presence of his body. For
touching his majesty, providence, inspeakeable and inu^sible grace, it is true
that he said, I am always with you to the end of the world. How Christ is
pr^sent with us, and how he is absent from us.
But as touching the flesh which the word took, touching that by the which he
was born of the virgin, fastened to the cross, laid in the grave, you shall
not always have me with you. And why? because he is ascended into heaven and
is not here: there he sits at the right hand of the father. Cyrill, There:
not here.
We must here diligently mark, that albeit he have withdrawn from hence the
presence of his body, yet in the majesty of his Godhead he is always with
us, Cyril in Joan. lib. 6. cap. 14. Christ absent in flesh.
even as himself ready to depart from his Disciples promised, behold I am
with you at all times unto the end of the world. Lib. 9. cap. 21.
For the faithful must believe though he be absent from us in body, yet in
his (divine) virtue he is ever present with all that love him: Lib. 9. cap. 22.
with whom he ever has been and will be present though not in body yet in
the virtue of his Deity. Lib. 11. cap. 3.
He could not be conversant with his Apostles in flesh, after he was once
ascended to his Father: yet Lib. 11. ca. 21.
for so much as Christ is truly God and man, they should have understood, that
in the unspeakable power of his Godhead he meant to be always with them,
though in flesh he were absent: and Lib. 11. ca. 22.
by that only means, notwithstanding he be absent in flesh, he is able to
save his. Origin, Orig. tract. in Matthew. 33. His body absent from us. His
manhood is neither in all places nor at all times with us.
according to his divine nature he is not absent from us, but he is absent
according to the dispensation of his body which he took. As a man shall he
be absent from us, who is every where in his divine nature. For it is not the
manhood of Christ that is there wheresoever two or three be gathered together
in his name, neither is it his manhood that is with us at all times until the
end of the world: neither is his manhood present in every congregation of
the faithful, but the divine virtue that was in Jesus. Ambrose, Ambr. li. 10.
super ^ucae cap. 24. de hora Dominicae resurrectionis. christ is not to
besought neither on earth nor in earth.
Steven amiddest the Jews saw thee (O Lord) absent. Marie among the Angels
saw thee not, being present. Steven sought not for thee on earth, who saw
thee standing at the right hand of God. Marie, which sought thee in earth,
could not touch thee. Steven touched thee because he sought thee in heaven.
Therefore neither on the earth nor in the earth nor after the flesh ought we
to seek thee, if we will find thee. Gregor. in Euang. homil. 2^.
Gregory, Christ is not here by the presence of his flesh, which yet is nowhere
absent by the presence of his majesty. Ibidem homil. 30.
The word incarnat both remains and departs. He departs (from his) in
body, and remains (with his) in divinity: Ibidem hom. 29. The fathers
themselves teach both parts of this consequent^ Christ is in heaven; ergo not
in earth.
We must therefore brethren follow him thither in heart whither we believe him
to be ascended in body.

If the flesh of Christ be not in earth, nor on earth, as these learned
Fathers teach us, how can it be locally closed in your massing waters? If his
humane nature be placed in heaven at the right hand of God there to remain
till the time that all things be restored, and from thence, not from any place
else, shall come to judge the quick and the dead, how vainly do you suppose
him to be corporally present in your p^xes, August. epist. 57. ad Dardanum.
That the substance of Christ's body may be in many places at one time is a
condemned heresy.
and really lodged in your bellies?


Phi. His body we say may be present in many places at one time.


Theoph. This you say, but what ancient Father ever said so before you? yea*
rather why forget you that this is often refuted by them as a leude and
heretical fancy? Does not Saint Augustine of purpose debate the matter and
in evident terms give this flat resolution against you? August. epist. ad
Da^danum. 57.
Doubt not, says he* the man Christ Jesus to be now there, whence he shall
come (to judgment) but keep in mind and hold assured the christian
confession, that he rose from the dead, ascended into heaven, sits (now at
the right hand of his Father, and Nec aliunde quam inde.
from thence, from no place else, shall come to judge the quick and the dead.
And so shall he come, by the very witness of Angels as he was seen to go
into heaven: that is In eadem carnis forma atque substantia.
in the very same form and substance of his flesh the which he has endued
with immortality, not bereaved of the former) nature. According to this form
(of his manhood) we must not think him to be diffunded in every place. For
we must beware that we do not so defend the Godhead of a man, that we take
from him the If Christ's manhood be in every place he loses the truth of his
body.
truth of his body. It is no good consequent, that which is in God, should be
every where, as God himself is. One person is both God and man, and one
Christ Jesus is both these: every where as he is God, in heaven as he is man.
In eadem epi. ad finem.
Dout not I say that Christ our Lord is every where present as God, but In
aliqu^ loco coeli.
in some one place of heaven by the means of his true body. And again,
August. in Johan. tract. 30.
Let us give the same ear to the He speaks of the truth of the gospel, not
of the truth of the body of Christ.
holy Gospel, that we would to the Lord himself if he were present. The Lord
is above (in heaven) but the truth is here which also the Lord is. The body in
which he rose b Vno loco esse po^est.
b can be (but) in one place: ^ his truth is every where dispersed.

Does not Vigilius a blessed Martyr and Bishop of Trident uphold the very
same point against Eutyches, and his accursed companions? Vigilius contra
Eutych. lib. ^ cap. 4.
The flesh of Christ, says he, WHEN IT WAS IN EARTH, SVRELY WAS NOT IN
HEAVEN, AND NOW BECAUSE IT IS IN HEAVEN, CERTAINLY IT IS NOT IN EARTH: yea so
far it is from being in earth, that we look for Christ after the flesh to
come from heaven, whom as he is God the word we believe to be with us in
earth. Then by your opinion, either the word is comprised in a place as well
as the flesh (of Christ) or That the flesh of Christ should be every where was
a sequ^l^ of Eutyches heresy.
the flesh (of Christ) is every where together with the word, seeing one
nature does not receive in it self any different and contrary state. Now to
be contained in a place, and to be present in every place be things diverse
and very dislike: and for so much as the word is every where, and the flesh
of Christ not every where, it is clear that one and the same Christ is of both
natures, that is every where according to the nature of his divinity, and
contained in a place according to the nature of his humanity. Christ ma^hood
con^ained in a place.
This is the catholic faith, and confession which the Apostles delivered, the
Martyrs confirmed, and the faithful persist in to this day.

Does not Fulgentius handle the same question, From this the Jesuits be utterly
fallen.
and precisely trace the steps of Saint Augustine and Vigilius? Fulgent. ad
Thrasimundum Regem. lib. 2. cap. 5.
One and the same son of God having in him the truth of the divine and
humane nature, lost not the proprieties of the true Godhead, and took also the
proprieties of the true manhead: one and the selfsame: local by that he took
of man, and infinite by that he had of his Father: one and the very same,
according to his Christ's humane substance is not both in heaven and earth at
one time.
humane substance absent from heaven, when he was in earth: and forsaking the
earth, when he ascended to heaven: but according to his divine and infinite
substance, neither leaving heaven when he came down from heaven, neither
departing from earth when he ascended to heaven. The which may be gathered by
the most certain words of the Lord himself. I ascend to my Father, and your
Father. How could he ascend but as a If Christ be not local, he is no true
man.
local and true man? or how can he be present with the faithful but as an
infinite and true God? not as if the humane substance of Christ might be every
where diffunded, but because one and the same Son of God, albeit according to
the truth of his manhead he were then locally placed on earth, yet according
to his Godhead (which in no wise is concluded in any place) he filled heaven
and earth. This true manhead of Christ which is local, as also his true
Godhead, which is always infinite, we see taught by the Doctrine
Apostolical. The body of Christ contained in one (...) place, not diffunded in
many.
For that Paul might show, the body of Christ as of very man, to be
contained in a place, he says to the Thessalonians: You turned to God from
idolles, to serve the living and true God, and to look for his Son from
heaven; declaring that he surely should corporally come from heaven, whom he
knew to be corporally raised from the dead. His conclusion is this, Whereas
then the flesh of Christ is This without question is the Christian faith, and
not the Jesuits vbiquitie or multilocitie.
proved without question to be contained in a place, yet his Godhead is at all
times every where, by the witness of Paul, etc. These be no wrested or
maimed allegations, but grave and advised authorities of learned and ancient
Fathers, plainly concluding with us against you, that the flesh of Christ is
not absent only from earth, and now sits above at the right hand of GOD,
but also locally contained in some one place of heaven by reason of the truth
of his body: and therefore not dispersed in many places or present in every
place, as you would now make the world believe it is in your Masses.


Philand. This is a bare shift of the Jesuits, and yet this is all the refuge
they have.
This was spoken of the shape, but not of the substance of Christ's body. For
Saint Augustine says, Aug. epist. 57.
Secundum hanc formam non est putandus vbique diffusus: according to this
(external) shape and form we must not think him every where diffused: and
yet the truth and substance of his body may be in many places at one time.


Theop. You forget that the rest say nature and substance: as Vigilius, Vigil.
contra Eutych. li. 4. cap. 4.
Circumscribitur loco per naturam carnis suae: Christ is circumscribed with
place by the nature of his flesh: and Fulgentius, Fulgent. lib. 2. cap. 5. ad
Thrasimundum rege^.
Secundum humanam substantiam derelinquens terram, cum ascendisset in coelum;
according to his humane substance leaving the earth, when he ascended into
heaven: and again, Ibidem.
Non quia humana Christi substantia fuisset vbique diffusa: not, as if the
humane substance of Christ should be every where diffunded. By the which it
is clear that neither the form, nor substance of Christ's body can be
present in many places at one time.

And what does Saint Augustine mean by the word form, but the perfection
and truth of man's nature, Form is all one with truth and perfection.
as Ambrose, Leo, Chrysostom and others do? What is, says Ambrose, Ambros.
lib. 7. epist. 47.
in the form of God? in the nature of God? Leo epist 97.
I demand, says Leo, what is meant by this, taking the form of a servant?
Doubtless the perfection of man's nature. Chryso. in cap. 2. epist. ad Phil.
serm^. 6.
The form of a servant is out of question, the nature of a servant, says
Chrysostom. Therefore Augustine himself adds this reason why Christ must
not be thought to be every where present, Aug. epist. 57.
ne veritatem corporis auferamus, Least we take from him the truth of his
body: concluding that Christ is every where, Ibidem. Per id quod homo is
substance as well as shape. Christ can have no humane substance without humane
shape.
per id quod Deus est, by that (nature) which is God: in coelo autem, per id
quod homo, in heaven by that (nature) which is man: Where these words that
which is man interpret what he mean by the former speech when he said:
according to this form Christ is not every where present.

But let the word be taken in your sense, yet does it fully confirm our
assertion. For humane form and shape is inseparably joined to the substance
of Christ's body: and Christ's humane form by your confession can not be
present in many places at one time: ergo neither his humane substance. These
^waine, shape and substance can not be severed: he is no man that has not
the shape of man. Now choose whether that body which, as you say your hosts
contain, shall keep the form and shape of man, or loose the nature and
substance of Christ. For the Lord Jesus as man, must have not only the
substance but also the shape of a man. Aug. epist. 57.
So shall he come, as you have seen him go to heaven, that is, says Austen,
in the very same shape and substance of (his) flesh. Phili. cap. 3.
Our vile body, says Paul, shall he change to be fashioned like to his
glorious body: but our bodies shall then have distinction of parts,
proportion of shape, circumscription of place: ergo the glorified body of
Christ has and must have these very proprieties of our nature. So that if his
bodily shape can be but in one place: his bodily substance can be in no more.
Therefore says Fulgentius: Fulgent. ad Thrasimund^^ reg^m. lib. 2. cap. 5.
Quod siverum est corpus Christi, loco potest vtique contineri: if Christ have
a true body, that no doubt may be concluded in a place. And Theodoret, Theod.
dial. 2. It is no humane body that has not shape, as well as substance.
Illud enim corpus habet priorem formam and figuram, and circumscriptionem, and
vt semel dicam corporis substantiam: that body (which Christ carried to heaven
with him) has the same form, figure, circumscription, and at one word the
same substance of a body, which it had before.


Phi. S. Chrysostom and S. Ambrose affirm the contrary.


Theo. What affirm they?


Phi. That one and the some body of Christ is every where present. Their
words are, Ambro. in. 10. cap. ad Heb. and Chrysostom. hom. 17. in eadem epist.
Quoni^m multis in locis offertur, multi Christi sunt? ^equaqua^, sed vnus
vbique est Christus, and hic plenus existens, and illic plenus, vnum corpus.
Because we offer in many places, are there many Christ's? no by no means: but
one Christ is every where, here whole, and there whole, one body. And S.
Chrysostom exceedingly wondering at so miraculous a presence cries out;
Chrysostom. de Sacerdotio. li. 3.
O the strangenes of the thing; O the goodness of (our) God! He that sits
above with his Father (in heaven) at the very moment of time is handled with
the fingers of all men.


Theo. Make you Chrysostom and Ambrose the disciples of Eutyches? Chrysostom
and Ambrose could not gainesay the rest, and be Catholics.



Phi. Make you no worse reckoning of them, than I do: and they shall have their
due honor.


Theo. I think them to be far from Eutyches error.


Phi. And so do I.


The. Why then allege you their words for that erroneous position which was
condemned in Eutyches?


Phi. I allege them for the real presence of Christ in the Sacrament.


Theo. Your real presence and vbiquitie if you will have Christ's humane
substance dispersed in many places, without shape or circumscription, are the
very bowels and inwardes of Eutyches heresy.


Phi. No Sir, S. Chrysostom and S. Ambrose were no heretics.


Theo. In deed they were not: and therefore you do them the more wrong to
wrest their speeches to make for his madness.


Philand. We produce them to confirm a truth.


Theophil. The very same truth, that the church of Christ abhorred in Eutyches.


Phi. What did the church abhor?


Theo. Even this which you would prove by the words of Ambrose and Chrysostom:
The Jesuits would draw Chrysostom and Ambrose to be of Eutyches opinion.
that the flesh of Christ after his ascension was not local nor circumscribed
within any certain place.


Phi. We grant the manhood of Christ in heaven, is local and circumscribed
with place: and that sets us free from Eutyches error.


Theo. It does if you constantly keep that point of faith and contradict it
not by an other devise.


Phi. We verily believe, and publicly profess that Christ's humane nature in
heaven has quantity, shape, distinction of parts, circumscription and all
other conditions of a natural and true body: These conditions of a true body
the manhead of Christ may have wheresoever it be.
what would you more?


Theo. We would no more, but if you fall from that, are you not within the
compass of Eutyches fury?


Phi. We fall not from it.


The. Then how can Christ's body in the sacrament want all these, which
christian religion affirms to be permanent and perpetual in the ma^hood of
Christ? or why would you collect out of Amb. or Chry. against the very
principles of faith that Christ's humane flesh is uncircumcised, and every
where diffused?


Philand. We mean that of Christ's flesh in the Sacrament, not of his
manhood in heaven.


Theophil. Be there many Christ's?


Philand. Who says there are? There is but one Christ: and that one Christ
has but one body; which is not every where.
you heard that even now reproved by S. Chrysostom and S. Ambrose, as a wicked
absurdity, to say that there were many Christ's. And therefore they concluded
there was but one Christ every where.


Theo. That one Christ, has he many natural and substantial bodies?


Philand. Why ask you those questions of us? we be not infected with any such
frenzy.


Theo. You may the sooner answer. Has Christ two real and natural bodies,
the one in heaven, the other in the Sacrament?


Phi. No, this is all one with that.


Theo. That by the rules of your creed is local and circumscribed: if this
be the same how can this be without quantity, shape, and circumscription?


Phi. Believe you not Christ when he said this is my body?


Theop. Yeas verily: but you so expound his words, that you subvert the whole
frame of his truth and our common faith, with your real and local presence.


Phi. Do we subvert the common faith with our opinion?


Theo. Our Christian faith is this. Aug. de essentia diuinitatis.
We must believe, says Augustine, the Son of God, according to the
substance of his Deity to be invisible, incorporall and uncircumcised, but
according to his humane nature to be visible, corporal, and local. You heard
Vigilius the martyr say, Vigil. contra Eutych.. lib. 4. cap. 4.
For so much as the word is every where, and the flesh of Christ not every
where, it is clear, that one and the same Christ is of two natures: eueriwhere
according to the nature of his Divinity, and contained in a place according to
the nature of his humanity: and this, says he, is the catholic faith and
confession which the Apostles delivered, the Martyrs confirmed, and the
faithful stand in to this day. This faith and confession if you infringe of
violate, you join hands with Eutyches against the church of God, and against
the grounds of our common creed: and this you must needs impugn if you
defend the natural body of Christ to be every where present, as you would
gather out of Ambroses and Chrysostomes words.


Philand. We say not, every where, but in the Sacrament.


Theoph. But their words are, every where. The words of Ambrose and
Chrysostom as the Jesuits conster them, are against the very grounds of our
common faith.

How Chrysostom and Ambrose must be understood.


Vnus vbique est Christus, one Christ is every where.


Philand. That is in the Sacrament.


Theophil. That is your additament. They say generally, one Christ is every
where.


Phil. To say that his humane nature is every where without any restraint,
were in deed a branch of Eutyches error.


Theophil. And since they say so: you must either understand it of his divine
nature, which is rightly and truly said to be every where present without
addition, or else of the spiritual and effectual presence of his body which
enters the souls, and strengthens the hearts of all the faithful by the
power of his grace and truth of his promise. And either of these ways their
words are very sound, and your local presence no part of their speech.


Phi. S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. de Sacerdot. lib. 3. Chrysostoms figurative
and vehement ^peaches much abused by the Jesuits.
Omnium manibus pertractatur: he is eue^ handled with all men fingers.


Theo. You do that father very much wrong, to wrest his eloquent and figurative
speeces to your carnal and gross surmises. The very tenor of his words will
declare that he means nothing less than your corporal and local touching,
With our bodily hands, we neither can nor do touch Christ. S. Ambrose says.
Ambros. lib. 10. in 24. Luc.
Non Corporali tactu Christu^, sed fide tangimus: We touch not Christ with our
fingers, but with our faith. And so S. Austen August. epist. Johan tract. 1.
Ipsum iam in caelo sedentem manu contrectare non possimus, sed fide
contingere. We cannot handle Christ with our fingers sitting now in heaven: but
with our faith we may. In this sense Chrysostomes words are very true but
nothing to your corporal vbiquitie of Christ's flesh.


Phi. How shall we know that this was his meaning: Chrysostom himself
excludes the corporal understanding of his words.
finding no words of his to direct us to that sense?


Theo. His speech is otherwise so false, that none but Jesuits would make any
doubt of it. And yet the very next words before these are a plain admonition
to the hearers what to conceive of this and such like places. Chryso. de
Sacerdot. lib. 3.
Annon euestigio in caelos transferris: annon carnis cogitationem omnem
abij^iens nudo animo, mente pura circumspicis quae in caelo sunt. Art thou not
presently carried up to heaven? Do thou not, casting all cogitation of
(thy) flesh aside, with a pure mind and soul severed (from the body) look
round on the things which are in heaven? In this spiritual and yet
hyperbolicall vehemency he goes on, amplifieng every poinct, and saying that
Christ is handled with all their fingers, and that Ibidem.
in the open sight of all that stood about: concluding no corporal or local
comprehension of Christ in the Sacrament by any of these mystical and
figurative speeches (whereof he is full,) but only that Chrysostom. Ibidem.
grace flowing into the Sacrifice should inflame all their hearts, and make
them cleaner than silver, purged and tried in the fire. This is the presence of
Christ which Chrysostom avouches, even the influence of his (heavenly) grace:
and that spiritual force and grace, as Gregory says, may very well be
constered to be the truth of his body and blood in the mysteries. So that the
same christ is every where present, not by local or corporal diffusion, but by
mystical operation: and one body is proposed to all, not to ^ill their
mouths, but to cleanse their hearts, The power of God must never be alleged
against his will, nor our faith which he has commanded us to believe.
and to give them assurance of eternal life.


Phi. May not the body of Christ in the sacrament be such as we defend,
though his body in heaven be not?


Theo. If the body of Christ in the sacrament be the very same that is in
heaven, how can it so much differ from it? If it be an other, how can it be
his, since he has but one natural body, and that by no means capeable of
such contrarieties as you imagine?


Phi. Is not Christ omnipotent?


Theo. Almighty he is in working his will, not in changing his nature.


Phi. Will you limite his might?


Theo. The christian faith is not repugnant to his might, but agreeable to his
truth, which you may not subvert with a pretense of his power at your
pleasures. Tertullian says very well, Tertul. aduers. Praxeam. Gods
omnipotency a common refuge with heretics.
If in our own presumption we abruptly use this reason, (nothing is hard to
God,) we may feign what we list of God, as though he had done it because he
could do it. We must not, because he can do all things, therefore believe he
has done that, which he has not. But we must search, whether he has done
it or no. For this respect some things may be hard unto God himself, to wit,
that which he has not done, not because he could not do it, but because he
would not.


Phi. Can not the power of Christ alter the nature of his manhood?


Theo. Were it possible that the manhood of Christ might be changed and
altered in his essential proprieties, When we produce gods power for our
fancies against his truth we make him a liar, and in subjection to our wills.
(which assertion the Church yet always rejected as heretical) why stand you
so much on this what Christ can do, when you plainly perceive by your Creed
what Christ will do? Shall his power ouerthwarte his will? Or his arm
disappoint his mouth? We need not dispute whether it be possible or no, this
suffices us, that the Lord himself says, he will leave the world and be no
more in the world: Whatsoever he can do, this we be sure, he will do: his
word is truth, and his will known: against that if you stand and oppose his
power to make him a liar, assure your selves he has power enough to be
revenged on your obstinacy, for urging his power (which is no part of your
care) against his will, which he has commanded you to believe and obey. The
Jesuits pretend god-power against the christian faith.



Phi. It is you that neither believe his will, nor agnise his power: we build
our selves on both.


Theo. His words by which you gather his will, you ^rame and inuert to your
own purposes: and when we would reduce you from the misconstruction of his
speech by the very tenor of the Christian faith, you plead his power to delude
his truth and ouerflorish a lewd heresy with a show of his omnipotency.


Phi. We do not pretend that power of God for any untruth.


Theo. If the Christian faith be truth; you urge his power against his truth.


Phi. Go we against the Christian faith?


Theo. Confess you the distinction of two natures in Christ after his
ascension?


Phi. We do.


Theo. And the proprieties of either to remain without confusion, conversion
or alteration?


Philand. What else?


Theophil. This then is the Christian faith, that h^th natures in Christ now
do, and ever shall keep and continue their several and different proprieties
without failing or changing.


Phi. Or if you do not see your selves condemned in the great council of
Chalcedo^, Act. 5. definitio. 2. as he^e^i^s for not believing it.
That we believe.


Theo. How the^ can the manhood of Christ be in many places at one time? Or how
can it in any place or time be without shape, quantity, circumscription and
such like proprieties of man's nature?


Phi. In heaven it has them.


Theo. If they can not be changed or altered, the manhood of Christ must have
them: not in heaven only, but in earth also, and in every place where the
substance of his body is.


Philand. A very witty exc^ption.

Then you believe the Christian faith to be true every where saving in the
Sacrament, and what is that but wilfully and openly to deny the faith where
you list?


Save in the Sacrament.


Theophi. If that be the same body which was on the Cross, it must have the
same natural proprieties of a body which that had.


Phi. It has as many as it may.


Theo. It must have as many as it should.


Phi. Which be they?


Theo. Proportion of shape, distinction of parts, extension of quantity,
circumscription of place, and the very same substance of flesh which he took
of his mother Marie.


Phi. You name these things which you see be not in the Sacrament.


Theophi. I name those which the manhood of Christ must have, wheresoever it be.


Phi. Must have? What necessity is in that*


Theo. As much as the denying of your faith and contradicting of his truth.
For these proprieties the body had that hung on the Cross, and without these
he can be no true man.


Philan. In heaven we tell you he has them.


Theophil. And in the Sacrament, we tell you, ^ee has them not: Ergo the
manhood of Christ is not in the Sacrament.


Phi. Whatsoever he can do: you be heretics in the mean time for
contradicting the christian faith.
Cannot Christ be where he list without those consequents?


Theo. His body can not.


Phi. Do not you now deny him to be omnipotent?


Theophi. Do not you now allege his power to frustrate both his will and
your faith?


Philand. You hold christ cannot, if he would.


Theo. We say christ would not, though he could. And since his will is evident
by his word, as our common faith avouches, you do wickedly to cross his
will with his power, and make his might attendant on your follies. Tertul.
aduer. Prae^eam
Dei velle, posse est: and non posse, nolle. The power of God (which we must
stand on) is his will: and that which he will not, that he cannot. You must not
therefore imagine what you list: and then ground upon the power and strength of
GOD: it is error and impiety whatsoever is repugnant to his truth, and to
father your falsehoodes on his almighty power is irreuerent and insolent
blasphemy.


Phi. You do not so much as confess that he can do it: and that causes us
to suspect you doubt of Gods omnipotency.


Theo. Because we suffer you not to unload your absurdities and impieties on
Gods power at your pleasures. The Jesuits incur not only Impieties but
impossibilities.



Philand. First grant he can do it, and of that we will commune afterward.


Theo. What shall I grant?


Phi. That Christ according to his corporal presence may be in many places at
one time if it please him.


Theo. What then shall become of S. Austen that said: Christ August. con^ra
^austum. li. 20. cap. 11.
could not concerning his corporal presence be at one time in the sun, in
the moon, and on the cross? And of S. Cyril affirming that Christ Cyril. in
Joan. lib. 15. cap. 3. These fathers were not afraid to say, Christ could
not be in many places at one time.
could not be conversant with his Apostles after he once ascended? If he could
not be in three places at one time, how could he be in more? If not in earth
when he was in heaven, how both in heaven and earth as you your selves
conceived and would have us confess?

And yet the thing, which we withstand, is far more impossible than this. For
the manhood of Christ, by the tenor of the christian faith has and must
have, after his ascension, humane shape, parts, length, breadth, both extended
and circumscribed: and otherwise to think, is the wicked and cursed opinion of
Eutyches condemned long since by the church of God for a mere impiety. You to
avoid the burden of that sentence confess these properties are and must be
permane^t in ye body which our savior took of the virgin: and wherein he now
sits at the right hand of God his father: The Jesuits whiles they would
shun Eutyches error, run headlong into contradictions and yet stick in the
same mire that Eutyches did.
marie the selfsame body you defend to be in the sacrament without shape,
parts, length or breadth either extended or circumscribed, which is we say
simply impossible. For shaped not shaped, extended not extended, circumscribed
not circumscribed, be plain contradictions, and those of one thing, at one
time, are not possible.


Phi. Is any thing impossible to God? 2. Tim. 2.



Theo. Does not the Apostle say, Hebr. 6.
Aug. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 5. c. 10.
Negare seipsum non potest, God cannot deny himself? and Impossible est Deum
mentiri, it is impossible that God should lie? S. Austen well notes Dicitur
omnipotens, faciendo quod vult, non patiendo quod non vult, vnde propterea
quaedam non potest, quia est omnipotens. God is said to be omnipotent, in doing
that he will, not in suffering that he will not. And therefore can he not do
some things, because he is omnipotent. And S. Ambrose likewise, Ambr. lib. 6.
epist. 37.
Quid ergo ei impossible? Non quod virtuti arduum, sed quod naturae eius
contrarium. What then is impossible to God? not that which passes his power,
but that which is contrary to his nature. Ibidem.
Impossible istud non infirmitatis, sed virtutis and maiestatis: quia veritas
non recipit mendacium, nec Dei virtus leuitatis errorem. This impossibility
proceeds not of infirmity, What things are impossible to God, and why.
but of might and majesty: because the truth (of God) admits not a lie:
nor the power of God any note of inconstancy. So that all changes against his
nature, or falsehoods against his truth be utterly impossible to GOD: and that
because he is almighty.


Phi. Of contradictions one part is ever false: and all falsehood impossible to
God.
That we know.


Theo. Then this also you must needs know, that contradictions be impossible:
for, of the^ if one part be true, the other is ever false: and that God should
be false it is not possible. You must therefore either with Eutyches affirm the
manhood of christ to be changed from his former shape, parts, quantity and
circumscription: and consequently from his former substance: or else against
religion and learning, reason and sense defend contradictions, that is truth
and falshoode to be possible both at one time; A lie in work is as bad as a
lie in word, and as contrary to the nature of God.
which is nothing but to make God a liar in his works as you be in your words
for maintaining that error.


Phi. At diverse times, and in (...) contradictions may be true.


Theo. There can be but one part (...) other at the same instant is ineuitablie
false: and as for your (...) the proprieties of christ's body, which we
speak of, be abs^lute and inherent necessities, no relations nor comparisons:
you may keep them for some better ^art: in this assertion they will do you no
service. This is right Iesuitical skill to say the body of Christ is and is
not contained in a place.



Phi. What if we say the body of christ in the Sacrament, has the same
proportion of shape, extension of parts, and circumscription of place which it
has in heaven, how can you refell us?


Theo. Never take the pai^es to incur new contradictions: a shorter answer will
serve you for all: and that is: say you believe, you cannot tell what. For
otherwise men will think you mad, if you fall to these positions that Christ
in the host has an humane shape, and yet the host, which covers him, fully
round: that he is there in the These be worse than the Poets chimers.
just length and breadth of a man, and yet exactly enclosed in every cromme of
the bread, and drappe of the wine, that he is * circumscribed with place, and
yet contained in no place, that he * consists of skin, flesh and bones,
and yet breaks in shiuers, and is poured out like liquor: these with infinite
other such outrageous and enourmous absurdities and contrarieties will declare
rather the weakness of your brains, than the manner of his presence. You shall
do well therefore either to show us what father ever taught these things before
you, or else keep this confusion of al religion and learning for those that
list to ieopard their souls upon such jests: The Realm of England is not yet
minded to admit th^se monsters into their Creed.


Phi. The best g^ounds you have for these things are dreams and miracles of
your own making.
We teach not these things without good grounds, and such as the Catholic
Fathers before us embraced, and allowed.


Theo. If you follow their steps, then show us their writings for that you
affirm.


Phi. Can we not think you?


Theo. What you can do, I care not: you do not, I see.


Phi. What one thing defend we, which we have not their witness and warrant for?


Theo. You have not one father for this whole question.


Phi. Not for the real presence?


Theo. You may run on with some misconstructions of the Fathers: which are as
soon answered by us, as objected by you: but an evident testimony for any of
the parts which I have proposed, you have none.


Phi. What parts?


Theo. Your head is wandering that you have since forgotten For none of these
points have the Jesuits so much as one ancient father.
them. For none of these points have the Jesuits so much as one ancient
father.
That Christ spoke not of the bread when he said, this is my body: or that the
sense of his words was literal, or that the substance of bread cease after
consecration, so as nothing remains of the former elements but accidents: or
For none of these points have the Jesuits so much as one ancient father.
that the corporal eating with the mouth (of which the Fathers speak) must be
meant of the things themselves, and not of the signs called by those names and
having those virtues after sanctification: or For none of these points have
the Jesuits so much as one ancient father.
that the material substance of Christ's natural body may be present in many
places at one time: or For none of these points have the Jesuits so much as
one ancient father.
that it is no heresy to defend the body of Christ after his ascension may
lack circumscription, extension or shape: For any of these bring us but one
sufficient and ancient authority, we will omit the rest, and admit your Mass.


Phi. Will you stand to that word?


Theo. If you will undertake the proof.


Philand. You be good at undertaking, but naught at perfourming.
I will.


Theo. And what if you perform it not, will you bethink your self how lewdly
you seduce the people of this land under a pretense of piety and resist the
annoincted of God under a color of blind devotion and zeal to your holy
Father the worker of all this wickedness though the founder of your two Celledges?


Phi. If I perform not that, I will do any thing: marie provided always you
shall not cavil at the Fathers works, when I cite them, and say they be
forged.


Theo. Provided also, that you produce the Fathers works themselves, and not
the bare reports of your fellows, that have falsely conveyed many things in
the Fathers names.


Philand. You shall have their own works.


Theoph. Then keep on your own course.


Phi. The rest of the points, which you propose, I am already past: only
tra^substan^iation, which you most impugn, I kept to the last to give you the
list: But if I prove it so, as you shall not deny it, will you be as good as
your promise, and become a catholic?


Theo. A Catholic if I were not, I would be with a good will, but not of your
making. For if you cannot show me one Father that ever taught your
Transubstantiation, well you may It is enough for the Iesu^^s to call themselves
Catholi^es, though they cannot show one writer for a thousand years that
taught the^r transubstantiation.
call your selves catholics and christ's own fellows if you will: but all that
be Godly and wise will take you for deceitful, if no^ for desperate, heretics.
But why spend you time with tri^ling thus? It were better your fathers were on
foot, at lest, if you have them.


Phi. Have them? Such as shall amaze you when you hear them.


Theo. Your vain is in. A stourdie preface does ill become an hungry Orator.


Phi. Mark the end.


Theo. I would see the man, that I might mark him.


Phi. S. Austen shall be the Which will say never a word for your purpose.

This is cited out of S. Austen by friar Walden tomo 2. de Sacramentis cap. 83
a divine work in D. Allens judgment. lib. 1. de Euch. sac^ pa. 34^.

This forgery with others was iudicially allowed by Pope Martin the fifth and
his Cardinals in their Consistory.


man.


Theo. Was he a Transubstantiator?


Phi. Fairly, flatly, fully.


Th. So was the moon first made of green cheese.


Phi. You will not believe him, til you hear him.


Theo. He is not long in coming ^hath he not yet learned his lesson? or are
you scant resolved whether it be he or not?


Phi. It is even he: and these be his words, Non dubitare debet al^quis, cum
panis and vinum consecrantur in veram substantiam Christi: ita vt non remaneat
substantia panis vel vini: cum multa alia etiam in operibus Dei non minus
miranda videmus. Hominem enim substantialiter mutat Deus in lapidem, vt vxorem
Loath: and in paruo artificio hominis faenum and filicem in vitrum. Nec
credendum est quod substantia panis velvini remaneat: sed panis in corpus
Christi: and vinu^ in sanguinem conuertitur, solummodo qualitatibus panis and
vini remanentibus. No man ought to doubt when bread and wine are consecrated
into the true substance of christ, so as the substance of bread and wine does
not remain, whereas we see many things in the works of God no less marvelous
(than this). A man God changes substantially into a stone, as Loths wife: and
in the small workmanship of man, hay and fern into glass. Neither must we
believe that the substance of bread or wine remains, but the bread is turned
into the body of Christ, and the wine into (his) blood, the qualities (or
accidents) of bread and wine only remaining. What say you to this check, is it
mate or no?


Theo. The words are sufficient, if the writer be ancient.


Phi. Then are you gone: for the author is S. Austen*


Theo. He seems to have been some glass^maker, rather than S Austen: for he
says the This young Austen lacked not only learning and truth, but Latin
and wit.
working of glass is as wounderful a feate, as the turning of bread into
Christ's body.


Phi. You would disgrace the writer: but he will not so be put out of
countenance.


Theo. I think he will not: for had he, or you, any shame left, he would have
blushed al his while to bear S Austens name, which was none of his: and you
would have had some remorce to deceive the world with such apparent and
evident treacheries.


Phi. I thought where we should have you. Now you cannot shifte the words, you
(...) the place for a forgerie: but this is against the first prouiso, which I
made with you.


Theophi. Then show up where you find it in his works: for that was the second
prouiso, which you agreed to.


Phi. I assure my self these words are Saint Austens.


Theophil. Your assurance is not current. Show us where, that we may find
them.


Phi. What if I have not the book in a readme^?


Theo. Name the place and it shall suffice.


Phi. Perhaps it is Had you not been ashamed of your occupation you would have
printed i^.
not printed.


Theo. By whom then is it reported?


Phi. By such as would not lie.


Theoph. By Walden the friar that wrate against Wicleff?


Phil. What if he were the reporter?


Theophil. Where had he it?


Phi. In an old copy, written with an ancient and set hand.


Theo. Which never no man saw besides himself.


Philand. That you cannot tell.


Theoph. Nor you: but where is that copy now?


Philan. Why ask you me? out of S. Augustine he had it.


Theo. Show us the book, and bear the bell.


Philan. He says it.


Theo. As though your frierly practices, and manifold forgeries under the
fathers names were not too well known to trust a Romish Coruester upon his bare
word, in a matter of such importance.


Phi. In my conscience, The words did so plainly betray th^mselues, that they
have since suppressed the book for ver^e shame.
he would not wilfully belie S. Augustine.


Theophil. Your conscience is no good consequence. In my knoweledge there was
no such doctrine taught in the Church, as these words import whiles S.
Augustine lived: nor five hundredth years after his death: but the contrary was
earnestly maintained and avouched, as I have proved by Gelasius, Theodoret,
and others. And therefore either Walden must make it of his own head, or
ignorantly light on a patch of Anselmus, or some such late writer, under the
name of Saint Augustine: which was common in your Abbayes and is at this day
confessed by your own fellows.


Philand. If you think Saint Augustine were mistaken: Bid likewise forged by
Walden.
you shall have in venerable Bede as plain words for this point as in Saint
Augustine.


Theophil. And as plainly forged as Saint Augustine was?


Philand. Hear what he says before you judge.


Theophil. I am as ready to hear as you to speak.


Philand. His words are, Citatura The. Walden, tomo 2. vt supra cap. 82.
Ibi forma panis videtur, vbi substantia panis non est. There the form of
bread appears, where the substance of bread is not.


Theophil. These places hit your hands as patte as if your selves had framed
them.


Philand. You were best say this is forged,


Theophil. I need not. It says so much of it self, creept you can show
where it is written.


Philand. In his He never wrate any such book*
book de mysteriis missae.


Theophil. There be exta^t eight tomes of his works: is it in any of them?


Philand. It may be, it is not.


Theophil. Did he ever write any such book, as de mysteriis missae?


Philand. What else?


Theo. Who says so?


Phi. This is alleged out of that book.


Theo. But is he never wrate any such book, how can thi^ be all^dged out of
him?


Phi. If he did not, you say something: but how prove you, that he wrate no
such book?


Theo. N^y you must prove he did. We having the Catalogue of his labors
witnessed by Tri^^emius and others of your own friends: and eight t^mes of his
writings at this day extant find no such book named as Walden mentions.


Philand. All this notwithstanding, he might write such a book. The credit of
both these places lies only on friar Walden, who (...) fourteen hundredth
years after Christ, and never any man saw the books besides him.

Why should not a man believe the legend, as well a^ (...) Walden, the legend
that being of more authority and antiquity tha^ the friar?





Theo. He might, is not enough: you must prove he did, before we acquit you
of corruption.


Phi. Walden repeateth those words as out of his book.


Theo. We had too late experience of Walden in S. Austen, to believe either
him, or you.


Phi. You will deny all things.


Theo. You yet bring nothing, but that which is no where found in the fathers
works, if it be not lewdly forged in their names. Think you with such
trumperie to try your selves Catholics?


Phi. We have found and good records.


Theo. Bring out those, for these be worse than rotten. A friar, fourteen
hundredth and thirty years after Christ, to come with new places out of Austen
and Bid clean contrary to the rest of their writings, and such as never any
man alleged before him: and never any man saw them after him, who but seducers
would bleare the world, and blind themselves with such authorities?


Phi. We did but allege them to sound what you would say.


Theo. Then leave them with shame, since you see what they are; and get you to
other, if you have any.


Phi. You would have them ancient.


Theo. Would you prove your selves Catholics by men of your own faction?


Phi. If you count that a faction, all the fathers were of From Pope Hildebrand
downward, a number of proud and stately prelates have been of your faction.
our faction.


Theo. You may soon make them to any faction, if you follow friar Waldens
fashion: but bring us their works that we may judge of their words, or else
you strive in vain.


Phi. Hereafter I will.


Theo. Then have you a cold suit of this question. For of accidents without
subject, or abolishing the substance of bread, never father spoke one word.


Phi. Yeas: S. Chrysostom ^aith, Chrysostom. sermo. 1. de Eucharist. in Euc^eniis.
Chrysostoms words examined.
Do thou see bread? do thou see wine? Do these things go to the
draught as other meats do? Not so. Think not so. For as when wax is put to
the fire nothing of the substance remains, nothing redoundeth: so here also
think thou the mysteries consumed with the substance of the (divine) body.
Hear you this Theophilus? Nothing of the former substance remains but the
same is consumed with the presence or substance of Christ's body.


Theo. I hear it well Philander, if you would take it right. When you put wax
into the fire, nothing, neither show, nor substance remains: this is so true,
that it will do you small good.


Phi. Will it not? So it is in the mysteries, says this father.


Theoph. You would have it so. But Chrysostom says, That is, think not on
the clements but lift up the eyes of thy mind above them, as if they were
consumed.
so think, when thou come to the mysteries.


Phi. And should we think a falsehood, when we approach to the mysteries?


Theo. No: but pull both your hearts and eyes from the material elements, as
not regarding them: and fix your cogitations on the celestial grace and virtue
that prevails and works in the mysteries.


Phi. He would have us think the mysteries to be consumed.


Theo. If any real mutation were to be concluded by this place, your holy
forms and accidents of bread and wine must be packing, as well as the
substance. For when wax is thrown into the fire, what accidences can you ^et
us remaining? do they not perish together with the substance? If you consult
the Schools, they will tell you the accidents only perish, the matter does
not. So that Chrysostomes similitude makes little for your conversion of
substances without accidences, Accidents must be consumed as well as substance
by Chrysostomes similitude.

That which is not is no mystery: and Chrysostom says the mysteries are
consumed.


his illation certainly makes less. Think, says he, that the mysteries in
like ^ort be consumed. The substance of bread, which you say is not, can no way
be taken with you for the mysteries: but the shows and forms of bread and
wine by your opinion must be counted in this and all other places the sacred
mysteries: and therefore if any mysteries be consumed, your accidences can
never escape the brunt of these words: Howbeit Chrysostomes true meaning was
not to turn the bread and wine from their former qualities or substances, but
the communicantes from all unworthy and earthly cogitations of the mystical
elements: and to stir them rather to mark in this Sacrament the wonderful
power and effects of Gods spirit and grace, than the base condition and
natural digestion of bread and wine.


Phi. Would S. Chrysostom have us think the mysteries to be consumed, unless
in deed they were consumed?


Theo. His directing our cogitations for religion and reverence rather to the
inward force, than outward appearance of the mysteries, does not change the
sensible qualities of bread and wine, whereof he spoke, The end of
Chrysostomes admonition and instruction.
much less the substance alone, whereof he spoke not: but draws the
receivers from that which their eyes behold, to that, which by faith they
believe to the secreter and diuiner part of the Sacrament: not abolishing the
one, but preferring the other, as more worthy to be considered and desired by
the comers to the Lords table. And in this sense he wills the people not to
think that the Priest is a man in the very next words that follow without
line or letter betwixt. Chrysostom. in Eucaeniis. sermo. 1. de Eucharist.
Wherefore approaching (to the Lords table) do not think that you receive
the divine body at the hands of a man, but that you take a fiery coal by the
Seraphims tongues, which Esaias saw in his vision.

Can this be Chrysostoms meaning, Chrysostom would have the communicants
think the Priest is no man and the sacrament is a fiery coal.

It is wilfulnes to understand one part of this sentence and to pervert the
other.


that in act and very deed the Priest is changed into a Seraphim, his hand
into a pair of tongs, the body of Christ into a coal of fire? Except you be
past your five wits, you will say no: yet Chrysostom in the same place
persuades the co^municants so to think as he did before that the mysteries
were consumed by the substance or presence of Christ's body. Then if the latter
words infer no such change: why should the former? If you be not so foolish
as to mistake the second part of this sentence, why be you so wilful as to
pervert the first, uttered at the same time, to the same purpose, with the
very same phrase of speech? Chrysostomes intent is no more to
transsubstantiate the bread, than the priest, or the body of Christ: but with
vehement amplifications (as his manner is) he persuades the people to come to
the Lords table with no less reverence than if they were to receive a fiery
coal (as Esaias did in his vision) from one of the glorious Seraphims. And to
this end also does he kendle them what he can, not to be basely minded and
affected toward the mysteries, as if they were only bread and wine, in that
sort to pass through the belly with other meats, but to prepare their
hearts, and to lift them up to God, Ibidem.
as they promised to do when the Priest said, lift up your minds and hearts,
and they made answer, we lift them up unto the Lord. These words therefore
force no real mutation in the things received, The right co^struction of
Chrysostoms words.
but lead the receivers from thinking on the weak creatures, which they see,
to the mighty power of Gods graces, which they see not: and this is done with a
religious consideration, not with any monsterous transubstantiation or
annihilation of the sacred mysteries.


Phi. S. Cyrill of Jerusalem says: Cyril. Catechis. mystagogica. 4.
Know you for a suerty, that this bread which is seen of us, is not bread,
though the taste find it to be bread, but the body of Christ. And so
Theophilact, Theophil. in 26. Matthew. That the Sacrament is no bread: is a new
kind of speech though not much material for the Jesuits.
It appears to be bread, but it is flesh.


Theo. The first authors of this speech were late writers, as Theophilact, or
lately set forth by your fellows not without great suspicion, as Cyrill of
Jerusalem: and the speech it self does somewhat vary from the style both of the
Scriptures and fathers which acknowledge this mystery to be bread and wine. 1.
Cor. ca. 10.
The bread, which we break, says Paul, is it not the communion of Christ's
body? We all are partakers of one bread. 1. Cor. 11.
As often as you eat of this bread and drink of this cup, you show the Lords
death til he come. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this
bread and drink of this cup. And our Savior in the Gospel speaking of the
cup: Matthew. 26.
I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine. Tertul. Tertul. lib.
1. contra Marcionem.
Christ has not, even at this day rejected the water of the creator, by which
he does wash his, nor the bread, by the which he does represent his very
body. Clemens Alexandrinus, Clemens Alex. lib. 2. cap. 2. pedago.
This is my blood, eue^ the blood of the grape. Cyprian, Cypr. lib. 2. epist. 3.
We find it was wine, which the Lord called his blood. The Lord called his
body, bread kneaded together of many corns, and his blood, wine pressed out of
many clusters of grapes. Origin, ( Orig. in 15. Matthew.
The Lords bread) according to the material (parts) thereof goes into the
belly and so forth by the draught. Austen, August. tract. in Johan. 26. The
elder fathers affirm the Sacrament to be bread.
As the men of God before us did expound this, the Lord commended his body and
blood in those things which are made one of many. For the first is kneaded of
many corns into one (lump) the other is pressed of many clusters into one
(liquour). That then which you saw, is bread; which also your eyes can tell
you. Cyrill of Alexandria, Cyril. in Joan. lib. 4. cap. 14.
To the believing Disciples Christ gave pieces of bread, saying; take, eat,
this is my body. Hesychius, (He means) Hesych. in Leuit. cap. 8. ii. 12.
that mystery, which is both bread and flesh. The phrase it self therefore
(It is not bread) sauoreth of later ages and writers: and crosses that course
of speech which both Scriptures and Fathers observed: and yet if you suffer
them to declare their own minds, they may soon be reconciled to the rest.

Theophilact What they mean that say it is no bread.
expressing the same point in other words, says: Theophil. in Marc. cap. 14.
Speciem quidem panis and vini seruat, in virtutem autem carnis and sanguinis
transelementat. (Christ) keeps the shape (or kind) of bread and wine, but
changes the^ into the virtue of his body and blood. Cyrill opens his own
saying more at large, Cyril. Catech. mystagogica. 3.
The bread of the Eucharist after the invocation of the holy Ghost, is now no
more common bread, but the body of Christ. Idem Catech. mystagogica. 4. No
bread: that is, no bare and common bread.
In the new Law, the heavenly bread and cup of salvation sanctify both soul
and body. As the bread serves for the body, so does the word for the soul.
Think not therefore (of the Sacrament) as of bare bread and bare wine, it is
the body and blood of Christ according to the Lords own words. And although
sense tell thee this (that is bare bread and wine) yet let faith confirm thee,
neither judge them by taste, but rather by faith assure thy self without all
doubt that the body and blood (of Christ) are given unto thee. This assertion,
we grant, is right and good; and this intent had he, when he said, the bread
which is seen is no bread, meaning no common, no bare bread.

In which assertion other ancient Fathers concur with him. Justinius, Just.
Apol. 2.
We receive not these things as a common and usual bread, or accustomed
drink, but we be taught, that the food blessed by prayer of the word received
from him, is the flesh and blood of that Jesus which took flesh (for our
sakes.) Ireneus, Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34.
The bread having the invocation of God is now no common bread, but an
Eucharist (or thanksgiving) consisting of two things, a terrestrial and a
celestial. So Ambrose, Ambros. de iis qui mysteriis initiantur. ca. 9.
(The Sacrament) is not that which nature has framed: but that which blessing
has hallowed. They do not avouch the Sacrament to be simply no bread; they
teach it to be no natural nor usual bread, because the virtue, power and
force of Christ's flesh is united to it and received with it, though to sight
and ta^^ it keep the show of nothing else but bread.


Phi. What is species panis which the Fathers speak of, Species panis is not
taken for the qualities of the bread without the substance. We have no trial
of substance, but by sense.
but the utter appearance of bread, when the substance is altered?


Theo. Does species signify a ^hape without substance?


Philand. It signifies the shape, and not the substance.


Theo. Every creature has his substance joined with his sensible shape and
form: and therefore though the one do not signify the other: yet the one
infers the other by the very necessity of nature: neither has GOD given
us any perfecter trial of substance than by sight and sense: which is sure
enough, because shows without substance are no creatures.


Philand. But this in the Sacrament is miraculous: and that is the reason, why
species in the Fathers does signify a show without substance: or as our
Schools rather like to say for perspicuities sake: accidents without a
subject.


Theophil. Your Schools were perspicuous, as the Land of Egypt was
light-some, when it was covered with palpable darkness: but where does any
Father speaking of the Sa^rament, take species for a show without substance?
Species does rather import than exclude the substance of these and all other
creatures.



Philand. That is ^uerie where the meaning of the word, when they apply it to
the Sacrament.


Theo. How prove you that?


Phi. It needs no proof: the very word does ^o signify.


Theophil. The word, species, does no more exclude the sub^taunce of bread
and wine in the Sacrament: than species humana, the show, shape and form of a
man, which you have, does take from you the ^ubstance and truth of man's nature.
Which if you think it does look what answer you will make to him that shall
ask what lies under the shape of a man in you: it must be the substance of a
man, or some worse thing. And if you can keep both the shape and substance of
man; why may not the bread and wine do the like* for all the word species,
which is verified of men and other creatures as well as of the bread and wine in
the mysteries?


Phi. The comparison is not like. The comparison is liker than you are ware of.
For the bread is changed and so am not I.


Theophil. Do you not often change both the inward and outward man, I mean
the state of body and soul?


Phi. I change as others do.


Theo. You can be no christian; if you be not changed from the state in which
you were born. You were born the child of Gods wrath, and servant of sin: if
you be renewed and freed from that, then are you wholly changed.


Phi. This is no No more is that in the bread any substantial change.
substantial change, such as we affirm to be in the bread.


Theo. If you would prove that which you affirm, you might happen to conclude
that, which now you can not.


Phi. That is soon proved.


Theo. I marvel then you stay long, before you do it: and faint so often when
you begin it. You avouch that the word species in the Fathers signifies your
shows without substance, and accidents without subject: and when the very show
of men, which you bear about you, conuinceth that folly: you presume a
substantial change to be in the bread to help forth the use of the word,
which you imagine against all learning and reason, was their meaning.

The word species taken for evident truth
For the word species, though it be diuersely used among the Fathers and often
iterated in this matter of the Sacrament: yet shall you never bring us any one
place, where it is taken for a show without substance: and therefore by that
word you can hardly infer the bread to be changed in substance, and nothing
to be left besides the accidents. Saint Ambrose says it imports as much,
as an evident sight and truth. Ambros. de iis qui initiantur mysteriis cap. 4.
Speciem pro veritate accipiendam legimus. Specie inuentus vt homo. We read
this word species to be taken for the very truth (of a thing.) As Christ was
found (not in show, but) in truth like a man. And of the Lords cup, Idem de
sacramentis. li. 4. c. 4.
Perhaps thou will say, speciem sanguinis non video, sed habet similitudinem. I
see not the truth of blood, but it has the resemblance. Which objection
Ambrose repeateth shortly after in these words, Lib. 6. cap. 1.
Similitudinem video, non video sanguinis veritatem. I see the resemblance, I
see not the truth of blood. Where note that species is not only contrary to
the only likeness and appearance of any thing, but equivalent with the truth
and nature of every thing. Then are shows without substance your fancies
without judgment: you never received any such doctrine from the Catholic
Fathers, your selves have devised it of late, since barbarism prevailed in
your Schools, and Antichrist was exalted in your churches.


Philand. So species is now and then used: but does that infer that this is
the general signification of the word wheresoever we find it?


Theo. This suffices to exclude your shows without substance, Species is the
substance and kind of any creature.
unless you can bring some better inforcement than the very word: which you
can not. And yet Saint Ambrose gives an other use of the word, (and that
treating of the Sacraments) which utterly subuerteth your accidental shows.
Ambr. de iis qui initiantur mysteriis. cap. 4.
Creaturae non potest esse veritas, sed species, quae facile soluitur at que
mutatur. No creature can be (said to be) a truth, but a show or appearance,
which is soon dissolved and abolished. In this sense species is all one with
any creature or substance, which soon decaieth, as every mortal thing does:
and the learned Fathers writing of the Sacrament continually use the word to
signify the nature and kind of every creature, and not the naked shows or
accidents.

Saint Ambrose, Ambros. de iis qui initiantur mysteriis. cap. 9.
Ante benedictionem alia species nominatur: before it be blessed, it is called
an other (not show but) kind. Ibidem.
Grauior est ferri species, quam aquarum liquor. The kind (or nature) of Iron
(not the show of iron) is weightier than the liquor of water. Ibidem.
If the word of Elias were able to fet fire from heaven, non valebit Christi
sermo vt species mutet elementorum: shall not the word of Christ be of strength
to change the kinds (not the shapes) of these elements? So does Augustine
likewise. August. de catechizandis rudibus. ca. 26.
Non sic habendam esse speciem benedictione consecratam quemadmodum habetur in
vsu quolibet: the kind (or element) consecrated with blessing, must not be so
reckoned of, as it is in common use. Idem in psalm. 77.
Idem cibus illorum qui and noster, sed significatione idem, non specie: the
(Fathers of the old Testament) had the same food which we have: but the same in
signification, not in (external) kind: Idem tract. 26. in Johan.
Aliud illi, aliud nos, sed specie visibili: they (drank) one thing, we
(drink) an other thing, but in visible kind: Idem in tract. 45. in Johan.
Ibi Petra Christus: nobis Christus, quod in altari Dei ponitur. Si speciem
visibilem intendas, aliud est. To them the Rock was Christ: to us that is
Christ which is set on the altar of God. If you look to the visible kind, it
is an other thing (than that they drank.)

In these places you can not interpret species, a show without substance,
unless you will transubstantiate Manna which the children of Israel did eat,
Species is nothing l^sse with the ancient fathers than a show without
substance.
the rock which they drank of, the hatchet which Elizeus made sw^m, the bread
that is in common use without and before consecration: for these things Austen
and Ambrose (comparing them with this Sacrament) do call visibiles species,
visibles kinds, as they do the bread and wine proposed to the faithful at the
Lords table.

And were you so perverse that against the meaning of the Father^, and
signification of the word, you would needs have species to be taken for your
miraculous and mystical accidences, I can tell you they are like to shrink in
this change as well as the substance. For Ambrose says, Ambro. de iis qui
initiantur myster^is. cap. 9.
Sermo Christi mutat species elementorum, the word of Christ changes by your
interpretation) the shows of the elements: which is so apparently false, that
your selves dare not abide it: And therefore species must stand, not for the
outward forms and shows, but for the things themselves. As Saint Augustine
speaking of the Sacramental bread, says: Aug. ^ermo. ad infantes. Cita^ur a
Beda. 1. Cor. cap. 11.
vt sit visibilis species panis, multa grana in vnum consperguntur. Many
corns are kneaded together to make (not the show, but) the visible kind (or
creature) of bread. By which it is evident that species with ancient writers
in their discourses of this Sacrament, is not a show without a substance, as
you vainly suppose, but a kind or creature, which is far from accidents
hanging in the air, you know not how, by miraculous geometry.


Philand. We ground not our selves so much on the bare name of species, as on
the change of the bread and wine, made by virtue of consecration: as all the A
change of the elements they confess, but not yours.
Fathers witness.


Theo. It is a very simple foundation to build on a bare word, which has
many significations besides that, and any signification, rather than that,
which you conceive: and yet that is one of the best foundations you have for
your new found shows without substance: and as for the change of the
sacred elements made by the words of Christ, and mentioned in the Fathers: if
you did not urge your fancies on their phrases, but examine their doctrine, you
should soon spy your error: which now you will not, you be so wedded to the
prejudice of your own opinion.


Phi. Do not all the Fathers with one voice confess a change to be made in
the elements by the words of Consecration?


Theo. Do not we acknowledge the same? How could usual bread taken of the
fruits of the earth, and serving only to feed the body, The change in the
elements is indeed wonderful.
become a Sacrament and instrument of heavenly grace and life, to quicken and
strengthen the soul of man, but by some great and marvelous change?


Phi. Such as none could perform, but the mighty finger of God himself. For
so S. Ambrose and others to persuade this change, have recourse to Christ's
eternal power and truth.


Theo. Yea verily.


Phi. That confession is suff^cient to confute the doctrine which you defend.


Theo. I see not how.


Phi. If the bread were not changed from his former substance, it could neither
be miraculous, One sacrament in his effect and force is more miraculous than
many corporal and sensible woonders.
nor need the omnipotent power of Christ. For figures and similitudes men may
make: but this mutation is wrought by the mighty power of the holy Ghost: and
the manner is unsearchable.


Theo. Greater power and truth are required for the finishing of one Sacrament,
than for the working of many miracles. Miracles not only the godly, but also
the wicked have diverse times wrought. The Sorcerers of Egypt did some wonders.
Antichrist has his miracles, and those not a few: But Sacraments, no Saint,
no not the chosen and elect Angels of heaven can institute. For who dare
promise, who can perform the spiritual and celestial graces of God to be
annexed to the visible signs, but only God? Christ's eternal power and truth
is required for the working of ^^erie sacra^^nt.
How could water regenerate the soul, if the word were not God? How could
bread and wine norish to life everlasting, unless the same God had likewise
spoken the word?

We must in all sacraments be fully persuaded of Christ's infallible truth, and
alsufficient power, before we can either believe, or enjoy the promises. If his
word might lack truth, or want power, then should our faith vanish, and these
outward elements perish without profiting us: but with him is no changing,
neither can any thing defeat his will: and therefore when we be taught to
look not on the weakness of the creatures which be corruptible, but on the
perfection of his heavenly word, which is puissant and predomina^t over al
things, what does this help your real and corporal conversion of bread into
Christ? What makes this for Tra^substantiation? God is wonderful in this and
all other his sacraments, not by casting away substances, God is marvelous in
his sacraments without transsubstantiation.
and leaving accidences, but by working that in our hearts by the mighty power
of his spirit above nature, which the visible signs import to our senses: and
this is more marvelous in any wise man's eye, than your accidental shows
without a subject.


Phi. God is marvelous in all his works: but in this more than in any other:
because the substance of the bread and wine is changed, No father avouches the
substanee of bread and wine to be changed.
where the qualities are not.


Theo. That change you dream of; but who avouches it besides your selves? or
what ancient father ever mentioned any such?


Phi. They all confess the change which we speak of.


Theo. You be so deep in your empty shows, that we take your all to be as
much as none.


Phi. Think you, as you list: we know what we have.


Theo. If your stoare be so great, why make you such curtsie to name us one?


Phi. You will quarrel with him, when I bring him.


Theo. Your self mistrust him, before you offer him.


Phi. I mistrust your carping, not his writing.


Theo. If mine answer be not sound, wherefore serve you but to refute it?


Phi. Well then, De cons. did. 2. quia corpus.
Eusebius Emissenus has an evident testimony for this matter. Recedat omne
infidelitatis ambiguum, quandoquidem qui author est muneris, ipse est etiam
testis veritatis. Nam inuisibilis sacerdos visibiles creaturas in substantiam
corporis and sanguinis sui verbo secreta potestate conuertit, ita dicens,
Accipite and comedite: hoc est corpus meu^. Et sanctificatione repetita,
accipite and bibite, ait. Hic est sanguis meus. This sermon is forged in
Eusebius Emisenus name.
Ergo sicut ad nutum praecipientis Domini repent and ex nihilo substiterunt
excelsa caelorum, profunda fluctuum, vasta terrarum: ita pari potestate in
spiritualibus Sacramentis, vbi praecipit virtus, seruit effectus. Let all doubt
of infidelity depart, because he that is the author of the gift is also the
witness of the truth. For the invisible priest turned the visible creatures
into the substance of his body and blood with his word (and) secret power,
saying, take, eat, this is my body, and repeating the sanctification he said,
take and drink; this is my blood. Therefore as at the Lords beck
commanding, the high heavens, the deep waters, the wide earth were made on
the sudden of nothing: so with like force in the spiritual Sacraments, when
(his) power commands, the effect follows. These words be plain enough, if
either truth or authority can content you.


The. Either shall content me, if I may be sure of either.


Phi. Here you find both.


Theo. Who wrate this sermon which you cite? If his age be not known, how can
his authority be esteemed?



Phi. Eusebius Emissenus.


Theo. When lived he?


Phi. Why do you ask?


Theo. Reason we know his age before we receive his testimony.


Phi. His age I can tell you is as ancient as his doctrine.


Theo. I think both of one antiquity. For neither the man, nor the matter were
known in the church of Christ for 900. years and upward.


Phi. How you be deceived? S. Hierom makes mention of Eusebius Emissenus, that
Hier. de scriptoribus ^ccles. in Eusebius. Emeseno.
wrate short homilies upon the Gospels somewhat before his time.


Theo. And that made your fellows put his name to certain latin homilies,
that were none of his: and to bear men in hand he was a frenchman: but when he
lived they can not tell.


Phi. Yes, S. Hierom says he died under Constantius, more than twelve
hundred years ago.


Theo. Eusebius Emissenus then wrate and then died: but who wrate these latin
homilies that were extant in his name?


Phi. Himself.


Theo. What countriman was he? The Jesuits say he was a Frenchman.



Phi. I think a Frenchman.


Theo. So Canisius both your colleague, and the compiler of your huge chaos or
catechism, says: marie when he lived, that he could not tell: and therefore
of his own authority places him 200. years after S. Hierom with a
perchance, Canisij Chronologia in 500.
least if we should ask him for his proof, he might be taken with a lie. His
words are, Eusebius Emissenus Gallus, Perhaps, is as much as you cannot tell
when.
cuius habentur homiliae, hoc forte tempore claruit, Eusebius Emissenus of
France, whose homilies we have extant, perhaps lived at this time: that is,
500. years after Christ.


Phi. And so it may be.


The. But this is not he, that S. Hierom speaks of. For he died under
Co^stant^us; whose reign and life ended 343. after Christ.


Phi. The elder he was, the better his credit for this question.


Theo. But the worst is, Emesenus is bishop of Emesa in Syria.
that Eusebius Emissenus was a Bishop in Syria, and wrate in greek: and
therefore to assign him latin homilies, and to suppose him to be a
frenchman, was a very gross corruption, and such as children will deride.


Phi. Might there not be an other of that name?


Theo. Ye as in that place, but in France there could be none.


Phi. Why not?


Theo. Because Emesenus does signify Bishop of Emesa in Syria, where this
Eusebius lived, and as S. Hierom writes, was buried at Antioch the chief
Metropolis of Syria.


Phi. But this is Eusebius Emissenus which Gratian alleges.


Theo. Gracian has put Emissenus for Emesenus by negligence or wilfulnes
choose you whether. No such place in all Europe as whence Emissenus should be
derived. This was a common practice with the friars in the fa^hers^ wo^^^s.
It is not the first word by five hundred, that Gratian has altered. For
Eusebius Emesenus Saint Hieroms certificate is very good: for Eusebius
Emissenus the first record that we find is in Gratian: where by the very
style, periods, casures, members and agnominations you may perceive him to be a
latinist, and as Canisius addet^, a Frenchman. Now in what age he lived, and in
what place he preached, we require some proof before we can or will admit
these things to be his, which you have forged in his name. Emissenus must be a
deriuatiue from some place: show any such place in Europe, and then you say
somewhat for the likelihood, though not enough for the certainty of this writer.


Philand. What if we can not?


Theophil. Then he that has but half an eye, may soon discern (...)
treachery.

Your Monks and Friars seeking to color their fained holiness, and late sprung
faith with the reverend titles of a^cient fathers, pr^fered the names of
Austen, Ambrose, Hiero^ Cyprian, Isidore, and others before diverse of their
own d^^ fe^: (...) and finding in S. Hierom, Eusebius Emesenus to be an old
writer, gave him a new liuerie with the rest, and ascribed certain latin
homilies such as they had unto him: whom themselves, or Gratian that first
lighted on this old new writer corruptly called Eusebius Emissenus. And because
the forgerie did hardly hang together, the right Eusebius being a Gretian and
of great antiquity, Canisius the general Atturnie for your religion, has
devised twoe more of that name: one a frenchman, that perchance, he says,
flourished in the fifth Centurie, and an other that Canisij Chronologia in anno
Dom. 500.
wrate after Gregory the great and expounded the ghospels: but when either of
them lived, or where they taught, neither he nor you can bring us any proof
besides your bare and vain supposals.


Phi. Will you not trust the inscription of the work it self?


Theo. That were the way to let every friar and forgerer, Nothing is more easy
than to give a false inscription to ai^e book.
create new fathers at his pleasure. It is as easy for them that copy out
other men's works, to make false as true inscriptions, and so have your Monks
played with every father that was ancient, as the most partial of your own
side do confess, and in this is too apparent. For how many men's names think
you, did this homily bear, which you allege, not yet two hundredth years ago?


Phi. What can I tell?


Theo. Then I can. Look in Walden, and in one Chapter you shall find this very
sermon bear three men's names.


Phi. Is that possible?


Theo. The less possible the thing: the more palpable your forging.

In the 67 chapter, Tomo 2. de sacramentis.

Walden cites a piece of this sermon under Anselmus name before he was ware.

Walden tomo 2. de sacramentis. cap. 68.


his adversary alleged the words, which you bring out of Isidore, in his
sermon beginning with Magnitudo caelestium. That Walden does not much impugn,
but very often so calls him: and yet at length remembering himself, he or
some man for him, yields to the decrees, and calls that writer Eusebius
Emisenus by Gratians authority: marie with a single s: where now a double is
gotten both into the word, and into Gratian, and yet in the 68 chapter
forgetting what he him self or others for him had done, he cites an other
part of the same sermon under Anselmus name: Ratificat eandem co^parationem in
sermon s^pe dicto, qui incipit Magnitudo caelestiu^, Anselmus dicens: This
comparison Anselmus does ratify in his sermon often spoken of which begins
Magnitudo caelestium, though afterward in the same chapter he return again to
his former staggering, and call the writer of your words Isidore or rather
Eusebius.


Phi. Let him be Isidore, or Eusebius, we You mu^t care for the author before
you cite him as a witness in religion.
care not whether.


Theo. Since the Sermon is not his, whose name it bears, we may not suffer
you to choppe names as you list: neither need we so much as regard the words,
before we know the author: lest we reverence lewd and late Friars under the
names of ancient and learn^^ Fathers.


Phi. Whatsoever he was, ancient he was, and taught the same doctrine, without
all question, which we do.


Theo. His antiquity you know not, and his doctrine you understand not. For
though we like not your shuffling and exchanging of names with the fathers, and
broaching your fancies and heresies under their (...) this wh^le sermon we can
and do admit, as having nothing either dissident from true antiquity or
repugnant to that which we teach.


Phi. Will you say that doctrine of his is not repugnant to yours?


Theo. Why should I not?


Phi. Will you confess that the visible creatures are turned into the substance
of christ's flesh by the secret power of his word? They are, but by no ma^eriall
or corporal change.



The. His words I say, make nothing for your abolishing the substance of bread
and wine, and leaving the accidents.


Phi. He says, the visible creatures are turned into the substance of Christ's
body and blood.


Theo. But he says not, the substance of the visible creatures is turned into
the substance of christ's flesh.


Phi. How are we made flesh of Christ's flesh and bones of his bones, and yet
keep our earthly substance?
How can one creature be turned into the substance of an other, but by loosing
his former substance?


Theo. In natural mutations it is so, but this is nothing less than natural.


Phi. It is divine and supernatural.


Theo. And so is it likewise spiritual and mystical: not really changing the
matter and substance of the elements, but casting grace unto nature.


Phi. Nay he says the substance of the creatures is changed.


Theo. Where says he so?


Phi. He says which is al one, that the visible creatures are changed into the
substance of christ's body.


The. But by no material nor corporal change.


Phi. How can the creatures be turned into christ's substance, but by a material
and corporal change?


Theo. That is your error, not your authors addition.


Phi. It is not possible to be otherwise.


Theo. What if your own writer in this very case and place reprove you for a
liar?


Phi. That Yea forsooth the next words will tell you so much.
earthly creatures should be turned into Christ's substance, without a
material and substantial change? Never say it: it cannot be.


Theo. Will you look but two lines farther, and you shall see this great
impossibility avouched by your own author. Quomodo tibi nouum and impossible
esse non debeat, quod in Christi, substantiam terrena and mortalia
conuertuntur, te ipsum, qui in Christo es regeneratus, interroga. De cons.
did. 2. quia corpus.
How this to thee should neither be strange nor impossible, that mortal and
earthly creatures are turned into Christ's substance, ask thy self which art
regenerated in Christ. How mortal creatures may be turned into Christ's
substan^e.
Sometimes since thou wast far from life, excluded from mercy, and banished
from the path of salvation as being inwardly dead, and suddenly initiated by
the laws of christ and renewed by the healthful mysteries, thou did pass
into the body of the church, not by sight but by faith, and thou which were the
son of perdition obtainedst to be made the adopted child of god by a secret
purity: remaining in the same visible measure, thou grewest inuisibly without
increase of quantity: and being thy self and the very same, Such a change is
in the sacred ^lements by your authors own confession.
that thou wast (before) in process of faith thou becamest another: in the
outward (man) nothing was added, and al changed in the inward: Taking this
spiritual and immaterial change of every christian in baptism, to show in what
sort, and how he meant that mortal and earthly creatures by cons^^ration are
converted into the substance of christ: which is far from a corporal and
substantial change, such as you would urge by pretense of his words in y^
creatures of bread and wine.


Phi. This construction cannot stand: A thing may be changed, and yet keep
his former substance.
that creatures should be turned into an other substance, and yet remain in
their own and former substance: For then how are they changed?


Theo. In your physical conceits it cannot: but if you consult those Fathers
that were the first introducers of this speech, you shall find it may.
Gelasius joins them both together in one sentence, the one to expound the
other. Gelasius contr^ Eutich.
In diuinam transeunt spiritu sancto perficiente substantiam, permanent tamen
in suae proprietate naturae. (The sacraments of the body and blood of Christ)
pass into a divine substance by the working of the holy Ghost: and yet
remain in the propriety of their own nature. And lest you should cauell
that they kept their former qualities and not their substance, in express
words he says, and tamen non desinit esse substantia vel natura panis and
vini: and yet (for all they pass into a divine substance) the (former)
substance or nature of bread and wine cease not, nor is abolished: no more
than the manhood of Christ was changed from his former substance, when after
his ascension it was replenished with divine glory.


Phi. You frustrate the sayings of the fathers with your comparisons.


Theo. They be their own comparisons and principal intentions in those places
where they speak these words: and therefore if you will rack the one to your
length, A man may soon rack a wo^d to any purpose, if he respect not the
intent and concu^rents.
and not respect the other, you may soon force some phrases to feed your
fancies. But this is not the safest way for you to walk in matters of faith:
nor the rightest course for you to take to come by their meaning. You must
look how far they press their own words, and what they would conclude, not
what you l^st to conceive: or imagine of their speeches. Howsoever they mention
a change of the bread into the divine essence and substance, no father
avouches any corporal, material, or substantial change of the elements into
the body and blood of Christ: but a spiritual, mystical and effectual
annexing and uniting the one to the other, either part retaining the truth of
his former and proper nature and substance.

This is apparent by those very places and sentences, which you bring to prove
a change: the fathers teach not the one without the other, as you saw for
e^ample in Gelasius and your Eusebius: and so in Cyprian: Cypr. de caen^ Domini.
Panis iste, quem dominus discipulis porrigebat, non effigy sed natura mutatus
omnipotentia verbi factus est caro: This bread which the Lord gave to his
disciples, changed not in shape, but in nature by the omnipotency of the word
is made flesh: and lest you should dream of any material or substantial
change, as your manner is, the very next words in the same sentence, are:
Cypr. Ibidem.
Et sicut in persona Christi humanitas videbatur, and latebat diuinitas: ita
sacramento visibili, ineffabiliter diuina se infundit essentia: and as in the
person of Christ, Two substances in the sacrament as there we^e in Christ.
his humanity was seen, his divinity was hid and secret: so in the visible
sacrament the divine essence does infuse it self, after an unspeakable manner.


Phi. Did you bring this place for us or against us? you could not have lighted
on a fitter for our purpose, if you should have sought these seven years.


The. I know it is one of your best authorities, as you make your account: and
yet it is no way prejudicial to us, if you suffer the father himself to tell
out his own tale: This is one of their surest places.
and be content to hear as well the ending as the entering of it. He says
the bread is changed: in nature; into the flesh of Christ; by the almighty
power of the word, expressing in what, into what, and by what the bread is
changed: more parts you cannot make.


Phi. We need not.


Theo. And yet all these notwithstanding he means no material nor corporal
change of the bread or wine, but that, as in the person of Christ there were
two distinct and perfect substances united and joined, the one his manhood that
was seen, the other his godhead that was hid: even so to the visible Sacrament
persisting in his former substance, does the divine essence infunde it self
after a secret and unsearchable manner, Virtutis diuinae inuisibili efficientia
probans adesse praesentiam.

Cypr. de ^aena Domini.


proouing the presence of an heavenly virtue to be there by the invisible
efficience.


Philand. If you will have the bread keep his proper and perfect both nature
and substance, what change is there made in the bread?


Theoph. This change is not the casting away of any thing, that was in the
bread, either nature or substance; but the casting unto it of an heavenly and
invisible grace: and so Theo^orete expresses the mutation that is in this
sacrament. Theod. dial. 1.
Non naturam ipsam transmutans sed naturae adiiciens gratiam. Not changing (or
casting away) nature it self, but adding grace unto nature. And that is S.
Ambrose his meaning when he says, Ambos. de Sacrament. lib. 4. cap. 4.
Sunt quae erant, and in aliud commutantur. (The bread and wine) are the very
same that they were ( And so Bertram 700. years ago did expound these words
of S. Ambrose.
both in nature and substance) and are changed into an other thing.


Philand. How can this be that they should be changed and yet continue the
same: but as we expound it, that in substance they be changed, and yet in
show continue as they were before?


Theoph. This is your fancy we know: but the learned fathers by their change
mean no such thing: they teach not any detraction or diminution of that which
was, but an adiection and apposition of that which was not. And therefore they
witness both: as well the permanence of the elements in their former nature, as
their change into an other. Chrysostom said as you heard before. Chrysostom. ad
Caes^rium.
The bread (sanctified) is counted worthy to be called the Lords body, etsi
natura panis in ipso permansit: though the nature of bread remain there still:
and Theodoret, Theod. dial. 2.
Neque enim signa illa mystica post sanctificationem recedunt a sua natura,
those mystical signs do not by Consecration depart from their nature. And
Gelasius: Gelas. contr^ Eutychen.

De cons. did. 2. Hoc est.


Non tamen desinit esse substantia vel natura panis and vini: and yet the
substance or nature of bread and wine does not cease (or perish). And to this
very sacrament S. Austen appl^eth this Rule: Omnis res naturam and veritatem
illarum rerum in se continet: ex quibus conficitur. Every thing contains (or
keeps) the nature and truth of those things, of which it consists.


Phi. You refu^^ Cyprian, you do not expound him. He says the nature (of the
bread) It is changed by adding grace unto it, not by taking substance fro it.
is changed; you prove it remains: be not these contrary?


Theo. B^ your exposition they are, by ours they are not. For the nature of
bread, we say remains, and is in nothing diminished, but increased with an
heavenly virtue that is added to it. And this, though it be a change to that
which it was not, yet is it no change from that which it was.


Philand. That is properly changed which is altered from that it was.


Theo. And that is as properly said to be changed, which is increased with
that it was not, though it be not altered in substance from that it was. The
soul of man is often changed, but never in substance. The body from the
cradle to the grave has many increases and changes, but in substance
persisteth the same that it was before it came into the world. Every thing
that grows, keeps that it had, and atchiueth that it had not, and yet is
that a change.

But what need we other examples, since the fathers themselves do both by
their words, and similitudes show what changes they meant? A child is By these
examples the fathers declare what change is in the bread.
changed by baptism: not in loosing or altering the substance of body or soul
which he had: but in attaining the grace and blessing of God which he had not.
The Lord himself is By these examples the fathers declare what change is in
the bread.
changed in person by his ascension, not that the truth, shape or
circumscription of his flesh are abolished, but endued with immortal glory. So
shall he By these examples the fathers declare what change is in the bread.
alter our vile bodies not by spoiling them of their substance, but by
imparting to them of his brightness, and as S. Paul writes, 1. Cor. 15.
We shall not all sleep, but we shall be changed.


Phi. S. Paul's words are nothing to the Sacrament.


Theo. They are somewhat to the use of the word which I proposed: and yet
Ireneus does not stick to resemble the change in the Sacrament to the very
hope and assurance which our bodies now have of that glory before they be
changed, or have cast off their mortal and earthly corruption. As, says he,
Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34.
the bread which is of the earth receiving the invocation of god, is now no
common bread, but the Eucharist, consisting of two things, an earthly and an
heavenly, so our bodies receiving the Eucharist, be now not corruptible (that
is not wholly destinated to corruption) [as] having hope of resurrection.


Phi. But S. Ambrose repeateth De iis qui mysteriis initiantur. cap. 9.
examples of corporal and substantial changes, when he would prove that
blessing in this sacrament ouerbeareth nature.


Theo. S. Ambrose does not say, S. Ambrose by his seven examples shows the
power of the word, not the manner of the change that is in the Sacrament.
that the bread is changed after the same manner, but meaning to show that
prayer and benediction works where nature cannot, yea many times alters
nature: he brings seven examples, whereof five are no substantial changes:
and in the end concludes, that if the prayers and speech of me^ could turn and
alter things above and against nature, much more can the word of christ bring
to pass that the elements shall be that they were, and yet be changed into
that they were not, and which by nature they are not.


Phi. He has no such words in that chapter.


Theo. His conclusion there is this, Sermo ergo Christi, qui potuit ex nihilo
facere quod non erat, non potest ea quae sunt, in id mutare quod non erant?
Ambros. de iis qui initiantur mysteriis. cap. 9.
The word of Christ, who could of nothing make that which was not, can he not
change those things which are, into that which before they were not? And in the
next book entitled De Sacramentis, assuming the same matter, and producing
almost all the same examples and arguments: he resolves in these words,
Ambros. de Sacramentis. lib. 4. cap. 4.
Si ergo tanta vis est in sermon Domini Jesus, vt inciperent esse quae non
erant, quanto magis operatorius est, vt sint quae erant, and in aliud
commutentur? If there be such force in the word of the Lord Jesus, that the
things which were not, (at his word) began to be, how much more can it work
this, that they shall be the same they were, and (yet) be changed into an other
thing? Ambr. Ibidem lib. 4. cap. 4.
And to show us an example, how a thing may be that it was, and yet be changed:
he forthwith adds, Tu ipse eras, sed era^ vetus creatura, posteae quam
consecratu^ es, noua creatura esse caepisti: Vis scire quam nouae creatura?
Omnis inquit, in Christo nouae creatura. Accip^ ergo, quemadinodu^ sermo
Christi creaturam omnem mutare consueuerit: and mutat quando vult instituta
naturae. In this chapt^r his examples are no substantial chaunges, though he
purposely pursue the (...) point that he did before.
Thou thy self wast: but thou wast an oulde creature: after when thou wast
Baptized, thou begannest to be a new creature. Will thou know how (true it is
that thou art) a new creature? Every one, says the Apostle, (is) in Christ a
new creature. Learn then how the word of Christ is accustomed to change every
creature* and when he will, he alters the course of nature^ keeping the same
similitude of Baptism for the explication of himself that the rest do: and
thereby declaring he means nothing less than that the matter and substance
of the bread and wine should be changed. For he that is baptized, suffers no
material, substantial nor corporal change: though he be borne a fresh and
put on Christ: and even so the sacred elements are turned into the flesh of
our Savior, without abolishing their former nature or substance.


Phi. If these places of S. Cyprian and S. Ambrose conclude not for us:
certainly they conclude nothing against us: and therefore you cannot refell our
assertion by them.


Theo. I do not. I show, the places which you take most hold of, have no such
sequel as you surmise: and so your transubstantiation is your late and private
imagination, without all antiquite.


Phi. Call you that late or private, which has been the general and constant
confession of all Christendom for these Never catch ^ Jesuit without a crake.
fifteen hundereth years?


Theo. It does you good to crake, though there be neither truth nor sense in
that you say. Has al christendom for these fifteen hundereth years confessed
the substance of bread and wine at the Lords table to be changed into the real
and natural body and blood of Christ?


Phi. It has.


Theo. How shall we know that?


Phi. You may find it in their writings.


Theo. How chances then you can not show one that for 800 years made that
confession?


Phi. We can.


Theo. You do not as yet.


Phi. Yeas we Some forgeries you showed us, but one place of any ancient
writer you neither did nor can show us. The sum of all the objections that
they can make, which are worth the answering.
have done it. S. Augustine told you plainly, the substance of bread and wine
did not remain, but only the qualities: and venerable Bede said, there was the
show, but not the substance of bread. Be not these direct and fair proofs?


Theo. Fairly forged they be: but otherwise the writers themselves were never
of that opinion.


Phi. I have proved by S. Chrysostom and S. Cyril that it is no bread.


Theo. No bare; nor common bread, as our sense does judge; but yet the nature
of bread still remains though endued with a more divine and mighty grace.


Phi. The bread is changed as S. Cyprian and S. Ambrose teach.


Theo. Not by loosing that it had, but by annexing that it had not.


Phi. It is converted into the substance of Christ.


Theo. But by no materal nor corporal change of the former substance.


Phi. This is your deluding of fathers.


The. That is your abusing of them.


Phi. You recall their words to your liking.


Theo. And you enforce the^ against their meaning.


Phi. Who shall judge of that?


Theo. Not you.


Phi. Nor you.


Theo. Let their own mouths be trusted.


Phi. I am well contented.


Theo. Then are you condemned. For where their words bear our exposition as
well as yours: We prove our exposi^ion by other direct places: they have
nothing but the general ambiguitie of the words.
you urge a corporal and substantial change on their speeches in every place:
which they in plain words protest to be no part of their faith.


Phi. Where find you that protestation?


Theo. Is your memory so short, that I must now make a new repetition?


Phi. You went about to prove that the substance of bread remained.


The. And that which I professed, I performed: you may turn back and view the
words. See fol. 756.
The substance of bread does not cease to be: the signs remain in their
former substance. As touching the substances of the creatures they are the same
after Consecration that they were before. And that was Cyprians meaning when he
said, Cypr. de caena Domini.
Corporalis substantiae retinens speciem: retaining their kind of corporal
substance: as also this substantial bread. This is warrant sufficient in any
Christian man's judgment for us so to interpret the fathers words, as we do not
abolish the substance of bread, which they confess remains.


Phi. Had that been their doctrine, would their after-commers think you,
Their after-commers kept the same doctrine for almost a thousand years.
have so soon swarued from their faith?


Theo. They did not. That very confession, that the substance of bread
remained after consecration, dured almost a thousand years in most parts of
the West Church, and namely in this realm.

Omit Bertram that lived 830. after Christ, whose book is extant, purposely
and largely treating of this matter. Walafridus an other of that time gives
flat evidence against your changing of substances in the sacrament, when he
says, Walafrid. Abbas. de rebus eccles. cap. 16. Citatur a Garetio.
In caena, quam ante traditionem suam vltimam cum Discipulis (Christus) habuit,
post Paschae veteris solemnia, corporis and sanguinis sui sacramenta in panis
and vini substantia eisdem Discipulis tradidit. In the supper which (Christ)
had with his Disciples last before he was betrayed, after the solemnities of
the old Passover, he delivered to the same disciples the sacraments of his
body and blood in the substance of bread and wine. And so does Druthmarus
reporting our Saviors act at his last supper, in these words, Christianus
Druthmarus in Matthew.
Transferens spiritualiter panem in corpus suum, and vinum in sanguinem:
(Christ) changing the bread into his body, and the wine into his blood
spirituallie. And so Paschasius, though you have here and there enterlaced that
book to help your selves, and printed it, under the name of Rabanus as well as
of Paschasius. Paschas de corpore and sanguine Domini, cap. 28.
Panis confirmat cor hominis, and vinum letificat, etc. propter quod in eadem
substantia iure celebratur hoc mysterium salutis. Bread confirms and wine
cheereth the heart, etc. wherefore in that substance is this mystery of (our)
salvation worthily celebrated.

Waleramus Bishop of Medburg a thousand years after Christ continued the same
doctrine, though some Italians then began to fortify their new conceits of
shows without substance. His words are, Cit^^^r a Tho. Walden. to. 2. de
Sacramentis* cap. 65.
Materiae vel substantia Sacrificij non simpla est, sicut nec pontifex solius
diuinae, vel-humanae solius substantiae est. Est ergo tam in Pontifice qua^ in
sacrificio diuina substa^tia, est and terrena, Terrena in vtroque est illud
quod corporaliter vel localiter videri potest: diuina in vtroque verbum
inuisibile, quod in principio erat Deus apud Deum. The matter or substance of
the sacrifice is not single, Two substances in the sacrifice as well as in
Christ.
as also the high priest himself, is neither of a divine substance only, nor of
an humane only. There is then as well in the high Priest as in the sacrifice an
heavenly substance, there is also an earthly substance^ The earthly substance
in the^ both is that which may corporally and locally be seen. The heavenly in
them both is the inuisile word, which in the beginning was God with God.

The Church of England, even to the conquest held the same Doctrine, and taught
it to the people of this Land in their public homilies which are yet to be
seen of good record in the Saxon tongue. The sermon then read on Easter day,
throughout their Churches is a manifest declaration of that which I say: where
amongst others, these words are occurrent. The doctrine preached in the Saxons
Churches of this realm until the conquest.
The holy font water that is called the welspring of life is like in shape to
other waters, and is subject to corruption: but the holy Ghosts might comes
to the corruptible water, through the Priests blessing, and it can after wash
the body and soul from all sin through Ghostly might. Behold now we see two
things in this one creature. After true nature that water is corruptible water,
and after Ghostly mystery, has hallowing might. So also if we behold that
holy housell after bodily understanding, then see we that it is a creature
corruptible and mutable: The sacrament is a corruptible and mutable creature.
if we acknowledge therein ghostly might, the^ understand we that life is
therein, and that it gives immortality to them that eat it with belief.
Much is betwixt the invisible might of the holy housel, and the visible shape
of his proper nature. It is naturally corruptible bread, and corruptible wine,
and is by might of Gods word truly Christ's body and his blood: not so
notwithstanding bodily, but Ghostly. Much is betwixt the body Christ suffered
in, and the body that is hallowed to housell. The body truly that Christ
suffered in was borne of the flesh of Mary, with blood, and with bone, with
skin, and with sinews, in humane limbs, with a reasonable soul living: The
sacrament is not Christ's body corporally.
and his Ghostly body, which we call the housell, is gathered of many corns:
without blood and bone, without limme, without soul. This then is not the real
and natural body of christ.
And therefore nothing is to be understood therein bodily, but al is Ghostly to
be understood.


Phi. What care we for your Saxon records?


Theo. Less care we for your Romish and Monckish records so lately and
grossly forged, as we have proved: yet this to your inward grief you may now
see: and shall an other day to your utter confusion feel, that your novelties
touching the Sacrament were never hard of in the Church of England, Lancfrancus
and Anselme since the conquest the first authors of transsubstantiation within
this realm.
nor in the Church of Christ, til Lancfrancus, Anselmus and other Italians a
thousand years after christ, came in with their Antichristian devises and
inventions: expounding Species and forma panis for the qualities and accidents
of bread without any subject or substance: which once taking place you fell
amain both to sacrilegious sophismes against truth, and rebellious practices
against Princes; and ceased not til you brought them to their hight in your
late Laterane Council under Innocentius the third, 1215 years after Christ.
This is your Catholicisme that you so much vaunt of, which the Christian world
was utterly ignorant of for almost a thousand years; and to the which you
would now reduce the simple with a show of holiness; pretending great gravity
and admirable antiquity with bold faces and eger speeches, though you be void
of both, if you were well examined.


Phi. Were the doctrine of elder ages in some doubt, which we know to be fully
for us; yet you confess these last five hundredth years are clear on our side.


Theo. The miter and Scepter were yours: Worldly kingdoms and honors have bin
subject to Antichrist in these latter ages.
the mystery of iniquiiie working as was foretold; and infecting the West
Church with hypocrisy and heresy, as fast as the Turk oppressed the East
with rage and tyranny: Yet in every of these last and most corrupted ages,
God raised a number of innocent and simple men, with the confession of their
mouths, and expense of their lives, to witness his truth against the pride
and fury of their adversaries, whom your holy father hanged, burned, and
otherwise murdered for repining at his proceedings, that whom with honor and
ease he could not allure: at lest he might quail with terror and torment.


Phi. Should we leave the fellowship of holy Popes, famous Prelates mighty
Princes, learned and Religious Moncks and Friars, yea Saints: The Jesuits are
eue^ drunk with the glory and renown of them selves and their adherents.
and join our selves to a few condemned and infamous heretics, as you do?


Theo. That which is precious and admirable before men, may be odious and
detestable before God. The dignities of men cannot deface the truth of Christ;
the higher their states, the greater their falls, if they did oppose
themselves against the highest.


Phi. You say they did.


Theo. I do not: but this I say, that if the respect of their external and
temporal glory, be the ground of your conscience, you have a wicked affection
as well as Religion. To follow men against God, is to magnify them before God.


Phi. You condemn them for cast-awaies.


Theo. I am not their judge. God may call in all times and places whom^ he
please, though we know it not.
He that made them, might be merciful to them amiddest the defects and dangers
of those days, as he has been to some in all ages and places: yet that is no
safety for you to defend their open errors, and wilfully to continue their
wickedness.


Phi. Were not our fathers religious and holy men?


Theo. Justify not your fathers against God, lest their mouths condemn you
for a pernicious ofsprng. God will be glorified, when he judges, say you and
your fatther^ what you can to the contrary. Reprove not the sharpnes of his
justice, which he never shows but for great and urgent cause: submit your
selves rather, and acknowledge it is his undeserved, and yet not unwonted
mercy that you be not consumed as your fathers were before you, but have yet
time and warning to rep^nt.


Phi. And are you such Saints that you ^eede no repentance? It is not of our
worthiness but of his great mercy that w^ have his truth which others had not.



Theo. We desire to live no longer, than we conf^sse before heaven and earth,
that as God has been righteous in revenging the sins and iniquities of our
fathers, by taking his truth from them, and leaving them to the power of
darkness, and kingdom of Antichrist: so he might most justly for our
ungodliness and unthankfulness have wrapped us in the same confusion and
destruction: save that of his infinite and unspeakable mercy, he would have
his Gospel preached afresh for a witness to all Nations before he come to
judgment: Mat. 24.
to make all men inexcusable, that have either not believed, or not obeyed the
truth. And this causes us, not only with all that is within us, to give
glory to his name for so great a blessing, but to beseech him, that though we
be lighted on the ends of the world when charity waxes cold, Mat. 24. Luke
18. Jude.
and faith is skant found on the face of the earth, we may not be carried away
with the error of the wicked to perdition; especially not to follow the way of
Cain, that dipped his hands in his brothers blood; nor take the wages of
Balaam, to curse and revile the people of God; nor perish in the contradiction
of Corah, for resisting both God and the Magistrate: but rather that we may be
sanctified and saved by the might of his word, and store of his mercy laid up
in Christ his son for all that believe him, and call upon him.


Phi. God send us such part as our fathers had.


Theo. You be so displeased with God for punishing the sins of your fathers
with blindness and error in these later ages, We must neither dislike the
justice of God toward others, nor refuse his mercy offered to our selves.

The Jesuits are so deep in love with themselves and their fathers, that they
take skorne to stoop to the grace of God.


that now you will none of his light, nor grace, though he offer it freely to
save your souls: but if you will needs perish, your own blood be on your
own heads: yet have us excused, if we think our sins heavy enough, though
we add not thereto the neglect of his word, and contempt of his truth as
you do. In the knowledge of God and reverence of his judgments there is a
path way to repentance, and hope of mercy: in the proud dislike of his
severity toward others, and s^ubberne refusal of his goodness toward our
selves, there is nothing but an heaping of extreme vengeance, which shall
consume the wicked and impenitent resisters of his word and spirit.


Phi. We be not of that number.


Theo. Were you not; you would be more careful to search, and willing to
embrace the truth of Christ once understood with all readiness and lowlines of
mind, knowing that God resists the proud and gives grace to the humble, and
not with an high-looking and self-pleasing persuasion, that all is yours,
neglect your duty to God and man.


Phi. We observe both.


Theo. You observe neither.

Subjection to your lawful Prince you have forsaken, and not only fled the
Realm, What subjection the Jesuits yield to their Princes that displease the
Pope.

The Jesuits talk a pace of their catholicisme but they prove it very
slowly.


and incited others to do the like, but the Christian allegiance, which the
Prince requires of her subjects you impugn with shifts and slanders, in
fauo^r of him, who wickedly and injuriously takes upon him to be the supreme
Moderator of earthly kingdoms, and chief disposer of princes Crowns: and so
fast are you lincked in confederacy with him, that in open view of all men you
will allow no Prince to bear the sword longer than shall like him, but
proclaim rebellions of subjects against their Sovereigns to be just and
honorable wars, if he authorize them by his Censures.

And where, to cloak your wicked and enormous attempts you boldly surmised,
that you did, whatsoever you did, for that Religion which was ancient and
Catholic: we have presently taken you so tardie and short of your reckoning
that for six of the greatest and cheifest points now in question betwixt the
Church of England and the Church of Rome, and reformed in this Realm by
public authority: you cannot bring us so much as one ancient and evident
testimony, that your faith and Doctrine was ever taught or received in the
primative church of christ, and yet you please your selves in your owm
conceits, and compass the earth to An old practice of the Pharisees.
get prosilites fit for such teachers, whom you may train up in error, and use
as instruments to catch unstable souls, and fire unquiet heads: that you by
them may disturb realms and fish for Princes thrones and lives in troubled
waters.


Phi. All this is as false, as God is true. We desire n^ more of their own
friends but to weigh their proofs in these cases.



Theo. God himself shall skant be truth if you may be the judges: except he
take your parts. But facing and craking laid aside, you must refer the
judgment of your doings and sayings to others, and not to your selves.


Phi. To Catholics I am content.


The. They must be then of your instructing: that is, such as will trust
neither fathers nor Scriptures against your Canons: otherwise in that you have
said they shall find no great cause to like your impugning the Princes power,
and right to establish Laws within her own land without the Popes leave: and
to hold her Crown against his censures: and as little shall they find to call
you, or count you Catholics.


Phi. Men of your own pitch will soon assent to any thing.


Theo. Let them be but indifferent and weigh what you have brought.


Phi. More we can bring, when we see our times.


The It skilleth not how much, but how sound that is which you can bring.


Phi. Of that hereafter: and yet in the mean time there be many other things
besides these that you have handled, that These God willing shall be handled
before it be long.
must be discussed, before we can be pronounced no Catholics. And as in these
you seeeme with wresting and wrenching to have some advantage: so in those we
could forthwith confound you.


The. Even as you have done in these.


Phi. A great deal more readily if I had time to stay the trial of them: but
this holy tide I must spend in other matters of more importance.


Theo. What: In spredding news, that the king of Spain does stay but for the
next summer?


Phi. We meddle not with foreign affairs,


Theo. A They study Machauel more than S. Paul.
number of you be better seen in policy, than in divinity: you were borne
belike to be rulers, though it be but of Rebels as Sanders was, that thought it
a praise to take the field in person against his Prince.


Phi. My travel is not to that end.


Theo. You leave that for others: and travel to sound the hearts of your
adherents, whether they be in number, wealth and zeal likely and ready to give
assistance, if any should invade.


Phi. What unchristian conjectures you have of us:


Theo. None but such as your own deeds and words occasion.


Phi, What cause have we given you to speak this of us?


Theo. What greater cause can you give, If they defend rebellions in open
sight, what do they in secret corners.?
than openly to avouch as you have done in your Defense of Catholics (as you
call them) y^ rebellions against such Princes as the Pope deposes are godly,
just and honorable wars?


Phi. If he may depose them they are.


Theo. You have in print affirmed both, and sought to prove them with all your
might: and therefore what shall we think your secret whispering and recon^ling
to the Church of Rome is, but a crafty bayte of Malcontentes to make rebels?


Phi. The parties themselves can witness we never mention any such thing in
our absolution. To them we appeal for record.


Theo. For my part I think you do not: It were too gross conspiracy and
treason to take vows and oths of subjects against their Prince by name: and
therefore if you should take that open course you were worthy to ride to
Tyburne not only for traitors but also for disards. Persons reconciled must in
the end be traitors whether they meant it at first or no^ the Jesuits have so
tempered religion and treason to flatter the Pope.
But when you reconcile them, you take assurance of them by vow, oath, or other
adiuration that they shall embrace the Catholic faith and hold Communion and
unity with the Church of Rome for ever after.


Phi. Why should we not?


Theo. Then when it pleases my Lord the Pope to deprive the Prince and to
excommunicate all that assist or agnise her for a lawful magistrate, what must
your reconciled sort do: Is it not against their oath and faith given to you at
their restitution to the bosom of the Catholic Church (as you term it) to
obey their Prince against the censures of your Church?


Phi. I have have in my way Theophilus: and I have said as much as I will at
this time.


Theo. I can hold you Philander no longer than you li^t: but yet remember this
as you ride by the way, which I reiterate, because both your Seminaries shall
think the better of it: that as many as you reconcile, so long as you teach,
this for a point of faith, Unless they recall this position, the conclusion is
inevitable.
that the Pope may depose Princes and must be obayed in those his censures of
all that will be Catholics, so many both heretics against God, and traitors
against the Prince, you hatch under the hoode of religion: and also that the
things now reformed in the Church of England are both catholic and christian,
notwithstanding your fierce bragges, and fiery words, lately sent us in your
RHEMISH Testament.


To the KING everlasting, immortal, invisible, unto GOD which is only wise, be
honor and praise for ever and ever. Amen
The special contents of every part.
The contents of the first part.
The Jesuits pretenders of obedience. Page 2 The causes why they fled the
Realm. 5 The proofs and places of their Apology. 7 Forcing to Religion. 16
Two Religions in one Realm. 21 Toleraunce of error. 26 Toleraunce of error in
private places and persons. 27 Compulsion to service and Sacraments. 29
Exacting the oath. 30 Their running to Rome. 35 This Land receiving the faith
from Rome. 40 Preachers sent from Rome with the Kings consent. 41 Preachers,
not conspirators from Rome. 41 How the Fathers sought to Rome. 42.48
Athanasius at Rome. 44 Chrysostomes request to Innocentius. 51 A forged Bull
against Arcadius. 53. Chrysostomes banishment. 55 How Saint Augustine sought to
Rome. 56 How S. Basil sought to Rome. 58 S. Ieroms letters to Damasus. 60 The
Rock on the which the Church is built. 62 S. Cyprian lately corrupted. 65
Gratian suspected. 66 Peter's person laid in the foundation of the Church. 67
Theodoret and Leo. 67 The Bishop of Rome resisted. 68 Paul resisted Peter. 69
Polycarpus resisted Anicetus. 70 Polycarpus resisted Victor. 70 Cyprian
resisted Stephanus. 71 Flauianus withstoode four Bishops of Rome. 72 Cyrillus
withstoode the Bishop of Rome. 72 Councels resisting the Bishop Rome. 73 The
Council of Africa resisted the Bishop of Rome. 74 Forged Decretals. 76 The
council of Ephesus threatening the Legates of Rome. 78 The Council of Chalcedon
against the Bishop of Rome. 79 The Council of Constantinople against the
Bishop of Rome. 81 Corruptions in the Cano^ law. 81 The Brytons resisting
the Bishop of Rome. 82 The Grecians detesting him. 83 The Germans deposing him.
84 His own Councels depose him. 85. France resisting the Pope. 92 Paris
appealeth from him. 94 The french King resisting the Pope. 95 The Kings of
England against the Pope. 97 Our resistaunce more lawefull than theirs. 104
Peter's dignity not imparted to the Pope. 104 S. Ieroms praise of Rome. 105 The
manners of Rome since his time. 105 The manners of Rome in his time. 106 S.
Cyprian forced to make for Rome. 106 S. Augustine forced to make for Rome. 107
From Peter's seat is from Peter's time. 107 The intent of the Seminaries. 108.
High experiments of Popes. 112 High experiments of the Popes clergy. 114 The
Jesuits slander England and Scotland. 118 What the Jesuits work and teach in
this land. 119 The Pope succeeds his Ancestors neither in seat nor belief.
12^
The contents of the second part.
The Princes power to COMMAVND for truth. 124 Princes be governors of
countries, Bishops be not. 127 Bishops by Gods laws subject to Princes as well
as others. 128. The Prince by Gods law charged with Religion. 129 Princes may
command for religion. 133 Constantine commanding for Religion. 134
Constantius commanding Bishops in causes ecclesiastical. 135. Justinian
commanding for causes Ecclesiastical. 137 Charles commanding for causes
Ecclesiastical. 139 The laws of Charles for causes Ecclesiastical. 140
Ludo^ikes laws for causes Ecclesiastical. 144 Ludouikes laws and visitors.
144 What is meant by (SVPREME.) 146. Supreme is subject to none on earth. 146
Princes subject only to God. 147. Princes not subject to the Pope. 147. The
Pope subject to his Prince. 148. Constantine superior to the Pope in causes
ecclesiastical. 150 Emperors superior to the pope in causes Ecclesiastical.
152 The Prince superior to the Pope. 160 Ieremies words expounded. 160 How
Prophets may plant and root out kingdoms. 161 How Kings must serve the
Church. 162 How Bishops are to be obeyed. 164 How the Church is superi^ur to
Princes. 167 What is meant by the Church 168. The Prince not above the Church.
171 Princes have power over the persons of the Church. 172 The words of S.
Ambrose to Valentinian. 173 The behavior of S. Ambrose toward Valentinian.
174 Valentinian refused to be judge between Bishops. 177 Valentinians fault.
178 Theodosius searched and established the truth. 178 Princes decreeing for
truth. 179 Athanasius: Osius; Leontius. 179 Athanasius reproved Constantius.
180 Athanasius expounded. 181 Why Constantius was reproved. 182 Osius words
examined. 188 Leontius discussed. 189 What Hilarie misliked in Constantius. 190
Kings commended in the scriptures for meddling with religion. 191 Moses and
^oshuaes example. 192 King David's care for religion. 193 Princes charged with
the whole law of God. 194 Asa, Iehosaphat, and Ezekiah performed that charge.
193 Manasses Idolatry and repentance. 196 Josiah reformed religion. 197
Nehemiah corrects the high Priests doings. 197 Princes meddled with religion.
198 Princes used to command for religion. 198 God comma^deth by their hearts
199. Princes commanding for Religion. 200 Princes have full power to command for
truth. 202 Princes may prohibit and punish error. 203 To command for causes
Ecclesiastical was usual with Princes. 204 To command Bishops for causes
Ecclesiastical was usual with ancient Princes. 206 The Jesuits purposely
mistake the Princes supremacy. 213 The Jesuits cauelling absurdities against
the Popes power. 221 This land owes no subjection to tribunals abroad. 228
This land not subject to the Popes tribunal. 229 What subjection the Pope
requires. 231 The Pope makes it sacrilege and blasphemy to doubt of his
tribunal. 231 A right Rhomish subjection. 232 Patriarks of the west. 233
Patriarks subject to Princes. 234 This Realm not in the Popes Province. 135
The Patriarke^dome dissolved. 235 The words of the oath examined. 236 It is
easy to play with words. 237 Princes govern with the sword, Bishops do not.
238 Princes only bear the sword in all spiritual things and causes. 238.
Princes supreme bearers of the sword. 240 Supreme governor displaceth not
Christ. 241 Princes may not command against the faith or Canons. 242.
Gregory shamefully corrupted. 243. Spiritual men a^ matters. 244. Carnal
things called spiritual 245 Carnal things made spiritual to increase the
Popes power and gain. 245 Carnal things made spiritual. 246 Princes charged
with spiritual things. 247 Princes chiefly charged with things truly
spiritual. 247 Princes charged at Gods hands with things spiritual, not
te^porall. 249 The Prince charged to plant the faith and rule the church. 250
The King of Englands charge. 250 The Prince charged with Godliness. 251 Their
power is equal with their charge. 252 The sword prohibited unto Bishops. 253
Only princes bear the sword. 254 The words of the oath. 254 Supreme concluded
out of saint Paul. 255 The Apostles subject unto Princes. 255 Suffering is a
sign of subjection. 256. The direction of the sword. 257 Who shall direct the
sword. 257 No man Judge of truth. 258 Discerners of truth. 259 The people are
charged to discern the truth. 260 The people must discern teachers and try
spirits. 261 We be not bound to the Bishops pleasure. 262 Wherein Bishops are
superior to Princes. 263 The function not the person. 264 The priests person
subject to the Prince. 264 The right direction unto truth. 265. The best
direction for Princes. 266. Who shall direct Princes. 267. Succession is no
sure direction. 268 Bishops may err. 26^ Councels may err. 270 and 276 Number
no warrant for truth. 270 Councels have erred. 272 Consent without staggering
due only to the Scriptures. 276 The Pope may err. 277.304.311 Christ prayed
for Peter. 278 Peter failed in faith. 279 Christ prayed for all. 280 No one set
over the Church. 281 The Roman Church may fail in faith. 283 Cyprians place
discussed. 283 The misconstering of ( Non potest) 284 Cyprians opinion of the
Romans. 286 S. Paul's warning to them. 286 S. Jerome misconstered 287 The
Romans may err. 288 Moses chair might err. 289 The high Priests did err.
290 Christ's promise to his Church. 291 The godly may err. 292 S. John's words
abused. 293 The whole Church erreth not. 294. The Jesuits condemned for
flatterers by their own fellows. 294 What Popes have erred. 296 Liberius an
heretic. 297 Honorius an heretic. 299 Vigilius an heretic. 301 Anastasius an
heretic. 302 Shifts to save the Popes from erring. 303 Caiphas free from
error 305 Caiphas as free from error as the Pope. 305 The Popes tribunal has
erred. 306 Vain mockeries of the Jesuits to save the Popes error. 309 Their
own Church confesses the Pope may err. 310 The judge of faith must not err.
312
The contents of the third part.
The Pope has no power to deprive the Prince. 314 What God has allowed to
Princes, the Pope cannot take from them. 317 Princes not depriuable by the
Pope. 318 The Prophets deposed no Princes. 319 Saul rejected by God, not
deposed by Samuel. 320 Saul deprived of the succession, not of the possession
of the Crown. 321 David anointed to succeed. 325 Jeroboam plagued, not
deposed. 325 Prophets may threaten. 326 Vzziah stricken with the leprosy, not
assaulted with violence. 327 Lepers severed from men's company, but not
disherited. 328 Vzziahs pride. 329 Athalia slain. 329. Achab reproved, not
deposed. 330. Elias induced the King and the people to kill Baals prophets. 331
Elias no executioner. 332 Fire from heaven at Elias word. 332. Iehu willed by
God to take the sword. 333 Elizeus deposed no King. 333 No Scripture
confirms the deposition of princes. 334 Kings hold their dignities of God,
not of priests. 335 The priest no Judge of the princes crown. 336 The priest
to direct, the Judge to decide. 338 Princes not subject to priests. 339.
Princes deprived priests. 340 Princes brake couenaunts with God, and yet were
not deposed. 341 No prince deposed in the old testament. 341 Christ is King of
Kings, but not the pope. 342 Christ have many prerogatives which the pope may
not have. 343 Binding of sins, not of Scepters. 344 Depriving is not feeding.
345 Temporal revenge not lawful for priests. 445 Heretics must not be
saluted, yet princes must be obeyed. 346. Heretics must have their du. 347
Society not duty prohibited. 348 We must shun the wicked, but not disobeie
the magistrate. 348 Excommunication infers no deposition. 350 The Jesuits
claim temporal and external power for the pope. 350.351 God, not Paul stroke
Elima^ blind. 352 What is meant in S. Paul by delivering unto Satan. 353 The
Apostles laid violent hands on no man. 354 The goods and bodies of men are
Cesars right. 355 Priests no Judges of temporal things but makers of peace
between brethren. 357 The temporal and spiritual distinct regiments. 358 The
Civil state directed, not punished by the spiritual. 359 Princes committed to
the preachers charge, not subjected to the popes court. 360 Princes may be put
in mind of their duties. 361 Nazianzene subject to the prince. 361 How the
preacher corrects. 362 How many degrees the pope will be above the prince.
363 If he hear not the Church let him be to thee as an Ethnic. 364 Ethnicks
must not be deposed. 364 The Church cannot depose the prince. 365 The Church
submitted herself to Princes. 366 The Church has no commission to depose
Princes. 367 The church with the^ is the Pope 367 Never king obayed the Popes
Censure. 368 The Church never decreed that Popes should depose Princes. 368
Impertinent examples. 369 Excommunication is not deposition. 370 The fact of
Babylas. 371 Babylas died under Decius. 371 The Prince penitent for his sins.
372 S. Ambrose and Theodosius. 373 Anastasius excommunication uncertain. 374
Michaels excommunication unproven. 374 Lotharius mistaken. 375 Of seven
examples but one proved. 375 S. Austens opinion of such excommunications. 376
The end of excommunication cease in Princes. 376 The Church prayed for
tyrants. 377 The Church prayed for the welfare of heretical Princes. 378 The
Church prayed for Constantius. 378 A lusty leap from the keys to the sword.
379 Rebellion against Princes defended to be just and honorable wars. 380
Graund thieves and murderers. 381 The Popes warrant to rebels. 381 The Pope
cannot warrant Rebellion. 382 Scriptures abused to serve Rebellion. 383 Asa
removed his mother from her dignity. 383 The Judicial part of Moses Law is
ceased. 384 The execution of Moses Law committed to none but to the magistrate.
384 No revenger but the Magistrate. 384 Phinees fact had Moses warrant. 385
Moses a magistrate and no priest after Aarons order. 386 Moses a Leuite but no
priest. 387 Moses a Prophet, no sacrificing Priest. 388 And so was Samuel. 389
Many offered that were no priests 389 Saul's sin was infidelity. 389 The Priest
did not appoint the wars. 390 The wars of Abiah. 391 Edome and Libnah
reuolting. 391. Ten tribes might fight with two 392 The Church of Christ never
allowed rebellion. 392 S. Basil allowed not the people to rebel for his defense.
393 S. Ambrose allowed no tumult at Millan in favor of him. 394. Athanasius did
not stir Constance against Constantius. 396 Athanasius never spoke evil of
Constantius. 396 Athanasius never disobaied Co^stantius. 397 Athanasius would
not have the people rebel for his cause. 398 The tumult at Alexandria for Peter
against Lucius. 399 Atticus harbored strangers but not armed subjects against
their Princes. 400 The Persian war was lawful. 400 What Leo requested of the
Emperor. 401 The Christians were subject to Julian, though he were an
Apostata. 403 The Church of Christ wanted no forces to resist. 404. 406
Christ's church obayed wicked Princes for conscience sake. 405 Leo the third
was denied his revenues in Italy but not deprived by the pope. 408 The pope did
not appear in this rebellion of Italy against Leo. 409 The division of the
Empire was not for religion. 412 Their own stories do not pretend religion
for the division of the Empire. 413 The division of the Empire. 416 Platina
reproved. 417 Who deposed Childericke. 418 Childericke deposed for a fool. 419
Wavering about Pipines title. 421 Philippicus rejected as a rebel. 421 Jews
the third. 422 The line of Pipine ended. 423 An other change of the Empire. 423
The pope gained by rolling the Empire to and fro. 424 Henry the fourth. 424
Pope Hildebrand attempting to deprive Henry the fourth. 425 The Jesuits commend
Hildebra^d to the skies for fitting their rebellious humor. 426 Hildebrand and
Henry the fourth. 428 Spitesul slanders of the Jesuits against Henry the
fourth. 430 Hildebrands virtues by the confession of his own countrime^ and
Cardinals. 431 Hildebrand favored of Moncks for taking their part against
ma^ied priests. 433 Hildebrandes undermining Henry the fourth. 433 The true
causes of Henryes excommunication. 434 Henry the fourth no Symonist^ 435 The
Moncks to flatter the pope diffame the prince for symonie. 436 What Hildebrand
meant by Simonie. 437 The Princes consent for placing of Bishops was no simony.
437 The Pope sought unjust quarrels against Henry the fourth. 438 The prince not
bound to the popes penaunces. 440 Hildebrands success. 441 Hildebrand the
first that offered deprivation to Princes. 441 The Romish art to weary princes.
442 The ^on d^splaceth the father. 443 Hildebrand and Boleslaus. 444 Princes
not punishable by Priests. 445. Adrian and Frederick the first. 446 Frederic^s
answer to the Popes letter.^ 447 Adrian conspireth against Frederick. 447 The
Pope conspireth against the Emperor. 448 Alexander made Pope by the
co^spirators against Victor. 449 Alexanders election not good. 450 Frederick
tired by the Popes practices. 451 The Popes foot in the Princes neck. 451
Honorius and Frederick the 2. 452 The Popes quarrels against Frederick the
second. 453 The lewdnes of Gregory the 9. against Frederick the second. 454
The Italian stories spitefully pursue those Princess that withstood the Pope.
456 Fredericks peace with the Turk could not justly be disliked. 457 The Pope
has been the ruin of both Empires. 458 The Pope crossigned Soldiers against
Frederick as against a Turk. 459 The second quarrel between Frederick and the
Bishop of Rome. 460 The Pope nourishes rebellion against Frederick. 461 And to
help the matter deposes him. 462 The causes of his deposition examined. 462
The censure of Innocentius against Frederick. 463 Fredericks right to the
kingdom of Sicily. 464 The Popes proceedinges against Frederick. 465 The whole
west Church in an vproare about the deposing of Princes. 466 Eberhards oration
against the Pope for presuming to depose Princes. 467 Frederick poisoned and
stifled in his bed. 468 Lodouike the fourth and John the 22. 469 Germany takes
part with Lodouike against Pope John. 470 The Pope makes it heresy to mislike
his pride or his wealth. 471 What submis^ion the Pope required of Lodouike. 472
The Germans swear obedience to Lodouike for all his deposition. 473 King John
of this Realm. 474 King John pursued by the pope for standing in his own
right. 475 To interdict whole Realms for one man's offense is unchristian
policy. 476 The Bishops of England eger to have King John deposed. 477 The
discord of Princes exalted the Pope. 478 The french King finely cousened by the
Pope. 478 King John the Popes farmor. 479 King John could not bind his
successor. 479 The Nobles lament the servitude of this Realm. 480 George King
of Bohemia molested by the Popes censures. 481 Half the kingdom of Navarre
surprised by the Spanish King. 482 Thomas Becket an arrogant resister of his
Prince. 483 Princes brought under the Popes feet by their own dissension. 484
The Kings of France ouerreached the Pope. 485 The stir between Philip of
Sweueland and Otho the 5. 486 The Emperor takes his farewell of Italy by
selling al he had both there and elsewhere. 487 These tragical vprores prove
no right in the Pope to depose Princes. 488 The Jesuits mistake an imprecatio^
in Gregory for a depriuatio^. 489 The Realm never con^es^ed the Popes power to
deprive princes. 490 Jesuits within compass of treason by the ancient laws
of this land. 491 Treason to aid the Pope against the Queen by the statute of
Edward the third. 492 The Commons ^ide their King against the Pope. 493 The
King of Englands oath. 493 The Patriarchs of Constantinople deposed no
Princes. 494 The people might covenant in their elections. 494 Zimisces an
usurper and a murderer. 496 A seditious Patriarck living at the same time with
Hildebrand. 497 Baptism binds no Prince to the ^opes deprivation. 498
Bishops may not prescribe conditions to Princes. 498 They have no power to
prescribe conditions to Princes. 499 Princes not depriuable by the Pope. 500
Wicked reasons of the Jesuits for the depriving of Princes. 501 Christians may
not kill tyrants though Heathens did so. 502 The Pope and his Cardinals worse
than Heathen. 503 The Cardinals letter for the killing of the Queen. 503
Murdering of princes maintained by the Jesuits. 504 The princes life is sought
for by their wars for religion. 505 Obedience to Christ forces us to no
rebellion against the prince. 506. Princes appoint pains for others not for
themselves. 507 Caluins name falsely pretended for rebellion against princes.
509 Beza does not allow subjects to displace their prince. 510 The Nobles of
France might lawfully defend themselves against the Guise. 511 P^iuate men
may not bear arms against a tyrant. 512 Zuinglius words concern not our
case. 513 Zuinglius aloweth no man to use violence to tyrants. 514 Succession
established by God himself. 515 Goodman and Knokes. 516 Luther did not allow
rebellion against Princes. 517 The Germans no Rebels in desending* their
liberty. 518 The Jesuits case not like the Germans. 518 The Jesuits object
they care not what. 519 The laws sometimes permit resistaunce 520 The stirs
of Germany, Flaunders, France and Scotland. 521 The manifold rebellio^s of
papists. 522 The Jesuits treasons. 522 Complaint of persecution. 522 Treason
made religion by the Jesuits. 523 Deposition of Princes is against religion.
524 Pastors have no power to compel. 526 Death inflicted in England not for
religion, but rebellion. 527 The power which the Pope claims is no point of
religion. 528 Peter's keys abused to color the Popes tyranny. 529 Supreme
head misliked by some of the Germans. 530 Supreme head mistaken by wrong
information 631 Supreme head not urged by us. 532 The Magistrate no governor
of the conscience. 533 Where God commands there no authorite wants. 534
Truth is authority sufficient against all the world. 535 One man with truth
is a warrant against all the world. 536. The faith of our fathers is not
always truth 537 God forbids us to follow the steps of our fathers. 538
The godly confessed their fathers did err. 539 All humane laws and bars
give place to God. 540 The prince might make laws for truth maugre the Pope.
541 Princes have settled religion without Councels. 542 Christian religion
received upon the direction of a lay man. 543 Truth authorized the Apostles
against Priests and Princes. 544 Railing on Princes is a capital crime. 545
The contents of the fourth part.
No point of Popery Catholic. 546. What is truly CATHOLIC. 547 The
worshipping of Images is not Catholic. 547 The west Church against the
worshipping of Images. 548 Corruption to help the credit of the second Nicen
council. 549 The worshipping of Images detested in the Church of Christ as
Heresy. 550 The ^mage of God made with hands may not be worshipped. 552 The
Jews and Gentiles did erect their Images unto God. 553 The heathen adored
their stocks as the Images of God. 554 The Image of man set up unto God is an
Idol. 556 The wodden Image of Christ may not be worshipped 557 The honor done
to a wodden Image is not done to Christ. 559 Adoration of Images no Apostolic
tradition. 562 S. Basil forged to make for adoration of Images. 563 The
shameful forgeries and falsities of the second Nicene council. 564 Both
Scriptures and fathers wickedly abused by the second Nicene Counc^l. 565 The
second Nicene Council conuincing it self of forgerie. 566 What an Idol is.
567 A wrong service of God is Idolatry. 568 The Church of Rome gives divine
honor unto Images. 569 Christ's honor may not be given to Images. 570 The
having of Images is not Catholic. 572 Athanasius palpablie forged in the
second Nicene Council. 574 The Church next to the Apostles, rejected Images.
574 Images came first from Heathens unto Christians. 575 Images rejected by
godly Bishops. 576. No corporal submission may be given to Images. 577 The
Nicene Bishops play the sophists in decreeing adoration unto Images. 577 The
wodden cross of Christ may not be adored. 578 Not one word in scripture for
adoration of Images. 580 No point of faith may be built on traditions. 581 No
point of faith believed without Scripture. 582 Baptizing of Infants is a
consequent of the Scriptures. 583 It may be a tradition, yet grounded on the
Scriptures. 584 Baptism of Infa^ts proved needful by the Scriptures. 585
Rebaptization repugnant to the Scriptures by S. Augustines judgment. 588 The
perpetual virginity of Marie the Mother of Christ. 589 The Godhead of the
holy ghost expressed in the Scriptures. 590 His proceeding from the father and
the son confirmed by the Scriptures. 592 Express scripture is the sense and
not the syllables. 593 Fathers wrested to speak against the scriptures. 594
The Popish faith is their own tradition against the scriptures. 597 Their
adoration of images is a late and wicked inuen^ion of their schools. 598
Images adored in the Church of Rome with divine honor 600 Images rejected by
Catholic Bishops. 601 S. Austen condemns Images as unprofitable signs. 602
Custom without truth is but the antiquity of error. 603 Prayer in an
unknown tongue prohibited by Saint Paul in Gods name. 604 S. Paul speaks of
unknown tou^gs 606 An unknown tongue cannot edify. 607 Divine service in a
known tongue cannot choose but edify. 608 S. Paul speaks of three learned
toungs as well as of others. 610 S. Paul speaks of the Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin as well as of other tongues. 611 S. Paul's words comprise both Church
service and sermons. 612 Saint Paul 1. Cor. 14. speaks of Church service. 613
The Church under the Apostles had no set order of divine service. 614 The
Church under the Apostles did sing, bless, and pray by the gift of the
spirit. 615 The Apostle had no certain prayers or service. 616 The Jesuits
halting reasons that S. Paul did not speak of the church Service. 616 S. Paul
to the Corinthians speaks of Church service. 620 No man may say AMEN to that
he understands not. 624 Necessary to understand our prayers. 625 The
primative Church had never her prayers and service in an unknown tongue. 627
The latin service was understood in the Countries where it was. 629 Alleluia
is used in all tongues as well barbarous as others. 630 The Britans had no
latin service. 632 Alleluia soung at the plough. 632 The Jesuits manner of
alleging impertiment authorities. 633 Bid does not say that the people of
this Realm had the latin service in his time. 634 The prayers of the
primative Church were common to all the people. 636 The Mass book proves that
the people should understand the Priest 639 The Priest needs no speech in his
prayers but to edify the hearers, 640 Prayer is as acceptable to God in a
barbarous, as in a learned tou^g. 642 Service in an unknown tongue is no
custom of the universal Church. 643 The primative church had her service in
such tongues as the people understood. 644 The primative church allowed prayers
in barbarous tounges. Whether side comes nearest to christ's institution. 650
S. Paul by the Lords supper means the sacrament. 651 The name Mass whence it
first came. 655 We do not swerve from christ's institution. 657 Christ did
bless with the mouth, and not with the finger. 658 Blessing in the scriptures
applied to diverse and sundry things 659 To do any thing upon or over the
bread is not needful 660 The rehearsal of christ's words makes a sacrament.
661 We show our purpose at the Lords table by our words and deeds. 662 The
word believed makes the Sacrament. 664 Vnl^uened bread is not of the
substance of the Sacrament 664 Water is no part of Christ's institution. 663.
and 670 Water is not necessary in the Lords cup even by the confession of
their own schools. 668 No water mingled whiles the Apostles lived. 672 The
Mass an open profanation of Christ's institution. 673 Private Mass euerieth
all that christ did or said at his last Supper. 674 Christ did not sacrifice
himself at his last supper. 676 The Primative church had no private Mass. 678
The Lords supper ought to be common. 679 The Lords cup was delivered to the
people as well as the bread. 679 Christ's precept for the cup extends as well
to the people as to the Priest. 680 In the primative church the lords cup was
common to all. 682 The causes for which the church of Rome changed christ's
institution. 683 The ancient church of Rome very vehement against half
communions. 684 Forbearing the Lords cup condemned in laymen as sacrilege 685
Sacrilege in the Priest can be no religion in the people. 686 The Jesuits
proofs for their sacrifice. 687 How the fathers call the Lords supper a
sacrifice. 688 Their own Mass book contradicts their sacrifice. 690 The
Lords death is the sacrfice of the Lords supper. 691 A memorial of christ's
passion is our daily sacrifice. 692 The elder sort of Schoolmen knew not their
sacrifice. 693 The Jesuits heap up fathers for a show though they make,
nothing for them. 694 The Sacrifices of the new Testament be spiritual. 695
What sacrifice it is that Malachie speaks of. 696 The Lords Supper is a
sacrifice for di^ers respects. 699 The Priests act can not apply the death of
Christ 700 The Jesuits sacrifice. 701 The word Sacrifice is not used by the
holy Ghost. 702 S. Paul makes nothing for the sacrifi^e of the Mass. 703
Adoration of the sacrament. 705 The Sacrament must not be adored. 706 The
Jesuits proofs for adoration of the Sacrament. 707 No Father teaches the
adoration of the sacrament. 708 S. Austen was far from adoring the sacrament.
709 Christ adored in the mysteries. 710 Chrysostom did not adore the
sacrament. 712 Nazianzene does not say that his sister adored the sacrament.
713 Dionysius made no invocation of the Sacrament. 714 Dionys. corrupted by the
Ies. 715 The whole church slaundered by the Jesuits. 716 Origin and Chrys^st.
lengthned by the Jesuits to serve the adoration of the Sacrament. 718 Origens
words (...). 719 Christ (...) our root. 719 Christ dwells in us more truly
than in the Sacrament. 719 The Church directed her prayers to Christ in heaven.
722 The Sacrament is a corruptible creature. 722 We must not basely be^d our
minds on the visible creatures. 723 The mystical signs must be reverenced, but
not adored with Godlike honor. 724 The signs remain in their former
Substance. 725 The Real presence. 726 Why the Jesuits mistake the fathers in
this matter. 728 The bread is made God by the Jesuits constructions of Christ's
words. 729 Christ said of the bread this is my body. 730 The Papists say
THIS in the words of Christ is taken for nothing. 732 The causes why the words
of Christ at his last Supper were not literal. 733 For what cause S. Austen
concludes the words of Christ to be figurative. 734 The Jesuits cannot tell
how to make the letter agree with there opinion 735 The figurative sense of
Christ's words avouched by the fathers. 736 The sign in the Sacrament cannot
be the truth. 739 The 6. of S. John expounds the words of the supper 740 The
fathers refer the 6. of John to the Lords supper 741 The fathers themselves
refer the 6. of John to the sacrament. 742 The words in the 6. of John are
figurative because the actions are spiritual. 744 To eat christ is to believe
and abide in Christ. 745 In S. John the manner of eating is spiritual, the
manner of speaking is allegorical. 746 What the Capernits error was. 746 How
the Ies. differ from the Capernites. 748 What fathers the Jesuits have for
their literal sense and corporal eating. 750 What the late Grecians meant by
pressing the letter. 751 The Sacrament is a sign of christ on the cross. 753
In sacraments the signs have the names of the things themselves. 754 The
signs remain in their former substance. 756 The power and operation of t^^
sign is changed. 75^ The substance of christ's flesh does not enter our
mouths. 759 Christ is not eaten with teeth. 759 The Jesuits narrowly driven
when they must take substance for accidents. 761 Christ is not eaten with teeth
or jaws. 762 The refutation of Eutiches error overthrows tra^substantiatio^.
764. Eutiches error is not refuted but confirmed by the real presence. 766.
Leoes words do not import the real presence. 767 The jesuits make the fathers
contradict themselves. 769 That body which enters our mouths increases the
substance of our flesh. 770 What manner of eating Christ in the Sacrament the
Church taught for a 1000. years. 772 The spiritual eating of Christ in the
Sacrament excludes the corporal. 776 What the Sacramental eating of Christ
is. 778 The wicked do not eat Christ. 779 The Church of Rome is not yet
resolved of her corporal eating of Christ's flesh. 780 The first Authors of
their corporal eating, condemn each others opinion for heresy. 680 The
grossenes of Papists worse than carnal o^ capernitical. 782 The Elements may
putrify, the flesh of Christ cannot. 783 Their sluttish divinity is a necessiry
sequel to their real presence. 783 We must ascend to heaven where Christ
sits in his glory. 384 Our hearts must be lifted up to heaven, not ^o the
he^^. 785 The true flesh of Christ is in heaven and absent from the earth. 786
The manhood^ of Christ is not in many places at once. 788 The substance of
Christ's body must be contained in one place. 790. Christ's manhood is not
every where by the very principles of our faith. 792 How one and the same
christ is euerywhere present. 792 The power of God does never cross his will.
793 Contradictions be as impossible as falsehoods be. 796 The Jesuits have not
one father for their transubstantiation. 797 S. Austen horribly forged by friar
walden. 798 Bid used in the same sort by the same friar. 799 In what sense
Chrysostom said the mysteries are consumed. 800 How the Sacrament may be
said to be no bread. 801 Species does not signify shows without substance.
803 The Persons of men cannot prejudice the truth of God. 817 The happiness of
our times is gods goodness not our worthiness. 818 The Jesuits religion is like
their subjection. 819 The Jesuits positions be both traiterous and
heretical. 820.
Faults escaped.
The first number notes the page, the second the line, m. margent, c.
correction.
Page 9. line 18. safely. read falsely. p. 20. l. 25. mercy. The breath. r.
mercy, the breach. p. 25. l. 30. Anastasius r. Athanasius. p. 37. l. 38.
Tiberius. r, Liberius. p. 63. l. 33 cunning r. cumming. p. 64. l. 30. you can.
r. Phi. You can. p. 66. l. 14. Seneca. r. Semeca. p. 72. l. 9. Athanasius r.
Anastasius. p. 82. m. 4000. r. 1000. p. 93. l. 12. Burdeaus r. Burges. p. 97.
l. 24. cattels r. chattels. p. 120 l, 41. convert r. co^triue p. 128. l. 32.
and if. r, Theo. And if. p. 149. l. 34. Maximus r. Mariaus. p. 173. l. 23. do
you not. r, Phil Do you not. p. 180. l. 38. which spoken r. which is spoken. p.
201. l. 1. adiudge to have r. the^ to have. p. 204. l, 41. they do r. they may
do. p. 228. m. whether the Pope. r. while the Pope. p. 229. l. 38. nec ipse nec
alteru^ r. nec ipse possit alteru^. p. 240. l. 13. goodline: r, godliness, p.
259. l. 8, and dare. r you dare. p. 270. l. 23 Protopius r, Procopius. 276, 12.
sound r. found. 280. l. 3. resist r. sist. and 26 r. Theo. Sure. p. 301. l, 3.
there r. three. 303. 3 your. r our. 35. l. 28. writing r. uttering. 318. l. 2.
reasonable r. treasonable. 333. l. 31. perceive r. ^ perceive. and 32. (...) r.
(...) and 39 shaken r. not shaken. p. 337. l. 1. you do r. you not do. p. 339.
l. 28. the defense r. you defend. 350. l. 19. maintaining r. maiming. p, 364.
l. 42. christian princes r. christians to be. 373. l. 29. precepts r. presence.
and 38. seals r. seats. p. 385. m. stay. say. 393. m. in the prayer r. in the
praise. p. 407. m. what faces r. what forces. 421.15. others r. oaths 423. l.
37. Foroniliensem r. Foroiuliensem. p. 42^. l. 11. Rhemish r Romish. p. 430. l.
9. Frederike r. Lodouike 439. l. 25. both r. but. p. 448. l. 43. Pauia r.
Papia. 450. m r less then their. 474. l. 8. restrained r. restored. p. 485. l.
20. of Nations r. of al Nations. p. 502. we damned r. we be damned. 505. l.
37. They had. r. Theo. they had. 508.9 and 10. lines dele. p. 512. m. wars r.
words. p. 513. m. manifest r. manifold. p. 548. l. 32. though r. ought 551. l.
12 restraining r. esteeming. 567. l. 23. aeque r. deductu^ aeque. 571 l. 29.
salvation r. salutation. ^. 574.11, God r. gods. 586.38. sati^fact^o^ r.
sancti^ic^tion. p. 605. l. 30. fond r food. 607. l. 8. Phi. r. Theoph. p. 636
l. 7. We. r. Phil. We. p. 713. m. does prove r. does not pro^e 734 l. 3. to
the r. to be the. p. 743. l. 33. my life r. any life. 758. l. 20. that is r.
this is. p. 759. m. i^ eaten r. is not eaten. 760. is pressed. r. is not
pressed. 762. l. 38. promises r. premises. p. 773.17. present r. pleasant. 782.
m. vide Antonium r. vide Antoninum.

Quotations in the margent either wanting or falsely printed.
P. 10. lib. imperf. r. lib. imper. 2. p. 13. lib. 10. r. lib. 1. p. 14. tract.
50. r. tract. 5 p. 20. 2. Cor. 34 r. 2. Chro. 34. p. 48 idem lib. 3 r. lib. 2.
p. 57. epist. 90. r. 91. Ibid. in ep. 90. r. 91. p. 66. distin. 39. r. 93. p.
136.37. and 31. r 37. and 38. p. 137. Novel. cons^it. 123.133. r. cons^it.
5.123.133. p. 157. cap. 74. r. 78. p. 161. Esaie 6. r. Esaie. 60. p. 206.
Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 4. r. 34. p. 230. Council Afric. cap. 29. r. 92. p. 237.
lib. cap. 37. r. lib. 1. cap. 37. p. 259. hom. 2. r. hom. 21. p. 262. 1. Cor.
17. r 1. Cor. 11. p. 265. definit. 8. r. definit. 80. p. 270. Socr. lib. 1. ca.
2. r. lib. 2. cap 20.271. c^. 52.1.53.276. cap. 33. r. cap. 31.295. tit. 22.
cap. 3. r. cap. 4.3.297. Socr. lib. 4. etc. r. Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 15.344. 1.
Cor. r. 1. Cor 5.346. Mat. 16. r. Mat. 10.347. 1, John 10. r 2 John. 1, 351.
cap, 5, r. Act. 5, p. 372. lib, r, lib, 5.377, 1480, r, 1580, ibid. 8. Tim, r,
1, Tim, 2, ib^^, ^e em, 19, r, 29, 417, fol, 888, r. 288, 422, gener, 23, r,
gener, 24, 5^7, lib, 5, r, lib, 8, 581, tract, 44, r, 49, 625, expos, 1. r,
expo^, 2.753, octo^^ ta^^m, r, octoginta trium, Quotations wanting. 23, to the
l, 38, Theod, lib, 4. cap, 1, 45, l, 1, Atha^, apol. contr, Arian, 385, l, r,
in John. lib, 12, cap, 96.


