THE BLAME OF KIRK-BVRIALL, TENDING TO PERSUADE CEMITERIALL CIVILITIE.

FIRST PREACHED, THEN PENNED, and now at last propyned to the Lords inheritance
in the Presbytery of Lanerk, by M. William Birnie the Lord his Minister in
that Ilk, as a pledge of his zeal, and care of that reformation.

MATT. 8.22. Follow me, and let the dead bury the dead. EDINBVRGH PRINTED BY
ROBERT CHARTERIS PRINter to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1606.

TO THE (TRVELY) NOBLE, JAMES MARQVES OF HAMMILTON, EARL of Arrane, Lord Auen,
Aberbroth, etc. the Shiriffe principal of Clydisdaill, and Provost of Lanerk,
True felicity wished, both here and hence from God in Christ Jesus.
THere is nothing wherein the Antichristian crew is found more condemnable
(Noble Marquis) nor that by their lin-sey-wol-sey confusions, they have dared
clamp the sincere twist of Gods truth, with the torn clouts of their
brain-sicke superstitions, instanced especially in their many fold
sepulchromany. Whose blame therefore we blase, that such colors of Asdod
remain not so standered out, even in Isreal's camp, under this our protested
reformation. But to award the malignance of any gainsaid affection, I
strong-hold my self (by this nuncupation of you) under your Marqueships
Mecenatisme. For as by the foster-father-hood of such high callings, Gods
Altar-mens travels in his own truth, ought to be steil-bowed* so these
great-good gifts of nature and grace, in body and mind, that God hes garnelled
up in you, does plentifully promit that comfort to us. For (to Gods glory I
speak, beside these personal parts of such vigorous talnes in statur and
strength, so dexterously kythed by a peereles pausty in all campestrial prowes,
and pas-tyming exployts, that (if I may say it) by a grace-full Gygantinisme,
the commonly dough^y are become your dwarfes) your mind (which is more) though
yet adolescent, is so magnifickly inner-manned* that in rauersing these
foreign territories (as ye Heroikly intend) ye can se no singular thing, that
in some compe^dious Micro-cosmo-graphy does not shine in your self. And
therefore, although the Magogick negotiation of Schittim (the bordel of both the
whordomes) hes ship-wreaked the souls ^f some, almost of your rank, yet being
so mainly munitioned with that panoply of God, I hope to see your triumph over
such temptations: As happily did your heauen-dwelling Father of incorruptible
memory. For so long as ye resolve to loyalize the love of your soul to the
Lord, and of your body to the betrothed breasts of that Lady that ought it, the
gates of hell shall not preuaill. But least ye prolong too long the just
experience of these high expectations, that Kirk and Country conceiues of you,
be entreated (my good Lord) to retrinch and abridge your forain tarry: that so
not only the viduity of us your well willing followers by your fairing away,
may be removed: but also the pinching langour of these two your daily
beed-Ladies: your Mother, to wit, the mirror of all godly grave matronisme,
and your Spouse now the young fruteful Matriarch of that multi-potent Marquesad.
So shall David enjoy his own Jonathan, and Israel, now in his growing need
his mediating Joseph, of all men now-adayes most skant: But the Lord by his
pasport of protection give your Lordship continual conuoy to your rinks end.
And grant that Coelum non animum mutet qui trans mare currit.

The incessant Orator to God for your Lordship M. W. B.

The blame of Kirk-buriall.
The proposition of the matter, Chap. I.
THere be three several stations that the divine Providence by degrees hes
assigned to man, whereby he may mount to immortality: First the womb, a
mansion for nine months: next the world that indureth to dissolution: last the
grave, the tabernacle of bodily rest unto the resurrection: to the
consideration of the first two whereof, although Philosophy may avail (as
Physic for our incarnation, and Ethick for our worldly well) yet to the
science of the last, the Grave, Theology is only sufficient, as a subject
that far ouer-reaches Natures reason. For we see that howsoever the
Corinthian error that doubted, or Saducean herisie denied the resurrection, in
our christian Kirk seem extinguished: yet the practice of many in burial
process, argues not only irresolution, but incredulity, whereof kirk-buriall
is badge: as wherein by a sacrilegious conversion they make Gods Sanctuary
their Golgotha, that is, the Kirk a caluarie or cairne of dead men's skulles.
Which sin, lest it seem to walk safely under protection of the Kirks
conniuence, or of the commons conceat that counts it indifferent, I intend to
decypher, beginning at burials definition.

The definition of Burial. Chap. II.
NOw Burial I find to be that religious ceremony whereby our defunct bodies
are interred unto the resurrection. For as in deing destruction is resembled,
Calvin in Act. 9 37.
so by burial (that is the reuersion of life) immortality is represented. I
call it a ceremony, in respect it is not of that essential necessity to
christian welfaire, as without the which we will be prejudged of the
resurrection. For although casually even the godly may fall under the in lake
of funeral exequies, yet of burial never: For whatsoever element shall
dissolve this elementall body in this mother dust, Jonas. 2. Lucan ^^.
the same is his tomb: and must repledg him at the requisition of the great
day: as did the Whale in the type Jonas. For as Lucanus to Caesar say* (who
after the Pharsalian defeat of Pompey his ^ost (...) inhibite to burn, Viues
upon the City of God 1. lib. 12 cap.
that is after the Roman use to bury the slane, Capit omnia tellus quae
genuit, coelo tegitur qui non habet venam. The which transuersed means, The
earth is ready to receive her brood,
And heavens will cover when leame tombs cannot do i would.
And Virgil affirms that whom the world neglectes unburied nature in tombs.
De Cini. Dei
Wherefore Augustine refuting the Heathen (who for the misery of the unburied
Gospellers, inflicted by the Goths at the saccadge of Rome, inferred the
discredit of the Gospel it self) makes answer that burial is rather a
solace to the living nor subsidy to the dead: and so but a ceremony. But such
a one, that withal remember it is so religious, that although it be not among
the points of Gods absolute and immediate worship, 2. Sam. 2.5.
yet as opportunity serves, it is religiously and conscientiously to be cared
for. As it hes ever been, not by the Kirk only, but by the very world: who in
many outward things hes been accustomed to murgean and apishly to imitate the
Kirks holy ceremonies, though neither in substance nor the right sense. For in
the Greek laws of Solon, the latin of Numa, and Roman of Justinian we find
a rigorous vigor against burial violation. According as wheresoever
immortality it believed, the same is in force: Le^i^^ in hist ^auig. in
Brasiliam.
in such sort that among the lately discovered Brasilians (people whose bellies
otherwise are burials to foes whom they eat) yet for their friends they dig
graves, though not to our form in length but to their own in hight: so that
the defunct is rather set in a tun nor tomb, over end on their feet, the more
viuely to testify their faithless hope of the resurrection.

Of the end of burial. Chap. III.
But the faithful who rests rightly persuaded, does religiously celebrate
burial for the conscience of a double duty. The first being due to the dead,
the other to the living. The due we ought to the Lords dead is the burial
honor: the which as part of their remuneration among men, for their good life
should follow them as deing in the Lord. Apoc. 14.13. So that the faithful as
forfoghten in the wearisome warfair of this militant life, after the victory of
dissolution, should be streeked down in grave the down-bed of restfull repose.
Where otherwise the deprivation thereof, or debarring there from hes ever been
inflicted as a most ignominious punishment against the most criminal.
According to the law imperial against parricids and such. Ierem. 2^.
And in the divine law, no burial was the asses burial the portion of
rebellious Ioachas: wherefore the burial duties by the old latins were called
Iusta: such a justum due to each man as burials necessity by natures right
required. For to defraude the most landles liver on ^^e, at lest of his
septipedall inheritance so equally proportioned to all by death, without
partiality in mettage, it were a shameless sacrilege. Again in respect of
the living the right use of burial is expressly profitable: were it but for the
hatching of hope, and fostring of faith, in the article of rising again from
the death. For as in Eccl. 12. the graves periphrase ( beth gnolam) signifies
the secular house: so shall it no longer be inhabit then the time come, (when
by him that lives for ever) time shall never be more. Revel. 10.6. For the
giving up of the godlies ghost may featlie be compared to three-thinges: first
it resembles the Prophetical rauishments that Jerome, Ezechiel and others had:
and Paul speaks of 2. Cor. 12. for the soul in dissolution (as the Psalmist
says psalm. 90) flees upward with the wings of immortality to the own
element (Heaven) to be with him that gave it, repledging the body to her mother
earth, Eccles. 12, till such time as the spirit return to invest her corpse as a
garment of glory thenceforth for ever. Again, Dissolution is like that
matrimonial desertion, that upon mutual consent the Apostle i. Corinth. vij.
for a time permites to the farther and freer use of fasting and praying. For
the body in grave, growing up to incorruption, and the soul in heaven
confirmed in immortality, shall joyfullie at last join in full glorification.
The which without both (that is bodily incorruption, 1. Cor. 15.
and spiritual immortality) is not made up to perfection. For even as Zippora
(though Moses wife) in her Madianitish manners, was not meet to join with Israel
Exo. 5. til after the farther trial of time she was better prepared. Exo. 18.
So this our carnal carrion is not meet for a heavenly match, til in the grave
it be trained to the incorruptible estate. And last it is likened by the
Apostle first Cor. xv. to a seed: which though by death it be sown incorruption
dishonor, and weakness in the gravely field of the grave, yet having
fructified to incorruption, glory and power, shall at la^^ in the Lords
harvest, be glaned in, by his Angel with the sharp sicle. Apoc. 14. and reaped
up to the fruition of sovereign felicity for ever. For although death in his
legacy registrate in the 12. of the Preacher, bequeathing the spirit to God
that gave it, does deliver the body but to the own dust, yet the vigor of
that testament does but endure to the terme-day of general refreshment. Act.
3. for the Innes of eternity are already arled in for our farther assurance,
Hiero. ad pammach.
by our two faithful furriours (Enoch and Elias) the Lords exemed ones to the
same end. So then for honor of the dead, and hope to the living (if to the
first we be not fraudulent, nor among the second faithless) we must grant the
debt of burial duty.

Of the general abuse of Burial ceremonies. Chap. IIII.
NOw this duty in respect it is discharged in ceremonies (in any kind
whereof, it hes ever been impossible to keep measure without the direction
divine) what sort here are lawful, under comparison with the lawless it rests
to define. And first all burial ceremonies may be reduced to two ranks: for
some are funerals, serving for preparation to; and some sepulchrals, serving
for placing in the grave the defunct. The ceremonial variety of both, whereof
my labor were infinite, let be vain to descryue. For to give but a glance in
funeral, the Greek and Roman did burn their dead, in rogo, as they styled
their funeral fire; the Indean with Got-seame did besmeare, the Schithean
swallied, the Egiptian pickled with bryme, but the Gerrens a Schithian sect,
after exinteration bespyced their gutlesse goodsirs: that so ridiculously,
Sylli. 13. lib.
by corruptible means they might assay to reteene fugitive incorruption,
Cicer. lib. 2. de leg. and lib. 3. de tuscu quaest.
as Lucian in his Dialogue de luctu: And Silius Italicus the Poet in his 13
book do testify of many such foolish feats. Again in sepulchrals, the
variety is found no less vain, every Nation serving it self with the own
vowstie devise. For first according to the number of the elements, so hes the
sepulchrall receptacles of humane bodies fourefold been found. Some chosing the
floting foam for their tomb, as among others the African Lotophagians, others
preferred to wither in the air, as of old not a few in Egypt and Ethiopia,
that so preventing the stinck of putrefaction by scowdring their skins in the
Sun, they might reserve their dead friends extant to be ordinar accombents
with them at their tables. And (which more deserves mockage) sometime the money
less Ethiopian by ingadging his reasted parent upon reuersion might relieve
his want. Yea, and the fire (although fearce) hes not been forborne, as to the
which in defraude of the worms many hes be taught their body both bone and
lyre. That so pitchering up their only relict asses in vrnes, they might make
a proud thought a very poor pomp. And although the worlds rest in common with
the Kirk hes made choice of the moulds of their mother earth (as the grave
only designed by God, warranted by the words exemples, and keeping best
relation to our resurrection, as out of whose lare only we may properly be
said to rise) yet in the usage thereof how infinitely men hes deborded,
Histories records.

Of the due direction in Burial. Chap. V.
But lest I should (as some do) in telling vice, teach it, I will turn me
rather to teach as I can, what, or what not the Kirk should do, nor toomely to
talk what hes been done abroad by the world in this earand: except so far as
by outward exemples we may confro^t our present confusions, whereat I aim. And
because nowadayes burial is ordinarily traduced as a scripturelesse thing,
and so amongst indifferents to be usurped at the unstayed arbitriment of men,
how and where both they will have it: I will here appeal men from their
pet-wils, nowhere else but to the words authority. For although to these that
are without spiritual spectacles, every minute of our sepulcromany seem not in
express scripurall terms to be condemned (being to the spirit of God as
parenticide was to the Law giver, Licurgus.
against the which he gave no law, lest he should not suppose such inhumane an
abomination) yet by his grace, I shall discover their particular conviction in
every corrupt abuse by the same. And first I would men wist that the word, Gods
sword, as it is said Hebr. 4.12. so it is found to be twin-edged. For by the
one edge which is of expres warrant from positive laws it cuttes, Hieromi. in
Isa. 66.
and by the other as equivalent, which is of collected consequences, it carues
and conuinces the catiue consciences of the criminal. For although the ten
words of Moses tables, seem only to aim at the ten broad sins, that
negatiuely they inhibite, yet there are none of their infinite brood and
offspring, that may not be particularly repledged to his mother kind: and so
incur the reverence of some one of the Decalogue laws. But in respect the
cases of sin, are become so infinite and intricate that some like mangrels do
participat of diverse kinds: and others so subtly twisted by the devil, that
yet they rest vnacknowledged. For this cause the Lord hes supplied the
generality of his law as the text, by his remanent word as the commentar. By
the benefit whereof we may easily particularize our subtillest sins
whatsoever: and that by two special means. First by the rule of Analogy, and
next by the benefit of example. To the twitch of the which, where express
warrant wants, we must either qualify or control our proceedings, as we shall
do in this our particulare anent burial. That what we see therein neither
answerable to Analogy nor exemple of the word we may conclude it is sin.
Quint. lib. 1
Now Analogy in any thing is that convenient proportion, whereby every part is
correspondent to the whole. As in musical instruments, though there be many
different strings yet must they al be tuned to harmonical proportion which is
the Analogy: otherwise the ingratious discord in the ear of the least string,
will mar all the mirth. Now scriptural Analogy is two fold, the one is of faith,
the other of manners. That of faith is the platform of knowledge that directs
us aright in all, and every one of the articles of the same, the which by
versing and searching the Scriptures may so be conceived in the mind of the
faithful, that in faith they need not err. And this Analogy the Apost. To.
12.6 speaks of: where he seems to design the Apostolical creed that Tertulian
calls the Canon or Analogy of faith. The which also 2. Tim. 2. he commendes
under the name of the pattern of wholesome words. Again the Analogy of manners
is that platform of right, that we oght to observe in every our action,
according to the warrant of the will of God. And this Analogy by searching and
versing of Gods law Psalm. 1. the canon of our conversation may be so learned by
the conscience that for lake of knowledge we need not sin. And this the
Psalmist very frequently calls the path way of God. As Psa. 17. and 27. and
119. Now this Analogy of manners wherewith here we have only ado, being the
morality or the law, exacts three things in every our action. First that the
matter done, be good; next that the manner of doing be well; and last in both
that we ever aim at the right end. As in our own particular we shall expone.
And first for burial, it is an action and a good action as being answerable to
both the general tytles of Moses two tables, piety and charity: that it should
be done no christian will contrauert: but in the other two, how the same may be
well, and to the right end: that is formal and direct, there stands the
question. In the which case a christian duty were to consult. First with their
conscience the register of the words Analogy. The which if a christian of
knowledge would but vouch save to do, he should soon find the oracle of Analogy
for his information. But now most men alas are so deeply addicted to affection,
that they neither make count nor question how or where they should bury:
contrare whom one day their criminal conscience will cry judgment, except
they repent. And if thou loath to hear conscience, yet list to hear the
direction of the words Analogy to thy reformation. Where first learn, that
howsoever the form and end of al actions ar to be examined by the general
inscription of the law (love) how to wit we have therein respected. First that
souerane love we oght to God, and next that proportional love we oght to our
neighbor: yet in matters of this kind (and al such specially that consists in
ceremonies) there is particular analogy to be observed that the Apost. 1. Cor.
14. sets down. Who wills al things, and consequently burial ceremonies to be
conformed to honesty and order last verse. and the end to tend to edification v.
26. upon the which Analogicall rules, then we shall first control the customs
of men's burials, and conclude what by Analogy is lawful.

Against the contempt of burial and insufficiency of burial yardes. Chap. VI.
THe first rule that directs the form, contains two cautions, and that for
good causes. For according to the forked folly used in burial, which either is
contemned, or else over carried in pomp, this rule does restrain both: by
ranging contempt under the rule of honesty and pomp, under the rule of order,
that they no ways exceed. Now as for burial contemptes, if we peruse humane
histories, as namely Caelius, Cicero in his Tusculan questions, Crinitus, and
diverse others: we shall find them have many conspirators: whereof we shall
recite such as make for us. We read of the Albanes that of the defunct took
no care at all: The Sabeans used them for fulzie: The Troglodites for mockage:
The Hircanes exposed them to dogs, that for the nonce they nurished. But
among the first of this crew were the doggish Cyniks, who would in no sort
consent to be buried. As we read of Minippus and Diogenes of whom it is
recorded, that being to dye, he directed his corpse to be exposed. And being
admonished that so he should be torn by birds and beasts, did reiyre a taunt,
in requyring a cudgel to be coutched beside, whereby to wear his wirriers
away. And being insisted with that it would be to small use, since death was
but senseless: why then (said he) are ye solist what befall a senseless
carrion? But this kind of reprobate Philosophy rather becomes renigat minds
then christian men. For if reprobates were by the Kirk known (as they are with
God barred up from hope) so might they justly be debarred from the benefit of
christian burial. And this Cynicisme although we seem not to profess, yet if
we walk the land abroad we will find many folk not flyting free in it. For
our Kirk-courtes or yardes, are become more like pwind-folds nor burials: as
being ordinarily be dunged by pestring and pasturing brute. Not far from
subscryuing the desperate legacy of some that can be content to bestow their
bowke to the burroughmure, if God would take the soul. According to the
conceaty resolution of Theodore, who being by the tyrant Lysimachus minassed
with the gibbet, Viues on the City of God chap. 12.
answered that his own minzeons only had it to fear and not he, to whom all
was one, whether to putrify above, or upon, or within the earth. But as this a
buse is contrare to the Apostles decency commanded, so is it also against the
common law that prouids burial to be had in holy reputation. So that to empty
the bladder, O to. frising. lib. 4.
let be the belly about burial (as they called it minxisse in patrios cineres)
was reput nefas, that is iniquity, let be inciuilitie. And for this cause the
faithful after Constantine (who first served edicts of liberty to edify
temples, whereas before the Kirks had always been served only with holy
Innes) in founding of Kirks, taking the type at Ierusalems temple, did among
the rest counterfaite the courts by Kirk yardes, the which for this commanded
decency they dedicated to burial use. The which therefore by the Greeks (as
thereby appears the works beginners) were called Caemiteria. And that not
without Emphase, seeing (as Atheneus says) it was the name before of sleeping
celles for strangers: and so the allusion wanted not edification. And albeit
the reason of the rest of the resemblance betwixt Temple and Kirk, as of the
Quier to the holiest place within the veil, etc. cannot so easily be espied,
yet the reason of this may well by this rule of decency, according whereto
since we have a Country law of our own extant, enacted for reparation of
ruinous Kirks, Marie Par. 9 Act. 76. James 6. Parl. 15. Act. 232.
and their yardes, it is the part of all Pastors to urge the benefit of it,
that so our common burials becoming seemly cemiteries, our Kirk buriers may
be deprived of the pretense of their infensibility and profanation. For the
Apostles mind is in his rule, that natures abscenities be decently covered and
oueruailed with her mothers mouldes.

Against seculare pomp in Funerals. Chap. VII.
THe other extremity that commes against the Apostles order is pomp. The which
as it is found more common, so it brings with it more perturbation. But for the
more particular deciphering thereof, we shall range it in two ranks: the one
sort of it being civil or seculare, the other superstitious. Again the first,
according to the duplicity of burial ceremonies, is found double. For partly in
the funerals, and partly in the sepulchrals of men it is to be seen. In
funeral pomp if we should view the customs of antiquity, and balance the
same with these of our days, as in few things we will be found inferior, so
in some far to surmounte them in vanity. To be short for commodity of this
our present comparison, under the old names of Funeral offices, we shall set
down the whole ancient funeral process, and confer it with ours of the new
now. All the which ceremonies for memory may be ranked in two sorts. Whereof
some did in common concern the whole funeral preparation: Seneca.
the general oversight whereof, appertained to their Libitmarii, that is
funeral men, that among the rest had the cure of funeral feasts. Now herein
although we inlake the officers, 2 Samuel 5.
yet is not the office intermitted: for their burial bankets we have not
learned to imitate only, but in our aruelles to exceed, where rather in the
day wherein a good one or great one falls, as being a breach of Gods hand in
his Kirk, should be celebrate with fast and measurable mourning. The second
sort of their ceremonies, were employed about the defuncts person, consisting
in three points. First in mourning for the dead, next in addressing the corpse
for the grave, and last in his conuoyance thither. In mourning beside the
interessed that made it in earnest, they had their made out mourners of the
feminine sex, that best could do it: whom they styled Praefi^ae. And these the
Preacher 12.5. seems to respect in mentioning the mourners of the streets.
But in this also we are more antic nor antiquity: for in steed of humane
teeres that best can express the own smart, some will have trumpets; and in
steed of mourning in the dust, as they did oft-tymes, we mumchance and mourgean
in such dilicate duilles, better feated for wowing nor woing, that heirs or
widows never dallies more nor under their duilles. But the Lord will have at
such hypocrysie in the end. The next point of their personal funerals, was
their peremptor preparation to the grave, consisting in two ceremonies: for
before that by the Libutinarian cure the dead was weind, Suer. in
the pollinctors inbalmed, and Sandapilarianes bespised, the corpse of the
great, and this also is superstitiouslie sometime exceded among some of the
best rank: on whom after Anatomicall exinteration, Apotheticary applications
are so excessiuely employed, that often times such prodigal profusion of
arromaticall gummes (if they were otherwise charitably bestowed) might make
sundry poor indifferently rich. Now the last funeral duty appertained to the
Vespilones, or bear-men, whose peculiare calling was (being followed in ranks
by the Acoluthists their friends, Domit.
whereof now the Roman Bishops hes bereft them) to carry their corpse in their
coffins to the grave. Such as we see mentioned in Luke 7.14. But among the
rest also, how far this ancient simplicity is mueterate, who beholdes our
great burials may easily consider. For although the death by all men should be
thought to be a kind of defeat from God, yet our Heroik burials are often led
like a martial triumph, wherein the toutting of trumpets, trampling of
steades, and trouping of men ranking themselves under stately standerts, and
punicall pinsels, displayed for whiuering in the wind, may sufficiently
testify the dedolence of men, as if by an vndantoned courage they would
quarrelously demand the combat in revenge of the dead. And as if the worm
(man) were able to stand out against the thunderbolts of death delashed by
God. but alas, if in death we could count our just kinsh we might rarather
dismay and fear. For although in the kingdom of the second coming we shall
triumph with our head Christ, over the stingles grave. 1. Cor. 15. yet as first
being by death defeat, the first fall is ours even to the dust. Ge. 3. Wherein
for our due desert here we deserve with Christ's thieves to have our legs
broken, rather nor in pomp our badges borne. For look how far fellonie may
glory in her fetters, so far may we in our funerals wherewith we but feared
death. For as some Gentiles, where gold is vernaculous and plentiful, their
catiues though therewith enchained, Tertul. de habitu muliebri.
yet remanes catiues: so to us, though our grave were of enamelled gold, yet it
is but our grave, the monument of our common misery, that by divine mercy only
may be remedied without farther means. And as a blood-gush made Julian at
last, to know Christ, Eusebius. Eccles. histor.
and Alexander (though the maine Monarch) his mortality (against the which he
had been be flattered before) so if we be not frentick, our funerals should
teach us our transitory estate. For of all pride this pomp I esteem it most
perilous, in respect that if the world will have by it the grave restored to
her victory, God for a meeting to the world will restore death to his sting.
For a document therefore against the which, the Lord did closly convey the body
of his own dissolved Moses, from being the object of such fecklesse
ostentation and perilous pomp. Deuteronomy. 34. The which seeing in that great one
the Lord did not allow, why should our far less ones lawleslie claim it? And
this for that civil pomp that in burial funerals is found blameable.

Against seculare or civil pomp in sepulchrals. Chapter VIII.
THe sepulchrall pride of men is nothing inferior. For (although before we
deduced, that among all the elements the earth to be the most seemly sepulcher,
yet) in the usage thereof the earthlings hes labored to transcend the earth in
pride, as in a touch we shall show. The name sepulcher as it is in common used
for all graves, so it implies two several kinds. Whereof some are peculiare to
some persons only, and others common to all. Again of the peculiar sort, sum
ar proper to singular persons only and others to mo, yet being of one sort or
family. To the proper kind of sepulchers (as in the world, yet for the most
part out of the Kirk) the choice of place hes been (as many where it remains)
indifferent: even so in the Kirk to the death of Sara it seems to have been,
at what time Abraham first to eschew that promiscuous confusion, and for a more
actual possession of his promised Canaan, under his pilgrimag, did acquyre a
field for his constant burial Genesis 23. wherein he and his Sara, Isaac and his
Rebeka, Jacob and his Lea, three married matches in others arms attendes the
resurrection. Genesis 48. And although the estate of Gods gathering Kirk then
required the decency and order of common burial, yet we find the necessity
thereof never holden absolut. For as among diverse necessities the meanest must
yield, so Jacob, having his head homeward from Sechem to Mambre (where his
father dwelled at his sepulcher) and within one days travel to his rinks end,
sustening in his camp a double irruption by death (in the first whereof, he
was deprived of Debora his vmwhile mothers Nurce; in the other of Rachel, the
wife of his choice) to avoid the suspicion of superstitious curiosity, he
yields to the most present necessity, and suffers the treto ly where it fell.
Eccle. 11. by entombing Debora at the oak of Bethel, and Rachel in the way to
Ephratah without farther carriage Genesis 35. So then we see that even after the
institution of common burial, the use of proper upon necessity (which being
lawless can bring no disorder) was never inueterat nor thought unlawful. For
as sound do they sleep by the mure edge that are folded up in the favor of
God (though it were by the Pest) as in the most stately tomb. Quid.
For as fish in every sea is at home, so we in every earth, if we be the
Lords, to whom the earth and her implements do all appertain. Psalm. 24. And as
this consideration serves to confound the superstitious opinion of the
prerogative of some sepulchrall places, for their hallowed moulds, so does it
for the blame (by the way) of these farland conuoyences of the dead to their
homed tombs, defrauding the weary corpse of the desired rest. For although upon
some prophetical respects, Jacob and Joseph both, commanded their carriage from
Egypt to Canaan, Gen 50. yet without the like cause, their case is no warrant.
Let men therefore rather translate their curiosity of sepulchrall care, in a
serious cure, how they may be gathered up aright to their grandsirs in God, and
in the common faith of our father Abraham. In doing whereof we shall be blessed
with the bed-fellowship of Jesus in our burial lare, where ever it be.
Otherwise if thy grave were of gold, yet it is but the gate of hell.

Of the diverse kinds of pompous sepulchers. Chap. IX.
THe proper sort of sepulchers, the world (as I said) hes labored to make them
proudly proper: so french hes men been in their fashions. For many to eternize
their soon forgot memory, and to gain the vogue of this vain world, hes
prepared Pyramides of pomp, others pillars of pride, some mousolies of marvel.
Laert. lib. 1.
As if such superciliosity, could sweeten the bitter swarfes of their sour
death, the wickeds greatest evil. But, as often it occurres (according to the
proverb, that he that hountes does not ay roast) so it may befall others that
did Pharao Cenchres (that drowned King of Egypt) who having a sepulchrall
Pyramide elabored by the panefull task of Gods people, wherein he desingde to
ly, Joseph Anti. lib. 2.
yet his funerals was found in red sea floode. And as both the name of a
Pyramide did signify, and the form resemble fire, so is he now for his pride
plotted with Pluto in the flame of hell. For ofttymes what men does propose in
pride, God disappointeth in his displeasure.

Of the common and allowed sort of Burial. Chap. X.
THe common kind of sepulchers are more answerable to Paul's order, and to that
sort of the Saints communion, that consists in lying together in grave. Yet
they are found diverse. For some hes been acquyred* and as conquished to that
use: as Abraham's cave in Makpela. Gen, 23. And Akeldama Matt. 27. Others were
munificently dedicate. As Iehosaphats veil by Jerusalem. In the which some,
out of Joel 3. hes conjectured that the convocation of the great day should be.
Other parts again are found of old mortified to that use: like Caluary: so
called (as some think) from Adams brane-pan, there found, if all be true that
is alleged. Of some one of the which sorts are all Coemiteries or clostered
places, wherein our bodies being kept from the carnage of beasts, are lade a
part to the resurrection. For sepelire (though Durand think it to be from sine
pulsis) yet I take it to be from se-palliare, that is, Duaren. de benef Eccle.
to cover apart, as our buried bodies be. Now this sepulchral communion for the
commonty of it, none should contemn. For although the place remane common, yet
to avoid confusion of ranks the sepulchrall preparation (I think) may be
different. For true honors monuments should ever have place. And what virtue
hes win in this world, should not be suffered to die with death. And therefore
Rachael, the joy of her Jacob, is not only buried, but by a distinct monument
memorized. Genesis 35. with the ods of a pillar that Debora wantes. And Iudaes
Kings the types of the great King, dwelt after death in David's princely tomb.
1. K. 62. Joseph. Ant, lib. 7. ca. 1^.
The mighty Machabees were monumented in Modine their own mount. 1. Mac. 9.
Joseph. ant. 13. But this license is to be only allowed upon a three fold
condition. First of personal discretion, whereby this kind of honor may
redound only to the honorable in God For as the grave of Elisha would not
contain the soldiers corpse. 2. King. 13. No more should the grave of the godly
honorable be profaned with the graceless ginge. The next caution is to keep
distinction of place, that men presume not to seek honor where God only
should; for fear of his jelousie, who cannot abide Dagon to play jake
fellow-lyke. And sen God hes taken in the Kirk for his own Innes, let it
suffice thee, like a doore-keeping David. Psalm 84. or a watchman Vrias. 2.
Samuel 11. to ligge in the court without. Yea, sen all the earth is before us
that we may ly where we will choice, if nothing can content our greede but
the Lords peace, we are guilty with Achab of Naboths wine-yarde. The last
caveat is moderation: that in making thy monument thou keep such a measure
that it become not another Mausoly, that is, the worlds ninth marvel. For as
that sepulchrall monster that Queen Artimise made to her husband Mousolus the
Carian Kirk (from whom the rest of that rank of sepluchers were named
Mausolies) was exposed to the salt taunts of dogged Diogenes, so may all that
sort of sepulchromany be set up to the mockage of others. Enclan. in di^lo.
Maus. and Diog.
For let the world think it but a fond folly to bellishe the outside of a
within rotten tomb, with beauty and braueries excess. But if thou must have a
monument make thy choice of any of the two lawful sorts, that before the
Kirk-buriall crop in, being but of the newest come-ouer antiquity, was only in
use. For some there was that to the imitation of Abraham, Durand. de Camit.
made up little caves or voltes, for burial use Such as we find, not a few
abroad about our oldest Kirkes, no doubt after the example of the Excedrall
domicils that, served the Priests for reuesteries, Joseph. (...) bello Iu^^.
lib. 6.6.
or Garderobs in the lewishe Temple. And because they were but adjacent and
incontiguous, being but severally set as to-falles to the continent Kirks, they
got therefore among us the name of of Isles, that yet they keep. And this kind
may content our most honorable. That so they may ly, if they list, like unto
Levites in compass round about the Lords house. The other sort of sepulchrall
monuments were tombs: that being tumorous above for better capacity, were
after the counterfoote of Joseph's arc. Genesis 50. Conform to the which custom
(although now mean men be worse to content) we see sundry of our crowned
Kings, whose monuments yet remanes in the I Will Columb-kill, Hector Boe. Chron.
to have been Kingly entombed in the Court not the Kirk. An use with us at
least unkind (as thereby appears) within this last periode of time containing
five hundredth of years. So then seeing our Nobles now may be as of old they
were then so honorably eased, with ones princely Isles or tombs, why should
they wilfully incur vnnecessar profanation, by burying in Kirks? An use that
only Papistry hes hatched as anon we shall show. And seeing some (even of
all sorts) in the light of the Lord hes begun to reform, let the rest in
the love and fear of God follow. For if they be happy that leads others to
righteousness. Daniel 12. surely that felicity shall be imparted to the
faithful followers.

Of superstitious pomp in burial. Chap. XI.
THus having deciphered (so far as serves this turn) the inciuility of this
their civil pomp, rests to speak of that which is superstitious. A matter of
more ado, Bellarm. de purgat.
as wherein the Lord is more immediately injured nor in the other. For as
throughout the Antichristian world, the exorbitance of superstitious exequies
are found infinite (as in their bel-ringinges, lampe-lighting, dirige singing,
incense burning, holy watering, letanie praying, soule-massing, vigilles
keeping, and such other gear may be seen) so we that will be called
Christians, and hes protested to forleit that lore, and to be reformed, yet in
our sepulchrals, at least, we adheere too much to that old deformity. For as
among them the well deserving by the purse, and liberality in legacy, was in use
to be Kirked up in burial: so here, which is more our headstrong ones, whose
deserving hes been but sacrilegious Kirk-robbing does clame to no less. So
that although they seem to make nyce in praying for dead, yet upon the dead
they will or else not: in bowing their knee no where else but on their forbeers
bellies: which ceremony how sib it is to the old superstition, I would they
could count. For superstition is like some serpents, that though they be
couponed in many cuttes, yet they can keep some life in all: right so
superstition that can hang by one hair, does live in this point. And if we
chock it not quyte, perhaps it shall hatch more. And in end it may be that it
out-reason thee thus. If thou have attained to that sepulchrall prerogative, to
ly in the Kirk, why should thou want that old privilege to be prayed for in
death* And if thou be to ly at the Altar, how wanrst thou a Priest to say thy
soul Mass? Virgilius.
Beware of this closter logic. For if once thou be led to a going in it thou
shall be drawn to a running with it in end. So easy is the descent of Auerne.

How Kirbburiall superstition crop in. Chap. XII.
Against the poison of this Papistry, there are two preservative considerations
that may aware it. First if we will but weigh whence and when this corruption
crop in, next how ackwart it is against our Analogy, and the words warrant. For
first howsoever this superstition is (now long) becomme most penny-rife
Papistry, yet among Papists it is not homebred. But the folly of it is first to
be fathered on the old Heathen. Who wanting well grounded hope of heaven, and
sufficient horror of hell, became plunged in infinite errors anent the estate
of the dead. For first having divided the world in men good or bad, Aug. de
ciuit and Viues on it lib. 9. cap. 11.
as we do: they subdivided both again in two ranks. As the good in these of
the best sort, whom for their merit they made Gods: and in a seconder good
sort, to whom although they allotted the Flizean fields, yet so that they
reserved them to a care of the residue relicts here, under the name Lares.
Who in our tongue are Brunies the which by vulgar deceived vote, were spirits
employed for the benefit of our militant mortality here. Their bad again
were likewise of two ranks. The first was the worst sort: who as the best of
the good were their Eudaemonies, so these as the worst were repute
Cacodaemones, or incarnate deuilles, Virg. 6. Aere.
to whom they assigned the pit of Pluto for prison. The next were the not so
bad: who being not Lares, but Laurae or Lemures, that is, bogils or Gaistes,
were by the world adjudged to such a purgatoriall penance, that wandering in a
vagarant estate about graves and alrish deserts, they were suspended till their
penance was ended from elisean repose. To remeede the which misery
superstition (the foster mame of all error) took frankely in hand. For to
purchase repose to such restless spirits, they began to consecrate the burials
of the dead to their deader Gods. Inscryuing their tombs with a trigram of D.
M. S. a diton that meaned, Dus manibus Sacrum, as if they said, this tomb is
consecrate holy to the grave Gods. And for farther effectuating of their
purpose they discharged a double duty; First in the celebration of certain
funeral festiuities to the honor of the grave Gods Manes. And these they
called Necia. The next were their sacrifices for the dead, and these were
either Iusta, and such as were common for all, Cyril. lib: 2, de leg b.
or Paren talia and peculiare for parents or friends. Which being done to them
all was thought well. To the which process if we shall collation the Roman
custom this day, we shall find them yet in such hot tread, that though in
profession they be but papists, yet in practice the are pagans to. For first in
ranking the world, they are both alike: for though to the good they give heaven,
yet to the best (their canonized saints) they pray, and makes heathen gods.
Bellarm. de purgat.
And as to the worst sort of the wicked, they adjudge hell, yet to the not so
bad, they likewise allot a purgatory, wherein they allege the soul must ly
upon reuersion at least, of some trentals of mass, according to the
pursse-merite of men wherein how rightly they resemble the old rite let the
world judge. For though they keep a ratryme of letanies (like the old Iusta)
to all, yet to their pursse-friends parentals are kept peculiare. And for
sepulchrall consecration, they are so far from missing one jot of their
lesson, that they have rather learned more nor their master had. For they
cannot only take in hand to consecrate the sepulchrall monuments of their
supposed saints, to become the said sanctuaries of God: Against the 48. an. of
the Couns. of W^rm. an. 815.
but by symoniacall transsubstantiation they can set out again the same
sanctuary in seal to be a sepulcher, that is to say, a necromanucal
amphitheater rather nor a theology school, where either God must get his way,
or be content to dwell in a dedicate Innes to Idols, and remain among the
loathsome graves. So then sen the source of this superstition is from the old
Heathen (the which in running through Rome is made the more muddy) as thou
would not seem to patronize such papisticall paganism, by de never by thy
burial in Kirk.

Of the time when Kirk-buriall was received. Chap. XIII.
FOr the time when first this prat came in practice, the searcher will find it
but an after-shot of antiquity: as the back-treading of times will teach For
throughout the first four thousand years it rested unknown: In respect that
during the formest two from Adam to Abraham (whose Histories the first eleven
chapters of Genesis compryses) wherein although the fathers at that time did
neither want (I doubt not) places of public worship nor buriales, yet sen
we neither read of Kirks nor buriales, me kill less of Kirk-buriales. The
next two to Christ, wherein likewise we find rather Kirk types nor Kirkes, but
all free of burial. For according as we may equally almost, subdiuyde that
time in four fiue-hundreths of years periodes: In the first whereof there was
only Altares of worship to the Tabernacle: the which continued in the next
to the Temple: and the Temple in the third to the second Temple, the which
with the synagogues did occupy the last. Now if any History either sacred or
profane in fragment or full in the Kirk or the world, did ever mention
burial at Altar or Tabernacle, in Temple or Synagogue, I will give over the
pleay. Where contrary ways, the ceremonial uncleanness by the touch of the
dead contracted, seems highly to importe against that profanation. But
leaving these Leuiticales to the own time, let us proceed in the progress of
time, wherein the constant silence of the insuspect ancients does testify
their misknowledgment and disclamation of the same: as a superstition that is
not only late, but (as many of the Papisticall punkes hes secreetly slipped in
the Kirk, without solemnity: And but then at last when the Kirk began to
grow no better worthy, but to become a burial: as being a den of thieves,
deserving the Lords cord-tawes. And if I were posed of my petty opinion
herein, as I am sure, the most pure five hundredth years of Christ was free of
this evil; as whereof the foremost three hundredth the Kirk had no Kirkes till
Constantines edict. And in the fourth hundredth likewise wherein Emperor
Honorius transporting the miraculouslie discovered relictes of Steven and
others, for the farther honorable commemoration, did lay them in no Kirk, but
near the City walls of Jerusalem. Yea, in the sixth hundredth and forty
four, we find an inhibitiue Canon against all Kirk-buriall in the counsel of
Bracaren. A token that but then that repressed corruption began to peep out,
that long after became strong. So I doubt not but that it was in the
dysemellest days only that it came in, as a late birth: to wit after the
error of purgatory, praying and massing for the dead, worshipping of Saints
and their relictes, and hallowing of mouldes. For so soon as the Kirk-ground
came by the opinion of holy prerogative for souls help, the opportunity and
privilege was both sought and boght to ly there. Like the money changers, who
thought to speed better by their troke in the temple nor any where else: whose
tables as the Lord ouer-threw, so may he justly our temple-tombes. But (to come
as near as conjecture may lead to Kirk-burials beginning) there hes been two
kind of Kirks in our christian world (although now time and commodity of
reformation may inueterat the platte) for some are common as builded upon the
public charge that of old were called Parochials, comprising for the most part
a millenarie of people. As in our Country plat and parochial distribution we
may commonly see. The other sort again was peculiar and more private, Durand.
de Eccles.
of two kinds likewise. For some were particularly appertaining to such
religious places as were destinate to the irreligious swarms of Monks and
Friars. The which sort in artificial curiosity exceded al others. The rest were
chapels founded by secular men that had might, according to the blind zeal of
the tym, for their private ease and superstitious show to have a peculiare
Priest of their own like Micah Judge. 17. Now Kirk-burial although it be now
come without blush, yet it brake not in bradelings, but as it were by degrees,
and some shame. For first the monastical Kirks by it were defiled, as these
that were never clean. For as (according to the old saying) all things were
set to seal at Rome, so was Kirk-buriall by that Romanist rabble, who with Esau
selling Gods grace made the people with Micah to buy Gods curse in that case.
And although at first they made nyce and long held their Abbay burials royal
and only for Kings, by whom they were founded: yet in end they were for price
exposed to the Ranget. But ere all was done, about the play end this pride
waxed so populare, that all kind of Kirkes became as common as the Kirk^
styles. Whereby by many that Heresy is yet acclaimed for heritage, though of
late conquest. Whose afterling entry falling out in the dreg of all times
(wherein the world lay besotted, and swattering in all sort of superstition)
does render it not only suspect, but also may serve for satisfaction to such
as uses to say they must ly with their fathers, of whose absence to speak
sparingly, better it were thou let them ly and followed them not in all things:
For as the most part in many actions like this, hes for their best pretense
their ignorant simplicity: So (I doubt not) if now they had life in their
boulke, they would yet ryue sheets, break bears, tumble down tombs, with
Paul's spirit at Listra, to testify their reclamation of such profanity. Act.
xiiij.

What Analogy we should observe in our burial. chapter XIIII.
THus having bewrayed whence and when Kirk-buriall corruption crop in: Restes
the other point for full resolution to show how far it is against the Analogy
of manners, as the word means. For as by the Apostles general rule of order and
decency we see what we should not, so by particular instances of this Analogy
out of the word, let us hear what we should, whereof we find a perfect
direction: for there is nothing required for the due direction in burial, that
although not in precept, yet of set purpose, otherwise is not set down. But
first we have to distinguishe between these burial ceremonies, that being
legal, were subject to Abrogation, and such as Analogy does reserve
inchangeable. For of the first that only concerns funerals, we read two
things discharged, the duty of mourning, and corporal address to the grave.
In mourning (beside the motion natural that we read in Abraham for his Sa^a.
Genesis 23. and should be in all) there was a ceremonial sorrowing for common
edification. Which though by Egiptians, it was kept in the excess of seventy
days (as no hopeless Gentile, to whom death is so great an evil, can keep
measure) yet the mourning in Israel was but made in a sabbath of days,
contenting them with the teinde of Egypts time. For as Joseph did first enjoine
Jacobs mourning to sabbaticall Genesis 50. in remembrance of that eternal sabbath
wherein our teeres for ever shall be wyped away) the season of ceremonial
sorrow was so limited thereafter as Eccle. 22. August. de Ci^i. Dei.
Herodian 4. lib. and Amon 19. testifies. Again the ceremonies of preparation
were partly used in embalming, and partly in baptizing (that is) in the
Judicial manner of bathing the bodies of their dead. The which both hes been
of old use, both in Kirk and world. As witnesses Ennius his verse, Tarquinii
corpus bona femina lauit and vnxit. Affirming the corpse of sticked Tarquin to
be both bathed and balmed. But for the ceremony of enbalming used in the Kirk,
it was at two times: to wit, immediately before first, and then immediately after
the expyring of life. The first we see in the 26. Matt. employed by Matte on
Christ verse. 12. And this ceremony in the miraculous age of the Apostles was
made a symbol for faith of their power to heal the sick, Damascen. tractat.
de Ortho. sid.
that as before Christ that oil served to cherishe expectation, so after for
application of him who was the anointed to the faithfuls comfort. Iam 5.14.
from whence afterward superstition fand out a fecklesse sacrament. Again their
dead they did likewise annoint. As to this use Nicodemus did buy his Alloes and
Mirrhe. Ioh. 19. But the Lord who on the Croce hade made consummation, by his
providence preventing that opportunity, would not be buried with ceremony, but
simply after the Jewish Analogicall manner, that is, the type taine away. Confer
Ioh. 19*40. with Mark. 15. as for their baptismes and washing ceremonies, them
they used as in life, for legal purification. So in death, for bathing a
ceremony that at the first hand was not inueterate. For in Acts 9. we read
that before Tabitha was lade up, she was washen. This custom the Apostle
respects. 1. Cor. 15. in mentioning the baptized for dead. verse. 29. for to the
Heb 6.2. where more sorts of baptism is mentioned nor one, the type and the
substance (that is) the legal sort of baptism, that did resemble, and the
Evangelical that was resembled are both contained in the words homonimie. The
usage of the which ceremonial rites, Ierus. 6. part of purificat.
he may read that list in the Iewishe Thalmudes. As for us that by the law of
christian liberrie are fred, having now fruition of the body, we have not the
use of the shadow. For although they for their suspended expectation of the
brydgromes coming, had under the Law to mourn in his absence, yet sen to us
his kingdom is come, that ceremonial sorrow we should transcharge in joyful
hymns, according to the use observed to have been in some christian funerals
by Jerome. Ierom. in the life of Paul the Hermit
And if mourn we will, yet do as Christ bade the women therein, Luke xxiij.
that is, mourn nor for death the door of hope now, but for sin deaths
mother: that so our sorrow may vent at the right vain. For sen death is
bereft of his sting in Christ, it becommes but a passage to life. And sen for
their crysme we have gotten self. Christ, and for their baptism ours, let us
not be content to change the corpse with the shadow. And this for the old
ceremonial use subject to abrogation, wherein if we do but the veil away,
there will remain the simple sort that analogy requires: for in burial betwixt
that they did, either in funerals or sepulchrals and that we should yet do,
the moveable ceremony was only the ods: that is, in being clothed in clean
linnene with Christ, Ioh. 19.40. and carried in a coffine, like the man of Nain
Luke 7.12. we may be laid (not in the Kirk, as contrare al Analogy, but) in a
comely, closse, clean, competent Kirk-ile or yard, that so associating our
selves with the predecessor saints, and not by ked in with the belly-god
beasts, that blindes the world with burial in Kirk, we may rise with the
rest, in comely array to our rest for ever.

All burial actions should tend to edification. Chapter XV.
THis for the Apostles rule touching that honesty and order required in the
analogicall use of our burial. Rests now the analogicall end that we ought to
aim at, which he calls edification, 1. Cor. 14.25. which seeing in all things
he commends, Ergo in burial. Now edification is but a borrowed word, for our
buildings are spiritual. For as Salomons many thousand artificers were
exercised about the building of the material temple: Joseph Ant. lib. 8 cap. 7.
so must we the many millions of the greater nor Salomons men, be occupied in
making up the spiritual, and in squairing our selves as the Lords lively
stones: that being sounded on all sides, we may soane aright in the Lords
aslare work the which is our edificatio^ And this in respect of the opportunity
of application can no where be more peremptorly promoued nor in burial, the
which beside that it bears in hand (even in death) immortal hope (as being
but a gathering up of Gods saints to their fathers Genesis 25. a sleep. 1 Thessalonians.
4. a seed j. Cor. xv. a rest from our travels. Appo. 19. etc.) it is a most
powerful preacher of mortification and humility. And so, Council. Colo^ part.
7. cap. 5.
mekill better it is to be in the house of mourning nor joy, that as the one
serves but to tickle our lustful appetytes yet the being in the other will
abate all carnal affection. Exemple whereof we may find even in excommunicate
Ishmael, who though he could not abide his borne brother Isaac, during the
lyfetyme of their common father Abraham, yet the sore sight of that saint his
syres death, did so tawne the truculent turk that he became content to partake
in the common pains of his fathers funerals with the son of promise. For but
the remembrance only of death or burial and their consequences (that
Ecclesias. calls our last things) is an effectual ^wband of affection and
restraint to sin. To the which use S. Jerome made his mort-head to serve. And
surely if we could but sufficiently make our use of that anotomicall
description of our immortality and misery, that the preacher sets down Eccle.
12 in such enigmaticall poesy, that as it passes all humane elegance and
eloquence, so I think it would make our craw-down fedrum fall, and make us sit
down in the dust of mortification. But, alas, the mynds of men are so
els-where bewitched, that against this Analogical end that we should propose for
edification, in steed to mortify by burial shows, they most exceed in pride
therein. So that men's nuptial festiuities ar ofttimes exceeded by their necial
folies in making their burials with the tempter. Matt. 4. a mont to show
worldly glory, rather nor with the Preacher to teach this worlds vanity. For
burials now are become the occasion not only of the brugling brags of men, but
of the contemp also of Gods house and servants. And whereas burials should flow
the honey of edification (as did the medicinal grave of Hyppocrates the honey
of health) they are rather whiles* like Herod's, whose birth day as it was John
Baptists burial. Matt. 14. so was his burial day tragical to the noble
Jews: whom to get himself mourned, he made to be slane. Joseph. anti. lib. 17
chap. 8. So then sen Kirk-buriall is at the best excuse but pride, as being a
clame of exemption from common case, and consequently against edification, the
Apostles right end, I conclude it is sin.

Of burial exemples. Chap. XVI.
NOw having found by Analogies line Kirk-buriall beyond square, it restes to
ripe up the rule of exemple. The second of the two means, that the Lord hes
employed for our easier information in his obedience. For as by prophetical
instruction we are taught what we ought to do, so by exemples instance we are
showen how the same hes been done by others: for authentic exemples are the
very practiced speculation of the Law it self. Wherein the spirit is so
plentiful, that there is no case of our conversation, Jerome on Daniel.
that may not either be qualified or controled by scripturall exemples; seeing
they are of two sorts. For some are to be noted as improper, that being
certain singular actions of some odd men, whose warrant if it wanted not, yet
being at least extraordinarly vouchsafed, they could require no ordinare
imitation. Such as the patriarchall polygamie, etc. For as the Lord said to his
two disciples (that after the counterfoote of Elias 2. Kings 1. would have
commanded a consuming fire to come down, against the in hospital Samaritanes.
Luke 9.) They are carried with an unknown spirit, that would imitate anomalous
exemples. And this sort (that thou be not deceived) the indytement of Analogy
will easily discern from proper exemples: whose use is only set down for us.
1. Cor. 10. the which likewise are of two sorts. For as the Lords laws are
either imperatiues of good or inhibitiues of ill: so are the exemples conform.
For some are of imitation to persuade good, and others of abstinence to
dissuade evil. And therefore they are to the Apostle types. 1. Cor. 10. that
is, exemples answerable to the law the Architype from heaven. And so through
this conformity of Canonick exemples to Authentic law, exemples becommes no
less nor laws. Where through we see that not only the five books of Moses
bears the title of the law, but the whole books of the old Testaments Bible
also Ioh. 10.34. and xv. 25. that so we may learn to count the comprysed
exemples for consecrate laws. For like as the sanctification and observation
of the Dominicall day (although it had no more warrant nor Dominicall and
Apostolical exemples, yet) the same does importe a vigorous necessity of law
to imitation For even as in a sea-fairing flot, the formest by sail does fuir
before with lantern and flag as fade whom the rest should follow: or like the
eagle in sore, trayning her young to flee: so did our ancient admirals and
fathers of faith pestere the righteous paths, for the use of our exemplare
imitation. But for our purpose; let us licere look what light of exemplare
laws in burial hes been borne before, for us to follow. And first as in the
word there is nothing more frequent nor burial exemple, in all the which there
is a tenorall process so equally and unchangeably euery-where observed, that
they are not only injurious, that count it without scripturall direction, but
also unjust that would infringe anywayes the old form, that in funerals we
find was simple, without pomp or pride, and in sepulchers was sober, without
superstition or profanation of any place appointed for Gods public worship. So
that this one-fold Analogy so euenly observed, did justly deserve in deed the
pragmaticall power of a perpetual law. For sen first we find the primitive
pattern of burial proponed by Abraham: next without interruption of the same a
perpetuatl practice in Israel; and last a peremptor confirmation thereof by
Christ, it can be no less nor a law to continue for ever. And to begin at the
original institution, we find it first solemnly set down in the consecration
of Abraham's conquest cave, where he designs it for burial use. Genesis 25. and
so begins the first (at least express) Cemiteriall law. For then the
faithfuls father for posterities exemple, will not lay nor be laid in Mambre,
where the altar was, but in Makpelachs cave only competent thereto. In the
which History (beside the literal sense that so planely does speak against
altar graves, and for cemiteriall simplicity) there is an elegant allegory
gathered for farther explanation. Whereby the cave in the field end may
import, that a place should be set apart for a monument of memento mori: in
looking whereon we may learn to loath this life, Benzo in hist noa^ orbis.
that once we must leave. And so like some American Kings, whose custom is to
comburie their concubines in tomb with themselves, so must we our old-mans
affections before we dissolve. Again for the process of afterling practice we
find it precise to the pattern as the own positive law. For till this day in
^ury the reserved vestigies of the synagogues sepulchers, Ier. in locis
hebraicis.
are ever seen in some apart place from thence where Gods sanctuaries was. So
that Jerusalem, howsoever memorable for the many-fold monuments of Peers and
people both (which besides the peculiar of Princes, prophets or priests) had
four sorts common to people: as the brok Kedron for Citizens, Aceldama for
strangers, Caluarie for the crucified, and Topheth or gehenna for Idolaters.)
yet all were without the very city walls, let be the temple. And so far in
the fields end, that not only for a religious respect were they separated
from the places of God, but in a politic conseate also from their own, in
permitting no city burial. And therefore is it that the Lord does at Nain
meet the corpse carried without as not lavvfull to be laid within the city,
Luke 7. Conform to the which we find some Roman laws, Criuit lib 2.
as by Emperor Hadrian, all city burial was forbid under the unlaw and
amerciament of fifty crowns. And this ancient policy we perceive practiced
in the ouldest of our own country Kirkes: that not without interuall are
situate from towns. for the farther conuenience of Kirk-courtes for buriales.
And this custom (I think) the Author of the Heb. 13. regards in allusion:
Iosep. Ant. lib. 8.

Iero. in locis hebraicis.


who reasons that in respect the Lord did suffer (and lykewaies was buried)
without the city camp, that we therefore should go without to get him where
he is. And although Iudaes Kings by princely prerogatives above populare
privilege were laid in the latte of David with himself in Sion, that makes
not against. For the middle Jerusalem (that was then the temples town) was
inclusiuely walled apart by it self, and distinct from David's city in Sion.
Durand. de Caemit.
So that if men be so nyce of their own nest and dwelling (that although once
the use was to bury at home in their house grave, yet to avoid the deads flewer
they were constrained to bury abroad) why should we presume to be so prodigal
of the place appointed for the Lords repare? For what ever in this case is
ciuilly absurd, can never be answerable to ecclesiastical honesty and order.
Now last this burial constitution of Abraham, as it was customable to his
kind, so was it confirmed by Christ in the conformity of his burial action,
as if that had been but the type of this So that as Joseph and Nicodeme,
executors of the exequies of Christ made conscience to keep that custom: So
John in his 9. calls it ((...)) that is, the Jews manner, Origin. contra
Celsum.
thenceforth christianly to be observed as being consecrat by Christ, whose
sepulcher was for the same cause, simple and at the city side. Where through
we see that this kind of imitatiue exemples are but as as many founded laws to
forfait, without favor all form of Kirk-burial. For although that according to
Isidore his destruction these exemples be not leges, Lib. Etym. 5.
that is, written as laws, but exemples for us, yet by the general name they
are ( iura) that is, rights to be observed sen to that use they are insert. For
seeing that law (that we call ius) is either natural, civil or national: it
follows, that these kind of expressed exemples of simple burial must be
laws: as being first natural, as we may read of the Emmet, and be, who
buries their dead, but without their hyues: and civil, as we heard before both
of the custom and constitution kept against city burial, let be of the
Kirk: and last, of nations, for Kirk-buriall is a thing never heard of before,
nor without Antichristianisme. Therefore the same must serve for an
irrefragable legislation. The which by Abraham's primitive institution becoming
Ius publicum, or a common law: and by Isreal's practice Plebiscitum, Aug. on
John tract. 12.
or the common conclusion: and by the common confirmation at last, obtained by
the conformity of Christ's burial thereto, becomes a constitution, implying
the edge of an edict for our perpetual imitation. As the very word that John
wayles herein ((...)) does importe, not only a custom but a constitution also.

What house a Kirk is and how far by burial it is profaned Chap. XVII.
THe contrare kind of exemples that negatiuelie are set down to exhort to
abstinence from their imitation rests to consider. For as by negative laws we
are forbidden, so by the conform exe^ples we must forbear the unlawful actions
of me^ which the Lord hes set as on the shalde shore, like beakens to warn
the shipwreake of souls: but in this our particulare, although there be
nothing more plentifully scriptured nor burial exemples, yet such a constant
conformity hes ever been kept therein, that lay aside ceremonies, we may
imitate any of all without error. And although the barbarity of Kirk-buriall (as
of old unknown) be without particular exemple, yet sen it is but Kirk
profanation, we find against it prohibitiues anew, for the general. For the
more commodious application whereof, it were here requisite once to define
what kind of house a Kirk is, that so men may make conscience to usurp the
same against the own use. What it is we may read, as it were, in that
Architectoral deliniation of the Lords pass over parlor Mar. xiiij. the which
(as it is descriued first in dimension to be high and large, next in apparel
to be comely prepared. And last, for that time at least particularly consecrate
to the Pass over use) So tells it that Bethel the domicile of God, must be
first an Ecclesie or Kirk, a tabernacle for the congregations repare, Durand de
Eccles.
that is, of such competent capacity as may easily contain the particular
flock. Next that it be for beauty a Basilick or temple, fit for contemplation
of Gods promised presence there. Matt. xviij xx. which bewty (although it must
keep bounds of christian simplicity, yet) no warrant will allow emulation in
houses humane, according to the Centuries conscience Matt. 8.8. whose roof he
acknowledged (with himself) unworthy to receive the Lord. For as David
disdained to dwell in a palice of Cedar while the Lord's Ark remaned in tents.
2. Sam 7. so Salomons palice (how princely so ever) yet was it magnificently
exceeded by the house he builded to God. Joseph. Anti. lib. 2. cap 2. Bernard.
in apolog.
1. King. 8. and 9. But this elegance (without exces) and comeliness (without
curiosity) I urge, because, alas, although the vmwhile zeal of Gods house did
eat the godly up with David. Psalm. 69. Yet now it is contrarily come to pass,
that the zeal of the godless does eat up Gods house, August. de sermon Dei in
monte.
his portion and all. And sin, that in our own experience hes been often
punished by the Prophecy of Haggai. 1.4. etc. And last the Kirk must be
according to the pattern an oratory or house of prayer. Isa. 56.7. that is,
destinate to the only end of Gods worship. So then under these three
conditions (to wit, of amplitude, ornacy; and vnprostitude chastity to any
other use nor the own) but specially the last it becommes a Kirk. As for that,
all Kirk-worshippe is under one comprised in the name of prayer by the Prophet,
there is a triple cause. First for that original encoenie or dedication
prayer, uttered at the temple consecration, it became after entitled always
the house of prayer. j. King 8. and consequently even so Kirks, because (beside
that the old holy places under the law had like the anointed persons a
mistick meaning serving to Catechize in the knowledge of Christ) they carried
also some material resemblance of such Gospel places, as should be set apart
for the worship of God. As first the Apostles Analogicall allusion of Altar and
temple worship then to Kirk ministration now imports. j. Cor. 9. and next was
acknowledged by the self Jews, in supplying the defects of the second temple
by building synagogues. Acts. xv.xxj. And last also the righteous accommodation
of the Prophecy it self Isa. 567* may proport. For there such a house of
prayer is proponed that should be Catholicklie patent to all people of the
world: which only is competent to the Evangelical temple. Mark. xj.xvij. So
then for conscience of that autentick consecration, that in common may concern
all the Oratories of God, Gratian. Deciet part. 2.
christians should not like cursed ones and Papists, usurp them to a sinister
use. For they in consecrations being more not superstitious, admitting the
uncouth exercise of burial, are contrare themselves, and prodigally profane.
Again the Kirk is called the house of prayer, because no point of Gods
worship, can either be seasoned or sanctified without prayer, as testifies the
Apostle j. Tim. 4.5. And last the Kirk is so called for the words homonimie,
or variety of sense for ( ^ephillah) that we expone prayer (like the root
that it springs from) does import more. For although the 90. Psa. in number be
entitled a prayer, yet from the matter it is rather a preaching: so that this
way to be the house of prayer by figure, is to be dedicate to the
administration only of the publict points of kirk-worship. The which points
(as being also the only undeniable and viue marks of a visible Kirk) are but
three: to wit, the word, sacraments and discipline, as if we look through the
rent veil we may soon perceive. For although there was without the temples
inner-uaile a variety of ceremonial vtensiles to be seen, yet within and
before the Arc of presence there was but three pledges of perpetual monument
consigned: the tables of the law* the sacramental vrne, and the rod of Aarons
rule, shadows of that trinity of the token^ that only may tell us where the
true Kirk is Heb 9. Where the Apost. mentioning the golden censor with all
(wherein John in the Revel. places the odoriferous prayers of the saints) means
the same that we say: that neither word, sacraments nor discipline can be in
season without prayer. So then to resume that parlor or place that is
competentlie spacious and speciose in outward form, and spiritually plenished
with no implements but the own proper three, is the only Bethel and dedicate
house to God And to assume, but burial-kirks are not such: Ergo. The Assumpion
may be seen in the misuse of the foresaid all three kirk properties. For first
by kirk-buriall kirk-bounds are so mistrammed, and in many places either so
eatten up with intaking Isles, or the passage so impeshed with thorter some
throughes: or at the least, the pauement so partiallie parted to paticulare
men, that if they cleave to that they have calked, the people that rests (as by
a proud purpresture postponed) must bide at the door. Again, the colors of
their comelines are become so uncouth, that in stead of Basilick beauty there
is often to be seen the badges of burial in black dolie duill. And the the more
to skar away christian contemplation, ye will find for object to your eye the
conuoysances of knights, portracts and pinsels of men. So that Gods seemly
sanctuary being transferred to the (without vvhited, but within rotten)
sepulchers of men odious to Christ Matthew. 23. becomes in populare opinion
thereby the alrishe Innes of bogles and Gaists. So that many for that presumed
fear dare not enter alone in the Kirk. But seeing as Tertulian says, Tertul.
de resurrect. carnis
that sepulchers are but mortuorum stabula, that is, stables for the dead,
there can be nothing more incompatible nor the same thing to be made an burial
beer, and to remain a Kirk both at once. As by weighing the scripturall
equivocations, that are bestowed on both Kirk and grave, maybe considered. For
as the Kirk hes many names in common with heaven (as Bethel, and the port of
heaven. Genesis xxviij. etc.) Even so the grave (beside the twelfe names
wherewith it is commonly called, as (...) (sometime the name of Gehenna, for
the boulkes of many muddy men that fell in that green) (...) Sepulchrum,
Sepulchretum, Mausolium, Dormitorium, Dur. de caem. Iero. on the 2. Chro 33.
Monumentum, Tumulus, Vrna, Spelunca Bustum) it hes yet seven names more, that
by scripturall equivocation are common with hell. So that the original words
of the text may be exponed to mean of either. And first in Proverb. 30.16. it
is called Schaol, R. Ios. Ben Leui.
that is a place of insatiable apetyte. Next is Abaddon, or of perdition. Psalm.
89.49 Thirdly Zal-maneth, the shadow of death. Psalm. 107. Fourthly Erets
Tachtau, the lowest parts of the earth. Psalm. 86 13. Fifthly Tit Hauon, or
myrie clay. Sixthly Borschaon, the pit of tumult both mentioned in the 40.
Psalm 3. verse. And lastly it is also called Bor Schachath, that is, the pit
of corruption Psalm. 55.24. All the which as they agree to the grave as the
grave and gate of Hell, so do they by the same figure to the golfe it self.
And by consequence, to make Bethel, or Gods house (which should be like heaven)
the place of insatiable appetyte, or of corruption, perdition, the shadow of
death, a pit of tumult, a myrie clay, etc (as in deed the Roman Kirk-buriers
do) in a Gigantomachy, they prease to commix the heaven with the hell. And
last for the use, who sees it not thereby so miserably transferred from the
own to an uncouth use, that very like these Herodians that mingled their
sacrifices with blood, Luke chap. viij. they pelmell the dead with the living
all in one Kirk. For sen burial action is of that nature that it needs no
prayer, if we shall inuey the same in prayers house, what do we else but
par-take with the profane in their Paganicall papistrie, that prays for the
dead? And so by impropriating the Lords prayer house to be a burial-Kirk we
incur profanation.

Documents against Kirk profanation. Chap. XVIII.
But to aware that sore sin of profanation, there are three kinds of documents
in the register of God, that may make us forbear: Symbolicall, to wit,
ceremonial and hystoricall. All the which we shall at least touch by the
instance of some exemples. Of the first kind there is one Exodus 3. For seeing
the Kirk is that burning Busse, whereof the bounds that were near about by
divine presence were holy, how mal-apert are men to aproche not only shodde,
but with shod-shooles to seug^ up the sanctury-ground? The ceremonial sort
among Moses his Leuiticals we find frequent. For beside that burial in Kirk
may be counted with the lintsey wolsey confusions, or like the commixtion of
sundry seeds) it may be put with the legal pollutions contracted from the
dead: the which was of such special profanatio^, that to approach the
Tabernacle under that kind of uncleanness, was punished with anathematicall
excommunication. The reverence of the which law we see Joseph is ware to incur,
even with Pharao, tovvard whom (for all his own credit) being vncleaned by
the dead, he is enforced to employ the domestics of court, to suit his
liberty of going up to Canaan, to bury his father. And hence is this old use
whereby the dore-cheeks of the dead were designed unclean by the funeral cypres
vvherwith they were decked, as the burning of bedstray of the defunct does yet: a
reason whose respect may restrain kirk burial, seeing it is but kirks
pollution. And last, for historiee of punished profanation (beside diverse among
the Prophets, 2. Macca 3. Ios ben Gor. Eb. cap. 1.
as of Huza 1. Sam. 6. and Huzia 2. Kings 26) among the profane, the exemples
thereof are infinite. As one of Heliodore, who (masgre the Priest) making
violent irruption in the Temple was scourged by God, and plagued with impotency
till the Priest prayed. But (beside these prophetical, apocriphall, or profane
proves) there is a popular experience that long since hes founded the opinion,
that beside the profanation of the whole Kirk was odious. The sacrilege but of
a Kirk-stone (though it were hid in a strong hold) were better nor a cannon of
battery to brangle down all. Then to conclude, sen the Lords Kirk is to us no
less then our Altar of lyuelie offerings Romans xij. j. the tabernacle of our
congregation. j. Cor. xj xvij. our arc of Gods presence. Matt. xviij.xx. or
temple of his worship. j. Cor. xiij.xiiij. our synagogue for the Lector of
the law and exhortation thereon. Act. xiij.xv. our Pass over parlor, let no
person presume to incur this crime of this profanation. The which as the
arch-synagogues of old did punish with apo-synagogie; so should Kirk-pastors
now ding it with the discipline rod.

Refutation of all objections making in show for Kirk-buriall. Chap. XIX.
THis ramasse of these reasons in the by gone discourse being thus made it were
time to stint here: were not the great hartted patrones of this creased cause,
hes resting some rag-footed resons that we must refute, that when their be
masked kirk-buriall shall be be-reft of her fig tree buskings, they may either
rest at the truth, or like renigate recusants refuse without reason. For all
they can bring for burial in Kirk, is builded up upon the sandy foundation of
three griplesse grounds For first there is a crafty sort that pretends reason
from the causes nature: next there is a combersome kind, that under color of
a right claim plays captane play. And last the confused commons, does argue
from their own use and others exemple. The first sect again hes two sorts to
reason the cause: The pan-sauoring Papist, and the dangerous indifferent. For
to the first no burial is blessed eneugh, Remists in Apoc. ca 9.
that is not among the memorials of martyrs, and canonized saints for their
souls help in Kirk: In the which religious reason (although both dead prayer
and purgatory might be taine in to refute, yet) I will not digress, but hold
on the point. So then where they allege that religious burial should be in
religious place, and consequently in the Kirk, they faill in their following:
Durand. de Eccesia.
as by their own domesticke distinction of hallowed places may appear. For
(fen some they call sacred as quiers, and others sancta or holy, as Kirks: a
third sort religious as burial courts) it will rather follow that burial an
action of the religious rank only ought to be restrained from the whole Kirk
to the court without. For indeed (to speak like no Papist) properly no place
by it self is more holy nor others, for all the earth is the Lords Psa 24 1. yet
in a metonimicall meaning, the continent Kirk is called sacred or holy for the
service of God contained therein, Conci. Gang
and should be secluded therefore from all other use. For what proceeding so
ever we purpose to approve before God, he propones as a condition to observe
opportunity in doing of meet time and place, to these that would find him a
thankful master: according to the document given in his censure of the
exchange in the temple. Matt. 21 For although these merchants might be excused
through their religious pretense, whose vent was to furnish the far land Jews,
being unprovided of a demisicle for the Tabernacles tribute Exodus 30. and a
turtle for the sin offering. Leuit. 5. Yet for their preposterous choice of the
place they are condemned. For upon the di^ray of making prayers house a cave of
knaves* their doom was to be scourged away for all their religious excuse.
whereinto I could wish this sort to take head: for to presume upon the
prerogative of burial, for being in Kirk-place, it were a braine-sick brade.
Greg. ans. to August Bish. of Canterb.
For as Gregory says, we ought not to love the thing for the place, but the
place for the thing it self. And if otherwise it were, why do they so
part^^lly step-barne the pursse-miserable poor from such a soul-helpe? but
hereof eneugh. Our indifferents again are well dangerous. For in making all
place alike lawful for burial laire, they cast in the Kirk as it were to the
mends. Like serpenting satan that could abide no tree vn-taisted in all the
garden. Genesis 3. But the reason of this racklesse assertion I could never read:
but by the contrare (sen indifferencies are things whose action imports
interest neither to faith nor good manners) misnurtered Kirk-buriall is not
indifferent. August. ad (...). 11^.
What if a man would but minte to burye a body in the presence chamber of a
Prince? would not the kempes of the corps-guarde not only account him as
clunishe, but cudzell him also for his capped conseate, and such idiot
indifferency? and yet it is more to misuse the cabinet of God. And suppose
that it were by nature to be ranked among indifferentes, yet it cannot remain
of that kind. For by the Apostles law 1. Corinthians. 10. all indifferent liberty
is bounded by edification and neighbourly love, the which in Kirk-buriall a man
cannot keep; because it breeds a kind of contempt of the secluded sort, and
a stumbling offense to the tender. And although it was long (yet louselie) held
as indifferent in the doylde days, yet being now but vmwhile, and as an
hes-beene, should never be more. In respect of the Kirk-sence and inhibition
served at the instance of God against Kirk-buriall by our national assembly,
conueened in the spirit of God about the first reformation. The vigor whereof
should strike upon all that are not Kirk out-lawes, unworthy of the communion
of saints: And this for the craftiest ground from the causes nature. The next
squader that commes in, are captanes of cheef, who when they have proudly
prefaced their ancester kirk merit, they sacrilegiously will usurp a
possessiue pronoun, and with a full mouth say, this kirk, or at least this
kirk-laire is mine. And so will conclude, by the law, I may ly here* But the
inspection of pieces will find this talk toome. And this kind as of most
cumber is of two sorts: the first are the patrons of the laick estate: the
rest are but portioners and possessors of old (as they allege) of a
Kirk-buriall place. The patron does reason his right to proceed of the
reservation of a burial privilege at the founding and dedication of their
Kirks by their forebeares; wherein (I think by their leave) they play fast and
louse. For what is it else to dedicate the same thing a Kirk, and yet deteene
it a burial, De cult. san. lib. 3. cap. 4.
but to give with the one hand, and to grippe again with the other? Like
Bellarmine who with a juggling distinction maks kirks as they are temples to
appertain to God, but as they are basilice that is, sumptuous buildings to
appertain to the saints of their dedication, the which gif-gaffing with God
is the very simonicall sin of Anani and Saphira his wife, punished with
perdition. Acts. 5. Against the which Esopes tail may well serve for a tant,
whose colzer and fuller taking up an Innes, in respect of their contrare
colors could not lodge together. For the colzear by cowming the walkers white
webs did weary him away to shift for himself: As by our col-blacke behavior
herein we are like to do to God. And if we look to the law of Cherem, that
is, of things devoted to God. Leuit. 27.29. we see what we once annex to the
crown of Christ's Kingdom, the union is so indissoluble that neither
prescription of time, vsucapion of person, nor bout-gate of circumstance can
give a regresse; if this greedy world could be induced to believe. So it
rightly we reason the patronall right, their tittle being onerous and not
lucratiue, 1. Sam. 2. Platina and Polidore Vug. in the life of Clement ^.
they ought the Kirk a plane patrociny and protection of law. But when by the
contrare under this patronage pretense, they either pinche the patrimony, or
yet the Kirk-place, of Laik patrones they becomme but lawless publicans, like
Hophnees with elcrookes to minche and not Samueles, to mense the offerings of
God: Or otherways like the templarian Knights, who being sometimes the kempes
of the Kirkes, became at last the contemptuous tramplers of her liberties and
robbers of her rents. Nico de Mil. in his repert. au^^um.
But this kind of patronage, though it lean on a law, yet (by old canons) it
wants place in burial that by special exe^ption hes been ever remitted to the
spiritual bar, only meet for burial decisions. And this for the Patrones
pretenses, which I pray God it may have power as much for to move their
affectiones, as it is able to convince their conscience. Again the kyndely
claim by possession that some cleaues to (that they will have so done old that
the antiquity is forgot) does rest yet to resolve. But first I would demand at
this sort (as did the King at the garmentlesse guest, that being called and not
chosen came to the wedding Mat. 22.) how came they there? for once they must
grant me the Innes was the Lords: but how their intrusion hes ejected God out,
advise with their answer till the great day, or else in time with remorse
repossesse. And if they claim title, condescend of the kind. For the Jews
do comprise all titular rights under one of three: acquisition, like Abraham's
(in the conqueis of the cave Genesis 23.) Heredation, like Isaacs (succeding
thereto) lucrifaction, like Jacobs, whose wealth was the winning of his own
hand-hammers. But none of these sorts can compass the Kirk. For if they call
it conquies or the pennyworth of their pecunial price, that is but simony sold
and sacrilege boght. Is it their heirship by ancester right? they succeed to a
vice by inquest of error. For there can be no cedence to such a succession. And
last, for to win such a wagde, sen none can propone such a pryse, I think shame
should never let them say it. The best then remains, that what herein by
cauillation, with Zacheus, they do unjustly possess, they male at least
(within him) to the interessed Kirk, an one-fold redress in the fear of the
Lord. The camshoch commons now at last coms in a rere ward to debate the
cause: who rather flytes nor forms reason, some from domestic use, others
from exoticke exemple. For use as their greatest gunne, they would seem to say
some what: alleging to a most ancient custom of keeping the predecessor lare
in burial. ^^^rian. de^. part 2.
To beeme-fill the which they may bring (I confess) some canons of counsels:
But what makes this for the cause? for though I should admit as lawful, such
earnest adherence to paternall grave, yet sen the Kirk is no burial at all,
how can it be claimed by thee through thy forbears? Or by what reason did the
first of thy upward line that lies in the Kirk, leave off his forbeares laire
that lay in the yard, if not farther yond? But this reason I may rightly
regyre: that sen the first followers of that folly in burial Apostasy, shaping
themselves schismatic Kirk-sepulchers, did lawlesly leave the ancient laire
of their better aduysed elders, they are unworthy of imitation. And to pretend
conscience of keeping use in misuse, thou wantst both right wit and sound
information. For suppose (by the Apostles order 1. Cor. 14.) the love of
parental laire be indifferently lawful, yet the necessity was never absolute,
as we show before; no not in the lawful place, let be in the Kirk. For although
Jacob seem to urge it Genesis 49. and that to entertain his posterity in full
hope to return (whereof the three patriarchall burials were a special pledge)
yet did he it without superstitious respect to Macpelaes cave. Witness himself:
in laying his departed Rachael, though not far from M^mre in Eprathaes way.
Genesis 25. and Joseph: whom the congregation conveyed (not to his forefathers
cave) but to Sechem. Ios. 24. the Prophetical pledge of his double portion.
Genesis 28. As for Ieroboams Prophet, whom for his preuarication they pretend to
have been punished with the deprivation of his paternall saire. 1 King, 13.
the Lords words means more then they mark. For (as the 25. verse may commen:
the 21.) the sense is, that being prevented by death (as he was by the lions
lench) he should never see home nor ly in the common laire by a peaceable
death. Otherwise the penalty of his presumption in the want of the usual
laire, had been but slight, seeing buried he was. So then under sko^gh of the
conscience scruple, to adheare to this uncouth use, it were but conceate and no
conscience. For beside the vnnecessity of keeping this custom, the
consideration of the impossibility of it should resolve the doubts in respect
of successional multiplications. For as neither all Adams children, no nor
Iaphets Gentiles, can be contained in grave with themselves, what tomb could
intumulate any entyre race of folks. Durand. de Caen it.
And therefore in temple foundations (because nature in grave craves
elbow-roume, and abhorres to be rufled with over frequent discovery) because
the center Kirk was both incompetent and incapable of the congregations dead,
there was always a circumferent yard of thirty foot in compass at least, or
more, if the occation of farther confluence required, set apart to burial
bounds in common to all. But if thou would stand upon a parentall society in
grave (seeing the deserters deserves to be deserted) seek upward to them that
most Analogically lived in the purest times: whose exemple thou may imitate
with less heresy hazard. For as in civil entries to heritage, if it be for
the better, men can make leap-yeare of their father and seek farther up: why
may not thou in this case bissextile some bodily forebeares, that so thou may
enter to the most immaculate aunciety and fathers of faith, whom all thou will
find not in the Kirk but in her courts buried? as I reed you do, or else in
error thou shall more err. For since use is an evil ruse where warrant is
away, let reason overrule and ordour reform. The sconce again that they
carry of others exemple, is rather found an excuse for the fact, nor a reason
for it. But the wit makes a wrong no more the better, nor did the trajection
of our first parents fall Genes. chap. 3. on the author of it satan, auailed
with God. For in sifting out their sin to the far end (from Adam to Eua,
from her to that evil one at last) as he did punish all by proportion (the
seducing serpent with a curse, the inducing Eua with a cross of subjection and
the grinding pains of her birth, the over easily adduced Adam with the care
and sweatty labors of this militant life) So may the Lord do in this process
of ours. For as the symoniacall seducers, that first lade this block before the
blind, with the immediate transmitters of Kirk-burial tradition, for this
times exemple deserves at least, at the hands of God both a cross and a
curse: the very same they may justly also incur, that does obstinatly
insiste in the trace of such foole-hardy footsteps. For the which cause then,
seeing in authentic exemples are but Egiptian reeds that do harm the hand
of him that leans on, we should look how we should live by the law, and not
to go louse by lawless exemples. And this far for such patrociny that
Kirk-buriall procutors do use pragmatically to plead. But the practicians now
keeps up for the as good, a reason in odds, that like a pittard hes more pith
nor all the rest whatsoever, that they use to take from the use of a
forehammer. The conclusion whereof in their clubbe-law, does often times make the
Kirk-dore fling on the floor. And although to beligger the lodgings of me^, for
fear of their murther-holes, they will look ere they loupe, yet to enforce the
Kirk-house (as if God had no gunnes) there are many of small fear. But to
refute a reason so rough, since it does pass our pastoral reach, in humble
reverence we remitte the same to the civil power, as by right appertains.
That they who by calling should be the foster-fathers of the Kirk, Isa. 49. may
by the rod of their charge, repress such unreasonable insolence, as they will
answer to him that set them in rank. And because that a publict law would
best rid the martch (if so be that such feet may come so far ben) I do
present this petition on the knees of the Kirk to his Highness self, that
according to our expectation founded upon his Majesty's gracious response (not
far from the Assemblies suit heere-anent) he would procure an inacted law to
beem fill the Kirk acts against Kirk-buriall: whereby secluding all from the
Kirk-laire, the great ones and good ones whom quality and condition does
exeeme from popular case, may in time begin to talk of a tomb, or else a new
I Will for burial use.

A recapitulation of some former reasons against burial in Kirk. Chap. XX.
NOw here ere I end, for the more populare application I will contriue an
clench of some former reasones in sylogistick form: by the which self-momus
may see Kirk-buriall blame vndenyablie induced: and that men may in familiar
use, as it were, bear the same about at their belt. For (beside that we have
showen it a prat of proud pride. chap. xj. etc. before) we may prove it also to
be not only a shameful superstition, but also a most perverse profanation.
And first to be superstition I prove it this way. All action that is atouer and
against the statute of the Lord is but superstition (for so the very etimologie
of the word does bear: for superstitio is quasi supra statutum. (Dei) that is
above or at over, or against the statute of God) but Kirk-buriall is above,
yea, against the statutes of God, Ergo, it is superstition. The assumption I
prove: All that is against the words Analogy is against the statute of God
(as none will deny) but Kirk-buriall is against the words Analogy. Ergo, it is
against the statute of God. The assumption I prove: All action that is against
the Apostles rule of decency and order in the manner of doing, and edification
in the end, is against Analogy (for these things he does require j. Cor. xiiij.
26. and 40. verse.) but Kirk-buriall is found to be such Ergo, it is against the
words Analogy. The assumption yet I prove in parts. First it is against
Analogicall order of burial* read the 15. chap. before. Next it is against
Analogicall decency, read chap. 18. Last it is against Analogicall edification
read chap. xvj. Ergo against Analogy, and consequently it is superstition.
Again I reason, al actions that is against the authentic exemples of the
word, that like laws are commended to us for ordinar imitation, are
superstition. 1. Cor. 10. but Kirk-buriall is so, Ergo it is superstition. The
assumption I prove by induction of time. chap. 14. and persons. chap. 17. So
that we have there clearly proved that before the time of Antichrists
discovery Kirk-buriall was unknown, and against the constant tennor and
Analogy of coemiteriall exemples that are contained in scripture: the which we
have sufficiently prouen to have the force of a law, and of necessity to be
followed chap. xvj. So then since Kirk burial is against scripturall Analogy
and exemple, it is superstition. Again that it is profanation, it is likewise
manifest by the words Etimologie: for profanum being quasi antevel extra
farum, is that that is vnholied, and depryued of sanctification. And so
contrare to the Greek word (...), which being (as many think) from a privatiue
particle (...) and (...) that signifies the earth means a sanctified or
separate thing from earthly use to an holy end. So then I reason all
transferrence of a separate thing from an holy end to a common use is
profanation. chap. xviij but Kirk-buriall is such. Ibid. Ergo profanation.
Again all Paganism or Papistry is profanation: but Kirk-buriall is both. cap.
xij and xiij. Ergo profanation. So these with the rest of my vnrecited reasons
closes up this conclusion, use Kirk-buriall no more. Against the which what
spirit will gain say but that of contradiction that Angels cannot persuade
Whereby some do prattle of burial rather nor learn to dye. But if old canons
were to urge (whereby men was provided to bury but where they paid their
teynds) I see not where a great sort of our cumber somest Kirk-buriers should
ly: who being to^-masters of the teynd^ themselves hes for-faulted their
freedom of all sort of laire. But the Lord let the world see what sacril^^g^
and profanation is, that being forewarned of the day of evil in making
redress, they may seek to be redressed in the redeeming Lord.

AMEN.

