Cristian prayers and godly meditatio^s upon the Epistle of S. Paul to the
Romans, briefly conteyninge the sum of every Chapter orderly, worthy to be
used of all the faithful in this wretched and sinful time, translated out of
Italian into English.

Imprinted at London by Wylliam Gryffith.

To my right hearty friend, master T. M. Thomas Beacon, wishes grace and
peace from God in Christ Jesus.
OF how great efficacy, virtue, strength and power christen prayer is, both
the sentences, and histories, of the holy scripture do abundantly declare. For
where at any time have the faithful desired of god by hearty prayer, wherein he
has suffered a repulse? Prayer gives victory over enemies, delivers out of
prison, preserves in dangers, keeps safe in fire, mitigateth the wrath of
God, obtains remission of sins, gets everlasting life, and purchases
for us of God all good things, whether we respect the body or the mind. Every
true Christian therefore can none otherwise than highly delight in such and so
great a treasure, whereof spring so many both necessary and profitable
commodities to the vser thereof. And albeit there are already many godly prayers
set forth in our English tongue worthy to be frequented at al times of the
faithful Christians, yet when I had perused these prayers and diligently
considered the profit of them, I thought it vnseming to defraud my countrymen
of so precious a Jewel. For in them they shall not only learn to pray truly
and according to the will of God: but also by the exercise of them they shall
learn and commend to memory the whole sum of S. Paul's Epistle to the
Romans, which Epistle in my judgment is the principal part of all the
divine scripture, forasmuch as it contains in a goodly order, yea and that
briefly, what soever is taught in the whole body of the sacred Bible necessary
for the instruction and edifying of a Christen man: so that whosoever has that
Epistle and understands the same, has obtained the knowledge of the most
necessary and principal parts of Christian religion.

Now to come by this thing, I mean, to get the knowledge of this so goodly and
profitable Epistle, these prayers made upon the same Epistle (which I have
caused to be imprinted for the profit of the readers) shall greatly help: so
that they which exercise them shall get double profit by them. And would God
some godly learned man would take the like labor in making and settinge forth
prayers upon other parts of the holy scripture, as this author has done in
this behalf. For although I discommend not the prayers made by good and
devout men (so that they be not contrary to the word of God) yet those prayers
which are made upon the holy scriptures are most to be allowed and used of the
godly Christians. For god can not disalow that whereof his holy spirit is the
Author.

These Christen prayers and godly meditations I send unto you as a pledge and
memorial of our friendship, nothing doubtinge but that, according to your
accustomed gentelnes, you will take them in good part. Thus with right hearty
thanks for your most hearty good will toward me, I wish you well to do. From
Shene the xij. day of February in the year of our Lord. 1550.

Godly and Christian Meditations and prayers made upon the Epistle of Saint
Paul to the Romans.
Upon the first Chapter.
O Jesus Christ, redeemer of the world, I thank God through thee for all his
benifites, and specially for the great gift of our redemption by thee, which
wast borne of the sede of David after the flesh, and are known the Son of
God by the divine power which thou have declared to the whole world, healing
the bodies and sanctifiing the souls of the faithful with thy spirit, the
which thou have communicated abundantly to man's generation, after that
destroying our death with thy death, thou art returned unto life for to be
everlasting life of whosoever accepts thee for their only Savior.

O my Lord, grant me so much of thy grace, that I always may be in the number
of those. O Lord, the only hope of my soul, cause me to know and to perceive
in the depnes of my heart, this thy unspeakable benefit. Exercise in me thy
healthful power, so that I may know thee always, as well the Son of God, as
the son of man. Heal the senses of my body to thentent that to my eyes,
ears, smelling, taste and touching, all those things may be abhorred which be
contrary to thy holy law. Sanctify my soul and my spirit, that they may be
a worthy habitacle of thy spirit. Make me, my Lord, to understand effectually
the virtue of thy wonderful resurrection, reviving me from day to day, and
causing me to live as dead to the world, and living to God: to whom with thee
and the holy Ghost be glory.

Lord God grant us so great love of our salvation that always we may remember
thee and none other in our prayers. Give us so great desire of thy glory that
our soul may rejoice and render thee thanks through Jesus Christ, when the
faith of the electes is seen in this darkness of the world. Give us such
perfection, that every one of us may serve thee with faith, and our neighbor
with charity in our vocation. Grant us such a taste of the fellowshipp of true
christians, that nothing may delight us more, than to comfort our selves with
them by mutual faith. Grant us such light of thy spirit that we may
understand our selves to be debteours for to distribute freely to other the
graces which by thee be given us. Grant us so much strength of spirit that we
be not ashamed of the Gospel of thy only begotten Son: the which doctrine
is accounted foolishnes to the wisdom of the flesh, but in verity it is thy
sauinge power to every faithful person. For by it is reveled and communicated
thy justice, with faith coming between, the which is planted by thy spirit in
the hearts of ye elects, and increases always, and bri^geth forth most sweet
fruits of charity. O father of mercies, grant us all these graces, that we
may always be knit in one spirit of faith and of charity with Jesus Christ
our head and thy Son, which with thee lives and reigns.

I see my Lord, by the grace that thou give me, that the knowledge of thee
which is gathered by the means of natural perseueraunce, is not enough of it
self to make us good, since it is so that men by the contemplation of visible
things created from the beginning, come into the knowledge of the everlasting
power and divinity invisible, have not glorified thee as God, neither were
thankful to thee, but vainly wandering in their own imaginations and making
profession of wisdom, became most folish, in so much that they worshipped the
creatures instead of the creator. Whereupon thy justice, for to punish their
vnthanckfulnes death deprave them of all good judgment, in such wise that they
embrace evil for good, and sewer for sweet. They have defiled their bodies
and souls with all abominable vices and uncleanness.

O Lord god of my salvation, keep me and al thy faithful servant from so
great abomination, and from such great blindness. Grant us O father of lights,
instead of the dark light of our understanding, the clear light of faith,
that we may acknowledge thee truly, and knowing thee every one of us, to love
thee, fear thee, and glorify thee, putting all the hope of our salvation in
thy mercy through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Upon the ij. Chapter.
O How great gods justice and mercy is, we are very ready to judge, and condemn
other, not perceauinge that then we condemn our own selves, for because that
now with will and now in deed, we do those things that beco^demned by us in
our neighbor, and plainly we know that after thy most just judgment,
whosoever sins is worthy of death, and certainly we wear already all
condemned to death everlasting if thy mercy and patience were not, the which
forbeareth us and calls us to repentance.

Grant us perseverance, O Lord, to understand so great a benifite, and
mollify our hearts with thy grace, to the end that our hardness and
vnrepe^tance do not increase toward us so much the greater wrath in the day of
anger when thy just judgment shall be reveled, in the which thou will tender to
every person according to his doings that is, eternal death to those which
continuing in evil works and resisting the truth, do provoke against them thy
furor. O lord suffer not that we, whom thy holy name is called upon, be nombred
among those, but for thy glory give us thy spirit, the which may teach us to
do thy will, and lead us in the way of thy most holy precepes, to glory honor
and peace everlasting, through Jesus Christ.

When Jesus Christ shall come to judge the quick and the dead, no body shall be
hable to excuse his unrighteousness with the pretense of ignorance, because
that they which have not had the light of the law written, have not lacked the
knowledge of good and evil by the law of nature: as clearly the conscience of
every on shows, the which aloweth that is good, and reproves that is evil.
But I know my Lord, that the knowledge of the law without thy grace can
nothing profit a man, because he is not just by the law. But who can observe
the same? and our nature is so corrupt and perverse, that it sees the better
and takes the worse: whereby it co^eth to pass that many do know thy will and
make profession to rule the blind, to lighten those that be in darkness, to
instruct the ignorant, and to understand thy doctrine and the verity of thy
law, and yet nevertheless teaching others they teach not them selves: they
forbid theft and adulthy, and be thieves and adulterers, they speak against
Idols, and be Idolaters, they glory of the law, and be transgressors of the
law, and slander thy holy name, and cause it to be evil spoken of amongst
the wicked. Therefore to the end that we run not into so great wickedness, and
that the knowledge of the law be not to us an occasion of greatter damnation:
write the same (O Lord) in our hearts by faith, and grant us such grace that
nothing may appear to us either so good or so profitable or so delectable, as
the observation of thy commandments: that having our hearts circumcised, we
may be thy true people, that our light may shine after such a sort in the sight
of men that seeing our good works every one of them may gloryfie thee O heavenly
father, through Jesus Christ our Lord

Upon the iij. Chapter.
MY Lord, like as the naughtines of the Jews was not sufficient to make void
thy faith of the noble promises made by thee unto that people, because that
thou art true and al men liares: semblably our iniquity can never be hable to
disanull the faith of thy promises which thy only Son has made to his
faithful congregation, saying to the same: I am with you even to the
consumation of the world. Therefore although I see the same altogether vexed,
deformed, and as a little ship in the midst of the sea beaten of furious
winds, notwithstanding I am sure that she can not perish because that Jesus
Christ, according to his promise, rules and governs her, and brings her at
the length to the port of eternal salvation. And how much greater our
unrighteousness is, so much more commendable is his justice the which forsakes
us not for our deserts, but defends us for his promise sake.

Ought we therefore to continue in sin to the intent that our unrighteousness may
commend the justice of Christ? nay, above all other things we should abhor
sin, as that which of his own nature dishonoreth Christ, and yet he by his
goodness and wisdom, of so evil sede gathers the fruit of his glory.
Deliver therefore, lord Jesus, thy Church from all slanders and from all
iniquities, so that like as now by our sins thou set forth the faith of
thy promises, so in time to come by our salvation we may glorify thy holy name.

My Lord, when thou gave thy holy law to the people of Israel, they
promised earnestly to observe the same but afterward coming to the
performance, they wanted so much of their promise, that one of the Prophets
speaking of them, says: that there is not one just, or wise, neither that
seeks after god. By the which thing it is requisite that all mouths be
shut, and all the world confess to be guilty and to be thy debtour, because
that none shall be pronounced just by the works of the law in thy judgment,
since it is so that the law does not justify, but does us to understand sin:
the which known leads a man to desperation if thy grace comfort him not.
Therefore we thank thee (O my Lord) with all our heart, for thy justice, the
which to put away our unrighteousness, thou have manifested to the world,
besides the law I mean the justice which thou do communicate by the faith
of Jesus Christ, to all them that believe, of all nations, for that without
exception every one has sinned and is destitute of thy glory, and whosoever is
justified, receaueth without any deserving, the justice of thy grace, through
the redemption wrought by Christ Jesus, whom from everlasting thou have
determined to be by the meditation of faith, the propitiation of the world
through his blood, meaning to set forth thy justice by the remission of sins
past, the which thou have suffered for to show thy justice in the time of grace,
to the intent that every one might know that thou art just and the iustifier of
every one that believes in Jesus Christ, the which with thee lives and
reigns world without end.

My Lord, when thy saints do say that we be justified freely by the means of
faith, many believe that by the preaching of faith thy holy law is destroyed:
but I through experience that thou geuest me of my self, am constrained to say
the contrary, that thy law is confirmed and established by faith, since it is
so that the man which is not justified through faith, does fear thee as a
sharp and rigorous judge, where as he that is justified by faith, loves thee
and worshippeth thee as a father: the one as a most vile slave serves thee for
fear: the other as a right loving son serves thee for love. Whereupon to
the one thy commandments do appear very grievous, and unto the other they be
very pleasant. The one having thespirite of the world through the wisdom of
the flesh loves himself and the world: the other having thy spirit by faith
loves thee and his neighbor for thy sake: and the more faith increases, so
much ye more grows charity in yt which consists all the observation of the
law. Therefore my Lord, increase in us faith, so that in us may be established
and fulfilled thy holy law, to thy honor and glory.

Upon the iiij. Chapter.
O My Lord, if that noble Abraham could not glory in thy sight yt he was
justified by his works, what ought I unhappy sinner to hope of my works?
Wherefore, like as he believing thy promises was freele justified by faith: so I
beseech thee, that I may obtain from thy mercy the free remission of my sins,
believing on Jesus Christ. And like as Abraham received the circumcision of the
flesh for a token of the justice of faith, semblably let me receive from thy
spirit the circumcision of the heart, to the intent that I may serve thee in
holiness and in justice all the days of my life. And even as Abraham receiving
the promise of posterity innumerable as the stars, he doubted not through
infidelity, neither be considered his body unable to procreation by age,
neither his wife which was baren by nature, but being strengthened by faith and
trustinge through thy word, for yt which he could not look for by his natural
reason, he believed that he should be the father of many nations, and giving
glory to thee, believed assuredly that thou wast able to perform that which
thou had promised, which raisest up the dead, and with thy word geuest
being to things which as yet be not: likewise promising me (my Lord) by thy
mercy the remission of sins and to take me for thy son and also to give me
everlasting life: grant me grace that I thereof may not doubt through
unfaithfulness, neither permit me to behold so much my unworthiness, that I
should not fasten the eyes of my mind always steadfastly upon thy verity, the
which is more able to save me, then my iniquity to damn me, and give me a
faith so strong that hopinge through thy promise for that which I could not
trust for by my sins, I may believe by the merits of thy only begotten
son, to become of the child of wrath, the child of grace and inheritour of
eternal life, and that I may render thee dew glory, believing steadfastly that
nothing is impossible to thee, whom, though I be dead in sin, thou can
revive with thy justice. If my soul be brought in a manner to nothing through
iniquity, thou have power to give it a being most noble and immortal,
restoringe in it thy image. The which grace my Lord I beseech thee that thou will grant unto me and to all other thy elects, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
the which by thy ordinance died upon the cross for our sins, and rose
again for our justice.

Upon the v. Chapter.
MY Lord, we are justified through the lively faith which thou have given us,
and be reconciled unto thee, through Jesus Christ our redeemer, which has
brought us unto his kingdom by the means of faith. Grant us O Lord, grace to
continue in thy grace, and augment in us faith in such wise, that our soul may
rejoice and glory, not only in hope of eternal glory, but also in the
tribulations of this present life, knowing for a surety that tribulation
works patience, and patience probation, and probation hope, which deceaueth
not, by thy increadible love that thou hear bear us (whereof the holy ghost
renders a most certain testimony, which is given unto our spirit) and the
passion of thy only begotten son, the which, to obey thy will, died upon the
cross for us miserable sinners and thy enemies, where as scarce might be
found one that would die for his friend either for one just and virtuous man.
If therefore thy charity toward us has been so great that while we were evil
and wicked, Christ dyed for us, much more now that we are justified through his
blood, we shall be saved from thy anger by him: because that being thy enemies
he has brought us in favor with thee by his death, much more now being
reconciled we shall be saved through his life. O Lord God, write these most
sweet thoughts with thy finger in our hearts, that being crucified by thy
grace, we may here glory that thou art our God and our father, through Jesus
Christ thy son and our redeemer. Amen.

My Lord God, man was by thee created unto thy image and similitude, that is,
most holy, just, and Lord of the world: but he through his disobedience became
unjust, ungodly, deceitful and servant of the Devil, neither should this our
misierie ever have had an end, if thy mercy had not ordained it from
everlasting that thy only begotten should be the beginning, the midst, and
thend of our salvation. Therefore we can not so much be sorry for the sin of
Adam, as we ought to be thankful unto thee for thy benifites, because that,
like as by Adam sin entered into the world and so death, even so through Jesus
Christ is come unto us life, justice and grace, a great deal more and of more
force (which we have received from thy kindness by Jesus Christ) than the hurt
that Adam has done us through his transgression, because that one sin alone
has condemned us, and the grace of Christ does deliver us from many sins.
And if by the sin of Adam death has reigned in the world, much more through
Jesus Christ life shall reign in those that receive the abundance of grace
and of justice which he gives to the faithful. Therefore like as the
disobedience of our first parents made us sinners and worthy of eternal death,
so the obedience of thy son makes us just and worthy of eternal life: And if
afterward the law taking place sin did abound, the Gospel coming after the
law, grace has much more abounded, to thend that like as sin has reigned
which leads to death, so now grace may reign that justifies and guides
such as believe unto eternal life, through Jesus Christ thy son and our
redeemer.

Upon the vj. Chapter,
O Jesus Christ my Lord, we are dead and buried in baptism and be risen again
with thee as thy true members. Therefore my lord with thy spirit mortify our
flesh and quicken our spirit, that we may lively perceive the virtue of thy
death and of thy resurrection. If our old man be crucified with thee, to
the intent we might walk toward heaven in the newnes of life, why in us as yet
do live the lusts of the flesh which do draw us unto the earth? Why do they
not suffer us to work all that which the spirit desires? O our Savior,
hear our lamentations and help us for the glory of thy holy name sake: and if
we be verily thine, make us in deed conformable unto thy image. And like as
death after thy glorious resurrection has no more power over thee, but being
destroyed by thee thou live eternally with God, semblably we all being
releued by thy grace, permit not (my Lord) that we be any longer maistered of
sin which is the death of our soul, but grant us grace to live always to
thee, and to sanctify our souls and bodies to thy service, to thend that unto
thy honor may be set upon the earth a resemblance of that holy and blessed
life which we shall live in heaven after the last resurrection.

Upon the vij. Chapter.
MY Lord, when I consider the great corruption of man's nature, on me comes a
horror and incredible fear of my self, since it is so that while thou
leauest man in his darkness and in his ignorance, he has never true fear of
thee, nor true knowledge of thy law, but may be well compared unto foolish
beasts, and is verily like unto them, and now thinks that sin which
reigns in him is dead, and it lives. But when thou give him such
perceueraunce that he is hable to see and to consider to what thing the law
binds him, then sin showing forth his force declares it self alive,
horrible and very mighty, and man is known to be most weak and worthy of
death, because that the law is spiritual and requires the purity of the
heart, and man is carnal and full of affections and of unclean desires. The
law commands that a man should love thee with all his soul, with all his
heart, and with all his powers, that he put al his hope in thy mercy, and that
he direct al his doings to thy honor: but man loves himself above all
things, he depends upon creatures, and is most desirous of glory, and for
every little trifle he is angry with his neighbor, and (as much as he can)
persecuteth him, whereas the law commands him that he should love him as
himself. Finally the the law forbids the desire of the flesh, and the more
it is forbidden, so much more it wareth fierce, and bringing forth fruit to
death, increases damnation. Likewise sin which dwells in man, taking an
occasion by the law that is holy and just, becomes more mighty and more
pernicious, and by the law, in which is set forth justice and life, is gendred
in man death and unrighteousness. And while the power of the law lasts there
continues enmity of man with thee and with the law. Let therefore (my lord)
thy mercy be blessed the which has brought us from most grievous bondage of the
law unto the most pleasant liberty of the gospel, and to the kingdom of
grace, and in the stead of the face of Moses, which fears, threatens,
curses and condemns, serves us the face of Christ which assures, blesses,
and saves us, giving unto the faithful the holy ghost, the which delivering
them from the yoke of the law, makes them in love with thee and with the
law, that living justly and holily upon the earth, we may live in Paradise
eternally, through Jesus Christ our Lord. We beseech thee my Lord, when that day
shall come, and when this most grievous battle shall end, that the spirit may
not desire against the flesh, and that the flesh likewise may not desire
against the spirit: which eftsoon makes my life very bitter, because I do
not that which I would, but I do that which displeases me. Albeit, it is not I
that any longer in this wise do work, but the sin that dwells in me, for
that I know there dwells not in me, that is, in my flesh, any goodness. Then
it is so that I have a good will, but I can not do that good which I desire.
Wherefore I do not that good which I would, but that evil which I would not. And
if I do that evil which I would not, it is but the sin that remains in me.
This I say because thy holy law deliteth me as touching the inward man, that
is, as concerning the spirit, the which is prone and bent to serve thee and to
live after the order of thy law. But I se an other law in my flesh, that is,
an other inclination that strives continually against ye inclination of my
spirit, and makes me prisoner and servant of the tyranous law of sin, the
which is directly contrary to thy holy law. Whereby it comes to pass, that
like as my spirit is wholly given unto justice and to holiness, and desires the
death of the body for to live with Christ, far from the greuaunces of the
flesh: even so my flesh is delited with iniquity, it fears nor loves thee
my Lord, neither gives credit to thy promises: it loves the entisements of
the appetites and the pomps of the world, neither wishes ever to come to an
end of this mortal life. Unhappy person that I am, who shall deliver me from
this defiled and sinful flesh? from this mortal clod of concupiscence, the
which never gives me rest, but always vexes me, and continually fights
against my spirit. I yield thee thanks my Lord, through Jesus Christ, which
with the sacrifice of his flesh has purged all the sins of my sinful flesh,
in so much that they be not imputed to me by thee to damnation. In the mean
season I live after thy spirit and through lively faith I am partaker of the
most pure flesh of Christ, which at length shall make my corruptible flesh
conformable to his glorious flesh, and shall deliver me from the body of this
death, making that which is carnal, spiritual, after such sort that all the
lusts and rebellings of the flesh shall be brought to naught, that all the
parts of my body and of my soul and of my spirit might be pure, holy and
clean, and most ready to accomplish eternally thy holy will.

Therefore I that in times past was wont to serve with the mind of my flesh to
the law of sin, now with a mind renewed by thy spirit I serve thy law, my
Lord: but with the remnantes of my flesh, that is, of the old man, I serve
nevertheless the law of sin, and do know my self so far from the
perfect justice of thy holy law, that altogether I should despair of my
salvation, if I did not acknowledge Jesus Christ for my redemer and for my
justice. To him with thee be glory everlastingly.

Upon the.viij. Chapter.
MY Lord, my soul melts for swetenes, when I read these most sweet words
pronounced by thy spirit: that they be free from all condemnation which be in
Christ Jesus, which do not live after the flesh but after the spirit, because
that the law of the spirit and of the life which is in Christ Jesus has
delivered me from the law of sin and of death, so that now I am become by
thy grace a member of Christ Jesus, the which making a sacrifice of his flesh
upon the tree of the cross, has destroyed sin and death, to justify and
to give us eternal life, that we should not live after the flesh but after the
spirit, because that if we shall live after the flesh we shall dye, for that
the affection of the flesh is contrary unto thy holy law and to the spirit of
Christ, which is the fountain of life. Mortify therefore my Lord, the
affections and appetites of our flesh, that the spirit of Christ may live in
us, the which now shall sanctify our souls with his presence, and thou
hereafter shall make glorious and immortal our bodies in the last resurrection.

My Lord, if the people of Israel have gloryed so much of the law, by the
which they received the spirit of bondage that engenders fear: how much more
ought we Christians to rejoice of thy gospel, by the which we receive thy
son, whose spirit brings forth love, and gives us boldness to call thee
father. O my Lord, grant me to taste so much of thy spirit, that my soul may
only glory of this incomprehensible treasure. Cause my lord, that thy spirit
always may render testimony unto my spirit that I am thy son, and
consequently thy heir and coheritour with Christ, which through reproach and
bitter death entered into the kingdom of glory and of life. Therefore my Lord,
strengthen my heart so that following thy steps I may boldly set thy cross
before the honors and pleasures of the world and this temporal life, loking
with patience for the redemption of my body, and knowing for a suertie that the
tribulations which be sustained in this world for Christ's sake, be not worthy
ye glory which shall be reveled upon us in the world to come. And for because the
invocation of thy holy name is our only refuge in our afflictions, and I of my
self know not how to pray as it is mete, let thy holy spirit (O Lord) help
my infirmity, direct my prayers: and in my tribulatio^s comfort me,
certifyinge me that like as to Jesus Christ all things wrought together for the
best when he seemed to the world forsaken of thee: semblably every thing helps
the salvation of those which love thee, and be called by thee after the
determination of thy good pleasure, because thou have appointed from
everlasting that thy children should become conformable to the image of thy
son in the cross and in glory, to thend that he might be the first begotten
among many brethren. If therefore (my Lord) thou have showed me this favor, to
call me unto this brotherhod, why should not I glory with my self in the
cross of Christ, specially knowing that thou iustifiest them whom thou
call, and do gloryfie those that be justified by thee. And if thou be
with us, who shall be against us? If thy charity was so great, that to deliver
us from death, thou have given to death thy son, how can it be that thou will
not grant us with him al things? Who then shall be so bold to accuse at thy
judgment seat thy electes? If thou by thy mercy assoylest them and acceptest
them for good and just: yea if Christ be dead to deliver them from damnation,
and be risen again and ascended into heaven to make intercession for them, who
shall be hable to condemn them? And if thou have given us so great and worthy
gages of thy love, who may make us believe that thou love us not? Whether
tribulation, misery, persecution hunger barenes, dangers, or swerd? yea I do
believe that all these things shall cause us to be more certain of thy good
will toward us, because that through thy grace we shall overcome, and in
ouercoming let us understand and be assuredly persuaded that we shall have the
upper hand in all our temtations. I beseech thee, my lord, to confirm us with
thy spirit in this holy persuasion, so that every one of us may say with thy
Apostle: I am sure that neither death neither life, neither Angels, neither
princes, neither powers, neither things present neither things to come,
neither highness, neither lownes, neither any other creature shall be able to
separate us from the love that God bears us in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Upon the.ix. Chapter.
MY Lord, when thy saints do say that the predestination of the electes does
not depend of man's works but of thy mercy, because that only they be saved
which by thee be chosen through grace: the wisdom of man can not abide this
verity, saying that this being true, thou shoulddest be unjust, cruel and
parciall: As though that if a potmaker can make of one lump of clay some
vessels to honor and some other to dishonor, it might not be lawful for
thee to fashion of one self substance some men to perdition, which be the
vessels of wrath, in the which does appear thy just judgment, and some
other to salvation, which be the vessels of grace, in whom is set forth thy
glory. But the wise of the world say as pleases them. I for my self (my Lord)
do render thee infinite thanks that it has pleased thee that eternal life
should depend of thy mercy and not of man's will, because that my corruption is
so great, that I am sure I should go into perdition, if my salvation did depend
upon me. And I know for a suertie that every one to whom it shall be granted by
thy grace to enter into the knowledge of his vanity, will be of the same opinion,
because he is wretched which trusts in his own power, and blessed is he that
puts affiaunce in thy mercy throuh Jesus Christ our Lord.

Upon the x. Chapter.
MY Lord, I know by experience that thy only begotten son Jesus Christ, is
thend of thy holy law, because he promises life to all the fulfillers, and
curses the transgressoures thereof. But how much more a man understands the
law, and is inclined to observe the same so much more he knows himself for
a sinner, and does despair of his own strength. And for what end does the
law bring a man to desperatio^? To this end that he might be constrained to
run unto Jesus Christ the only Savior, whereunto the justice of faith
exhorts him, speaking to him in this wise: O sinful man despeire thou not
for thy unrighteousness, for if thou will believe with thy heart and confess
with thy mouth, that Jesus Christ very God and very man, dyed for thy sins,
and is risen again and ascended into heaven for thy justice, thou shall be
just and saved. Grant therefore (my Lord) for the glory of thy holy name, a
lively faith to those which be as yet under the law, that believing and
confessing with heart and with mouth the Lord Jesus, they may be justified and
receive thy holy spirit, the which writes the law in their hearts, and of
servants of the law makes them thy children, and leads them by the way of
good works unto eternal life, the which thou have promised to every one that
shall believe in Jesus Christ our Lord.

My Lord, thou have promisod that who so ever calls upon the name of Jesus,
shall be saved. But how be they able to call upon the name of Jesus, which believe
not in him? and how shall they believe in him if they have no knowledge of him?
and how shall they have the same, if thy gospel be not purely preached unto
them? and how shall it be sincerly preached if thou send not faithful preachers
unto them? Send therefore my Lord, preachers unto thy people, and open our hearts
with thy spirit, to thend we may lively believe thy word, and believing may call
upon Jesus Christ our mediator, and by calling upon him we may be preserved
from thy anger, because that without his protection, no living creature shall be
justified in thy sight, since there is not given unto men under heaven any other
name by the which they may be saved, but the name of Jesus our redemer, to
whom with thee and the holy ghost be glory world without end.

Upon the.xj. Chapter.
MY Lord, we are thy faithful, but greater is the number of ye unfaithful. The
which thing may minester an occasion unto our flesh to wax proud, if thy
spirit did not restrain it. Grant us therefore grace (my lord) that we may
know our faith to be the gift of thy mercy, and not the reward of just works
which we have done: So yt we ought not to put our affiaunce in our selves, but
to fear, because that if thou should leave us in the power of our own
disposition, we should fall into incredulity: like as contrary wise they that
be now unfaithful shall believe if they shall be visited with thy mercy. O the
depenes of the riches of thy wisdom and of thy knowledge. How unsearchable be
thy judgments, and thy ways impossible to be found out? And yet not
withstanding man's wisdom presumes to call thee in judgment, and to require
the reason of that thou do. From this wicked presuption keep us (my Lord)
and grant us grace to be fools in this world, to thentent we may be wise in
thy sight, for that the wisdom of the world is folishnes with thee, to whom
be honor and glory.

Upon the.xij. Chapter.
MY Lord, grant me grace that like as thy only begotten son offered up in
sacrifice his flesh upon the tree of the cross for our salvation, semblably
we may make a sacrifice of our selves to thy glory, by mortifying our will and
our reason in the service of faith. Wherefore let thy spirit live in us, the
which permits not us to be conformable to worldly men, but transformeth us
into thy image through the renewing of our mind, to thend that we may know and
work thy holy will, in the which consists felicity and perfection. Grant
my lord, that every one of us may be sober, neither let us presume of our
selves more then that which is convenient, but humbly contain our selves
within our vocation, in exercising that talent faithfully which thou haste
given us to profit our neighbor. Give us (my Lord) a pure love, to thentent
we may be lovers of goodness. Make us fervent in spirit, diligent in thy
service, pacient in adversity, continual in prayer, loving and gentle toward
our brethren, keeping hospitality, glad with them that be glad, sorry with the
sorrowful, of one mind and of one accord: not proud and arrogant, but gentle
and courteous to our inferriours: not sclaunderous, but showing good example to
al men: not contentious, but quiet: not revenging, but ready to forgive. Pour
into us my lord, so much swetenes of thy spirit, that every one of us may
bless and not curse, pray for his persecutours, and not be overcome of evil,
but overcome evil with good, recompensing wrongs with well doing, that we
being holy and perfect, through our perfection and holiness thy holy name may
be gloryfied.

Upon the.xiij. Chapter.
MY Lord, I see many among Christian people the which under the pretense of
the liberty of the Gospel (which is all spiritual) do hide the licentiousnes
of the flesh, and will not obey their superiors: as though the powers being
ordained by thee, he did not resist thy ordinance, and condemned not himself
whosoever resists power.

Therefore we pray thee, my Lord, that thou will grant us grace to obey redily
the commandments of our heads, the which now are not against thy ordinances,
and make us to render willingly that which is our duty, to every person,
either reverence, either tribute, either honor, or what soever it be, that we
may remain in nothing dettoures one to an other, but only to love together,
because that love is the acomplishment of the law. Behold now the night
approaches to an end, and draws near to the day of eternal life. Therefore
(my lord) send forth thy spirit that may cleanse our souls from the works of
darkness, and put upon us Jesus Christ thy brightness, causing us to live after
such a sort, that our life may be a true rese^blance of him, to the honor and
glory of thy holy name.

Upon the.xiiij. Chapter.
IESV Christ my Lord, I perceive by the light that thou have given me, that I
ought to accuse me self, and not to judge other: nevertheless I hear
oftentimes the accusation of my self, and do take upon me wrongfully the
judgment of my neighbor. Therefore I heartily beseech thee, that thou will
vouchsafe to restrain this my presumption with thy spirit, saying unto my
soul I was dead and am risen again to be Lord of the dead and of the living:
wherefore then iudgest thou thy brother? Speak these words O Lord unto my soul,
and make them to enter into the bottom of my heart, that in time to come I may
forbear to judge an other, and attend to the consideration of my self, living
in such wise that I may not be condemned in thy judgment, but be called to
possess with thy elects the kingdom of everlasting life

My Lord, thy kingdom is justice, peace, joy in the holy spirit. Grant us
therefore faith that justifies, and peace which pacyfieth the conscience, and
the joy that sweteneth the bitterness of the world, that we may know by these
most precious gifts, that we are heirs of thy kingdom, and may serve thee in
justice, peace, and ioyfulnes all the days of our life.

My Lord, for as much as all that is not done in faith is sin, we beseech thee
that thou will give us so much strength of spirit that neither fear, neither
hope, neither tribulation, neither prosperity may entise us to do any thing
the which we believe does displease thee, to the end that living in faith and in
fear, we may always prefer thy holy will before all things.

Upon the.xv. Chapter.
O Lord Jesus Christ hear our prayers, and pour thy love into our hearts, that
setting aparte all carefulnes of our own commodities, we may procure with all
our endeavor the profit and the salvation of others: like as to deliver us from
the bondage of the devil and of death, thou becamest a servant, and taking
upon thee all our iniquities, have cancelled them with thy blood upon the
cross. And even as thou came to save not only the people of God, but all
other nations the which worshipped false gods: semblably grant that we may be
benificiall and liberal toward our familiars and strangers, toward our friends
and enemies, neither permit any dissension to rise among us, to thentent that
by all men, with one spirit and with one mouth together, the holy name of thy
eternal father may be gloryfied. Replenish my Lord, with peace and with
spiritual joy, our hearts, increasing in us faith, that hope may abound in us
by ye power of thy spirit, the which leads us by the way of love unto thy
holy kingdom.

Upon the xvj. Chapter.
MY Lord, grant us grace to believe, and without contradiction to obey the
preachers of thy word, which do preach purely Jesus christ and the Gospel, and
suffer us not to be deceived by preachers which do come in the form of sheep
and be ravening Wolves, and wander about, causing division and offenses, as
those that serve not Christ Jesus in the Gospel, but their belly by false
doctrine, and with the sweet venom of their words do corrupt the hearts of
the simple. Keep us my Lord, from the deceit of such, and grant us grace to
be prudent and wise unto good, and pure and simple as infants unto evil, and
tread down shortly under the feet of thy faithful, Satan with his
ministers, that thy gospel may be sincerely preached in all parts: the which
thou have promised by thy prophets in the holy scripture, and the fulness of
time being come, thou haste declared by thy Apostles to the whole world that
whosoever shall believe: and be baptized shall be saved, through Jesus Christ our
redemer: the which with thee lives and reigns in the unity of the holy
Ghost world without end. Amen.

FINIS.
A prayer to be said at the reading or hearing of gods word.
O Eternal and most merciful God: whose word is the light unto our steps,
and the lantern unto our feet: we most humbly beseech thee to illuminate our
minds, that we may understand the mysteries contained in thy holy law, and
into the same self thing that we godly understand, we may be virtuously
transformed, so ye of no part we offend thy high majesty, through our Savior
Jesus Christ. So be it.

Vertit vt Chamaeleo corpus hirtum,
Praeter albentes, maculas in omnes:
Sic adulator tenet omne recte,
praeter honestum.
printer's device of William Gryffyth, featuring a griffin (McKerrow 157) ^
GEVE ^ GOD THE GLORY NOW ^ AND ^ EVER ^ MORE ^


IMPRINTED AT LONdon in Fleetestrete, at the sign of the Faulcon by VVylliam
Gryffith, and are to be sold at his shop in S. Dunstones churchyard. 1569.


