A schole of wise Conceytes, Wherein as every Conceyte has wit, so the most
have much mirth, Set forth in common places by order of the Alphabet.

Translated out of diverse Greek and Latin Writers, by THOMAS BLAGE student of
the Queens College in Cambridge.

Printed at London, by Henry Binneman, dwelling in Knight rider streate, at
the sign of the Marmayd. CVM PRIVILEGIO.

The names of the Authors used in this Book.
LAurentius Abstemius. Aulus Gellius. Plinius Secundus Nouocomensis. Nicolaus
Gerbellius Phorcensis. Petrus Crinitus. Angelus Politianus. Aesopus. Gabrias.
Gulielmus Gowdanus. Anianus. Ioannes Antonius Campanus. Horatius. Gerardus Lew.
Poggius. Bebelius. Brasitanus. Adrianus Barlandus. Erasmus Roterodamus.
Hermanus. Rimitius.
Virtutu^ non minus quam literarum splendore clarissimo viro D. Guilielmo
Chester equiti aurato, salutem, and in agnita veritate constantem zelum, a
Domino IESV, vnico omnium piorum seruatore, Thomas Blage Cantabrigiensis optat,
atque ex animo precatur.
OMnes qui hac tempestate elucubrationum suarum, fructu aliquo Reipub. prodesse
volunt (vir ornatissime) id mihi polliceri videntur, imo praestare merito
debent, vti omnino aliquid in lucem proferant, quod ad Christiani hominis
institutum, aut alioqui ad bonos mores componendos pertineat. Me vero si
quispiam rogitet cur (...) potissimum transfer aggrediar, huic ita responsum
volo: Quia ta^tum in se (...) disciplinae ad corruptissimos nostri soeculi
mores eme^dandos complectantur, adeo vt vel minimi quispiam iuditij, in his
aliquantisper versatus, meliora prosequi, deteriora fugere discat: atque hoc
citra laborem, quod in locos communes redigantur, and vnicuique rei sua Fabula
(quantum potui) vere accommodetur. Proinde amicorum praecibus compulsus, hoc
opus aggredi, absolutumque in lucem aedere, Patronum aliqucm mihi quaerere
decreui, sub cuius angusto nomine hic Libellus exiret: cumque animi oculos,
huc, illuc, non parum volutassem, tu mihi tandem prae alijs magis arrisisti,
tum nonnullis de causis, quas impresentiarum omitto, tum quia inter caeteros
clarissimae huius Ciuitatis ornatissimes vires, nominis tui splendour been
audiat: saxitque omnipotens Deus, vt indies, quoad fieri potest, vna cum nomine
cuncta foeliciter cedant. Accipe igitur pro tuo in nos studio, haec (licet
exigua) and remissis interim grauioribus curis, haec leniora perlege. Gratius
enim animi mei (...), aut luculentius meae ergate obseruantiae symbolum dare
nequeo. Superest vt Christum Iesum comprecemur, tibi vt and vitam, and
incolumitatem largiatur, and istum animum quem indidit, semper in maius
prouehat. Vale. Cantabrigiae vigesimo Decembris. Anno partae salutis 1569.

Ad eundem (...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...):
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
A Dialogue between the Author and the Printer.
Author. AS I did musing lie,
with sundry thoughts oppressed,
Seeking to salve my careful mind,
of pain to be redrest:
And pondring how my youth
full ydiely I had spent,
In scilence only wrapped up,
my mind it did torment.
From darkness unto light
I thought it best to call,
By setting forth some little book,
which profit might us all.
And that I did intend
is brought now to effect.
At idle hours I did it pen
as time would me direct.
The work you plainly see,
friend Printer what it is,
Declare if printing it deserve,
and what there is amiss.

Printer. Your meaning I perceive,
your purpose I allow,
In that you are so diligent
to prosecute your vow.
And as in ages all,
those have their praises due,
Which painfully do run their race,
and idleness eschew:
So can I not mislyke
your noble enterprise:
Which seek to help your countrymen,
with this your fine devise.
But shall I tell you plain,
herein what is my mind?
Be think this work was done before,
and it in print I find:
For Esope as you know,
already englisht is:
And what does yours, but taste of him?
naught do I see but his.

Author. This briefly understand,
that Esope is not last
In this my book, nor only he
alone does stand aghast:
But sundry writers else
about him here do stand,
Both witty, learned, eloquent,
as has been taken in hand.
Besides, if well you mark,
comparyng that with mine,
It is as near as East to Weast,
and dross to Silver fine.
Uncomely tales in that are found,
and most absurd to read,
Of reason void, of mirth bereft,
to no good end they lead,
No head nor foot in them is had,
but set confusedly,
On Esope falsely forged tales,
what man can it deny?
As in the life of Xanthus wife,
and others he does write
So rudely, falsely, foolishly,
how then should this delight?
Of Esope that I write,
the Greek text does allow.
Dissenting clean from that you think,
let this content you now.
In common place it is reduced,
applying as I might,
So truly, unto every thing
his proper place and right.
From ninteene authors else,
I have selected out,
Their fine devise, their sayings wise,
their pleasant deeds and stout.
The truth hereof you hear,
first try, then judgment give:
If contrary you find to this
then do not me believe.

Printer. I have compared since
your doings unto his,
And contrary to that I thought,
I find that now it is:
Besides uncomely tales,
and falsely forged Fables,
Wherewith his book replenisht is,
perceive I many bables.
For yours and his do far
in every case dissent,
I see from whom you do derive,
your doings and intent.
To answer your demand
full ready am I pressed,
And will hereafter when you list,
accomplish your request.

FINIS.
To the gentle Reader, in the commendation of Fables.
AS I reuolued in my mind the sundry kinds of Writers, which for the profit
of Man have put in remembrance their imaginations, they that have writ Fables
are to be accounted with the rest: for they have not only wonderfully
delighted the hearts of men, but also have more allured them to do things both
good and profitable with their Fables, than Philosophers with their precepts.
For they with such a sweetness do so pierce the hearts of the Readers, and by
similitudes do declare (which are of much force to move affection) what men
ought to take, and what to refuse, that thereby they are compelled, against
their wills to agree unto them. For the mind is disdaynfull to hear, neither
will it easily abide things profitable and honest, except they be poudered
with some merry ieste Hereunto bears witness a certain Orator of Athens, who
on a time speaking to the Athenians, when he perceived them less attentive,
required them that they would vouchsafe to hear a Fable: they were contented:
then he began thus: Ceres, the Swallowe and the Egle sometime iorneyed
together, when they were come to a river, the Swallowe flue over, and the Eele
swam through the river: when he had so said he held his peace, then they
asked him what Ceres did? Your Gods (quod he) are offended at you which will
not hear them that counsel you for your profit, but if they tell any tales ye
hear them willingly. What force fables are of to move affection, I could
declare by many examples, yet will I propound but three. The inhabitants of
Samos would have put their ruler to death, whom Aesope dissuaded saying: As a
Fox passed over a river, he was driven into a ditch where he stuck so fast in
the mudde, that he could not escape, who^ the flies stinged: the Hedgehog seeing
him there, moved with compassion, asked him if he should drive the flies from
him. No (quod he) for these are full with my blood and can little trouble me,
but if thou should drive them away, other hunger sterued flies will occupy
their romes, and suck out all the blood that is left within me. The like shall
happen to you O Samians, for if ye slaye your Ruler which is so wealthy, ye
must needs chose others, which whiles they enriche them selves, shall poll you
of all that this man has left: wherewith all the Samians being moved, left off
their purpose. By the like means was Tiberius Caesar persuaded, when he
appointed for every day Magistrates, whereupon (as Josephus tells) the
Country of Jury was governed by Cratus and Pilatus only by the space of
twenty years. For (as Statius says) he that rules but a little while,
shows small favor to the people. The Himerians sometime minded to chose
Captain of their army Phalaris the tyrant of Agrigentum, whom Stesichorus
the Poet with this Fable discouraged from their purpose, saying: A horse fed
alone in a meadow, at length came a Heart thither and spoiled it: whereupon the
Horse took the advice of man, by what mean he might be revenged, to whom the
man said: If thou will take a bytte in thy mouth and suffer me armed to get
upon thy back, whose counsel he followed, and by his help put the Heart to
flight and became the conqueror, but from that time forth he could not rid his
mouth from the byt nor the man from his back. Even so (said Stesichorus) the
like shall happen to you, if ye chose Phalaris your captain, for your enemies
ye shall subdue, but ye shall be in bondage to this Tyrant for ever: with
which words the Himerians being discouraged, forsook the counsel to chose
such a Captain, what time the people of Rome separated themselves from the
Senators, because they paid tribute and were combred with warfares, did not
Agrippa Menenius turn them from their purpose with this fable? Sometime (quoth
he) ye Romans, the members of man perceiving the belly to be slothful, fell
at variance with her and determined to give her no longer any succor. It
happened, that, because they denied her nourishment, they became faint,
whereupon they were at one again. In like manner the Senate and people of Rome
are as the belly and members, which need one of another help, and as by
discord they perish, so by concord they are of strength: By which Tale the
people turned from their purpose and became friends again with the Senate.
Therefore not without good cause both the Greek and Latin Poets, as Hesiodus
and Horace, have mingled such Fables amongst their works, and also the
chiefest and famous Philosophers, as Plato, Aristotle, and Plutarche, with many
more, have highly commended them, whose opinion was, that they much auayled to
the instruction of a moral and civil life: wherefore Leouicenus and Valla, of
late writers the best learned, did translate Fables out of Greek into Latin,
which they knew would be to their praise, and to the delight and profit of
others: Neither were they deceived, for they are daily read of most learned
men. I can not therefore perceive, why by translating these Fables, I should be
defrauded of the praise due to me, which other have had, except we be so
spiteful, that to us that is not lawful, which with great commendation to the
Grecians and Latinistes is allowed. Fare well.

The first Fable, of the Penance of the Wolf, the Fox, and the Asle.
THe Wolf, the Fox, and Abuse of the simple.
the Ass sometime iournied together toward Rome, to obtain remission of
their sins: In the way (because they thought the Pope would be otherwise
occupied, that he might not intend them) they agreed to be shriuen one of an
other, and to suffer Penance at their discretion. The Wolf therefore made his
confession to the Fox in this manner: That he saw a sow which had.xij. pigs,
the which walked alone in the fields, wallowing in fatness, and suffered her
pigs at home to starve: wherefore he devoured the sow, because of her heinous
offense in forsaking her young ones: and after, being moved to pity, he killed
also the pigs, to rid them out of their pain, and eat them up: This he
told with tears, desiring to know what penance he should do therefore. In
faith (quod the Fox) thy fault is not great, say once a Pater noster and then
thou shall be pardoned. Straight after, the Fox began his confession thus: A
countryman had a Cock of the game, which bet and vanquished all other cocks
near about, who with his shril crowing, troubled in every quarter, not only
the hole, but also the sick persons, especially those which had the headake,
whose pride I could not well away with: as I found him therefore on a time
abroad with the hens, I caught him, and carried him away to my hole, where I
devoured him: for which deed the Hens kackled against me, and troubled me with
their crying: I therefore to revenge the injury done unto me, tore many of
them in pieces and eat them: herein I confess that I offended, therefore I
require pardon. Hereunto the Wolf said: Thou did well in qualifying the
noise and pride of the Cock and Hens, and therefore it is but a small fault,
yet will I join thee this penance, That the three frydayes following, thou
eat no flesh, if thou can get none: for I will show thee as much favor,
as thou did to me. Well now Sir said they to the Ass, let us hear thy
confession, who began thus: My moyling and drudgery which I endure, is not
unknown to you my Lords, as in carrying of corn sacks, stone, wood and water,
yet once I offended, whereof I repented me full often: For a servant of my
Lords, appointed ruler over me, being once a cold, a straw appeared out of
his shoo, which I snatched away from him, whereby he took great harm and
cold of his feet. Therefore be merciful unto me, and join me some penance.
But they said, what haste thou done thou thief? Mary fie on thee, by thy means
that servant had such hurt of his feet, that we think he is dead thereof,
whereby thy soul is damned, and therefore thy body ought not to escape scotte
free, then they killed and devoured him.

Moral. The mighty and rich men in like manner do pardon one another, but to
the poor they are hard hearted and inexorable.

2 Of the Spider and the Gowte.
A Spider nigh weeried with continual Abu^danc^ sometyme^ perilous.
labor, ceased of his work and walked abroad for disport: whom the Gout
met, and accompanied as fast as he could, though it were with much pain: when
that days journey was nigh at a point, they approached near to a little town
called Tuche, where they determined to seek fit lodging for their purpose. The
Spider took little heed but turned into the house of an exceeding rich man,
where on every side he set up his streamers. The^ were straight at hand, those
like Devils in a play, which cast down his webs, and as fast as he set them
up in any part of the house, they were swept down: he could not work so
closely, but it was found out, such was his misery, that in a house of so
much wealth and abundance, he only wanted and was thrust down. But the Gout
went like a beggar, (which caused him to be the longer without lodging) at
length he got him to the cottage of a poor man, where when he had laid him
down to rest, it is not to be told what misery he endured: his supper was
coorse bread, and a Cup of cold water to drink, when he was dry: his bed to
rest his weerie bones upon, was a hard boorde strewed without either boughs
or grass, but thinly with a little straw. I need not show, how ill agreed so
hard a bed and so rude an host, to so tender limbs, and to his skin as soft
as silk. When the day star was scarce risen, the Gout and the Spider met
again. Then the Spider first declared his nights ill rest, and how often he
shifted his place: sometime vpbraiding the Master with too much niceness,
sometime with the double diligence of the sweepers. Ah (quod the Gout) the
poverty of mine host is incredible: for if I had leisure, I could show thee
spots both black and blew, that my bed as hard as the Adamant, has imprinted
in my soft skin. Then they took counsel thus once again, That the Spider
should goo to the poor man's cottage, and the Gout to the rich man's house,
whereunto they both agreed. When it waxed dark, they came near to a City,
and the Gout remembering well his appointment, fair and softly went into an
exceeding rich man's house, where he hid him self: whom when the Master had
scarce see ne, Jesus GOD, with what hearty good will, what kindness, and with what
names did he entertayne him: straightway, he was laid upon beds of Down, his
bolsters stuffed with soft partriche feathers. I will not speak of the wynes,
as sweet and dark wynes, wynes of Lesbus and Campania, birds that feed on
grapes, phesants, and party colored birds: to conclude, there was no kind of
pleasure that his fantasy lacked. The Spider went into a poor man's cottage
and began his webs on every side, from wall to wall he hanged them up, he
followed his business with hand and feet, he brake it down and set it up
again, and that he began he ended: and to tell you at a word, he was Lord
and King alone, craft and policy he feared none, for his building was so
high, that he was without the reche of a broom. Not long after the Gowte spoke
with the Spider, to whom he magnified his pleasures, his happiness and riches:
The Spider likewise wonderfully praised his kingdom and liberty in building:
They concluded therefore, that whyther so ever they iourneyd, the Gowte should
lodge at the rich man's house, and the Spider at the poor man's cottage.

Mor. Some sort of men speed better in some place than others, and rich men's
houses are a mansion place for disseases: but where least riches are, there is
most liberty.

3 Of an Ass, the Trumpeter, and a Hare, the Messanger.
THe Lion King of four feeted beasts, Abiectes.
having war with the Fowls, set his army in array, ready to join battaill
with them: whom the Bear asked what furderance the sluggish Ass, or the
fearful Hare would be, to win the field, because he saw them amongst the
other Soldiers. He answered him: The Ass with the sound of his Trumpette,
shall encourage the Soldiers to fight: and the Hare, because of his
swiftness, shall be a Messanger.

Mor. None is so vile, but he is good for some thing.

4 Of an old man.
A Certain devout man counsailled an Abstine^ce
old man to leave of the luftes of the flesh, whereunto he had been
outrageously given. He answered him: Holly Father, I will obey your reverend
and wholesome precepts, for I perceive that Venerie does much hurt me, neither
am I able to follow that trade any longer.

Mor. Many abstain from vices, wherein they are nooseled, not for the love of
God or goodness, but because of infirmity, and fear of punishment.

5 Of the Shepherd and the Sea.
AS a sheepherd kept his flock near the Sea side, and saw it calm, he
desired Affliction.
to be a Merchant venturer, whereupon he sold his sheep and bought Dates,
and wayed his Anchor. It happened, that a sudden tempeste arose, and that the
ship was in danger of drowning, so that they were feign to lighten it of all
the burden, scarce able to escape empty: Shortly after, as one passed by on
the Sea shore (for then by chance it was calm) he marvelled to see it so
still, whereupon he said, The Sea longs again for Dates, and therefore it is
so calm.

Mor. Misery makes a man warier.

6 Of an Heremite and a Soldier.
A Certain Heremite, being a man of Agreement perforce.
godly living, exhorted a Soldier to leave of the warfare in this world,
which way very few without offending God and hurt of their soul, do walk
in, and to give him self to quietness, and prepare for his souls health. I
will Father (quod the Soldier) do as ye will me, but truth is, that in these
days Soldiers may neither demand their wages, though it be very small, ne
yet take any pray.

Mor. Many for sake their wicked living, because they can use it no longer.

7 Of the Fox and the Bramble.
AS a Fox climbed a hedge, his feet Aid.
slipped, who (as he was falling) caught hold on a bramble to stay him:
wherefore when he had torn his feet with the pricks thereof, being in
pain, he said to the Bramble: woo is me, for I came to thee for help, who
haste hurt me worse: not so (quod the Briar) thou wast deceived, for I catch
every thing, and think thou to lay hold on me?

Mor. Some are so foolish as to require aid of those which naturally are
bent to hurt.

8 Of a Wagtayle and a Phesant.
THe Wagtayle went to the Phesant and said: Ah wretch, why do thou
Accusing an other.
not wype thine eyes but let them continually stand with water? the
stenche of thine eyes make thee lothesome. The Phesant herewith being wroth,
answered, How dare thou check me, which art so vile an outcaste? Thy tail
has the palsy, and art thou busy to note my fault? Go mende thy own first,
and then may thou better heal me. The Wagtayle hearing this, departed
ashamed.

Mor. He that will condemn an other, must first be clear him self.

9 Of the Mise and the Frogs.
THe Mise on a time contended with the Frogs for the kingdom of the Ambition.
Marshes, whereupon they proclaimed open war. The battaill being joined, at
the first onset they behaved themselves so valiauntly, that the victory was
doutful. The wyly Mouse lurking in the grass, privily as it were out of an
Ambushement, assauted the Frogge. But the frog being of strength more
puissaunt, encourage and leaping more valiant, with open war provoked his
enemy: Their spears were bulrushes. It happened, as they were fighting, that
a kight espied them a far of, who incontinently made speed unto them: but
these noble warriors, being earnest in fighting, and nothing regarding
themselves, were snatched up, and torn in pieces by the Kight.

Mor. The like happens to seditious Citizens, which being inflamed with the
greedy lusts of bearing rule, whiles they strive either with other, who shall
be head officer, do hazard their goods, and commonly their lives.

10 Of the beasts and the birds.
THere was sometime a battaille between Ambodexter.
the beasts and the birds, the victory was uncertain, for both hoped well, yet
much fear and danger was, on either party. The Batte thinking the birds to be
the weaker side, left their company, and took part with their enemies. The
birds by the conducting and government of the Egle won the field. The Batte
was condemned for a runawaye, and banished the company of all birds, and that
from thenceforth he should never fly by day light, and this was the only
cause, that the Battes fly but by night.

Mor. He that will not take part of the sour, shall not taste of that which
is sweet.

11 Of the Pecocke and the Nightingale.
THe Pecocke complained to Juno, Sister and wife to Jupiter, because the All
things as god will.
Nightingale song so sweet, and she hirselfe for her horsenesse, was a
bywoorde to all men. To whom Juno said: Every one has his propre gift of
GOD: The Nightingale in singing, but thou in colors of feathers passest all
other birds, every man must be content with his estate.

Mor. What God sends, receive it thankfully, neither seek thou further, for
God does nothing unadvisedly.

12 Of a young man that song at the burial of his mother.
A Certain man wept and lamented for All things not decent.
his wife being carried to burying, but his son did sing: whom his Father
rebuked, as he had been mad that he would sing when his mother went to
burial, whereas he ought with him to be heavy and lamente. Why Father (quod
he) if thou have hired these Priests to sing, why art thou angry with me
that sing for nothing? That is no part of thy office said his Father, but
belongs to the Priest.

Mor. All things are not seemly for all men.

13 Of Heaven and Earth.
ON a time Heaven poured on Earth Anger.
many storms, lightning, and thundering, wherewith he oppressed it. But she
being angry, called the Air to her, and said Brother I pray thee meddle not
betwixt Heaven and me, for I mean to overthrow him, because he has wrought
me such injury, that I would feign by all means be revenged. Ah sister (quod
the Air) do not so, but pacify thy wrath, for though that Heaven have vexed
thee now, you shall an other time be merry together. Yet Earth being impatient,
would not yield, but armed him self and began too war with heaven. The air
beholding that, sent such a dark miste, yt the earth could not discern
where heaven was. This darkness continued so long between heaven and earth,
till the earthes fury was past: after which time the air sent out his winds,
which drove away the mist.

Mor. All men ought to quench fire, and not to kindle it.

14 Of a Lion in love with a Countreymans daughter.
A Lion enamoured with a Countreymans Armed always.
daughter, desired her greatly, whereupon he requested her father to give her to
him in marriage. What (quod the man) should I mary my daughter to a beast? Then
the Lion frowned and grinded his teeth at him, wherewith the countreyman being
afraid, went from his former talk, and said: I would gladly match

(...) gree, that as I occupy the day, so thou may run thy race in the
night. Let us obey our Creator, and be not lofty over me, but suffer me to
give light in the day, and to preserve the good creatures of the Lord. The
Moon herewith being more vexed, departed in a chafe, and called to her the
stars, of which she gathered a great army, and began battle with the
Sun, against whom she shot her arrows, and endeavored with her darts to
stryke him. But the Sun be^^^ above her and at the vauntage, came down, and
with a swoorde divided the Moon in two, and threw down the stars, saying: In
like manner I will use thee, as often as thou art round: whereof (as report
goes) it came to pass, that the Moon continues not always full, and that
the stars do use to fall. The Moon therefore having the overthrow, was
ashamed and said: Better it is, when I am full to be divided, than altogyther
to be abolished.

Mor. Likewise many proud persons would be Rulers alone, and can not abide to
have any their better or like to them.

17 Of the Spyder and the Swallowe.
A Spider offended with the Swallow, Attempt not above thy capacity.
because she devoured the flies which were his meat, hanged up his webbes
before the hole, (from whence the Swallowe should fly) to take her. The Swallow
flew forth and carried away ye web with the weauer. Then the Spider hanging in
the air and perceiving his death to be at hand, said: Justly have I this
deserved, which did think to catch great birds, when without great labor I
could scarce get the smallest thing that flies.

Mor. Attempt nothing above thy capacity.

18 Of a Dog and a Wolf.
AS a Dog slept in a court before the house of his master, a Wolf came
Attendance.
suddenly and caught him: whom, as he would have killed, the Dog besought,
saying: Good master spare me now because I am lean and thin as thou see,
but if thou will tarry, there shall be within these few days a great marriage
kept at my Lords, where I will so fill me and make me so fat, that then I
shall do thee more good. The Wolf crediting his words, let him goo. Shortly
after, the Wolf came and found the dog sleeping upon the house top, to whom
he called as he stood beneath, willing him to perform his promise: Nay
verily (quod the Dog) but if from henceforth thou find me sleeping without
doors, tarry not at all upon hope of any marriage.

Mor The burnt hand ever after fears the fire.

19 Of the Ass and the Fox.
AN Ass put on a Lions skin and Bablers.
walked abroad, putting all other beasts in fear, who on a time seeing a
Fox, endeavored to make him also afraid. But he (for by chance he heard him
braye) said to him: Thou know well that I would have trembled at thee, if I
had not heard thy braying.

Mor. Some unlearned men which outwardly bear countenance, through their
babbling are reproved.

20 Of the Egle and the Pie.
THe Pie sometime desired the Egle, to make him one of his friends of his
household, because the beauty of his body deserved it, and also the readiness
of his speech to do messages: I would so do, said the Egle, but I fear least
that which I speak within doors, thou would preach it abroad on the house
tops.

Mor. Keep no bablers nor teltales in thy house.

21 Of a Nightingale fearing the Kite.
A Nightingale espying a Kyte flying abroad in the air, and making a great
crying was sore afraid, to whom the Tyrustie said: Fear not sister, for
this preparation to fight and these threatenings will light at length, either on
a little mouse, or a chicken, we must take heed of the Hanke, whose gripes we
shall first feel, ere we hear his voice.

Mor. Quiet and close men are more to be dreaded, than threatners and great
pratlers.

22 Of a Countreyman that would pass over a River.
A Cou^tryman ready to pass a stream, which by chance was suddenly risen,
with late rain that fell, sought the shallow. When he had assayed that part
of the River which was calmest, he found it deeper than he supposed: again,
where it was roughest, there he found it shallowest, than he bethought him
whyther he might commit his life to the calmest place of the water, or to the
roughest.

Mor. Dread those less which are full of words and threatenings, than those
that say nothing.

23 Of a Heart and a Vine.
A Heart escaping the hunters, lay hid Benefactors.
under a vine. When they were a little past her, she supposing she lay safe,
began to feed on the vine leaves. Which being stirred, the Hunters returned:
and judging (as it was in deed) some beast to lurk under the leaves, they
with their arrows slew the heart: who as she lay a dying, said thus: Rightly
am I served, for I ought not to have hurt that which saved me.

Mor. They which do any wrong to their benefactors, are punished of god.

23 Of a man bitten with a Dog.
A Certain man being bitten by a Dog, went about seeking for help. At
Benefits ill bestowed.
length one met him, who as soon as he understood what he would, said to him:
If thou would be healed, thou shall need no surgion: only let ye dog which
bit thee lick the blood from thy sore, for better remedy than this can not be
found. The other smyling at him said: If I do so, I shall be bitten of Dogs
daily more and more.

Mor. Naughty men having received good turns, are the sooner ready to render
displeasure.

24 Of an Ass that served an unkind Master
AN Ass served a certain man many Benefits il rewarded
years, in which time he never offended him. It happened afterward, being
heavy laden, that he stumbled in a rough way, and fell under his burden. Then
his cruel Master bette him sore, and in spite of his heart forced him to
rise, calling him a slothful and sluggish beast: but this poor wretch
thought thus with him self: Miserable is my estate, which have happened to so
unkind a Master, for though I have served him a long time without displeasing
him, yet does he not forgive me this one fault, in recompense of the good
service that I have done him.

Mor. This Fable is against those, which forgette the benefits that they have
received, and grievously punish the least offense of their benefactors toward
them done.

25 Of the Mouse that set the Kight at liberty.
A Mouse espied the Kight taken in a Foulers grin, on whom he took compassion,
(though he were his most enemy) and gnewe the knots in pieces, and set him at
liberty. The Kight remembering the good turn no longer than it was in doing:
When he perceived him self loose, laid hold on the poor Mouse, and with his
talents tore him in pieces.

Mor. Wicked men in like manner are wont to recompense their benefactors.

26 Of a Husbandman pricked by a Be.
A Husbandman being stoong by a Be, marvelled that out of the self same
Benefits.
mouth so sweet juice proceeded; and so grievous a sting. The Be answered,
the more beneficial I am, ye more I hate them, which do me wrong.

Mor. The more good men do, the less injury they endure.

27 Of the tree Abrotanum and the Hare.
THe property of Abrotanum, is to draw out any thing that sticks fast,
with the help of Auxangia. Wherefore on a time came a Hare halting to him, for
a thorn which stuck in his foot, and said: O Physician both of body and
soul, take pity on me and help me, and forthwith showed his right foot.
This tree being moved with compassion, put him self upon the wound, brought
out the thorn and healed it. Wherefore the Hare remembering this benefit,
carried daily a flaggo^ of water on his shoulders, and watered the root of the
tree, whereby he caused it to continue fresh and green.

Mor. Let us always gladly serve our benefactors.

28 Of the Crow and the Dog.
AS the Crow was offering sacrifice Benefits for aduau^tage.
to Minerua, she bad the Dog to her good cheer, but he answered her: Why
do thou bestow sacrifice to no purpose? For the Goddess so hates thee,
that she suffers thee to have no credit in any divination. To whom the Crow
said, for that cause the more do I sacrifice unto her, that I might get her
favor again.

Mor. Many for advantage, fear not to benefit their enemies.

29 Of a Hunter and a Partriche.
A Hunter had caught a Partriche, Betraying.
which as he would have killed, she besought him pardon for her life, and to
set her at liberty, promising to bring to his net many Partriches: The Fouler
answered her redily again, saying: I think that now thou art more worthy of
death: because thou have given thy word to betray thy friend.

Mor. He which goes about by deceyt to undo his friend, runs headlong
into misery.

30 Of the Dolphin and the Eele.
A Certain Dolphin finding an Eele in the sea, pursued after her, whom Beware
of memyes.
when he had often caught, but could not hold, because of her slippernesse, he
was wonderful sorry. But the Eele being disposed to mock him, and thereby to
escape, spoke craftily to the Dolphin: I am sorry for thee, that thou art too
much weeryed and grieved with swimming after me, but thy labor is lost: for
in the deep waters thou shalt never take me, but go with me into the mudde,
and thou shalt have me at thy pleasure. The foolish Dolphin being in a chafe,
and also greedy of his pray, began to swim after her, intending utterly to
destroy her: when the Ele had led the Dolphin into shallow places she wound
her self into the mudde, and said: Come up to me, for I shall be stayed by the
roots of herbs, and thou shall have thy desire of me. The Dolphin gave a
skip to catch the Eele, but she skipt into the mud, and she stack fast on dry
ground: In the mean time came a Fisher, and struck him thorough, whereof he
dyed.

Mor. He that goes with his foe, it is no marvel if he fall.

31 Offayre Trees, and deformed.
MAny Trees grew together in one ground, tall, straight, and without Beauty.
knottes, amongst whom there was one tree low, crooked and knotty, whom for
his deformity the other mocked. It happened that the lord of the soil would
build an house, for which he commanded all those trees to be cut down,
save that which for his shortness and mishapyng, would disfigure the house:
when the other were he wed down, the evil favored tree said thus with
himself: Of thee Nature will I no longer complayn, that I am mishape^, seeing
that such fair trees are always in danger.

Mor. Let no man be grieved in that beauty hurts many.

32 Of a Lioness and the Fox.
THe Fore oftentimes vpraided ye Lioness, that she had but one whelpe at a
time, truth it is (quod she) but then that is a Lion.

Mor. Beauty consists not in plenty, but in virtue.

33 Of an Astronomer and a Trauailer.
A Certain Astronomer diligently vewing the stars, unwittingly fell into
Boasters.
a well, but a Trauailer by chance coming by, and seeing him sighing, said:
Do not thou see the earth, which gave thy mind upward?

Mor. Many boast that they know of things to come, not knowing what presently
happens.

34 Of Scholars.
A Certain Wheel wright had been often deluded by Scholars, that were
bagabu^ds, which came to him for alms saying they had great skill in Magike,
and that they could do many things: of which number, there came one a begging
to his door, in the name of a Master of the seven liberal Arts, to whom he
said: My friend, were not you here the last year? No (quod the Scholar:)
depart therefore (quod he) and come no more here, for I will give thee nothing.
The Scholar was offended, and asked why he spoke in the singular number to
him, being a Master of the seven liberal Arts, and a Magitian. He answered:
I know much more than thou do: for with one handiecraft labor I find me, my
wife and children, but thou with thy seven Arts can not find thy self, but
go a begging. Wherefore thou ought to reverence me, and not I thee. When
he had so said, the Scholar departed, well mocked.

Mor. It is a folly too boast of any title, where as knowledge wants of that
which is professed.

35 Of a Boaster.
A Certain ragged and ill favored man came into a Tavern, and because he was
lightly regarded, began to boast of his nobility, that he descended of an
ancient house, to whom one answered: Auaunt knave with thy nobility, our
Millers Ass is more noble than thou, for he goth with a man waiting on him,
but thou go without.

36 Of a Boaster.
A Certain man who having travailed far, returned into his country, and made
great vaunts of his manly acts yt he had done in many places, especially yt he
had daunced a dau^ce at Rhodes, that none of yt place could: for proof whereof,
he said, yt he had to witness the^ which were there present, to whom one of
them that stood by, answered: Sir, if this be true, what needs witness,
there stands Rhodes, and there is thy dance.

Mor. All talk is superfluous, except we have present proof.

37 Of the Mole.
THe Mole a blind beast, said sometime to her mother: I see a Mulbery tree,
and straight after, I smell a great savor of Frankincense: but the third time
she said, I here the noise of the fall of an iron pellet: her mother
answered: As far as I perceive, thou lackest not only thy sight, but also thy
smelling and hearing.

Mor. Some brag they can do things impossible, and in the least are reproved.

38 Of the birth of Hills.
THe talk was sometime that the hills did travail, whereof men hearing,
Boastiag.
came thither, and stood gaping about waiting for some monstrous thing, not
without great fear. At length the hills were delivered, and brought forth a
Mouse: whereat there fell such a laughter amongst the^, yt they were ready to
sown.

Mor. Crakers will promise great matters, but scarce perform the least.

39 Of the Frog and the Fox.
A Frog came forth of the marshes into the wood amongst wild beasts, and said
she was well seen in physic, and that her cunning was as good as
Hipocrates, or Galenes: all beasts gave credit, only the For mocked her saying:
shall she be counted skilful in physic, whose lips be so pale? Let her first
heal her self. And thus the Fore mocked her. For the mouth of a Frog is of a
sky color.

Mor. It is mere folly to profess that whereof thou have no skill.

40 Of a Pecock spoiled of his feathers by a Soldier.
A Pecoke boasted too a Souldyer that had decked his hat with Estriche
feathers, that she had much fairer feathers: and to verify her saying, she
spread abroad her tail: The Soldier therewith being inamored, caught and
spoiled her, wherewith he dacked his helmet: Then the Pecoke said to hirselfe:
woe is me wretch and fool, too show so precious a thing to a spoyler, which I
ought to have kept close.

Mor. By boasting of precious things many are stirred to become thieves.

42 Of the Kidde and the Wolf.
AS a Kid looked out of a window, he espied a wolf passing by, upon whom
Boldness.
he rayled: Ah vngracius person, said the wolf, it is not thou that tauntest
me, but thy safe hold.

42 Of the Sun and the Northeast wind.
Sometime the Sun and the Northeast wind contended, who was the stronger,
whereupon they agreed to prove their strength on a wayfaring man, that he might
have the victory which caused him to cast away his wallet. First the
Northeast wind with sharp storms and bitter blastes assayed him: He stayed
not a whit therefore, but as he went, he wrapped his clothes double about him:
When the Sun was come to his course, by little and little in spreading his
beams, he calmed the wind, then was this man in such a heat and swet, that
he puffed and blowed exceedingly, and at length by the outragiousnesse thereof,
being fainte, he could go no further, but got him into the cool shadow,
casting away his wallet, and sat him down under a thick wood: by which
evident token, the Sun was conqueror.

Mor. Look before thou leap, for though thou be strong, yet perhaps another is
stronger than thou, if not stronger, yet craftier, with his policy to give
thee the foil.

43 Of a Fox and women eating of a Hen.
THe Fox passing by a farm house, espied a great route of women eating Hens
sumptuously prepared, but (God wot) there was no talk amongst them, to whom
she said: what crying and barking of dogs would be after me if I should do as
ye do? Thou wicked beast (quod an old woman) we eat that is our own, but thou
stealest from others.

Mor. We may not be so bold with other men's goods, as ye right owners.

44 Of a Dog and Wolves.
A Great barking Dog was a sore enemy to the Wolves, for when they would have
entered the city, he kept them out: wherefore they also hated the dog, whom
they would feign have killed. At length they sent two Ambassadors to ye Dog,
desiring him to come abroad into ye fields, and they would make him their king,
because he was mighty and valiant: The foolish curre consented and went with
them, whom they brought safely to ye other wolves that tare him in pieces.

Mor. He that will be hardy, let him keep him self in a sure defense.

45 Of the Pecocke and the Crane.
THe Pecocke and the Crane sometime Bragging.
supped together, and amongst other talk, the Pecocke bragged much of his
fair tail, despising the Crane: he granted yt she was a fair bird in that
point, yet was he able with his stout flying, to enter amongst the clouds,
when she could scarce fly to the house top.

Mor. Let not one think scorn of another, every one has his proper gift and
virtue: for he that wa^teth thy quality, perhaps has yt which thou lackest.

46 Of a Knight which had a brauling wife.
THere dwelt a Knight at Florence, descended Brauling Women.
of a noble blood, which had a wayward and brauling wife that daily went to
her ghostly Father, to whom she complained of her husbands demeanure: for which
he much blamed the Knight. It happened not long after, that she desired her
ghostly father to set her and her husband at quiet, whereupon he called him to
shrift, saying, that if he came, he doubted not but to make them friends
again. The Knight agreeing, the other required him to make declaration of his
faults. In faith (quod ye knight) it shall not need, for I know that my wife
has often told thee all that ever I did, yea and more too.

47 Of Arion and the Dolphin.
ARion was an ancient man, and came of a noble lineage: he could sing to the
Brute beasts kinder than men.
harp: he was borne in the city of Methimne in the Isle of Lesbus, whom
Periander King of Corinthe loved for his cunnings sake, from whom he departed
to see the famous country of Sicilie and Italy. When he was come thither, and
had well delighted the ears, and contented the minds of most me^ in those
parts, he gained greatly, and lived in pleasure and love of all men.
Afterward having gathered much substance, he minded to return to Corinth,
whereupon he hired a Corinthian ship and mariners of that coaste, because he
hoped to find friendship at their hands. The Corinthians received him, and
lau^ched into the deep, who being greedy of this great pray of money, took
counsel to kill Arion. He understanding of his destruction, gave them all the
money that he had, praying them only to save his life. But being past hope and
sore afraid, he requested that before his death, he might put on his apparel
and take his Harp and sing a mourning song to comfort his heart withal: The
Mariners (though they were hard hearted and cruel) desiring to hear him,
granted his petition. He being clad as he was accustomed, standing in y^
hinder part of the ship, song with a loud voice, the song called Orithium. In
the end of his song, as he stood with his harp and in his clothes, he cast him
self intoo the Sea. The shipmen nothing doubting but that he was drowned, kept
on their voyage. But a strange and wonderful thing happened, for a Dolphin
suddenly swam by and received him, carried him on his back above the water, and
brought him safe and sound to Tenarus, in the land of Laconia: from whence
Arion went straight to Corinthe, and showed him self to King Periander, and
how he was carried of the Dolphin, declaring all that happened.

The King little believed this, but commanded him safely to be kept til ye
truth were tried. The mariners were sought for (and Arion sent out of the way)
who being brought before the king, he demanded of them (making no semblant
that he had knowledge of Arion) whyther they heard any thing of him in the
parties whence they came: they answered, that when they set forth he was in
Italy, and lived well there, and was highly esteemed in the cities: and also
was exceeding rich. Whiles they thus spoke, in came Arion with his Harp,
having on the same apparel wherewith he lept into the Sea, whereby the shipme^
being amazed, and pricked in conscience, could not deny it.

Mor. In brute beasts we shall sometime find more friendship, than in
covetous men, which care for nothing but riches, neither have any spark of
humanity, but the only phisnomie.

48 Of a Kid and a Wolf.
A Kid straying from the flock, and being pursued by a Wolf, turned back to
Busy bodies.
him and said: O wolf, because I am persuaded yt thou shall eat me, play
first on thy pipe that I may dance, least I die in sorrow: As the wolf was
playing and the Kid dau^cing, ye dogs heard it and chased the wolf: who said to
the kid: I have well deserved this, for I ought not being a cook, to
counterfeit a minstrell.

Mor. They which regard not that where unto they are naturally inclined, but
assaye that which to others belongs, fall into adversity.

49 Of the Crab and the Fox.
A Crab fish came forth of the sea and fed, the Fox being hungry and seeing
him, caught him: who being ready to be devoured, said: I am well served, which
being a fish of the sea, would live on land.

Mor. Those me^ are justly miserable, yt forsaking their proper science, do
meddle with that, which becomes them not.

50 Of the Aple tree and the Pomegranat tree.
THe Pomgranat and the Apple tree co^tended about their beauty: When they
had continued long in strife together, a bush, which was their neighbor,
often hearing them, at length said: It is time friends to be at one.

Mor. The vilest persons sometime will meddle in their betters matters.

51 Of a Dog and his Master.
A Certain man had a Dog whom he always fed with his own hands, Causers of
evil.
because he should love him the more, and when he was bound he loosed him: But
yet he commanded his servant to tie him up, and beat him, to the end the
dog might perceive he loved him, and that his servant did not. The dog taking
it grievously to be daily tied and beaten, ran away. Whom when his master
rebuked as a churl and forgetful of all his benefits, that he would run away
from him which loved him so, and fed him, whom he never bound nor bet. Ah sir
(said the dog) that your servant does at your commandment, I count it done by
you.

Mor. Those are evil doers, which are causers of evil.

52 Of the Turtle.
A Certain Turtle being a widow, lived Chastity.
in great heaviness for the death of her mate, but she remained chaste: who^
other birds pitying, desired her to abide with them, where unto at length she
consented: They made her the best cheer they could, but she seeing their
abomination and whoordom, forsook them, and led the rest of her life in chaste
widowhed.

Mor. Who protests chastity, must set his mind on no worldly affairs.

53 Of a scolding Woman.
A Certain man had a scold to his wife, A charm for Scolds.
which always brauled with him, what soever he did, which the more he bet
her, the more fierce she was. When he saw that stripes would not prevail, he
attempted an other way, for as often as she chid, he played on a pair of
Bagpypes, whereof he had no skill. When he had so done, she was more fierce:
but at length he continuing his playing, she daunced for anger, and in the
end she stroke the Bagpype out of his hand. But he took it again, and played,
wherewith she being chafed, ran out of the doors, saying, that she would
not endure his wickedness and drunkenness. The next day she began her
scolding afreshe, but her husband played as he was wont. Then the woman
declared that she was overcome, and left of her cursing, promising her hushand
to become most gentle unto him, so that he would lay away his Bagpype.

Mor. Malaperte women by diverse ways must be charmed.

54 Of two Hawks and a Quayle.
Two hawks being confederate together, co^desce^ded to divide their pray
Choose the least evil.
equally. When they hunted on a time, they caught a Quayle from her nest, too
whom they said: Choose whether we shall eat thee alone, or else bring us to thy
nest that we may eat thy young ones with thee. The Quayle answered: I am in
trouble on every side, and what I shall do I can not tell: it is better to
fall into their hands alone, than to dye with my young ones: but before they
killed her, she said: Better it is to suffer a little harm than a worse.

Mor. Of two evils the least is to chosen.

55 Of the Wolf and the Crane.
THe Wolf sometime had killed a sheep, which as he greedely devoured,
Churl.
by chance the bones stuck fast in his throat: he trauayled far and near
seeking for help but found none, for all me^ judged him well served for his
greedynesse. At length by fair flattring words, and greater promyses, he
allured the Crane too thrust his long neck intoo his throat, and to pluck out
the bone that stuck fast. When the Crane had so done he required a reward:
But the Wolf laughed him to scorn, saying: Be packing thou patch, can thou
not be content with thy life, thou art bound to thank me therefore: for had
I list, I might have bitten off thy neck.

Mor. All is lost that is put in a riuen dishe.

56 Of the Fisher and the little fish.
A Fisher cast his hooks into the water Certentie.
bayted with flesh, wherewith he caught a little fish, the prisoner besoughte
him to release him, now being so little, and too let him grow bygger, that
hereafter he might have the more commodity of him: Nay said the Fisher, I
will not bye the pigge in the poke, for I use too take what presently I can get.

Mor. Leave not the bird in the hand, for that in the bushe.

58 Of a Fox that would kill a Hen sittyng.
THe For being entered a countreyma^s house, found a Hen sitting on Eggs in the
nest, which besought him, saying: I pray thee kill me not now being lean,
tarry a while till my chickens be hatched, which thou may eat without any
toothake being young: Ah (quod he) I were not worthy too be called a For, if
now being hungry, I would forsake my pray that is ready, upon hope of chickens
which are not yet out of the shell: I have strong teeth, which are able to
grynd the hardest flesh that is. And when he had so said, he devoured the
Hen.

Mor. He is not wise, which upon uncertain hope of greater things, will let go
that which he has presently.

58 Of the Frogs and their King.
THe Frogs being free besought Jupiter too give them a king, he laughed at
Common people.
their foolish petition, nevertheless they continued their instante suit so
long, that at the length they forced him thereunto. He cast them down a beam,
which with the fall thereof made a great noise in the water. The Frogs being
afraid hild their peace, and did homage to their king, and approached by little
and little nerer unto him. At length they boldly hopped up and down on him:
and thus their foolish king became a laughing stock unto them. Then called they
on Jupiter again, desiring of him a valiant king-He sent them the Storke, who
walked like a stout champion through the Marshes killing and devouring as many
Froggs as he met. At even when the Stork was gone too rest, they came forth of
their holes, hoarsly crying, but to a dead man, for Jupiter his will was, seeing
they were not content with a merciful king, that they should be oppressed with
a tyrant.

Mor. The like happens too the common people, which having a merciful and
gentle Prince and judge him a dastard and slouthful, and pray that they may
have a stout prince. Again having a valiant Prince, they dispraise his
cruelty, praising the others clemency. Either it is, that we are not
contented with things present: or that is true, seldom comes the better.

59 Of the Colyer and the Fuller.
A Colyer sometime desired a Fuller to dwell with him in house together:
Company.
Nay (said the Fuller) this neither pleases me, nor yet is for my profit. For
I fear greatly least that which I make clean, thou should raye as black
as a coal.

Mor. We are hereby warned too keep company with those that be of a perfect
honest life, and to shun the fellowship of leude men, as a noisome plague.

60 Of a Shepherd which kept a Wolf amongst his Dogs.
A Shepherd finding a Wolves whelp, brought him home, and kept him among his
dogs that were a sauegarde for the sheep, which being well grown, began to
kill sheep, and to teach the dogs to eat with him, which thing the shepherd
marking, killed the Wolf, but yet he could not make the dogs leave killing of
sheep. Then said the shepherd, worthily am I thus served, because I put a
Wolf amongst the Dogs, which has taught them too kill sheep.

Mor. The fellowship of evil men corrupts good manners.

61 Of the Raven and Wolves.
A Raven sometime followed Wolves over many high hills, wherefore he required
to be part taker of their pray, because he had so far followed them, neither
had left their company. The Wolves made light of him, because he followed not
the^, but their pray, and in yt he would as soon devour the hearts of wolves,
if they should be slain, as of any other beast.

Mor. We must always mark not yt we do, but of what mind we are in doing.

62 Of the father and his sons.
A Husband man had many young men Concord.
to his sons, which were always at varia^ce, whom he diligently endeavored to
unite in love toogether, and because he would plainly open to the^ the
inco^uenie^ces of their discord, he brought a bundell of small sticks, which
he commanded them to bind with a little cord, and then to break it in
pieces: they being but young and weak, did their good will to break it, but
could not prevail: Then their father loosed it, and gave every of them a
little rod thereof, which every one according to his strength did easily break:
and forthwith he said to them: Sons, if ye would agree, and stick thus one
to an other, no man were able to vanquishe you: but if ye be eyger to hurt and
pursue one an other with mortal hatred, ye shall soon be a pray for your
enemy.

Mor By concord small things increase. By discord great things wast and consume.

63 Of Bulls and a Lion.
There were four Bulls which agreeed to stick one too an other as well in
wealth as in woe, whom the Lion perceived feeding together, and therefore was
afraid too assail them though he were very hungry: but in the end he
devised by some crafty way to sever them: whom after they were parted he soon
tore them in pieces.

Mor. Nothing is surer than concord and discord makes the mighty weak

64 Of a Lion which begged of the Wolf part of his pray.
THe Wolf and the For entered fellowship, Consenting perforce.
and went a hunting, to whom, as they were dividing the Heart which they had
taken, the Lion came by chance, and challenged the third part of the pray,
because he was king of four footed beasts: but the Wolf denied it: then the
Lion being angry, laid hold on the Wolf with his claws, and plucked the
skin clean from his head, and made it read, whereby the Wolf escaped
searse with his life. After the Lion turned to the For and said: What say
thou? Forsooth my lord the King (quod he) I grant not only ye third part,
but also the whole Heart unto you: What (quod the Lion) has any body taught
thee to answer so wisely: Yea sir, (said the Fore:) The red hatte which you
put on my fellow the Wolf has taught me.

Mor. Better it is sometime to grant a part than to leese the whole.

66 Of a Snayle.
THe Snayle being offended that he continually Content in thy state.
abode in moist and low places, desired the Egle, (of whom he had heard, that
she flewe so high, that she might behold the greatest part of the Earth on
every side) to carry him up on high, whereby he might at once behold both
Hills and Gaileys, the Fields and she Sea. Which thing, when the Egle had
quickly done, she cast him down, whereby he fell on the ground, and was
dashed in pieces.

Mor Let no man exalt himself higher than his state and nature does require.

67 Of the Dove and the Kyte.
IN time past the Doves kept war with the Kyte, whom because they would
banquishe, they chose the Hawk too be their King. When he was come to the
kingdom, he was rather a mortal enemy to them than a King, he caughte and
destroyed them as fast as the Kite. Then the Doves were wonderful sorry for that
they had done, and judged it much safer for them to have endured the
perpetual wars of the Kite, than the tyra^nie and oppression of the Hawk.

Mor. Let no man be too much grieved with his estate, for nothing is blessed
on every side.

68 Of a Husbandman.
A Certain husbandman was discontented, that he daily ploughed his earth, and
could attayn no great wealth through his toyling, and had seen some soldiers
which when war was broken up, had so increased their substance, that they
went well apparailed, fared sumptuously, and lived in all pleasure. Whereupon
he sold his Sheep, Goats, and Dxen, and bought horse and Armoure, and went
a warfare, where, because he played not the man as he ought, he was spoiled of
all that he had and wounded sore: then he misliked warfare, and minded to
occupye merchandise, hoping for greater gain and less pain: when he had sold
his Farm, and laded his ship with merchandise, he launched out into the
deep, where suddenly there arose a great tempest of weather, the ship was
drowned, and he with all his company were cast away.

Mor. Let every man be content with his estate, seeing that misery is every
where at hand.

68 Of the Hare and the Fox.
THe Hare and the Fox made their peticions too Jupiter, the one desired
swiftness to his subtlety, the other subtlety to his swiftness: Jupiter
answered them: In the beginning of ye world, we gave every beast his propre
gift bountifully: now if one should have had all, other had been wronged.

Mor. God has bestowed his gifts so indifferently upon every man, that we
ought with our state to be satisfied.

69 Of the Elm and the Osier.
THere sprung up an Elm in the bank Contention with superiors.
of a River, which mocked an Dsier that grew next him, for his weakness,
because that with the least beating of the water he moved, but of his own
strength and stoutnesse he boasted excedingly, and how that he had continued
there many years not able to be shaken by the violence of the water. It happened
on a time, that by force of the waves he was broken down, and carried away by
the stream: Then the Dsier mocked him, saying: Whither away neighbor, will
thou now forsake me? Where is now thy strength become?

Mor. Those men are wiser that give place to their betters, than they that do
contend and have a foul overthrow.

70 Of the Serpent and the Crab.
THe Serpente and the Crab being entered friendship, lived together. The Crab
being a true meaner, exhorted him to leave off his gyle: but he would not obey
him: the Crab therefore watched him, when he was a sleep, and as well as he
could pressed him down and slew him, be seeing the serpent when he was dead,
said: Thou ought before too have been straight and simple, and then thou
had escaped this punishment.

Mor. They which go craftily to their friends, do rather hurt them selves.

72 Of the Heart and the Wolf.
A Heart sometime accused a Sheep before the Wolf, that he ought him a bushel
of wheat: The Sheep in very deed knew nothing of this, yet for fear of the
Wolf promised payment. A day was set, which being come, the Heart put the Sheep
in remembrance thereof, she denied it, excusing that promise too be made for
fear of the Wolves presence. Forced promises are not to be kept.

Mor. It is a clause of the law, force must have the repulse by force. But
thereof comes a new sentence: It is lawful to pay craft with the like.

73 Of a Feller of wood.
AS a Woodfeller was cuttyng wood near a river side, he lost his axe, who
being uncertain what to do, sat him down on the rivers bank and wept. But
Mercurius understanding the cause, and moved with pity, diued under the water,
brought up a golden axe, and asked him, if that were it which he lost: He
denied it too be his: then he dyued again, and brought up one of Silver, the
which he refused too be his, then he dyued the third time, and took up
his Axe, which he acknowledged to be his which he lost. Mercurius perceiving
him too be a just man and a true, gave them all unto him, who forth with
came too his fellows, and showed them what had happened unto him. One of
them because he would also try it, came to the River, and cast in his Axe
willingly: then satte him down and wept.

Unto whom when Mercurius had appeared, and understood the cause, he likewise
dyued, and brought up a golden Axe, which he asked, if he had lost: He
rejoicing, did affirm it too be his. Whose impudent and manifest falshod
Mercury perceiving, neither gave him the golden axe, nor his own.

Mor. How much GOD loves the ryghtuous, so much he hates the unrighteous.

73 Of the Cock and the Fox.
THe Fox being sometime very hungry, thought by suttletie too get his pray
amongst the Hens, which by the conduction of the Cock were flowne into a
higher tree than he could clymbe: whereupon he came to the Cock, whom he
gently saluted, and said: What make thou so high? Have thou not heard the
news of late, which are so good for us? Verily (quod the Cock) I heard
nothing: but I pray thee what are they? The Fox said: I am come hither to
make thee pryuie of our joy: For there was lately a general Counsel held of
all Beasts, wherein was concluded a continual peace between all Beasts: so
that now without any manner of fear, molestation, or laying awayte of any,
every one may walk where as he list in safety and quietness, therefore come
down and let us keep holy this day. The Cock perceiving the subtlety and
craft of the Fox, said to him: Thy tidings are very good, which also I do
like well: and forthwith he stretched out his neck, and looked a far off,
as though he saw some strange thing, whom the Fox asked, what he espied? The
Cock answered, I see two dogs coming amayne with open mouth: the Fox there
with quaking for fear bad them Adieu, for time it is for me to be gone, and
foorthwt took him to his feet: What sir (quod the Cock) whyther runnest
thou? what fear thou? thou need doubt nothing, if this peace be
concluded: verily (quod ye Fox) I can not tell whither these Dogs have heard of
this decree or not. Whereby one craft was paid with ye like.

74 Of a deceyuer.
THere was a certain man who sowed lead and other trifles in a piece of
lether, as though it had been some Jewel, and in the sight of a rich merchant
and other men, he privily threw it to the ground, and after took it up
again, inquiring if any had lost it: This rich man being covetous, came and
affirmed it to be his: to whom the deceyuer said: Is it a precious thing as it
seems? The Merchant avouched it to be. Mary (quod the other) thou shall not
have it again except thou give me.x. Crowns for a reward, which he willingly
gave, and forth with departed and opened the leather, but he perceiving it to
be a small trifle, went to the Deceyuer, alleging yt he was beguiled,
wherefore he threatened to hang him, except he restored the.x. Crowns. Why
(quod the deceyuer) did thou craftly and falsely say it was thine? and he
caught hold on his hand and would have brought him before ye mayor to try
their honesty, but ye merchant plucked back his hand and ran away.

75 Of a Fox caught by a Dog, whiles she feigned her self dead.
A Fox counterfeyting that she was dead, to the end to entrap the birds
which should come to her as to a dead carcass, being walowed in dirt, did lie
with her face upward in a field, waiting for Choughes and Ravens, and such
like greedy birds, which she would devour. It happened a dog to come by,
which snatched at her and with his teeth tore her. Whereat she said: I am
worthily served, for whiles I endeavor subtly to catch birds, my self am
caught by an other.

Mor. They which lie in wait for other, ought not to be grieved if they be
entrapped them selves.

76 Of a Boy and a Thief.
A Boy sat weeping on the brinke of a Well, whom a Thief demanded the cause
thereof. Mary (quod he) as I drew water my rope brake, and a pot of gold is
fallen in. This thief believing him, put of his clothes and lept into the Well
to seek it: which, because he found not, he came up again, where he could
neither see the Boy nor his cote, for the Boy was gone with it.

Mor. He that uses deceit, sometime is deceived.

77 Of the Thrushe.
THe Thrush made his vaunts yt he had won the friendship of the Swallow, to
whom his mother said: Thou art a fool son, if thou think to live with her,
seeing either of you desires contrary places, for she abides in hot places,
but thou in cold.

Mor. Make not those thy friends, whose living disagreeth from thine.

81 Of the Air and the vvinde.
THe Air on a time cited the wind before the Judge and maker of all things,
and said: O Lord of all things, behold and take pity of me, ye have placed
me Prince like enough, for which I give you thanks, because ye have appointed
me to be the life of all living things, but herein I was deceived, for this
wind does make me so cold and intemperate, therefore I say to him, if he
presume from hence forth to blow upon me, I will choke him: to whom the
Creator said: Air thou say ill, though the wind make thee cold and toss
thee, yet he makes thee wholesome and temperate. If the wind blew not on thee,
thou should be corrupt, loathsome, infected and hated of all men: wherefore
thou ought to love him which preserves thy health, wherewith the Air was
at one with the Wind.

Mor. We ought to love, and patiently suffer them which correct us.

82 Of a Trauailer.
A Wayfaring man having trauayled far, vowed, if he found any thing to
Covetousness.
offer the half thereof to Mercurius. He found a bag full of Almonds and Dates,
which he took and eat: but the Date stones and shells of the Almonds he laid
upon an Altar, saying: Thou haste O Mercury, my vow, for with thee I partake
both the outside and the inside of that I found.

Mor. The Fable is against covetous men, which for covetousness deceived the
Gods.

83 Of a Woman and a Hen.
A Certain Widow had a Hen, which day by day laid an egg: she supposing, if
she gave her more barley, that she would lay twice a day, did so: but the hen
being fat, could not lay once a day.

Mor. Sometime they loose the present commodity, which through covetousness
seek after more.

84 Of a covetous man.
A Covetous man having sold all his goods, made a wedge of gold, which in a
certain place he buried together with his soul and mind, to which he daily went
to see it: One of the workmen watching him on a time, and perceiving what was
done, dug up the wedge and carried it away: afterward he came, who seeing the
place empty, began to lament and pluck him self by the hair. When one saw him
thus weeping, and understood the cause thereof, he said: Friend be not sorry,
for having gold, thou had it not, take therefore a stone, and hide it for thy
gold: and suppose that it is gold, and it shall be all one to thee, for as I
perceive, when it was gold, thou did not occupy it.

Mor. It avails nothing to be endued with possessions, except we have the use
thereof

81 Of the Chough and the Doves.
A Chough seeing Doves in a certain douehouse well kept, colored him self
white, and went thither, because he would be partaker of their food. They as
long as he held his peace, supposing him to be a Dove, received him into their
company. But he forgetting him self on a time chatted, whose nature they then
knowing, bette him and drove him away: Of which meat being deprived, he
returned to ye Choughs: they because of his color not knowing him, drove him
from feeding with them: so coveting both, enjoyed neither.

Mor. We must be content with our own, considering that covetousness, besides
that it nothing avails, sometime is the cause to loose the preseut good that
we have.

82 Of the Dog and the shadow.
AS a Dog by chance swam over the River, he carried in his jaws a piece of
flesh. The sun then shyning, as commonly it happens, the shadow thereof
appeared in the water: which when he had seen, supposing it to be another
piece of flesh, snatched greedely thereat, and so lost that he had in his
jaws. The Dog being stricken at the heart, both with the loss of his flesh
and also of his foolish hope, barked thus in his language: Ah wretch, which
lackedst a measure in thy greedy desire. Thou had enough and too much had
thou not doted, now through thy folly thou have nothing left thee.

Mor. We are warned of modesty and wisdom, in desiring and eschuing of
things, and to use a mean in our desires.

88 Of a covetous Ambassador,
ACerte^ covetous man being sent Ambassador for his country to another City,
there were straigth at hand trumpeters to welcome him, and to delight his ears
with music, hoping thereby to fill their purses with money. He sent them
word, it was now no time to play because his heart was heavy for the death of
his mother: the Trumpeters deceived of their purpose, departed sorowing. Then a
friend of his hearing of his sorrow, came to see and comfort him, and asked
him, how long it was since his mother died? Forty years (quod he) then his
friend understanding the wily deceyt of the Ambassadoure, laughed exceedingly.

Mor. This Fable belongs to covetous men, which study all the ways to the
wood to save their money.

89 Of a covetous man dying.
AS a covetous man lay a dying, and understood that at length he should carry
nothing with him, he turned him to his friends and neighbors whom he saw
present, and said: Learn of me, which al my life time have endeavored to
gather goods, that ye trauaill not too much too heap up riches: for of so many
Acres of land, of so much precious apparel which with so great sweating I
have got, I shall have but a hole of five foot, and one sheet, wherewith being
dead, I shall be covered.

Mor. It is a foolish and miserable thing to bestow so much labor in
gathering of goods, which (whyther we will or not) we must quickly leave.

90 Of a Raven taken by Dogs.
TWo Ravens feeding on a carcass, had torn away two great gobbets of flesh,
which they purposed to carry through the Air: but Dogs coming suddenly upon
them, the one of them leaving his piece of the carcass, straight flewe farraway
from the sight of them: The other greedy of his pray, and staying to let go
his piece, was taken by the dogs: Who seeing that he should presently die,
said: Ah wretch and unhappy pack that I am, which for so small a
commodity leese so many pleasures of life.

Mor. Insaciable greediness has commonly been the undoing of covetous men.

91 Of a Got and a Dog.
A Got being hungry, desired to enter a Gardin where he saw green
potherbes: but a Bandog, whom the Gardener had set to be keeper, would not give
him leave, but swore his death if he stepped in. The Got answered, why do
thou forbid me to eat that, which avails thee nothing? I will in no wise do
this (quod the Dog) because it is my natural disposition.

Mor. This Fable shows the nature of covetous men which have plenty of many
things, whereof they have no use, neither suffer others to enjoy it.

92 Of a covetous man that eat withered Apples.
A Covetous man had gathered many Apples and fair, such as the Poets report
to have bin in the Gardins of Alcinous and the Hesperians: which he did so
spare, that he durst eat none, except they began to perish. His son being
very liberal, brought his fellows very often into the Apple loftes, saying:
Take of these what ye will, but touch not them that are perished, for my father
will have them served always after meat, which thing they willingly obeyed.

Mor. Nothing is more miserable than a covetous man which keeps for others
that which God has lent him to use.

93 Of a Iester and a Bishop.
A Certain Iester came in the calends of January to a Bishop, who was very
Covetous Prelates.
rich, but covetous: Of whom he begged a piece of gold for a new years gift.
This Prelate said that he was mad, in that he supposed to have so much money
given him for a new years gift. Then the fellow begged a piece of silver,
but he said that was too much. Again, he required of him ye least coin of
brass: but when be could not obtayn y^, he said: I pray thee yet (reverend
father) at the least, bestow thy blissing on me in stead of a present. Then
said the Bishop: Kneel down son that I may bliss thee. Nay, then (quod
he) I care not for your blissing, if it be so good cheap, for if it had be^
worth a farthing, you would not have granted it to me.

Mor. This is against Bishops and Priests, which set more by riches than all
holy mysteries of the Church.

94 Of a Priest which buried his Dog.
A Country Priest dwelling in Tuscia, who was very rich, had a little Dog
whom he dearly loved: which, when it died, he buried in the churchyard.
Whereof the Bishop of that Diocese being advertised, and being covetous,
supposing thereby to get some great sum of money, therevppon he somoned the
Priest to appear before him. He knowing well the pretense of the Bishop,
took with him fifty pieces of gold, and came to the Bishop, who laid sore to
his charge the burying of his Dog, for which he commanded him to prison. The
Priest (as he was rich) so being witty withal, humbly answered him, saying:
Reverend Father, if your holiness understood the singular wisdom of my
Dog, ye would nothing marvel that he was buried amongst men: For his wit
passed man's reason, as well in his life time as at the hour of his death. What
is this (quod the Bishop) that thou say? Forsothe (quod the Priest) he made
a Will at his latter end, and knowing your necessity, he bequethed you fifty
pieces of gold, which I have brought with me. The Bishop, when he had
received the money (being well pleased) sent away the Priest unpunished.

95 Of a Shepherd that encouraged his flock against the Wolf.
A Shepherd which had a great flock of Gotes and sheep, seeing his flock
daily to be a pray to the wolf, and to decrease, he gathered them all
together, and with long talk exhorted them not to fear the wolf (seeing they
were more in number, and besides that fenced with horns, which ye wolf lacked)
but that they would at once withal their might defend themselves from his
assault, promising the^ his own aid to the uttermost. They being herewith
encouraged, did promis and swear that they would not stir an ynche for the
wolf. But shortly after when they heard that the wolf came, they were so
afraid, that the shepherds words could by no means stay them from running
away. Then said the Shepherd to him self: it is not possible that nature
should be altered.

Mor. Dull heads and cowards are afraid, not only of the sight, but also of the
report of their enemies, neither ca^ they be encouraged to manhood by any talk
of their Captain.

96 Of a Fisher and five Fishes.
THere were five Fishes, young, fat, and lusty, which swam in a creek of the
Counsel.
sea, whom a Fisher espying that passed by, set his nets to take them. They
seeing that, said: It is good that we strongly swim together and break
those nets, that hereafter they may deceive no more fish, for we are strong,
and this we may stoutely do. Then an ancient and witty Sturgion lying at rest
in the water, and hearing this, started up saying: little ones, your intent is
foolish, therefore I counsel you, if ye will be safe, to avoid the nets,
otherwise when ye are fast in them ye will be sorry. These Fishes being young,
and trusting in their own strength, despised the counsel of the elder, and
they swamme together over the nets, minding to break them, but the nets
yielded, and their rushing did not prevail, so that, when they were taken, they
mourned, lamented and syghed to late.

Mor. It is good to believe our elders, which are wiser than our selves.

97 Of the Owl.
SOmetime the most part of birds went to the Owl and desired her no longer to
abide in holes of houses, but rather in the boughs of trees, where is sweeter
singing. And incontinently they showed her a young Oak new sprung up, small and
tender, where she might sit very softly, and build her nest: she would not
agree thereto, but gave them counsel not to credit the young plant, for it
would bear in time to come, birdlyme, which would be their destruction. They
being a light kind of birds and often flitting, despised the good counsel of
the Owl: but when the Oak was growe^, it was broad and full of boughs: then
the birds together did fly amongst the boughs, there they took their
pleasure, hopped up and down, played and song together. In the mean time the
Oak brought forth birdlime. Then the small birds all too late repented, that
they refused that wholesome counsel: and this is the cause (men say) why all
birds, as soon as they see the Owl, come clustering about her, follow her,
sit about her and fly with her, for they remembering that counsel, accounte
her wise, and come about her by flocks, that they might learn wisdom and
knowledge of her.

Mor Despise not the counsel of him that gives it a right.

98 Of a Fox.
A Fox being caught in a snare, when Counsel for private gain.
she had escaped with her tail cut of, was ashamed of her life, where upon
she pretended to persuade other Foxes thereto, so as by a common mischief she
might cover her own shame: When she had assembled them all together, she
cou^selled them to cut off their tails, alleging that they were not only
uncomely but also a superfluous burden: One of the Foxes answered her: Truly
sister, if this thing were not only for thy profit, thou would not counsel
us thertoo.

Mor. Wicked men give counsel too their neighbors for no good will, but for
their own advantage.

99 Of the Lion and the Got.
A Lion by chance espied a Got upon Crafty me^
an high rock, whom he counseled rather to come down and feed in the green
meadow: so would I said the got, if thou were thence, for thou geuest me
counsel, not for my pleasure, but to slake thy hunger.

Mor. Credit not every man's talk, for some counsel not to profit thee, but
themselves.

100 Of a Fox taken by a Countryman.
A Fox being taken by a Countryman Crafty men.
of whose Hens he had killed many, with flattering words besought him to set
him at liberty, swearyng deuoutely that thencefoorth he would never do him
harm. The Countryman answered, I would willingly forgive thee, and let thee
go safe and sound, but that I know thee to be crafty, and a promise breaker,
and I certainly know, that thou can not hinder me being dead, but I
mystrust thee being alive.

Mor. We must give no credit to false and crafty men.

101 Of a Woman that would dye for her Husband.
A Certain chaste Matrone that loved her husband well, was grieved at Craft
of women.
the heart for the sickness of him, weeping and mournyng much: and because
her hearty good will might appear the more, she besought death, if needs he
would have her Husband, rather too take her and to excuse him: whiles she
thus spoke, she espied Death with his lothesome looks approaching, wherewith
she being aghast, and already repenting, said: I am not that body which thou
seek, he lies in the bed whom thou came to slay.

Mor. No man loves his friend so well, but he loves him self better: Near
is my coat, but nearer is my skin.

102 Of a Lion being old.
THere was a Lion which in his youth Cruelty requited.
through his fierceness had purchased the displeasure of many: whereof in his
old age he received just punishment. Every beast in recompense of their hurt
requited his quarrel: The Bore with his tuske, the Bull struck him with his
horns, and especialy the Ass, (being inflamed to cast off the name of a
cowarde) with chyding and kickyng, courageously did beat him. The Lion then
wayling lamentably said: Those whom sometime I have hurt, pay me agein with
the same measure, and not without a cause: Agein, those to whom sometime I
have done good, requite not now my goodness, but rather unjustly are my foes:
great was my folly when I made so many my enemies, but greter, in that I
trusted false friends.

Mor. When thou art in prosperous estate be not lofty nor fierce, if fortune
once frown or look awry, they whom thou haste hurt, shall revenge their
quarrel: if thou have friends, put a difference between them, some are friends
not too thee, but too thy table, and to thy fortune, which as the wind
turns, will turn, and happy shalt thou be if they be not thy foes.

103 Of an Egle and a Conie.
Sometime an Egle buylt her nest in an high tree, who by chance espied young
Rabbettes a far off feeding, which he snatched up, and carried to his young
ones to feed on. The Conye with flatteryng words besoughte him to restore his
son. But the Egle supposing him being but a small beast, and earthly, by no
means able to hurt him, tore the^ in pieces with her claws in the sight of
the Conie, and gave the^ to her young ones to make merry withal. The Conies
heart earning sore at the death of her Rabbets, would not let it rest
unrevenged, but dug up by the roots that tree where her nest was, which
with the least blast of wind was overthrown: By which means the Egles young
ones being without feathers, and not able to fly, fell to the ground, and
were destroyed. Which thing not a little comforted the Conie.

Mor. No man bearing him self stiff of his own strength, ought to despise the
weaker, seeing sometime the feeble do revenge the wrong don to them by the
mighty.

104 Of the Hares and the Frogs.
IT happened that Hares hering a strange Courage.
roaring in the wood, all trembling began swiftly to run away: In running
they stayed at a marishe, being in doubt what to do, seeing danger on every
side: and to increase their fear they espied Frogs there drowned. Then one
wyser than the rest said: Wherefore are we so fondly afraid? Let us take a good
heart, for swiftness in running we lack not, but only a courageous stomach, as
for this hurly burly we need not fear but set it light.

Mor. In all things take a good heart: strength without courage is but dead: for
the chief head of strength is hardiness.

105 Of the Be and Inpiter.
THe Be which as men think, was the first make of Wax, came sometime Cursing.
to sacrifice to the Gods, whose oblatio^ to Jupiter was a house of honey,
wherewith Jupiter rejoicing, commanded her petition whatsoever it were, to be
granted. Then the Be asked thus: most puisant god of al gods, I beseech thee
grant to thy handmayde, that who soever comes to the hyue to steal away her
honey, may forth with dye as I have pricked him. Jupiter being abashed at her
request, because he loved mankind far above all other, at length said to
her: Be thou content if thou sting him that steals thy honye, that thou
may leese thy sting and foorthwyth dye, and that in thy sting thy life may
lie.

Mor. We curse our enemies, but it commonly lyghteth on our own heads.

106 Of a heart and a Lion.
A Heart escaping Hunters, entered a Danger.
cave, where he chanced on a Lion, by whom he was taken: As he was dying, he
said: Woe is me, that fleeing from men, have happened on the cruellest of all
beasts.

Mor. Many men avoiding small dangers, run into great.

107 Of the Town Dogs.
A Great route of Town dogs coursed sore a Country dog which ran away and
durst not resist: at the last he turned again and showed his teethe to them,
then they all stood still, and durst not come near him, where as the
Captain general of the host was present, who turned to his soldiers, and
said: Fellows, this sight warns us not to flee, seeing we see more danger
to them that run away, than to those that resist.

108 Of two Pots.
TWo Pots stood together on a bankthe Dealyng.
one was of earth, the other of brass, which both were sodeinly caught by the
force of the streams, the earthen Pot fering to be broken went swiftliest,
whom the Brazen pot comforted, willing him to fear nothing: for he could
take heed enough, that they should not knock together. Nay (said the other)
I know well enough, whether the River beat thee against me, or me against
thee, I shall be in hazard on every side. Therefore have I determined to keep
no company with thee.

Mor. Better it is too deal with thy fellow, than with thy better, for the
myghtyer man can sooner hurt thee, than thou him.

109 Of the Swanne svngying at the point of death.
A Swan being nere at the point of death, was asked of the Storke, why Death.
he soong sweter, being nigh his death, (which all other beasts do so much
hate) than in all his life time before, seeing at that time he ought to be sorry:
the Swan answered: Because from henceforth I shall not be troubled with
seeking for meat, neither shall I need to fear the Foulers ginne.

Mor. We are warned hereby not to fear death, being by that bereft from all
miseries.

110 Of an Old man which set Trees.
A Man of very old age, was mocked of a young man, because he planted trees,
where of he should never see fruit: The old man answered: Neither thou perhaps
shalt gather fruit of those which thou ghost about to set. Shortly after the
young man fell out of a tree, which he clymbed to gather beries, and brake his
neck.

Mor. Death spares no age.

111 Of the Phesaunt and the Pecocke.
THe birds sometime being at debate about Debate.
a certain election, at length chose the Phesant and the Pecocke, who also
straue for their prerogative, and about it consumed their substance. Then ye
birds assembled before the Egle, to whom they showed their election, craving
that he as an indifferent Judge would confirm it. The Egle, because he would
perfectly understand the case, sent for them both to hear them. The Phesaunt
began his tale thus: Oryghtuous judge how passing fair a bird I am thou
may perceive, how sweet also my flesh is, it is not unknown, wherefore I
think my self worthy of the Lordshippe. Then the Pecocke laid for him self
thus: Most gracious Lady, the words which the Phesaunt has alleged are
untrue, for in beauty I far exceed him, besides that my varyable tail of
right chalengeth this honor, and forthwith she spread out her tail: When the
Egle had heard both their arguments, he began first with the Pecocke, and
said: In setting up thy tail thou haste dispraysed thy self, for thy filthy
feet declare thee unworthy to be ruler: Then turning to the Phesant he said:
because thou art weak and always weeping, and further canste not sing, I
deprive thee also of this office. And so both were put out.

Mor. They which will be lords must not strive.

112 Of the Ape and the Brocke.
THe Ape came to a Brocke to borowe Dettes.
an Hundredth marks, because he would occupy beyond the Sea, promysing him
half the gain: the Brocke answered, I am content, if thou canste find
sufficient sureties for payment, with an Oblygatyon of their hands. The Ape
brought the Bugle and the Bull to be his suretyes, and left the obligation in
the custody of the Horse, and went on his journey, but never returned. The
Brocke seeing him self thus deluded by the Ape, did demand the debt of the
sureties, but they scorned him, wherefore he complained unto the Judge, and
showed the obligation, who compelled the sureties to pay it, but they ever
after persecuted the Brocke, and wounded him sore.

Mor. He that boroweth not, keeps him self out of strife and great trouble.

113 Of the Dog and the Cock.
THe Dog and the Cock entered friendship and iorneyd together: when night drew
Deceyte.
near, the Cock flew up into a tree, and rested, but the dog slept at the
root of the hollow tree. It happened that the Cock, as he was wo^t, crowed in
the night season, whom the Fox hearing, ran toward him, and as he stood on
the ground, he prayed the Cock to come down, because he greatly desired to
embrace so trim a singing bird: the Cock bade him that he should first wake
the porter, which slept at the root of the tree, and that when he had opened
he would come down: as the Fox sought means too call him up, the Dog starte
up and tore him in pieces.

Mor. Wise men will by policy send their enemies to myghtier than themselves.

114 Of the Fox and the Storke.
A Fox sometime bad a Storke to supper, when the service was brought in, the
Fox set broth on the table, which because it was thyn, the Storke assayed to
pick up with his bill, but could not, which the Fox easily licked up: the
other thus deluded, departed with much shame. Within few days after ye Stork
returned and likewise bade the Fox too supper: A glass full of meat was set
on the boorde, which because it had a narow neck, the Fox might well look on
and be hungry, but he could not once lick his lips withal, which the Storke
with his bill easily pulled out.

Mor. Laughing, jesting, crafty and deceytfull dealing must be requited with
the like.

115 Of a Friar, a Layman, and the Wolf.
A Certain religious man of the order Deceytfull persons.
of S. Anthony, begged of a Husbandman a portion of corn, for which he
promised to warrant all that he had, especially that his Sheep that year
should be safe. The cou^tryman giving credit to his promises, let his Sheep
stray abroad where they list, whereof the gretest number a Wolf destroyed: the
Farmer therewith chasing, when the next year the gatherer came for corn, did
not only deny him his alms, but also blamed him for his foolish promises.
Why what is the matter (quod he)? The other answered, his sheep were
destroyed by the Wolf: What the Wolf? (said he) surely that is a naughty
beast, trust him not, but beware of him: for he would not only deceive S.
Anthony but also Christ him self, if he could. It is therefore folly to
credit those whose mark that they shoot at is only to deceive.

116 Of a Parat.
A Parat being brought out of the East parts into the West, where no such
Deserts rewarded.
birds are wont to breed, marvelled that he was more esteemed there, than in
his native country: for he was kept in a Cage of yuorie wrought with
Syluerwire, fed with most sweet meat, which thing happened not to other
birds of the west parts, which in beauty and speaking as far excelled.
Then the Turtle being shut up in the same cage, said: This is not marvel
worthy, for no man in his own country is rewarded as he deserves.

117 Of an Ass.
Sometime an Ass served a Gardener Desire of new things
of whose cruelty he complained to Jupiter beseching him to have a new
master. Jupiter granted his request, and put him to a tyler, who^ because he
laded him with much heuier burdens, he mislyked: He therefore prayed Jupiter
yet once again, to shift his service from him to a gentler Master. The God
smyled at his folly, yet the Ass continued so long an earnest suter, that he
forced him thereto. The^ he served a Curryer, whose trade when the Ass had well
perceived, he repented, saying: Ah wretch that I am, which can be contented
with no master, for now I have got such a one, which as I suppose, will also
currie my skin.

Mor. Things present we never allow, but seek for new.

118 Of wax that desired hardness.
THe Wax lamented that he was made Desire that is fit.
soft, and in danger to be hurt with every light stroke. On a time he espied yt
tyles were made of earth, much softer than he was, who by the heat of the
fire were made so hard, that they continued many years, he likewise cast
himself into the fire, hoping thereby to come to that perfection of hardness
that they were: but the Wax straight way being melted, consumed away.

Mor. We are forbidden to covet that which is contrary to our nature.

119 Of a Pacient and a Physician.
A Physician took upon him to cure a Pacient, who at length dyed: then Diet.
said he to the Pacientes kinsfolk: this man cast him self away for lack
of good diet.

Mor. He that uses quaffing and lives inordinatly, shall never be old, or
else shall have a very short life.

120 Of an Ass carrying an Image.
AN Ass carried an Image of silver on his shoulders, which every one that
Dignity.
met it, did worship: wherewith being insolent, he would no longer be an Ass:
then was it told him that he was no God, but carried an Idol.

Mor. They that are placed in dignity ought to know that they are men.

121 Of a Fisher.
A Fisher fished in a certain river, where he spread abroad his nets and
compassed in the water, tying a stone to either of his ropes, and thus
continued beating the water that the Fishes shooting by, might unawares fall
into his nets: which one of the inhabitauntes thereabout seeing, rebuked him
for troubling ye river, that he suffered it not to have the clear water: he
answered: Except the river be thus troubled, I should dye for hunger.

Mor. The Rulers of Cities do most of all enriche them selves, when they
stir up discord amongst the people.

122 Of the Belly and other members.
THe members of man perceiving the Discord.
Belly would not work, fell at variaunce with him and denied their help any
longer. It happened, that they began to faint, the cause whereof they perceived
to be: that the Belly, having received ye meat, did equally part it to every
member, whereupon they became friends again.

Mor. Great things by discord decay, but small things by concord are of
force.

123 Of the Frog and the Crab.
A Frogge seeing a Crab swimming by the water side, said: What is he so
ylfauoured and foul, that dare trouble my water? seeing I am mighty and
strong, I will put him to flight. When he had so said, he lept upon the Crab
saying: why wast not thou ashamed O wretch, to enter into my resting place?
Did not thou blush being so foul and so black, to defile the clear water?
The Crab, as his manner is, began to go back and said: I pray thee sister say
not so, for I would be at one with thee, therefore come not thus upon me. The
Frog seeing him go back, supposed that he did it for fear of him, whereby he
waxed more fierce against him, saying: Draw not back thou filth, for thou
may not escape, this day will I give thy flesh to the fish, and incontinent
he skipped upon him to kill him. The Crab seeing the present danger turned
about, and with his claws byt the Frog and tore him in pieces.

Mor. Every man, as much as in him lies, let him study to avoid war and
discord.

124 Of a Leopard and an Unicorn fighting with a Dragon.
THe Leopard sometime fought with ye Dragon, against whom (because he could
not prevail) he besought the Unicorn to aid him, and said: Thou art a goodly
beast, expert in fighting and valiau^t, wherefore I pray thee help me. The
Unicorn hearing this commendatio^ of himself, answered: Thou say truth,
for I have skill in fighting, and therefore I will valiauntly defend thee, for
when ye Dragon shall open his mouth, I will thrust him into the throat with my
horn. When they were both come to the Dragon, the Leopard gave the onset,
trusting to the strength of the Unicorn, but the Dragon fought with them and
spit fire at them. The Unicorn seeing him open his mouth ran hastily to thrust
him through, but he cast his head at one side, whereby ye Unicorn missing him,
smot his horn fast into the ground and died.

Mor. He that will fight for another, seeks his own destruction.

125 Of the envious Dog and the Ox.
A Dog lay sleeping in a rack full of hey, thither came an Ox to feed.
Despite.
The Dog seeing him coming, barked and for bad him. To whom the Ox said: the
Devil choke thee with this thy despite, which neither can eat hey thy self,
nor yet will suffer me.

Mor. Many are of that disposition, yt they will grudge others that, which
they for lack of wit can not attain unto.

126 Of a young Man.
A Certain young Man espied an old man going crooked like a bent bow, whom
Despise nothing.
he asked if he would sell a bow? Haste thou (quod he) any need to loose thy
money? If thou live til my age, nature shall give thee a bow without money.

Mor. The faults of age are not to be laughed at, because no man, if he live,
can escape it.

127 Of a Countryman and Pears.
A Certain gluttonous man took his journey to go to a Wedding whereunto he was
bidde^. By the way he found an heap of pears, but none of them he touched,
albeit he was exceeding hungry, which in contempt he made water on, for he
thought scorn of such meat, going to so good cheer. But as he passed on his
way, he came to a stream lately risen with rain, which without danger of
his life he could not pass over, therefore he returned home again: and by the
way he was so hungry (because of his long fasting) that if he had not eaten the
pears that he pissed on, seeing there was nothing else, he had famished.

Mor. Despise nothing, for what is so vile or base, that will not at one time
or another serve for some purpose?

128 Of a man that refused Clysters.
A Certain rich German fell sick, to who^ Despraysers of Physic.
came many Physicians to cure him, (for to honey come flies by heaps) amongst
whom one held opinion that he must take a Clyster, if he would recover his
health: The pacient hearing this (because he had never taken any such
medicine) was wood angry, and commanded all ye Physicians to be put out of
doors, saying that they were mad, which would minister to his tail, when his
head aked.

Mor. All wholesome things seem tedious to them which never assayed the^.

129 Of a Deceyuer.
A Certain poor man being sick, vowed to the Gods, if he might recover his
Dissemblers.
health, an hundred Oxen in sacrifice: the Gods (because they would try him)
made him whole. When he was well, because he had no Oxen, he made an hundred
Oxe^ of paste, which on the Altar he sacrifised. The Gods meaning to punish him
therefore, appeared to him in a dream, and said: Go to the sea shore in such a
place and there thou shall find an hundred talents of gold. This fellow when he
awaked, rejoicing greatly, went to the place yt was showed him and sought for
it, where he was taken by Pirates, whom he prayed for his liberty, promising
the^ a M. talents of gold, but to him they gave no credit, but carried him away
and sold him for a M. Grotes.

Mor. God hates dissemblers and liars.

130 Of a Cat and Mise.
A Cat hearing that there were many Dissimulation.
Mise in a certain house, came thither: of which, those that she caught she
devoured: The Mise seeing them selves daily diminished, agreed together to come
down no more, least they should al be destroyed: for if the Cat come not hither
(said they) we shall be safe. The Cat perceiving the Mise descended not,
thought by deceyt to take them, and climbed up on a beam, whereon she hanged
her self, fayning to be dead, whom one of the Mise, as he looked downward
espied, and said to him: verily my friend, though I knew thou were dead, yet
would I not come down.

Mor. A wise man once deceived through the falsehood of a wicked man, will never
after credit his dissimulation.

131 Of the, Wolf and the Sheep.
A Wolf being bitten by Dogs and evil entreated, lay prostrate along: he
lacking meat, espied a sheep, whom he desired to bring him some of the
running water to drink, saying: If thou will give me drink, I will provide
meat my self she answered: if I give thee drink, thou will eat me.

Mor. This Fable is against an evil body, which by dissimulation lies in
wait.

132 Of the sick Ass.
THe report was, that the Ass lay sick, nigh at the point of death, there came
both the Wolves and Dogs to visit him, and demanded of his Son, how his
Father did, he answered (looking through the chinkes of the door) better than
ye would.

Mor. This Fable speaks of them, that feign to take heavily the death of
other, where as they wish them dead long before.

133 Of a Fox.
A Fox came into a Vineyarde where he espied fair clusters of Grapes which
were ripe, of them feign would he eat, and because they were past his reach,
he thought to find some shift to get them: but perceiving his labor to be
lost, and that by no means he could satisfy his desire, he turned his sorrow
into joy, saying: Those Clusters be yet to sour to eat, for they would set
my teeth on edge.

Mor. It is wisdom to dissemble that he cares not for that which he knows
he can not get.

134 Of a man that would kill a Hog.
IT was a custom in a certain City of Picene in Italy, that he which killed
a Hog in Winter should bid his neighbors to supper. Now there was one which
minded to kill a Hog, but loathe he was to be at any charges, whereupon he
asked the advice of his Godfather, how he might shifte of the expenses. Tell
abroad (quod he) to morrow, that this night there was a Hog stolen from thee.
It happened the same night, (he nothing mistrusting it) that one verily
conveyed a Hog from him. In the morning when he rose, he looked for his hogs,
whereof missing one, he went incontinent to his Godfather, and cried a loud,
that one of his Hogs were stolle^. Well done (quod he) thou playest y^ wise
fellow, for so I taught thee to speak: the other swore by all the Gods he did
not lie. I conne thee tha^k (said his Godfather) thou followest well my
counsel. The other for all that did swear and stare the more that it was
true. Thou art to be commended (quod he) for I for warned thee so to say,
and my counsel was good. The other seeing him self thus flouted, departed
heavily.

135 Of the Egle that cited al manner of birds.
THe Eagle called together all manner of wildfoule: which being assembled, as
he Disobedi^nce.
corrected certain faults, there came Hunters which set abroad their nets to
catch the birds. The Egle seeing the present danger, made proclamation by his
criers, that all should follow the banner of the Egle, and fly with her, if
they would escape: then as many as flew with her escaped, but some gluttonous
and disobedient, who beholding the pray and coveting it, flew into ye nets,
wherein being entangled, they cried piteously.

Mor. He that will not obey, falls into mischief.

136 Of a Satyr and a wayfaring Man.
A Satyr, which in old time was counted Double tonged.
God of the Woods, walking abroad, found a wayfaring man covered with snow and
nigh dead with cold: on whom taking pity, he brought him into his den and
made a fire and cherished him. It happened that the Satir espied him breathing
on his hands, where of demau^ding the cause, he answered: to heat his hands.
And being set down to meat, the trauayler blowed on fried barley that was on
his trencher. He asked again, why he did so? to cool it (quod he.) The^ the
Satir drove him out of his den, and told him that he would harbor none that
had so variable a mouth.

Mor. Deal not with that man, which has a double heart, or is unstable in his
words.

137 Of a tyrannous Griffon.
THe Griffon sometime took upon him Do as ye would be done unto.
the government of a Realm, which with Tyranny he ruled, commanding that
no Stranger should bye or sell any thing amongst them. Secondly, that none
should come from other Countries to them. Thirdly, that none of his subjects.
should travel to other places: These three things being straightly executed,
he lived in pleasure and waxed rich, whereof he never gave any thing. It
happened that his Country was destroyed by lightning and tempests, wherefore
his Citizens cried out, that they might travail abroad, least they died for
hunger. Then he sent Ambassadoures to other Nations, desiring to sell them of
their marcha^dise and barter them at their pleasure. But they denied it,
because he never would sell any thing to the^: then he required that they
would come with their ware to him, but they would not. Last of all he prayed
them to receive him and his people being then in misery: but they said: Thou
would never come till need made thee, therefore we will not receive thee.
Then he and his people being thus reprobate, died miserably.

Mor. We must do, as we would be done unto.

138 Of a Pie and a Cuckoo.
A Pie espying a Cuckoo lurking amongst the boughs of a tree, supposed it to
be Doubt the worst.
a Hawk, where with being moved, flewe away: which thing other birds near at
hand beholding, mocked the Pie, that in stead of a Hawk, she flew from the
Cuckoo, she answered: I had rather be mocked of you, tha^ my friends should
weep for me.

Mor. It is better to minister occasion for our foes to laugh at, than our
friends to weep at.

139 Of a Serpent.
A Serpent being trodden upon by many, Dreadfulnesse.
made his moan to Jupiter, but he said to him: If thou had stinged him
which first kicked thee, the next would never have attempted it.

Mor. They which withstand their assaulters, become a terror to others.

140 Of the rule of women of their husbands.
A Certain man carried about through the Dread without need.
whole world a pair of boots, which he would give that man who feared not
his wife. He could find none a great while, which would take them. But at
length a Countreyman received them, to whom he said: Soft let me put them
in thy bosom and wype them. But the Cou^tryman (because his shirt was new and
white) said: I dare not least my wife tau^t me for blacking my shirt: the^ he
took away the boots and bet him therewith, saying: Get thee hence in the
Devils name, because thou dreadest thy wife for a little trifle, thou did
mean to deceive me of my boots, and he straight way departed. But I think he
has not yet bestowed them justly of any man.

141 Of a woman.
A Certain Woman had a dronkard to her husband, from which vice (because she
Drunkenness.
would rid him) she used this policy: She watched him when he was dronken
heavy a sleep, and like a dead man without feeling, and took him on her
shoulders, carried him into the churchyard, laid him in a grave and departed.
When she supposed that he was sober, she went and knocked at the head of the
tomb, who asked, who knocks at the door: his wife answered, I am here, and
have brought meat for the dead. Ah (quod he) bring me rather some drink tha^
meat, thou do trouble me in speaking of meat and no drink. The good woman
stroke her breast and said: woe is me wretch, for my craft will do no good:
thou my husband art nothing mended, but become worse, so that this disease has
got an habit in thee.

Mor. We must not continue in evil deeds, for custom sometime creeps on a
man.

142 Of the Bore and the Countryman.
THere was a Bore which routed up the corn, whose ear a Countreyman cut
Dulspirited.
off. It chanced he came again the second time, then he cut off his other
ear. When he came yet again, he caught him and carried him into the city and
gave it his Attorney to make merry withal. At the feast when he was broken up,
his heart was not sound. Then his Master was wroth with the Cook therefore.
Sir (quod the Countryma^) it is no marvel yt his heart is not here, for I think
the foolish Bore had no heart, for if he had had any, he would not have come so
often into my corn to his cost. Then all the guestes laughed exceedingly at his
foolishness.

Mor. Many live so without spirit or boldness, that it is doubtful whether
they have a heart or not.

143 Of a Gnat.
A Gnat in the Winterseason, supposing ^ducation (...) youth.
that he should die for hunger and cold, came to a Hyue of bees, of whom he
desired meat and lodging, promising (if they would grant it him) to teach
their children the art of Music. Then one of the Bees answered: I had
rather my children learned some trade which can keep them from hunger and
cold.

Mor. We are warned to bring up our children in those sciences, whereby they
may be able to get their living.

144 Of a Norisher of Bees.
A Certain man, when the Owner was absent, came to the place where honey ^nimie.
was made, and stole away an honey comb: the owner at his return seeing the
hiues empty, stood up and sought if ought were left. The Bees returning from
feeding, and fynding him there, pricked him with their stings, and handeled him
very ill. Then he said to them: O vile beasts, which have let eskape
unhurt him which has stolen your honycombes, and strike me which take care
over you.

Mor. Some men through folly cannot beware of their enemies, and drive back
their friends, as such that lay awayte to deceive.

145 Of many creeping Worms and Beasts.
MAny creeping beasts sat a sunning, amongst whom the cockatrice was, who
cried aloude: Who so dare fight with me, let him come forth. The Snayle came
forth to fight with her: as they were together striuyng, ye Cockatrice would
have bit the Snaile, and poisoned him, but he drew his head into his shell that
she could not touch him, afterward the Snayle came forth and bit the serpent,
whereby she was overcome. Not long after, she being agein encoraged, excused her
self, that she was not valiantly overthrown: wherefore she said: If there were
any other warrior amongst the^, she would revenge her self, and make him run
away. The Hedgehog hearing this came forth, who was full of prickles, whom the
Serpent assaulted, but the Hedgehog pricked her sore, and wounded her, whereof
she was ashamed: but a Frog willing to be revenged of the Serpente, went on
her, and would have slain her, but she though weary hardened her heart, and
took the Frog and devoured him.

Mor. He is a fool which being unarmed, will assault his enemy.

143 Of the Kings fisher.
THe Kings fisher is a solitary bird, always living in the sea, which as it
is said, takes heed of men's huntings, and therefore builds her nest upon the
rocks in the sea, who on a time being ready to breed, did make her nest: As she
was gone out to her pastyme, it chanced the sea to arise (being stirred with a
boisterous wind) above her nest, which being drowned, her young ones perished.
She at her return, seeing what had happened, said: Woe is me wretch,
which fearing to be betrayed on land, have run to this which is more
deceiptfull.

Mor Some men taking heed of their foes, do un wyttyngly happen upon
friends who are much crueller than their enemies.

147 Of the Apes and the Libard.
IN the land of the Moors there is great store of Apes, whose enemy by kind
is the Lybarde, whom because he can not match with strong arm (seeing they
clymb into high trees) he practices this policy against them: he lays
himself along under the boughs, and stretching out his legs faineth himself
dead. At which sight the Apes that sit in the trees, do much rejoice, then
they supposing him to be dead, send out a scoute watch to descrie the truth:
The Ape comes tripping warely and softely, who perceiving no toke^ of life,
because the Libard in all points counterfeteth a dead carkas, boldly
ventureth to go upon him: the other Apes seeing his boldness, al fear set
aparte, come down, and leap upon him, which he quietly endures: at length
when they have in contempt kicked him so long that they are nigh weary: he
starteth up suddenly, and one with his teeth, an other with his nails, he
teareth in pieces and deuoureth.

Mor. We ought chiefly to eschew that enemy, which fayneth his strength to
fail.

148 Of the Hen and the Fox.
A For entered into a poultrie house, where he saw a Hen on her nest being
sick, whom he asked, how she did: Ah (quod the Hen) I should do much better
(sister) were thou gone.

Mor. The presence of our enemies does much hurt us.

149 Of two Enemies.
TWo men hating one an other deadly, sailed together in one ship, whereof the
one satte in the foreparte of the ship, the other in the hinder part thereof,
sodeinely there arose a tempest, which put the ship in hazard: then he that
set in the stern, asked the master which part of the ship should first be
drowned, the stern (quod he:) then he said: My death shall nothing grieve me if
I may see mine enemy die before me.

Mor. Many men care not what harm they have, so that they may see their
enemies before them hurt.

150 Of the Crow and the Raven.
THe Crow envied the Raven because by him men took divination, for which he
was supposed to for show things to com: whereupon he espying trauailers by,
flewe up into a tree, where she stood and cried like a Raven: They at her
crying turning aside and wondering, at the last vnderstanstanding the truth, one
of them said: Let us be going fellows, it was the Crow that cried, and she
has no soothsaying.

Mor. Those men which strive with their betters, besides that they are never
able too match them, deserve to be laughed at.

151 Of the Wolf and the Fox.
THe Wolf having much prouisyon Envy.
of meat, lived at ease, to whom the Fox came and demanded the cause of his
ease: the Wolf perceiving that he envied his good fare, feigned sickness too
be the cause thereof, and he prayed the Fox, too beseech the Gods for his
health: The Fox being grieved that his purpose would not prosper, went to a
Shepeherd, and willed him to go to the Wolves den, where sodeinly he might
take his enemy that lived void of care: the shepeherde assaulted the Wolf,
and slew him, the Fox possessed his den with all the good chere, but he
enjoyed it no long time, for the same Shepeherde caught him likewise.

Mor. Envy is a lothesome thing, and he that is the cause thereof commonly
makes a rod for his own tail.

152 Of the Covetous man and the Envious.
Two men made their prayer to Jupiter, a Covetous man and an envious, who sent
Apollo to them to satisfy their desires, he gave them free liberty to desire
upon this condition, that what soever the one required, the other should
receive double. The covetous man was long in doubt, because he thought nothing
was enough: at length he asked no small thing, his companyon received double so
much. The Envious man requested one of his own eyes to be put out, greatly
rejoicing that his fellow should lose both.

Mor. Covetousness never says ho: as for Envy nothing is more mad, which
wishes him self mischief to hurt another withal.

153 Of the Wolf and the Ass.
THe Wolf and the Ass were sawyers together, but the Ass wrought above, and
the Wolf beneath, who sought occasion to slay his fellow, wherefore he said:
Ah wretched Ass, why do thou cast dust into mine eyes? Forsooth (quod he) I
do not, but rule it after my knowledge: if it please thee to saw above, I
will beneath. Tushe (quod the Wolf) I see what thou do, if thou cast any
more into my eyes I will pluck out thine: when he had thus said, the Wolf
blew hard, that the dust might fly up in to his felows eyes, but the timber
staying it, it fell into his own: wherewith being sore troubled, he swear,
that he would overthrow the porters, but sodeinly it fell, and killed the Wolf.

Mor. Mischief commonly lights upon the pate of the Author.

154 Of the Lion and the Wolf.
THe Lion being stricken in age fell sick, and lay in his den, all beasts
save only the Fox came to visit their King: Whereupon the Wolf having
opportunity, accused the Fox unto the Lion, as one that set naught by him
being their Lord, for which cause he came not to see him: By chance the
Fox came in, and heard the latter end of the Wolves tale. Then the Lion
roared ageynste the Fox, who incontinent crauyng space too make answer,
said: which of all those that are here present, has done so much good as I,
which have trauayled far and near to seek a remedy for thee of the
physician, which I have learned: Then the Lion commanding him forth with to
tell the medicine, he said: The Wolves skin being yet alive, to be plucked from
his back and put warm about thee, is the medicine and only remedy. As the
wolf lay along, the Fox laughed at him, saying: It becomes not thee to
provoke thy lord to wrath, but to favor and good will.

Mor. He which continually diggeth pits, at length turns him self therein.

155 Of the Heart and the Oxen.
A Heart being pursued of a Hunter, ran Escaping of dangers hard.
into an Ox stall, praying the Oxen to hide him in their rack: they told him
that there was no safe harboring, for both their master and his servants
would come thither: He answered that he was safe enough so that they would
not bewray him: the servant came in, and mistrusting nothing to be hid in the
hey, departed: the Heart was excedingly glad, and feared nothing. Then one of
the Oxen older and wiser than the rest, said to him: It is an easy matter to
deceive him, that is as blind as a Mole, but if thou escape our master, which
has an hundred eyes, I will warrant thee: Straight after came in the master
to redress his servants negligence, looked round about, and groping in the
rack, felt the horns of the Heart, and cried out for his servants, who straight
way came, took the beast and slew him.

Mor. When one is in peril, it is hard to find a place to hyde him in,
either it is that Fortune tosseth the oppressed, or that being afraid, and
uncertain what to do, thorough folly they betray them selves.

156 Of the Cock and the Cat.
A Cat sometime being hungry came to Evil me^
devour a Cock, whom because she had no just cause to hurt, laid to his
charge his great noise that he was wont to make, because that with his shrill
crowing, he did let men of their rest in the night: the Cock replied that he
was thereof giltlesse, seeing by that means he raised up men to their daily
travel: It is but lost labor (said the Cat) to plead thus: for thou treadest
thy mother, neither art thou so content, but thou medlest with thy sister: the
Cock being ready to purge him self of that fault, the Cat waxed more eger
against him, saying: thou striuest against the stream, for this day I will
be thy priest.

Mor. If any man would beat a dog, he shall soon find a staff. The evil
man by hook or by crook, if he list will throw thee down.

157 Of the Countryman and the Serpent.
AS a Countryman walked about his grounds, he found a Serpent in the snow nigh
dead with cold, which he pitying ^^ill for ^^od.
much, brought home, and laid him by the fires side. The Serpent by reason of
the fire, came again to his strength and venim, could no longer endure the
heat, but filled all the Cottage with his hyssing. The Countryman got up a
stake, and ran at him, wherewith he stroke him, and then took him up for that
displeasure, saying: Wylt thou thus recompense my curtesy? Go thou about to
destroy him that saved thy life?

Mor. It chances often, if a man save a thief from the gallows, he will
soonest seek his death, and on whom men bestow most labor, of him they
shall reap least good.

158 Of a Servant which cast his Masters Ass from a Rock.
A Certain Husba^dmans Servant threw From eui^ to Worse.
down his masters Ass hedlong from an high Rock, that he might not daily
be forced to drive him too and fro, but he told his master, that he fell
down him self: wherefore his master did cause him to bear all things on
his shoulders, which the Ass was wont before to carry. The which thing the
evil servant markyng, said: I was not well advised when I slew my innocent
fellow, which eased me of so great travail, I am thus worthily served.

Mor. Whiles fools would avoid any evil, they fall into worse.

159 Of the Bat, the Bramble, and the Cormoraunt.
THe Bat, the Bramble, and the Cormorant entered freendship together, and
determined ^xercise.
to live like merchants, whervppon the Bat borrowed money, and shipped it, the
Bramble took garments, and the Cormorant Brass, and sailed together. It
chanced a great storm too arise, that the ship was drowned, and all their
goods lost, and they escaped to land: since which time the Cormorant sits
on the sea shore, to see if the sea will cast up the Brass any where. The Bat
fearing his creditours, shows not his head by day light, but goth to feed by
night: And the Bramble does catch hold of the garments of such as are passers
by, seeking if he can find his own.

Mor. Whereunto we do apply our selves, in time to come we follow the same.

160 Of the Worm.
THe Worm that lurketh in the durte Experie^c^
went abroad upon land, and said to all beasts, that she was as learned a
physician for medicines as ever was Poeen physician to the Gods: Why (quod the
Fox) canste thou cure others, and can not heal thy self of thy lamenesse?

Mor. All talk is in vain, except experience have been had before.

161 Of a Dog and a Butcher.
SOmetime a Dog had stolen a piece of flesh from a Butcher in the market, and
straight ran away: the Butcher being cold at the heart with the loss of the
thing, first held his peace: then remembryng himself, cried out after him,
saying: O vile thief, for this time run safely, thou go scotfree for thy
swiftness, but hereafter I will watch thee narrowtier.

Mor. The burnte hand fears the fire.

162 Of Cockles.
A Countreymans son roasted Cockles, whom as he heard hissing, he said: O O
evil beasts which when your housen be burnt do sing.

Mor. All things done out of due order, are to be discommended.

163 Of the Ass and the Fox.
THe Ass the Fox being entered friendship, ^^lshod in ^^lowship.
went forth a hunting, whom a Lion meeting, the Fox seeing the present danger,
went to the Lion' and promised to deliver ye Ass into his hands, so that she
might escape scotfree: the Lion agreed: then she led the ass, and caused him to
be trapped in a net: but the Lion seeing him so fast, that he might not escape,
first laid hold on ye Fox, and after he served the Ass likewise.

Mor. They which betray their felows undo them selves unawares.

164 Of a Dog and the Ass.
A Bandog (which is able too vanquishe ^alse wit^^sse.
not only Wolves, but also Bears) had iornied a long way with an Ass which
carried a sack full of bread. As they went on their way, a tempeste arose,
then the Ass happened on a meadow, where withgood grass he filled his belly
full: but the Dog desired the Ass to give him a little piece of bread least he
sterued: he not only denied him that, but also scoffingly counseled him to
feed on grass with him. In the mean time the Ass espying the Wolf coming,
besought the Dog to aid him. Nay (quod he) thou did counsel me to feed on
grass to slake my hunger, so I will thee to defend thy self with thy iron
heels against the Wolf.

Mor. They which aid not them which need help, are wont to be destitute of
the succor of others in the time of need.

165 Of the Dog and the sheep.
A Dog brought an action against a Sheep for a lofe of bread which he ought
him, the sheep denied it, whereupon they joined issue, then the Dog brought in
the Kight, the Wolf, and the Raven to bear witness to the debt, who affirmed
it for truth: the Sheep was condemned, whom the Dog caughte, and pulled the
skin from his back.

Mor. It is well known, that by false witness many are oppressed and overcome.

166 Of an Ass.
THere was an Ass amongst the Cumanes, which was weary of his bondage,
^aults.
who by chance brake his collar and ran away into the Forest, where he
found a Lions skin, which he made fit for his body, and thus behaved
himself like a Lion, puttyng both men and peastes in fear with his tail:
For the Cumanes knew not a Lion. In this wise he lived there a good while,
both counted and dreaded for a fierce Lion, until that a certain Stranger
coming unto that City, (which oftentimes had seen both a Lion and an
Ass,) and therefore easy to be known, perceived by his long hanging ears, and
other euidente signs, that he was an Ass, (whom he did well beat with a
staff, and delivered him to his master. In the mean time the Cumanes laughed
exceedingly at the Ass, which was supposed lately to be a Lion, especially
those whom he had welnigh driven out of their wits.

Mor. We can hardely hide those faults, which we have used from our
chyldhood.

167 Of a wicked Man and the Devil.
A Wicked man having committed many Faults punished.
heinous offenses, for which he was often apprehended and committed to prison,
where he was kept very straightly, besought the help of a Devil, which
often had aided and delivered him out of trouble. At length he was taken again,
who (as he wonted) required succoure of the Devil: who came to him, carrying a
great bundell of shoes on his shoulders and said: friend, I can help thee no
longer, for I have trotted to so many places for thy deliverance, that I have
worn out all these shoes, and I have no money left me to bye any more,
wherefore thou must needs perish.

Mor. Let us not believe always to escape scotfree with our faults.

168 Of a Camel.
WHat time the Camel was first seen, Familiarity.
he was much dreaded, and because of his hugeness, men fled from him. But in
process of time, his tamnesse being known, they took a good heart and came to
him: afterward understanding the beasts courage, they so far forth despised
him, that they put a byt in his mouth, and delivered him to be driven by boys.

Mor. Custom and daily company, make terrible things to be little set by.

169 Of the Fox and the Lion.
THere was a Fox which had not ben used to the sight of a Lion, whom when he
saw by chance once or twice, he quaked for fear and fled away: As he met
him ye third time, he stood nothing in doubt of him, but boldly approached and
saluted him.

Mor. Familiar conversation makes men bold, even with those whom they were
afraid before to look on.

170 Of a Hind calfe.
SOmetime a Hind calfe said to a Heart, Father thou art borne greater and
swifter ^eare.
than Dogs, thou have horns also to revenge thee, why then do thou so
fear them? where at he laughed, saying: Thou tellest truth, but I know this
one thing, that as soon as I hear the Dog bark, I am feign to fly away,
but how it comes I can not tell.

Mor. They which of nature are fearful, by no persuasion can be boldned.

171 Of the Lion and the Frogge.
A Lion hearing a voice, came forth leaping, wherewith suddenly afraid, he
stood still, waiting for some strange sight: at length a little Frogge came
forth of the water: whom when the Lion had espied, (all fear set a part) he
came nearer and dashed him in pieces with his foot.

Mor. This fable for bids vayn fear.

172 Of the Egle.
THe Egle for his beauty preferred him self before all other birds, which
thing al did affirm that it was true, but the Pecock said to him self: Thy
feathers make not thee beautiful, but thy bill and thy talands, because none
of us dare contend with thee about their beauty for fear of them.

Mor. Mightier men's affairs are praised of many, more for fear than truth.

173 Of a Dog fearing the Rain.
A Certain Dog as often as it rayned, durst not come forth of the house, and
being demanded of an other Dog why he did so, answered: because sometime I
was sealded with hot water.

Mor. They which have tasted of great evils, are afraid of the smallest.

174 Of a Cock.
A Cock being taken by a Fox, escaped from him very hardly. Not long after, he
saw a Foxes skin, wherewith being sore afraid, ran away, whom other birds
mocked that he was afraid of nothing. Ah (quod he) if ye had bin in the Foxes
gripes as I have bin, ye would be afryad of his foot steps, how much more of
his skin?

Mor They which have escaped great dangers, dread the least.

175 Of a sick man and the Physician.
A Sick man being demanded of the Physician how he did, answered: that he
Flattery.
swette more than needed. Well (quod the Physician) that is good. The second
time being asked, how he did, said: I shiuer and quake sore: that is good (quod
the other.) The third time he demanded his patient as before, who answered,
that he had the dropsy: that is also good said the Physician. Then one of the
household asked him, how he did: in faith (quod he) through so many good
things I perish.

Mor. We ought chiefly to abhor the^ which only speak to delight the ear.

176 Of the Raven and the Fox.
A Raven sometime having got his pray, made a great noise in the boughs, whom
the Fox seeing thus rejoice, ran unto her and said: I greet you with all my
heart, I have often heard reports to be untrue, but now in deed I find it: for
as I passed by this way, by chance I espied thee in a tree, I am therefore come
unto thee, being offended with report: for they say that thou art blacker
than pitch, but in my sight thou art whiter than snow. In my judgment thou
passest the Swa^, thou art fairer than white Iuie: If thy voice were agreeable
to thy beauty, I would sooner acounte thee the Queen of al birds. The Raven
allured with this smoothe tale, prepared him self to sing. In the mean while
the pray fell out of his bill, which the Fox caught up, laughing
exceedingly, whereof the silly Raven being ashamed, repented his folly.

Mor. Eschew vaynglorie, and that venomous sect of Flatterers may easily be
avoided: but if thou covet to be magnified, Master Parasite will wait on you
at an ynche.

177 Of a man and his two Wives.
A Certain man of middle age being daintily brought up, whose hair was half
Fellowship of women.
black half graye, married two wives at once in the spring tune, whereof the
one was yo^g, the other old, which both dwelled together in one house: the
elder because she would allure him only to love her, daily ke^med his head, and
plucked out yt black hairs. The younger likewise (because she would entise him
to her, from the old woman's company) plucked out his white hairs. At length
between them, they had plucked off so much hair, that he became balde and a
common mocking stock.

Mor. Nothing is better for old men, than to leave the company of women,
especially those that be young, except he will be cloyed.

178 Of a Soldier.
A Certain Soldier being bidden of his Flying of danger.
fellows, to help them at a certain City of Italy, which fell away from the
king of France, answered them: If the right Lord of the soil shall besiege
the city, who shall bring us help? They said: The king of France. Then the
Soldier climed up on a Tomb and cried thrice with a loud voice, O king of
France but when no answer was given him, he turned to them that had him,
saying: I will not come thither, when he that should help meca^ not hear me
requiring aid. The other which went thither, were besieged of the Lord of the
town, which being won, they were taken and killed.

Mor. They are fools which like Harebraines put themselves in danger.

179 Of Trauailers.
TWo men iourneid together, whereof Fellowship.
the one found an Axe, the other warned him that he should not say, I have
found, but we have found. Straight after, as they came together to those
which had lost it, he which had the axe, following his fellow which iorneyed
with him, said: we are undone, nay (quod the other) say I am undone not we:
for when thou founddest the axe, thou did say, I have found, not we.

Mor. They which were no parteners in prosperity, are no sure friends in
misery.

181 Of a Lion and a Bear.
A Lion and a Bear having got a Hindcalfe Fighting.
did fight together for him. When they had long fought and were giddy and
weary, they lay down to rest. But the Fox went about them, and seeing them
laid flat with the Hindecalf in the midst, ran between them and took away
the Calfe, they might see him, but could not arise, wherefore they said: what
fools are we to labor for the Fox?

Mor. Fools lay the pooles, but wise me^ have the fish.

182 Of a rich man and his servant.
A Rich man had a dulhead to his servant, whom he used to call the king of
Folly.
foolish: He being often offended with his words, thought he would be eue^
with his master, and on a time he turned again to him and said: I would I
were King of fools, then in all the world there were no greater kingdom tha^
mine, yea and thou also should be in subjection to me.

Mor. Al things are full of folly.

183 Of a woman that bet her Husband.
A Certain Woman of a manly courage, Fools.
had shrewdly beaten her Husband, which was a coward and dolte, because the
Kight had stolle^ one of the chickens, which she going forth, left him to
tend: wherefore when his Wife was absent again, he tied all the chickens to
one thread, and kept them more diligently, least the Kight should snatche any
of them which he was put in trust to keep: but the Kight coming suddenly,
caught one in his claws, which as he would have carried away, he drew up all
the rest together into the Air. This wretched husband remembering that for one
chicke^ lost he was so ill handeled of his wife, was afraid of more mischief
to come, and thought it therefore better to die, tha^ to try his wives fury
again. Now this witty woman had put certain figs in a little pot, well dressed
with honey and sweet spices, whereof she warned her wise husband, whose
lickerousnesse she feared, yt he should not taste thereof, because present
poison was in them. Her husband willing to die, did eat up all the figs,
supposing that to be the best way to die and to escape his wives anger. When
the woman came home and knew that the Kight had snatched away al her chickens,
she took up a staff and determined to beat her husband, because he kept the
chickens so ill: to whom her foolish husband said: I pray thee wife beat me
not now being ready to die, for I have eaten up all the poison in the glass,
to punish my self for my fault. Then the woman turning her anger into
laughter, forgave her husband, which for keeping her chickens ill, otherwise
contented her.

Mor. There is no fit remedy against fools.

184 Of Fishers.
SOmetime Fishers went a fishing: wherewith Fortune.
being weary and had caught nothing, they were very sorry and minded to
depart: forthwith a Tunny being chased by an other great fish, skipped into
their boat, whom they took and departed merrily.

Mor. Fortune commonly gives that, which by cunning can not be got.

185 Of a rich man and a poor.
A Certain man being marvelous weary Fortune frowneth on the poor.
of the great abundance of his riches, offered a beggar an. 100. crowns, if he
would go to Fortune (which dwelled in the furthest parts of the world) and
beseech her in his name to bestow no more goods upon him. The poor man being
aghast because of the trauaill of so long a journey, refused at the first: but
afterward changing his mind, and promising that he would go, the rich man
said he would give but. 90. The poor man supposing it to be a small reward
for so great pains, first would not agree thereunto, but after requiring 90.
the rich man could hardly be persuaded to give him. 80. The beggar refusing
that sum, and after requiring it, the other rebated always ten from the
number which he offered, till it came but to ten pieces.

At length the beggar, which refused. 100. Crowns, being forced by poverty,
took the. 10. Crowns, and went unto Fortune, whom with many prayers he
besought to give no more goods to the rich man, but rather that she would be
bountiful to him, which from his tender age had lived in continual poverty,
who^ fortune answered: I have determined to double yea and treble the rich
man's goods which sent thee whether he will or not, but thee will I make to
live continually in extreme poverty: besides that, thou should never have
had y^ 10. Crowns which thou receyuedst, had I not ben very fast a sleep.

Mor. Against a miserable person Fortune always frowneth, but to a Fortunate
person she is continually beneficial even against his will.

186 Of a Physician.
A Physician having the cure of a sick man, whose chance was to die, said to
them Friends.
which carried the corpse, this man if he had refrayned wine and taken clisters,
had bin alive at this day: the^ one of the^ that were by answered: Sir your
advise should have been showed when it might have done good, and not now when
it is too late to call him back.

Mor. Friends should help in time of need.

187 Of the Countryman and the Mouse.
THere was a Countreyman very poor, but yet so merry conceyted, yt in his most
misery he forgot not his natural pleasantness. It happened that his ferme
house by chance was set on fire, which burned so sore, that he mistrusted ye
quenching, which with heavy cheer he beheld. In the mean time he espied a
Mouse running out of the ferme, which made have to escape burning. The
Countryman forgetting his loss, ran after the mouse, caught him, and flong him
into the midst of the fire saying: Thou unthankful beast, in time of my
prosperity thou dwelledst with me, now because Fortune is changed, thou have
left my house.

Mor. Those are no true friends which cleave to thee like a burre in thy
felicity, but in adversity swiftly run away.

188 Of the Lion and the Hog.
THe Lion intended to get him a companion, whereupon many beasts desired to be
matched with him, yea and instantly required it, but he set light by them,
and chose only yt hog into his fellowship, wherfo being demanded ye cause
answered: this beast is so faithful that he never forsakes his friends or
fellows in the greatest danger that can be.

Mor. We seek the friendship of those men which in time of need clean to us,
and not those which give us the slip.

189 Of the Dog that devoured the sheep.
A Certain shepherd gave his Dog charge Friendship feigned.
over his sheep to look to the^, for which he fed him with the best meat.
Nevertheless the Dog often killed a sheep and devoured him, which when the
shepherd had espied, caught the Dog and would have killed him. Why (quod the
dog) would thou destroy me? I am one of the household, stay the wolf rather
which continually lies in wait to destroy thy sheep. Nay (quod the shepherd)
I think thee rather worthy of death than the wolf, for he is my open enemy,
but thou under the color of friendship do daily decrease my flock.

Mor. They are more grievously to be punished which under ye pretense of
frie^dship do hurt us, than those which show them selves to be our open
enemies.

190 Of the Lark.
A Lark being caught in a net, wept and said: Woe is me wretch and unhappy
Gain.
bird, for I have taken from no man either gold, silver, or any other precious
thing, but for a little grain of corn I must die.

Mor This fable is against those which for a trifling gain put them selves in
danger.

191 Of a wild Ass.
A Wild Ass seeing a tame Ass in a su^ny place, went to him and accounted him
blissed, because he had good feeding and was in good lyking: after ward seeing
him bear burdens, and the horsekeeper follow, stryking him with a staff, he
said: I think thee now no more happy, for. I see yt with much sorrow thou
enioyest this felicity.

Mor. Gayn full of misery and danger, is not to be followed.

192 Of the Thief and the Dog.
A Thief sometime offered a Dog a piece of bread to stop his mouth withal, to
whom he answered: I know thy pretense, thou give me a piece of bread to leave
my barking, but thy gift I utterly abhor, for if I receive this bread, thou will carry away all things out of this house.

Mor. Take heed that for a little lucres sake thou loose not a great thing:
beware how thou trustest every man: for some there are which under a color,
not only will pretend friendship in word, but also in deed.

193 Of the Wood and the Countryman.
WHat time as trees had their proper language, a Countryman came into the Wood
and required a handle for his Axe, they granted his request. When he had well
mended his Axe, he began to cut down the trees: then the Wood al too late
repented his gentleness, and was full sorry that he had made a rod for his own
tail.

Mor. Take heed who^ thou pleasurest, for many having received good turns,
have abused it to ye destruction of ye giver.

194 Of a Country man and a Counselor.
A Certain countreyman being in law up to the ears, came to a Counselor, to
the end that by his help he might wind him self out of the law. But this
Counselor being otherwise occupied, sent him word that he had no leisure to
talk with him now, praying him to return an other time. The Countreyman
accounting him for his sure friend, came often, but could not speak with him.
At length he returned again and brought with him a young sucking Kid and fat,
with which he stood at the Lawyers gate, and often plucked him to make him
bleate: the Porter (whom his master commanded to open the gates to them that
brought presents) hearing the voice of the Kid, straight way opened the gate,
and bade him come in: Then the Countryman turned to the Kid, and said: I thank
thee my little Kid, for thou art the cause that I come in so lightly.

Mor. Nothing is so hard, but with gifts it is mollifyed.

195 Of Jupiter.
WHat time as Jupiter made a feast at a marriage, al beasts brought in their
presents, every one after his ability, among whom the Serpent was: with a
rose in his mouth, which he offered: Jupiter seeing him, said aloude, every
man's benevolence I williugly accept, but thine in no wise I will receive.

Mor. The wise man may well guess that the wicked offer nothing without a
crafty pretense.

195 Of Flies.
FLies flew into a hole full of honey, whereof they did eat: their feet stuck
fast Gluttony
therein, that they could not escape, who being nigh choked, said: Ah
wretches, which for a little meat do perish.

Mor. Gluttony is the cause of much evil to many.

196 Of Landbirds and Waterfoules.
THe Birds of the land were offended that the Waterfoules did feed both on
water and on land, whereupon they sent for them, and after communication
had, they gave the^ warnyng to meddle no more upon land, upon pain of their
lives. Dear sisters (quod they) this talk lyketh not us very well,
nevertheless if ye will vouchesafe to take part with us, our hearts shall be
much lightened, and we the better contented to obey your request. The Birds of
the land by reason of their gluttony, desiryng to eat of the meat in the
water, flew altogether with them into the water, but because they could not
swim, they were in great hazard of drowning, wherefore they besoughte them to
take pity on them: the Waterfoules being merciful, took them up on their
backs, and brought them to land: for which deed the Landbirdes gave unto
the Waterfoules free liberty to feed both on the water and on the land.

Mor. Gluttonous persons think all too little that goes besides their own
mouth.

197 Of the Egle and the Raven.
AN Egle came down from an high rock Glorieng.
and light on a lambs back, which thing the Raven seeing, desired to counterfeit
him in his doings, and disce^ded upon a Ram, where because his claws stuck
fast, he was caught and cast out to play withal.

Mor. Let no man account of himself by an other man's manhod, but by his own
power. Cut thy cote after thy cloth.

198 Of two Young men.
TWo young me^ came into a Cooks shop as though they would have boughte God
knows all.
meat, the Cook being occupied, the one stole a piece of meat out of the
basket, and gave it his fellow to hide under his garment: the Cook perceiving
y^ a piece of flesh was gone, accused them both of theft: then he that took
it, swore by Jupiter he had it not: the other that had it, swore that he took
it not, well (quod the Cook) the thief I know not, but he that you have sworn
by, both saw and knows the thief.

Mor. If we have ought offended, men know it not straight way, but God that
rides on the heavens and beholds the depthes of the sea, sees al things: if
men would remember this, they would offend less.

199 Of Money.
Sometime Money being demanded of virtue, why she rather went to the evil
Goods evil gotten.
than the good, answered: because good men brought up in thy school never
learned too lie and for swear, and to occupy usury, and to rob others, for
these things are wont to draw me unto them: forsooth (quod virtue) I had rather
that my scholars lived in poverty, than they should defile them selves with
these vices, for both of them have a short end: the good leaving everlasting
glory upon earth, fly up to the kingdom of heaven: but the evil with
slander enough, leaving their riches, shall go down to the bottom of Hell.

Mor. Gather riches after no ill way, for it will not only bring in this life
an evil report, but also after death perpetual torment.

200 Of the Thorn and the wild Got.
A Wild Got sometime came to a Thorn which was new sprung up, whereof he fed
him self full: Not long after, the Got remembering the good taste of the
Thorn, returned unto it, mynding to feed thereof as before, but the Thorns
being hardened, stoocke fast as she would have swallowed them in her throat and
the roof of her mouth: The Got with pain thus vexed, spoke opprobriously
against the Thorn, saying: Ah wretch, thy beginning was good, but now thou
have little vauntaged me.

Mor. Many men likewise begin well, but their end is ill, whereby they bring the
curse upon them.

201 Of a Got and a Vine.
THe Vine said to the Got, thou hurtest me by shearing my leaves: thou know
I am no grass, but though thou do me this harm, I will provide great plenty
of Wine to sacrifice thee to the Gods.

Mor. Commonly a man helps him, to whom he would do some mischief.

202 Of the Ant.
AN Ant being thirsty came to a well to drink, wherein by mischaunce he fell,
Good turn.
which a Dove far off espying, cast down a bough from an high tree, and help
him: the Ant clymed up thereon, and escaped. Immediately after, a Fowler set up
his nets to catch the Dove: then the Ant for to recompense his benefactoure,
came softely stealyng on the Fowler, and bit his foot, whereby the Dove flew
away.

Mor. We must requite a good turn with the like.

203 Of a Gardener.
A Gardener taking a Mole would have kill Good Will.
led bir, to whom she said, I pray thee good master, kill not me thy poor
servant which have so fair a skin, and does dig up thy gardins for nothing:
Ah (quod the Gardener) thou shall not pacify me with these flattering words,
because that in digging up my gardins against my will, as thou say, thou
rootest up all the herbs to feed thy self, and to bring me to beggars state.

Mor. In all things the good will of men is to be marked.

204 Of Mise that would hang a bell about a Cats neck.
THe Mise assembled together and took Great talkers.
counsel by what policy or cunning they might escape the Cats wyles: then one
which in age and experience passed the rest, said: I have found a way which
shall save us harmless from so great dangers, if ye will be ruled by me:
let us hang a Bell about her neck, by the sound whereof, we shall know and
perceive the coming of the Catte: then all with one voice commended his
counsel as good, and said, they must so do. Then an other elder than the rest
starte up, commanding silence, and said: I also allow this opinion, but who
will be so hardy, that dare hang the Bell about the Catts neck? but when every
one refused to do it, their talk was in vain.

Mor. Many commend those things that ought to be done, but few are found to
execute the same.

205 Of Fishers.
ON a time Fishers drew their nets out of the sea, which they perceiving to be
Grief for sudden chance.
heavy, rejoiced greatly, supposyng they had a great multitude of Fishes, but
when they drew the net to land and found a great stone but few Fishes, they
waxed heuie, not for the small number, but because it fell out otherwise than
they judged: then one of the company being an ancient man said: let us not be
grieved: for sorrow waits upon pleasure, and therefore we ought to be sorry in
some thing, because we rejoiced so much before.

Mor. We ought not to be grieved, being defeated of our purpose.

206 Of the Tygre and the Fox.
A Hunter pursued wild Beasts with darts, whereupon the Tygre commanded
all other beasts to depart, and he only would end that fight: the Hunter still
cast his darts, the Tygre forthwith was wounded: As he fled out of the
field and drew out the darte, the Fox asked who had so sore wounded so
valiant a beast: he answered, that the doer he knew not, but by the greatness
of the wound, he took it to be some man.

Mor Strong men for the most part are more hardy than needs, but cunning
passes force, and policy strength.

207 Of the wolf and the Sow.
AS a Sow was ready to farrowe, the Hastiness
Wolf came unto her, promisyng to be a safegarde for her young Pigges: she
answered: Of thy service I have no need, but if thou will be accounted
religious, or show me any pleasure, I pray thee depart further from me, for
with thine absence thy service shall stand me in better stead than with thy
presence.

Mor. All men deserve not credit in all things: for many promise their endeavor
not for thy sake, but for their own commodity.

208 Of a Cat.
A Certain man had a great Cheese in a ceffer, which a Mouse had tasted,
therefore by the counsel of a friend of his, he shut in the Cat there, which
after she had killed the Mouse, devoured the whole Cheese.

Mor. Those ought to be no kepers, which can no less hurt us than our
enemies.

209 Of a Man that would try his Wives mind.
A Certain crafty man desirous to understand his Wives mind, because she
Hasty (...).
had often said that so derely she loved him that if she might wish she
would redeem his life with her death, he willingly let fall upon both their
bare feet a burning stick. Then the woman being in pain, and forgetting the
love she bare to her husband, did shake off the burning stick from her
feet only.

Mor. Credit not women when they say they love their husbands better than
themselves.

210 Of the Cock and the Capon.
A Cock and a Capon dwelled together in a poultry house, but the Cock was lord
of the Hens, and the Capon fed amongst them: It happened that a Fox caught this
Cock, and devoured him, and his comb he touched not, but kept it safe and
brought it to the Capon, saying: O brother capon, thy fellow is dead, wherefore
I have brought thee his comb even for pure love which I bear to thee, now
if it please thee to come down, I will crown thee, that thou may take the
regiment of the Hens as the cock did: the Capon being ambitious and greedy of
promotio^, flew down from his roost, and came to ye Fox, who rejoicing thereof,
caught the Capon incontinent, and killed him.

Mor. Take heed how thou credit al me^.

211 Of the Fouler and the Lark.
A Fowler set his nets for birds, whom ye Lark a far of espying, asked him
what he did, he answered, yt he built a City, then he went a good way back,
and bid himself: the Lark crediting his words came to the net and was
taken: too it the Fowler ran, to whom the Lark said: Friend, if thou build
such a City, thou shalt find few dwellers therein.

Mor. Houses and Cities then chiefly become desolate, when the Rulers are busy
bodies.

212 Of a Goose.
THere was a Goose which day by day laid a golden Egg: her master desirous
Have maeth wast.
in all the haste to be rich, killed the Goose, hopyng that there was some
hidden Treasure within her: and then finding her empty, the wretch was
amazed, and after mourned and syghed, that he had lost both his hope and
substance.

Mor. We must measure our affections and that we be not to hasty, for have
makes wast, and he that all would have, sometime loses all.

213 Of a woman and her Lover.
A Lewd woman wept bitterly for her lover ready to depart from her, whom
Harlots.
she had nere polled of all that he had: whervppon her neighbor demanded the
cause why she wept so comfortles, for sooth (quod she) his departing does not
grieve me, but the cloak which I left him to put on.

Mor. Harlots love not their lovers, but their Money.

214 Of a Serpent and a Husbandman.
A Serpent lurking in the entry of a husbandmans Hatred.
house, slew his boy, for whom his parents mourned much, but his father for
sorrow took an axe, went out and would have killed the Serpent, the Husbandman
seeing him look up, made have to strike him, but he missed him, for he stroke
the mouth of his hole: when the Serpente was gone in and the Husbandeman
thinking that he had forgot the wrong, he came and set bread and salt before
his hole, but the Serpent softely hissing, said: Hereafter neither trust or
friendship shall be between us as long as I see a stone and thou thy sons
grave.

Mor. None forgets hatred or vengeance as long as he sees the cause of his
grief.

215 Of a Man and a Woman twice married.
A Certain man having buried his wife, which he loved well, and married a widow
which daily laid in his dish the ma^lynesse of her former husband: he because
he would be eue^ with her, dashed in her teeth his other wives honest behavior
and chaste living. It happned on a time, when she was angry, a beggar came too
the door, and asked their alms, to whom she gave a piece of Capon which she
for her own supper and her husbands boiled, saying: I give thee this for the
soul of my first husband: Her good man hearing that, called the poor man and
gave him the rest of the Capon, saying: I give thee this for the soul of my
Wife that is dead: By which means either spytyng other, at length had nothing
for their supper.

Mor. We must not fight with those that can revenge their quarrel.

216 Of a Wolf and Dogs.
A Wolf espied two Dogs, which were keepers of the flock of sheep, fighting
together, and with their biting tearyng each other, was in good hope that he
might safely assault the sheep. Therefore with great violence he ran upon
the sheep, and took a fat one quickly, with which he fled away speedily. The
Dogs seeing that, left off their strife, and ouertooke the Wolf runnyng away,
whom they wounded so sore that he could scarce escape: but straight after
being demanded by an other Wolf why he set on the flock alone, where so
strong resisters were? In faith (quod he) I was deceived by their mutual
fighting.

Mor. The hatred which we bear to strangers, are wont to set at one the
debate between neighbors.

217 Of the Countryman and the Horse.
A Countryman drove by the way a spare Help in need.
Horse, and an Ass sore laden with packs, the Ass being weary with
trauayling, prayed the Horse if he would save his life, to ease him somewhat of
his burden, the Horse thought skorne and denied his help: It happened as they
trauayled on in their journey, yt the Ass being ouerladen, fell under his
burden and dyed: then his master laid al ye asses burden and eke the skin
upon the horse, wherwithall his back began to crack: Ah wretch yt I am, said
the Horse, I am thus justly served, because lately I refused to help the poor
laboring Ass.

Mor. We must help our friends that are in misery, for part of our rising our
country claims, and part our friends.

218 Of a Fox that fell into a Well.
A Fox being fallen in to a Well, and at the point to be drowned, besought the
Wolf which was on the wells brink to cast down a rope and help him up: The
Wolf said: How fellest thou in here? Ah (quod the Fox) this is no time to
tell thee, but when thou have drawn me out, I will show thee all things in
order.

Mor. Men in danger had need of present help, and not spend the time in idle
talk.

219 Of a Pig and his fathers will.
A Pig wept much for the death of his parents, but when he had red his will
Heritage.
and found that a great heap of Acornes and many bushels of meal were left
him, he held his peace: and being asked why he wept no more, answered: The
meal and the Acornes have stopped up my mouth.

Mor. A great heritage causes the heirs quickly to leave their mourning.

220 Of the Cockatrice and Seawolf.
THe Cockatrice on a time went to the Hypocrisy.
sea side in the clothing of a Monk, and called to him the Wolf saying: O
brother, since thou wast marked with the sign of the cross, thou art become a
perfect Christian, I pray thee therefore come unto me, and instruct me in the
faith of Christ, that I may be baptized, and thereby escape everlasting
judgment, and have fruition of eternal joy. The Wolf fish marking him well
and knowing what he was, said: O thou Hipocrite, a coule makes not a Friar,
thy words are full of wickedness and craft, neither entendest thou to be
baptized of me, but rather thou would begyle and poison me: therefore I will
not hear thee, and forth with he swam away, and left him all ashamed.

Mor. Beware of those which come in sheeps clothing outwardly, but in wardly
are ravening wolves.

221 Of the Wolf and the Dog.
A Wolf met a dog by chance very early Home is homely.
going through a Wood, who^ he courteously saluted, being very glad of his
coming: at length he asked him by what means he was in so good lyking: he
answered, that his master loved him dearly, for when he fawned on him, he
stroked him, and fed him with meat from his table, and that he never slept by
daylight: moreover, time would not serve to tell how much I am made off by all
the servants. Mary said the Wolf, thou art happy in deed, which have so
good and so loving a master, if I might dwell with him, I would think my self
the happiest of all living beasts. The Dog perceiving the Wolf very desirous
to change his accustomed trade of living, promised his help to bring it to
pass, that he might be retained to his master, so that he were content to
become tamer, and to live in bondage: The Wolf was content and it pleased him
well to walk toward the Town. By the way they had very pleasant talk, but
when it waxed light day, the Wolf perceived the Dogs neck worn bare,
whereupon he asked him, what meant this bareness of his neck, he answered,
the cause is, that when I was fierce, I barked at my friends as well as my
fees, and sometime did byte them, wherewithal my Master not well pleased, did
beat me often, forbidding me to assault any, save a thief or a Wolf, and by
this means I am tamer and carry the mark in remembrance of my fierceness: the
Wolf hearing him say so, told him he would not bye his Lords love so dear,
saying, farewell therefore, for I esteem my liberty far better than this
bondage.

Mor. Better is a dry morsel in a low house where a man is ruler, than in
the kings palace to fare delicatly, and to be in servitude: for liberty in
the court has no place.

222 Of a Lynnet.
A Certain Linnet was kept up daintily by Hunger.
a rich man, who much delighted in his singing. It happened in time of dearth,
that many poor birds came to ye Linnet and asked his alms, but nothing would
he give the^, save of the fragments and broken meat that was left, which he
cared not for, but the birds rejoicing thereof, eat it up sweetly.

Mor. It is an ill dish, which a man will refuse when he is hungry.

223 Of a Mule.
A Mule being fat and pricked with prouender, Honor.
cried aloude and said: My Father is a swift running horse, and I am
altogether like him, but once when he should needs run, and in running
stayed, he straight way remembered that he was an Asses foale.

Mor. Though time bring a man to promotion, yet ought he not to forget his
estate, for this life is unstable.

224 Of a King and Apes.
A Certain King of Egypt appointed Apes to be taught to dance, which as no
beast is of liker favor to a man, so none counterfaiteth better or
willinglier a man in his doings. They having learned very quickly the art of
dancing: on a day appointed they began to dance and were clad with the
richest purple. Their dancing delighted the company a long time, until a
merry conceyted fellow cast down amongst them nuts, which he privily had
carried in his bosom: the Apes had no sooner seen the nuts, but forgetting ye
dau^ce, became as they were before time: of dauncers, Apes, biting and tearing
their clothes, in pieces, and fighting together for the nuts, not without great
laughter of ye beholders.

Mor. The gifts of Fortune change not a man's disposition.

225 Of Oxen.
A Heardman entered the stable and saw the Oxen skipping for joy, he therefore
axed them the cause of their joy, they answered: Our hope is to spend this
day in the goodly leasues. Why (quod he) What thing has brought you to this
hope? We dreamed said they, it should be so: Ah (quod he) give no credit to
such dreams, which ye are like to find untrue, for I dreamed that ye should
ploughe to day, and men's dreams are wont to be truer tha^ beasts.

Mor. Nothing is so soon begyled, as the hope of men.

226 Of a Hog.
A Hog was blamed of a sheep that he yielded no profit to his Master, of whom
he was so diligently fed: seeing they gave him milk, wool and lambs. He
answered: when I am dead, my fruit comes in, for he feeds me for a
purpose.

Mor. None will take pains without hope of reward.

227 Of a man which hid a treasure.
A Certain rich man hid a treasure in the wood, whereof none knew but his
Godfather, whom he greatly trusted. But when he came within few days after to
see it, he found that it was dug up and carried away: he therefore judged (as
it was in deed) that his Godfather had taken it away: he went and spoke with
him, saying: Godfather, I will also hide a. 1000. crowns more where my
treasure is. He being desirous to gayn more, brought again the treasure and
laid it where it was: when the true owner came shortly after thither and found
it, he took it home with him and went to his Godfather and said: Thou promisie
breaker, bestow no more labor in vain to go to the treasure, for thou shall
find it no more.

Mor It is an easy thing to deceive a coueious man with hope of money.

228 Of the Pigarde and the Egle.
THe Pigard sometime being pursued by a Hawk, flyed to the Eagle for
saliegard, Humility.
saying: Thou art great and merciful, therefore came I to thee for aid and
succoure, which am small and weak, craving that I may be under the shadow of
thy wings, to defend me from the fury of my enemy. The Eagle moved with
pity and compassion, said: Because of thy lowliness and imbecillitie abide
with me, and fear nothing as long as thou art in my company.

Mor. They that are mighty, ought to defend the meek and lowly.

229 Of the Dog and the Cook.
A Dog brake loose and ran into a kitchen, Heart.
where he stole away a Heart whiles the Cook was otherwise occupied, who
turning about and seeing him running, said: Trust me, where soever thou
become, I will watch thee, for thou haste not taken a heart from me, but
rather given me a heart.

Mor. Often harms are warnings to a man.

230 Of a man stoned.
A Certain man being stoned to death of the people, rose again: who being
asked of one, what did most grieve him in that stoning, said: Nothing so much
as the stone which one did throw whom I supposed to be my friend, although
it touched me not.

Mor The hurt done by our friends does more grieve us, than that which our
enemies do.

231 Of a sheep crying.
A Sheep being caught by a Dog which was keeper of the flock, made a great
crying, but being taken by the Wolf, did not cry at all: who being demanded
of the shepherd, why she did so? answered: It greeueth me more to be hurt of
the dog, which should be my keeper and friend, than of the Wolf, who naturally
is my foe.

Mor. The hurt by them of the household done, more hurts than that which is
done by strangers.

232 Of a Raven and a serpent.
A Raven lacking meat, see a Serpente sleeping on a sunnie bank, at whom
Hurtful gain.
he slew down and caught him up: who turned again and byt him: the Raue^
therewith nighe dead said: Ah wretch that I am, which have found such a gain
whereof I perish.

Mor. This fable is against him, which by finding a treasure, has put him
self in danger of his life.

233 Of a poor Man.
A Certain poor Man had nothing but a Hurtful things.
house underset with shores, which was like to fall. It happened on a time as
he returned from the fields, he found it fallen, and because he had not
wherewith to set it up again, he was so much troubled in his mind, that he
fell to mourning and weeping out of measure. But as this poor man thus made
his moan, he espied a brazen pot, which many years had been hidden in the
Wall, lying amongst the stones and rubbishe, which when he had taken up and
opened, he found it full of gold, wherewith his heart hopping for joy, he left
off his weeping.

Mor. Sometime that we think hurtful, turns to our great profit and
commodity.

234 Of a learned man not esteemed.
A Certain learned man being bidden to ^esting.
the feasie of a Prince, and commanded to sit down in the neathermost rooms,
when the other guestes had great fishes set before the^, but to him very small
ones, he did eat none, but put them first one after an other to his mouth,
the^ to his ears, as though he would demand some thing of them, and after
laid them down whole and untouched in the dishes again: whom the master of
the feast asked why he did so? he answered, two year ago in these parties my
father through shipwreck was cast away, and what became of his body I could
not afterward know, I did therefore demand of these little fishes if they
could tell any tidings of him, but they answered, yt at that time they were not
bredde: wherefore I must ask the greater Fishes. The Prince hearing so merry a
saying, commanded of the greater fishes to be set before him, and ever after
he placed him amongst his chiefest guestes.

Mor. Amongst unlearned me^, learning is not so profitable to the learned as is
pleasant and merry talk.

235 Of a Physician.
A Nolde Woman being troubled with Ignorance.
pain of her eyes, bargained with a Physician for a certain sum of money to
pay him if he healed her: if not, he should have nothing. The Physician went
about his cure, who daily came and anointed bir eyes, but she (that hour he
dressed her) cold see nothing: then he at his departure, carried some thing out
of the house. The old woman see her stuff daily decrease, so that when she was
healed, scarce any thing was left, to whom when the Physician came and required
his bargain, because she could see clearly, and thereof brought witnesses, she
said: Truly I rather see less than before, for when I was blind I could see
much stuff in my house, but now that I can see, as thou say, I perceive
nothing of yt which I had.

Mor. Wicked persons not knowing what they do, speak often against them
selves.

236 Of Dogs.
A Certain man had two Dogs, whereof ye one he taught to hunt, the other to keep
his house, if it chanced the hounde to catch any thing, he which kept him was
partaany thing, he which being offended, cast often in his fellows teeth that
he daily took payres, and the other did nothing, and yet he was fed with his
trauaill: his fellow answered and said: Blame not me but my Master, which
never taught me to labor, but to eat that an other has swet for.

Mor. Young men which know nothing, are not to be blamed, seeing their Parents
brought them up so.

237 Of a Sheep wasting Corn.
A Husbandman complained that ye sheep destroyed all his Corn, whereupon
Immodeatenesse.
Jupiter commanded the sheep to feed temperately, and because they obeyed not
his will, the Wolf was appointed to afflicte them moderately. But when the
shepherd complained that all his flock was killed by the Wolf, Jupiter was
offended, and bad the Hunter kill the Wolf, which thing he quickly did.

Mor. No immoderate thing is continual.

238 Of the Owl and the Lark.
THe Lark came to the Owl and said: Impossible promises.
Dear sister, I pray thee bear me company to morrow at noone, for my lover
desires to see me by Sun light: Now if I be matched with thee, I shall
seem more beautiful. The Owl promised to be there, for he was ashamed to
stick with her for so small a trifle. When day was up and the Sun did shine
very clear, the Lark waited for him, but the Owl durst not appear by Sun
light, because she could not see, and therefore came not, wherewith ye Lark being
offended, always after abhorred and pursued her: wherefore the Owl flies not
by day for fear of the Lark, but seeks his meat by night.

Mor. None ought to promise that, which he can not perform.

139 Of the Reed.
THe Reed was displeased that not only all other trees, but also sometime
grass Inconsta^cy
did bear a nest, but he only of that honor was deprived: he therefore prayed
a little bird to build her nest upon him, so would I (quod she) but I mistrust
thy inconsta^cy, for I will not build my childrens house upon so ticklish a
foundation.

Mor. We ought not to commit our selves or our children to inconstant persons.

240 Of the Eele.
THe Eele said to a Serpent, why do me^ pursue me rather than thee, seeing we
are so near kin and so like? Mary (quod he) If they hunte me, they seldom
escape scot free.

Mor. They are least hurt, which use to revenge their injuries

241 Of the Crow and the Sheep.
A Crow lighted on a sheeps back and made a great noise, then said the
sheep: If ^nnoce^cie.
thou should do so to a dog, thou might chance catch copper. Yea (said
the Crow) I know with whom I deal, for I am to the pacient grievous, and to
the angry plesaunt.

Mor. The wicked strive continually with the feeble and simple folk: the
innocent is trodden under foot, but no man gaynsayeth the ungodly, if he be
stout.

242 Of the Ape and the Fox.
THe Ape prayed the Fox to give him a Enough has none
piece of his tail to cover his buttockes withal, because that which to him
was a burden, would stand him in good steed and do him much worship. The
Fox answered and said, that she had nothing too much, and she had rather
sweep the ground therewith, than it should cover the Apes buttockes.

Mor. Some have great scarcity, and some have great plenty, yet few rich
men are so well bent as to help the poor with any thing of their excess and
superfluity.

243 Of the Frogs and the Sun.
THe Frogs reioysed at the marriage Vain joy.
of the Sun, to whom one said: O wretched kind, if we only fear the sun
beams, who will abide him if he get children?

Mor. This Fable is against those, which ignorauntly rejoice at their own
harm.

244 Of a Wolf fallen into a pit.
A Fox espying a Wolf fallen into a hole, did laugh, and rejoicing skipped
about the brinkes of the Pit, calling him foolish beast, which would not
beware of men's deceytes. As he thus wantonly scoffed, the earth failed, and
carried him headlong in also: whom the Wolf seeing to fall, said: I shall now
carry a great comfort of my death to hell, because I see the Fox, (which
mocked me) perish with me.

Mor. We ought not rejoice at an others misery, seeing we may fall into the same
likewise.

245 Of two Hogs.
A Certain man had two Hogs which bare so mortal hatred one toward another,
that daily they tore each other with their teeth: but when their Master killed
one of them, the other was wonderful glad, seeing that his enemy should die
incontinent: within few days after, when he him self was drawn to death, he
tormented him self, saying: Woe is me wretch, Why did I so rejoice over my
enemies death, whom so soon I do follow too the same end.

Mor. None ought too rejoice, no not over the death of his enemy, seeing it
is evident that all must dye.

246 Of a Wolf that put on a Shepes skin.
A Wolf put on a Sheep skin, and was Judging outwardly
conversant amongst the Sheep, of whom he daily devoured one, which thing when
the shepherd had espied, he hanged him up in an high tree, then other shepherds
asked him why he hoong up a Sheep: Ah (quod he) the skin as ye see is a
sheep, but in his deeds he was a Wolf.

Mor. Men must not be esteemed after their apparel, but after their works,
for many are under sheep skins ravening Wolves.

247 Of the Elephant.
AS the Lion passed by the wild beasts through the desert, they made their
obeisance to him as King of beasts, only the Elephant bowed not his knee,
because he could not, but some beasts envying him, reported ill of him to the
Lion, he sent for him forthwith, and said: Why art thou so stubborn, that
thou do not thy duty as the rest? My Lord, according to my power I honor
thee, but I can not kneel because I lack knees. The Lion said, if thou do it
in thy heart, it suffiseth: wherefore he condemned his accusers, and promoted
the Elephant.

Mor. We ought to give no judgment, before the truth be tried.

248 Of an Ass.
THe Ass in the winter season was much troubled for ye extreme cold yt he
suffered, Labor.
and yt he lived only by straw, whereupon he wished for the spring tide, that
he might feed of the sweet grass. When the spring was come, his Master
being a potter, compelled him to carry clay into his workehouse and wood to the
furnace, and thence to carry brick and tyle into diverse places: wherewith being
anoyed, he longed for summer, hoping the^ to take his ease when his master was
busy in his harvest: but then he carried wheat into the barn, and from thence
home, and had no rest: wherefore he thought if Autu^ne were once come to have
an end of his travail: but he could not yet be eased of his travail, but as
then carried wine, fruit and wood: then he desired for frost and snow again, yt
at the last he might have some ease of his travail.

Mor. In this life there is no time void of continual labor.

249 Of a Countryman and Bees.
A Certain Countryman kept an Hiue of Bees, by which he became rich:
nevertheless Learning.
he was often stong when he fetched away the honey co^bes, wherewith being
offended, he threatened the Bees saying: If hereafter ye touch me I will surely
overthrow you and drive you away. What (quod the Bees) thou can be content
to gather ye sweet, but art loath to taste of the sour: be quiet, or we will
forsake thee. It happened, when he came again to gather honey, a Be stong him,
wherewith being mad, he overthrew the hiues, the^ the bees forsook him, whereby
ye covetous churl fell into poverty.

Mor. Who so will have gain, must endure some pain.

250 Of a Husbandman and a Poet.
A Certain Husbandman came to a Poet, whose grounds he tilled, whom because he
found alone sitting amongst his books, asked him by what means he could live
so solitary? Mary (quod he) I was not alone before thou came here.

Mor. Learned men which daily are in company of such as they are, be never
alone, but when they are amongst the unlearned.

251 Of a Rich man unlearned, and a Poor man learned.
A Certain man being rich but unlearned, mocked a learned man which was poor,
because that he himself with his own travail had gathered much goods, but
he which was so learned was in great penury: No marvel (quod he) because
thou haste studied to gather Riches, but I have endeavored to get lerning, which
does far excel riches. Hereupon there fell a contention between the rich
man and the learned, whither lerning or riches were more excellent, which
could not be ended seeing both had many favorers, but the rich man had most: At
length by this means it was known that learning excelled riches, thorough
civil discord being both compelled to live in banishment, when they could
carry nothing a way with them of their substance they went away into an other
city, where the learned man was hired to teach for a great stipende, and had
in honor and estimation: but he which was rich, through poverty being feign
to beg his bread from door to door, confessed that in his opinion he had
erred.

Mor. The gifts of Fortune, because they pass too and fro, are far subject
to the gifts of the mind, which are proper and everlasting.

252 Of a Parat.
A Parat dwelling in a kings court was asked of other birds, why she was so
highly esteemed? Who answered, because I have learned to speak as a man.

Mor. We must learn good and liberal sciences if we will be had in honor and
estimation.

253 Of the Pike and the Tenche.
AS a certain Fisher angled, he so bayted Learn by others.
his hooks that the Fishes could not perceive them, which the Pyke and the
Tenche seeing, were very desirous of it: but the Pyke being subtle said to the
Tench: This This Bayte seems to be good and delicate, yet I think it is laid
to deceive fishes withal, therefore let us forsake it least we perish through
the lusts of gluttony. In faith (quod the Tenche) it were a folly to leave so
good a morsel for fear of nothing: I will first try it and make merry with it,
and look thou what will hap. As he swallowed the Bayte, he felt the deceyte of
the hook and would feign have retired, but the Fisher first plucked him up,
then the Pyke swam away and said: Let us learn by our fellows mischance,
least we perish.

Mor. Happy is he, whom other men's harms do make to beware.

254 Of a Mermayd and a Lechour.
A Certain shameless and lecherous person sailing on ye sea, espied a most
beautiful Mermayde, after whom he lusted so much, that he provoked her to
lechery, but she did sing much sweeter and prepared her self to beguyle this
Merchant, saying: as I perceive thou love me, but if thou will have thy
pleasure of me, come into the water, and it shall be at thy commandment. This
fellow was so enflamed with lust, that he clean forgot his own estate, and
therefore skipped into the Sea to her: She seeing that, left him in great
danger and swam away.

Mor. This Fable wills unclean men to beware that they likewise perish not
through the beauty of a woman.

255 Of a Ielous man.
A Certain Ielous man married a Wife, Lewdness of women.
whom he knew dishonest, whereupon he delivered her to a trusty friend of his to
keep, promising him a great reward, if he kept her so safely, that by no
means the bond of wedlock were broken. When he had tried her a few days
and perceived that she might hardly be kept safe, because through her subtlety
he was night overcome, went to her husband and told him that he would not take
so great charge upon him, seeing that Argus himself, with an hundred eyes,
were not able to keep her by co^straint: he said moreover, if he might be put
to choice, he had rather by the space of one whole year, daily carry into the
fields a sackefull of fleas, and turn them all to grass, and bring them home
again at evening, tha^ one day too have the charge of a leude woman.

Mor. No keeper be he never so diligent can keep safely a wanton mynion.

256 Of a Liberal man.
A Frank and Liberal man toward all Liberality.
me^, travailing far, fell amongst thieves, who standing about him, and ready to
slay him, one of them cried out: kill not this man which has much helped me,
for sometime he did not only receive me ge^tly into his house, but also norished
me being sick, and caused a physician too look unto me, with which words his
fellows relenting, suffted him to depart unhurt..

Mor. As far as we may, we should do good to all men.

257 Of a Covetous man.
A Very hard head bought a rich farm and plentiful, which was set withal
kind of Trees that bare fruit, which yielded to the former lord great
abundance of fruit, although it were vnfensed and common for all trauailers:
the new lord supposing that if it were dressed better and looked too, it would
bear fruit more abundantly, took great pains about it, and enclosed it
with thick hedges and walls, and appointed keepers to watch it, but it being
so diligently tended, yielded little increase. Then God being asked whereof this
came, answered thus: Thou art the cause of so great evil, because thou
keep on every side the fields fenced with hedges and strong walls: sometime
I gave great increase because many required much, but now seeing it serves
thee alone, why do thou ask so much?

Mor. God gives plenty to a liberal man, because he might supply the
necessity of many.

258 Of the Dog and the Lion.
A Dog by chance met with a Lion, to Liberty.
whom he said meryly, what wandrest thou (O miser) through woods and deserts
nighe pined for hunger? Mark how fat and trim I am: I never take payns for
it, but get it ydelly Truth it is (said ye Lyo^) that thou farest well, yet
thou (O fool) art in bondage, serve thou which can serve, for I am free and
will not serve.

Mor. In every thing liberty far excels.

259 Of the Lynnet and the Boy.
A Bey asked a Linnet in whom he had a singular delight, and had fed him fat
with good meat, why he would not return into the cage whence he went out?
Because (quod he) I might feed at my own pleasure, not at thine.

Mor. Liberty is to be prefered above all dainties.

260 Of a Fox and a Crocodile.
THe Fox and the Crocodile did strive about their Nobility: The Crocodile
(...).
laid for him self many proud things concerning the worthiness of his
auncesters, that they had prices in games. Whereat the Fox laughed, saying:
Truly friend, though thou never namedst that, yet it appears by thy skin,
that thou haste bin a great dooer in old time.

Mor. The thing it self reproves liars of their falsehood.

261 Of the Shepherd and the Husband men.
A Boy kept sheep in a great pasture, who three or four times did cry in
ieste that the Wolf was come: which thing caused the Husband men (out of
every Quarter of the Countries) to assemble there. It chanced verily, that the
Wolf came at length, and the Boy called for help as before, but they being often
deluded, would not once stir out of their doors, whereby the sheep were all
destroyed.

Mor. He that uses lying, though he chance once to tell a truth, shall not
soon be credited.

262 Of Mercurius.
IVpiter commanded Mercurius to bestow amongst crafts men the medicine to
make them lie, which when he had well stamped and measured, he poured it
equally upon every one. The shoemaker only remained, on whom (because much of
the medicine was left) he poured all in the mortar: whereof it came to pass,
that all crafts men are liars, but most of all are shoomakers.

Mor. This Fable is against lying workmen.

263 Of an old Man and his Son.
A Certain old Man being thrust out of (...)
doors by his Son, lived in an Hospital. On a time he espied his son
trauayling that way, whom he prayed, that at the least he would send him two
towels of all his linen, for which he had swet full sore: who being at length
moved with his Fathers prayers, commanded a little Boy his son, to fetch
his Grandfather ye linen that he required. The Boy being witty and worthy of
such a father, brought but one, whom his Father rebuked because he brought not
two as he was bidden: forsooth (quod he) I keep the other for thee, yt when
thou art old and live in an Hospital, I might send it to thee.

Mor. Look what love we bear toward our Parents, the same will our children
bear toward us.

264 Of the Falcon and the Cock.
A Certain Knight had a Falcon, of whom Live in ^hy vocation.
he much rejoiced, whom he always carried on his fiste, and fed him well, but
on a time he let his Falcon fly, because he would call her to his hand, and
whistled for her, but the Falcon would not came down. A Cock seeing this,
exalted him self, saying: What do I poor wretch always living in durte and
mire, am I not as fair and as great as the Falcon? Sure I will light on his
glove and be fed with my Lords meat. When he had lighted on his fiste, the
Knight (though he were sorry) yet somewhat rejoiced and took the Cock, whom he
killed, but his flesh he showed to the Falcon, to bring him again to his
hand, which the Falcon seeing, came hastily too it.

Mor. Let every man walk in his vocation, and let no man exalte him self
above his degree.

265 Of the Camel.
A Camel being weary of his estate, co^playned that the Bulls had goodly
horns, but he him self had no defense to resist other beasts: He therefore
besought Jupiter to give him horns also: Who laughed at his foolish request,
whereof not only he was denied, but also had his ears cropped.

Mor. Let every man be content with his calling, for as some hunte after
better fortune, they happen to worse.

266 Of the Ass, the Ape, and the Mole.
THe Ass complained that he lacked horns, and the Ape that he wa^ted a tail.
Peace fools (quod the Mole) for I am blind also.

Mor. Some are not content with their estate, but if they wayed well other men's
misfortunes, they would quietlier endure their own.

267 Of the Snayle and Frogs.
A Snayle espied many Frogs feeding in one poole together, so light and nimble,
that they would easily leap every where, then he accused nature for creating
him so slow a beast, and for carrying so great a burden, that scarce he could
stir withal: But when he perceived the Frogs to be devoured of Snakes, and
to be in danger of every trifle, he comforted him self saying: Oh how much
better is it to carry a burden, which may be a safegarde against al weathers,
than to be so often in danger of death?

Mor. We must not be grieved with the gifts of nature, which are sometime more
for our profit, than we can understand.

268 Of a rich man.
A Rich man had two daughters, whereof Love of money.
the one died, at whose burial he hired women to lament: the other said: What
wretches are we, for to us this mourning belongs, but we can not skill
thereof, and they which have nothing to do there with, how pitifully do they
wayle? To whom her mother said: Marvel not daughter, if they lament so, for
they do it because of money.

Mor. Some men for love of money fear not to pick advantage from an others
misery.

269 Of the Nightingale and the Hawk.
A Nightingale sitting upon a tree, did Lucre.
sing as he was wont, but the Hawk seeing him and lacking meat, flew at the
Nightingale, which being ready to be killed, besought the Hawk not to devour
him, because she could not suffice to fill his belly, but he ought, lacking
meat, to fall to greater birds. Nay (quod he) then were I mad, if I should
let go that I am sure of, and pursue that I see not.

Mor. Some men are so foolish, that upon hope of greater things which are
uncertain, put away that they have presently.

270 Of a mad Man.
A Certain mad Man wandering through Cities, cried aloud that he had wisdom
Madness.
to sell, then one offered money and required it, to whom he lent a blow and
gave him a long thread, saying: Thou shall be wise if thou keep thee as far
from mad men, as this is long.

Mor. We must have nothing to do with mad men.

271 Of a Priest and his Boy.
A Priest given to belly good cheer, delivered Madseruaunts.
to his Boy ten fat thrushes put upon a Spit to be roasted, saying that he
should eat them all at a byt, if he let them fall into the ashes. Within a
short while after, when he returned (for he was gone out to do certain
business) he found the boy crying, who being demanded why he wept,
answered, because he could eat but nine when they fell into the ashes,
requesting that he might not be forced to eat the tenth because he was full
swollen more than enough. The priest being offended, as well with the madness
of the boy, as because he saw that he had lost his supper, led the boy without
the thresholde of the door, and showed him three ways, saying: Choose which of
these thou will, for here thou shall not lodge this night.

Mor. We ought not too keep mad servants in our house.

272 Of a Fox.
AS a Fore passed over a River, he was Magistrates.
driven into a ditche, where he stuck so fast in the mudde that he could not
escape, whom the flies sore stinged. The Hedgehog seeing him there, took
compassion on him, and asked him whether he should drive the flies from him: No
(quod he) these are full with my blood, and can little trouble me, but if thou
should drive them away, other hunger sterued flies will occupy their
rooms, and suck out all the blood that is left within me.

Mor. Old Magistrates must remain in their office,

273 Of an Ass.
AN Ass bare great malice to a Hog which dwelt with his master, because he
did nothing, and yet was fed with diverse kinds of meats and became daily
fatter, but he him self continually drudging did fare hardly, whereby he was
so lean, that he could scarce go. But at length when he saw his fellow
carried to the Butchers to be killed for man's meat, he somewhat revived and
said: Ah, this is the end that me^ take such pains in feeding a Hog. O how far
better is it to be an Ass, than a Hog?

Mor. We ought not to envy those, whom we think happy, whereas that cloked
felicity, to many is cause of misery.

274 Of a young man.
A Certain young man which should marie Marriage.
a Wife, being demanded whyther he would have her, turned him to his friends
and neighbors present, saying: Why stand ye like dumb men, why do ye not
pray God to help me this day? for if we pray God help them that nyse where
no danger is, how much more ought ye now to pray for me, to whom so great
danger is at hand?

Mor. They which marie, enter into great danger.

275 Of Jupiter.
IVpiter celebrating a marriage, received Mean life.
all beasts unto the feast, only ye Snayle made slow have, the cause whereof
he maruelling at, asked him why he came not to the feast? he answered: My house
is dear to me and excellent: whereat Jupiter being angry, gave sentence that
he should carry his house about him.

Mor. Some men had rather live hardly at home, than daintily abroad.

276 Of a Fox and a Weasel.
THe Fox had so long time fasted without getting any manner of pray, that he
looked very lean and thin, and by chance crept through a narrow hole, into a
vault of corn, where when he had well fed, he assayed to go forth ageine,
but his belly being full let him: the Wesill seeing him a far off struggling to
get out, cou^selled him if he would get out, to come as fresh and fasting as he
went in. This fable reherseth Horace thus:

Sometime did pass a narrow hole,
a hungry Fox and thin,
To come unto a vaulte of wheat
where easly he got in:
And being full, could not repasse,
to whom a Weasill spoke,
Come fasting forth as in thou wentst,
this way needs must thou take.
277 Of an Apple tree.
AN Apple tree mocked ye Olive tree that he bare small beries, seeing she
brought forth so great Aples, that her boughs could hardly bear the^: suddenly
there arose a wind, and all the Apples almost, because of their weyghte and
vyolence of the tempest fell down, and her boughs were broken, but the Olive
tree stood whole: then said she to her self, how far better had it bin for
me to have borne lesser fruit?

Mor. We ought to be content with small things, seeing abundance of riches
can not be enjoyed without great danger.

278 Of the Fly and the Ant.
THe Fly striued with the Ant about his nobility, the Fly alleged that she
was of a noble blood, and that she flyed, dwelts in Kings palaces, fared
deyntily, there unto idelly atchieuing, and the Ant to be base born, to creep
on the earth, to live in holes to gnaw on corn, and to drink water. The Ant
replied that she was no base born, yet contented with her birthe, the Fly to
be a vagabund, her self none, she tasted of corn and running water, the Fly
of bakemeats and sweet wine, and she got not her living ydelly, but with
travail: furthermore the Ant to be always merry in safety, beloved of all
men, beside that an example of labor, the Fly to be in danger, hatred, and
spited of all men, yea and a figure of slothfulness: the Ant to be mindful
of Winter, and to lay up this provision, the Fly to live from day to day, and
in the winter to be hungry, or else die for hunger.

Mor. A mean life, quietly out of checking, is better tha^ a delicate life in
much trouble.

279 Of a Husbandman and his Dogs.
A Husbandman wintered in the Country a good many days: at length he Masters.
began to want his necessary things. First he began to kill his sheep, after
his gotes, last of all his Oxen, to keep life and soul together, because he
was nighe pyned with hunger. The Dogs seeing that, determined to save their
lives by running away, for they supposed in that he spared not his oxe^, which
for husbandry he occupied, that he would serve them with the like sause.

Mor. Take heed in what house thou serve for hyre, some masters are most
discourteous, which in their rage care not what mischief or displeasure they do
to their servant.

280 Of the Lampurne and the Crocodile.
THe Lampurne on a time finding the Meading with strangers.
broude of a Crocodile, killed them all, and departed. When the Crocodile
returned and found her young ones dead, she was out of measure sorry, and desired
by all means possible to revenge their death, whereupon she went armed to
devour the Lampurn, but on a time she found a cruel serpent and venomous,
and she supposed it to be the Lampurn, who^ she assailed, saying: Ah wretch,
now can thou not escape, thou have without cause slain my sons, therefore
now I will dispatch thee: the snake answered, take heed of me, for I am no
La^purne but a venomous Viper. Ah (quod the Crocodile) thou can not deceive
me, for thou art no Snake but a Lampurn, and altogether like to one, and
therefore I will kill thee, but as she went to slaye him, the serpent prepared
him self, byt her, and also poisoned her.

Mor. No man ought to fight with him whom he knows not.

281 Of a Lion and a Mouse.
IT happened that a Lion (wearied with Mercy in Princes.
running and heat of the weather) laid him down to rest in the shadow under
the green trees, who being suddenly waked with a flock of Mise that ran over
his back, caught one amongst the rest. This poor prisoner besoughte him
earnestly to set him at liberty, saying that he was altogether unworthy to
stir him to anger. The Lion considering it would be no commendation for him to
slay so small a beast, let him go free. Not long after it chanced as the Lion
ran through the thick wood, he fell into a net, well might he roar, but escape
he could not: This Mouse hearing the Lion so lamentably roaryng, streighte way
knew his voice, and crepte in at the holes of the earth, and diligently sought
for the knots of the snare: which having found, he gnew in pieces, by which
means the Lion escaped out of the net.

Mor. Mighty men must use mercy, for Fortune changing as the wind, even the
stoutest at a time may need help of ye basest: therefore a wise man though it
lay in his power to hurt any man, ought to fear that, he that fears not
that, doteth greatly: and why so? Though it be so, yt bering thee bold of thine
office thou carest for no man, the day may come that thou may be aferd. It is
not unknown what has happened to noble and mighty Princes, who have not only
bin glad to seek aid of most vile persons, but also have feared their
displeasure.

282 Of the Wolf and the Lamb.
AS a Wolf was drinking at the head Might.
of a spring, he espied a Lamb far beneath also drinking of the same Spring,
whereat grudging, ran hastily to the La^be and roughly rebuked him for troubling
the spring. The Lamb al trembling besought him to she we compassion on him,
being thereof giltlesse, alleging that because he drank far beneath him by no
means he could trouble his drinking, neither yet meant it. The Wolf having
determined even at the first sight, the death of ye La^be, threatened him most
rigorously, saying: Thy labor is in vain to ask pardon, for thou art always
my enemy, thy Father, thy mother, and all thy cursed kindred are willingly my
foes: but this day I will be revenged of thee.

Mor. The mighty if he be disposed to hurt, easily finds occasion thereto. A
small thing is a great fault, if a man deal with his Superiors.

283 Of the Hares and the Frogs.
THe Hares sometime assembled and bewailed Misery of others eases some.
their life as full of danger and fear, that they were devoured by men, dogs,
and Eagles, and many other: whereupon they decreed that it was better once to
die, than all their life to be in fear: then they rushed to the marsheward, as
though they would fall therein and be choked: but Frogs which sat on the
banks, hearing a noise of running, skipped into it. Which thing one of the
Hares wyser than the rest seeing, said: stay fellows and do your selves no
harm, for there are other beasts more fearful than we.

Mor. Wretched men are comforted by the misery of others being greater.

284 Of a Swanne.
A Rich man brought up a Swanne and a Goose together, but not both to one
Music.
purpose, for the one should serve to sing, the other for the table. When the
time was come that the goose should do that for which he was kept up, it
chanced to be night, so that one could not be known from the other, and the
Swan was carried, away instead of the goose, who soong a song at ye beginning of
her death, by which she showed her nature, and by her sweet singing escaped
death.

Mor. Commonly Music prolongeth life.

285 Of a Moore.
A Certain man bought a Moore, who thinking that the blackness of his skin
Nature.
happened through the negligence of his first Master, took him home and ceased
not continually to wash him with such things as would make him white, by
which means he so vexed the poor slave, that he brought him into a sickness,
his skin remaining still as black as before.

Mor. Nature will abide as it was first.

286 Of a Horseman and a Husbandman.
A Horseman required a Husbandma^ to Necessity
catch a Hare, which he took in his hands and asked the price, and
forthwith set spurs to his horse: but the Husbandma^ said: Make no haste, for
I will give it thee for a present.

Mor. This Fable touches those which refuse their own upon necessity.

287 Of a Man and his Dog.
A Certain man having forgot to shut the door where the Hens roosted: When
Negligence of servant.
he arose in the morning, found that they were all killed and carried away by
ye Fox: He was wroth therefore with the Dog, because he had not well tended his
goods, and bet him sore. Why, (quod he) if thou have bin negligent in shutting
the door, for who^ the Hens laid eggs, and hatched Chickens, is it any marvel
if I being in a dead sleep and have no profit by the^, did not perceive the
Fox coming?

Mor. We must never hope to have diligent servant, where the master is
negligent.

288 Of a Fox.
A Fox durst not assault by night a flock of Hens for fear of a Dog which
he knew to lodge amongst them: but when Neighbor
he understood that they were gone to an other place to company with other
Hens where no dog was, supposing to obtayn his purpose went thither and killed
them all.

Mor. It is better to have a good and courageous neighbor dwelling near,
than cowardly kinsmen.

289 Of four footed Beasts.
WHen war was proclaimed between No aid, no fellows.
four footed beasts, and fowls: The Beasts made a league with the Fishes,
that by their aid they might be defended from the rigorousnesse of the Fowls.
When they looked for help at their hands, the Fishes sent their Ambassadoures
to declare that they could not come by land unto the^.

Mor. Make not those thy fellows, which can not help in time of need.

290 Of a Soldier and his Horse.
THere was a Soldier which had a New things best.
passing fine horse, and bought an other in goodness nothing like unto him,
whom more nicely he kept than the first: Then said he to his fellow, why does
my Master keep me passingly above thee, seeing I am not to be compared to
thee, neither in co^linesse, strength, nor swiftness? He answered him: This is
the course of the world, that new guestes are best welcome.

Mor. Such is the madness of men, that they prefer new things before old,
though they be worser.

291 Of the Kid and the Wolf.
A Got going abroad to feed, shut up her young Kid at home, charging him not
to Obedience.
open the door till her return: The Wolf by chance hearing that, after her
departure knocked at ye door, fayning the voice of the Got, and bad him open
it. The Kid perceiving his pretense, denied to open the door, saying: Though
thy voice be like a Gotes, yet I see a Wolf through the chinkes.

Mor. It is good for children to obey their Parents, young men to be ruled by
age.

292 Of a Chicken caught by a Kight.
A Hen having many chickens did greatly fear least the Kight should catch
the^, whereupon when she saw the Kight, she gathered them often under her
wings to save them from their enemy. But one day espying the kight flying
toward her, she called her chickens together, which al came quickly at their
da^mes clocking, only one excepted, which despising her calling, whiles she
coueted to eat a corn of wheat, was snatched up in the claws of the cruel
Kight into the Air.

Mor. They which obey not their Parents commandment, fall into misery.

293 Of a Philosopher.
A Philosopher of the sect of Cynicus in Offenses unpunished.
chyding being stricken, was not only there with contented, but also rewarded
him that struck, with a piece of silver: Which thing when all that were
present marvelled at, and said that he was worthy to be beaten ageyn, ah (quod
he) ye know not what I have done now, but herafter ye shall know: not long
after as that stryker would have beaten an other (for he hoped to gayn somewhat)
he received his deaths wound, and feeling death to come upon him, he said:
how much better had it bin for me to have bin stricken again of the Philosopher,
than to be rewarded with a silver penny?

Mor. When offenders escape scot free, it does the^ sometime more hurt tha^
punishment.

294 Of the Fox and the Egle.
ON a tim a young Fox wandering from her Oppression of poor.
hole, was snatched up by an Eagle, the^ he cried for his Da^me to have aid of
her: She hearing her young one cry out, came hastily running and besought the
Eagle to set him at liberty: The Eagle having got that pray, would not
depart withal, but carried it up to her nest. The Fox desirous to be
revenged, caught up a firebrand, following after him to set fire on his nest:
when she had climbed up into the tree, she said to him: Save thee and thy
chickens if thou can. The Egle fearing to be burnt, prayed her to take pity
of him and his little ones, and what soever he had of his, he would restore.

Mor. By the Eagle is understood the mighty and men of stout courage. By y^
Fox the poor, whom the rich are earnestly bent with forged crimes to charge
and slander: yet the Antes, when their anger takes effect, though they be a
weak people, sometime their injury wreakes very well.

295 Of an Olive Tree.
AN Olive tree marvelled yt a wild Vine Over ha^^inesse.
which grew near unto him, had shooted up so high in so short time, that he
was far higher than he which had continued many peers in one place: but
winter coming on, the wild vine withered away. Then the Olive said: We ought
not envy those things that shoot up apace, whose end is so soon at hand.

Mor. Things soon ripe, are soon rotten.

296 Of the Mouse and the Cat.
A Flock of Myse had their abiding in a hollow wall, whereout by chance
peeping, they espied a Catte, which satte in a chaumber lookyng grimly, and
hangyng down her head. Then said one of them: This beast seems very gentle
and simple, for her countenance pretends holiness, I will therefore go
speak with her, and contract a perfect league of friendship with her that shall
never be broken. When he had so said, he came nerer unto her, whom the Catte
caught and tore in pieces: the other seeing that, said: Verily, verily, we
must not credit smooth looks.

Mor. We must not judge any man by his countenance, but by his good works:
for in a sheep skin often are wrapped ravening wolves.

297 Of the Kyte and the Hawk.
THe Kyght contended with the Hawk before the Egle about his excellency,
Outward judgment.
alleging that for the greatness of his body he ought to be preferred. The
Hawk again said, that the stature ought not to be considered, but the
strength. Then the Egle said, Go ye on hunting, and whyther of you shall bring
me the worthier pray, I will judge him chiefest: but when the kight had
brought a little mouse, the Hauk a pigeon, the Eagle said: How much bigger the
dove is than the mouse, so much I declare thee Hawk to excel the Kight.

Mor. Men must be judged by their valiant acts, not their huge stature.

298 Of Cocks and a Partriche.
A Certain man having Cocks at home, bought a Partriche, whom he put with
Patience.
them to feed, but she being beaten and driven from their company was very
sorry, supposing that for being a stranger she was thus handled: but seeing them
shortly after fight one with an other, she left off sorrow and said:
Hereafter, if I see them fighting, I will not be grieved.

Mor. Wise men patiently suffer wrong of strangers, perceiving that they
abstain not from their native Countrymen.

299 Of the Sow and the Dog.
A Sow mocked a Spaniell, because he Patience for gain.
used to faune on his master, which so often had beaten him, and plucked him by
the ears, to teach him to hunte. Thou mad body (quod the Dog) thou
know not what I have gained by these stripes, for hereby do I eat the
sweet Partriches and Quayles.

Mor. We must not be grieved if our Master beat us, for thereof issues
plentyfull goodness.

300 Of a Lamb and a Wolf.
A Lamb standing in an high place, rayled Patience perforce.
on the Wolf as he passed by beneath, calling him naughty beast and ravening:
to whom the Wolfturning said: Thou do not taunte me, but the toure whereon
thou stand.

Mor Some suffer wrong of vile persons, for fear of greater men.

301 Of a Fly.
A Fly by chance fell into a flesh pot, wherein being nighe choked, said to
himself, behold I have eats and dronk so much, and so well washed me, that now
being so full I am content to dye.

Mor. A wise man will stoutely bear out that which by no means can be
avoided.

302 Of a Wolf and the Lion.
THe Wolf and the Lion being entered friendship together, did seek their living:
when the Wolf heard the baying of sheep, he said: Trust to it friend, we
shall have meat anon: When he therefore by following the noise of Sheep, was
come to the pen, he found it well fensed, and the Dogs near a sleep: Then
he returned to the Lion, saying: It pleases me not that at this time we eat
of sheep, for they are very lean, let them grow fat, and we will return
when they be fat.

Mor. The Fable notes those, which being let of their purpose, do allege
that they would not.

303 Of the Ape and his two sons.
THe report is, that if the Ape chance to have a twinne, she loves the one,
and ^arentes.
hates the other: It came to pass, that she had two at a clap, who by chance
being put in fear, because she would escape the present danger, carried that
she loved in her arms, which as she ran headlong, she dashed against a rock,
and slew it, the other which she hated, sat on her rough back, and went scot
free.

Mor. It chances commonly that parents bring that child to naught whom they
make wanton, and whom less they cocker, to prove a valiant and good man.

304 Of an old man which carried an Ass.
IT was talked sometime amongst the Please every body.
Popes Secretaries, that those men which framed their life after the opinion
of the common people, were in a miserable bondage, because it was impossible to
please every one, seeing they are of sundry judgments. To which opinion one
told, that there was an old man which went to market, with his son to sell
an Ass, which he drove unladen before him. As he passed on his way, there
were men laboring by in the fields, which blamed the old man, because that
neither he nor his son did ride on the Ass which went empty, seeing the one
for his age, the other for his infancy had need to be carried. Then the old
man set his son on the Ass and him self went by on foot, which thing other
seeing, said that he doted for letting his son ride which was stronger, and
he being old would follow on foot: forth with he changed his mind and set
off his son and ryd him self. When he had ridden a little further, other met
him, who blamed him, yt he had no regard to the age of his little son, but would
let him follow him as a drudge, and him self being his Father did ride on the
Ass: where with he being moved, set his son also on the Ass. Not long
after he was asked by other, whose ye Ass was: Mary (quod he) it is mine:
then they rebuked him that he had no pity on his poor Ass, but to set two on
him, seeing one was sufficient. Then the man being troubled with so sundry
opinions, and seeing he could not be in quiet, but still was checked, he bound
the four Asses feet together, and on a stast carried him on his own shoulders
and his sons to market: whereat all men wondering, laughed exceedingly,
blaming both their follies, especially the Fathers. The old man there with
chafed, went to the rivers side and cast his Ass bound into the water and so
lost him and returned home: by which means the silly old man desirous to
content every body, could please none, but lost his Ass.

305 Of a sumptuous feast of the Lion.
THe Lion made a sumptuous banquet to all other brute beasts, wherein Hens and
Thrushes and such like birds were dressed, some roasted, some sodde^. This feast
pleased very well the dog and the Cat and other beasts that devour flesh, but
the rest whatsoever feed on grass and barley, judged this feast as unsavory.

Mor. It is hard to content the diverse opinions and fantasy of ye common
people.

306 Of the Plantin and the Ape.
PLantin is an herb profitable to heal a quartain, whereof an Ape hearing,
which had a Son vexed with that disease and could not be cured though she
had spent much upon Physicians, came unto one Macer and said: I have wandered
far and nere, and can find no help for my son, but now I have found thee
whom I know to be a great physician: therefore give me thy counsel, that I
may get help for my son of the quarterne. Then Macer because he would be
justified therein, said: Take four roots of Plantine, and give them the pacient
and he shall soon be cured: the Ape hearing that, prepared the medicine which
he ministered, and therewith healed him.

Mor. Let us seek out a learned phisitia^ if we would be restored to health.

307 Of the Fur Tree and the Bush.
THe report was sometime, that the Fur tree despised the Bushes, and boasted
Pleasure.
of his own tall stature, that he was placed in houses, and too bear a sail
in the ships: but the Bushes to be low, vile and good for nothing: then they
framed him this answer: thou beastest much (O Fur tree) of thy goodness, and
skornest our evils, besides this thou concealest thy mischief, and passest over
our good fortune, but when thou shall be cut down with the axe, how gladly
would thou be like unto us which are void of care?

Mor. Felicity has evils to accompany her, as misery has good things. In
su^me, this is safe and void of care, the other is never out of fear nor void
of danger.

308 Of the Sow and the Bitch.
THe Sow and the Bitch contended about Perfection.
their nobility: The Bitch alleged that of all four footed beasts she was
the fruitfullest. The Sow quickly replied saying: Seeing thou say so, know
thou, that thy whelps be borne blind?

Mor. Things are not judged by quick speed, but by full perfection.

309 Of the Dog and the Ass.
WHen the Dog fauned on his Lord or Perseueraunce in his vocation.
the servant, they stroked him with their hands and made much of him: which
thing the Ass marking well sighed deeply, being weary of his estate, yea and
he thought it unjustly appointed that the Dog should so be beloved of all men,
as to be fed at his masters table, and thereunto to attain with ease and
play: contrariwise, himself to carry packs, to be whipped, to labor without
ceassing, and yet nevertheless to be hated of all men: Seeing these things
come to pass by fauning, he purposed to follow that trade of living being so
profitable: and watching a conuentent time, when his Lord returned home,
because he would put the thing in trial, he ran before to meet him:
incontinently he lept on him and knocked at him with his heels. Then his
master cried out for help, which thing his servant hearing, ran speedily
to him: and the foolish Ass which thought him self civil and courteous, was
well beaten with a staff.

Mor. All men can not do all things, neither all things become all men. Let no
man meddle above his capacity, nor go about that, which he is most untowardly
in.

310 Of a Camel and Jupiter.
A Crooked Camel required horns of god, whom for his evil pretense, God
mocked, Petitions.
and from thencefoorth cropped his ears, and made his head smaller, whereby he
might seem altogether deformed.

Mor. We ought to require of GOD that which is seemly.

311 Of an Ox.
AN Ox was offended, that Nature had given him strength without any defense,
because he lacked weapons, which he thought better than strength: he therefore
besought Jupiter that he would vouchsafe to give him horns, which when he had
obtained, he forthwith repented him of his petition: For before being naked,
he was free, and could be caught by none, but now that he had horns, he was
caught in a snare and led to Ploughe, and compelled to great pains.

Mor. We must ask nothing of God, but that we understand will do us good.

312 Of the Wesill and the Myse.
THe Weasil through age lacking strength, and not able to hunte the Mise as he
was wont, he therefore to practice some shift, hid himself in a heap of
meal, thinking thereby easily to catch them: the Myse greedy of the meal,
ran into it, and were all devoured by the Weasill.

Mor. Where thou canste do no good with a Lions skin on thy back, put on a
Foxes skin.

313 Of the Crow and the Pitcher.
A Crow being thirsty, found a Pitcher of water, which because it was deeper
than he could well reach, he assayed to pour out the water, but he could not
prevail, then gathered he stones on the sand, which he cast in, whereby the
water was raised higher, and he drank thereof.

Mor. Sometime that which can not be done by strength, may be by policy and
counsel.

314 Of a Lion and a Fore.
A Lion being taken in a snare, endeavored with all his force to break the
bands: the harder he plucked, the straighter he was held. The Fox having an
errande that way, and seeing this, said: O King, by no strength may thou
escape hence, but by policy, for the snare must be let out and loosed, and
not drawn in. Which when the Lion had done, he straightway loosed the snare
wherewith he was bound, and escaped free.

Mor. Policy is far better than strength.

315 Or a Wolf being hungry.
A Wolf in his old age not able any Poor and rich.
more to hunte, was sore a hungered, neither could he find any kinsman or
friend which would help him with meat. As he therefore wandered through a
great Wood heauyly, he chanced upon a dead carcass of an Ox, which he had
scarce begone to tear, but a company of other wolves, ravens, and crows
came thither and prayed him to receive them as his friends to partake of his
pray: Then the Wolf said to him self: behold me whom lately my brethren and
sons regarded not, now strange beasts reverence, and desire my friendship,
but they do not this honor to me, but to the Ox.

Mor. A poor man is hated of all men, but the rich are honored.

316 Of the Horse and the Heart.
THe Horse kept war with the Heart, Poverty praised.
and being often driven from his meat and put to the worste, he lamentably
desired the aid of men, with whom he came into the field: then he that before
had the overthrow, became co^queror: but his enemy being over come, and
subdued, he him self became bond too man, feign too carye him on his back, and
a bit in his mouth. Of this fable writes Horace.

A Heart in fight excelling much
the horse, from meat him drove,
The strife was long, but horse was fayn,
the help of man to crave.
The byt he took with merry cheer,
straight vanquished was his foe,
His Ryder yet he durst not cast,
nor yet his byt forgo,
So he that dreadeth poverty,
and can not use a mean,
Shall lead his life in servitude,
and loose his freedom clean.
317 Of Geese.
THe Geese and the Cranes destroyed a piece of ground, whereof the country men
hearing, came suddenly upon them, the Cranes espied them and flewe away, but
the geese, because of the might of their body not able to escape were taken.

Mor. When a town is woonne, the poor escape easily, but the rich are taken
captive: for riches in warfare, are rather a burden, than a commodity.

318 Of the Ape and his young ones.
IVpiter sent out a precept, commanding Praise not thy self.
all living things to appear before him, that he might give judgment whose
offspring were the best favored: ye beasts came running, the birds flying, and
the Fishes swymming thither. Last of all came the Ape, and with him his young
one, at whose ylfauoured buttockes every one laughed. Tush (quod the Ape) whom
pleases God Jupiter shall have the victory, yet in my judgment this my child
is fair, and therefore of right before al other to be preferred: whereat
Jupiter also smyled.

Mor. We and ours seem good in our own eyes, but of us and our doings, let
other judge.

319 Of Mariners.
IT happened as many Maryners were sailing Prayer.
on the sea, that there arose a great tempest sodeinly: then every one prayed
to his God for help, but one amongst the rest said: Ye know not what ye pray,
for before these gods can go to the Lord for our succoure, we shall perish
thorough this storm: therefore I do think it best to pray unto that God
which without the help of any other can deliver us from this present danger:
Then they cried to almighty God for help, and straight way the storm ceased.

Mor. We must not seek for help at the foot, when we may go to the head.

320 Of the Owl.
IN the assembly of birds, the Eagle said that he would choose the young ones
of other Praise of our own.
birds to serve in his court: and when every one strove to prefer his own,
the Owl said: I pray thee (O Queen) receive mine, which in beauty pass all
the rest: why (quod the Egle) what beauty are thy sons of? The Owl
answered: Of the same that I my self am: Then all the birds laughed
exceedingly.

Mor No child is so deformed, which to his parents seems not fair.

321 Of a Fox and a Dog.
A Fox being coursed by a Dog, and even at ye point to be caught, having no way
Praise another for aduau^tage
to shift him said: why would thou destroy me thou dog, seeing my flesh thou
can not eat? Go catch rather that hare (for there was one the^ hard by)
whose flesh me^ judge to be ye sweetest: the dog harkned to ye counsel of the
Fox, and let him go free, pursuing the hare, whom because of his wonderful
swiftness he could not overtake. Not long after, the Hare met with the Fox,
blaming him for setting the Dog at him. The Fox answered him: I marvel what
thou meanest to accuse me, which praised thee so greatly: what would thou
have said, if I had dispraysed thee?

Mor. Many under the color of praising, devise utter undoing to some men.

322 Of the Wolf and Porkupine.
ON a time the Wolf being hungry had Preparation.
a good fansy to devour a Porkupine, whom because of his sharp pricks he
durst not assail, but invented a crafty wyle to trap him in, cou^selling him
not to trouble his back with so many weapons in time of peace, seeing that
other Archers carried none with them but when they go to warfare: Nay (quod the
Porkupine) we must suppose that there is no time void of war against a Wolf.

Mor. A wise man ought always to be armed against ye assaults of his enemies.

323 Of an Old man loath to dye.
A Certain old man desired death which Preparation to die.
came to take his life from him, to spare him till he might make his will, and
provide all other necessaries fit for such a journey: whom Death answered: Why
have not thou prepared thy self being so often warned by me? Mary (quod he) I
never saw thee before? Why (quod Death) when I daily took, not only those
which were of like years to thine (of which number very few remain) but
also young men, children and babes, was it not sufficient warning that thou art
mortal? when thy eyes wared dimmo, thy hearing thick, other senses daily
decaying, and thy body being worse and worse, did I not tell thee that I was
near at hand? and yet thou say thou have no warnyng: wherefore I will no
longer prolong the time.

Mor. We must direct our life, as though death were always before our eyes.

324 Of a Dog brought up to hunting.
A Certain man brought up his Dog in Present gain remembered.
hunting, whom because he was old he pricked forward, but in vain it was,
for his pace was slacked, he could make no great have. It chanced that he
caught a wild beast, which because he was toothlesse, slipped from him, whom
his master rebuked much for that fault, and bet him also: the Dog answered,
that of right he ought to pardon him, because he was now old, but when he was
young he did his endeavor courageously: but I perceive said he, that with out
profit nothing pleases you, when I was young and lusty, thou made much of
me, but now that I am old, thou castest me off for Hauks meat: when I got any
pray I was welcome, but now that I am slow and toothlesse, I am put back: but
if thou were a good master, for my good deeds that I have done, thou would
cherishe me in my age.

Mor. A good turn once past is soon forgotten, if it be to come it is not much
regarded, if there be any profit presently, it is well remembered.

325 Of a Man which plucked up a Hedge.
A Certain man rayled against a hedge, Preseruers.
wherewith his vine was enclosed, because it was barren, which he cut up and
cast away as a thing unprofitable. Then the Vine lying open, and made common
both for men and cattaile, was wasted by every body. The Lord of the Vine seeing
this, blamed him self of folly, seeing so foolishly he had removed the hedge
yt preserved his grapes.

Mor. They which preserve things, though they seem idle, do no less than
they which have gathered them together with their travail.

326 Of the Ass and the Lion.
THe Cock sometime fed with an Ass, to who^ as the Lion was coming, ye Cock
Presumption.
crowed out aloude, and the Lion straightway fled (for men say) he is afeard
at the crowyng of a Cock. The Ass supposing that he ran away because of
him, went straight after the Lion, whom when he had so far pursued that
they were without the hearing of the Cocks crowing, the Lion returned and
devoured him, who as he was dying, cried out: Ah wretch and mad body that I
am, for I am borne of none that were warriors, and wherefore have I rushed into
the host?

Mr. Many men assail their enemies which upon set purpose do humble them
selves, by the which means they are slain.

327 Of Cocks.
AS two Cocks fought together for the Pride.
Hens, the one put the other to flyghte, which hid him self in a dark corner:
But the co^queror flew up to an high wall, where he stood and crowed aloude:
forth with an Egle flewe at him and caught him: since which time, he that hid
himself did tread the Hens without fear.

Mor. God withstandeth the proud, but on yt lowly he pours his goodness.

328 Of the Horse and the Ass.
Sometime a Horse decked with fair trappers and a sadle, greatly neyghing,
ran thorough a high way, whose running an Ass laden by chance did let, he all
raging and chewyng his bit for anger, said: Ah lither lurdeyn, why withstandest
thou the Horse? Give place or I will tread thee down: the Ass durst not once
bray, but quietly avoided. It happened as the Horse ran his race, his hoof
brake, who then being paste running or making any show, was spoiled of his
ornaments, and after sold to a Tanner. The Ass seeing him coming with a
Tanner, said unto him: What good sir, how happens this kind of weed? where
is thy gilt saddle, thy studded trappers and glittering bridle? Thus it is fit
my friend to happen to every one that is proud.

Mor. Many men in their prosperity are so puffed up with pride, that they clean
forget them selves and al modesty, but for their presumption they soon suffer
adversity.

329 Of a Crane.
A Crane seeing an Egle flying up as high as the sun, and to behold it
perfectly, he said to himself: I am as fair and great as the Egle, I will
therefore fly up to the Sun, and look upon it as steadfastly as the Egle, and
after I shall be esteemed as highly as she: but as he mounted up toward the
stars, his strength was gone thorough weariness, neither could he fly up
to the Sun: yet such was his pride, that he would not come down, but began to
mount upward still. But being thus combred, that be neither could stay
himself, neither fly to the sun, he fell down.

Mor. Who so clymbeth higher than he should, falls lower than he would.

330 Of Jupiter and the Raven.
ON a time Jupiter myndyng too create a Proud of an others purse.
king of the fowls, appointed a day of assembly, to the end that he which
was comliest should be appointed king. The Raven hearing thereof, and knowing his
own deformity, gathered together diverse feathers and decked himself, that he
was goodlyest of all. When the day appointed was come, the fowls assembled
together: then Jupiter would have made the Raven king because of his gayness,
whereat the other disdayning, plucked every one his feathers from him, whereof
he being spoiled was a Raven as before time.

Mor. He that hangs on another man's sleeue, if he chance to fall from him,
all the world shall know what he is.

331 Of a Flea and a Lion.
THe Flea came to the Lion and said: Falls of pride.
Neither fear I thee, neither art thou stronger than I, but I pray thee what
is thy strength? thou scratchest with thy nails, and with thy teethe thou
bytest, so does a woman fyghting with her husband: but in strength I far
exceed thee, and if thou will, let us go fight. The Trumpet being blown, the
Flea stuck fast about his nosethrills biting: but the Lion with his own
nails tore him self til he was chafed: The Flea having overcome the Lion
sounded the Trumpet, and rejoiced: but as he flew away, he was entangled in a
Copweb: and being ready to be devoured, he lamented that he strove with the
greatest beasts, and now to be killed by a vile Spyder.

Mor. This fable is against those which vanquishe great men, and are
vanquished by mean persons.

332 Of the Pecock and the Chough.
WHen the birds would make them a king, ye Pecock prayed them to choose Princes.
him for his beauty: when they so minded, the Chough began to say: if in thy
reign ye Egle pursue us, how will thou help us?

Mor. Princes must be chosen not only for their beauty, but also for their
strength and wisdom.

333 Of a Man and a Dog.
A Certain man had prepared a supper, to which he badde certain of his
friends, whose Dog likewise desired another Dog, saying: Friend, come and suppe
with me. Which Dog being come in at the doors, and seeing such great cheer
toward, rejoiced greatly and said to him self: Oh what joy has happened me of
late, for I shall fill my belly so full, that I shall not be hungry to morrow:
and as he wagged his tail for joy, because he trusted in his friend, the
Cook seeing him thus do, caught him by the legs and cast him out of the window:
when the Dog was fallen, he rose up quickly and ran howling away: As he went a
dog met him, and asked him what good cheer he had to supper, the dog
answered: I was so out of measure dronk, that I knew not the way whereout I
came.

Mor. We must not trust to those which promise us a good turn of an other man's
gift.

333 Of a Heardman.
AS a Heardman kept a Heard of Bulls, he lost a Calf, whom in every desert he
sought a long time, but when he could not find him, he prayed to Jupiter,
promising if he would show him the Thief which stole his Calfe, to offer a
Got in sacrifice to him. It happened as he walked in a grove of Oaks, he found
that his calf was devoured by the Lion, whereat trembling for fear, he cast up
his hands to heaven and said: God lupiter I promised to give thee a kid if I
found ye Thief, now if I escape his hands, I will undertake to give thee a Bull.

Mor. This Fable is against unlucky men, that lacking ought, pray to find
it, which having found, they seek to avoid.

334 Of the Lion and the Fox.
WHat time the Lion fell sick, al beasts came to visit him, only the Fox
stacked his coming, to whom the Lion sent his Ambassadors to summon him to
appear before him, because his only presence would much delight the king,
besides that, suspicion of danger there is none, first, because the Lion is
his chiefest friend, therefore desires greatly to speak with him: again, he
lay sore sick, so as if he meant to hurt him, he had no force thereto. The
Fox wrote again, wishing recovery of his health, for which he would pray
unto the Gods, but in no wise he would come to see him: for he was afraid of
the foot steps, which all looked toward his Den, but none backward, by
which it was evident, ye many beasts came in, but none returned.

The answer of the crafty Fox
unto the Lion sent, Horace.

Which in his Den lay very sick,
to show is my intent:
Because the tract of many beasts
I find to enter there,
But none of them returns again,
which gives me cause of fear.
Mor. Take heed how thou trustest promises, which except thou do, thou shall
often be beguyled: for of words, and deeds a man may first conjecture and after
judge.

335 Of a man created Cardinal.
A Certain merry conceyted fellow, hearing Promotio^.
his friend to be created Cardinal, came to greet him for his promotion: he
lofty and swelling with pride, cou^terfayting that he knew not his old
friend, asked who he was: the other being ready in his merry answer, said: I
pity thee and others that come to such promotion, for as soon as ye have got
such honors, ye leese so your sight, feeling, and other senses, that ye
clean forget your old friends.

Mor. Some being promoted to dignity, despise their old acquaintance.

336 Of the Fox and the Got.
THe Fox and the Got being both thirsty, descended into a Well to drink:
Providence
after they had both dronk their fill, the Got looked round about to get
out, to who^ the Fox said: Be of good chere, for I have found a shift to help
us both out, for if thou will stand upright and lean on thy forfeete, and
pitch thy horns fast to the Wall that I may climb up on thy back, when I
have got forth, I will also draw thee forth: The Got with all his heart
followed his advise. When the Fox thereby had skipped out of the well, he lested
about the brinks thereof, rejoicing much, for which he blamed the Fox that he
broken promis with him. Nay (quod the Fox) if thou had as much wit as thou
have hairs in thy beard, thou would not have gone down into the Well
before thou had well pondered how to come out.

Mor. Wise men will first for see the end of a thing, and after enterprise it.

337 Of Field Mise.
A Flock of Field Mise appointed to gnawe down an oak full of mast that they
might have their meat the redier, so as they need not so often run up and
down for it. Then one wiser than the rest forbad the^, saying: If we destroy
our nourisher, who shall give food to us and our seed in time to come?

Mor. A wise man ought not only to behold things present, but also things to
come.

338 Of a Flea.
AS a Flea was biting a man, he was taken, who asked what he was, seeing he
Punishme^^ of vices.
fed of him: answered, he was of that kind of beasts, which as nature
ordained, lived by that means, praying him not to kill him, because he could
not do much harm, whereat the man laughed, saying: I will therefore the sooner
kill thee, because it is not lawful to hurt any, either much or little.

Mor. We must not favor the wicked, whither their trespass be small or great.

339 Of the Sheep and the Shepherd.
A Sheep sometime rayled on the Shepherd, Railing.
because he could not be co^te^t with the milk that she gave him for his food
and his sons, but he did fliece him of his wool. The shepherd offended with
this talk, lead her Lamb to the slaughter: What (quod the sheep) can thou
do me any worse villainy? Yea (quod the sheperd) that I can, for I may slaye
thee and cast thee out to be torn in pieces by Wolves and Dogs: then the
sheep durst not mutter, being afraid of some further inconvenience.

Mor. We ought not to be angry with God, if he suffer our goods and our
children to be taken from us, seeing he is able more grievously to punish
both the quick and the dead.

340 Of Frogs.
TWo Frogs fed in the marshes, it happened that Summer that the water dried
Rashness.
up, whereupon they forsook it and sought another, at length they found a deep
well: which when they had seen, the one said to the other: Let us go
down into this Well. Nay, soft (quod his fellow) how shall we get up again,
if the water be dried up here?

Mor. We ought to enterprise nothing unadvisedly.

341 Of a Fisher.
A Certain Fisher being but a noouice in that art, took his pypes and his
nets and went to the Sea, and standing on a rock, played first with his pype,
supposing that by his sweet melody the fishes would dance: but when he had
long tried yt way and could not prosper, he laid down his pype and took up
his net, which he cast into the Sea, wherein he drew many fishes. When he had
emptied his net and saw them skipping, he said: Oh wicked Creatures, when I
piped, ye would not dance, and now that I have left off, ye begin to skip.

Mor. This fable is against those which do any thing without aduisement, and
out of time.

342 Of the Ape and the Fox.
IN the assembly of brute beasts, the Ape daunced, for which he was created
King. The Fox envying him, brought him to a place where he had espied flesh
in a snare, to whom he showed that he had found a treasure which he could
not have because by the law it is the kings right, willing him to take it
because he was king. The Ape went rashly in, and forthwith was caught in the
snare: Then he accused the Fox of treason toward his person. Why (quod the
Fox) shall thou be King over beasts, which art so mad?

Mor. He which goes rashly to work, falls hastily into misfortune.

343 Of a Dove.
A Dove being very thirsty, espied in a certain place a pot of water painted,
which he supposing to be verily, flew with great force, and unawares dashed
against the table, wherewith she brake her wings, fell to the ground, and was
caught up by one that passed by.

Mor. Some men for great joy, unadvisedly taking matters in hand, do thereby
cast them selves away.

344 Of a Currier and a Hunter.
ON a time a Currier came to a Hunter to bye a bears skin, for which he drew
money to have paid. In faith (quod the hunter) presently I have none, but to
morrow I will go a hunting, and if I chance to kill a Bear, thou shall have his
skin. The Currier (to refresh his spirits) went into the forest with him,
and because he would the better behold the pastime between the Hunter and the
Bear, he climbed into an exceeding high tree. The Hu^ter went boldly to the
Bears Den, who put in his dogs and rouzed him. It happened that the Bear
shunned his blow and forthwith struck the Hunter to the ground: who knowing
the nature of the beast to be, to take pity of a carcass, held his breath
and feigned him self to be dead. The bear smelled at him euerywhere, and
perceiving by no means any life in him, departed away. When the Currier saw
that the beast was gone, and that there was no danger, he came down out of ye
tree and went to the Hunter, whom he bad arise, and afterward demanded what
the Bear said in his ear? He warned me (quod he) that hereafter I sell not
a Bears skin, before I have caught him.

Mor. We ought not accounte that we have not, as sure as that we have.

345 Of the Beauer.
THe Beauer is a four footed beast, commonly living in pooles, whose members
Regard of health.
Physicians occupy: who being pursued and ready to be taken, and knowing the
cause of his persecution, cuts of his privy members, and casts it to them
which follow him, whereby he escapes.

Mor. Wise men having regard of their health, ought to spare for no cost.

346 Of the Houpe.
THe most part of birds were bidden to the Marriage of the Eagle, there the
Regard of gaye clothes.
Houpe was set up above the rest, because of his fair Crown and goodly
feathers, whereat the other birds disdayned, for that he used to tumble in
dunghils and in the fylth.

347 Of the Beam.
A Great piece of Timber being carried in a Carte, rebuked the Oxen that they
Rejoicing.
went so slowly, saying: Come for shame ye slothful luskes, your burden is
but light. Thou mockest us (quod the oxen) yet do thou not know what
hangs over thy head: we will soon cast off this lode, but thou shall bear
a wait till thou be ready to break. Then the Beam repented, and from thence
forth durst not once shoot out a railing word against them.

Mor. Let no man rejoice over an others misery, seeing he may be subject to
greater.

349 Of the Lion, the Bore, and the Ravens.
THe Lion sometime prepared to fight against the Bore: wherefore the Ravens
beheld them from above, that they might forthwith devour him which was
overcome. But they became friends again, and the other were disapointed of
their purpose.

Mor. We should not rejoice at an other man's harm.

350 Of a Wolf.
A Wolf being old and not able any longer Religious men.
to hunte, gave him self to religion: put upon him a Monks attire, and begged
meat from door to door: and being rebuked by another Wolf, said: What
would thou I should do? My teeth are out, and run I can not, wherefore I
mistrust otherwise how to live.

Mor. Many addict them selves to Religion because they ca^ not otherwise live.

351 Of a Bear.
AS a Bear scolded by chance with his Repentance to late.
Wife, he thrust out her eyes, but after repe^ting, he was so grieved therewith,
that he byt of his nails. And when in talking he said, that for ye love he
bare to her he had cast away his best defense: What good (quod his wife) does
this to me? Thou should have done this before thou scratchedst out my eyes.

Mor. After harm done it is too late to repent, seeing that which is done, can
not be undone.

352 Of a simple Countryman.
THere was a Countryman which as he came from market, heard two Cuckoes Reward
for well doing.
aunswering one an other out of two sundry woods. And when the Cuckoe of the
other wood had near put to silence his countrycuckoe, he lighted off his
horse and climbed a tree, and as well as he could, he help his countrycuckoe
with his crying. In the mean time a Wolf devoured his horse: the^ was he fayn
to go home on foot, where he complained to his neighbors, how for the honor
of his country he had help his Cuckoe, whereby he had sustained great loss.
Then they all with one accord paid his damages, supposing that it was not fit
that any should receive hinderance, which had traveled for their common wealth.

353 Of the Egle and the Dorre.
A Hare being pursued by an Eagle, ran into the hole of a Dorre, requiring
succor Reuengement.
of him. The Dorre besought the Eagle not to kill his suppliaunt, desiring him
for mighty God Jupiters sake not to despise his weakness: but she being
displeased, wafted at ye Dorre with her wings, and snatched away the Hare,
which she devoured. The Dorre flew after the Eagle, to learn where her nest
was: When he was come at it, he rolled down the eggs and brake them. She was
sore displeased that any durst enterprise to do it: yet she made her nest the
second time in an higher tree, there the Dorre served her again as before.
Then the Eagle being altogether in doubt what to do, flew up to Jupiter to whom
she is consecrated, and laid her third brood in his lap, committing them to
his custody. But y^ Dorre roiled together a ball of dung which he carried up
and let fall into Jupiters bosom, who rose up to shake off the Dung, and
forgetting the eggs cast the^ down, by mean whereof they were broken. When
Jupiter understood by the Dorre that he had done this to be revenged of the
Eagle, for she had not only iniuried the Dorre, but also committed wickedness
against Jupiter him self, he told the Eagle when she returned, that the Dorre
was the cause of her woe, and that he did it justly. Therefore Jupiter, because
he would not have the kind of Eagles to be scant, counseled the Dorre to be at
one with the Egle: but because he would not be persuaded, Jupiter appointed the
Eagles to bread in that time, when the Dorres appear not.

Mor. Despise no man, seeing there is none but being provoked can revenge
himself.

354 Of the Storke and the Swallow.
THe Strorke sometime built in the top of a Toure, and a Swallow with in, which
for joy that she had young ones, made great thattering, wherewith the Storke was
offended, because he could take no rest with his young ones, for her great
noise. When ye Swallow was abroad, he plucked down her nest and killed her
young, who being returned to her nest, made great sorrow for that mischaunce,
but because she knew not the doer, she reue^ged it not. Shortly after, the
Swallow made a new nest and had young, for joy of whom she again chattered.
But the Storke being newly disquieted, called to her, saying: I will serve thee
and thy birds again as lately I did, except thou leave of thy chattering
that I may take my rest. The Swallow hearing this, was greatly inflamed to be
reue^ged: wherefore on a time when the Stork was a sleep in her nest, the
Swallow set fire thereon and burnt her and her chickens to ashes.

Mor. We ought to do no wrong to our inferiors least privily they hurt us.

355 Of the Town Mouse and the Country Mouse.
IT pleased a town Mouse for his recreation Riches.
to walk abroad into the country, who^ when the cuntry Mouse had espied, he
desired him home to his house, where al things were made ready, and to supper
they went: he brought out all his provision of victuals that he had laid up
against the winter, to make this jolly gueste some daintly theere. The town
Mouse frouning thereat, disalowed much the scarcity of the Country, and
forthwith commended the plenty of the City. As he returned to the City, he
brought with him the country Mouse, to the end to accomplish his craking with
effect: They fell to their meat, which sumptuously the town Mouse had ready
prepared. And as they were merry together: in the midst of their feast they
heard the noise of a key in the lock, there was quaking and trembling with a
great hurly burly, and happy was he that could escape soonest. The country
Mouse unaccustomed to such flights, besides that ignorant of the place, escaped
very narrowly. When the servant was gone, the town Mouse returned to the
feast and called for the country Mouse: He being yet afraid, came creeping out,
and after desired by the Town Mouse to fall to his meat, he asked, whyther
this were a common custom with him? Yea (quod he) it is daily, and therefore
not to be wayed: What daily? said the country Mouse. I promise you, these
dainties taste more of the sour than of the sweet: for my part I had rather
live like a beggar quietly, than with these delicates in such ieoperdie.

Mor. Riches truly make a semblant of pleasure, but if thou consider them
earnestly, they are not without much danger and pensiveness.

356 Of the Mule and the Horsle.
A Mule espied a Horse gorgeously decked with a gilt byt, a fair sadle, and
purple trappers, at whose Fortune he enuted much, supposing him to be happy,
because he always fared well, and went gayly: contrariwise, his own estate in
comparison of his to be miserable. For (quod he) I am ouerlade^ with the
packsadle, and I am daily drudge to carry burdens. But shortly after, he espied
the horse returning from battle sore wounded, then he accounted his own
estate better than the horses, saying: I had rather get my living hardly with
my daily labor, and to be cladde in vile array, than after such fair and trim
apparel to be in danger of my life.

Mor. We must not envy Kings and Princes because of their wealth and
substance, seeing they are subject to many more perils than poor men are.

357 Of a Devil.
A Devil wa^dring through the world (as his manner is) marked a certain young
man rejoicing at the death of his parents, whereat he was very glad: but
going a little further he wept, seeing an other very heavy at his Fathers
burial, who being demanded the cause of so diverse affections, answered: The
laughing of the son for the death of his parents, declares that those being
rich are dead, of which number very few escape our hands: but the weeping
is a token of the fathers poverty: and the kingdom of Heaven, for the most
part, is wont to belong to those which are poor.

Mor. Too much riches do carry a man down to hell.

358 Of the Birds.
THe Birds were greatly afraid least the Rich enemies.
Dorres should kill them with shooting off Bals, because they heard that they
had rolled together a great heap of bals. Fear not said the Sparrow, for how
shall they shoot bals at us that fly in the air, when they can not carry
them on earth but with much toil?

Mor. We need not fear the riches of our foes, when we see they lack wit.

360 Of an Ox and a Bullock.
AN Ox being well stryke^ in age, daily Riottousnesse.
went to plow. It happened yt a young heyfer which never had labored, fetched
his friskes in the pastures not far off, and scorned the toyling of the
older, boasting much of his own liberty, that he had tasted neither yoke nor
chayn, but y^ others neck was worn bare with labor. The Ox presently
answered nothing: not long after he espied this royster led to be sacrificed,
then he said thus to him: What end has now thy easy life? Thy careless
living at hearts ease has brought thee to ye axe, I think now thou will rather
counsel me to labor tha^ to idleness, which is the cause of thy death.

Mor. To lead an honest life there needs travel: the Sluggard and he that
is bent to riottous living, shall come to that which he would be loathe.

361 Of Birds.
THe Birds took counsel to choose them ^ulers.
sundry Kings, because the Eagle alone was not able to govern so many
flocks: which thing they had put in execution, had not the Crow warned them
to leave off their purpose: who being demanded the cause, why she thought it
not meet to choose many Kings, answered: Sooner is one sack filled than many.

Mor. It is better to be under the dominion of one than many.

362 Of a wicked Man.
A Wicked Man went to Apollo which is in Delphus, to try his cunning, for
^ecretes ^nowen to ^od.
which purpose he took a Sparowe with him in his hand, which under his cloak
he hid: who as he stood near to the golden table in Apollos temple, asked
the GOD, saying: O Apollo, that which I hold in my hand, is it a live or
dead? If he had said dead, he would have showed the Sparow alive: if alive,
he would have strangled it and showed it dead. But God Apollo knowing his
wicked pretense, said: whither thou will, do: for it is in thy power either to
show him alive or dead.

Mor. God can not be deceived, neither is any thing hid from him.

363 Of a Boy that would not learn.
A Boy which hated learning, being brought by his Father into a School,
could not be enticed by any fair means of his Master, to speak the first
letter of the Alphabete: Then said his Master, open thy mouth, for that this
Letter requires, but he gaped and spoke not. The Master seeing his labor
lost, bad him sit amongst his fellows, warning them to persuade him to
speak only this Letter: then his schoolefellows exhorted him in the best
manner that they could, saying: Is it such a pain to said A? Nay (quod the
Boy) but if I spoke that, he would make me learn B. and so the rest. But
neither my master nor my Father shall have the power to make me learn.

Mor. They which are unwilling to learn, can never be forced to it.

364 Of the Dove and the Crow.
A Dove being fed in a douehouse, was ^eruaunts.
exceeding proud of her fertility: The Crow hearing thereof, said to her:
Friend, brag no more hereof, for the more thou breedest the more care thou
heapest.

Mor. Amongst servant, those are most miserable, which in time of their
bondage get many children.

365 Of the Ass and the Calfe.
AN Ass and a Calfe fed together in one pasture, by chance they heard the
sound of a bell, which they supposed to be a sign that their enemies were at
hand, to whom the Calfe said: Let us be packing hence fellow, least our
enemies take us prisoners. Nay, fly thou hence rather (quod the Ass) whom
they use to kill and eat, for I care not, I know this, where soever I become
my life shall be to carry burdens.

Mor. Let not servant fear much to change their masters, least the last
be woorser than the first.

366 Of the Bat and the Weasell.
A Bat by chance fell to the ground, and Shifts.
was caught by a Weasell, who ready to be killed, besought him to save his
life: but he said, that he could not let her escape, because he naturally hated
all birds: she answered, yt she was no bird but a mouse, whereby she was
loused. Again falling an other time and being taken by an other Wesell, she
prayed that he would not devour her. Nay (quod he) I am an enemy to all
Mise: she answered that she was a Bat and no Mouse, whereby she escaped again:
and so it chanced that by changing her name twice she got her pardon.

Mor. We must not always sing one song, seeing they that turn as the world
does, commonly escape danger.

367 Of the Fox and the Cat.
IT happened amongst other talk that the Fox had with the Cat, he bragged that
he had so sundry kinds of shifts, yt he could fill a bag withal. For my part
(quod ye Cat) I have but one to trust unto at a pinche: As they were thus in
their talk, a great route of Dogs came hastily running upon them: Then the Cat
skipped up into an high tree, but the Fox being enclosed with the dogs, was
caught.

Mor. One counsel so it be true and of force, is better than many wyles.

368 Of a Merchant and a Jew.
A Certain prodigal fellow having wasted all his Fathers goods, applied his
mind to practice deceyte. It happened on a time, that he wrapped a piece of
ordure in a cloute and brought it into the market, saying that he had a
precious thing which was of such force, that if any man tasted the least
crumnie thereof, he should have fulfilled what soever he thought of. But a Jewe,
whose manner is privily to mark al things, thought, if he did buy it, that he
would have in his mind many Towns and Lordships, when he tasted of it
(because he would be exceeding rich) He came therefore secretly unto him and
asked the price, whereunto this prodigal fellow said: Auau^t, thou shall not
buy it, for thy clothes declare, that thou art not able. The Jewe said to him,
how know thou? Tell me the price, he answered. 700. Crowns: the Jewe paid
him the money, upon condition, that if he had said true, he should enjoy it:
but when he had tasted it, he spit it out, and said it was ordure. Then the
seller having performed his promise, pleaded the cause before the mayor, and
enjoyed the money.

369 Of a Carter.
A Certain Carter asked his wagon, why Sick folks
that wheel which was worst made so much creaking, seeing none of the rest
did so? The wagon answered: Sick folks are wayward, and always complaining.

Mor. Diseases cause men to compain.

370 Of an old Woman.
MEn commonly will (if through their folly any mischau^ce happen to them)
Sinners.
lay the blame to Fortune or the Devil, to excuse them selves, they do so
much follow their appetites: wherewith the Devil not contented, when by
chance he espied an old woman climbing a tree, whence he perceived she was
like to fall, and then the fault would be laid on his neck, he called for
witnesses, to whom he said: Behold, that same old woman has climbed that tree
without my consent, where I see she will fall: bear witness therefore with me
that I counseled her not to go up. Immediately she fell: then being demanded
why she climbed that tree, answered, the Devil forced me: then he brought
forth his witnesses, and proved that she did that without his advise.

Mor. Those men deserve no pardon, which voluntarily sinning, blame Fortune or
the Devil therefore.

371 Of the Nightingale and the Raven.
ON a solemn feastday the Eagle bad ye birds to dinner: after it was done, the
Singing.
Egle called forth the Nightingale, whom he bad to sing some melody to
lighten their hearts withal. She forthwith soong sweetly, that it delited the
hearers. In the mean time a Raven passing by and hearing this, said: I will
also sing with ye Nightingale, for I have a base voice which shall be heard
far off, and he began to crook very lothsomely, which caused the
Nightingale to hold her peace. The other birds were offended with the Raven for
troubling ye feast: then the Egle commanded him, either to depart or to hold
his peace, but he answered that he would sing, and for her he would not stir an
ynch. The Egle commanded him again to avoid, which because he stubbornly
disobeyed, was commanded to be slain.

Mor. It is vain to sing, where the hearers are unwilling.

372 Of the Dove and the Pie.
THe Pie asked the Dove what was the Simplicity.
cause that she always built in one place where her chickens were always taken
away: she answered, simplicity.

Mor. Good men are easily beguyled.

373 Of an Ass and Frogs.
AS an Ass laden with wood passed thorough a marshe, by chance he slipped
Slothfulness.
and fell, who not being able to arise, lamented and sighed, but the Frogs
which were in the marshe, hearing him sighing, said: What would thou do
sir, if thou had continued here so long as we have, which for so small a
time do so mourn?

Mor. This talk may any man use to a slouthful person, which for a little
pains is troubled, being able easily to overcome great affairs.

374 Of the Pelican.
THe Goose and the Duck made sometime a great feast, to the which they bad all
tame Fowls, but to set out their Supper, they went into the wilderness and
found the Pelican, whom they brought with them to their banquet. When the
feast was done, they all besought the Pelican to abide with them and not to
live so solitarily in such penury, who at length being somewhat persuaded,
continued a few days with them and made great bankets: but when he would have
prayed, he was interrupted with their chattering: wherefore he left their
company, and lived the rest of his life in solitariness.

Mor. Who so will serve God truly, must do it alone quietly.

375 Of the Smith and his Dog.
A Certain Smith had a whelpe, which Sluggards
all the while he stroke on his iron, did sleep: but when he went to meat, the
dog would straightway arise and eat the crumbs that fell from the table, or
bones, or any thing else. Which thing the Smith marking well, said to his Dog:
Thou wretch, I ca^ not tell how to handle thee, for whiles I am busy in my
work, thou lie snorting and sleeping, but when my teeth go, thou startest
up and waggest to me thy tail.

Mor. Idle sluggardes which live of an other man's sweat, must be punished
according to the rigor of the law.

376 Of the Bull and the Mouse.
A Mouse did byte a Bull by the foot, and Strength.
straightway ran into his hole: the Bull shaked his horns and sought for his
enemy, but see him he could not: then ye mouse laughed him to scorn, saying:
Because of thy strength despise not every body, for now a silly Mouse has
hurt thee, and escaped free.

Mor. Let no man regard his enemy.

377 Of a Weasell.
A Weasell came into a Smiths shop, and Strife.
licked on a fyle which lay there, wherewith her tongue being torn, bled very
much: She rejoiced greatly, supposing to carry away something from the iron,
until her tongue altogether was worn away.

Mor. This fable is against those which in strife hurt them selves.

378 Of Hares.
THe Hares sometime holding war with the Eagles, required aid of the Foxes:
but they answered, we would help you, but that we know what ye are, and with
whom ye fight.

Mor. They which strive with their betters, set little by their own health.

379 Of the Ram and the Bull.
THere was a Ram amongs many others which with strength of his horns and his
head, at the first conflict easily subdued all the rest, whom because none durst
meet (he had so often the victory) he swelled with pride and challenged the
Bull to fight: but at the first onset when he rushed against the Bulls forehead,
he was stricken again so vehemently, that he was nie dead, and then said: Ah
fool, what have I done? Why have I provoked so mighty an adversary, to whom
nature has made me unequal?

Mor. We must not strive with our betters.

380 Of the Quayle and the Lark.
THe Quayle because of preservation of Society.
his kindred, desired to have a league of amity with ye Gossehauke, wherefore he
desired the Lark to make his comme^dations, and to require peace with him on
his behalf. The Lark did the message honestly, wherewith the Gossehauke being
troubled, answered: This request is hard to grant, nevertheless I will that
the Quayle come with thee unto me and speak for her self: The Lark showed
her this answer, who much rejoicing thereof, went to the Hawk to confirm the
league, who being ravished with the sight of them, forthwith devoured them both.

Mor. None ought to match him self with his better.

381 Of the Nut tree, the Ass, and the Woman.
A Certain Woman questioned with a Stripes.
Nut tree growing by the high way side, which was always pelted with stones by
passengers, why he was so mad, yt the more he were beaten, the more increase he
yielded, the Walnut answered: Remember you not the old Proverb? The Nut tree
ye Ass, and the Woman, are al under one law: which three will do nothing well
without great store of stripes.

Mor. Some men make a rod oftentimes for their own tail.

382 Of the Bear and the Be.
A Bear sometime stinged of a Be, was so wood angry thereat, that with his
Suffering wrong.
nails he tore in pieces the hyues where the Bees made honey: The Bas seeing
their hiues plucked down, their food carried away, and their young ones slain:
rushing al at once, assailed the Bear, and nighe stong him to death. He hardly
scaping from them, said to himself: how much better had it bin for me,
patiently to have suffered the stinging of one Be, than to provoke so many
enemies against me?

Mor. Sometime it is far better to suffer wrong done by one, than in
requiting it to procure many foes.

383 Of the Sovve and the Dog.
THe Sow and the Dog taunted either other: The Sow swore by Venus, Tauntes.
that without doubt she would tear the Dog in pieces: He answered her
again flowtingly, saying: Ye swear very well by Venus, for ye show that she
loves you well, because that tasting thy filthy flesh, she suffers thee not
at al to enter her temple. The Sow said: For this cause it appears that the
Goddess loves me the more, for him that either kills or hurts me, she
utterly abhors: as for thee, either alive or dead, thou sauourest ill.

Mor. Wise Orators cunningly convert to their own praise the tauntes of their
enemies.

384 Of a Boy and his Mother.
A Boy stole his Fellows Book out of the School, which he brought to his
Theft.
mother: but she corrected him not therefore, but rather made much of him: Who
waxing elder, stole greater things: and at a time being taken with the manner,
he was straightway led to execution, whom his mother follow and lamented: but
he prayed the Hangman that he might talk a word or two in his mothers ear,
who straightway laid her ear to his mouth, which he with his teeth byt off:
his mother and diverse others rebuked him that he had not only played the
thief, but also used villainy to his mother. She (said he) is the cause of
my undoing: for if she had chastised me when I stoale the Book, I had not new
bin led to hanging.

Mor. Faults which are not at the first corrected, do increase greater.

385 Of Mercurius and Tyresias.
MErcurius desirous to know, whether the prophecy of Tyresias were true, he
stole his oxen in the country, and came to him in the likeness of a man into
the city, and lodged with him. Tyresias understanding his oxen to be lost,
went abroad and took with him Mercurius, to consider by divination of the
thief, whom he bad to tell him what bird he did see: he answered that he
saw an Eagle on the left hand, flying toward the right hand, he said that he
had nothing to do with her. The second time Mercurius told him, that he saw
a Crow sitting upon a tree, sometime looking up, sometime leaning down, who
as soon as he understood it, said: This Crow swears by heaven and earth,
that if thou will, I shall receive my oxen.

Mor. This kind of talk any man may use against a thief.

386 Of a theeuish Partriche.
A Partriche sometime in the absence of an other bird, stale her eggs: who
returning to her nest and seeing it robbed, was full heavy, she went about
seeking so long till at length she found them and the thief, whereof she showed
the Judge, who cited the thief, and craftily examined him thereof: He utterly
denied it, whereof the Judge could give no sentence for lack of witness, but
the accuser said to him: thou ought to torment him till he confess the
truth. Nay (quod the Judge) thou shall prove that thou say, that I may
judge thereof right, or else I will martyr thee with him. Then she because no
proof was made, was tormented, and the felony enquired off. In the end the
thief declared al, and many other theftes which he had committed, whereof the
Judge commanded to hang him up out of hand.

Mor. Who so accuses any one, let him first examine him self, whether he be
of like fault gyltie.

387 Of the Hawk and the Cuckoe.
THe Hawk sometime mocked the Cuckoe, because that being as big bodied as he,
and in color like him, for his faynte courage he did live by worms, and not
by the sweet flesh of other birds. Not long after, the Cuckoe espied the
Hawk hang out of a high Toure, being caught in pursuing Pigeons, to whom he
said: How far better had it bin to have hunted worms, than other men's
birds?

Mor. Their life is safer, that being void of peril are content with their
own, tha^ those which by coveting other men's goods come in danger.

388 Of a Grammarian teaching an Ass.
A Certain Grammarian boasted that he was so passing fine in his art, that if
Time.
he might have a sufficient reward, he would take upon him to teach not only
children, but also Asses. The Prince hearing of ye man's rashness asked him
whither he thought he could teach an Ass within ten years, if he gave him.
50. Crowns. The shameless man answered, that he would not refuse to be
slain of him, if in that space the Ass could not write and read. His
friends hearing of this, marvelled and rebuked him, because he had promised to
do a thing, not only hard, but also impossible: and they did fear, least when
the time had bin expired, he should be slain of the King: whom he answered:
Before this time be come out, either the Prince, the Ass or I will die.

Mor. Delay of time is commonly wont to be a help, for those which stand in
danger.

389 Of a man that would try his friends.
THere was a certain man very rich and Trying of friends.
liberal, which had many friends whom often times he had bid to supper, to
the which willingly they came, and because he might ye better know, whither
they would be trusty in time of need, he assembled the^ together and told
them that he had foes lately vpstart, which he meaned to destroy, praying them
therefore to arm themselves and come with him to revenge his quarrel: then
every one began to excuse him self saving two, which he accounted for his
friends, and afterward loved them dearly, but the other he rejected.

Mor. The best trier of friends is adversity.

390 Of a young man and an old.
A Certain old man espied a young man gathering of his fruit, whom he gently
Try all ways.
entreated to come down from the tree, and not to purloyne his goods: but he
spoke to the wind, for he lightly regarded his age and his words. Ah (quod
the old man) I have heard, that not only in words, but also in herbs
force consists, whereupon he began to pluck the leaves and cast them at him.
The young man seeing him do so, laughed out of measure, supposing that he
doted, to drive him down with leaves. The old man willing to assaye him by
gentle means, when he perceived that he could nothing prevail, said: I will
prove what stones will do, for in them men say, there is virtue: and
forthwith filled his lap with stones which he cast at the young man, and
perforce made him come down and depart.

Mor. A wise man ought to assaye all manner ways, before he take any weapon in
hand.

391 Of the Lion and the Bull.
A Bull being afraid of a Lion, fled Trouble.
away, and by chance met with a Got, who with frounting countenance
threatened to strike him with his horns, to whom the Bull full of wrath, said:
It is not the knitting of thy brows fears me, but yt the fierce Lion is so
near at my heels, thou should feel what it were to meddle with a Bull, and
to renew his wound.

Mor. To the sorrowful ought no more misery be added, who that has bin once
in trouble, has tasted sorrow enough.

392 Of a Lark,
A Certain Lark by chance builded her nest in a piece of wheat, that was
somewhat Trust in thy self.
riper than other: whence her young ones were not able to fly when the corn
was yellowe. As she was going forth to seek meats, she warned the^ if any
novelty happened to be done or said, to mark it well, and at her return to
certify her thereof, after her departure, the owner of the corn came thither,
and said to a young man his son: See not thou, that this corn is ripe and
needs laborers? to morrow therefore by break of the day, go to my
friends, desire the^ to help me in with my harnest: when he had so said, he
departed. When the Lark returned to her young ones, they came fluttering about
her, and prayed her out of hand to haste and carry them away: for the owner
had sent to his friends, willing them to come the next morning to reap his
corn: She bad them be of good cheer and fear nothing, for if the Lord of
the ground have remitted the matter to his friends, to morrow it shall not be
cut down: The next day she flew abroad again for meat, the Lord waited for
his bidden friends, the Sun waxed hot, but nothing was done, neither any
friend of his came. Then said he to his son, I see well that these my
friends for the most part are loyterers, let us therefore entreat our
kinsfolks and neighbors to morrow betimes to come: her Chickens were then
afraid and told it to their mother: she bad them to leave of fear and care,
for none of alliance would be so obedient as to come at a beck, especially to
labor, take you heed only, if ought be said again. The next morning she went
abroad as before, his kinsfolks left the work undone: The owner seeing that,
said to his son: Adieu both friends and Cousins, bring thou to morrow at
the break of the day two sickles, one for me, another for thee, and we with
our own hands will reap it. When her young ones told her this, she said: It
is time to be packing, for that he said without doubt shall come to pass:
for on him that ought it, the labor is turned, not where it was required: and
thus the Lark shifted her nest, and the corn was reaped. Hereof Ennius writes
these two Verses:

This sentence in thy mind,
bear thou in any wise:
Look for no help of friends,
where thy help may suffice.
393 Of a Fox taken.
A Fox being taken in the snares of a Countryman, of whose Hens he had
killed many, desired a Cock (of whom only he was seen) that he would either
bring him a knife to cut the ginne, or else say nothing to his master till he
had gnawne it a sunder with his teeth. The Cock promised both, went quickly to
his master and told him that the Fox was fast in the snare, whom the Fox
espying to come with a club to kill him, said: Ah unhappy wretch and fool that
I am, which believed the Cock would keep my counsel, of whose wives I have
killed so many.

Mor Never trust those, whom we have greatly hurt.

394 Of an Ass.
A Certain poor man which had nothing but a barell of wine and an Ass, had
Trusting mortal things.
married his only daughter to a certain young man, promising him somewhat in
frank marriage, which he thought to gather of his wine and the Ass (for he had
determined to sell them) but the next night after that the bridal was kept,
the Ass died, who as he was dying, brake ye vessel with his heels, and spilt
the wine.

Mor. We must put no trust in transitory things.

395 Of one that played the part of Christ.
A Certain Countryman playing the part of Christ in a play, was beaten and
evil Truth hates jesting.
entreated of the Jews, wherefore he flong away the cross and said: The Devil
be your God, for I will not. Then a Baker took his part, whom the Jews
likewise did handle opprobriously: which thing the pacient suffered: but
another said to him, Meal stealer: then the Baker answered, hold thy tongue,
or else I will overthrow thee with my cross.

Mor. Truth can abide no gesting, neither men that are guilty will willingly
hear of any jesting of their doings.

396 Of the Heart.
A Heart beholding him self in a clear Vain desires.
water, allowed much his fair forehead and broad horns, but the smalnesse
of his legs he condemned. As he was thus viewing and judging, there came a
Hu^ter upon him: the Heart fled away very swiftly, the Dogs pursued him: but
being entered into a thick wood, his horns were wrapped fast in the boughs:
then he praised his legs and dispraysed his horns, which caused him to be
taken.

Mor. Things which do hurt we do hunte after, but good things we despise, we
wish for blyssednesse before we know where it is: Riches and promotion we
seek for, wherein we think that felicity does consiste, but in the^ is much
travel and pensiveness.

397 Of a Countryman and Hercules.
A Countrymans Carte stuck fast in a deep mire: straight way he besought
help of Hercules. To him an answer was given: Thou dolt whip on thy horse,
and lift thou forward thy wheels, and then call on Hercules, and he will be
ready at hand.

Mor. Vain requests do not avail, which God will not hear, help thy self,
and then God will help forward.

398 Of a biting Dog.
A Certain man had a Dog which often Vainglory
times had byt many, whereupon he tied a clog on his neck, that men might take
heed of him. The Dog supposing that to be given him for a commendation of his
courage, despised his companions: then one of them told him of his blindness,
that he wore that clog with shame, and not with honor.

Mor. A vaynglorious fool sometime counts that to be his praise, which is
utterly to his shame.

399 Of the Hog and the Horse.
A Hog espied a barded Horse, which was set out to warfare well appointed, to
Valiant death.
whom he said: Whether make thou such have, thou fool, perhaps thou shall be
slain in battle: The horse answered him, though thou do nothing worthy of
praise, but being fat lie wallowing in the mire, yet a little knyfe thy life
shall dispatche, where as great renoume after my death I have.

Mor. It is better to die valiauntly, than to prolong thy life led wickedly.

400 Of the Swan and the Crow.
THe Raven envied the Swanne for his Undefiled life.
whiteness, whom with all policy he endeavored to defile and make black:
and because he could not work his will whiles the Swan waked, he practiced it
when she slept. Wherefore he came in a night the Swanne sleeping on her nest,
and with his blackness polluted her and made her black. When day was up and
the Swanne awaked, she saw her self thus painted, she washed her self
continually, till she became fair.

Mor. Who so will be blissed, let him keep him self undefiled.

401 Of a Thrush.
A Thrush being caught with birdlyme of a Fouler, did torment her self,
saying: Undoing him self.
The pangs of death grieve me not so much, as that my own things are my
destruction: for men say, that birdlime is made of Thrushes doung.

Mor. Then are men most grieved, when their own doings do slay them.

402 Of the Lion and the Mouse.
A Lion sometime caught in a snare, was Unequal marriage.
so entangled, that he could not wind out him self, whereupon he desired the
Mouse to gnawe a sunder the ginne, promising a recompense for his good turn.
Which thing when the Mouse had quickly done, he required the Lion to give him
his daughter in marriage: the Lion (to requite his benefactor) granted her unto
him. When the new married wife was come to her Husband, by chance not seeing
him, trod on him, and burst him all to pieces.

Mor. All marriages and matches unequally made, are not to be allowed.

403 Of a River.
A Certain River checked his headspring, Unthankfulness.
as being a standing water, neither having any fishes, but him self he highly
commended, because he bred goodly Fishes, and pleasauntly ran through the
valleys. The head spring fretting at the unthankfulness of the River, ceased
his wonted course, whereby the River wanting both his Fishes and his pleasant
noise, dried up.

Mor. Some claim as their own, whatsoever they do, robbing GOD of his
honor, from whom al goodness does proceed.

404 Of a Serpent.
A Serpent being overwhelmed with a A wise Ape.
great stone, desired a man that trauailled that way, to roll off the burden
from him, promising to give him a great treasure if he would do it. Which
when the gentle fellow had done, the Serpent did not only break his
promise, but also said the man was worthy to die. As they thus strove, it
happened that the Ape passed that way, who being chosen judge between them,
said: I can not end so great strife between you, except I see first how
the Serpent stood under the stone. When the man had laid the stone upon the
Serpent, he said: I think that unthankful beast ought to remain under the
stone.

Mor. Unthankful men are worthy of no good turn.

405 Of a man that brake an Image.
A Certain man had a wooden Image, whom he prayed to bestow some benefit
Wicked men.
on him, but the more he prayed, the more he lived in poverty: Where with he
being angry, caught his Image by ye legs, and floong him against a wall, where
with his head being broken, great abundance of gold came out, which as he
gathered, he said: thou art froward as I think, for whiles I did reverence
thee, thou did me no good, but when thou wast well beaten, thou have yielded
much riches.

Mor. A naughty man will do much more good by beating than by honoring him.

406 Of an Ass and a Raven.
AN Ass having a galled back, fed in a meadow, on whom a Raven did sit and
picked at his sore, whereat the Ass brayed and skipped: The horskeeper
standing a far off, laughed thereat, whom as a Wolf passing by espied, he
said: Alas, if we poor wretches should do so much, we should be pursued: but
at him they laugh.

Mor. Wicked men only peeping abroad are forthwith known.

407 Of a Dog.
A Certain rich man, much given to hunting, did keep many dogs, whereof one bit
his son, that he dyed: Their master being wroth, commanded to slay not
only the man killer, but also all the rest: then said one of them, one has
offended, but all are punished.

Mor The wickedness of one, often hurts many.

409 Of the Nourse and the Wolf.
A Woman sometime had a child to nurse, whom she thretned to cast to the Wolf
except he left his crying. It happened that the Wolf passing that way, heard
what she said: whereupon being in good hope, he waited still at the door.
The child at length being stilled, fell a sleep, the Wolf returned fasting
into the couerte with a Flea in his ear. The she Wolf asked for his pray.
Mary (quod he sighing) I was deceived, a Nurse promised to cast me a boy that
cried, but she did not.

Mor. No credit is to be had in a woman.

410 Of a Woman that wept.
THere was a young Woman whose husband lay at the point of death, whom with
these words her father comforted saying: Daughter, vex not so much thy self,
for I have provided thee a husband, much fayrer than he is, which shall soon
drive away thy longing for this: but this woman would not harken to her fathers
talk, but blamed him for making mention so hastily but when her husband was
dead, she asked her father, weeping, if the young man were near, which he said
should be her husband.

Mor. The love which women have to their husbands soon wears away, after
they be dead.

411 Of a Woman beaten.
A Certain Woman sore beaten of her husband, fained her self dead, to make
him afraid, for she hild her breath, and lay with her face upward, not once
stirring: This wise man knowing well the fetches of women, said: The dead
beast must be flayde, and he caught up a knife, and began to flaye the skin
from her feet: she perceiving the end of her dissimulation, plucked back her
feet, and straightway arose.

Mor. Women's wyles are practiced in vain against wise men.

412 Of the Widow and the grene Ass.
A Certain Wydow being weary of leading a single life, desired too mary, but
she durst not, because she feared the mocking of the people, which reported
evil of those that were twice married: but her godmother showed her by this
policy, how lightly rumors are to be regaded: she commanded her to take the
white Ass she had, and cause him to be painted green, and the^ to lead him
through every streate, which thing at the first sight was so wondered at, that
not only children, but also old me^, moved with this strange Wonder, followed
the Ass, to behold him, which being daily led through the city, they ceased
to wonder at. Then said her godmother, the like shall happen to thee, for if
thou mary, thou shall for a few days be a byworde to the people, but within a
while after, there shall not be a word spoken of it.

Mor. No thing is so wonderful, that in continuance of time will not cease to
be wondered at.

413 Of the hare and the Fox.
THe Hare judged him self worthy to be preferred before the Fox, because in
Wisdom
swift running he far passed him: the Fox answered, I have a more excellent
wit, whereby I do oftener begyle the Dogs, than thou with thy swiftness.

Mor. Wisdom far passes strength or swiftness.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
The first Fable of the penance of the Wolf, the Fox, and the Ass. fol. 1. 2
Of the Spyder and the Gout. fol. 3. 3 Of the Ass, the Trumpeter, and a Hare,
the messanger fol. 7. 4 Of an old man. eodem. 5 Of a Shepherde and the Sea
fol. 8. 6 Of an Heremite and a Soldier fol. 9. 7 Of the Fox and the Bramble
eodem 8 Of a Wagtayle and a Phesaunt 10. 9 Of the Myse and the Frogs eodem 10
Of the Beasts and the Birds 11 11 Of the Pecocke and the Nyghtingale 12 12 Of
a young man that song at the burial of his mother 13 13 Of Heaven and Earth.
eod. 14 Of a Lion in love with a Countreymans daughter 14 15 Of a Gourde and a
Pine tree. 15 16 Of the Sun and the Moon 16 17 Of the Spyder and the
Swallow. 18 18 Of a Dog and a Wolf. eo. 19 Of an Ass and a Fox. 19. 20 Of the
Egle and a Pie. 20 21 Of a Nightyngale fearyng the Kyte. eode^. 22 Of a
Countryman that would pass over a River. 21 23 Of a Heart and a Vine. eo. 24 Of
a man bitten with a Dog. 22 25 Of an Ass that served an unkind master.
eod. 26 Of the Mouse that set the Kyte at liberty 23. 27 Of a Husbandma^
pricked by a Be. 24 28 Of the tree Abrotanum and the Hare eodem. 29 Of the
Crow and the Dog 25 30 Of a Hunter and a Partrich. eodem. 31 Of the Dolphin
and the Eele 26 32 Of fair Trees and deformed, 27 32 Of a Lioness and the
Fox. 28 33 Of an Astronomer and a Prauailer. eodem 34 Of Scholars. eodem 35 A
boaster 29 36 Of a Boaster 30 37 Of the Mole. eodem 38 The birth of Hills. 31
39 Of the Frogge and the Fox. eodem 40 A Pecock spoiled of his feathers by a
Soldier 32 41 Of the Kydde and the Wolf. eodem 42 Of the Sun and the
Northeast wind. 33 43 Of a Fox and women eating of a Hen 34 44 A Dog and
Wolves, eode 45 The Peacocke and the Crane. 35 46 Of a knight which had a
brauling wife. eodem 47 Of Arion and the Dolphin. 36 48 A Kid and a Wolf. 38 49
The Crab and Fox. 39 50 Of the Apple tree and the Pomegranate tree. co. 51 Of a
Dog and his master. 40 52 Of the Turtle. eodem 53 Of a scolding woman 41 54 Of
two Hawks and a Quayle 42 55 Of the Wolf and the Crane eodem. 56 Of the
Fysher and the little Fish. 43 57 Of a Fox that would kill a Hen sitting.
44 58 Of the Frogs and their King eodem 59 Of the Colyer and the Fuller. 46 60
Of a Shepherd which kept a Wolf amongst his Dogs eodem 61 Of the Raven and
the Wolves. 47 62 Of the Father and his sons codem 63 Bulls and a Lion 48 64
Of a Lion which begged of the Wolf part of of his pray. 49 65 Of a Snayle. 50
66 Of the Dooue and the Kyte codem 67 A Husbandman 51 68 Of the Hare and the
Fox. 52 69 Of the Elm and the Osiar eodem. 70 Of the Serpent and the Crab. 53
71 Of the Heart and the Wolf 54 72 Of a feller of Wood. eo. 73 Of the Cock
and the Fox. 56 74 Of a Deceyuer. 57 75 Of a Fox caughte by a Dog, whiles she
feigned her self dead. 58 76 Of a Boy and a thief. 59. 77 Of the Thrushe eodem
81 Of the Air and the Wind 60 82 Of a Trauayler. eodem 83 Of a woman and a
Hen. 61 84 Of a covetous man eod. 85 Of the Chough and the Doves 62 86 Of the
Dog and the shadow. 63 87 Of a covetous Ambassador 64 89 Of a covetous man
dying 65 90 Of a Raven taken by Dogs eodem. 91 Of a Got and a dog. 66 92 Of a
covetous man that eat withered Aples. co. 93 Of a lester and a Bishop 67 94
Of a Priest which buried his Dog. 68 95 Of a Shepherd that encouraged his
flock against the Wolf. 69 96 Of a Fisher and five Fishes 70 97 Of the Owl.
71 98 Of a Fox. 73 99 Of the Lion and the Goat eodem 100 Of a Fox taken by a
Countryman 74 101 Of a Woman that would die for her husband. eode^. 102 Of a
Lion being old, Folio 75 103 Of an Eagle and a Come. 76 104 Of the Hares and
the Frogs. 77 105 Of the Be and Jupiter. 78 106 Of a Heart and a Lion 79 107
Of the town dogs. 78. 108 Of two Pots. 80 106 Of the Swan singyng at the point
of death. eo. 110 Of an old man which set Trees 81 111 Of the Phesant and the
Pecocke. eodem. 112 Of the Ape and the Brocke 83 113 Of the Dog and the Cock
84 114 Of the Fox and the Storke eodem 115 Of a Friar, a Layeman, and a Wolf
85 116 Of a Parat. 86 117 Of an Ass. 87 118 Of Wax that desired hardness.
eodem 119 Of a Pacient and a physician. 88 120 Of an Ass carrying an Image.
eodem. 121 Of a Fysher. 89 122 Of the Belly and other members. eodem 123 Of the
Frogge and the Crabbe. 90 124 Of a Leoparde and an Unicorn, fighting with a
Dragon. 91 125 Of the envious Dog and the Ox. 92 126 Of a young man. eode^
127 Of a countryman and Pears. 93 128 Of a man that refused Clysters. eodem
129 A Deceyuer. 94 130 A Cat and Myse. 95 131 Of the Wolf and the Sheep
codem. 132 Of the sick Ass. 96 133 Of a Fox. eodem 134 A man that would kill a
Hog. 97 135 Of the Egle that cited all manner of Birds. 98 136 The Satyr and
the Wayfaringman. 99 137 Of a tyrannous Gryffon. eodem. 138 The Pie and the
Cuckoe. 100 139 A Serpent. 101 140 The rule of women over their husbands. eod.
141 Of a Woman. 102 142 The Bore and the Cou^tryman. 103 143 Of a Gnat. 104 144
A norisher of bees. eo. 145 Many creeping Worms and Beasts. 105 146 The bird
called Kings Fisher. 106 147 The Apes and the Libard. 107 148 The Hen and the
Fox 108 149 Two enemies. eodem. 150 The Crow and the Raven eodem 151 The Wolf
and Fox. 109 152 The Covetous man and the Envious. 110 153 The Wolf and the
Ass. 111 154 The Lion and the Wolf eodem 155 The Heart and Oxen. 112 156 The
Cock and the Catte 113 157 The Countryman and the Serpent. 114 158 A Servant
which cast his masters Ass from a Rock 115 159 The Bat, the Bramble, and
the Cormorant. 116. 160 Of a Worm. 117 161 A Dog and a Butcher. 117 162 Of
Cockles 117 163 The Ass and Fox. 118 164 The Dog and the Ass eodem 165 The
Dog and the Sheep. 119 166 Of an Ass. 120 167 A wicked man and the Druell.
121 168 Of a Camel. eodem 169 The Fox and Lion. 122. 170 Of a Hind calfe, eod
171 The Lyo^ and Frog. 123 172 The Eagle. eodem 173 Of a Dog fearyng the Rain.
eodem. 174 Of a Cock 124 175 A sick man and a physician eodem 176 The Raven
and the Fox 125 177 A man and his two wives 126 178 Of a Soldier. 127 179
Of Trauailers. eodem. 181 A Lion and a Bear. 128 182 A rich man and his
Servant. eodem. 183 Of a woman that bet her Husband. 129 184 Of Fishers. 130
185 A Rich man and a poor 131 186 A Physician 132 187 The Countryman and the
Mouse 133 188 Lion and the Hog. eo. 189 The Dog that devoured the Sheep 134
190 Of the Lark. 135 191 The wyld Ass. codem 192 Thief and the Dog. 136 193
The Woodde and the Countryman. codem 194 The Countryma^ and a counselor 137
195 Of Jupiter. codem 195 Of Flies. 138 196 Landbirds and Waterfoules codem.
197 The Egle and the Raven 139 198 Two young men. 140 199 Of Money. codem. 200
The Thorn and the wild Got. 141 201 Of the Goat and the Vine. 142 202 Of
the Ant. codem. 203 A Gardener. 143 204 Of Myte that would hang a Bell about a
Care neck. codem 205 Of Fishers 144 206 The Tygre and the Fox 145 207 The
Woolfe and the Sow codem. 208 A Catte. 146 209 A man that would try his wives
mind. code^. 210 The Cock and the Capon 147 211 The Fouler and the Lark
codem 212 Of a Goose 148 213 A woman and her Lover codem 214 A Serpent and a
Husbandman 149 215 A man and a woman twice married. codem 216 A Wolf and Dogs.
150 217 The Countryman and the Horse. 151 218 A Fox that fell into a Well 152
219 The Pyg and his Fathers will codem. 220 The Cockatrice and Sea wolf. 153
221 The wolf and Dog. cod. 222 A Linnet. 155 223 A Mule. codem 224 A King and
Apes. 156 225 Of Oxen. 157 226 A Hog. codem. 227 A man which hid a treasure
158 228 The Pygarde and the Egle. codem 229 The Dog and the Cook 159 230 A
man stoned codem 231 A Sheep crying. 160 232 The Raven and the Serpent codem
233 A poor man 161 234 A learned man not esteemed 162 235 A Physician 163 236
Of Dogs. codem 237 Of a Sheep wastyng Corn. 164 238 Of the Owl and the
Lark. 165 239 The Reed. cod. 240 The Eele 166 241 Of the Crow and the Sheep.
codem 242 The Ape and Fox 167 243 The Frogs and the Sun codem 244 A Wolf
fallen into a pit 168 245 Two Hoggs. cod. 246 A wolf that put on a Sheeps
skin. 169 247 The Elephant. codem 248 Of an Ass 170 249 A Countreyman and
Bees. 171 250 A Husbandman and a Poet. codem 251 A rich man unlearned, and a
poor man learned 172 252 A Parat. 173 253 Of the Pyke and the Tenche codem 254
A Mermayde and a Leachour 174 255 A realous man. 175 256 Of a Liberal man. 176
257 A covetous man. cod. 258 Of the Dog and the Lion 177 259 Lynet and the
Boy. 178 260 Fox and Crocodil. cod. 261 The Shepherd and the Husbandmen. 179
262 Of Mercurius cod. 263 Of an old Man and his Son 180 264 The Faulcon and
the Cock codem 265 Of the Camel. 181 266 The Ass, the Ape, and the Mole 182
267 The Snaile and Frogs. codem 268 Of a rich man. 183 269 The Nightingale
and the Hawk codem 270 A mad man 184 271 A priest and his boy. co. 272 Of a
Fox 185 273 Of an Ass 186 274 A young man. codem. 275 Of Jupiter 187 276 The
Fox and the Weasyll codem 277 Of an Apple tree. 188 278 The Fly and Ante. 189.
279 A Husbandeman and his Dog. 190 280 The Lampurne and the Crocodile codem.
281 A Lio^ and a Mouse. 191 282 The Woolfe and the Lamb 193 283 Of the Hares
and the Frogs 194 284 Of a Swanne. codem. 285 Of a Moore 195 286 A horsman and
a husbandman codem 287 A man and his dog. 196 288 Of a Fox codem. 289 Of Four
footed Beasts 197 290 A Soldier and his Horse codem 291 The Kydde and the
Wolf 198 292 A Chicken caught by a Kyght odem 293 A Philosopher. 199 294 The
Fox and the Egle. codem 295 Of an Olive tree. 200 296 The Mouse and the Catte
201 297 The Kyghte and the Hawk codem 298 Of Cocks and a Partriche. 202 299
Of the Sow and the Dog 203 300 A Lamb and a wolf. co. 301 Of a Fly. codem
302 A wolf and a Lion. 204 303 The Ape and his two sons codem 304 An old man
that carried an Ass 205 305 A sumptuous feast of the Lion 207 306 The Plantine
and the Ape codem 307 The Fur tree and the Bushe. 208 308 Of the Sow and the
Bitche 209 309 The Dogs and the Ass codem. 310 Of a Camel and Jupiter. 210
311 Of an Ox. 211 312 The Weasill and the Myse codem. 313 The Crow and the
Pitcher 212 314 The Lion and Fox. cod. 315 Of the Wolf being hungry 213 316
Of the Horse and the Heart. codem 317 Of Geese 214 318 The Ape and his young
ones 215 319 Of Maryners. codem. 320 Of the Owl. 216 321 A Fox and a Dog.
code^. 322 The Wolf and Porkupine 217 323 Of an old man loathe to dye codem
324 Of a Dog brought up to Hunting 218 325 Of a man which plucked up a Hedge
219 326 The Ass and the Lion 220 327 Of Cocks. 221 328 Of the Horse and the
Ass. codem 329 Of a Crane 222 330 Jupiter and the Raven 223 331 The Flea and a
Lion. co. 332 The Peacocke and the Chough. 224 333 A man and his Dog. cod. 333
A Heardman. 225 334 The Lion and the Fox. 226 335 A man created Cardinal 227
336 The Fox and Got. 228 337 The Field Mise 229 338 Of a Flea. codem 339 The
Sheep and the Shepherd 230 340 Of Frogs codem. 341 A Fisher. 231 342 The Ape
and Fox. cod. 343 Of a Dove 232 344 The Currier and the Hunter. eodem 345 The
Beauer. 234 346 The Houpe. eodem. 347 The Beam eodem 349 Of the Lion, the
Bore, and the Ravens 235 350 A Wolf. eodem 351 Of a Bear 236 352 A simple
Countreyman eodem 353 The Eagle and the Dorre 237 354 The Storke and the
Swallow 238 355 The town Mouse and the Country Mouse. 239 356 Of the Mule and
the Horse. 241 357 Of a Devil. 242 358 The Birds. 243 360 Of an Ox and a
Bullock. eodem 361 Of Birds. 244 362 A wicked Man. eod. 363 A Boy that
would not learn. 245 364 The Dove and the Crow 246 365 Of the Ass and the
Calfe. eodem 366 The Bat and the Weasyll. 247 367 The Fox and Cat. eod. 368 The
Merchant and the Jew. 248 369 A Carter. 249 370 An old Women. eod. 371 The
Nightingale and the Raven 250 372 Of the Dove and the Pie. 251 373 Ass and
Frogs. eod. 374 The Pelican 252 375 Of the Smyth and his Dog. eodem 376 Of
the Bull and the Mouse. 253 377 A Weasyll eod. 378 Of Hares. 254 379 The Ram
and Bull. eod. 380 The Quayle and the Lark. 255 381 The Nut tree, the Ass,
and the Woman. eodem. 382 Bear and the Be. 256 383 Sow and the Dog. eod. 384
The Boy and his Mother. 257 385 Of Mercurius and Tyresias. 258 386 Theuish
Partrich. 259 387 Of the Hawk and the Cuckoe. 260 388 A Grammarian teaching an
Ass. eodem. 389 A man that would try his friends. 261 390 Of a young man and an
old. 262 391 A Lion and a Bull. 263 392 A Lark. eodem 393 A Fox taken 265 394
Of an Ass. 266 395 One that played the part of Christ. 267 396 The Heart. eod.
397 The Countryman and Hercules. 368 398 The biting Dog. eod. 399 Of the Hog
and the Horse. 269 400 Of the Swan and the Crow. 270 401 The Thrushe. eodem.
402 Of the Lion and the Mouse. eodem. 403 Of a River. 271 404 The Serpent. 272
405 A man that brake an Image. eodem. 406 An Ass and Raue^. 273 407 Of a Dog.
eod. 408 The Nourse and the Wolf. 274 409 Of a woman that did weep. eodem.
410 Of a woman beaten. folio. 275 411 The Wydowe and the green Ass. eod. 412
The Hare and Fox. 276
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, dwelling in Knight-ryder street, at
the sign of the Marmayde. Anno Domini. 1569. CVM PRIVILEGIO.

OMNIA TEMPVS HABENT.



