AN ANSWER TO THE DEMANDS of a great Prelate.

Touching the Hierarchy of the Church.

And the just defense of Privileged, and Religious men.

Permissu Superiorum.

Printed at ROAN. M DC XXVI.

coat of arms(?) with lion rampant EMMANUEL

(...) ^ndijs. (...) Patris. Will. Sanc^ A.C.

C^ll Emman. Cantat



AN ANSWER To the demands of a great Prelate, touching the Hierachy of the
Church, and the just defense of Privileged, and Religious men.
MY LORD:
I Am not able to express the obligation which I have to you, by reason of the
Commandment which you vouchsafed to lay upon me; which yet notwithstanding is
both sweet and sharp. Sweet, in regard that it comes from you, whom I do so
highly honor, as well in regard of the eminent quality which you hold in the
Church of God, as by reason of your rare virtues, and besides for that you are
pleased to love me cordially, and more then I shall ever be able to deserve.
But yet sharp withal, because it brings a complaynt with it, and shows a
most bitter root, which has sprowted forth, and produced in the heart of many
some little aversion from Privileged persons, and Religious men; and which
has filled the minds of many with a kind of sharpness, and even of
contempt, and hate against them. Yea the matter is past on so far, that many
of them have armed themselves, with a certain fervor and zeal, and have put
themselves into combat, against those other, as against the enemies of their
persons, or at least, as against the enemies of their authority, their power,
and their greatness. And yet certainly it seems, it would have been more
honorable, even to fight for them, as for their Children, to protect them as
their Orphans, and Pupills, to have set upon the Wolf who threatened them,
being their sheep, rather then to have beaten them themselves; for having
perhaps a little strayed from the rest of the flock, if yet indeed they have
strayed at all. Alas, it will not be unfitly done to fear, that the same Sermon.
157.
which the great Chrysologus says of St. Paul, may also be said of many
others: Per zelum legis, legem impugnabat, and in Deum, Dej amore peccabat. I
pray God of his great goodness, to defend us from this great misery, for it is
one of the most permitious and irremediable michiefes of all others, if a man
persuading himself that he seeks nothing but God, do yet indeed under that
belief, seek himself, and suffer himself to be transported by some passion,
for such a one is a kind of incorrigible man, and whilst he thinks to merit
much, he loses all: Qui errat, quo magis progreditur, Seen.
eo magis errat, profectus ejus, defectus est.

But now since it has pleased you to tell me, that many of our Lords the
Prelates of France, have this firm belief, that Privileged and Religious
men, have as it were, conspired against their authority; and desire to abase
and weaken their power, to raise up and strengthen their own Privileges, upon
the diminution and ruin of Episcopal powers; I will not speak to you, as to
you; but I will do it to you as to them; or rather (if it please you) I will
do it by you to them; but yet with so great respect, and by way of discourse
so full of honor, of candor, and of truth, that God willing, no man shall
have just cause of complaint by it. And to the end that this good fortune may
happen to me, and that God may inspire me with his grace, I do in mine own
heart, desire your holy and paternall Benediction.

I demand not of you (for the particular which I have in hand) any grace or
favor, nor the sweet effects of your friendship; nor any thing indeed, but
mere justice, yea and even rigor, if you will (saving that you being so good,
can hardly be rigorous to any) and that you may make no account of my reasons,
but according to the true value of them; and by the just weight of a mind
which is not pre-occupated, or possessed by any contrary opinion: nor wrapped
up in certain jealousies, and untrue reports; nor inflamed with the false fire
of passion, which may be ouer-cast with zeal; nor yet pricked on by any
discontentments, but of a mind entirely free, from all these things; and which
weighs reason by the balance of the Sanctuary; and judgeeth of the whole
business, as in the presence of God; and as being to render an account to the
Divine Majesty, of all his actions; for the true way of treating well the
affairs of God, is to treat them so, as belongs to such affairs; and to
banish from thence all kind of humane interest, and all that which may savor
any way of earth.

But now, before I will plunge my self more deeply into this sea, which is
tossed by so many winds, and into the handling of this truth, which is opposed
by so many men, it comes into my thought, that I must here do that, which
was anciently remarked by Tertullian, to have been done, by those Primitive
Christians, when they were persecuted much; for their enemies caused the God of
the Christians to be painted, after a very strange and barbarous manner: for it
was in the figure of a man, appareled with a large loose garment, full of
Majesty, upon the top whereof, as upon the shoulders, the head of an Ass
was put, with a book in his hand. The feet which did appear under the fringe
of his Robe, had upon them these Words, which were written in letters of
gold, Deus Cadeaux.
Christianorum Ononychites. Now upon this ground the Pagans build strong
discourses, in prejudice of God and of truth; and made the Church so
ridiculous, and did so disadvantage the faith of Christ, that it was not
possible to do it more: Vidimus in foro (says Tertullian) and risimus, and
formam, and nomen. Quod colimus nos, Deus vnus est. But yet me thinks (says
he) it is but reason, that it should first be understood, whether indeed we
do adore that fantastical thing, or no; and men should first be agreed upon
the matter in fact, before they should put their wits into such a full
carriere, and give themselves law and liberty to say that which is said; and
indeed all that to which they have a mind, tearing in pieces that white and
innocent Robe of Truth. It is greatly to be feared, least the passion of some
particular men, may have chalked out, and framed some very deformed face, for
the representing of this particular, which we have in hand; and for the showing
it forth in ill posture, and with an aspect of great disadvantage, and setting
it also in a false light. They say, that these Privileged persons have a mind
to oppress the authority of our Lords the Prelates, that they destroy the
Hierarchy of the Church, that they invest the authority which was established
by the Apostles, that they are tied too close upon the Pope (and of this
for-sooth, they make a mortal sin) that they exalt themselves above Bishops;
that they forsake the care of Parishes, and draw all to themselves; that they
abuse their Privileges, and become insolent, and too independent upon their
Ordinaries; that they despise Ecclesiastical Parsons and Curats, whom they
undermine; that they follow not the Maxims of the Country, and the Privileges
of the Gallian Church, that they fill the best Chayres of the Kingdom, and in
fine, that they make themselves petty Kings. Having thus made up this Picture,
and given such a coloring to it (as is used by the great Bassaw, who
ordinarily makes all his, full of night, and deep shadows and darkness)
having I say framed the face of this business, after this manner, they put men
then, into an Alarm, they cry out and Preach, yea and excommunicate in many
places; they print Books, and they do wonders. What, say they, is it fit that
men band themselves thus against Bishops? is it fit to put the Church in
Scisme? that poor Religious men should be so full of obstinacy and ambition?
that without punishment they should bring confusion unto that order, which has
been established by our Predecessors, and a World of such discourses as
these, which are received and believed as Oracles, and indubitable truths. I
will therefore say with Tertullian, to such as shall have figured or rather
dis-figured us in this fashion, before the eyes of my Lords the Prelates, that
first they should in earnest strive to know, whether that be true or no,
whether or no we adore this Orient Sun, and this interest of our own, and
whether our designs and pretenses aim at that. For otherways it is to frame
an ougly thing at pleasure, and it is like setting up a Quintaine or some man
of wood, so to learn to make thrusts of the Lance, and of language at it,
when yet in the mean time all this is done with disadvantage, to the service
and glory of God? We men should first seek to know whether indeed it be the
Arc of truth, or else the Chest or Coffer of our own interest, which we
adore, and then afterward they might cry out at ease, and without danger of
error.

My Lords, in such a business as this, a man may either seek the sole Glory
of GOD, and the good of souls which are bathed in the blood of Jesus Christ,
who is the true Bishop and Pastor of our souls, or else he may follow a
passion, being over-cast and gilt with a show of zeal, and set forth with
the apparent ornaments of virtue; or else in fine, he may give himself way to
be persuaded to certain things, which he takes indeed to be very true,
though yet in very truth they be not so. Of you my Lords I believe that it is
the first consideration, which puts you on; or at the most, that it is the
first, and the third; you having perhaps, given belief to so many discourses;
where with men may have desired to flatter you; and perhaps to work and make
deep impressions upon your minds. But yet withal. I beseech you suffer me to
tell you that, which generally is in the belief of men; namely, that many who
are not Bishops, have suffered themselves to be transported into the second
error, and have taken passion, interest, and jealousy, for direct
inspirations: but verily I am in fear, least God should say, Non mittebam
Prophetas, and Ier. 22.
ipsi currebant; non loquebar ad eos, and ipsi prophetabant.

Now therefore to discern who is inspired by God, and who is put on by an
Episcopal and Apostolical spirit, and who on the other side is posessed by
passion, I know not how it may be done more Divinely, then by the mouth of God,
and by the mouth of three of the greatest personages, who have ever been in
this World; and who all three were Pastors, according to the very heart, and
gust of God.

The first is Moses, that father of the people of God (and as it were their
Bishop) under whom Joshua was placed. It happened therefore, that one Eldad and
Medad, who being a part from the multitude of the Jews, (and some will say
perhaps that this is a figure of Religious men) began to prophecy amongst the
people, that is to say, to instruct, and Preach to them. This news was
quickly carried by a young man to Joshua, who being inflamed with a zeal,
which was not altogether so very pure; ran with speed to Moses: and being
desirous to use double diligence in giving proof of his fidelity; said
somewhat which pleased not Moses in any sort, who was a man all full of the
Spirit of God. But let us hear his Words. Statim Iosue filius Nun, minister
Mosi, and electus e pluribus; Domine mi Moses, prohibe illos. At ille, quid
inquit aemularis pro me? quis tribuat mihi vt omnis populus Number. 11. 29
Prophetet, and det eis dominus Spiritum suum? What is that which this holy man
means to say, this Idea of the Pastors of the people of God? I had rather make
it be spoken by the mouth of a Pope, which was more worth then gold. But first
you may observe in passing by, that instead of Prohibe illos, the Caldean
version says; Mitte eos in carcerem; for this declares yet better, the
boiling heart of Joshua, and the excess of his too hot zeal. But now let us
hear what the Pope says. Pia Pastorum men's Lib. 22 mor. cap. 24.
(says St. Gregory) quia non propriam gloriam, sed authoris quaerit; ab
omnibus vult adjuuari, quod agit, fidelis namque Predicator optat, si fieri
valeat, vt veritatem, quam solus loqui non sufficit, ora cunctorum sonent. Vnde
cum Iosue, duobus in castris remanentibus, atque prophetantibus, vellet
obsistere, recte per Mosen dicitur. Quid aemularis pro me, etc. Prophetare
quippe omnes voluit, qui bonum quod habuit, alijs non inuidit.

Will you therefore see this ill zeal, and how Moses speaks of this
emulation? Here it is. Domine mi, prohibe illos. And will you see the true
Spirit of God, and the pure zeal of his service, and of the good of souls?
Behold also here it is, Qui^ mihi tribuat ut omnes, etc. The second instance is
more eminent, and it is Jesus Christ who is speaking, and we must adore his
Words. Thus stood the case. As he was going to Caperna^um, Markc 9.
the Apostles busied themselves about debating, who was to be the greatest man
amongst them. Dear Lord, what a kind of discourse was this, for the Apostles
to make? But being arrived at their lodging, Christ our Lord demanded of them,
what discourse they had held upon the way? to which they all held their
peace, and were infallibly ashamed of their having so impertinently debated
about the point of precedence. And our dear Lord instructed them sweetly, and
taught them, that true greatness is to be only found in the bosom of
Humility. Now St. ^hn interrupted him, saying thus: ^aister, we have seen a
certain ^an, who has bin so bold as to im^loy thy name, in dispossessing
people of Devils; but perceiving that he did not follow us, and that he was
none of our Company, we did expressly prohibit, that he should work no more
of these miracles. Jesus autem ait; Nolite prohibere eum, ^emo est qui faciat
virtutem in nomi^e meo, and possit cito male loqui de me. Qui. n. non est
aduersum vos, pro ^obis est. Will you see the true zeal of the honor of God,
Nolite ^rohibere etc. Qui. n. etc. And will you see on the other side, a zeal
which has in it a little heat, and ^oyling up of passion, Non sequitur nos,
and prohibuimus eum. In the name of God let me make you hear this great Oracle
of Greece, and other great personages. For Saint Chrysostom interpreting those
words Gloss. in Mark. c. 9.
aforesaid, says thus, Veruntamen non erat tantae perfectionis, quod vellet
sequi Christum and discipulos ejus etc. Et talis etiam non est prohibendus quia
beneficia diuina non solum dantur per maiores sed etiam aliquando per minores
and imperfectos, vt in hoc etiam declaretur virtus nominis Christi. Add here
that which is said by another. Putauit eum excludendum a beneficio, qui non
vtitur officio; sed docetur, neminem a bono quod ex part habet arcendum, sed
ad hoc potius quod non habet prouocandum. In fine, the gloss proceeds
thereuppon and says; Per istum qui non erat de societate Apostolorum,
significatur laicus bonus, qui non habet predicandi officium; tamem bonis
verbis and exemplis agit ad expulsionem daemonis de cordibus proximorum,
quamuis non sequatur Christum per statum Religionis, and clericatum. It is
therefore much more strong, when he is a religious man. In fine, Titus
Bostrensis adds thus, In. c. 9. Luc.
Qui vobis, qui mediligitis, non aduersantur, pro vobis faciunt. Si qui. n.
sunt quiquae ad gloriam meam spectant, implere satagunt, illi non ex se, sed
gratia mea preueniente ea praestant. And indeed it is their vocation, and for
this reason it is, that God sends many Religious orders into the World;
giving them this express and precise vocation, which obliges them to employ
themselves toward the salvation of their neighbors, and to do service to
them who have most particular obligation of the care of souls; but now you
will say, why is it that God does send this extraordinary succor, since the
ordinary may well perform it, without the other. To this I will not answer a
word, but I will beg of Romans 9.
St Paul that he will answer it. Tu quis es, qui respondeas Deo, nunquid dicit
figmentum ei qui se finxit, quid me fecisti sic?

The third instance is of that master of Bishops, the great St. Paul, 1 Phil.
but we must hear himself. Quidam (says he) propter inuidiam and
contentionem, quidam autem, and propter bonam voluntatem, Christum predicant;
quidam ex charitate, scientes quoniam in defensionem Euangelij positus sum.
Quidam autem ex contentione Christum annunciant; non sincere existimantes
pressuram se suscitare vinculis meis. Quid. n. dum omni modo sieve per
occasionem sieve per veritatem Christus annuncietur, and in hoc gaudeo; sed and
gaudebo. Scio. n. quia hoc mihi proueniet ad salutem. Do you not admire the
greatness of this heart, more capable then the circumference of the whole
World? Do you not admire the purity of this soul, which cares not a whit, by
whom, nor in what particular manner Jesus Christ be praised and served, so that
it be done indeed, although it should be to the disadvantage of his own
honor, and of his life, yea and of his reputation, which is more dear then
life. The intention of those ill Preachers was such, as that those great
personages, whilst they are explicating this passage: Pereat Paulus, pereat
praedicatio, St Chriso. St Anselm. Theof. Corn.
Ecclesia, fides, mundus, no sip si simul dummodo ad breue tempus in honor
simus, say, that Saint Paul takes no care of all that, but says, that upon
condition my master may be well served, and that souls may be assisted and
comforted, all the rest concerns me not, for I have no interest, but that of
my master, and I am afraid least by seeking mine own honor, and mine own
advuntages, with too much curiosity and care, I may hinder the service and
glory of my Lord God. I like him well who says, that a man may perceive the
truth of their zeal of the service of God, who have charge over souls, John
12.
when they do as Martha did, who said to Jesus Christ, in so good a fashion;
Magister non est tibi curae quod soror mea reliquit me solam ministrare, dic
ergo illi, vt me adiuuet. In effect you will find that Saint Mary Magdalen did
not fail, to put her hands to work, she sent for perfumes, and did embalme
therewith the sacred head, and the blessed feet of Jesus Christ, and forgot
not to help her sister; after she had for sometime given ear to the heavenly
words of her dear Master, who was the only divine love of her heart: for as
for him who was scandalized at this action, he deserves not so much as to be
named; and so he received that answer which he (...). S^^^t Ignatius enters
e(...) against those wretches who banded so against Saint ^aul: and says;
Fugite istos, sunt. n. Epist. ad Trall.
^aniloqui, seductores, non Christia^i; sed Christempori, Christilucriones,
^uique ex Christi nomine quaestum faciunt, etc. But this holy Martyr believed
that those Preachers were Heretics, and so also did Saint Chrysostom, though
indeed Saint Anselme does hold more probably, that they were Catholics, but
yet Catholics, who even consumed themselves with envy, to see that St. Paul,
appeared in the world with such a deal of luster, and eclipsed a part of their
glory, leaving them in obscurity. This was the thing (as St. Anselme says)
which transported their heart, and bred in them a desite to destroy Saint Paul,
whatsoever it might cost them. I have no mind to make the application, but it
suffices me to show the heart of Moses, of Saint Paul, of Christ our Lord,
and of God; and the purity of mind of these men, who are made according to
the heart of God. For so that souls may be saved, such may be saved, such men
neither care for their particular honor, nor for their interest, nor indeed
for any thing of this World; nor by whom the business be performed, nor by
what means, so it may be by that, which the Divine Providence has judged, and
chosen for the best. For as Gerson says, to believe that nothing is well done,
but that which thou do, or that which thou causest to be done; alas, this is
a point of great hazard. If this be to seek God, there are indeed very many
who are much deceived, for men are wont to call this a seeking of ones self,
and not a seeking of God; or if it be a seeking of God; it is for the finding
of himself in that search, and to build (as a man may say) at the cost of God,
a Temple, or Trophy ^or a man's own glory, and reputation. Si adhuc hominibus
placerem, Christi seruus non essem, said that man of Heaven, that instructor of
Bishops.

But now we must consider the reasons that men allege against us, in this
argument, and what those winds are which make such a tempest, in the sea of
the Church, as that a man would say all were lost. So full have men their
minds of zeal, and so inflamed upon this business, and so much noise do
they make. As for me, I ask for such minds of men, as may be cool, and
quiet, and wise, and by no means troubled, and boiling up. And I demand no
grace, nor favor, but only a sober and settled judgment, without any other
interest, then of Gods service, and which may not be pre-occupated by certain
inueterate opinions, which have no soliditie in them. In fine, my Lords, I
desire no other kind of minds in men, but such as are made like yours, that
is to say, such as are solid, firm, dis-interessed, and which desire but to
meet with the true means of saving the souls of your Diocesses; and to
comfort the sheep of your Flocks, and I am well inclined to believe, that of
you which Saint Paul said of himself, in Romans 9.
relation to others. Optabam. n. ego ipse (Paulus) anathema esse a Christo, pro
fratribus meis.

Let us therefore see the reasons which some allege to prove that there is
no necessity of Religious men, but rather that they are of prejudice to the
Hierarchy of the Church.

THE FIRST REASON.
^t Charles did not serve himself of ^eligious men, for the establishment of
the Hierarchy of his Diocese, which yet was the honor of Diocesses.

THe first, the most specious, and peradventure the most strong reason is this,
which here we find alleged; namely, that the great and incomparable Saint
Charles, did not serve himself of Religious men, for the establishment of his
Diocese, which is nevertheless the most flourishing, or at least one of the
most flourishing in Italy, and perhaps even in the whole World. Can any man do
better then Saint Charles? Can a man fail by imitating Saint Charles? Can it
be disliked if a man do that, which was done by S. Charles? who is Canonized,
both in Heaven and in earth?

Charles the judge of this question, for if you do, you will infallibly loose
your cause: I say you will infallibly loose it.

Before I prove this truth, I will tell you by way of surplussage, that
supposing Saint Charles had proceeded so as has been said (which yet is not
so) it cannot be inferred thereupon, that all the World, either must do, or
has done the like. There may be reasons which are good at Milan, which are
not gusted elsewhere, and some things are good in some season, which are not so
in others. If he were now living, and in France, he must be feign to hold
another style, and to go in another air then this. But yet they say still,
that Saint Charles was of that opinion. Let it be so. But Saint Bonauenture
was of an opinion directly ^ontrary to this, who was a Cardinal as Saint
Charles, a Pastor like him; at least as learned as he, and a Saint as he was;
and yet nevertheless; he taught and practiced the direct contrary, and found
himself very well therewith. But let us hear him speak by his own mouth, or
rather take the pains to read a Treatise which he made altogether upon this
subject, under this fair Title. Quare fratres minores praedicent, and
confessiones audiant. And you shall see whether Saint Bonauenture, be of the
opinion of Saint Charles, or at least, whether he be of that which is imputed
to him. See but his Apology for those poor Religious men, and my turn is
served. You will tell me perhaps, that it is so indeed, but then you will say,
that Saint Bonauenture must go for a suspected man. It is certainly as easy
for me to say, that Saint Charles man also be suspected, though in^eede h^
ought not to be so. But then yo^ say, that Saint Bonauenture was (...)
Religious man; and Saint Charles was he not so too? And if not; the^ I demand
justice of you my Lords for why will you have Religious me^ believe St. Charles
in this business, an^ yet you will no^ that such as are no^ Religious, should
believe St. Bon^uenture. Either believe them both, o^ relinquish them both; or
else you will ordain men to be both judges and parties, which is contrary to
all form of justice in France.

Thomas also was of a contrary opinion to St. Charles. But you will say, that
he was no Archbishop, any more then Saint Bernard, who was also none, but yet
of the same opinion with him. He was not indeed, but it was long of no body
but St. Bernard, that he was not Archbishop of Millan, as well as St.
Charles; nor of any but Saint Thomas that he was not Archbishop of Naples: Now
whom my Lords, do you esteem more in the sight of God, either him who
refuses to be an Archbishop, being pressed to be so, by the Pope, and by the
whole World: or him who presses that he may be so, as they say Saint Charles
did, whilst yet he was young, and before his conversion. Or do you think
perhaps that St. Bernard, or St. Thomas would say any thing against their
conscience in a matter of such moment.

But let us yet say more, let us leave the Character a part, do you not
believe that the testimonies of these two Seraphins, be as weighty and as
important in the way of conscience, as that of the great St. Charles, who
esteemed these two great Doctors and great servants of God, so much, that he
esteemed nothing of himself, in comparison of them.

Charles; and I will show you by good account, nine and forty Popes of a
contrary opinion, I wll show you 500. Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, most
illustrious, most reverend, most holy, most wise. And (which imports) most
dis-interested, both in France, and elsewhere, who were of a contrary opinion.
I will show you Emperors, Kings, Monarchs, and even Oracles amongst men, who
are also of a contrary opinion. I do highly esteem Saint Charles, and God
forbid but I should. But yet if I should believe him alone, against a sacred
torrent of so many others, he would give me little thanks for it, and truly
I have no mind to offend him. Would he disagree from St. Bonauenture, he,
who in effect, did nothing but by the advice of Panigarola, a man of the same
Order, and far inferior to Saint Bonauenture.

Charles his life, does carry other manner of reasons with it, then that which
you allege, how he came to make his Diocese so flourishing: for that story
tells us, that the thing which made him victorious, over so many impediments,
and enabled him to do what he listed, was this which follows.

1. That he led a holy and irreprehensible life. L. 1. c. 8.


2. He did ordinarily fast, and L. 8. c. 21.
that oftentimes, with bread and water; yea and even when he was present at
Feasts, and he fasted for devotion and not for thrift.

3. He gave over in one morning, L. 2. c. 2.
the reuenew of threescore thousand Crowns by the year; and who would not
believe a man, who should at once allege threescore thousand reasons, which
weigh at the least, a Crown a piece.

4. He always every day recited L. c. 2. 8.
his Breuiarie, with his knees bent, and his head bare, and he even blotted it
all out with tears, which his devotion shed in so great abundance.

5. He did never in effect, go out L. 2. c. 2.
of his Diocese.

6. He gave alms, even almost L. 4. c. 3. and l. 8. c. 28.
beyond the means he had.

7. He served with his own hands L. 4. c. 3.
such persons as had plague soars upon them.

8. He made the visitation of his Diocese on foot, and he performed his
Pilgrimages, after the same manner.

9. He daily celebrated mass, with an L. 8. c. 2.
incredible devotion, and with a Majesty, which was more then humane.

10. He was peradventure the L. 8. c. 16.
most humble man of all his Diocese, and did in his very soul, believe more
meanly of himself, then of any servant he had.

11. He was indefatigable, in the L. 8. c. 31.
execution of his Office.

12. Under his Scarlet he wore a L. 8. c. 31.
hard and rough haire-cloath.

13. He took his rest, either upon L. 8. c. 3.
the bare ground, or else upon straw which was as hard.

14. He would read the holy Bible upon his knees, and with his head bare, and
the while, he would shed abundance of tears.

15. He carried a tender love toward the seraunts of God.

16. Every year he made the spiritual L. 8. c. 5.
exercises twice, sometimes in the Nouiciate, at Nouellara (which my Lady his
sister had founded) under father Anthonio Valentino, a Jesuit (of whom I have
understood thus much) and sometimes at Arona, in the Nouilitate, which he had
founded himself, and then he did ever make his general Confession.

17. He would never do any thing L. 1. c. 4.
without taking very wise counsel, and he did exceedingly distrust his own
judgment.

18. He was ever the first at good works, at the Office of the Church, at
Sermons, at the visiting of Hospitals, and serving the sick.

19. He was greatly exact and L. 8. c. 3.
careful, not to give holy Orders, nor Benifices, but to persons very capable,
and of good life.

20. He would do nothing of importance L. 8. c. 3.
without communicating it first, to the Pope, and his Council, whom he
honored as the Oracle of Heaven.

whole Diocese, and not either seculers, or Regulers, or such other aids as
those; in fine, in the midst of all impediments, and when the whole seculer
power would oppose it self to his designs, the Governors of Millan sent
word to King Phillip the second, that they were not able to resist him; and
the King would ordinarily make this answer, Pues^el Arcobispo es un sancto.
Let this Archbishop alone, for he is a uery Saint. The Archbishop Visconte
his successor, a most wise man, and whom I have heard Preach, would sometimes
be making the same offers; but the same King answered concerning him; Luego
este no es saincto. No, says he, the case is not the same. For this man is not
yet a Saint, when he shall be so, we will speak with him again. So that the
belief which was had of the sanctity of Saint Charles, was that which made him
so omnipotent; do but give me some Saint Charles like him, and there shall be no
Barbarism which shall not be tamed, and even made holy in a short time: but
without that there will be much to do, whosoever he be that goes about it, and
Charles Baromeus, would not have wrought those wonders, if he had not been
St. Charles.

Charles did not serve himself of Religious men, in making that Reformation.
Though that were so, yet the Pope his Uncle, served himself of them; and so
did the greatest Cardinals of his time, who found that they had no cause to
repent it. Farnesse at Rome, Paleotta at Bolonia, Valerio at Verona, Priuli at
Venice, Medici at Florence, and Este at Ferara, that I may say nothing of my
Lords, the Cardinals of France; whose memory is both in benediction and
admiration; he of Bourbon, of Vendosme, of Lorayne, of Tornon, and so many
others. And these two last, being men of very great judgment, and reputation,
resolved when they dyed, to breath out their souls in the hands of Religious
men, and to leave their hearts depositated amongst them, in testimony of an
everlasting love. And I will also forbear to say any thing of such as live,
and of an innumerable number of most eminent Prelates of France; yea and of
Europe, who have found themselves well at case, by not having been of that
opinion, which here is attributed to Saint Charles. I could here say much of
those great Cardinals of Ioyuse, of Condy, of Retz, of Peron, of Ciury; and of
so many others: but I will forbear, and pass no further upon this point.

Charles be made the Judge of all this questions for either the story of his
life deceiues us, or certainly my Lords, you will loose your cause. So true it
is, that Saint Charles did the just contrary, of all that which some men would
make the World believe. See how he did it, and what his life relates. When he
was converted in good earnest to God, and to that eminent manner L. 1. c. 5.
of life which he grew to lead, he took for his guide, Father John Baptista L.
1. c. 5.
Ribera a Jesuit. When he resolved to make his entry into Millan, and to
dispose of that people; he chose Father Palmio and some others of the same
Order, which proved so to the glory of God as all the World understands. He
settled Colleges and Religious-Houses, and served himself L. 2. c. 7.
of them for his Seminaries, and for the affairs of his Diocese. At Millan he
found the Barnabists, who are very good Religious men, and who gave him great
succor toward the government of his Church. Besides, he brought in the
Theatins, esteeming them to be very worthy L. 2. c. 19.
laborers in the Vineyard of God. And yet the good Cardinal did not
conceive, that he had half the men whereof he had need, for so great an
office. He never ceased, till he had brought the Capuchins into those
Dominions of the Swissers, which L. 6. c. 8.
were under his Arch-bishopricke, believing that the sanctity of the life, the
good example; and the Preaching of those Fathers, would work that effect,
which since indeed they have wrought. He also placed two Colleges of Jesuits
at Lucerna, and Ibid.
Fribourg; and besides at Millan, and at Arona; and he served himself of all
those good Fathers, toward the perfecting of that work, about which he went.
In these most solemn and most renowned visitations, which he made amongst the
Grisons, in the Voltolina, and other Countries which were blasted with Heresy:
he had ordinarily Panigarola with him, L. 7. c. 4.
who was then but a mere Cordelier, though afterward he was made Bishop of
Aste, and Father Achilles Gagliardo a Jesuit; besides others who were not of
so much note as these two. Yea, there were three men, of whom he thought he
could never have enough, Panigarola, Emanuel Sa, and Father Adorno. The first
of them for Preaching; the second for cases of conscience; and the third, for
the conduct of his soul, for in all his life, and even in the hour of his
death, he would ever be so conducted by this Father Adorno; that in effect,
he did nothing but by obedience to him, at least in those things which
concerned the interior man, and the guiding of his conscience, which was most
tender and nice. And his life speaks of things ^great, and so extraordinary in
this ^de, as that I dare not touch them ^ere. When he was able to escape away,
and go to Nouellarie, there L. 7. c. 11. and 12.
to confer with Father Anthonio Valentino (who was Father of the Nouices of
the Jesuits) he thought himself to be in a kind of Paradise; and when
afterward, he came to find himself assaulted by Death, he ^ent for Father
Adorno, and made his general Confession to him, and would needs dye in the
Arms of him, upon whom he had entirely relied for the direction of his
soul, during his life. That I may say nothing of the Iacobins and Cordeliers,
and other Religious men, who lived on Alms, by whom he was often assisted,
with very great fruit.

And now I most humbly beseech you most illustrious, and most reverend Lords,
is it true which they have said of Saint Charles; that (...) did not serve
himself of Religion men, he who ever had them at (...) feet, he who dyed in
their Arme^ and who in effect, did never a^ thing of much importance, when in
he was not assisted by their Cou^sells: he who served himself of the^ labors
in his visitations, and wh^ received comfort by their conuers^tion, making
himself the founder o^ some, the protector of others, and generally a Father
to them all. He^ took great contentment to reuolue^ that passage of Saint
Gregory up and down in his mind. Cuncti qui praesunt, non in se potestatem
Ordinis debent sed aequalitatem pensare conditionis; nec praeesse se hominibus
gaudeant, sed prodesse. Those two words of praeesse and prodesse, were
everlastingly before his eyes, and yet more, this other passage of the same
Pope: Qui episcopatum desiderat, bonum opus desiderat. Notandum vero, (...)
illo tempore hoc dicebatur, quo Part. 1. c. 8.
q^ssquis plebibus praeerat, primus ad ^rtirij tormenta ducebatur, tunc
er^audabile fuit episcopatum quaerere, ^ndo per hunc non erat dubium ad ^plicia
grauiora quemlibet peruenire. Whilst he was repassing this saying in his
mind, it is not easily to be believed, with how great ardour of zeal, he
would think of culti^ting his Diocese; serving himself of all men, but not
of any who would employ themselves but by halfes. He was the first at labor,
and the last, and lowest of all in the esteemation of himself. And it seemed,
as if he had been made Cardinal but to kill himself with taking pains, and
to dye himself purple in his own blood: and to bath in the sweat of his own
labors, and so to be exalted to a thousand, and a thousand Crowns of merit.

Cap. 18.
Possiuinus a seculer Priest, and (...) Domesticke of the holy Cardina^ and the
witness, who saw wh^ he wrote. Here is then the ca^ the Religious men
finding themselves to be surcharged, and n^ being able to attend to all tha^
which the holy Cardinal expecte^ at their hands, desired that he^ would be
pleased to free them from some part of that great employment.

From hence, some good Priests took occasion to offer themselves to be used by
Saint Charles, in whatsoever he should command. This small beginning enlarged
it self; ^d these first servants of God, did ^arme themselves by little and
little, ^d set themselves forward apace. and the better to advance this py^us
design, and to become more ac^ptable, and necessary, they alleged to the
holy Archbishop, as follows.

1. That Religious men, were not absolutely at his disposition. That they had
Generals and Prouincials; who disposed of them at their pleasure. That
sometimes when they were in the midst of some great good business, they left
it all, to follow the call of Obedience. That when Saint Charles began to
have particular gust in any one, it was then, that they would be taking him out
of his hand. That he was not the Master of any of them. That every one had
particular rules, which obliged him to diverse things, and that therefore he
could not ser^ himself freely of them.

2. That they had too great Privileges and power from Popes, and that they
were too independent upon their Ordinaries.

3. That they were not of the ordinary body, and of the Hierarchy of the Church.

4. That they might not be Parsons or Curats, Archdeacons, Canons,
Theologals, Vicars general, nor serve the cures of Villages.

5. That secular Priests were rather to be reformed by secular Priests, then by
Regulers, who have had no education that way.

6. That by little and little, some Priests might be substituted to the place
of others; and so the Clergy of Millan would infallibly grow to be reformed,
both in Country and City: by the substitution, I say, of of good Priests, who
might lead holy lives, and that all the younger Priests, moulding themselves by
those others, might thus put themselves upon the way of Ecclesiastical
perfection, obtained by secular Priests, who shortly would people Lombardie,
with excellent men for the Church. That Religious men not being come in, but to
succor the Church when it was in decay, and seemed to hang toward ruin,
there would now be not great need of them, but for singing their Office in
the Quier, and to make mental Prayer.

8. That good secular Priests were the men, who would uphold the dignity of
Bishops, and who live not but by them, nor take any thing to heart but their
Commaund^ments, and who would ever be at their feet, and ever near at hand;
to be employed by them, in all kind of labor without contr^diction.

9. That for the greater assuranc^ and stability hereof, they would take an
Oath, nay they would man a particular vow, between the hands of the said Lord
Cardinal, whereby they would irreuocably oblige themselves to him, and would
make themselves as his Creatures.

This is that in gross, which I have learned both in Millan, as also out of
the life of the Saint aforesaid, touching that which they alleged to him.
And now he who embraced all sorts of people, for the service o^ God, was much
pleased by the luster of these fair and winning propositions. And as for the
men, he received them after a paternall manner, and gave them the Church of
the holy Sepulcher; and obtained the yearly reuenew of a thousand crowns for
them of Pope Gregory the thirteenth; and by occasion of offering themselves to
him, he gave them the name of Oblati, which continues with them till this
day, and in truth they have done God good service in the Diocese of the holy
Cardinal. Now as for saying, whether afterward they grew up to frame a body,
or whether they have chosen a General, or no, or what Hierarchy they have, I
must clearly auow mine own ignorance. For in truth, I know not how the case
stands, and I am so little curious, that I have not taken care to inform my
self. It is true, that I have bin told many times, but I put not this either
into my book of receites, or of expenses, as a thing which concerns me not.
But I beseech God to conserve and enrich them, with all the benedictions both
of heaven and earth, for the service of the Church, and the good of souls.

9. This was then the occasion of that change which arrived at Millan; wherein
my Lords, you may be pleased to observe, that it grew upon the desire of the
Religious men, and at their instant (...) that Saint Charles discharged them,
of that too great employment: for these are the express words of the History.
Besides that the holy Cardinal did never give over, even till the end of his
life, to serve himself of Religious men, and to employ them upon the conduct
of his soul; and you may well believe of so great a Cardinal, that since he
trusted his conscience, and his heart in the hands of Religious men, he might
also well trust the rest, his flock, and whatsoever was in his Diocese, which
was the honor of Diocesses.

10. To tell you now which of the two is better, either to have served Saint
Charles in the establishment of his Arch-bishopricke, and to break through
difficulties, or to have helped to conserve that, which was established
already, would be but odious, and without fruit. In like manner to debate,
whether this be not sitter at one time then in another, would prove to make a
discourse apt to breed jealousy, and to discover a high way covered with
thorns. To know moreover whether the Oblati do better service to Bishops,
then Religious men, yea or no; for the love of God, do not engage me upon this
task. When you go to Millan, you man take the pains, to inform and instruct
your selves herein. As for me, I know in a manner what might be said, but I
also know withal, that I will not say it. That which I will be bold to say is
this, that I do infinitely commend the large heart of Saint Charles, and his
affections of a father. He ever loved both the one and the other, ever employed
both the one and the other, and as his life does witness, he better loved to
be a Father to all, then partial to any. And seeing that he had all in his
power, he would not commit himself wholly to any; nor put himself into
parallel with other folks; and to the end, that all might be good children to
him, he was a loving Father to all. His life does further relate, that he had
often in his mouth, that word of the wiseman. Discurre, festina, suscita Cap.
^7.
animam tuam, ne dederis somnum occulis tuis, nec dormicent palpebrae suae. In
fine, he awaked all the world, he employed all the servants of God, and he
never thought himself to have men enough to cultiuate his Diocese, whereof he
so much procured the advancement.

11. True, but yet he wished for some things to be in regular persons, and
there were many little things which pleased him not. Alas, is there any kind of
people, whereof a man is not weary at ^ngth, since a man grows weary even of
himself, and many times he ^ares not for that after noone, which he
passionatly desires before. In fine, the mind of man is so made. But now my
Lords, tell me if it please you, do you believe that there has been nothing
done, by those others, which might have been wished otherwise, and which
displeased Saint Charles, and his successors. Are they perhaps impeccable, or
are they men dropped down from Heaven, and confirmed in grace? If a man will
not serve himself, but only of such as make no faults, infallibly he must
serve himself of none; but he must, as Saint Paul says, go out of the
World, and seek them beyond these parts of the earth which are inhabited by
men. Every man is a man, and extremely a man, and subject to many tokens of
humanity, and (...) inhumanity too. He is the most excellent amongst them, who
commits the fewest faults A good old^ Religious man of the Mendicants, said
thus at Millan. When those other good men shall have served St. Charles as long
as we, and shall have sweat blood and water so many years: the world will
then be able to judge, who shall have done better service. And is it therefore
fit, that for some little fault, all former services should be forgotten. Some
one man, will have committed some light indiscretion; and a hundred others of
the same Order, will have performed a thousand good services, and must the
misfortune be so great, as to impute the fault of that one to the whole body,
and that no account should be made of all that good, which a hundred servants
of God have wrought, and must all this be buried, in the pit of oblivion? The
great wisdom and wise charity of Saint Charles did ^rue it self of all: he
managed the ^ood services of some, he excused ^e faults of others, if any were
made, and he gained the heart of the whole World.

THE SECOND REASON.
That Privileged persons trouble the Hierarchy of the Church.

MY Lord Bishop of Geneua, who was the Saint Charles of France, and whose
memory is in benediction, was a Prelate, whom you my Lords did honor so
greatly, that more cannot be imagined. One day when I had the ho^or to
discourse with him at Paris, with that liberty which by his commandment, and
through his goodness I had acqui^ed, and there had passed more then five and
thirty years, since I had formerly touched this string: in familiar speech he
said to me afte^ this manner, but with that ayr^ which he ordinarily used, and
wit^ that Angelical serenity of his. (...) know not whither these men will g^
to frame this Hierarchy, and when they find, and fancy these distinctions.
When soever it shall plea^ them, I will make them see, that Religious men, are
one of the most important pieces, or parts of the tru^ Hierarchy of the Church.
And some there are, who make a show, as if the would only abase Religious men
who yet in very deed would feign abase Bishops too, and even the Pope
himself. Alas, says he, le^ us live, and serve our selves of them whom the
good God sends to v^ for although we were ten times a many as we are,
infallibly we should not be half so many, as were fit: s^ true it is, that,
Totus mundus est (...) maligno positus.

2. Saint Bonauenture, a Cardinal In Apol. peuperum art. 2. 4. Propositionis.
(...)^ Bishop, disputing with a certain Doctor Gultelmus de Sancto a^ore, who
said at that time, all that which now is said upon this argument (for all that
which is expressed ^n in this year 1625. is but the repetition, and echo, of
that which was delivered in the year 1257. this St. I say, does observe a
choice passage in the Gospel, from whence he draws a most excellent
consequence, and extremely to the purpose Luke 10.
of our question. He observes, I say, that when that poor Trauailer was
wounded, by those murdering Thieves, the Priest passed by, and that was all he
did. A Leuite shortly after passed also by, but he did not so much as once
touch the poor wounded man, and so that these two, who were in greatest
obligation to help him, left him wholly without succor. By chance there passed
also a poor Samaritan, and, (...) (though he were in less Oblig^ did yet
alight to the ground, he p^red oil and wine into his bleed^ wounds, he raised
and set him^ upon his beast, he caused him to ^drest, he paid the charges, he
(...) stored him in fine to himself, a^ was afterward greatly praised (...)
Christ our Lord. It does many tim^ happen, that they who style themselves, to
be only of the Hierarch^ have so many businesses to do, the they leave many
without succou^ and God sends others, who su^ply that omission, in such sort,
the what some do not, others do, an^ that with a good will. And Go^ who is the
common Father of al^ sends help, both by means (...) the one, and of the
other. And afterward he says, Messis multa, operar^ pauci; rogate ergo
dominum messis, v^ millat operarios in vrneam suam. Nam^ ^onorum Potisicum est,
non tam pati^ter far, quam desideranter appete^ co-operatores Euangelistas ad
multi^dines diuinarum messium colligen^. A good mother will never be ^ie, when
she sees a man, who ^ough he be none of her ordinary ^omesticke servants,
does yet ne^erthelesse (finding a son of hers ^allen down in the street)
raise him ^p with a ready hand, and wrap ^im gently in his arms, and carry
^im back in to her bosom. Nay, she will not know how to entertayne that
honest man kindly enough, nor ^e able to tell what thanks to give ^im. In
fine, he adds this; Pensatis ^mnibus nul^^ debet vtaeri iniuriosum, (...)
supers^^um, si caelesti Hierarchiae ^lacuit, aliquos ad hoc opus, etsi non
necessitate consti^^los, sed charitate inductos eligere, quos and sub-caelestis
Hierarchia voluit and debuit approbare. I conjure you to weigh these words well.

3. And when it should bee^ that Religious men, were not o^ Hierarchy of the
Church, but o^ a kind of extraordinary succo^ will any man infer thereupon,
(...) they are not of the body of^ Church? Saint Paul came in (...) the
College of twelve Apo^ was already furnished, and was ^traordinarily called;
but yet wa^ not, I beseech you an Apostle, an(...) the body of the Apostles,
and (...) great Apostle, and through his ^cellencie, called the Apostle? I^ now
there being but twelve se^ for the Apostles, where shall these of Saint Paul
be? Saint August^ will tell you this better then I, or ^ther, you know it
already with any speech of mine. St. Marti^ one of the Apostles of France,
ca^ in afterward, and what shall (...) he be of this body, and of the num^ of
the rest, because he was call^ afterward, and to their succor?

The enemies of the Church, do sometimes fear one of these extraordinary men,
more then a hundred and fifty of those others. Toll Thomam, and Ecclesiam
dissipabo, said that miserable Rucerus, long ago. Take Friar Thomas away, shut
but up his mouth, let that dead man speak no more, and I will fear no body,
but will ruin and renuerse the whole Church of Rome.

4. The Popes and Councels say expressly, that Bishops and Pastors succeed the
Apostles, and the Disciples of Jesus Christ. This is most true; but so it is
also true, that Popes and Councels have employed Religious men, and grafted
them, as it were, into this Hierarchy, as Kings are wont to do, who (besides
their ordinary Militia, which serves for pay) have their white banners, under
which voluntaries are assembled, who are the men many times, that go first
(...) the knockes; and supposing that the acquit themselves well, and continu^
under the authority of the King, the^ are praised, beloved, and admired b^ all
the World. Besides them, who (...) mere right are obliged to procur^ the
salvation of those souls, which are under their charge, God an^ his Vicar on
earth, has certayn^ choice troops, which are sent t^ succor those others,
and that the^ may acquit themselves the better, i^ doing their duty, they give
them Privileges and arms, wherewith^ to fight against Hell, and against sin^
and all those miseries which destroy^ souls. This is not therefore to trouble
the Hierarchy, but to magnify it, to succor it, and to live and dye for^ the
service of it.

Your Mr. Renatus Benedictus, who (...) is now dead, said one day to Father
(...) Maldonatus, that in very truth, the^ Church had formerly been in such
^ermes, that she had had necessity that Religious men should come into the
World to help her to re-establish Ecclesiastical discipline; but now, said
he, when all goes so well, we have no more need thereof, and therefore let
them suffer us, every one to follow his occupation. I would to God he had said
true, and that the World were in so present state, as that Religious men had no
more to do, but to say their prayers. Alas, and what could we desire more then
this? But in conscience, my Lords, are we now grown to be in such case as
this, and is France so well sanctified both in City and Country?

6. The wish of a certain worthy Prelate of this Kingdom, is much more worth
the making, he uses these very words, and for all kinds of reason, his
testimony is worthy to be received both with affection, and with honor, he
being such as he is, leading such a life, as all the World does know, and
admire.

Lord how happy a thing it is when the Ecclesiastical men, who are of the
Clergy, and when the men of Religious Orders be in good accord, and maintain
good intelligence for the service of those souls, which have cost the Son of
God so much blood. When these Hurs and Iosuahs hold up the arm of these Moses;
that is to say, of the ordinary Pastors, to whom the government of souls
committed to their charge does belong: How great benedictions grow from this
holy vnaminity and correspond^nce: But on the other side, what confusion
springs forth, when they, who both by their Character of Priest hood, and by
a Reguler life ought to be in Order, do encounter and oppose one another: For
if the salt be unsavory; with what shall any thing be seasoned? If Order be
disordred, by what means shall the extreme corruptions of disorder be
removed? If the rule be not straight, with what shall one be able to measure
the dimensions of any building? O how truly does the poor Church endure by
these debates, other manner of torments, then Rebecca suffered by the combat
of her Children. I confess, it carries difficulty with it, for two men to
run in a Tiltyard at the same time, and in the same way against one another,
without justling, but that again grows very easy, when there is a partition,
which cutteth the length of the carrier in the middle; and in the same manner
is it easy for diverse to labor in the same Vineyard without contestation,
where the business is so great, and the laborers so few, every one seeking
not his own interests there, but the interest of Jesus Christ: provided
always, that they pass not the limits, which the Son of God has
prescribed, etc. And a little after, he says thus. The Church, which is the
seamlesse Coat, not of Joseph, but of Jesus Christ, is torn by these Schisms,
nothing indeed being so contrary to it, as internal divisions, which do
afflict it more then external hereresie, etc.

7. That the first honors be rendered to my Lords the Bishops, and the second
to the Pastors, and Parsons or Curats of Churches, is out of all dispute: Let
them be great in dignity, and eminency, let them command, let them govern,
let them triumph. They shall never be either so great, or so holy, but that all
good Religious men will wish, that they may be so more and more, and that they
may see them also many St. Charleses. That which Religious men desire, is
neither greatness, nor honor, nor revenew, nor precedence, nor any thing
which carries luster, and noise with it. That which they desire, is but to
sweat blood and water, to labor day and night, to serve and comfort the whole
World; to Preach, to take Confessions, to visit Hospitals, and Prisons, and
must this be for troubling the Hierarchy? The Oriental Church is so far off
from ever having had this belief, that even in these days, they scarce make
any Patriarch, Archbishop, or Bishop, but such as are Religious of the Order
of Saint Basil.

And still this Hierarchy of the Church must needs have a head, who may govern
and range it as is fit. Since therefore fifty Popes without interruption one
after an other, have sent these Regulars in aid and succor of the Hierarchy,
who will presume to say, that so many Popes, and after them, so many
Cardinals, and great Prelates, have troubled the Order of the Church, together
with so many Kings, who have desired them, sent for them, honored them, and
who would needs appoint by their express commandments, that they should have
employment in their Dominions, and in fine, who have served themselves of them
in their own souls.

8. A very learned Doctor in Paris, has observed (in the relation which he
makes of those Hierarchies of Heaven; to those on earth) that the Prelates or
Governors of Religious men, are as the Principalities of Heaven, in the
Hierarchy of the Church on earth. Is this to trouble the Order of the Church,
and to bring in coniusion?

The Cardinals (says he) answer^ to the Seraphins, the Bishops to the
Cherubins, the Parsons and Curates to the Archangels, the Abbots and
Superiors of Regular men, to the Principalities, etc.

If now we should examine this business by the fruit, which both the one and
the other do produce in the Church, there would be much to be said, but this
would be odious. It is better that you be pleased to employ your memories upon
that which has been said already, and to retain that in your minds, which
was delivered by two Holy Prelates, speaking in these words.

Petri Successor pia prouidet saluti S. Co^. l. c.
animarum, and in nullo praejudicat authoritati Pontificum, tanquam ornans, non
deornans Ecclesias^^um Hierarchiam, dum mittit Religiosos. Vnde Sanctus
Gregorious, ecce mundus Sacerdotibus S. Greg. in Past.
plenus est, and tamen in Dei mess, rarus operarius inuentiur. This great
Pope, and this great Cardinal, when they speak these wordes^ do they think,
they trouble the Hierarchy of the Church?

9. If these Regulars did intrud^ themselves, and as Tertullian sayth^ Si quis
missus est a seipso: If they made havoc where they go, and disturbed the
Order of the Church, i^ would indeed; be inexcuseable, and punishable. But
being inspired by Almighty God, authorized by Counsels, sent by Popes,
approoved by the Bishops of all times, and of all Countries in the World;
having bi^ in possession of so many ages, and succeeding their predecessors,
who have lost their lives in cultiuating the Vineyard of Jesus Christ: Alas,
shall this be called a trouble to the Hierarchy of the Church? Hierarchicha
opera non peragunt authoritate sua, sed Ordinariorum, and potissime summi
pontificis: (...). l. c.
Says this great Cardinal, cujus dispositionis authoritas positiua ^urae
transcendit: For these are his very words.

10. It is to be feared that the Church will find her self like the poor
Rebecca, who felt two brothers contend so furiously in her womb, and that she
may say, as the Spouse does, by the relation of Saint Bernard. Filij matris
meae pugnauerunt contra (...), quia pugnauerunt contra se. Si sic futurum erat,
quid quid necesse erat me concipere? I must needs make you hear the voice of
this worthy Prelate. That the ranks M. de Belley. Sermon. 10. de S. Ignat.
of this Militant Church, have been addressed according to the Orders of the
Triumphant, there is no doubt at all. The Hierarchy of the one, having been
formed according to the model of that Mountain of Heaven, amongst the
inhabitants of the eternal Syon. Besides, in this Hierarchy, which contained
the Order of Pastors in the Church of God^ there be added certain troops o^
succors, which enter into the Orde^ with them, as Michael did into tha^ of the
Angel of Israel; and these troops compose a kind of Hierarchy, by reason of
their particular government, and of a special kind^ of Economy, which they
obseru^ under the name of Orders, and o^ Regularity. And although these
congregations of men have many differences, yet are they without any division
amongst themselves; and especially without separation from the body of the
Church in general. And they beautify this Spouse of the Lamb by those
delightful varieties: for which the Holy Scripture declares her to be so
grateful. And they compose the precious Carguanet which adorneth the neck of
this chaste Dove with so great luster. I say therefore that the Orders of
Regulars compose a particular Hierarchy: yet ^nexed nevertheless to the
general Hierarchy of the Church. Not ^at Religious men make any new Religion
in point of belief, or that they maintain any difference therein, from the
rest of the faithful, but on the other side, for as much as their life is more
exemplar, and more perfect, and in regard that they are the most illustrious
portion of the flock of Jesus Christ; their piety does make their faith much
more delicate and more docile. Their souls not finding difficulty to believe
any thing, so that it make for the advantage of his glory, who drew them out of
the darkness of this World, to the admirable light of the practice of those
counsels of his, which put them into the state of acquiring perfection.

But I was saying that they seemed to compose a kind of Hierarchy by reason of
their exemptions, which substract them from the jurisdictio^ of the ordinary
Prelates, and Pastor^ because their life is sequested from the ways of worldly
men, and because the correspondencies of their Economy, which finally pitcheth
upon the holy seat of Rome, by the degrees of their local Superiors their
Prouincialls, and their Generals, is a copy drawn out of the Original of
Parish Priests Diocessaries, hnd Metropolitans, according to that order which
the Son of God has established in his Church, the whole rendering it self
into the unity of the Apostolical Seat of St. Peter, as into the center upon
which, as upon an immovable Rock our Lord has established his Holy Church.

11. And now since they will mould the Hierarchy of the earth, upon that of
Heaven, it comes fitly to our purpose: for besides the Angels ^uardians, who
are they which go^erne the World in the ordinary ^ay? Such as are good Divines
^ow, that there is not in a manner any Quier of Angels, whereof God does not
sometimes send one, or other to perform some great charities to mankind.
Sometimes a Cherubin, sometimes a Seraphin, sometimes an Arch-angell; and (as
Saint Paul said to the Hebrews,) Omnes sunt administratorij spiritus, in
Ministerium missi propter cos qui hereditatem capient salutis.

And now do you believe, that the ordinary Angels take it ill, when the
extraordinaries come to succor, and help to save souls; and think you that
this is a troubling of the Hierarchies. But you will say, have not perhaps the
ordinary Angels sufficient power to do what is fit. To which I make you this
answer. Shall we give Law to God, and prescri^ to him what he shall do? and
sha^ we offer to change the unspeakeab^ designs of his holy Providence, an^ of
his Charity? when the Apostle^ were so laden, that they could no^ draw their
net, being then so full^ fish, they saw another boat which Luke 5.
passed. Et annuerunt socijs qui era^ in alia naui, vt venirent, and adjuvare^
eos.

So far off are they from mis-l^king, that others should put their hands to
their work, that they entreat them to do it with great instance, and without
that succo^^ they might perhaps have lost bot^ their pains, and their fish;
and thi^ passage is applied to this argumen^ by some great personages, for the
Apostles represent the Prelates and Pastors; and that little boat the
Regulars, who are called to succor and assist in the saving of souls.

12. If men say, that the Hierar^y is no other thing, then my Lords ^e
Prelates, and the Parsons and ^urates, if that be so, it is certain, ^at
Religious men are not of it. If ^en say, that none are of the Hie^rchy, but
they who have charge of souls, in that case, neither the Cardinals nor
Canons, nor Religious, nor Abbots, nor Chapters, nor a world of Ecclesiastical
persons, shall be of it. But we must consider whether in very deed, the nature
of a Hierarchy consist in that: For St. Dennis, of whom all the World has
taken and learned, what be^ongeth to a Hierarchy; and Saint ^homas after him,
says first, that Hierarchia est saier Principatus, and P. p. q. 108. 1. 1.
multitudo ordinata sub vno principe. 2. Vna est Hierarchia hominum, and
Angelorum sub vno principe Deo. 3 In diuinis personis est Ordo, sed non est
Hierarchia; quia non est ibi purgare, illuminare, and perficere, (...) quo
consistit Hierarchia. 4. Non ess^ multitudo ordinata, sed confusa; si^
multitudine diuersi ordines non essen^ Vt ergo sit Hierarchia, debent e^
diuersi Ordines sub vnius Princip^ gubernatione. In this sense, all the which
is in the Church being auow^ed and addressed by the Pope, wh^ is the chief of
this Ecclesiastica^ Hierarchy, and put in that pla^ which has been destined
for it, (...) purge illuminate, and give perfection, is so far of, from being
out o^ the Hierarchy, that it is a very profitable part thereof, and which, in
a^ times, has done admirable things for the service of God, of the Church^ of
Prelates, of Pastors, and for the good of souls. But if the word o^ Hierarchy
be taken in the most rigorous sense, and if it comprehend nothing else, but
Prelates, and Pastor^ and them whom they employ, (themselves not being able in
their own ^ersons, to do all that which is fit) in ^his case, the Regulars will
fall out in ^ood earnest, to be of the Hierar^hy, for they are employed
therein ^y Counsels, by Popes, by a world ^f Prelates, yea, and by the
greatest ^art of Pastors themselves; excep^ing only some few, who of late ^aue
made noise enough.

The Kings of France themselves have commanded this to be observed in their
Dominions, in such sort, as that Saint Lewis laid a perpetual sentence of
banishment out of his Kingdom, upon that Doctor Gulielmus de Sancto Amore, who
already had been condemned at Rome, in full Consistory, and whose book was
mis-liked, and torn, and yet worse used; that book which he had composed
against the Cordeliers, and the Iacobins, and wherein he served himself of the
same Arguments in effect, in the strength whereof men make such a hoo-bub in
these days.

13. But you will say perhaps, tha^ Pope Anicetus and others, and the Counsels
also, and the Canons do^ take that for the Hierarchy, which Christ our Lord did
first send, namely his Apostles, and then his Disciples, by two and two, whom
the Prelates and Pastors do succeed^ But it is one thing, when they say that
these latter succeed those former, and another thing it is to affirm, that
none but they are in the Hierarchy of the Church: For what will you say, if
other great Saint^ make it good, that you must rather^ take the Hierarchy by
the Parable o^ the Vineyard, which is the Church^ There indeed the first are
my Lords the most reverend Bishops; and they who follow after are the venerable
Pastors, and Parsons and Curates, but that they who are sent at the ninth ^d
eleventh hours, are those Re^lars who are designed to Preach, ^d receive
confessions, etc. as being ^me but toward the evening, but ^ho yet
nevertheless shall at the end (...) the day be passed for true labou^rs, and
shall also be well paid, and ^ith the same coin of those others. those eminent
men, to whom God ^ue his spirit for the assistance of ^oses and Aaron, in their
gouerne^ent of the people of Israel, did ^ey trouble the Hierarchy? Congrega
Number. 11.
^ihi septuaginta viros de senibus Isra^, etc. Et auferam de spiritu tuo,
tra^mque eis, vt sustentent tecum onus po^li.

14. Let us yet come closer, and ^y, that since it belongs to the ^icar of
Christ our Lord, to go^erne this Hierarchy, and that he (...) the head thereof
(as that learned ^octor of the Sorbonne does excellently De Monarchia.
prove) let us see the motiu^ which they aleadge, when they sen^ the Regulars
to know, whether the^ have troubled the Hierarchy, or els^ on the other side,
whether they hau^ done it good, and most faithful se^uice. I might cite a
hundred Bull^ but I will only choose three or fou^ but yet such as shall be
clear, strong^ and which shall press home; and wi^ have great power upon all
the^ minds, upon whom truth and reason will have power, as they are sure my
Lords to have upon yours.

Pope Gregory the ninth in the Bul^ Cum messis, whereby he gives diverse
Privileges to the Minorite F^ers, and namely, in the administra^ of
Sacraments, has three motiue^ The first, Cum messis multa sit, oper^ rij vero
pauci, etc. The second, Quo^ Ministerium vestrum diligenter i^plentes, vos
operarios inconfusibile^ exhibetis. The third, Vt qui spirit^ ^uitis, spiritu
and ambuletis, de doctri^ vestra and conuersatione, flores and ^uctus
proueniant gratiores.

Paul the third, in the Bull, Cum ^ter, whereby he granterh many ^riuiledges
to the society of Jesus, ^oth mention two motives of that ^rant: The first, Ne
gregi Dominico ^imarum cura de sit, and illum anti^us serpens indefensum and
inpraepara^m inuadat. The second, attendentes ^d fructus vberes quos in domo
Domi^i hactenus produxistis, and producere ^on de sinitis vestrae Religione,
integri^ate, scientia, doctrina, moribus and ex^erientia, etc.

Pius Quintus, in the Bull, Et si Men^icantium, whereby he confirms all
^riuiledges of the Mendicant Friars ^ayth, Attendentes plerosque
exve^erabilibus fratribus nostris Archiepis^opis, and Episcopis, qui Ordines
Men^icantium praecipue, tanquam fructise^os in agro domini palmites; and
colere, and adjuvare deberent, non solum^ exequi negligere, vecumetiam Con^
Tridentini decretis in pravum sens^ retoris, vos, and eorum quemlibit, (...)
rijs afficere incommodis, and pertur^tionibus, eorumque Privilegijs (...)
modicum afferre gravamen conant^ (whereof he recounteth diue^ propterea
volentes praemissis, ac^ similibus excessibus and gravamini^ ex nostri
Pastoralis Officij debito pro^dere. Attendentes etiam illos qui o^diei, and
aestus, tam in praedicatio^bus, quam in caeteris spiritualib^ muneribus
quotidie sustinent, nis^tiam aliquantum pie subleventur, fac^fore, ut oprressi
a suis officijs omni^ desistant, ne in posterum ^is aliquo^ inferatur gravamen,
etc. omni and s^gula Privilegia, etc. quomodo-lib^ concessa, etc. authoritate
Apostolu^ tenore praesentium, perpetuo approb^mus and confirmamus.

Alexander the fourth, a long tim^ before this, had the same motive for ^he
Cordeliers, in the Bull of Nimis, ^hereby he protected them against ^he
persecution of certain Clerks, and says thus, Nimis iniqua vicis^itudine
largitori bonorum omnium respondetur, dum ij qui de patrimonio Christi
impinguati, luxuriant damna^iliter, in eodem Christum patenter ^nfamulis suis
non verentur, acsi fa^tus sit impotens Dominum vltionum, etc. Cumque non desint
plerique tam Ecclesiarum Prelati, quam alij, qui ^aeca cupiditate traducti,
propriae avi^itati subtrahi reputantes, quicquid vobis fidelium pietas
elargitur, quie^em vestram multipliciter inquietant, contra vos molestiarum
varias occasiones exquirentes. Volunt namque etc. (where he recounteth al those
wrongs which the said Cordeliers had received of the said Clerks.) Ne hujus
modi gravamina vobis ab eisdem Pre^latis, vel eorum subditis vlterius
inferantur, authoritate praesenti^ districtius inhibemus, etc.

Gregory the 14th. in his Bull, Ecclesi^ Catholicae, had also the same motiu^
for many Privileges, which he gav^ or confirmed, to the Society of Jesus

15. If men desire to see general Counsels, for making an end of this proof,
they may be easily brought but you know them better then I, and therefore it
would be a superfluous discourse; for you know (as I say) what the Councels of
Viena, of Lateran, and of Trent affirm.

If therefore to have shed so much blood, for the maintayning of the Christian
Faith, and of the Church over the whole World, if to hau^ sweat blood and
water. If (...) have fought against Heresy and Errors, and Schism if to hau^
courageously defended the Catholic Church, even to the last breath of life;
if to have Preached, written so many books, labored night and day, both in
Cities and Countries, through whole ages: to have served ^he whole World, to
have obliged ^en millions of souls to have sacrifi^ed their life to the glory
of God, under the authority, and by the ^ommandement of so many Popes, and holy
Prelates, even of this Kingdom of France: If this, I say, be to trouble the
Hierarchy, if this be a mortal sin, if this be a Schism, we cannot
indeed deny, but that by the space of so many Ages, the Regulars have
committed these disorders; and that so many holy and wise Prelates, at whose
feet they dyed, in labor under them, and for them, throughout their Dioceses,
that these great Prelates, I say, have committed a very grievous fault. But so
also on the other-side, if these proceedings do merit any return of
friendship, if any kind of sweetness, it seems, that it were more
honorable for men to show some little good will to them, who desir^ to employ
their lives, and their labors under the authority of my Lords the Prelates, to
live and dy^ at their feet for the glory of God^ and the good of souls, which
ar^ very glad to find themselves assisted^ and comforted by them, and do
accept of the little services which they can do.

16. O how highly do I commend^ that good and gallant Pastor in Paris, who did
so holily, and so ingeniously say as follows. Let us do better then the
Regulars, and let us not busy our selves with crying out Hierarchy, Hierarchy:
for infallibly, if we do better then they, we shall conserve our Hierarchy,
and we shall need to be in no fear least it diminish, or that we shall be
entered into by a breach, or that it shall grow to be dissipated. But till such
time, as we see our selves in that condition, why shall we not serve our
selves of the holy labors of so many good servants of God; who are withal, of
our own flesh, and bone, and of our own blood, and our brethren, and who
might perhaps have been that which we are, and perhaps better then we: But
for the love of God, they would not accept it. If all the World here had a
heart, and a tongue like that of this worthy personage, the Gallican Church,
would be a Heaven upon earth, but as soon as men permit the infernal Dragon
to whisle there, and that he promise certain divinities, and sublime
greatnesses, a thousand divisions, and a thousand sorts of miseries enter in,
which God of his great goodness shall remove if it pleases him, as I beseech
him, with all the powers of my soul to do. As for that, which one of the
chief men of Paris said, concerning proper interest, the offerings, the
respects, the honor, the power, and such other things as these, I wilbee far
from objecting it, and so doubtless these things, would not be good for the
Hierarchy, and sure, there is no such matter amongst them. Besides that, this
is without the compass of my design, and I have somewhat else to do, then to
touch those strings which sound not well, and it would never become me well to
do it, since it was so ill taken, at the hands of that great person, a Doctor
of the Genebrard de Hierarchia.
faculty of Paris, an Archbishop, and a man of so great reputation. I had
rather make Saint Paul say this word, which issued out of an Apostolical, and
Seraphicall heart. Noli frater cibo tuo perdere eum, pro quo Christus mortuus
est.

As if he would say, alas do not amuse your selves about your own
commodities, nor about your own greatness, do not hinder the good and
comfort, and perhaps the salva^ion of those souls, which are bathed ^n the
blood of Christ our Lord. Though this should cost you somewhat, it will never
cost you so much, as it cost him, who employed even to the last drop of his
blood upon it. If the Regulars do good to your flock, will you be offended
with them for that? if they do them no good, the World indeed is much
deceived, which believes, and daily sees the contrary. Salus populi suprema lex
esto. The Law of Laws, is the safety of the people, and the assistance of
souls, and it is evidently seen, that both the people and God himself have
blessed, and as it were, canonized a million of innocent actions of good
Religious men, who have assisted a World of persons. If I durst descend deeply
into this matter, and show you the necessity, which the Church conceiues it
self to have of this succor, so fa^ of would it be, from tearing this
Hierarchy in pieces, that you would evidently see, that perhaps it would have
prooved a mere Anarchy, (a^ was said by a great Archbishop of France) if the
goodness of God had not sent this help. But I will not enter upon this
Discourse, nor give any manner of offense to any, it suffices for me, to plead
the cause of God, and of his servants, showing the innocence of their
proceeding, and the purity of their intention.

THE THIRD REASON.
That Religious and Privileged men do abase the authority of my Lords, the
Bishops, and become, as it were, insolent by reason of that power, which is
imparted to them, by their Privileges.

THis is the source of all our great and most important difference. There is
nothing so insupportable as contempt, ^specially when it grows upon any ^an
from his inferior; contempt, ^hether it be truly offered, or but ^magined,
produces most prejudi^iall effects. If Regulars have indeed ^o^mitted this
sin, it is certainly worthy ^f blame, and intolerable; but so, if it ^e not
true, without doubt they who ^ould needs suggest this to our Lords ^he
Prelates, and persuade them to believe it, has been a little in the wrong;
and to omit the speaking (...) any thing which may offend them, (...) will
only say, that their zeal, ha^ had a little more of the smoke, the^ of the
fire. At the worst hand, the^ is no mischief without a remedy^ and when the
objection were tru^ men should rather apply a plaist^ with some lenity, then
tear off the arm, which has some little hurt (...) it; and which afterward
might do good service, being cured, and rest^red to former health.

2. But I maintain, that this is (...) mere, and most ougly slander, an^ I
hope, that, by the help of God I shall make the matter so clear, the no man
of a good mind, wilbee ^ble to refuse me his belief, nor eu^ contradict me
with reason.

There has not been any tim^ when the Devil has not endeauor^ to put
jealousy into the minds (...) the greatest, and to make Religious ^en, who
are his capital, and irre^onciliable enemies, to be suspected. Who would ever
have believed, that ^n France there could have bin found any Prelate, whom
Saint Bernard ^ight put into jealousy and pain? And yet the while, Iosilinus
the Bi^hop of Soissons wrote back to him Ep. 213.
(...) terrible letter, whereof the title ^was this. Bernardo Abbati salutem ^n
Domino, and non spiritum blasphe^iae. The poor Abbot, being stro^en with this
word, as if it had been (...) pointed stone, or a bolt of thun^er, made this
answer. Minime ^uidem ego spiritum blasphemiae habere ^e arbitror, etc. Et
quoniam vt video, ^ondum quieuit indign ^tio vestra, qua ^orsi^an adversus
Ecclesiae conculcato^es justius incanduisset, etiam nobis di^o, Schismaticos
vos, aut fomitem esse ^candali, nec dixi, nec scripsi, nec cre^idi, and dico
securus. In the mean time, I believe that the occasion^ which this most
reverend Bisho^ took, was from this, that the Churches of Paris, of R^imes, o^
Chaalons, and of Bourges, were no^ so perfect, and that the Council o^ King
Lewis the 8th. did seem to carr^ that King to consent that Saint Bernard might
assist those Churches, an^ the Prelates; now this holy Abbot^ being full of the
spirit of Charitie^ wrote thus to my Lord of Soessom^ who was of the Council.
Miru^ valde, si contra vestrum consilium h^^ fiunt; mirum magis and malum, si
vestro consilio fiunt; etenim consulere talia, manifest Schisma fabricare est^
Deo resistere, Ecclesiam ancillare, and novam in servitutem redigere
ecclesiasticam libertatem. Now the enemies of Saint Bernard did blow up this
discourse, and cast into the mind of the good Bishop so many shadows and false
rumors, that in fine, he broke out, and called S. Bernard a blasphemer, and a
man possessed with the malign spirit of blasphemy, before those clouds could
be well dispersed. This caused much scandal in France, and God was greatly
offended thereby; but in the end, all was accommodated, and men came to see
clearly, that it was but a craft of Lucifer who desired to make those two
Angels, fight with one another, and to make the Hierarchies here on earth
revolt, as he had made those of Heaven rebel before.

3. It has often arrived in the Church, that sometimes good Prelates should
heat, and band themselves against the Regulars, and ever with very good
pretexts, but time, patience, truth, and God have cleared all, and turned the
storm into calm. Sometimes the Iacobins have thought they should have bin
swallowed up; sometimes the Cordeliers; sometimes the other mendicant Religious,
sometimes the Jesuits, and sometimes the Order it self of Saint Benet; as
being too powerful, and having for too long a time, disposed of the Keys of
St. Peter.

But yet certainly, it would be good to see the plat-forme of this mighty
building; and to know upon what this great complaint is grounded, which is the
spring and force of other complaints: for is it perhaps, that Religious men
have a desire to carry away the Miters and Crosiers of my Lords the Bishops? Is
it because they debate about having the upper end of the board, and to be
seated in the places of most honor? Is it, that they Preach whether they will
or no, or in their Dioceses; and that they make themselves little Monarchs in
the Empire of others? Does any one of them hear Confessions without their
consent, or at least, of their Vicars general, according to the Council of
Trent? Is it perhaps, that they have more credit and belief, amongst the
people, more auditors at their Sermons, and after a sort, more power in
appearance then many others? Dear God, what is the matter, and how shall men be
able to behave themselves? If these Religious be vulgar persons, men despise
them: If there be never so little in them which is more eminent, men enter
into jealousies, and say. There is no remedy, but these men must be humbled. In
fine, what is that which they do whereby indeed the great power of the
Prelates of the Church, is abased? Is it, that they have too many Privileges,
and too great authority to absolve sins? Is it that they take Confessions
within fifteen days of Easter, and Minister the Communion excepting only
upon Easter day, which the Canons, and the Counsels have excepted? Is it that
men visit not the Blessed Sacrament in their Churches, and that men enter not
upon taking conziance of their Regularity? Is it, that they are not entirely
and without exception dependant upon my Lords the Bishops in all and every
thing that can be thought of? Is it, that they do insolently abuse the
favors, and Privileges, which the Sea Apostolic has given them? or else, is
it because, they do not forsake the use of their Privileges upon the least
word of their Bishop, even when he grows stiff without reason against such a
power, as is established by God? I do even draw my wits dry, to say all that
which I can bring to memory, for the finding of the motherroote, from which all
these thorns grow and sprout; and these sharp nestes, which prick, so many
hearts at this day, and tear the union of the Church, making division amongst
the Children of God, and (which is worst) both parties conceive themselves to
have reason; perhaps whosoever be deceived, he is deceived without any fault
of his, but ^et in fine, he is deceived.

4. During the wars between France, and the Dukes of Burgundy, there
chanced a certain thing, which may well serve my turn. The men of Lewis the
11. going forth one morning before day, to make some discovery in the Country,
saw an incredible number of reeds growing out of a marrish ground. They
firmly believed that it was some troops of light horse, who had a mind to
make some enterprise upon the Kings Army. Others thought, that they were
Lanciers, who came to make a road for some surprise. There were never men more
afraid. They all at full gallop retired themselves into the gross of their
Army, they put the Camp into Alarm, and thrust fear into the most valiant
hear^es of the French Army, expecting instantly some shrewd skirmish. As soon
a^ the twy-light stroke through the night, and began to open the day, and
that the morning Star, had already disclosed a little light, me^ saw that
this was nothing but empty^ Canes and Reeds, which waved a^ the discretion of
the wind; so as tha^ horrible fear was instantly changed into a public
laughter, and fell by way of confusion upon those childis^ scoutes, for having
made so foolis^ and so frivolous a report.

They who love not Religious men and who go tossing up and down to discover
some little passage, some doubtful Canon of some Provincial Synod, and
indeed, some I kno^ not what; being all wrapped up either in the night of
passion, or of proper interest, do represent the Orders of Religious men, as
of Armies all ^camped, and resolved to assault and subdue the authority of my
^ords the Prelates. They tell them ^ales without ceasing, and make most ^range
reports, they cast so many ^eares into their minds, and paint ^ut the
business so hideously, they al^eadge so many cases happened, and not ^apned too,
they tickle them so de^ightfully about the delicate point of their authority,
and the power of the Crosier, that they shake even such, as are most
immovable. Who would not believe men so learned, and who make profession of so
much zeal, and ^iety, and who have done nothing but cry out above these thirty
years? But yet in truth, if we shall behold the beam of that rising Sun of
truth, and look on them a little near at hand, it will be found, that these
armed men be but reeds, and people void of all that interest and ambition,
which is laid to their charge, and who of all things are thinking least of
contending with that lawful authority, which God has given to my Lords the
Bishops, and to the Pastors of the Church.

5. Let us begin in the name of God to see, and weigh this truth which is of
so much importance. I^ the Religious do nothing without reason, without right,
without auow, without authority, nay (I will say more) without being obliged in
conscience, is there any man of common sense, who can blame them for it? For if
they attempt any thing beyond this, there is indeed no excuse, nor any cloak
which can cover them, and they must be reduced into terms of reason. But is
it not fit, that every man defend his right, and that every one enjoy what is
his own, and which is justly acquired by him? There are now so many ages,
since Regulars are in possession of their privileges, and shall they suffer
them ^o be lost and abolished by a mor^ings work? Privileges well given,
^ery authentical, granted by so ma^y, and so holy Popes, admitted by ^o many
holy Prelates through out ^e Christian world; authorized by ^ur Kings, recorded
or permitted by so ^any Sovereign Courts of justice; ^btayned by the sweat of
so many ^rowes, by the effusion of so much blood, by means of so long, so
^reat, so holy labors, of so many, and ^o worthy personages, the very Suns ^f
their several ages, must all this, I say, ^ee suffered to perish by a mornings
^orke? And all this upon what reason? (...) will not name it, but I rather
choose ^o beseech you to weigh it well in the ^ght of God, and in the scales of
the ^anctuarie.

6. But there is much more then ^his, which is, that the holy Canons ^orbid in
terms express, worthy to ^e well observed, and show that Regulars cannot
commit this unwo^thinesse, without hurting their conscience, and (that which
greatly i^ports) without doing much wron^ both to the Pope, and to the Church
Let us hear the Canon, and the Pope. Cum et si sponte volueris, de ^re L. 1.
Dec. Greg. tit. 43 de arbitris. c. 5.
tamen nequiveris sine licentia Ro^ Pont. renuneiare Priuilegijs, vel Ind^
gentijs libertatis, quae Monasterium ^lud indicant ad jus, and proprietat^
Romanae Ecclesiae pertinere. Such (...) are the houses of the Order of Sai^
Francis, and the other Mendican^ Pope Gregory speaking to an Abbo^ who desired
to forgo all his Priv^ledges at the instance of the Bisho^ (who pressed him
much) makes hi^ know his fault, and tells him, that h^ was doing that, which is
above (...) power, and contrary to his consc^ence, and contrary to the authori^
of the Sea Apostolic, and again^ the sacred and settled style of the Church.
The Laws of the Church, ^^sse much further then this, for ^^ey declare that if
Regulars should ^^nounce all their Privileges, all that should stand for
nothing, and be of ^o value. Nay yet further, they are ^ommaunded under pain
of excom^unication, not to alienate any ^ing of their temporals, and much ^sle
of their spirituals: So that it is ^ot now the Religious whom men ^ppose, but
the Pope, the Sea Apo^olike, the Church, and they oppose ^ntiquitie. Let us
hear the words. ^nnocent the third, to the Arch-bi^hop C. si diligenti de
for^ competenti.
of Piso. Asseruisti te usque ad ^aec tempora tenuisse, quod licitum sit ^erico
renunciare saltem in tempora ^bus causis juri suo, etc. immemor con^^itutionis,
quae cavetur pacto privato^um, juri publico minime derogari. Cum ^gitur hoc jus
in Milevitensi, and Car^haginensi Concilijs sit specialiter promulgatum, ne
Clerici Clericos, relicto suo Pontifice, ad judicia publica p^trahunt, alioqui
causam perdant, and^ communione habeantur extranei, and^ manifest patet, quod
non solum invi^sed etiam voluntarij pacisci non posunt, ut saecularia judicia
subeant; cu^ non sit beneficium hoc personale, cui^ nunciare valeat, sed potius
toti Col^gio Ecclesiastico public sit indultu^ cui privatorum pactio derogare
non p^test. Quod habet locum a fortiori (...) Reg. 99. ^om. 1. 9. 36. act. 1.
Regularibus (says Emanuel Rodericu^ quia clerici habent liberam volun^tem,
Regulares vero non habent vell^ nec nolle; ideo non potest praejudicare ^rum
consensus in judicem non suu^. All this Article deserves to be rea^ as also
the Article 2. of the question 27. where he brings many proh^bitions to
alienate the goods (...) Churches and Monasteries, eue^ under the pain of
Excommunicat^on. That of Paul the second, in the extravagant Ambitiosae is
express^ It is a thing worthy of remarke, which a great Prelate said one day in
^n assembly of Prelates, that this af^aire went full to iustle upon the ^ope,
and that the bottom of the ^usinesse tended but to some perni^ious division
and schism.

I would name him for honors sake, ^ere it not, that he is still living, and
that perhaps he would not wish to be ^ited upon this occasion.

If the Popes, who have given them these Privileges, shall take them ^way
again, there is no more to be ^one, but to bow down the head, to ^bey with
humility, and to be con^ent. But that the Regulars should ^egrade themselves,
that they should ^ffend the Sea Apostolick^, that they should do wrong to
millions of ^ules, that they should renounce the ^uours imparted to them by
Kings, ^his counsel cannot be fitly given them, especially when a man
considers to what this business tende^^ and the motives whereby God seet^ that
men are drawn, and the intere^ which the Church has herein, an^ the salvation
of souls, and in fin^ that they are excommunicated, (...) they do it of
themselves.

7. But this goes yet further, for they who call in question the force (...)
Privileges granted by Popes, gro^ to shake whole Kingdoms, Chapters,
Commonalties, and they ouerturne the peace of the Church. An^ in fine, for what
cause, and for wh^^ is the question? Alas, he who foun^ into the bottom of
this business^ cannot choose but have his heart tran^perst.

But you will say, it is not the Pr^viledge which we question; but r^ther the
misuse, and intolerable ^buse which grows thereby.

I am not such a Sot, as that I w^ defend and Canonize an abuse, or y^ deny,
that some abuse may slide in; ^or that some indiscreet persons may ^ot be
found. The world was never without such, nor ever will be, vn^esse God work a
miracle. But be ^ou pleased, to let the abuses and ^ust complaints which you
have to ^ake, be set down, and infallibly ^hey shall be remedied, without
noise, without dispute, and without scan^all. Might I be so bold, as to ask
^hether they who give you these im^ressions against us, be impeccable or ^o?
whether they commit any ^aults? whether ever they fall into any indiscretion?
If they confess ^ot themselves like other men? If ^hen you shall have taken
all the ^eligious away; they of whom you ^eane to serve your selves, shall not
^rop down from heaven, and be ^onfirmed in grace, without so much ^s tripping
at any time? whether ^hey and you shall never be in any difference with one
another, notwithstanding rhat Saint Peter, and Saint Paul, had disputes
between themselves; and two Angels are found in Daniel to have fought with one
another more then twenty days? Have you no fear my Lords of the passage of
that old Roman, Exurgen^ Tacit;
magis alij homines, quam alij mores; and that other, Refodeo Antigonum; and
can you ever hope to meet with a whole commonalty, yea or even with any one
single man, in whom in fine, you find nothing to be wished otherways, and who
may commit some indiscretion? do you judge of a whole body, by some one part,
which is out of joint; and of a whole Order, by one indiscreete man, o^ for
some simple thing which perhaps he may have done without malice, and with
great innocence? Di^ Christ our Lord excommunicate all his Apostles, because
one of the^ John 6.
was a Devil? For so he was named by Christ himself. And do you believe,
that of all those Oblati of St. Charles, of whom you spoake but now, no one did
ever commit any fault?

If this be so, show us our abuses; if we give you not contentment, if we
allege not reasons which are to be of full weight, and worthy of being
received; if we do nto produce as many Authentical Bulls as can be desired;
we shall at least be ready to submit our selves to all kind of satisfaction,
and to live and dye at your feet, and under those just laws which you shall be
pleased to prescribe. But first, we must have three words, and they are these.

To Understand, to Consider, and to Judge. And to keep your selves from
prejudging, and to make supposition of nothing, which may not be solidly
averred, and that after the parties be heard by word of mouth, for otherwise
there will never be a^ end. Only you wilbee pleased to consider things
maturely, for you cannot condemn us without fault, but by condemning Popes,
Councels, Kings, Cardinals, and the greater part of my Lords the Prelates of
France, your Predecessors, whom you arraigne in arraigning us.

8. Three great Archbishops, all yet alive, and the chief of this Kingdom,
have told me more the^ once, that they have never derived more honor, and
service from any, then from Religious men. A hundred Bishops have said as much,
and I will make it good, that there is no man, who serves and honoreth my
Lords the Prelates, with a better heart, and with less interest, then good
Religious men do, nor who would employ their lives, and their heads more
frankly for the service of God, and of my Lords the Bishops, ^f there were
need. Never (says S. ^ugustine) did I see better people, ^hen those who
persever in Religious ^rders, and never worse, then those ^ho depart from
thence. Serve your ^lues of the former, and leave the ^tter, since you have so
great assu^nce from so great a Bishop, for ^ey being so good, how can they be
(...) wicked, as to disesteeme the Pre^tes, whom all the world does e^eeme so
much.

If Religious men do well, why do ^ou put your selves in pain? If they ^o ill,
command their Superiors to ^ke order with them: and if they do ^t content you
with reasons which ^e full of life and strength; and in ^e, if they do not
their duty, but ^at they tolerate others faults, use ^u that power, which God
and the ^ouncell gives you, and when this ^albe done, where is that contempt
Conc. (...). Sess. 21. (...).
and diminution of your authorities^

9. If you find that it be a charg^ of conscience to you, that they tak^
Confessions at Easter, I say, if it b^ but for that, I will easily deliver you^
the scruple; for I will show you by a^ by, that there is no conscience (...)
this, I say, none at all, and perhap^ there is more obligation of consc^ence,
not to hinder it, as I shall she in the due place. It is said in divi^ty, that
if a man has two or thr^ good Authors for an opinion, (...) may follow it with
a good cons^ence, and without any fear at (...) Now they will allege you m^
then twelve Popes, more then a h^dreth Prelates, more then two hundredth Authors,
to show; that (...) both may, and ought to be done^ good conscience; and that
perh^ otherwise, one may do more (...) then good to souls. And theref^ by this
occasion, nothing at all of (...) authority of my Lords the Prelates do perish,
nor of the right of the Pastors, and Parsons, and Curats, nor even of their
profit. And wherein is then the contempt?

10. But some man preaches too licentiously, and words fall impertinently from
him to the scandal of Bishops. This indeed, is without all excuse, stop you
therefore his mouth, take his Pulpit from him, get his Superior to send him
from thence; let his indiscreet zeal be punished: there is nothing so
reasonable as this. For if there be any thing in Prelates to be wished
otherwise, it is not in public that we must proclaim it, and so begin to
mangle the reputation of my Lords the Prelates. Their name, and their life also
ought to be as the Sun, which is ever crowned with beams and glory, and a
man must never be so aduenturous, as to interpose the Moon of any passion, or
indiscretion, to eclipse these fair lights of the world. It is not every
bodies cas^ to say as Saint Bernard did long ago. Clauditis nobis ora, vtinam
and Ep. 42. ad Hon. Archl.
oculos claudatis, etc. Some one will have given himself leave, and will have
spoken indiscreetly, and fifty others will have esteemed it to be their
triumph to speak well of you. Alas, must so many honest men suffer for the
indiscretion of some one, and must the head be cut off, because the little toe
is not right.

11. But perhaps you would feign see, if the Blessed Sacrament be well and
decently conserved and kept; i^ there be nothing in it but that, do but
vouchsafe one day to go thither to say Mass, and give the Communion, and you
shall see all at your case; if it be upon some other motive that serves for the
glory of God, since Popes, Councels, Canons, Custom, and possession do so
oppose it. Good God, how many great and holy Pre^ates who are gone before you,
did ^eaue the world as they found it. They ^ived, and suffered others to live
in ^eace: they were in a manner adored ^y the people; they left behind them
(...) memory so sweet, and full of be^ediction. What is this which has
^rrived since that time, that the Heaven and the earth must be thus revol^ed?
Many great Prelates have pro^eeded so far, as to say, that if they ^ere not
assisted by Religious men, ^hey would infallibly leave both their ^Miter, and
their Crosier: A Bishopric being such an Office, and ^harge, that even an
Angel would ^ardly bear it without great fear, as ^he Council says.

When any man is so bold as to ^inde fault with any thing concerning ^he power
which our most Christian ^ings, and the Gallican Church enjoy; we are wont to
answer, the because they have so infinitely oblige^ the Sea Apostolic, and for
that t^ Frenchmen have shed so much blood in defense of the Church, the^
have very well deserved these fauo^ and are in a most just possession ther^of,
and that men ought not quest^on them. And so my Lords, gi^ me leave to tell
you, after the sam^ manner, that the ancient Religiou^ men have endeavored to
serve the V^niversall Church, and in particular^ this most Christian Church of
Fran^ with so great fidelity, so much l^bour, so much blood, and the loss^ of
so many lives, that Popes an^ Kings have thought it fit to acknowledge their
good and acceptable services by imparting some favors an^ privileges to them;
you need bu^ read our Annals of France, where you shall see that which I dare
no^ say, and which modesty also will no^ permit me to express.

12. It is your greatness, my Lords, to have men at your feet, who are
sometimes so great, as that they may seem to obscure others. Alexander the
great said, that his greatness consisted in that all his soldiers were
Alexanders. Christ our Lord affirmed, that he would have his servants appear
to be more then himself. Opera quae ego facio, and ipse John 14.
faciet, and majara horum faciet. A King of Egypt there was, who to show his
greatness, made an Idol, which all the World was to adore, of a Basen wherein
he washed his feet. What jealous apprehension can you have of the greatness
of Regulars; since notwithstanding that they were a hundred times greater then
they are, yet still you see them prostrate at your feet whenever you will.
Are they to Preach? behold they are at your feet. Must they take holy Orders?
behold they are at your feet. Must they have power to hear Confessions in
your Dioceses? Behold they are at your feet. Must they obtain some
extraordinary favor, and have leave to absolve from cases reserved? Behold
they are at your feet. Do they go to your Towns, or do they depart from
rhence? Behold they are still at your feet. Can any body fear after all this,
that they who in effect are ever at your feet, may enter in parallel with you
for greatness, and may have design to draw you down, they who have their
heads at your feet? Alas, they make you afraid of them, who tremble when they
are in your presence.

13. Would you permit me to let a word or two fall from my mouth which yet I
will not press too far? but yet it is good to call to mind, that all
Regulars are not so little considerable, as that many of them be ^ot your own
flesh and blood, and ^escended of the same parents with ^our selves. Many of
them might ^aue been Archbishops, and Bi^hops, and more then this? and some
^aue forsaken Miters, and Cardinals ^ats, to hide themselves under the ^oly
humility of a religious life. If ^hey have despised themselves for the ^oue of
God; men must not infer ^hereby, that they must be despica^le to others. It
is good for them, that they are despised, but it is not ^lwaies good for them,
by whom ^hey are so despised.

He who reads well that Article of Saint Thomas, who says, that ^piscopi
sunt in statu perfectionis, and that religious men are in via, does ^row to
wonder as soon as he has ^ead the whole body of that Article. ^ut let us
pause here, for I have pro^ised that I will not plunge my self too deeply
into this matter. The greatness of religious men is of the kind, that they
will ever esteem^ themselves to be very great when their heads are at the feet
of my Lord the Bishops.

14. A certain great Docto^ of the Sorbonne, a dear friend (...) mine, and a
man esteemed over a^ France for his piety and learning, sai^ thus to me one
day at Paris with the tears, after a sort, in his eyes. Ala^ to what pass are
we now arrived (...) France is full of Simoniacall and in^cestuous persons,
and of Libertin^ and Atheists, and yet the while o^ might think that men
dispute of nothing but of precedences, of powers of great authority, and of
castin^ religious men, and such as ser^ God, to the ground. And all the is done
under a thousand fair app^rances, as if the Church of God depended upon
knowing who shalbe^ the most great, the most absolute, and ^e most redoubted;
whilst yet in the ^eane time, Christ our Lord has ^reached the direct
contrary to us. ^ut now (says he) the worst is, that ^e youngest men are they
who make ^ost noise in this business, and ^ho are most full of this fervor.
It ^reakes my heart to see, that in steed (...) laboring for the salvation of
^ules, such a coil is kept for the ^ory of bodies, and for any little ^mbition
of greatness. This is that, as near as I can remember, which that great
Personage said to ^e, who is yet full of health, and ^ull of virtue. And upon
that oc^asion I alleged this reason to him, which seemed a very strong one:
that (...) this were considerable in any coun^ry of the World, it was so in
France. ^ut I will leave this for you to guess (...), if it please you, I will
only tell ^ou, that having imparted it to some worthy prelates, they avowed to
me^ that it was most true.

As for that which concerneth^ Confession, and the rest of that kind^ it will
fall more naturally into the next Chapter. And to end thi^ Discourse, and to
leave your mout^ with a good relish, I will set before 2. Cor. 4.
you, the Father of Bishops, and the shining Sun of Archbishops. The first
of them says, Non enim nosmet ipsos praedieamus, sed Iesum Christum
Chrysostom hom. 8.
Dominum nostrum, nos autem seruos vestros per Iesum.

And the second: Quoniam acerrimum in ipsos bellum illi gerebant, atque in
sidias undique ipsi struebant: Nam, inquit, adversum nos pugnatis, ac un potius
adversum eum qui a nobis praedicatur? Neque enim nos ipsos praedicamus, nam ego
servus sum, ego eorum etiam qui praedicationem excipiunt minister, operam omnem
alteri navans (...) que ipsius gloriae causae quiduis facient. Ita dum mihi
bellum infers, ea qua ^illius sunt deijcis.

And a little after. Vides ne a^nimum ab omni gloriae studio purum: ^antum
abest, inquit, ut eorum quae Domini sunt quicquam vsurpemus, ac ^obis
arrogemus, ut etiam no sipsos prop^er eum subijciamus.

THE FOVRTH REASON.
That Religious men forsake the Parishes, and so do wrong to the Pastors and
Parsons, and Curates of Churches, and consequently to Bishops.

1. ALL those former streams and torrents have flowed out of this source, and
all those claps of thunder, and beams of lightning have broken out of this
Cloud: For (if the truth may be spoken) they are some of the Pastors and
Parsons and Curates, who have thundered so ^ong, and so loud, that at length
they have light upon some of my Lords the Bishops. They have brought upon the
board before them, the abasement of Ecclesiastical powers; the diminution of
the authority of Ordinaries; they have cited certain little Canons of
Provincial Conncels; they have founded forth with a loud voice, this word of
Proprius Sacerdos; they have made (...) mighty Emphasis upon this other word,
agnoscere vultum pecoris sui^ they press hard upon the succession to the 72.
Disciples, whom the^ represent; they deplore the solitude of their Parishes,
and of their high Masters, and they impure it to Religious men, who draw all
to themselves; they represent to the World how miserably the Hierarchy of the
Church is defeated, and they allege a world of other inconveniences, without
saying any one word touch^ng their own interest. And according to this, we
must firmly, forsooth, believe, that it is not that which puts them on; but
the interest of God, and the good of their flock. And I am glad it is so, for
if I were ^ncountred by their interest, and that (...) were to fight against
that, in good ^arnest I would lay my weapons down, for that (as is delivered
by a man of a gallant wit of these days, in a book which is current in Paris)
there is not a passage in Saint Au^ustine, nor an argument how strong ^ever it
may be, which is strong e^ough against five hundred Crowns ^f good revenew by
the year.

2. Supposing therefore that it is ^t the interest of God, and the ^ood of the
Church, and the sal^ation of souls, which thrusts ^em on: I will hope my
Lords, that I shall the more easily make you see that there is nothing to be
feared herein of this kind: I will not deny but that the comparison between
them and the Disciples is fit, and that very holy personages have very happily
made it good. I will say moreover, that if it please you, we will yet do more
then they demand; and we will, if it please you and them, accord also that
they are the second Apostles whom God sent after the first, Saint Paul, Saint
Barn^bas, and Saint Martial and those others who were named Apostles by Jesus
Christ.

We will also accord to the which others say, that they are the Archangels of
this Hierarchy, and you the Seraphins. I will hold (...) self to this. As much
honor (...) pleases you, yea and more then y^ desire, for alas, we can never
gi^ too much: But yet when men wi^ press so hard upon that of the comparison
of the 72. Disciples; I assure you my Lords, that the good Saint Vincentius,
does apply it so naturally to Religious men of his Order, that you will esteem
it to square better with them, then with you, or at least as well.

3. 1. Misit eos binos and binos. First this agrees better to Religious men,
who go not but by two and two, then to others who are ever alone; and no man
has, or ought to have any more then his cure.

2. Misit eos praedicare. Is not this the sacred Profession of the Friars Luke
10.
Preachers, whom the Sea Apostolic has qualified with this honorable name of
Predicatores verbi Dei.

3. In omnem Ciuitatem and locum, See how this fits with Religious men, who
have the whole World for their Cloister, and not for them, who are tied to one
Parish?

4. Nolite portare sacculum, neque peram, neque pecuniam in zonis, etc. This
makes clearly for Religious men, but as for Pastors and Parsons and Curates,
in truth it can hardly be applied to them.

5. Neque baculum, neque calceamenta, etc. This is as clear as the Sun.

6. Curale infirmos, etc. It is working miracles whereof he speaks; and then
let us never speak more of this.

7. Ego mitto vos sicut oues in mediae luporum. You may well believe, that men
seek not greatly after such Benefices as these, and yet in the mean time,
this is the highest ambition of holy Religious men, who many times are rather
Martyrs, then Confessors. In fine, you see that the comparison is so natural,
that a man may say it is even made of purpose for religious men. But there is
nothing more easy then for good wits to find out comparisons so natural,
and so likely, that more cannot be desired. So that indeed to rely greatly
upon this course either way, is to build upon a foundation not very solid. And
at the very most (as S. Thomas says) they shall be the first Disciples, Opusc.
15. c. 4.
and the religious shall be the second: for defacto, Christ our Lord did send men
at several times, the second after the first.

4. But it is yet worse, that men should put you upon an impossibility, and
verily with ground little enough, by alleging that passage which men chaunt
out so much. Diligenter Pro. 27.
agnosce vultum pecoris tui, tuosque greges considera. For they conclude upon
this, that resolutely things must so be done, that every one may confess
himself at least once in the year at his Parish; and that religious men must
not take the Confessions of any, within the fifteen days of Easter. Give your
selves, I beseech you, my Lords, the patience to consider and weigh that well
with all simplicity and candor, which I am about to say to you, and without
the infusion of any little drop of gall or passion: for that this word of
Pastor of sheep, of Face, of Know, must needs be understood of confession in a
literal sense, this certainly cannot be said: Solomon had no thought thereof.
There was not in that time, either Confession, or half Confession. And as for
making a Prophecy thereof, that conceit would have no garb in it; especially
concerning a thing impossible, or at least unprofitable, as I shall make you
touch with your hands. The true literal sense of the place is this. The wise
man speaks indeed of sheep, and it is as much as if he had said: Although
thou be very rich, yet have thou care of little things; such as sheep are. Non
enim (says he) habebis jugiter potestatem: Rup. Gloss. Greg. Iansen.
For perhaps though thou be rich to day, thou may be poor to morrow, and
have need of small helps. A little lower I will give one or two litterall
senses, which carry proportion to this. But one good Author will be found, who
makes this passage say literally, that which men pretend against Privileged
persons. And you see well, that following a litterall sense, there is no color
to understand it of Confession. More color would that have, which that
Dutchman said, prooving that a man was not to confess but only to God, and
bringing in David for having said, Consitemini Domino quoniam bonus. And much
more color Psalm. 105.
had they who said, that all the World might confess it self (at least in
case of necessity) to all the World; Saint James having said in so express
James 3.
words, Consitemini alterutrum peccata vestra. But all this is worth nothing,
and would but make this Divine Sacrament ridiculous, and in effect of no use at
all.

5. But now though we put the case, that this passage may serve for this
purpose, yet shall it be either impossible to be practiced, or in effect
without any profit at all. For Saint Peter is a Pastor, if ever there were any
in the world, and Pope, and the Bishop, and Parson. This sheep is the son and
subject of the Church.

Let us not speak yet of the Conscience, but only of the Countenance,
Cognosce vultum pecoris tui. Is there any Parson or Curate in Paris, who
knows the face of all his parishioners which are daily changed. Is there any
Bishop that presumes to say that he knows the face of all who are in his
Dioceses? (For that the Pope should know all Christians, is a most ridiculous
thing.) Cardinal ellarmine of holy memory, was often heard to say to the most
illustrious Cardinal of Roche-foveault, Monsignore, veramente cisono troppo
Christiani al mondo. I assure you, says he, that I am oppressed with resort of
men, and with visites; and I must needs avow to you, that me thinks there
are to many Christians in the world. For what means can a man have to know, to
serve, and to content them all? And yet nevertheless this man was no more then
an Archbishop, and did but speak of mere visites.

And now do but imagine whether a great Archbishop can know the face of all
his sheep, and yet if he could, to what would that serve for the good of
their souls?

If now you will take these words, to know the face of your sheep, for the
condition and state of the heart, and of the conscience, this is yet far worse:
For would you have the Pope confess all the Christians in the World, or the
Bishop all the multitudes of his people, or the Pastors and Curates all their
Parishoners? Though they had a hundred heads a piece, they were not able to
do it, and if men were forced to undergo this burden, no man living would
either be a Parson or a Bishop, or a Pope.

6. But let us put the case that all this could be done, for what yet I
beseech you would it serve? For that which a man knows in Confession, is just
as much if he knew it not at all, and all Laws and rights both divine and
humane, do forbid the Confessarius to violate the secret of Confession.

And Clement the 8th. has expressly forbidden the Superiors of Religious men
to take the Confessions of their sheep or subjects; and that yet, if they
should take them, they may not without Sacrilege serve themselves of that
knowledge which grew to them by way of Confession. And now what kind of
knowledge is that which serves for nothing? Would the Holy Ghost oblige us to
have such a knowledge of our sheep as whereof it should forbid us to make any
use at all: And who would ever confess himself to you, if he believed that
you would ever serve your self of the knowledge of what he told you? The most
learned Doctors themselves, and they also of the Sorbonne, teach that if the
Penitent did assuredly believe that his Confessarius would reveal his S. Tho.
in 4. d. 17. q: 3. art. 3: major. ibid. q. 5.
Confession, he should not be obliged to confess to him; for what then would
this precept serve of knowing the face of the Sheep? And I ask you, if of
themselves they would willingly go to confess to a man, who they believed
would serve themselves of the knowledge of their sins for their own turn?

7. What then is the meaning of these words to know their sheep? Is it to
ordain some man to take their Confessions by and under your authority? Even in
conscience do you believe that this is to know? In some Parish of Paris there
be many thousands of souls, and more then a hundred men who will have been
enabled to take confessions. What knowledge will the Parson or Curate have
obtained of his sheep for all that? These good men who were enabled to take
confessions, will have spent themselves even to death with laboring in it the
whole day, and will have gotten some cruel headache by it, will not remember
the thousand part of that which men have confessed to them, and for what then
will it serve their turn, and what knowledge will the Parson or Vicar draw
from thence? will they go tell him what has been Confessed to them? they
will be far from any such thought, and though they would, they cannot.
Besides, the Penitent is not bound to tell his name, nor who he is. And
besides, if he should declare it untruly, S. Tho. opus. 15. c. 4.
how shall he be convinced therein? If he Confess himself eight days
before, and do but reconcile himself on Easter day, how will you know the
face of that sheep? If he have no mortal sin in his soul, and that he
will not then Confess himself at all, how will you still come to know him? I
assure you that when I found the bottom of this business, I find reason to be
amazed, that such a noise is made about such a passage; and which signifies in
effect nothing less then that which is given out.

8. For if to know, be to depute some one who may know; O then, all is lost
for them. For if the Pope, and if the Bishop can appoint whom he lists for
that purpose as well or better then the Parson or Vicar, behold then the gate
is open for all Religious men, and the cause is gained. For to say, that the
Parson may do it, and that neither the Bishop, nor the Parson of Parsons, the
Father of Bishops, the Vicar of Jesus Christ may not do it, this is clearly
against common sense, against more then twenty Popes, against the swift current
of the Church, against two General Councels at the least, and against a
hundred Doctors of great reputation. And when a man should say that the Pastor
at the Communion knows the face of his sheep; and that the Canons therefore
ordain, that they only should minister the Communion to them, and that they
do thereby sufficiently comply with the said passage, Cognosce vultum, S. Tho.
opus. 15. c. 4.
etc. what would they be able to allege against it, which might subsist. For
one Doctor whom they shall produce, we will produce twenty, and it is well
enough known, that the true literal sense of these words does import no more,
but that Princes should be true Pastors of their people; or housekeepers of
their family, and domestickes: and at the most it teaches them, that the way
to make a family great, is to have great flocks of sheep, which is the most
harmless means of growing very rich, and that very soon. As for the rest,
they are but moral senses, and good wits will draw forth as many of them as
they list, and they may serve for the instruction of man's life. But that this
should import a Commandment touching Confessions, and Confessions at Easter,
and be a text of so much advantage for Pastors; verily that I may not say any
thing which sauoureth never so little of sharpness, it does much amaze such
men as are of good understanding, and void of interest.

9. To say, that he should know them, that so he may conduct them, as is fit,
this indeed were to be wished, but what conduct will you be able to give a
man, who may come to you in a press of people, at eleauen of the clock upon
Easter day in the morning, and whom afterward you shall not see in a twelve
month, and peradventure never more, for he may change his parish. And will
you be able to remember at the end of a year, what he said to you the year
before. But let us here make a stop, for we have walked too long upon a weak
planke, and upon a passage which deserves so little consideration.

10. The great passage, whereof men serve themselves, is the Chanter, Omnis
uiriusque sexus, of Innocent ^he the third, in the Council of Lateran, and
Prop^^^s Saeceraos, and the Gloss also, which does expressly say, that a man
must confess himself to his proper Priest, or must have lea^e of him to do
otherwise. For as much as it necessary that he confess himself to his own
Pastor or Vicar, at the least at Easter, or else that we ouerturne all
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy.

My Lords most reverend and most illustrious, I conjure you to renew here your
attentions, and your good affections, for you are greatly interessed in what I
shall say. As soon as the Parsons or Curates should have proved (if they were
able) that this is not to be understood of the Pope, ^ust so soon would you
find, that by a stronger reason, they would maintain, that it were also not to
be understood of you, nor should it be permitted to you any longer to place
Paenitentiaries in the Churches of all This relates to an Hospital which was
founded in Paris by S. Jews.
your Dioceses, to cause the publication of the Indulgences of the three
hundredth blind men, as you are wont to do, nor yet the Iubilee in the next
year, nor at any time afterward, by their saying a man must Confess himself
to his proper Priest, who is the Parson or Curate, or to them who shall be
liked by him, and to no other: and it shall not be lawful for you to allow any
man to hear Confessions in your Church, unless it please them. Pretending,
that in this they depend on none but God, having as much power within their
parishes, as Bishops have within their Dioceses, and as the Pope has in Rome.
And this is the language which secretly passes amongst many of them, who have
aimed at this mark this long time, and one of them upon my knowledge, has
expressed himself in clear terms, that he depended not upon the Pope, nor
upon the Bishop, but upon God alone. They will say as much of the Deanes of
Chapters, who pretend to be the proper Priests of the Chapter, and as the
Parsons or Vicars. They would say as much to my Lords the great Almoners of
France, who are the Bishops for the Court, and you would be put to more pains
to justify and defend that, then the Regulars their Cause, by whom they
begin their battery, that so afterward they may also bring it in upon you.
Let us see the force of the Canon, which they bring against you, and against
us, but let us see it with a sweet and quiet mind, without sharpness, without
prejudice, and without all imaginable respect of interest, for we cannot honor
you too much, nor them after you.

11. First, what is this Gloss, and who is the Author thereof? It is Ioannes
Andraeas a Doctor of Bolonia, and Doctor Bernardus Botonius, borne at Parma,
and a Canon of Bolonia, who glossed the Decretals, and seemed to say, That
Regulars cannot hear Confessions without license given by the proper Pastor,
in virtue of these Privileges. For otherwise they should be equal to Parsons
and Vicars. Let us see their very words upon the Canon, Proprio Sa^e doti; sed
ecce si Praeditatores and fratres Minores, vel alij Religiosi, non habentes
populum, habent Privilegium vt alienos Parochianos possint recipere ad
paenitentiam, nunquid sufficit Priuilegium, vt Parochianum alterius possint
recipere ad paenitentiam sine licentia proprij Sacerdotis? Dicat quod non;
privilegium enim aequiparat cos illis, qui a populo sunt electi, velillis, qui
ab Episcopis populo praeficiuntur, and dat eis solam executionem, and ita
necessaria est adhuc licentia Proprij Sacerdotis. To this honest man of
Bolonia, who yet is no man of great moment, and to this reason of his which is
poor enough, I will oppose two great men of the same place. One is Gregory the
thirteenth, and the other the Cardinal Paleotta, Archbishop of Bolonia,
whereof the one by most express Bulls, the other by the practice of his Dioces,
have disauowed this Gloss, and have showed, that men ought to make no account
thereof. Whom now my Lords, would you rather believe, either this petty Canon,
or else the Pope and the Cardinal, who were both of them Doctors of Bolonia
and Oracles of the Church? and who expressly affirm that Proprius Sacerdos, are
the Pope, the Bishop, and the Parson also. But now take heed, that he who makes
the Gloss, do not specify that the Proper Pastor must be only the Parson or
Curate, but that he be kept to the General term, and that it be the proper
Priest who gives this leave. And who has ever doubted hereof. And who has
ever been so insolent, as that he durst presume to hear Confessions without
the leave of Popes, Councels, or Bishops? But if on the other side, men have
this leave, against whom do they mount this Canon, and this Gloss, which is
so chanted out, and makes so much noise to so little purpose? But let us put
the case, that this Doctor does understand the Parson, or Vicar by this word of
Propius Sacerdos. Is he the Oracle of the world, and is the opinion then of one
simple Doctor, an article of faith.

12. Now I oppose against this man, twenty Popes at least, who in express
terms have disavowed this Gloss, as namely Innocent the fourth, Alexander
the fourth, Clement the fourth, Martin the fourth, Boniface the eight, Bennet
the eleaventh, Clement the fifth, John the twenty two, Eugenius the fourth,
Nicholas the fifth, Sixtus the fourth, Leo the 10. Paul the third, Paul the
fourth, Gregory the thirteenth, Sixtus the fifth, Clement the eight, Paul the
fifth, Gregory the fifteenth. And now under Pope Vrbanus, my Lords the
Cardinals, who have been deputed at Rome for these affairs. For all these in
express, precise, and formal terms show the direct contrary, as may be
seen by their several Bulls.

I oppose also amongst others, two general Councels, that of Vienna in the
year of our Lord 1311. where Phillip the Fair, King of France, did assist to
honor it with his presence, and liked well of that which was there agreed; and
that also of Lateran, where the Popes, Clement the fifth, and Leo the 10. made
express Bulls to declare the contrary, and that the Mendicant Priests who were
Religious, and should be aurhorized by the Pope, might absolutely hear
Confessions, preserving ever charity, the authority of the ordinaries, and not
diminishing at all their authority.

And the same also does the Council of Trent affirm. Moreover I oppose at
least fifty Doctors, greatly learned, and many of them canonized Saints, who
do clearly hold the contrary; and show that the Canon, Omnis vtriusque,
cannot any way hinder Privileged persons from hearing Confessions, without
wrong to any.

I oppose besides the consent of the whole World; for the general practice of
the Church has been such, as I have said, in Italy, France, Germany, Polonia,
England, Spain, Flanders, in the East, in the West, in the South, and in the
North, in the old and in the new World, and this without contradiction of
others, then some very few persons, who have always been condemned.

I oppose yet further the authority of our Kings, and of the Sovereign Courts
of Justice of the Realm, who have received Regulars, and have been pleased
that they should enjoy their privileges, and have maintained them therein; and
have served themselves of them, and with good success. And one of our good and
virtuous Frenchmen, and a L. de Monarch. 3. p. l. 2. c. 14. Ep. 150.
learned Doctor of the Sorbon, has greatly praised this passage of Petrus
Blesensis, Tunc salubriter disponitur vita Regum, cum Religiosorum hortamenta
sectantur, and ducuntur consilio Sapientium. And in effect all Kings, and above
them all, our own, who are the very Sons of Kings, and the Flower de Luces
of the World, have proceeded thus.

I oppose withal the judgment of many wise, learned, and most virtuous
Parsons and Vicars, who themselves have exhorted their Parishoners to confess
themselves to good Regulars, where they believe, that they may be better
assisted for the salvation of their souls. For every one of them says, and
says truly, what does this import me, so that my flock be saved? for my part
I am so much the more discharged, who have, God help me, other work enough to
do. May not I be secure in point of conscience, since the Pope, the Counsels,
so many Doctors, so many Saints assure me that I am discharged? Besides that I
observe that the best Parishoners, and they who frequent my parish most, and
who honor me the most, are they who have their souls best cultivated with
virtue; and make most account of devotion. Provided that I know they be well
Confessed, this ought to serve my turn. Besides a great scruple which I have
upon my soul, is the fear I am in, lest they whose Confessions I apply my
self to hear, may perhaps not worthily acquit themselves, and the fault
thereof fall upon me, and now I am delivered of this remorse when they go to
a place, where morrally I ought to be assured that I am discharged in the
sight of God. Must then such a noise be made for a little interest, or for a
little air of honor, and for a certain, I know not what, which is not worth
the speaking of? Now I have heard this very language spoken in Paris it self,
and that by the principal Parsons and Vicars of the Town, men of virtue and
honor, and who have a very great care of the true Hierarchy of the Church, and
to save their sheep, and to perform their Office exactly well. What shall I
say to you of that noble Chancellor of the University of Paris? Though
formerly he had been a little too stiff and warm in the business, yet he
advised himself better afterward, and said, Status Curatorum debet cum bona
Gers. 10. 4. de statib. Ecclesiastici c. 3. de statu curatorum considerat. 7.
gratia suscipere statum Privilegiatorum, tanquam co-adjutores missos a
Superioribus, etc. Yea, and when he is at the top of his zeal for the Parsons
and Vicars, he does very judiciously add, Salva sempter rationabili
authoritate Praelatorum. So that we must either condemn Popes and Kings, and
so many holy Bishops for having showed little judgment, and having had little
reason in giving the power which they have given to Religious men, or else,
says Gerson, the Parsons and Vicars have been much to blame in opposing
themselves to them, who have bin so well, so justifiably, and so anciently
authorized and maintained in their privileges.

Finally, I oppose the Parliament of Paris, which is the Parliament of Peers,
and the paragon of parliaments, which has made two solemn decrees among the
rest, the one in favor of the Iacobins, in the year of our Lord 1505. and in
the behalf of one who was called Gally, and the other in favor of the
Cordeliers, in the year 1531. and it went against a Councellor of the
parliament it self, called Lovys du Bellay, parson and Archpriest of Saint
Severine, and Archdeacon of Paris, who pretended to make Religious men be
hindered from hearing Confessions, and was directly rejected from his demand,
and Religious men maintained in the use of their privileges. This suffices,
and I will say nothing of other parliaments, which are wont to honor the
Decrees of the parliament of Paris, and not to contest them.

13. So that you see worlds, Popes, Councels, Kings, Prelates, the Provincial
Synods of Langres, 1452. of Paris 1557. of Aix 1585. of Chartres 1526. of Roan
1581. of Troyes and others, as that of Bordeaux 1582. of Bourges, 1584. and
before all this, of Angers 1291. You see the decrees of Parliaments, the
possession of five hundredth years, the universal custom, Bulls, Decrees,
Sentences, Histories, Condemnations of Contradictors, a whole troop of
Authors, the most wise Pastors and Vicars themselves, the common Dictamen of
the Church, the incredible good which arriueth by it, you see, I say, all this
in favor of Regulars on the one side, and on the other a petty Canon of
Bolonia, who in fine is not indeed contrary to us, though he be so in
appearance.

14. Rendering therefore to my Lords the Prelates that which their quality
deserves, and their virtues require, that which the Council of Trent ordaynes,
that which use, right and custom have made to pass in the nature of a Law,
and honoring parsons and Curates, and loving them with particular affection,
and withal exhorting all devout men to do honor to their parsons or Curates,
to frequent their parishes, to pay in all their rights, and yet notwithstanding
having those so authentical privileges in their hands and the possession of so
many years; why do men complain so much of poor Religious men, who very
often reap no other thing but much pain and travail? Oh, no man knows what
it is to be a good Confessarius, but such a man as is in a very ordinary
exercise thereof: Alas, what a huge patience is needful, what kind of
longanimity, what a condiscending, what a company of repetitions must be
endured, how many uncleanness, what hazards, what a company of ill hours? Is
there perhaps so great pleasure in feeding upon nothing but the sins of the
people, and with Saint Peter to devour Dragons, Vipers, and a million of
brute beasts, full of venoime? I do rather think that men should have pity
of such poor men, then envy, and give thanks to these poor Martyrs and
Confessors for their pains they suffer, rather then to arraigne them thus,
and make war upon them.

Some of my Lords the prelates, have themselves been willing to hear
Confessions, and they have done it with great edification, but we have known
of very few, who have long continued in that course; so tough, so dangerous,
and so greatly wearisome is that business.

15. As for us, if we were to take our turn in pleading, certainly I would
cite no other Canon then that of Omnis vtriusque sexus, with the Gloss of one
of our Synodes of France. The Text says that a man must confess himself to
his Proper Priest, or else have his leave to Confess himself to another. Now,
who is this Proper Priest, who may give the leave? Let us hear the Synod of
Langres in the year of our Lord 1421. Ne remaneat aliqua haestitatio, quis
proprius dicatur Sacerdos, declaramus prout etiam jura and doctores declarant,
quod Proprius Sacerdos est Papa, ejus Legatus, Paenitentiarius, Diocesanus, and
Vicarius Generalis; and ille cui cura suae Parochialis Ecclesiae est commissa.
After this I beseech you what can more be said?

16. There rests only now this complaint, that parishes are forsaken, and
that consequently Priests study not; that men go not to their Sermons; that
for spite they leave all; that Religious men devour all, and that their
Churches swell with people, whilst parishes are forsaken to the great contempt
of the Hierarchy of the Church. That now few are found who will be parsons or
Vicars, especially in Villages; and therefore Bishops grow to find much
difficulty in furnishing their Dioceses; by means whereof all goes to ruin,
and souls are damned, and yet Bishops in the mean time are as much obliged in
the sight of God to have care of their Dioceses; as the Pope has of his, and
of the Universal Church. Besides, that Priests finding themselves not to be
employed, and that persons of quality go to Confess themselves elsewhere, and
that men make no great account of their Sermons, they spend not their time in
study; and not studing, they give themselves to idleness, and from idleness
grows the rest, in such sort, that Regulars are the cause of these mischiefs,
and that secular priests grow to be irregular, and it belongs to Bishops to
redress these things, who groan in the mean time under this burden, and
know not how to apply good and effectual remedies.

17. Behold here great store of crimes hudled up one upon another, and behold a
grievous mortal sin, whereof (by mischance) the Regulars mean not to
confess themselves to be guilty. And the reason is, because they know it not,
and they found themselves upon this, that non entis proprie non est scientia.
And they make good that they are not the cause of these mischiefs in the
strength of these maxims of Law, which is received throughout the whole
world. Qui vtitur iure suo, nemini facit iniuriam. For what? shall it not be
lawful for me to do well, for fear least others do ill for spite? What will
you say if God have sent Religious men into the world, as Renatus Benedictus
said, to awake them of the Church, who were sleeping? And certainly these are
the motives which Popes assign in their Bulls of privileges, and which deserve
to be read and well weighed, with a mind full of respect and piety. God
himself discovered this to Pope Innocent the third, when he showed him the
Church, as if it had been falling to the ground, and Saint Dominicke, and Saint
Francis, who shouldred it up so happily, that they kept it on foot, and
restored it to the former place. But let us pass from this discourse, which
yet nevertheless is not impertinent. For considering the incredible good which
God has vouchsafed to work by means of Regulars over the whole world, we
have reason to praise his infinite goodness, to render him all glory for it,
and to hope that they may yet be able to serve him in the assistance of many
souls.

18. O how I love that good and gallant Parson in Paris, whom all you my Lords
do also love, and verily he deserves it, who said thus after an Apostolical
manner, and with a generous heart. Let us do better then Religious men, and
believe me the Religious men will be more afraid of us, then we of them. The
world follows virtue, or the opinion of virtue, or both together: that which
we should do, Religious men strive to do, but let us strive to do that which
they do, and their Houses will be more forsaken then ours. Let us adorn our
Churches as they do, let us make learned and devout Sermons which may greatly
edify our people, let us live as we speak, let us cultiuate the souls of our
Parishioners, let us make choice of Priests of good lives, let all go orderly
in our Churches, let us lay all our interests at the feet of the Crucifixe,
and this will be the most powerful means to defend us, and to mainetaine us
in our rights, and to have cause to fear nothing. But otherwise to make such a
noise, and to do nothing, but cry out without ceasing, and to toss
Excommunications up and down, and to be sending threats, all this makes for
nothing but discourse without producing any fruit, and men's minds are so made,
that by this means they rather grow wild, then soft and sweet, and restored
to the way of the ancient piety of France. In fine, this man lives after this
manner, and not only he, but some others also, who are adored in their
parishes; and all men do so love them, and they are so desired, and even as it
were oppressed with business, that men cannot see them, but with half an eye.
And as for those others who are ever crying out, they breed more fear then
envy in such as would draw near to them; and they estrange their parishioners
from them, who believe that there is some other thing in the business then the
pure love of God, the salvation of souls, and the preservation of the
Hierarchy. I beseech God to preserve this most virtuous Pastor, and bestow upon
him a great heap of benedictions, and grant that all the rest may walk the
same pace, and do so much good, that Regulars may have no more to do. O, in
how great repose, and with how joyful a heart would they pray God, for so many
and so worthy laborers?

19. Let us come to that other exception, that Benefices remain void, and
that now in effect men do find no persons capable to fill them with,
especially in country towns and villages. Now here I must clearly auow
either my simplicity, or my too great credulity. For in very truth I was of
opinion, that there had not been half a Benefice which enough had not extreamle
desired to get, and to heap one upon another, and that not being able to
procure them by any other means, men buy them out right with ready money; and
that they use a thousand tricks to serve one another turns; and that Simony
was never so refined, nor less apprehended to be ill, and all the rest of that
which common fame is spreading in all companies. Verily I believed all this,
and I confess I did it as a thing most certain, and without all doubt. But,
my Lords, since you have told me the contrary (for you have said it) I will
resolutely give my mind this law, and I will make it stoop to this yoke,
that I will believe you without contradiction.

But, my Lords, you will pardon me if still I tell you, that although I believe
the thing, yet I cannot force my heart to believe the cause which is alleged;
namely, that Regulars are the cause thereof. For how can this be? Is it because
they get their Benefices? let them have no more of them. Is it that they divert
Secular Priests from taking those Benefices? excommunicate them. Is it that
they carry away all the stations or Indulgences? They have none but such as
please you, and oftentimes they have but the refuse of others. Is it because
they debaush secular Priests make them be punished by their superiors; and if
they will not, do it you. Is it because they do not Counsel them to study?
Alas, some times they say that the Jesuits make too many men learned, and too
full of knowledge; and sometimes the direct contrary. Good God, whom shall we
believe? If I feared not to offend some, and if I had not promised that I would
not anger any, I would acquaint you very clearly with the true source of all
these miseries, but I had rather leave it to your thought; and I will impose
perfect silence upon my self, saving only in this that I declare to you
clearly with a strong voice, and with much truth, that it is not good
Religious men, who are the cause of these disorders.

20. So far of it is, that Regulars should be the cause, that a hundred
Bishops will tell you on the other side, when there has been some disorder in
Bourgs and Villages, they have served themselves of Regulars, to put things in
Order as before, and the success has proved, that the choice was good. This
is so clear, that it needs no proof. Whether this trouble the Order of the
Church, whether it be against the authority of Prelates, or against the right
of Pastors, or against reason, I make the most reverend Charles the Bishop of
Langres, the Judge; who in his Synod, after he had commanded the publication
of that Canon, Omnis vtriusque, says these very words. Ne detur materia
fratribus Mendicantibus querelandi, volumus quod in fine publicationis
constitutionis praedictae, Omnis vtriusque sexus, etc. subinferatur, and
public, quod per hoc non intendimus praejudicare Privilegijs super audiendis
Confessionibus, eisdem fratribus concessis: subjungendo quod fratres nobis
praesentati possunt audire Confessiones libere, and confitentibus eisdem,
paenitentias salutares impartiri de commissis, etc.

All that which he demands is, that men do it under his authority, and this
is done, and it is more then most reasonable that it should be so. But in the
mean time you see that it is he who is called the Proper Priest, he who
sends whom he will, and who serves himself of good Religious men, for the
help of parishes. And do you not believe that other Bishops have the same
Dictamen with this great Peer of France, and Bishop of Langres, who held this
language?

21. Let us add to this, that if ever there were little cause of complaining
upon this title, it is in this age of ours. No, my Lords, do not any longer
fear that now Secular Priests will not prove such as you desire, or that
parsonages will be in want of men very well able to serve the Cures, or for the
service also of other Benefices. For the fatherly providence of God has sent a
new Renforce, by a most virtuous congregation of holy Priests, who being full
of knowledge and piety, will supply all these wants, according to the vocation
which God has given them, to reform secular Clergy. By the example of their
lives they will show what is to be done, by their endeauours they will fill
such places as shall be void, both in City and Country, and they will yield
good laborers will refuse to take no pains, and will gladly spread their
Charity over the whole World, as they have already begun to do in many
places, and will also by little and little grow substituting excellent
Ecclesiastical men, to make this Church of France flourish both in Villages
and Towns. One only thing I fear, that after men shall have cried hard
against Religious men, they will also begin to cry out against these, every
one interpreting their zeal according to his own fancy; and banding
themselves perhaps as stiffely against them, as against Religious, and
alleging a thousand things according to their passions and humors.

Now if this should happen, you would clearly discern even from that instant,
that the noise which is made both against the one, and against the other,
proceeds from some other root then of mere charity, and of a true desire of
the good of the true Hierarchy.

To tell you more of this would serve for nothing to my purpose, only I will
say franckly, that there will never be good laborers enough; that there is more
work cut out, then we shall be able to sow, and that the heart of a Bishop,
which ought to be a heart paternall and Apostolical, ought to embrace all them
who may serve to cultiuate the fair field of the Church of God.

22. There is escaping from my hand (and I know not how to keep it back) a
passage, which seems pardonable to a man, who defends so good a cause.
Aristotle says, that, Ex quibus constamus, ex ijs nutrimur, and conseruamur in
esse. This being so, my Lords, it is still to be considered, that Regulars have
not lost their time, nor done any great wrong to them, who have done them the
honor to employ them; and that indeed they are not yet to be cast out of the
way. Certainly it has pleased the infinite goodness of God, to serve himself
of them either for plantation of our faith, or else of pity in an eminent
degree; and that in a manner, over the whole world.

Is it not true, that it was Saint Bernard who made Campayne flourish? St.
Columbanus, Burgundy? St. Martin, Tourayne? Saint Anselme, Normandy? Saint
Dominicke, Languedoc, and Guyenne? Saint Vincent, Britany? Saint Thomas and
Saint Bonauenture, the King Saint Jews and France? Saint Augustine the Monk,
all England? And now in our days is it not they, who have planted the Cross
of Jesus Christ in all those new worlds, and who are planting it now whilst I
am speaking, in the heart of Aethiopia, in Persia, in the East, and throughout
the four Winds of the world. May they not well be thought to help toward the
entertaining of the Church, since they have sweat blood and water to plant it,
and are bedewing it with their tears, and with their blood, and sealing it
with their heads and lives? For a little I know not what, must the occasion
alas, be lost of drawing so many exemplar services out of their labors? under
color of some little indiscretion of any single man, who may be transported by
his zeal. That amendment which might be desired, can it not possibly be
procured without such a deal of business, and confused noise? O my God, there
are so many abominations in the world, upon which we daily look, and yet men
open not their mouths, and hardly think that it concerns them at all, and
now it seems that all consists in dragging Religious men after them, as if
that being once done, we were instantly to see virtue ride in Triumph. I would
to Christ there were no impediment but that, and (...) would to Christ that all
this did ^urne upon no other thing, but that ^f the pure zeal of the service
of God. If every one might make his own complaints, good God, what a terrible
discourse would grow upon it, but let not the Divine Majesty be pleased, that
so great a misfortune should ariue. It is better to hold ones peace, and to
labor in silence and humility. Bona facere, and mala pati Apostolicum est,
said the great Saint Bernard.

23. That, my Lords, which is to be much weighed is, that by this course they
are not the Regulars whom men assault, but the Privileges themselves, and the
Popes who gave them, and the authority of the Sea Apostolic; for all this is
but a level at the same aim, and General Counsels, and Canonized Saints,
and the doctrine of the Church received by the whole world, and practiced
through so many ages, and judged by so many sentences.

And all this must be done for (...) point of honor, or of power, and in a
business, which so many great Cardinals full of wisdom, and so many holy and
venerable old men, who were grown gray in the Government of the Church, would
never alter.

I find that my most illustrious and most reverend Lord, the Cardinal of
Rochfaucault, who is of so delicate a conscience, so grave in his judgments,
and of so exemplar a life, did say very well when he said. I care not what
habit men wear, but I ever take the best. As long as Religious men serve to
good purpose I do willingly serve my self of them; when they forget
themselves, I will also forget them. When Doctors and Seculars, and Pastors do
well, I will love them, and shall be glad to employ them. In fine, when a man
is to make his choice, he must ever take the best, whatsoever habit he wear.
Behold this is a saying worthy of him.

24. I would to God that he with any other, who resembled him, were arbitrator
of this cause in difference, to calm this Tempest, and to appease all things
with the spirit of (...). For there is good means for it, when that which may
be said on both sides, may be heard: allowing to my Lords the Prelates, more
honor then ever themselves desire, as also to the Pastors of particular
Churches, and leaving also Religious men in liberty to enjoy their right in
repose, and with respect and honor. These words of Abraham cast themselves into
my mouth, Facta est rixa inter pastores Genesis 3.
gregum Abraham and Lot, etc. Dixit ergo Abraham ad Lot, re quaeso sit iurgum
inter me and te, and inter pastores meos and pastores tuos, fratres enim sumus.
Ecce vniuersia terra co^am te est, recede a me, obscero: si ad sinistram ieris,
ego dexteram tenebo; si tu dexteram elegeris, ego ad sinistram pergam, etc.
Elegitque sib Lot regionem circa Iordanem, and recessit ab Orient. Make you
the choice, my Lords, and take you the fair Eastern Sun to your selves;
those first beams of the day of honor are due to you; the most lively
Oriental spring of light was made for you. You are they whom the world must
honor, as every one looks toward the rising Sun.

The sweet dewes of Indulgences, the Eastern winds of Missions, and the powers
of commanding and sending hither and thither, ought to issue out of your
mouths: all the sweetenesses of heaven pass by your hands, just as the
favors of nature begin from the East. Be you therefore the Orients of the
world, according to the style of Origin. Estote filij Orientis, ecce vir oriens
nomen eius, dabo Zachar. 6.
vobis sernum meum Orientem, and eius Zachar. 3. 1. Reg. 9.
erunt optima quaeque, etc. All this is done to you.

25. Religious men, whom you honor with the name of Brothers, but who yet are
in effect your sons, and your servants, will place themselves toward the
West, and will lodge all their ambition, in the setting Sun of Mortification.
They will not at all mislike that the beams of honor be ecclipsed from them,
so that the beams of their charity may be able to shine brightly in the
darkness of sinful souls, and that they may cause the zeal of saving those
souls, rise up from the descent of humility.

They will be well content to see themselves in this setting quarter, where
the day of honor dies, where tempests are wont to rise in the sea, where
impetuous winds and hailes are wont to grow, where the world seems to be in
affliction and misery. That which they desire (after they shall have received
some beam of favor from you) is to labor for the salvation of souls, and
the conversion of sinners.

Let the tempest of slanders, the hayle of murmurings, let combats and strife
against infernal powers, be for them; and they will gladly utter these
excellent words. Et nox sicut dies illuminabitur, sicut tenebrae eius, ita and
lumen eius; for sitan tenebrae conculcabunt me, and nox illuminatio mea in
delicijs meis. They will do that which Saint Paul did, Collaboro Euangelio,
and they shall be that whereof Saint Dennis speaks, Adiutores Dei and
Cooperatores, If it were not that you liked better to labor in the same
climate, you as fathers, they as children, you as masters, they as servants,
you as Pastors, they as workmen, and that you love to do like those nations
whereof Pliny speaks, who for the most part had but one arm a piece, and yet
in the world there were not better Archers then they: for one lending his arm
for bending the bow, another his, for entering the arrow upon the string, and
both of them employing both their forces, draw and shoot off with such
stiffenesse, that there is nothing which they cannot pierce.

O how strong and invincible would the Church be, if we all wrought after this
manner. Frater qui adiuuatur a fratre, quasi Ciuitas firma, etc. If we Prou. 18.
did just the contrary of that which S. Paul said, Omnes quae sua sunt
quorunt, Philip. 2.
non quae Jesus Christi. And if all Ecclesiastical persons did valiantly tread
their proper interest under their feet, and carry the glory of God, the good
of his service, and the salvation of souls in a high place, what a golden age
would this be? And what a terrestrial Paradise, I beseech you, my Lords,
should we find, if the Church might enjoy such happiness in this age of ours?
We should fully enjoy this sweet Paradise, if the Serpents did not go
continually hissing out his temptation off, Eritis sicut Dij. But whilst every
one is in Genesis 3.
doubt to be drawn down, and given up in pray to contempt, whilst both the
one and the other of us will needs conserve our selves, and believe that we do
none of this but for God, and that in so doing we defend Gods right as well as
our own, it is greatly to be feared, least it be told us, that we do not well
observe the counsel of our Sovereign Master; who seeing his Apostles whom
you represent, and his Disciples whom we represent (and whom we imitate the
least unworthily we can) dispute, about I know not what superiority, said to
them, Quicunque voluerit Math. 20.
inter vos mayor fieri, sit vester mtnister; and qui voluerit inter vos primus
esse, eric vester seruus.

We therefore, my Lords, do not pretend to debate with you about any precedence
of authority, nor to partake in the honor of your greatness, this is
confessed to be yours, and so yours, as that it belongs to none else. That
which we pretend, is, that you leave us where God has laid us, at your feet;
but so that you will be pleased to leave us also in that liberty, which God and
his Church, and Popes, and Councels, and your Predecessors, yea and many of
your selves have given us for the assistance of his sheep, and for the comfort
of those souls, for which you must answer to Christ our Lord, who has given
all his blood for every one of them.

Yea there is not any one of them, of whom God does not respectively say to
you, as the son of that Prophet did to the King, Custodi virum 3. Reg. 20.
istum, qui si lapsus fuerit, erit anima tua ejus. A passage which Saint
Gregory the great applies to all the Prelates of the Church.

26. When you shall be pleased to weight all this well, my heart bids me hope,
that you will do, as my Lord the Cardinal of Rets, of most happy and dear
memory, and Bentivoglio who is a friend to France, and to the Hierarchy, did at
Paris; and as my Lord the Cardinal of Lorayne, and my Lord Bishop of Toul,
whose memories are blessed, did at Nancy. For both the one and the other having
harkned to certain persons, who suggested to them a thousand things, just like
the^e, which me having endeavored to persuade you now, having had some thought
to treat seriously hereof, and to procure an accommodation of things, and
being certainly, and fully, and sincerely informed of the business, both the
one, I say, and the other, did leave things as they were, and would make no
change at all, discerning well, that all those Discourses to the contrary, had
no manner of subsistence, but only a little glistering and show. All the
world did greatly commend their wisdom, and their zeal so full of judgment;
and one of them told me in plain terms, that he discovered well, how that
in this business, there was I know not what, which savoured somewhat of a
Schism. Those great and incomparable Cardinals of Ioyeuse, and of Perron,
would never give ear to this Discourse, but living and dying, they witnessed
the contrary; serving themselves most willingly of Religious men, for the good
of their Dioceses. And to show, that they repented not themselves thereof,
they resolved to annexe their hearts, as the seals of their goodness to
those former actions of theirs, and to give them depositated into the hands of
Religious men, who keep them as two great treasures.

27. They who abuse your goodness would make you, as it were, believe that if
you take not the better heed, your authorities will be entirely beaten down, and
that all is upon the point of utter ruin. I am glad, my Lords, that they
address themselves thus to fright you by things so poor, and of so little
consideration. For I must beseech you to recall to your memories, that in the
year 1225. or there abouts, in the reign of Saint Jews, Gulielmus de Sancto
Amore, and a certain Sigerius, with some other undertaking young Divines,
composed a Book, wherein they put word for word, all that which men now object
against us, and more then that, and presented the Libell, to Innocent the
fourth, pretending to extinguish those two holy Orders; but death came quickly
upon him, and that such a death as your self may read, if it please you,
together with the last words he spoke, which you may also vouchsafe to weigh
well, for they import. Alexander the fourth followed him, who caused this
Libell to be burnt, as a work worthy of that hand which set it forth. And so
the end of those two men, who were S. Tho opus. 15. c. 4.
enemies of these Orders, was very disastrous; or of one of them at least, who
dyed miserably.

In fine, you shall have in Saint Thomas all those very arguments which are
brought against us at this day, with the angelical and most solid answers of
this Oracle, who, at his return to Paris, did publicly make good all his
Doctrine, and answered all them who went to assault him with their Canon shot,
and with arguments, which they conceived to be omnipotent. But there happened an
accident which discovered that spirit well, whereby they were animated, who
banded themselves against these. For upon a certain Palme-Sunday when Saint
Thomas Preached publicly in the University, and spoke like an Angel, behold a
strange and very unworthy case which happened.

For a certain silly fellow called Iuliot, a Picard, who appeared about the
middle of the Sermon, and opening a great paper, wherein was contained a list
of injurious speeches against the great man, and a thousand outrageous slanders
against his holy Order: After I say, that he vomited out all this, he
concluded thus with a loud voice. How now my masters, can you be content after
all this, to hear the Sermon of so wicked a man, and of a Doctor who teaches
so abominable errors. And you brother Thomas, what do you answer to this?
Now the people was confounded to see the unspeakable modesty of Saint Thomas,
who harkened to all that poisoned Discourse with so profound humility, and with
a silence so full of modesty, and holy mortification; that they esteemed him
as a Saint of Heaven, for he did never so much as answer any one word. But
the people calling up their spirits, and considering the insolency of this bold
mean fellow, did that, which you may read if it please you, in the story; for
I will not load this paper with it, nor yet importune you. But so it is, that
the Auditors did that, which perhaps you your selves would have done, if you had
been at that Sermon; and the King caused him, and those masters of Art, to
be punished, who had made him commit that base trick, so full of insolency
and scandal. Now all those good Religious, seeing themselves oppressed on all
sides, and that the earth and this World failed them; they had recourse to
Heaven, and to the holy mother of God, who appeared to Saint Thomas, and made
him see these Words written in letters of Gold: Liberavit vos Deus abinimicis
vestris, and de manu omnium qui oderunt vos. In a word, in the year of our
Lord 1259. all this tempest broake up, and those holy men remained in peace.
But I dare not forbear to tell you, that all this storm grew not into that
height, but by reason of a certain rage, and a strong passion of a Prelate,
who had seen a Nephew of his enter into the Order of Saint Dominicke, and had
never been able to draw him thence. Alas, a little wind does sometimes stir
up great storms upon the Sea of this World, and how many things do men ill,
under color of good, if they take not heed?

28. Methinkes you do yet desire at my hands the Theses which Saint Thomas
defended publicly in this matter, and the Propositions which he maintained
against all them who disputed thereof: which was the cause why all the World
yielded to the truth, and which calmed this tempest which was so black and so
terrible, that it was likely to swallow up these two Orders. I will obey and
give you here the chief points thereof, and I will draw them out of his book,
and do you but see, if they be not the very same of these days.

1. Cum misit Deus Apostolos 12. Opusc. 15. c. 4.
and 72. Discipulos, dedit illis facultatem alios mittendi, sicut fecit Sanctus
Paulus. 1 Cor. 4.

2. Multo melius potest Papa, and Episcopus delegare alios, and mittere in
vineam Domini, quam Parochus.

3. Minores Angeli in caelesti Hierarchia mitti possunt a superioribus, and
eadem plane opera exerc^nt, ideoque dicuntur Seraphin and Cherubin, quia eorum
opera exercent: sic in Hierarchia Ecclesiastica.

4. Papa non destruit Ecclesiasticam Hierarchiam cum mittit Monachos ad
praedicandum; quod enim potest inferior, ut Curatus, concedere, committendo
curam alicui; hoc potest ejus superior, ut Episcopus, and Papa.

5. Papa in hoc non facit contra decreta Canorum, nec contra statuta Sanctorum;
quod si daretur eum facere contra verba statutorum, certum est eum servare
intentionem statuentium, quae est vtilitas Ecclesiae.

6. Quae sunt de jure positiuo, relicta sunt sub Papae dispensatione, ut est
hoc de quo quaeritur; nempe mittere Monachos ad Praedicationes, and
Confessiones audiendas.

7. Quisquis Papae, vel Episcopo suo, vel alicui ejus vicem habenti confessus
est; ille confessus est proprio Sacerdoti.

8. Cum Episcopus subditum Sacerdotis absoluit perse, vel per alium cui
commisit, tum Sacerdos Parochialis ita debet se reputare cognoscere eum, ac si
sibi confessus esset. Nam cognoscere potest aliquem, aut ex propria
Confessione, aut ex sententia superioris, an sit dignus communione.

9. Licet concedatur posse aliquod malum oriri ex hoc, quod aliquis non
confitetur Parocho suo, tamen multo plura and majora mala nascuntur, si quis
cogatur necessario illi confiteri, vt patet experientia.

10. Quicquid Sancti Doctores and Canones videntur dicere de Monachis, quorum
Officium esse dicitur magis plangere, quam docere; hoc dicitur de Monachis
illis, qui nec Sacerdotes erant, neque Diaconi, sed solitarij, and Heremitae:
non de ijs qui ad hoc vocati sunt, and qui non ex propria authoritate id
faciunt, sed ex commissione Praelatorum.

11. Etiamsi daretur duos tantum Ordines a Domino esse institutos, qui possent
propria authoritate praedicare, etc. posset tamen Ecclesia tertium statuere
Ordinem, qui posset propria authoritate praedicare; multum magis eorum quiex
commissione, sicut in Primitiua Ecclesia fuerunt tantum duo Ordines sacri,
scilicet Presbiteri and Deaconi; and tamen postea Ecclesia minores Ordines
statuit.

12. Quidam a Confessione desisterent, nisi possint alijs quam suis
Sacerdotibus confiteri, propter multas causas.

13. Ex communi consuetudine Orientalis Ecclesiae, omnes fere Monachis
confitentur.

14. Quidam novellum sibi statuentes errorem, in tantam prorumpunt audaciam, vt
asserant, non posse per Episcopos Religiosis praedicta committi, absque
voluntate Parochi, and quod pernicio sius est, non posse hoc asserunt concedi
per Privilegium sedis Apostolicae.

15. Optime ait S. Dion. Eccl. Hier. c. 6. summus Sacerdos per suos ministros
aut Sacerdotes purgans, aut illuminans, ipse dicitur purgare and illuminare;
ergo and Episcopus eodem modo, qui autem facit per alium, per seipsum facere
potest.

16. Blasphemiae vicinum est dicere, quod Episcopus non potest vsum clauium
exercere in quemlibet suae Diaecesis, sicut and Christus posset.

17. Potest institui Religio ad subveniendum pauperibus in necessitatibus
corporis; ergo multo magis potest institui ad subueniendum animabus per
Praedicationes, and Confessiones.

18. Quod potest inferior, potest etiam Superior, quod ergo potest Curatus,
potest Episcopus, and potest Papa. Cui, vt ait Cyrillus, omnes iure diuino
caput inclinant.

19. Alij gubernationes, alij opitulationes, inquit Apost. 1. Cor. 12.
Opitulationes Opusc. 14. c. 23.
sunt ij, qui ferunt opem maioribus, vt Titus Apostolo; Archidiaconi Episcopo,
etc. Hoc autem non destruit Hierarchiam.

20. Alter alterius membra, and vnum corpus in Christo. Romans 12. Manifestum
Opusc. 15. c. 3.
est quod Ecclesiasticae vnitati derogat, quicunque Religiosis impedit ne
docere possint, etc.

21. Qui Romanae Ecclesiae Privilegium, ab ipso summo omnium Ecclesiarum capite
traditum, auferre conatur, Ibid. c. 3.
hic proculdubio in haeresim labitur, vt dicitur in Decretis. Did. 22. Cap.
Omnes and a Sancto Ambrosio, qui ait se in omnibus sequi Magistram, sanctam L.
3. de sacram. c. 1.
Romanam Ecclesiam.

It is Pope Nicholas the second, who speaks against them of the Church of
Millan, for entering into competition with Rome, and would needs march hand in
hand with the Roman Church, which Saint Thomas applies also to the point in
question.

22. Ab Apostolis 7. Diaconi instituti fuerunt, qui erant in statu
perfectionis; Opusc. 14. c. 23.
nam relictis omnibus secuti, erant Christum. Ab horum exemplo omnes Religiones
deriuatae sunt. Quemadmodum ergo Apostolu Episcopi, discipulis Parochi, sic
Diaconis Religiosi successerunt.

23. Behold here is a part of the Propositions, which Saint Thomas defended at
Paris, in public manner, and with such amazement of all the University, that
there was not found a man so bold as to dare once stir this stone. The
Preface of his Book carries these very words in the front.

Praedictus Doctor post diuinitus obtentam victoriam, Pariseos rediens, omnes
dicti operis Articulos, public^, and solemniter repetens, disputauit,
firmavitque.

That which goes immediately before these words, and the sentence of the Pope,
is a thing which I will not cite here, but let him see it, who will. I will say
nothing here, which may offend, or which may savor of recrimination, or which
by any ill odor of strong passion, may poison this discourse, which is
dedicated to pure and free, but yet strong truth.

I conjure you, my Lords, to weigh well these four words, Public, Solemniter,
disputauit, Firmauit. So that all Paris had the contentment to see this great
person sustain all the assaults of the whole world, and he was so happy and
so puissant, that he made truth triumph, and did with a little stone beat
down that huge Colossus, which men had erected, to the end that falling upon
him, it might drive both himself and all his Order into dust.

30. That which Gulielmus de sancto Amore had enterprised at Paris with so ill
success, a certain Richardus Armaeanus, the Primate of Ireland, after he had
played rex in England, did also enterprise in Auignon in the year 1356. under
Innocent the sixth, before the Pope himself, and the Cardinals, and presented
them with a book made aduantageously in the behalf of Parsons and Vicars, yea
and also of Bishops, against Regulars, wherein he delivered the same things
which had been offered before by Gulielmus de sancto Amore; for in this
business, there is never any thing but repetitions, and noise enough? without
any fruit at all, and ordinarily the matter ends in some disastrous death.

I will not tell you here, how this poor (...) died, but I will only put you
in mind that the book was held worthy to dye with him, and that many who have
banded themselves against the servants of God, have either sooner or later, had
regret, and sorrow in their hearts, or else some other thing which was worse.
The face of death makes the face of business change very much.

31. The wisest men have ever judged, that they have no good bargain, who make
themselves opposites to the servants of God, especially in those things which
are established by his divine Majesty, or his Grand Vicar, and there be a
thousand and a thousand Histories to show this as lamentable and fearful, as
they are authentical. Men use sometimes to dispute in Divinity, whether the
Pope may err in the Canonization of Saints, as also about the approbation of
Religious Orders. For my part, I will not enter at this time into that
question, but I will not fear to say, that when God has any such desire, and
that he sends some to this effect, if any man then make opposition, God does
certainly find himself offended thereby, and is wont to resent it, and therefore
Saint Paul says aloud. Itaque qui haec spernit, non hominem spernit 1. These.
4.
sed Deum, etc.

Now after points of faith, and some others of the most important of the
Church, I know few things whereof there is more formal, clear, and
authentical proof, then of the point which here I defend. For twenty Popes,
three General Councels, so many Provincial Synodes in France, so many
Cardinals, Primates, Archbishops, Bishops, Canons, express Texts, fifty Bulls,
Sentences of Parliaments, Judgment of eminent Doctors in great number, consent
of some Parsons and Vicars, even of Paris, doctors of the Sorbonne, Saints,
Miracles, Reasons, Arguments, possession beyond the memory of man, Texts of the
Gospel, particular vocations of God, who has expressly sent us more then six
Religious Orders all entire, the authority of so many Emperors, Kings,
Potentates, sovereign Courts of Justice, heaven and earth, such a number of
ages, and the voice of the world.

Is not, I say, all this sufficient to fortify this truth against those poor
reasons which they allege, and which in very deed, and in the sight of God,
and of disinteressed men, are not of such moment, as to warrant that account
and noise, which some make thereof.

There was a time when a sentence was given against Saint Bernard, and that
from the highest Tribunal in the Church of God. The Saint seeing himself over
laden, by so mighty an authority here on earth, had recourse to heaven and
said, Tuum Domine Jesus Tribunal appello, tuo me iudicio servo; tibi committo
causam Epist. 1.
meam. Tu vides qui tua video, qui quaerunt and sua. It que arbiter meus esto
Domine Jesus, de valtu tuo tudicium meum prodeat, oculi tui videant aequitatem.
O Jesus bone, quam multa facta sunt, prounius animulae perditione, etc. In fine,
men removed both Heaven and earth at Cluny,, at Rome, in France, at Clairivaux;
but at length the holy Abbot won the cause, and God paid him that which he
had lost, and took part in the business with his servant, and it was a
miracle which he wrought, writing this Epistle, and he said boldly to his
Secretary, Scribe, Scribe, quia opus Dei est. It is for God, it is on the
behalf of God: It is by the express Commandment of God, it is for the saving
of a soul redeemed by his blood; it is for interest, it is for the
conservation of an Order, which he has established by means of a servant of
his, Saint Bennet, who was our Founder, and therefore says he write boldly,
fear nothing my good brother, neither the hayle, nor the flood, nor the
tempest, for resolutely God will be Master.

32. I will not, my Lords appeal to any body from you, but to your selves, and
howsoever it is said, that a man must never be both Judge and party, yet I avow
to you with all candor, that I confide so much in your goodness, your zeal
toward the pure honor of God, of the Church, and of France; and I add yet
further in the goodness of our cause, which has been combated so often, and
through the mercy of God, has never been Conquered, that for my part, I
desire no other Judges but your selves. In truth it seems to me that you and
we in this difference are, as anciently the two Angels in Daniel were, who had
both a good intention, and aimed at nothing but at the glory of God, and fought
not but for the salvation of souls; and therefore God sent an Angel, who is
called of great Counsel; who accommodated all, and made it evidently appear
who was in the right, and who in the wrong. And I will hope and believe so well
of his eternal and paternall providence, as that he will do the like in our
case, and will make you most evidently discern his holy will. Sicut ergo fuerit
voluntas in Coelo, sic fi^t, etc.

I tell you therefore yet once again, that I will not appeal from you to any
but your selves, but I will imitate that good Abbot, and good St. Bern. Ep. 213.
Frenchman, as good as ever was in the World. You may be pleased to remember
that Pope Innocent the second, had employed him extraordinarily to appease the
Schism, and he did all that which a Saint was able to do, who had his hands
full of miracles, and was ever able to work them.

But what did the innocent Abbot gain by this? A thousand jealousies rose up
against him, a thousand slanders were darted against the white of his poor
heart; the Pope himself in a Letter calling him Rebel and Traitor against the Sea Apostolic. Who would ever have believed this? Yet in fine, so it was. The
holy man opening the Popes Letter to him, was as if he had opened a Cloud full
of fire, with a bolt of thunder in the midst, and with a blow as if it had
pierced his heart. But yet calling his spirits to himself, and adoring the
admirable but secret providence of God, he wrote in these terms to the
Pope. Quis mihi faciet iustitiam de vobis? Si haberem Ep. 213.
iudicem ad que^ vos trahere possem, iam nunc ostendere vobis (vt parturiens
loquor) quid meremini. Extat quide^ tribunal Christi, sed absit ut ad illud
appellem vos qui illic, si vobis necessarium and mihi possibile esset, vellem
magis totis viribus insistere, and respondere pro vobis. Itaquoe recurro ad
eum, cui in praesenti datu^ est judicare de vniuersis, hoc est, ad vos, vos
apello, ad vos, vos indicate inter me and vos.

In quo quaeso puer vester tam male meruit de vestra paterninate, vt eum
inurere and insignire placeret, Nota, and nomine Proditoris? Nunquid non me
vestrum Vicariu^, dignatio vestra constituit, in reconciliatione Petri Pisani,
etc. This virtuous Abbot firmly thought that he should have met with thanks,
for having even defeated himself with labor to appease this Schism; and in
place thereof he found himself qualified with the name of Traitor, and a
perfidious man, who had (as it were) betrayed both the Pope and the Church. All
his choler was such, as that he had none at all, and his appealing (as for a
wrong) was not to appeal at all; but to remit it to the providence of God, to
make the truth appear, and to make his innocence subsist, which was evidently
afterward as you know.

33. I beseech you most humbly to consider well, that notwithstanding men have
desired so many, and so many times, to stir up this business in France, in
Italy, in Germany, in England, and in Avignon, there has indeed been made a
great deal of confused noise, but the Authors thereof have never gathered any
other fruit, then a great deal of pain, and things have still remained in
the same state they were in before. In fine, all that which ordinarily men got
in those times, was to b^ able to observe in whom there was a little passion,
and in whom there was none. There was never (God be thanked) less reason to
be afraid then now; since now we see France to be filled with so many
worthy Prelates, and so zealous of virtue, and of the salvation of souls, as
you are. I beseech God to multiply these great favors toward you, and ever to
give you hearts which may be truly Apostolical; and all full of caelestiall
fire, and give grace to us, that we may well and worthily serve the Church,
under your favors, and by imitation of you. And I pray God that we may never
be reproached for that, for which St. Paul reproacheth 1 Cor. 3.
the Church of Corinth. Cum sic inter vos zelu^ and contentio, nonne carnales
estis, and secundu^ hominem ambulatis? Cum enim quis dicat ego quidem sum
Pauli, alius autem ego Apollo, nonne homines estis? Quid igitur est Apollo?
Quid vero Paulus? Ministri ejus cui credidistis, and vnicui^ sicut dominus
dedit. Ego plantaui. There is for you my Lords, and for the Pastors and Vicars,
Apollo regauit, behold this is for privileged Persons, whom God has sent to
succor them. Deus autem incrementu^ dedit; Itaque neque qui plantat est
aliquid, neque qui rigat, sed qui incremen^u^ dat Deus. Qui autem plantat and
qui rigat vnum sunt, unusquisque autem propriam mercedem accipiet, secundu^
suum laborem. Dei enim sumus adjutores, etc. I pray God, I say, that the first
part of this Discourse (all which is so Divine) may never be verified upon
us, but that the second passage may be verified, which certainly is a most
rich one, and able to make the Gallican Church to become a terrestiall
Paradise, and the pearl, the flower, and the Lilly L. 5. de confid. c. 4.
of all the Churches in the World. And for the accomplishing hereof, the
advice which St. Bernard (one of the Apostles of our France, gave to Pope
Eugenius, who was both his Son, and his Father, and his very heart) does
admirably serve in my judgment.

The title is this. Quales coadiutores habere debeat Episcopus, to discharge
himself worthily of his place, and in such sort as that he may also save his
flock, for this is the true point of State, which imports; and if this be not
done, the rest is trash. Amongst other qualities which he ascribes to these
Prelates, who have a mind to be Saints, one is, that they take men who may
serve them faithfully.

These men he calls Cooperators and Coadiutors, and says; Tuum est
vndecunque euocare, and ascribere tibi, exemplo Moysis senes non iuuenes, sed
senes, non tam aetate quam moribus, etc. Elige viros qui missi post aurum non
cant, sed Christum sequantur. Qui Regibus Ioannem exhibeant, Aegyptijs Moysen,
fornicantibus Phinees, Eliam idolatris, Elisaeum auaris, Petrum mentientibus,
Paulum blasphemantibus, negociantibus Christum. Qui vulgus non spernant, sed
doceant, non diuites palpent, sed terreant, pauperes non grauent, sed foueant,
minas Principum non paueant, sed contemnant, etc. To do well, a man should
here set down the whole Chapter so precious and full of juice it is, but I
should be importunate, and it will suffice to set down the end thereof. Elige
eos qui ad teredeant, fatigati quidem, sed non suffarimati; gloriantes quod non
aurum attulerint, sed quod reliquerint pacem regnis, legem barbaris, quietem
Monasterijs. Ecclestis, Ordinem, Clericis disciplinam, Deo populum
acceptabilem, sectatorem bonorum operum. And where shall we find such men as
these? It would become me ill, to tell where, whilst I am speaking to you, my
Lords, who know it so much better then I, besides that the matter speaks
sufficiently for it self.

If you fear that Saint Bernard being an Abbot and a Monk, may have been too
favorable to them, who should by reason of their profession, have those
qualities which he holds requisite for such as are to serve Popes and
Prelates, let us take hold of another, with whom we will make an end of this
discourse.

Will you be content to believe Pope Gregory in this business? Hearken then
to this Oracle, who applies most happily these words of Job, to this purpose.
Quando erit Omnipotens mecum and in circuitu meo pueri mei, quando lauabam
pedes meos butyro and Petra fundebat riuos olei. Pueri Job 29. S. Greg. l. 19
c. 9. and 10.
in circuitu Ecclesiae and Christi sunt qui caelestibus mandatis inseruiunt.
Pedes sunt sancti Praedicatores, and inferlorum operum Ministri; hi butyro
eloquij pedes lauant. Quid ad haec nos Episcopi, etc. You may see the rest if
it Opusc. 15. c. 4.
please you, and how Saint Thomas applies it to this question.

If yet you will needs fear lest this great Pope may also perhaps remember
himself to have been a Monk, and that so perhaps he may hang toward the
party of Religious men, in pointing at those conditions, which are not more
easily, nor more eminently, nor more ordinarily found, then in Religious men,
who make profession thereof, let us even resort to Saint Charles, whom you love
so well, and let us conclude out of his mouth, as we began by him. This holy
Prelate will tell you first, that he desires no more of Religious men, Act.
Medi^l. part. 4. in. Instruct. wisit. 1. de Regular.
but that they observe the Council of Trent. Now this is reasonable.

Secondly, he commands his visitors, that performing toward Religious men,
that which the Pope has by express favor accorded to them, they do by no
means grate Act. Medi^l. p. 4. Inst. Conf.
upon their Privileges. And this is also reasonable.

Thirdly, that he should never be able to have too many Oblati, or other
laborers for the saving of souls, for as much (says he) as Saint Katherine
Sermon. 3. Synod. 11. and l. 8. vitae. c. 13.
of Sienna desired even to loose heaven, for the gaining of one only soul,
and what marvel was it then if that holy Virgin would be kissing the ground,
and the place where Preachers were wont to set their feet, they being the
Cooperators of Jesus Christ. And there is nothing more pleasing to God then to
see us such; and when he finds a man who with him will bear the burden of
the salvation of souls, etc. Thus says Saint Charles, and this also is
reasonable.

He did even burn with such a love of God, and with so great zeal of the
salvation of souls, that he could not get laborers enough by the half, who
might attend to this holy function; and this was his only reason for his
making the Oblati of St. Ambrose, conceiving that they were to prove men who
would sacrifice them selves to this alone, without any other diuersion in the
world, and depending upon his only will. But I have spoken of this already at
large, and I must end all this little discourse by the mouth of a great Apostle.

If, my Lords, there be any thing which by misfortune may have offended you
never so little in this discourse, which has been made by your commandment,
I do most humbly beg your pardon for it. If perhaps you may find, that it
contains strong, and pressing, and solid reasons, it is God who has
inspired them, and therefore the glory belongs only to him. I beseech him
with all the powers of my soul, that he will be pleased to make you gust them
well, and that he will grave them profoundly in your hearts, to the end, that
he who is the God of Union, and not of Division, may establish an inu^olable
peace, and perfect Union in his Church. For as for us, I declare thus much to
you, that after we shall have most humbly prayed the great God, to make every
one of you a Saint Charles whom you loved so well, we shall esteem it for the
highest happiness, and honor, and succor, to be your most humble servants,
and we will say with the Divine Apostle: Non enim nosmeteipsos praedicamus, sed
Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum, nos autem servos vestros per Iesum, etc. Omnia
autem propter vos, vt gratia abundans per multos, in gratiarum action abundet
in gloriam Dei. And so my Lords, I humbly crave your holy Benedictions.

Benedictus Deus.
FINIS.

