The Kings Psalms
The first Psalm, (...) the obteinyng remission ^f sins.
O Lord of Lords, God almighty, great and dreadful, which by thy word
haste made heaven, earth, the Sea, and all things contained in them.

Nothing is hable to resist thy power, thy mercy is over all thy works.

(...) things be under thy dominion and rule: both man (...) beast, and all
living ^^^atures.

Thou art merciful too whom thou will: and haste compassion on whom it
pleases thee.

Thy counsel shall stand for ever: and what so ever thou will shall be done.

Power, Dominion, and Glory is thine: which art above all things, and in
all things; and in us all.

Thou art father of mercies, and GOD of all grace, peace, and comfort: which
wilt not the death of sinne^ nor delitest in the damnation of souls.

O Lord God, which art rich in mercy, and of thine especial love toward
us, even when we were thine enemies by sin, did send into the world
thine only begotten son Jesus Christ: that whosoever believes duly in him,
shall not perish, but have everlasting life.

Have mercy upon me, have mercy upon me, according to thy great mercy.

And according to the multitude of thy merc^^, put away mine (...)

O God most (...) me from my (...), and make me clean (...) mine uncleanness.

For I acknowledge (O Lord) my heinous sins: and accuse my self of mine
unrighteous deeds.

I confess against my self, the wickedness of my heart, which has been ever
unfaithful, and rebellyng against thy precepts.

I have been an untrue and a froward child to thee, and have provoked thee
with my vanities.

O holy father, I have offended thy divine Majesty: and am not worthy to be
called thy son.

Because I provoked thee to anger, through the multitude of my sins: and have
not exercised my self in thy righteous laws.

I have turned back from thy ways, and done evil before thee.

I have done wickedly and unjustly behaved my self, leaving thy
commandments, and murmuring against thy correction.

I have turned my self away, and not kept my promise made unto thee: I have
walked in an evil way, after mine own thoughts and fantasies, chusyng the
things that thou would not.

O Lord God almighty, I have not feared thee, nor showed due reverence unto
thee: but I have been disobedient and stubburne unto thee.

As a common harlot is with out shame, eue^ so am I without shame of my sins:
for behold, I speak unto thee, and yet I sin more and more.

I have left that which is good, and gone back from thee: and I have not put
my trust and hope in thee, my maker, but have sought for help, and sauegarde
otherwise.

I have ploughed wickedness, and reaped iniquity, and eaten the fruicte of
lies: Because I have trusted in mine own way.

I have cast thy laws behind my back, not regardyng thy commandments, nor
leauyng mine own leude customs.

I have not given my heart to return to thy paths: for I would not know thee,
but have fallen through mine iniquity.

I never unto this day, turned truly unto thee with all my heart: But as a
woman that breaks her fidelity, and promise unto her houseband, even so (O
lord God) I have broken my promise unto thee.

For I have lived abominably, and have had no remorse, nor repentance for my
evil deeds, but have run from sin to sin, followyng the leude desires
of my heart.

Thou knoweste all things (O Lord) how I have provoked thee to displeasure
by my leude inventions: and none of all my sins be hid from thee.

I hated thy discipline and correction: and regarded not thy words and
sayings.

I have not done penance for my malice: But have increased in much vanity.

My heart has been void of truth: and my hands have wrought
unrighteousness.

My tongue has spoken sinfully: and I have labored with the imagination of my
heart, to find out lies and deceiptes, and no truth has been in my ways.

I have accustomed my tongue to speak ^rifles and vanities, fulfillyng my
fleshly desires and thoughts, my purposes and inventions have been contrary to
thy will, whereby I have offended the eyes of thy Majesty.

Thou haste seen all these things (O Lord) and haste holde^ thy peace, and
yet they were evil in thy fight, and displeased thee.

In thy anger thou have cast me away, and art divided from me now many days.

Thou have given me up to the desires of my heart: To do the things which
be not semyng.

Woe I am, that I have gone from thee: great is my misery, that I have lead
my life in sin.

Woe is me, that I have forsaken thee to do my devises, not after thy mind,
to accomplish my thoughts, which have not proceaded of thy spirit, but have
heaped up sin upon sin.

Mine infamy and reproach is daiely before mine eyes: and for shame I dare not
show my face.

And now, o lord god, why forgettest thou me: why kepeste thou away so long
thy mercy from me?

Hear now my cause graciously, although thou haste been displeased with me
agreate while: For thou art merciful: be not angry always, I beseech thee.

Cast not away a contrite and penitent person, a wretch and an abiecte,
which humbly calls upon thy name.

Turn again a little toward me, O lord God, and forgive me my mischeuous
deeds.

Order me not according to my sins, nor punish me as my wickedness deserves.

Show not forth thy power against a poor wretch: persecute him not so sore,
which is without al strength.

Turn not thy face alwaie from my prayers: but according to thy promises, take
me again unto thy favor.

For I am thine, O righteous father, who^ thine only dear son has redeemed
with his precious blood.

And now my soul abhors my old conversation: and of thee, which art judge
of all men, I ask mercy.

I do submit my self under thy mighty hand: for after thine, anger thou
show mercy, and in the time of tribulation thou do forgive sins.

I acknowledge, that I am a sinner, beseching thee lord God almighty, of thy
goodness to do with me, according to thy great mercy.

I am confounded and ashamed to lift up mine eyes unto thee, for my sins are
ascended up unto thy sight.

Against thee (O father) against thee I have sinned, and dooen evil before
thee: thou see that mine iniquity is great.

Truly I have been an offender against thee, even from my cradell, and sinee
I sucked my mothers breasts, I have not ceased to do evil.

Behold, I was begotten in iniquity: and my mother brought me into this
world defiled with sin.

For the Corn of an evil seed is sown in my heart, and how much
wickedness has sprung thereof unto this day, thou know, O lord.

I can not shake of my sins and offense, but I carry still with me the
infamy of my youth.

Behold lord, I am sold under sin, and in my flesh I find not that which
is good.

For the good that I would, that do I not, but the evil that I hate, that I
do.

All the thoughts and imaginations of my heart, have been set to do evil,
ever since I was young.

O why do I dye in my sins lord God: seeing thy will is not that a sinner dye,
but return from his sin, and live?

For thou art good and merciful, and according to thy great mercy, sauest
them that be unworthy.

For albeit no man is able to bear the punishemente, which thou dooest
threaten against sinners, yet the mercy, which thou have promised, is great
and unsearchable.

Thou have showed mercy a thousand times heretofore: to make thy name
glorious, as it is even yet still.

The old fathers in their necessities cried unto thee, and thou did deliver
them: there put their trust in thee: and they were not confounded.

When they were at their wits end, and wiste not what to do: this was
their only refuge, to lift up their eyes to thee.

Thou did save them for thy names sake, to show in them thy might and
strength.

Many a time they provoked thee through their iniquities, and stirred thy
goodness to displeasure.

Yet when thou saweste their tribulation, and their lowly submission unto thee,

Thou did remember thy promise, and by and by baddest pity and compassion
upon them: according to the multitude of thy mercies.

Have mercy upon me (O lord God omnipotent) have mercy upon me: for I am a
miserable, and a wretched creature: make me whole I beseech thee, who^ thou
haste stricken for my sin and iniquity.

My soul is troubled greatly: and how long, O lord, will thou not look
toward me?

How long will thou reject my prayer thus criyng out unto thee? Will thou
hear me at no time? How long will thou turn away thy face from me.

Where be thy old mercies (O Lord) whom thou haste stablished in thy truth.

Will thou now (O Lord God) cease to show mercy? Or will thou withdraw thy
goodness for displeasure?

Have thou cast me away for ever: That thou will never hereafter be pleased
with me?

Thy hand is not weakened, but it may help: and thy ears be not stopped,
that they refuse to hear.

How long shall my mind be troubled with painful and heavy thoughts? How
long shall sorrow formente my heart?

How long shall mine enemy have the ouerhande of me? look toward me, lord
God, and hear my prayer.

Give light to mine eyes, for I have slepte to long in death: and my sins
have prevailed against me.

Turn again, O Lord, turn again, and deliver my soul: and save me for thy
great mercies sake.

Lo, now is the accepted time: now be the days of health and grace.

In death who shall remember thee? In hell who shall laud or praise thee?

He that lives, he that lives, shall praise thee: and shall make thy mercy
known.

Lord rebuke me not in thine anger: nor punish me in thy great displeasure.

Cast not thy darts at me: nor lay not thy heavy hand upon me.

For I have borne thine anger a long while, and of the Cup of thy high
displeasure, I have drunk, very deep.

There is no health in my flesh, for fear of thy displesure: I have no peace
nor rest, when I behold my sins.

My iniquities be gone over my head: and like an heuie burdein they daily
press me down.

The wounds in my soul do fester, and stincke, even through mine own
folly.

I am a wretch, cast away from thy favor and presence, and go mourning all
the day long.

My soul is full of filthynesse, and no part of me is whole and sound.

Wherefore my enemies do persecute me the more, the greatness of my pain
makes me to rore and cry.

My heart faints and tre^bleth within me, and my strength is gone away.

O Lord, thou knoweste my desire, and thou see my necessity.

Forgive me all my sins (O Lord GOD almighty) for thine own sake, and put
out of thy sight my heinous offenses, for according to thy goodness, thou
haste promised forgiveness of sins to them that do penance.

Have mercy on me lord, for the glory and honor of thy name, and be no
longer displeased with me, and then thou shall surely be known to be just,
and true in thy words, and shall overcome when thou art judged.

For by this, thy great grace shall be known: that thou take mercy on them,
which have not whereof they may glory in thy sight.

And all the dwellers on the earth shall learn, and know thy goodness, when
thou shall confer, and give thy benefits to us for thy great names sake,
and not after our evil ways, and wicked deeds.

Uerely lord God, except thou show unto us thy manifold mercies, the world
shall not have life, nor they that dwell therein.

And if thou help us not with thy goodness, how may they, which have
offended, be raised up from their sins?

Have mercy on me o good father, have mercy on me, and for thy glorious name,
be no longer angry with me.

Take me sinner unto thy mercy, for the name of thy holy son Jesus, who^
thou haste sent, to be the obtainer of mercy for our sins through faith
in his blood.

Behold holy father, behold thy child, whom thou have chosen: behold thy
well-beloved son, in whom thy soul deliteth: upon whom thou have put thy holy
spirit, and sent him to preach the Gospel to the poor, to heal them,
which for their sins be sorrowful, and contrite: to comfort them that
mourn, to preach pardone to the prisoners, and sight to the blind.

Behold thy littell one, which was borne for us, behold thy son which is
given to us, whom thou haste not spared, but given to death for us all, to be
a sweet offering and sacrifice to thee.

Uerely be took upon him in his body, our infirmities, and he bare our pains.

He was made weak for our sins: and he was wou^^ed for our offenses.

The correcttion for our peace was laid upon him, and by the strokes that he
suffered, our wou^des were healed.

All we went a straie like sheep, every one followed his own way, and thou
(O lord) put on him our iniquity, strikyng him for the offenses of thy
people.

He gave his body to be beaten, and his cheeks to be stricken, he turned not
a way his face from them that scorned him, and spit upon him.

Through his love and mercy, he has redeemed them that were lost, and by
his blood shed on the cross, he has pacified all things, in heaven and in
earth.

He gave himself to death, and made his prayers for the^ which were offenders.

Look (O merciful father) and consider, who it is that thus did suffer: and
remember (I besche thee) for whom he has suffered.

For this is that innocente whom thou gave to death for us, even then when
we were sinners: and shall we not, being now justified by his blood, much
rather be saved from wrath through him?

If we, when we were yet enemies, were reconciled to thee, by the death of thy
son shall we not being reconciled, much rather be saved by his life?

Behold that pure and immaculate lamb, which takes a way the sins of the
world, by whose precious blood, we are redeemed from our iniquities.

Look upon that most meek innocent, which like a Lamb that was led to
his death: and being most cruelly entreated, once opened not his mouth.

Behold thine only son, whom although thou begattest of thy almighty power,
substance, and nature: yet thou would he should be partaker of my
infirmity.

Which being God in nature, thought it no rauine to be equal with God, but
made him self low, taking upon him the shape of a servant, and coming in the
similitude of sinful flesh, condemned sin in the flesh, submittyng him
self unto thee, O father, even to the death of the cross, and there put on
the hand writing, that was against us, contained in the law written, and
taking it out of the way, fastened it to his cross, on the which he spoiled
potestates and powers, and made a show of them openly, and triumphed over the^
in his own person.

Turn the iyes of thy majesty (O lord God) and look upon the work of thy
ineffable goodness.

Beh^ld thine own sweet son, how all his body was drawn, and stretched
forth on the cross.

Look upon all the parts of his body, from the croune of the head unto the
sole of the foot, and no pain shall be found like unto his pain.

Behold (O loving father) the blessed head of thy dear soonne, crouned with
sharp Thorns, and the blood rennyng down upon his godly visage.

Behold his tender body, how it is scourged: his naked breast is stricken and
beaten: his bloody side is thrusted through: his heart pa^teth: his senewes be
stretched forth: his Godly eyes dasell, and leese their sight: his princely
face is wanne and pale: his pleasant tongue is inflamed for pain: his inward
parts wax dry and stark: his arms both blewe and wanne by striefe, his
bones be plucked one from an other: his beautiful legs be feeble, and
weak: and the streams of blood issuyng out of his body, run down apace
upon his feet.

Look (O my maker) upon the humanity and ge^tlenes of thy dear soonne: and
pity the infirmity of thy weak handie work.

Behold (O glorious Father) the body of thy dear soonne, all too rent and
torn: and remember I beseech thee, of how small substance I am.

Look upon the pain of him that is both God and man: and release the misery
of man, whom thou have made.

Behold the grievous sufferyng of the redeemer, and forgive the sin of him
that is redeemed.

Keep me from all evil ways: and teach me by thy holy spirit, to choose the
way of truth.

I beseech thee (o thou king of holiness) by him that is most holy, by this
my redemer Christ, that thou bring me again into the right way that I may be
united, and made one with him in spirit which abhorred not to be united with
me in flesh.

Make me to go perfectly in thy paths, and to hate al wicked ways.

Wash my heart from malice, and cleanse me from my secret sins.

Cleanse me (O holy father) with the blood of the new Testament of thy
well-beloved son, which has loved us, and washed us with his blood from our
sins, and has redeemed us from al iniquity.

Purify my heart by the sanctification of thy spirit, and the sprinklyng of
the blood of thy son, from al filthiness of sin, and evil conscience.

O God almighty, be merciful unto me sinner: for thy glorious name sake, and
remember my sins no longer.

For thou art God, gracious and merciful, and patiently dooest suffer us: and
would that no man should perish, but that all men should return to
penance.

Make me, O Lord God, to return from my evil ways and wicked thougtes.

Remember not the sins and abominations of my youth: according to thy
mercy, be myndfull of me for thy goodness sake O lord.

Look not upon me with a grievous countenance: for there is no man that dare
speak for me.

Enter not into iudgeme^te with thy servant, for if thou accuse me, I shall
never be quitte.

For if thou, o lord, mark my sins and iniquity: who shall not fall before
thee?

This is certain and sure that then in thy sight no man living shall be
justified, seeing thou haste found iniquity even in thy angels.

How much rather in me^, which is abomination and filthiness, and dwells
in the earthly house of this body, and drinks iniquity as it were water?

Who is clean from filthiness when all be corrupted? Truly not one: No though
he have lived but one day on the yearthe: and though his Months may be
easily numbered.

Of a truth there is no mortal manne, which has not done wickedly: nor there
is any righteous on earth, which does good and synneth not.

Yet because mercy is in thy hand (O lord) although thou be dreadful my hope
is in thee, in whom my soul trusts.

My soul looks for thee, because mercy and ple^tifull redemption is with
thee.

For this I know assuredly, that thou will not cast me away for ever: But
although thou cast me away for my sins a while, yet thou will have mercy
upon me again, according to the multitude of thy mercies.

For thou (O lord) are ^ull of pity and mercy: and wilt not turn thy face
away from us, if we will retour^e to thee.

Thou art our God, full of sweetness, verity, and patience, and disposest
all things by mercy.

The fou^taines of thy goodness be ever full and flow over: thy grace never
decaieth.

All thy ways be mercie^ truth, to them that seek outthy covenant and
testimonies.

How gentle and loving the father is to his children, so gentle and loving art
thou (O lord) to them that fea^e thee, and for the habou^dance of thy mercy,
thou do it pardon our infirmities.

Thou ^nowest thine own handie work: thou remem^e^est what we are: thou see
that we are flesh, and of no strength.

Thou have not forgotten, that this world is full of unrighteousness and
wickedness: and that it is wholly set and bent on evil.

Yea nevertheless thou art merciful, and full of grace, and like a merciful
lord, forbearest to punish sinners, when they repent them self and return
from their sins.

Have mercy upon me (O Lord God my Savior for the glory of thy name: And
deliver me, and forgive me my sins for thy names sake.

O righteous father, look not straightly upon the multitude of my sins: but
look on the face of Jesus thy holy soonne, which being without sin, bare
our sins in his body on the free of the cross.

Turn away thy face from my sins: and put out all my iniquities.

Make a clean heart in me (O God) and renew me with a right spirit.

Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me.

Give me again the comfort of thy help: and stablish me with thy mighty
spirit.

Mollify my heart, o lord God, that I may return to thy paths: for I have
wandered over long in the way of error.

Turn me to thee, and I shall be turned: for thou art my maker: and I am the
claye and work of thy hands.

Turn not thy face away from me, nor go not from thy servant in thine anger.

Be my helper, and forsake me not, despise me not, O lord, which art my GOD
and my health. Amen.

The second Psalm for remission of sins.
O Most mighty God of Angels and of men: whose judgments be unsearchable,
and whose wisdom is profounde and deep

Hear the prayers of thy servant: and cast not away the humble suits of thy
poor creature and handie work.

For as long as I shall live, I will speak unto thee: and I will not hold my
peace, so long as the breathe is in my body.

I do turn my soul unto thee, and I set mine eyes directly upon thee.

Let thine anger be turned away from me I beseech thee, and grant, that I
may find grace and favor in thy sight.

According to thy greatenesse of the merry, forgive me all my sins.

Pluck me away from mine heinous offenses: and heal my soul, which has
offended thee, make me free from the guilte of my transgression: for I
acknowledge my iniquity, and am sorry for my sins.

I have forsaken thy way, and I, knowing thy commandments, have dooen all
things contrary to them.

I have broken the covenant that I made with thee: and have despised to keep
thy law.

Uerely I have sinned against thee O lord God, and the blemishe of my synne^
bideth still with me, even unto this day.

I have forsaken, thee, O God my maker, and gone away from thee my savior,
and have rebelled against thee, like the Ore that winceth, and strives when
he (...) ^o yoked.

I have h^^den^d my heart against thee: and I have lifted up my neck proudly
after (...).

^ have trusted in ^yes, and through de^eipte would not knowledge thee: but I
have followed the l^udnesse of my heart.

My (...) and arrogancy have begiled me: and the fooli^^ boldness of my
heart, has brought me into desolate ways.

Mine own counsels and aduises have wroughte me these things: Such is the
malice and rebellion that possesses the hearts of men.

My soul is ^ut from quietness and rest* and I cannot think of any good
thing.

The yoke of my sins is waxed very heavy: it is lifted up, and fastened
about my neck.

Thou have spoken to me, but I would not hear, thou haste called me, but I
would not answer, I believed not thy words, nor would abide thy counsel.

I regarded not thy holy word: and I gave not my mind to thy sayings.

Thou have stricken me, but I would not know the cause thereof: thou haste
corrected me, but I would not take thy discipline.

I did not consider in my heart, that thou would not forget my sin and
malice.

With my mouth and my lips I glorified thee, but my heart was far from thee

I hid my sin as Adam did: to the intent to have my iniquity unknown.

I asked counsel of thy mouth: and I would not follow thy law.

I have sinned before thine eyes* and therefore my soul is made unstable.

I forseke thee, which art the fountain of continual springyng waters: to
the intent to big to my self muddie pittes, which have no water.

In all these things, I am not returned to thee: nor I have not prayed unto
thee, that I might leave my wicked ways.

Se lord, and behold, how vile I am made: all the beauty of my soul is
perished and gone: In so much that now I dare not in any wise behold and
look upon thee.

And there was no cause, why I should forsake thee, and vainly follow vain
things.

Lord have mercy upon me, and hear my prayers: for thou art my God, and
there is no savior besides thee.

Turn away from me thy heavy displeasure: and destroy me not for my sins
of my youth.

I humbly beseech thee, O Lord, forgive me, forgive me for thy excedyng mercy.

O Lord God of hosts, if thou be determined to save, who can let or
resist? If thou stretche out thy hand, who shall turn thee away?

Thou may do to me as the potter does to his pot: for (behold) I am in
thy hand as the claye is in his.

Amend me (O lord) but in mercy, not in thine anger least thou utterly
consume me: make me to understand and know how hurtful and deadly a thing it
is to forsake thee, my Lord GOD, and to cast away from me, the fear of thee.

There is no man that can heal me, nor cure my plage: no man can deliver me,
^ut thou, O lord, which woundest and make whole which strikeste, and
healest again.

My destruction comes of my self: my help and salvation stands only in
thee.

For none is like unto thee thou art mighty: and great is the name of thy
strength.

Turn me to thee, o lord, and I shall be turned: take away from me this
sinful heart, that thy law may bring for the fruit in me.

Remember me Lord, for thy goodness sake: and for the great love that thou
bear toward me.

O lord God, behold, thou have made both heaven and earth by thy great
might: and nothing is hard to thee.

Thou art that puissaunte and mighty, whose name is the lord of hosts: great
and marvelous in thy counsel.

As soon as thou have spoken the word, all things be done: as soon as thou
have commanded, things be: and thy word returns not to the void, and
without effect.

Thou, o lord God, show mercy unto all: for thou can do all: and thou
makeste as though thou saw not the sins of men, because they should do
penance, and amend their lives.

For thou love all things that be: and hateste nothing that thou haste
made: for nothing thou made, or have ordained of any hatred.

Thou spareste and tenderest all men: for all things be thine, and thou love
the souls of men.

Thou do minister mercy, equity, and justice in the earth: and therefore
in these virtues thou greatly delitest

Truly (O lord) thou art righteous and gracious, notwithstanding I have
offended thee, transgressyng thy covenant, and trespassyng against thee.

O lord, thou have seen all my abominations: look on my cause, and consider,
how vile and wretched I am: see and behold my great confusion.

In the time of reconciliatio^ hear me, and in the day of salvation have
mercy on me.

Be merciful unto me, and have mercy on me, which have none other help but
thee: whose will nothing can resist: when so ever thou do purpose to save.

Hear me, which am a wretch, making supplication unto thee, make me to
trust in thy name: and deliver me by thy power.

Have regard to me from heaven, O Lord, and look down from thy holy
habitation: and from the throne of thy glory.

Destroy me not because of my iniquity: but remember the sorrow and pain that
I suffer.

Be not still angry with me (o lord) forget all my sins and remember the^ no
longer.

Let my prayer ascend up unto thee: say unto my soul behold I am come to
thee, thy health and thy salvation.

The third Psalm for remission of sins.
O God eternal, just, and holy: which kepest couenaunte and mercy, with
the^ that love thee, and keep thy commandments.

Look at me, and have mercy upon me: for I have trespassed against thee: and
dooen evil in thy sight.

Show foor the upon me the tender affections of thy mercy, that thy
servant may have an heart to pray unto thee.

I humbly make my prayer before thy face, not trustyng in mine own
righteousness, but in thy great mercies.

For I am unclean and filthy: and al my righteousness is like a foul bloody
clo^te.

Unto thee, O lord, be justice, mercy, and pity: but unto me be confusion
and shame, for my iniquities.

Certainly even from my beginning, I have used my self proudly against thee,
doing wickedly, and ceasyng not.

O Lord, thou haste redeemed me, and yet I have not ceased to offend thee, and
my heart has not been straight in thy sight.

Thou have taught and instructed me, and stablished my power, and I have been
evil affected toward thee, being like unto a deceiptfull bow.

My pride and presumption accuse me to my face, I am overthrown in mine own
wickedness: I do seek thee (O lord) I beseech thee, that I may find thee,
thou art separated from me: for I have gredily followed filthiness.

Yet will I accuse mine own sinful ways before thee, o lord, until thou
have mercy upon me, and receive me again into thy favor.

God forbid, that ever I should depart from thee again, and not diligently
seek for thy promises.

I will never hold my peace nor keep silence: until thou have established that
covenant with me, which thou haste made, and ordained in times paste.

That is to say, like as the justice of a just man shall not deliver or save
him, what time soever he shall offend: so the wickedness of a wicked man
shall not hurt him, what time so ever he shall return from his wickedness.

In hope of this (O Lord God) I will tarry thy pleasure: for thou art good to
the^ that trust in thee, and to the soul that seeks thee.

Thou kepest thy truth for evermore: and the word which issues forth of
thy mouth, shall not be void, and of none effect.

Destroy me not, good lord, for my sins: Nor reserve not eternal
punishemente for me.

Open thine eyes, and behold the greatness of my pain, and my aff^iction:
for my iniquity is great in thy sight and my sins have brought me into this
trou^le.

Destroy me not utterly. nor leave me in my sins: for thou art God of
mercy, and very gracious.

Execute not the punishment upon me, which thou had purposed: do to me
according to thy name; although my defaultes and sins be many.

O lord, thou art my God: and thy name has been put upon ^e: leave me not in
the deepenesse of my troubles.

Thou haste chastised, and reformed many, and haste strengthened the weary
hands, thy words have set up him that staggered: and thou haste made
straight the crooked knees.

Wherefore I will seek thee (O Lord God) which haste wrought great things
unsearchable and innumerable.

Thou haste taken up the poor out of the duste, and have exalted them, which
were obiectes,

For thou do deliver the poor in his misery, out of the strait and
bottomless pit of tribulation: and out of the wide mouth of anguishe and
affliction, into rest and quietness.

Thou art gracious and merciful, for that thou sheweste mercy to the^, which
he not yet come into the world: and thou art very merciful to the^ which
diligentely observe, and keep thy laws: and thou do pacie^tly suffer
sinners: giving them time and place, whereby they may be changed from their
malice.

Hear me poor wretch, making supplication unto thee, for in thee, and thy
name, I have put my trust and affiaunce.

Take me thy servant unto thee, and make me good, and let me not be
disapoineted of that I look for.

Come again (o lord God) and save my soul: destroy me not, whom thou have
redeemed by thy great might, and power.

Look not upon the hardness of my heart, nor upon my sins: but like as thou
have many times showed mercy, so now be merciful, and forgive me.

Hear me (O lord) and be pacified: regard my prayer, and do according to
thy great name.

O Lord, I look to have help and salvation from thee: and this is my daiely
meditation, and exercise.

For thy mercies be great: and thy goodness is inestimable.

Hear me now favorably, and withholde thy mercies no longer from me.

In the way of thy judgments, I will look after thee: my soul desires too
magnify thy name, and to have thee in memory.

Incline my heart to do thy commandments: and direct my ways evermore in
thy sight.

Let me never hereafter go away from thy ways: nor leave me not now in the
deepenesse of my troubles.

Turn not thine eyes away from me: but teach me (O lord) to do those
things, which are pleasant in thy sight.

Make a perpetual league and covenant with me, that thou will put thy fear
into my heart: yt I never swerve from thee in all my life.

Withdraw not thy goodness from me for ever, but keep thy promise and
fidelity.

Be good unto me with beneuoleuce and favor: for thou art merciful, and thy
displesure continues not for ever.

Remember me with favor and kindness: and visit me with thy salvation.

I know (O Lord God) that thou art gracious and merciful, pacient, and of
great mercifulness.

Thou art good and merciful, thou keep covenant and mercy with thy
servants, which walk before thee in their whole heart.

There is none other God but thou, which regardeste and carest for all.

For thou haste been ever very merciful to me: delivering my soul from the
deep hell.

Let thy goodness (o lord) be ever with me, for all my wealth rests only
in thee.

In the time of tribulation I call upon thee (O lord) for thou art nigh unto
the^ which call upon thy holy name.

Succoure me (O God) and look merrily upon me: show me the light of thy
countenance: in thee my soul trusts, and my heart rejoices

Let my prayer come unto thy throne: bow down thine ear unto my cry.

Hear me now being penitent, O lord, whom thou have hitherto patiently
suffered: to the intent I should repent, and amend my life.

O God, I have opened unto thee my life: Save me for thy names sake: For my
trust is in thee.

What care I for worldly things: this one thing only I need and desire,
that I may find grace and favor in thy sight.

Wherefore I beseech thee O lord God, take away from me this pain and sorrow:
or at least wise mitigate and assuage it, either by comfort, or by counsel,
or by what means so ever it shall be seen good to thee.

The fowerth Psalm is a complaint of a penitent sinner, which is sore troubled
and overcome with sin.
O Lord GOD merciful and pacient: and of much mercifulness and truth.

Which for thy abundant charity, and according to thy great mercy, have
taken us out from the power of darkness: and haste saved us by the fountain
of regeneration and new birth, and the renuyng of the holy ghost: who^ thou
have shed upon us abundantly by Jesus Christ our savior.

If I have found grace and favor in thy sight: Suffer me to speak a word
unto thee: and be not displeased with me.

Why do thou ever forgette me: and leauest me in the mids of my troubles,
and euilles?

Where is become thy zeal and thy strength? Where is the multitude of thy
tender affections: and of thy mercies?

O lord, may not he which is fallen, rise up again? or may not he, which
has gone away from thee, return to thee again?

Shall my sorrow ever endure? Shall my wound be incurable and never healed.

How comes it to pass, that I turn still away from thee? my sin daily
increases, and of my self I cannot return.

In as much as it is not given to manne to direct his own ways: neither to
make perfect his own procedinges.

For in thy hand is the life of every living thing: and the spirit also of
every man.

Thou show thy mercy to who^ thou will: and thou art gracious to them,
whom thou fauourest.

Thou do kill, and thou do quicken: Thou leadest down to hell gate, and
bryngest up again.

Thy iyes behold the ways of every man: and thou searchest the hearts of men.

There is no place so secret or darcke, wherein sinners may hide the^ selves
from thee.

Nor any man may so lurk and hide him self in caves, but thou shall se him,
which do fulfill both heaven and earth in every part.

Why have thou cast me away from thy presence? and take me for thy enemy?

Why have thou laid upon my head the heavy weight of my sins seeing no man
is able to bear thy displeasure

What means it, that thou sheweste thy power against a wretch? Why
destroyest thou me for the sins of my youth?

If I have sinned, what shall I (...) (...) thee: and if my sins be increased,
what shall I do?

If I do justly, what shall I give to thee? or what shall thou receive at my
hand?

My wickedness shall hurt myself: and my rightousnes shall profit me.

The life of man is a temptation upon the year ^^and if I have synne^ as all
men have what mai^ I (...)

Shall any man be found clean, and without (...) fore thee? or shall (...)
without default in his dides

How may ^ more all man (...) pu^e from spirit (...) sight? (...) how may
he, which is borne of a woman, ^ee righteous.

Remember (O lord) I beseech thee, that thou haste made me of the earth: and
that thou shalt br^ng me again into the dust of death.

My days pass and vanish away like smoke: they waist daily, there is no
tarriyng.

My life flies away as the wind: and considers not that which is good.

I (...) but lately ^orne into thi^ world, and shortly I shall be taken away
hence by death, I never continue still in one state.

The days of my life be few, and short: thou haste appoincted an end,
which I shall not pass.

Naked and bare I came out of my mothers womb: and naked and bare I shall
return again: Tuely all men living are vanity.

Have pity, o lord, on the^ that are in misery: and despise not the works
of thy hands

Though we sinn^: yet are we under thee: for we know thy power and strength:
and if we sin not, then are we sure that thou regardest us.

Cease thy indignation (O lord) and turn it from me: and cast all my sins
behind thy back.

Take away thy plagues from me: for thy punishment has made me both feeble,
and fainte.

For when thou chastisest a man for his sins, thou causest him by and by to
consume and pine away.

Whatsoever is delectable in him, perishes like unto the clothe that is eaten
with Mothes.

Would God I had one to defend me a while, until thy anger were turned
away: or that thou would set me a time, in the which thou would
remember me.

I am clean cast away from thy presence: shall I never hereafter se thy face
again^*

Behold, I have opened the griefs of my soul: the days or my sorrows hau^
taken me

The fl^uddes of tri^ulation compass me round about: and the ^reaures of thy
fury run over me.

And I cry* unto thee (O lord God) but thou heareste me not: I ask mercy:
but thou reie^test my prayers.

Why thrustest thou down (...) wretch from thy presence? or why forsakest thou
me so long time?

Why take thou not away my iniquity? And why put thou not away the
wickedness of my heart?

Arise, and tarry no longer (O Lord) arise, and ^eie^^e me not for ever.

Have me in remembrance I beseech thee: for I thro^ghly tremble and shake for
fear.

Yet I will not hold my tongue* but cry still unto thee with a mournyng and an
heavy heart.

Turn away the stroke of thy vengeance from me: bring my mind out of
troubles into rest.

I am here no longer continewer, but a pilgrim and a stranger, as all other
mortal men be.

And what ^s man, that thou shoulde^^ be^ angerie with him? Or what is
mankind, that thou should be so heavy Lord unto us?

What, wit thou bring follow upon sorrow? I pant for pain, and find no
rest.

My sorrow greeueth me when I should eat and sudden fighes over whelme my heart

I am as if my bones were all to broken, when I hear mine enemies rail upon
me and say to me day by day, where is thy God^

Why tournest thou thy face away from these things (O Lord?) Why have thou
no regard of my trouble?

I earnestly ^ake my prayers daiely (...) thy sight and the heaviness of my
heart* I do show unto thee.

My spirit is careful, and troubled within me: and desperation has entered
into my heart.

Is it thy pleasure, O lord GOD, to cast away thine own handie work?

Deliver my soul from corruption, and my life from everlasting darkness.

What avails it me, that ever I was borne, if thou cast me straight into
damnation? seeing that she dead shall not praise thee: nor any of them which
go down to hell.

I have sinned, what shall I do to thee? why have thou put me to be
contrary to thee? I am weary of mine own self.

Why searcheste thou out my sins so narrowly: when there is no man that ca^
take out of thy hand?

If ^ would say that I were rightous and without sin: then thou might
worthily condemn me to the fire, prepared for the Devil and his angels.

But I confess, that I am a sinner, and I do humble my heart in thy sight.

Surely if any man would stand with thee in judgment, he shall not be able to
answer one word to a thousand things; wherewith thou might charge him.

This makes me to fear all my deeds: knowing that thou spareste not him that
offends.

If I look upon thy power, O how mighty and strong thou art, if I shall call
for judgment, who shall defend my matter, or speak for me?

To thee, O lord, I call and cry: to thee my God, I make mine humble suit.

Turn away thine anger from me: That I may know that thou art more
merciful unto me, then my sins deserve.

What is my strength, that I may endure? Or what is ye end of my trouble,
that my soul may pacie^tly abide it?

My strength is not a stony strength: and my flesh is not made of brass.

There is no help in my self and my strength flees away from me.

Although thou hide these things in thine heart: yet I know, that thou will
remember me at length.

For thou art true and just O lord God, thou do not condemn unjustly:
which rewardest man, according to his deserte^.

All this is come unto me, because I have forgotten thee, and not used my self
truly in thy testament.

My heart has turned backwarde: and I hau^ followed the desires of my flesh.

And thou have surely known thi^ thing: which ^nowest the s^cretes of the heart

Lay not against me (O lord) the sins of my youth: nor have in remembrance
^yne old injuries dooen against thee.

Daily sorrow ouercometh me: and sa^nesse possesses my heart.

I look after peace, but I can not have it: I look for a time of health, but
my grief continues still.

When the time of thine anger is past, let mercy come yet am I unhappy more and
more.

Woe and alas that ever I sinned: My heart therefore mourns and is sad, all
mirth and joy be banished from me.

How am I wasted? How miserably am I confounded? because I have forsaken, and
cast away thy law.

Death has ascended up by the windows: pearcyng the inward parts of my heart.

When I daily, one while in use secretly with my self, an other while with
loud voice cry out and complain: the mean tym^ (...) draws nere to the
pit.

Who shall give me place to rest in from all my griefs and troubles? And I
will forsake all men, and get me away from them.

Who shall give me water to my head, and a fountain of tears to mine iyes?
that I may bewail my sins both night and day.

And I will look for him, which may save me: and deliver me from the wrath
to come.

I have no trust neither in life nor death: but I fear thy judgment, o lord,
and the pains prepared for wicked sinners.

The fear of my sin makes me careful: and the burdein of my conscience
oppresses me sore.

O God, which tenderly love mankind, and art most rightful judge: spare me
now I beseech thee, and show me some favor while time is.

Forgive that which I fear put away that which I dread: before I depart
hence, and shall not return again.

My sins do vex and trouble me sore: they be so great that none can be
greater.

Alas my fall, alas my misery, alas ye grief of my plague and stroke: certainly
my syn is the cause of all this, and so I will take and suffer it.

The.v. Psalm for the obteinyng of godly wisdom.
O Lord God of mercy, which by thy word have made all things: and by thy
wisdom haste created manne.

O God eternal, to whom all things be known; be they never so secret:
which know all things before they be done.

Open my lips, and my mouth, that I make speak and show forth the glory,
and praise of thy name.

Give me a new heart, and a right spirit: and take from me all wicked and
sinful desires.

O lord I am folishe, ignorant and blind, when I am destitute of thy
knowledge.

I am ignorant and without intelligence, my dullness is so great, that my iyes
can no see, nor my heart perceive.

Yea, I am a very babe and a child, and know full little mine own life and
co^uersatio^.

My lips be defiled, and unclean, my time is short, and I am not able to
understand thy law.

Give thy servant I beseech thee, an heart apt to take learning: that I may
know what thing is acceptable in thy sight at al times.

Send down from heaven the spirit of thy wisdom, and replenishe my heart
with knowledge thereof.

The wisdom gives true knoweldge: and out of thy mouth proceeds both
counsel, and intelligence.

Thy wisdom opens the mouth of the dombe: and makes the tongue of
infantes eloquent.

If any seem to be perfect among men: yet if thy wisdom forsake him: he
shall be reckened nothing worth.

Thy wisdom is to men a treasure that fails not: which who so use it, they
are joined to god in love and amity

How well is it with that man, which is witty in this behalf, and has his
soul endued with thy wisdom?

What manne in all the world knows thy counsel? Or who ca^ compass in his
mind, what thy will is?

Who can co^prehende thy purpose and mind? Except thou give him wisdom, and
instruct him with thy holy spirit.

For men's reasons do fail in many things: and their forecastes and
inventions be uncertain and unsure.

For the mortal and corruptable body much greeueth the soul, and the
earthly house of the body holds down the mind, musyng upon many things.

Counsel and good success comes from above: where also wisdom is and
virtue

With thee (O lord) is richesse, glory, and righteousness, which be
treasures incorruptible.

He that has found out thee has found life: and he that loves not thee,
loves death

O Lord GOD, touch my mouth, that my iniquity may be driven away: dwell
thou in my heart, that my sins may be purged.

Wisdom does not enter into a malicious soul: nor will abide in a body,
which is suiecte to sin.

Teach me (O lord God) least my ignorance increase, and my sins wax more
and more.

Let thy spirit teach me the things that be pleasant unto thee, that I
may be led into the straighte way out of errors, wherein I have wandered
over long.

Let thy wisdom be stablished in my spirit: and write thy law in my heart.

Thy wisdom is to me more precious then al riches and I desire more to have
it tha^ all other things, be they never so fair and goodly.

O lord thou know how sore I am inflamed with the love of thy wisdom,
which is my only study, and meditation.

O how pleasant and sweet thy words be to my heart? truly much more then
honey is to my mouth.

Thy word is a bright ca^dell to my feet, and a light to my ways.

Thy wisdom pleases me more then thousa^des of gold or of silver can do.

I have more pleasure and delectatio^ in the way of thy wisdom: then in
great abundance of treasure.

Would GOD my ways may be ordered, that I may learn thy wisdom and thy
words.

Thy word gives heat and inflameth: wherefore I greatly desire it.

O happy is he (lord) who^ thou instructest: and make learned in thy law.

His soul has alwaie studied wisdom: and his tongue shall speak judgment.

The law of God shall be written in his heart: and he shall not be overthrown
as he goes.

O Lord, which art my God, and my savior, hear my prayer, and my tongue
shall ever speak, and set out thy mercies.

Give me wisdom which is assiste^t to the throne: that I mai^ discern
between good and evil, and may know thy holy mysteries.

Open mine eyes, that I may perceive, and behold the wounderfull things,
which be in thy law.

Remember thy word now I call upon thee: For I have put my hope in it, make me
to know the way of thy wisdom: and hide not thy knowledge from me.

Order me according too thy mercy, and disappoincte me not of that I look for.

Teach me right wisdom and intelligence: for thy wisdom is all that I
desire.

Put thy word in my mouth: and fasten thy wisdom in my heart.

Let thy wisdom rule and guide my thoughts: That they may alwaie please
thee.

Thy words be wonderful and marvelous: wherefore my soul deliteth in them.

Thy wisdom is perfect: and thy knowledge is clear, and gives light to the
iyes.

It is more amiable then gold and precious stones, it is far sweeter then
the honey comb.

Thy wisdom is pure, and undefiled, and makes souls strong: thy words be
certain and true, and give understanding unto the simple.

When shall he that erreth in his spirit have knoweledge? and when shall he that
is ignorant have learning?

When will thou send down thy holy spirit from above? when shall the
blind heart be lightened with knowledge? when shall the tongue that stammereth
be made eloquent?

I am like a babe without wisdom and discretion: let thy strong hand (O
Lord) be my help.

I know that thou canste do all things and nothing is hard to thee.

Thou art great (O lord) and canste not be known, and thy wisdom is
infinite.

I have declared my cause before thee: do with thy servant, according to thy
great mercy.

Look toward me and have mercy upon me: that I may bring to pass that, which
I believe and think, may be done by thee.

Make the way of thy wisdom known unto me: and replenishe my heart with the
knowledge thereof.

Hear my voice (O lord) according to thy mercy: entreat me according to
judgment.

Give glory unto thy name (O Lord for thou only art good and wise: and there
is none other savior beside thee

Hear me (O Lord) for thy name sake: and withhold not thy mercy from me.

My lips shall speak and set forth thy laud and praise when thou haste
taught me thy wisdom.

Then I will declare thy marueiles: That other also may be converted unto thee

And may bless thy name for ever, world without end. Amen.

The sixte Psalm. A Christian man prays, that he may be heard of GOD.
O Lord hear my prayers: and let my cry come to thee.

Turn not away thy face from me, in the day of my tribulation.

What day so ever I shall call upon thee: hear me (O Lord God.)

For thou art great and workest wonders: thou only art God.

Also thy works be great: thy thoughts be very profounde and deep.

Bow down thine ear unto me: and hear me, for I am poor, and without help.

Have mercy upon me (O lord) for when trouble comes I fly unto thee for
succor.

Make glad the soul of thy servant: for I have lifted up my heart unto thee.

O lord, thou art good and merciful: and of much mercy to al them that call
upon thee.

Hear my request and peticion, and graciously accept my prayers.

O Lord GOD, in thee I trust: let me not be confounded, I beseech thee:
Deliver me in thy righteousness.

Harken unto the voice of my cry (O my king and my God) for I make my humble
suite unto thee.

Hear my voice, with which I call upon thee: have mercy upon me, and save me

My prayers be ever unto thee (O lord God) if that the time of thy gracious
pleasure shall come, when that according to the multitude of thy mercy, thou will hear me in the truth of thy health.

Have regard unto me (O lord) for thy mercy is sweet according to the
multitude of thy mercies, look upon me.

Go not far away from me, O my GOD) but make haste to help me.

Let my words be pleasant unto thee: and make that the thoughts, and
meditation of my heart may be acceptable before thee.

Turn not away thy face from thy servant, for trouble rises up against me
on every side: wherefore now succor me.

My heart desires thee, my soul seeks for thee: I tarry and look when I may
behold thy face.

Turn not away thy face from me, cast not away thy servant in a displeasure.

Thou have always helped me before this time: forsake me not now in my most
need, o my lord and my God.

To thee I cry daiely, go not away from me: and turn not the deaf ear
unto me.

Cause my prayer to enter into thy presence: and let my cry come unto thee.

Hear me (O Lord) for I lift up my mind unto thy holy temple.

Help now in time of trouble, for vain is the help of man

I look after thy help, O Lord and to thy iudgemetes my will is conformable.

Look unto me, and take pity upon me: for I am poor and left alone.

O Lord God of hosts, if thou will, thou may help me: nothing can
overcome thy strength.

My God, my God, leave me not in these grievous tribulations for thy great
names sake.

O God, make have to deliver me, O lord make speed to help me.

Be contented to deliver me: For in thee I trust, O Lord God.

Behold, I have no help in my self: There is no man that regards my
necessity

I am poor, and in misery and great calamity: and my strength is gone from
me.

Arise up, O Lord, and declare thy glory unto thy servant.

Let salvation and health come to me from thee: yt all my enemies may be
ashamed.

Thine arm is mighty and strong: and when thou will all things be obedient
unto thee.

Heaven is thine, yea, and the earth is thine: thou made the world, and all
that is therein.

Let thy mercy comfort me: which surely I desire more then this life.

I stick to thy testimonies O Lord, let me not be confounded.

Out of the deep I have called unto thee, O lord: lord hear my voice.

O let thine ears mark well the voice of my complaint

O lord, if thou impute my sins unto me: how may I look for thy grace and
pardon?

But thy mercy exceadeth all things: and thy truth passes the heavens.

Wherefore my soul has looked to thee: and to thee makes humble prayers.

O God, be not still, keep not silence: but for thine own sake, see that thy
holy name be not dishonored.

Extend out thy mercy to them that call upon thee, and thy righteousness to
them that seek thee.

I have cast my burdeine upon thee, bear me up: and let me not always be
in wavering, seeing that I have put my trust in thee.

My soul cleaves unto thee: make thy right hand to stre^gthen me against the
power of mine enemies.

Hear my, o lord, and deliver me: incline thine ears unto my prayers, and
save me, for I am poor: O Lord have regard unto me.

Thou, O Lord God, art my help, and my savior.

O God, thy way is holy and rightful, what God is so great as thou, our god,
art.

Thou dooest marvelous things: thy name is ye lord: thou only art the
highest upon all the earth.

Be now pacified toward thy servant: and hide thy face from me no longer.

Be good unto me, O lord, as thou art full of goodness thy self, that I may
glory in thee all the days of my life.

My lips rejoice to sing praise unto thee: and even so does my soul, which
thou have redeemed.

My heart shall always study thy righteousness, when they shall be confounded
which seek to do my harm.

I will run all the way of thy commandments, when thou shalt dilate, and
enlarge my heart. Amen.

The seventh Psalm for an order and direction of good living.
TO thee, O lord, I lift up my mind.

In thee I trust, O lord God, let me not be confounded, least mine enemies
make me their iestyng stock and a matter to laugh at.

O Lord, make thy ways known unto me: and trade me in thy paths.

Direct me in thy truth, and instruct me: for thou art God my savior: I
look after thee every day.

O Lord thou art sweet and rightful and bring again into thy way, them
that went out.

Thou leadeste straight in thy judgment them that be mild and tractable: and
teach them that be meke, thy words and testimonies.

Thou healest them that be contrite in heart: and asswageste their pains and
griefs.

Thou hold up all them, which else should fall: and all that are fallen: thou
lifteste up again.

Thou give sight to the blind, and losest them that be bounden.

Thou art nigh unto al the^ that call upon thee: So that they call upon thee
faithfully and heartily.

Thou fulfillest the desire of them that fear thee: and hear their prayer,
and sauest them.

Have mercy upon me (O God) have mercy upon me: for in thee my soul trusts.

Uerely my soul has a special respect unto thee: for my health, my glory,
and all my stre^th comes from thee.

For thine own sake (O Lord God) lay not my sins to my charge.

I understand not all mine errors: innumerable troubles close me round
about, my sins have taken hold upon me: and I am not able to look up.

Put to thy hand to help me: and lead me right in all my works.

Make me to walk perfectly in thy ways, that no kind of sin overcome me.

Set a watch before my mouth: and keep the door of my lips.

Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart be ever pleasant
and acceptable in thy sight.

Let the word of truth never go away from my mouth: and suffer no malice
to dwell in my heart.

O Lord, deliver my soul from liyng lips: and save me from the deceiptfull
tongue

Put into my mouth thy true and holy word: and take clean from me all idle
and vnfruictfull speech.

Deliver me from false surmises, and accusations of men: rule me eue^ as thou
think good, after thy will and pleasure

Turn away mine iyes, that they behold no vain things: fasten them in thy
way.

Take from me fornication and all uncleanness: and let not the love of ye
flesh begile me

Yea, deliver my soul from pride, that it reign not in me, and then shall I
be clean from the greatest sin.

Stay and keep my feet from every il way, least my steps swerve from thy
paths.

My iyes look ever up unto thee (O lord) because thou art nigh at hand: and
all thy ways be the truth.

Thy mercies be great and many (O lord) blessed is ^e, who soever truste^h in
thee.

For when I s^ied unto thee my feet be slipped: thy mercy (O Lord) by and by
did hold me up.

Teach me to do thy will, and lead me by thy pathe way, for thou art my God.

O lord save my soul, and deliver me from the power of darkness.

Let the brightness of thy face, shine upon thy servant, for unto thee (O
Lord God) I ^aue ^edde for succor.

Look unto me, and have mercy upon me: for I am desolate and poor.

Keep my soul, and deliver me, that I be not confounded: for I have trusted
in thee.

O Lord God, forsake me not: although I have dooen no good in thy sight.

For thy goodness grant me, that at the least wise now I may begin to
live well. Amen.

The eight Psalm. A Christian man prays, that he may be defend^d from his
enemies.
O God almighty, save me from mine enemies: and by thy strong power defend
and keep me.

Preserve my soul, for thou art holy: save thy servant, which trusts in
thee.

For strangers do assault me daiely: and seek my soul to destroy it.

O God help thou me: O lord, deliver me from them that rise up against me.

Be ready, O God, to succor me: make have to help me, O Lord.

Be thou my protector, and a place of strength: wherein I may safely be.

For thou art my strength and my refuge: for thy name sake lead and guide me.

Take me, O God, out of the hands of mine enemies and cast me not away in the
time of tribulation: when all my might is decayed and gone.

Help me, O lord God, and save me for thy mercies sake

Have mercy upon me, O lord, the God of my health: and in thy righteousness
deliver me.

From the vexation of the^ that persecute me: from the assault of mine
enemies: which compass me about on every side.

Let them be confounded and brought to naught, which be adversaries unto my
soul: let them be covered with shame and rebuke, which seek my hurt.

Let them turn back with rebuke and shame, which say, God has forsaken
him: let us set on him and sake him: for there is none that shall deliver him.

Conioyne thy self (o God) unto my soul: make it strong and deliver me from
mine enemies.

Destroy them by thy power: and bring to naught al their strength.

That they rejoice not, and say among them selves, we have overcome him; and
utterly cast him down.

Save me (O Lord God) for in thee have I trusted: say to my soul, be not
afraied, for I am with thee.

It is in thy hand, what shall come of me, deliver me from mine enemies, for
yet they cease not.

Their cruelty increases daily more and more, and companies of tiranntes
violently come on me and they have not thee before their iyes.

But thou (o lord) not gracious and merciful, and suffer long: and thy
mercy and truth be great.

Look unto me, and have mercy upon me: and indue thy servant with some of
thy strength: for I call upon thee: and earnesty make my prayers in thy sight.

My enemies rejoice, that I am fallen, and that my heart has turned out of thy
way.

But I trust in thy mercy, and my heart is comforted, in hope to have help and
salvation from thee.

For thou art good and gracious, thy mercy indureth ever, and thy truth
continues from one generation to an other.

Let al them rejoice in thee and be glad, which seek thee: and let them which
love to have salvation of thee, say: magnified be the Lord for ever. Amen.

The ninth Psalm. Against enemies.
SO lord and behold, how many they be which trouble me, how many which make
rebellion against me.

They say among them selves of my soul: There is no help of god for it to
trust upon

O lord god, in thee I have put my hope and trust: save me from the^, which
do persecute me, and deliver me.

Least peradventure at one time or an other, they take my life from me: and
there be none to deliver me from them

Have pity upon me (o lord) look upon the affliction, which I suffer of my
enemies.

Forget not thy poor servant, suffer not them, which be oppressed to look
for help always in vain.

Put them to flight: disappoinct the^ of their purposes: cast them down
headlong as their wickedness has deserved, for they are traitors and rebels
against thee.

Let their power be brought to naught: and their wickedness light upon their
own heads.

Let the wicked sinners return into hell, and let the^ fall, and be taken
in the pit, which they have dug.

I will trust in thee (o lord) which sauest them, that in thee put their
confidence.

They say, that thou forgettest thy servants and that thou hidest thy face,
because thou will not se their trouble

Their pride is to us much grief and vexation: and they glory and triumph in
our trouble and adversity.

How long (O Lord) will thou stand a far of, and hide thy self in the time
of tribulation?

How long shall the wicked despise thee? and say in their heart, that thou
regardeste nothing.

Rise up (O lord) stretche out thy hand: forget not the^ which be oppressed.

Bring down the power of the wicked: that they may perish together with their
wickedness.

Let thy zeal suddenly come upon them: the fiery Thunder b^ltes, and the
spirit of the whirle wind be portion of their part.

Prevent me in the day of my tribulation: and deliver me out of my distress.

Have mercy upon me, for I am troubled on every side and my strength is
decayed, through mine iniquity.

Mine enemies speak of me much shame and rebuke: an they are wholly bente to
take my life from me.

The pains of death compass me round about and the flouddes of my sins
trouble me sore.

The ropes of hell be tied round about me: and I am wrapped in ye snares of
death and which way so ever I go. I find stumdlyng blocks, to overthrow
me.

Stand up (O Lord) and punish this naughty people, and deliver me from my
deceiptfull enemies.

Hear me in the day of my tribulation: let thy mighty name defend me.

For thou art my fortress and my glory: and bear up my weakness and
infirmity.

Save me Lord I beseech thee, that mine enemies prevail not against me.

Power out thy indignation upon the^: and let the wrath of thy fury vex and
trouble them.

Let them be confounded for ever: yea, let them tremble and perish together.

Let the^ fall into the deep pit: and never be hable to rise up again.

That they may know thy name to be the Lord of hosts only mighty and
high, world without end. Ame^.

The.x. Psalm. When the enemies be so cruel, that he cannot suffer them.
Have mercy upon me (o God) for thine enemy fredeth me under his fete: he
cease not to assault me, and to do me much grief:

He always coueteth too swallowe me up: and many there be that proudly brag
and crake against me.

They gather them selves together in corners: They watch my steps, how they
may take my soul in a trap.

They be like unto a Lion that is greedy of his preye, and like a young Lion,
they privily lie in wait for me.

They do beset my ways that I should not escape: they look and stare upon
me; to take me in their snare.

They have prepared a net for my feet: they have dug a deep pit, that my
soul might fall therein.

Make me strong (O lord GOD) by thy might and power: make my way perfect
before thee.

Keep my steps continually in right paths, least perchance my feet begin
to slip.

I am so vexed, that I am utterly weary: help me against the^ that lie in
wait for me.

Make thy mercy to be marvelous in me: and deliver my soul out of their
hands.

Hide me from the company of the wicked, and from the rage of them that work
iniquity.

According to thy great mercy quicken me, that now in my sorrow I be not
brought under the power of mine enemy, which rages against against me.

Send forth thy light and thy truth, and they shall lea^ me into thy holy
hill, and into thy tabernacles.

Instruct and teach my hands to battle: make my arms strong like a bow
of steel.

Girde me with strength to battle: overthrow the^ that arise against me.

Instruct me in the way, wherein I may walk: provide for me by thy oversight

Cast down mine enemies before my face: and destroy them that hate me.

Least mine enemies over come me, and the companies of tirantes ouerwhelme me.

Make my feet to be steadfast: and my paths straight.

They rejoice and be glad of my fall and declination: they be assembled
together against me: they strike to kille me in the way, before I may beware
of them.

They curse and banne my words every day: and all their thoughts be set to
do me harm.

My life is as it were in the mids of fierce Lions: whose teethe be like
unto spears: and their tongue like a sharp swoorde.

And who shall stand with me against all these or who shall overcome these
woorkers of iniquity?

They shall flee and r^nne away (O Lord) a^^^ne as thou rebukest them, from
the voice of thy thunder they shall ^enne headlyng.

Which look upon the earth, and it wholly quaketh which toucheste the
hills, and they smoke: judgment proceeds from thy face, thine iyes do
approve equity.

Keep me, O Lord, from mine adversaries: and under the shadow of thy wings
defend me.

Judge them that hurt me: fight against them that fight with me.

Let them go backwarde and have evil luck, which persecute me: put them
to shame, that will my hurt.

Make them to be as duste in the wind: and let thy angel vex and disquiet
them.

Let them vanishe away like smoke: and as wax melts with the heat of ye
fire, so let them perish, O lord, from thy sight and presence.

Beat them down, that they be not able to stand: never give over, until
thou have utterly destroyed them.

Make their ways darcke and slippie: and let thine angel fiersly go upon
them.

And thou, O Lord God, have mercy upon me: send me help, and then I shall be
able to resist them.

For I am weak and in sorrow: give thou me health and salvation.

Let thy hand correct and chastise me: But deliver me not unto mine enemies.

My soul is filled with the scornyng, and derision that mine enemies have at
me: and with the despite fullness of the proud.

My soul is clean discouraged within me: it groneth and fretteth in it self
against me: yet will I trust in thee: for that I shall estsones give thee
thanks again for the help and salvation that thou sendest me.

For thy very truth now help me, O thou which art my health, and the hope
and comfort of all regions of the yearthe, and of the main Sea.

Which by thy power rulest from the beginning: thine iyes behold all things.

What God is there but thou? Who is so strong as thou our God?

In thy protection I will trust until iniquity be passed and gone.

In thee, I shall be strong and sure for evermore.

The.xi Psalm. Of confidence and trust in God.
O Lord, which art my light and my health: of who^ shall I be afraied? O lord
thou art the ste^gth of my life: in thee I will ever trust.

For like as the Heart (when he is chased) coueteth to the rivers of water:
even so (O Lord) my soul desires to be with thee.

My soul thirsts to be with thee: For with thee is the fountain of life,
and recreation in adversity.

Here in this world is labor and pain: Calamity, and misery.

We have battle daiely with enemies: we have no rest here so long as we
live.

But when so ever we put our trust in thy help: then we shall be sure by thy
protection: Saying unto thee, thou art our defendor, our refuge, and our God,
and in thee we trust.

Thou shall deliver me from the snares of the Hunters: and from the perilles of
my persecutours.

Thou shalt make a shadow for me under thy shulders: and under thy wings I
shall be harmless.

Thy truth shall be my shield and buckeler: and no evil shall approach nere
unto me.

And therefore if my enemies shall war against me that they may devour me
wholly: yet I will not flee, nor turn my back.

Although never so strong enemies shall pitche their te^tes against me, my heart
shall not be afraied: If death suddenly come upon me, in thee will I rest
without fear.

Thou shall hide me in thy Tabernacle, in the time of adversity thou shall
hide me in some secret place of thy tente: thou shall set me upon a sure
rock.

Thou shall lift me up above mine enemies, be siegyng me round about: and
thou shall deliver me out of their hands.

If I shall walk in ye midnes of tribulation, thou shall keep me, and shalt
stretche forth thy hand against mine enemies: and thy right hand shall
save me.

O Lord, thou shalt do and bring to pass all things for me, thy mercy
indureth ever: thou will not despise thy own handy work.

Thou shalt lead me out of the net, which mine enemies have spread abroad
to catch me in: thou shall take me out of their pit.

O how great be the good things, which thou l^iest up in store for them that
fear thee.

Which also thou show to them that trust in thee, even in the sight of the
children of men.

Thou hidest them in the secret place of thy countenance from trouble of
enemies: and from their contentions.

O Lord, what a precious treasure is thy goodness? and men shall trust in thy
protection.

They shall be filled with the ple^tifulnes of thy house: and thou shalt make
them drink of thy River of deinties.

They shall drink with thee of the fountain of life, and in thy light, the^
shall se light.

Thy righteousness is as the highest mountains: and thy judgments be like
unto ye deep botomles waters.

Thy mercy stretches up to the heavens: and thy truth ascends up to the
same.

O Lord God, thou haste ever from age to age, been our refuge and succor.

Before the foundations of the ^earth were laid, without beginning and endyng,
thou art God.

O my God, thou have helped me eu^r from my youth: and until my old age, and
last days forsake me not.

I will acknowledge, that I have al my stre^gt^ of thee, for thou art my
protection, my God, and my savior.

And therefore what time so ever I shall be afraied: I will trust in thee.

What time so ever I shall call upon thee: I know that thou art my God.

Keep thy mercy for me always: and the covenant that thou haste made with
me, let it be surely performed.

And if I have swarued from thy law, and not walked in thy judgments.

If I have broken thy statutes, and transgressed thy commandments.

Then with thy rod visit mine offenses: and with stripes correct my
trespasses.

But take not thy mercy away from me, not let not thy promise be void, and
of none effect.

Break not the covenant that thou haste made with me, and chan^ge not that
which has issued out of thy mouth

For in thee (O GOD) our health and glory does consiste, thou art our
helper, in whom we do ever trust.

And this is certain, that all they, which trust in thee, shall not be
confounded.

For who is he that has trusted in thee, and is confounded?

For thy name sake, o lord, thou forgiuest our sins, although they be many,
and grievous.

Thou art a sure stay to them that dreads thee: and show them thy
testament.

And unto thee I cry (O lord) and I believe, that thou will save me, for thy
great mercies sake.

Thou shalt redeem my soul in peace, from the wrath which is to come in the
last day.

I will offer up to thee Sacrifice of laud and praise: And I will render up my
vows to thee, which art the highest

The wicked watch, and look to destroy me: But I trust in thy mercy.

Thou art my protector, and my buckler: my GOD, my strength, my refuge, and
deliverer.

I tarry and look for help from thee (O lord) blessed is the man that
trusts in thee.

O lord, what great pleasures thou have prepared for me in heaven: that I
should delight in no yearthly thing, but in thee?

My most pleasure is to clean fast unto thee: and in thee to set my hope
and trust.

I commit my spirit unto thy hands: deliver me from the powers of darkness
of this world. Amen.

The.xij. Psalm. If GOD defer to help long time.
O My God, my Go^, why forsakest thou me? why lokest not upon my necessity.

Shall thy mercy fail for ever? Will thou never be pleased more?

How long will thou be miscontented with me, O lord: will thou kindle thine
anger thoroughly as it were fire?

When will thou have any regard to deliver my soul? To deliver my life from
destruction of enemies.

How long shall I cry, and thou will not hear? How long shall I make
exclamation for very pain, and thou will not save me?

O lord god of hosts, how long will thou be angry with the prayers of thy
servant?

Come again unto me (O God my savior) and take away thine indignation against
me.

When thou art turned (O Lord) thou tha^ restore al things again: and he
that was in sadness before; shall take joy and comfort of thee.

Let thy hand be to help manne, which is thy h^ndy work, whom thou have
exalted, and magnified to set forth thy glory.

Mine enemies live wealthily and are strong: and they which hate me, increase
and go forward daiely.

They despraise and set at naught my counsel, because I take God for my hope
and comfort.

They say to me daily, thou trusteste in God, let him deliver thee; and save
thee: if so be that he hear love and favor toward thee.

They leap at me as it were so many dogs: the companies of the wicked bark
at me: they beset my hands and feet round about.

O Lord, go not far away from me: thou art my strength: make speed to help
me.

Deliver my soul from death turn my way from the rage of dogs.

Keep m^ out of the mouth of Lions: and save me from the deep lake.

Thou art both holy and strong, and no man is hable to resist thee: when thy
anger is great and fervent.

Who shall not fear thee (O Lord?) Or which of all princes shall not obey
thee?

The earth trembles and quaketh for fear of thine anger? and the people shall
not be able to abide thy ^^r^atning.

Help me, O Lord God my savior: and for the glory of thy name ^eliuer me:
and forgive me my trespasses.

For I do utter and express mine iniquity unto thee: and my sin greueth me
very sore.

Arise up (O Lord) and help me: and deliver me for thy mercies sake.

O god, my refuge, and my strength, which haste been ever a great help in
tribulation.

Thou diddeste receive me into thy tuition, when I came out of my mothers
womb, and thou m^ste my helper, when I sucked my mothers breasts.

I was left to th^^ as soon as I was borne, even from my mother^ womb, thou
art my God.

Withdraw not the self far away from me: for tribulation is nere at hand,
and there is none that ca^ help me.

Mine enemies compass me round about my persecutors besiege me on every side.

And I am feeble and weak and sore broken: the pain of my heart makes me to
gron and sigh.

I am as the water that is cast forth: my strength is gone, and utterly
dried up, as if it were a tile stone.

Have mercy upon me (O Lord) have mercy upon me: and impute not my sins,
unto me, which I have done by folly.

Remember not my sins passed, let thy mercies prevent them: for I am in a
marvelous wretched case.

I am weakened and clean out worn: and go mourning every day.

And now (O Lord) what look I after? verily my soul looks to thee for help.

Show now and declare thy goodness to me, and withhold not thy help from me.

My soul is replenished with troubles and adversities, and draws nere unto
deaths door.

I am in great poverty and need, and my heart is sore troubled within me.

Cast not me away in the time of my most necessity: and now when my stength
fails me, fail not thou me O Lord.

Deliver me from mine enemies: and make me not a mockyng stock to them, that
jest and rail upon me.

Save me from these roaryng Lio^s ready to devour, and from the hands of them
that would have my life from me.

I do cry to thee (O lord) for thou art my hope, and my portion in the land
of livers.

Bring my soul out of prison, and set my fete in a place where I may walk at
liberty.

Turn not thy face away from me, least I be made like unto them that
discende intot the pit.

Give ear unto my prayers: for I am punished, and brought very low,

Deliver me from my persecutours: for they be much stronger then I.

O Lord hear me spedely, least my spirit fail within me.

Deliver my soul out of trouble, and in thy mercy destroy all mine enemies.

And make them to perish which would destroy me: for I am thy servant. Ame^.

The.xiij. Psalm. In which he gives thanks to god that his enemies have not
gotten the ouerhande of him.
I Will magnify and praise thee (O Lord GOD) for thou have exalted me, and
set me up: and my enemies have not gotten the ouerhande of me.

O Lord of hosts, I have cried unto thee: and thou have saved me.

Thou haste brought my soul out of hell: thou haste holden me up from
falling into the deep lake, from whence no man retourneth.

Thou haste not closed me up in the hands of mine enemies: but thou haste
set my feet in a place both wide and broad.

I have sought thee; and thou have heard me: thou have brought me into
liberty out of great distress.

Thou have turned my sorrow into gladness: thou have ceased my mournyng, and
compassed me round about with mirthe.

Thou haste declared thy great magnificence, in helpyng thy servant.

Thou have done mercifully with me in my miseries.

Thou have regarded ye pain of the poor: thou have not turned a way thy face
from me.

I will ever be singyng and speaking of thy mercies: and I will publishe to
other thy fidelity and truth, so long as I shall live.

My mouth shall never cease to speak of thy righteousness, and of thy
benefits: which be so many that I can not number them.

But I will give thee thanks till death take me away I will sing in ye praise
of thee so long as I shall continue.

I will triu^phe and rejoice in thy mercy, for that thou have looked upon my
necessities, and regard my soul in my great distress.

Thou haste been my sure refuge, and the strength of my trust, and hope.

I thank thee Lord for thy goodness alwaie: and for thy exceadyng mercy.

Thou haste been my comfort in the time of my trouble, thou have been merciful
unto me, o lord, and have revenged the wrongs ye mine enemies have done to me.

According to the multitude of the heavy thoughts that I had in my mind,
thy comfortes have cleared and lightened my heart.

Thou haste sent me now joy, for the days wherein I was in sorrow: and for
the years in who^ I suffered many a painful storm.

Thou have called to rem^braunce the rebuke that thy servant has been put
to: and how furiously mine enemies have persecuted me.

O lord god of hosts, who may be compared unto thee? thou art great and
greatly to be praised.

Thou art high upon all the earth, thou art exalted far above all Gods.

Glory and honor before thy face: holiness and magnificence in thy
sanctuary.

With Justice and Judgment thy roial throne is stablished: mercy and truth
go before thy face.

Blessed art thou (O lord) which have not holden back thy mercy from thy
servant.

After that I had long looked for thee (O Lord) at the last thou did
attend unto me, and heardest my cry.

Thou have taken me out of the lake of misery: and set my feet upon a
rock, and made my steps sure.

Thou haste given me my desire: I have seen thy joyful countenance.

Thou haste stricken all my adversaries, and have abated their strength.

Thou haste rebuked the rablement of them that vexed me: and have plucked me
forth of their hands.

Thou haste cast them headlyng into their own pit: their feet be wrapped in
the Net, which they laid privily for me.

Mine enemies are reculed back: they are fallen down, and destroyed from thy
sight.

Thou have been the poor man's defense, and his helper in tribulation, when
most need was.

Thou haste dooen Judgment for me: thou haste defended my cause against my
accusars.

And although thou were very angry with me a little while: yet now I live
through thy mercy and goodness. Uerly I supposed with my self, that I was
clean cast away out of thy favor.

But thou haste heard my prayers: and according to thy great mercy, have
taken me again into thy favor.

O Lord, of thine own mind and will, thou have given strength unto my soul:
but when thou hidest thy face from me (o lord) how greatly was I astonished?

When I was in adversity, then I cried unto thee: and thou did answer
me: when my soul was in great anguishe and trouble then (O lord) I did
remember thee.

I have tasted and seen how sweet thou art: truly blessed is that manne that
trusts in thee.

According to thy name, so is thy commendation and praise: but thy counsels
touching us be without example, and greater then can with words be expressed.

Dominion, power, and glory be thine: for thou haste made al things: and
because thy will is so: they do still continue.

Thy name be blessed, praised, and magnified both now and ever, world without
end. Amen.

The.xiij. Psalm. In the which the goodness of God is praised.
O Lord our governor, how wonderful is thy majesty throughout ye whole
world? which haste set thy glory above all the heavens.

What is manne that thou magnifieste him so greatly? Or the son man that thou
do visit him?

O Lord, thou art great and much to be praised in thy holy hill.

Praise be unto thee (O Lord God) let our vows made to thee be always
performed.

Confession and magnificence are thy work: and thy righteousness continues
for evermore.

Thou haste dooen many things (O lord God) both marvelous and great: and
there is none that ca^ be like unto thee in thy work.

Thy ways be just and true, who will not fear and dread thee, and magnify thy
name

I thank thee (o lord God) with all my heart: and I will halowe thy name for
ever.

O lord thou art my strength and my praise: Thou haste brought down mine
enemies, which art a judge even from the beginning.

The right hand is exceadyng strong: thy right hand works many great acts.

Thine arm is mighty and strong, and because it has pleased thee, thou have
stre^gthened mine infirmity.

I will praise thy great and dreadful name: for it is holy.

Although I have fallen, yet I am not crusshed in pieces: for thou haste
sustained my hand.

I have opened and showed my way unto thee: and in thee I have trusted, and
thou at length haste accomplished my desires.

Thou have broken the heddes of mine enemies, and haste made them to stoop:
which walked proudely in their sins.

Thou have dominion over their power, and when they be exalted and set a lofte
in their ways, thou abateste their courage, and destroiest the^ with thy
mighty arm.

In thy name, I will ever rejoice, and in thy mercy is all my glory.

Thou love righteousness and judgment: the earth is replenished with thy
mercy

Thy iye looks favorably upon the^ that dread thee, and trust in thy mercy.

There shall no good thing be lackyng to them that seek thee, and they that
fear thee, shall not be helpless.

For thou do order their ways, and hear them when they cry unto thee.

That thou may deliver their soul from death: and swage their pains when
they be grieved.

For thou helpest them, whose hearts be broken with sorrow: and bearst up with
thy hand them that be contrite in spirit.

Thou sauest the souls of thy servants, and all they that trust in thee,
shall not be destroyed.

Wherefore my tongue shall sing thy praise (O lord god) I will always magnify
thee.

I will love thee (O lord) which art my strength, my stay, my might, my
savior and my refuge.

My God, my defendoure, and my buckeler, the strength of my salvation, and my
supporter.

After that I had called upon thee with due laud and praise, thou haste saved
me from mine enemies.

When I was in trouble I called upon thee, thou haste heard my voice out of thy
holy temple, and my cry has entered up into thine ears.

Thou have saved me from mine adversaries, that rose up against me: thou have
delivered me from wicked enemies.

Then haste taken me from the company of evil men and mine iye has seen
upon mine enemies, the things that I desired.

And therefore if it should fortune me to pass through the darcke vale of
death: I will go without fear: For thou will be with me, thy rod and thy
staff shall comfort me.

Thou shalt deliver me from tribulation: thou shall hope me from them, which
seek to destroy me.

Mine iyes be upon thee (O Lord) for thou shalt bring my feet forth of the
snare.

Unto thee (O Lord God) I will perform my vows, I will give thee thanks
both now and evermore: world without eror. Amen.

The.xv. Psalm. Of the benefits of God, with thanks for the same.
MY soul praises thee (O Lord) and all that is within me, praises thy holy
name.

My soul gives thee humble thanks, and thy benefits I will never forget.

Which forgiuest all my sins and healest all my infirmitie^.

Whith have saved my life from destruction: and showed in me thy grace and
mercy.

Which he have satisfied my desire with good things, and shalt once restore
my youth again.

Thou haste entreated me mercifully at all times, and haste revenged me of mine
enemies.

Thou haste been a defense to me (O Lord) and a sure foundation of my wealth.

Thou have guided me with thy counsel, and taken me to thee, through thy
mercy.

Thou haste many ways, declared in me thy great might and power, and after
thine anger has been past, thou have turned again and comforted me.

Thou have sent me many grievous troubles, but at the length thou haste
brought me out of the bottomeles depenesse.

Thou haste made me privy to thy ways, and haste not hid thy counsels from
me.

Thou art full of mercy and grace (O Lord) slow to wrath, and ready to
goodness.

Thy displeasure lasts not alwaie, and thou keep not back thy mercies in
thine anger for ever.

Thou rewardeste us not, according to our sins, nor punishest us, according
to our deserts.

Look how high the heaven is, in comparison of the earth: so great is thy
mercy toward us.

How far as the East is distante from the Weste: so far (O Lord) remove
our sins from us.

Like as a natural father, has pity upon his children: even so, O Lord God,
thou have had compassion upon us.

Thou haste not forgotten thy creature: Thou remembrest that we are flesh,
yea, all men living.

And that the age of men is like unto grass, and may be compared to the
flowers in the field.

Which as soon as the sharp wind has blown upon them with his blastes,
wither away and dye, so that no man can tell where they did grow.

But thy mercy, O lord, and thy loving kindness is always upon the^ that
fear thee: and thy righteousness indureth for ever.

So that we keep our promise and couenaunte with thee: and so remember thy
commaundmentes, that we do them in deed.

O Lord, thou have stablished thy throne in heaven: and thou gouernest (...)
things by thin imperial power

I will magnify thee, O GOD, and praise thy name world without end.

I will give thee thanks alwaie, and make thy name glorious for ever.

O Lord thou art puissant and great: and thy magnificence is unsearchable.

One generation shall show to an other thy works, and they shall declare thine
ancient noble acts.

They shall ever praise the magnificence of the glory of thy holiness, and the
memory of thy great goodness.

For thou art good and gracious to all men, and thy mercy exceadeth all thy
works.

The iyes of all men behold, and wait upon there: that thou shouldeste give
the^ their sustenaunce in time convenient.

Thou openest thine hand and fillest every living creature with food
necessary.

O Lord, thou art rightful in all thy ways, and holy in all thy deeds.

Thou kepest al them that love thee, and the torment of malice shall not touch
thee.

My mouth shall speak thy glory and praise, and all living creatures shall
honor thy holy name for ever.

Praise the lord, O ye his Angels mighty in power, which do his
commandments, and obey the voice of his word.

Praise ye altogether God, O ye all his hosts, you his ministers, that do his
will and pleasure.

Praise the Lord, O ye all his saints, for his name is glorious, and his
praise goes above both heaven and earth.

Praise the lord together, O ye, all his works, every thing that lives,
praise ye the Lord. Amen.

FINIS.XV. PSALMORVM.
The.xxj. Psalm. Of David. The complaint of Christ on the Cross.
MY God my God, why have thou forsaken me? It seems that I shall not obtain
deliverance, though I seek for it with loud cries.

My God, I will cry all the day long, but thou will not answer: and all the
night long, without taking any rest.

The mean time thou most holiest, semest to sit still not caryng for the
things that I suffer: which so often haste helped me heretofore, and haste
given to thy people Israel, sufficient argume^te and matter to praise thee
with songs, wherewith they have given thanks to thee for thy benefits.

Our forefathers were wo^t to put their trust in thee: and as often as they did
so, thou did deliver them.

As often as they cried for help to thee, they were delivered: as often as they
committed them self to thee, they were not put to any shame.

But as for me, I seem rather to be a worm, then a man: the dunghill of Ada^,
the outcast of the vulgar people.

As many as have seen me: have laughed me to scorn, and reviled me, and
shaking their heads in derision at me, they cast me in the feeth, saying: he
is wont to boaste and glory, that he is in great favor with God: wherefore let
God now deliver him, if he love him so well.

By thy procuremente (O lord) I came out of my mothers womb: and thou gave
me good comfort: even when I sucked my mothers breasts.

Through thy means I came into this world: and as soon as I was borne, I was
left to thy tuition: yea thou waste my God, when I was yet in my mothers womb.

Wherefore go not far away from me: for danger is even now at hand, and I
so no man that will help me.

Many Bulls have closed me in, both strong and fat, they have compassed me
round about.

They have opened their mouth against me, like unto a Lion that gapeth upon
his preie, and roareth for hunger.

I am powered out like water, and all my lymmes loosed one from the other, and my
heart is melted within me, as it were wax.

All my strength is gone, and dried up like unto a tile stone, my tongue
cleaves to the roof of my mouth: and at the last I shall be buried in the
earth, as the dead be wont.

For dogs have compassed me round about: and the most wicked have
conspired against me, they have made holes through my hands and my feet.

I was so ungently entreated of them, that I might easily number all my bones:
and after all the pain and torment that they did to me, with grievous
countenance they stared and looked upon me.

They divided my clothes among them, and cast lottes for my coat.

Wherefore Lord, I beseech thee, go not far from me: but for as much as
thou art my power and my strength make have to help me.

Deliver my soul from danger of the sword, and keep my life, destitute of
all men's help, from the violence of the dog.

Save me from the mouth of the Lion, and take me from the horns of the
unicorns.

I will show unto my brethren, the Majesty of thy name: and when the people is
most assembled together I will praise and set forth thy most worthy acts
and deeds.

All that worship the lord, praise him, all the posterity of Jacob magnify
him, all ye that be of the stock of Israel, with reverence serve and honor
him.

For he has not despised and set at naught the poor man, because of his
misery: nor he has not disdainfully turned away his face from him, but
rather as soon as the poor manne cried unto him for help, he heard him by and
by.

I will praise thee with my songs openly in a multitude of people, and I will
perform my vows in the fight of the^ that honor thee.

The poor shall eat and be satisfied: they shall praise the lord that study
to please him: and as many of you as continue still such, your hearts shall
live.

All the ends of the world shall consider these things, and be turned to
the lord: and all Heathen nations shall submit them selves, and do homage
unto thee.

For the Lord has a power royal, and an Imperial dominion over the heathen.

The most mighty and greatest of all the^ that dwell on the earth, have
eaten, and after that they have tasted the spiritual gifts of the Lord, they
have submitted them self, and made humble suite unto him: yea, and all the
dead, which are huried in the earth, shall knele and make reverence in his
honor, because he has not disdained to spend his own life for them.

They that shall come after us, shall honor and serve him.

These things shall be written of the Lord, that our posterity may know,
and understand them.

That they also may come and show these things to the people that shall be
borne of them, that the Lord has done these things, which be so marvelous.

A Psalm of thanks giuyng. Iubilate deo omnis terra.
Rejoice and sing in the honor of the Lord, all ye that live on earth.

Worship and serve the Lord with gladness, come into his sight and
presence with joy and mirthe.

Acknowledge you, and confess, that the Lord is that GOD, which has created
and made us, for truly we made not our self, but we be his people, and his
flock, which he nourishes and feeds continually.

Go ye through his gates to give him thanks for the innumerable benefits,
which ye have received of him: and to sing through his courts, his worthy
acts and deeds: praise him, and highly commend his name.

For the lord is both good and gracious, and his mercy is infinite: he is
most constaunt in keepyng of his promises, not to one generation only, but
even to all.

A Psalm to be said in the time of any common plague, sickness, or other
cross and visitation of GOD.
O Come, let us humble our selves and fall down before the Lord with
reverence and fear.

For he is the Lord our God: and we are the people of his pasture, and the
sheep of his hands.

Come therefore, let us turn again unto our lord, for he has smitten us,
and he shall heal us.

Let us repent, and turn from our wickedness, and our sins shall be forgiven
us.

Let us turn, and the Lord will turn from his heavy wrath, and will
pardon us, and we shall not perish.

For we knowledge our fault, and our sins be ever before us.

We have sore provoked thine anger, O Lord, thy wrath is waxen hot, and
thy heavy displeasure is sore kindled against us.

Thou haste in thine indignation stricken us with grievous sickness, and by and
by we have fallen as leaves, beaten down with a vehemente wind.

In deed we acknowledge, that all punishementes are less then our deservings:
but yet of thy mercy Lord, correct us to amendment, and plague us not to
our destruction.

For thy hand is not shortened, that thou can not help neither is thy
goodness abated, that thou will not hear.

Thou haste promised, O Lord, that before we cry, thou will hear us:
whilst we yet speak, thou will have mercy upon us.

For none that trust in thee shall be confounded: neither any that call upon
thee shall be despised.

For thou art the only Lord, who woundeste, and do heal again, who
killest and reuiueste, bryngeste even to hell, and bryngeste back against.

Our fathers hoped in thee, they trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them.

They called upon thee, and were helped: they put their trust in thee, and
were not confounded.

O Lord, rebuke not us in thine indignation, neither chasten us in thy heavy
displeasure.

O remember not the sins, and offenses of our youth: but according to thy
mercy think thou upon us, o lord for thy goodness.

Have mercy upon us, O Lord, for we are weak: O Lord heal us, for our
bones are vexed.

And now in the vexation of our spirits, and the anguishe of our souls, we
remember thee, and we cry unto thee: hear Lord, and have mercy.

For thine own sake, and for thy holy names sake, incline thine ear, and
hear, O merciful Lord.

For we do not power out our prayers before thy face, trustyng in our own
righteousness: but in thy great and manifold mercies.

Wash us thoroughly from our wickedness: and cleanse us from our sins.

Turn thy face from our sins, and put out all our misdeedes.

Make us clean hearts, O God: and renew a right spirit within us.

Help us, o God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name: O deliver us,
and be merciful unto our sins, for thy names sake.

So we that be thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks for
ever, and will always be showing forth thy praise, from generation to
generation.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the begin. etc.

A Psalm of thanksgiving, for deliverance from the plague, or any other kind
of sickness trouble, or affliction.
Lord, thou art become gracious unto thy land, thou have turned alwaie the
afflictions of thy servants.

Thou have taken away al thy displeasure, and turned thy self from thy
wrathful indignation.

For if thou lord, had not helped us, it had not failed but our souls had
been put to silence.

But when we said our feet have slipped, thy mercy, O lord helped us up.

In the multitude of the sorrows, that we had in our hearts, thy comfortes
have refreshed our souls.

Our souls waited still upon the lord, our souls hanged upon his help, our
hope was always in him.

In the Lords word did we rejoice, in Gods word did we comfort our selves.

For the lord said: call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will hear
thee, and thou shall praise me.

So when we were poor, nedie, sickly, and in heuines, the lord cared for us:
he was our help and our savior, according to his word.

In our adversity and distress, he has lift up our heads, and saved us
from utter destruction.

He has delivered our souls from death, he has fed us in the time of
dearth, he has saved us from the noisome pestilence.

Therefore will we offer in his holy temple, the oblatio^ of thanksgiving with
great gladness: we will sing, and speak praises unto the lord our savior.

We will give thanks unto the lord for he is gracious, and his mercy indureth
for ever.

The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, long sufferyng, plenteous in
goodness and pity.

His mercy is greater then ye heavens, and his gracious goodness reaches unto
ye clouds.

Like as a father pitieth his own children: even so is the Lord merciful
unto them that fear him.

Therefore will we praise thee and thy mercies, o God: unto thee will we sing,
O thou holy one of Israel.

We will sing a new song unto thee, O God: we will praise the Lord with
Psalms of thanks giuyng.

O sing praises, sing praises unto our GOD: O sing praises, sing praises unto
our king.

For God is the king of the earth, sing praises with understanding.

We will magnify thee, O GOD our king, we will praise thy name for ever and
ever.

Every day will we give thanks unto thee, and praise thy name for ever and
ever.

Our mouth shall speak the praises of the Lord, and let all flesh give
thanks to his holy name for ever and ever.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel for ever: and blessed be the name of his
Majesty, world without end. Amen.

Glory be to the father, etc. As it was in the begin. etc.

FINIS.
The Queens prayers Or Meditations: wherein the mind is stirred to suffer all
afflictions here.

Jmprinted at London, by H. Wykes.

Colloss. iij.
If ye be risen again with Christ, seek the things which are above, where
Christ sits on the right hand of God: set your affection on things
that are above, not on things which are on the earth.

Most benyng Lord Jesus, grant me thy grace, that it may alwaie work in
me, and persevere with me unto the end

Grant me, that I may ever desire and will that, which is most pleasant,
and most acceptable to thee.

Thy will be my will, and my will be to follow alwaie thy will.

Let there be alwaie in me one will, and one desire with thee, and that I
have no desire to will, or not to will, but as thou will.

Lord thou know what things is most profitable, and most expedient for
me.

Give therefore what thou will, as much as thou will, and when thou will.

Do with me what thou will, as it shall please thee, and as shall be most to
thine honor.

Put me where thou will, and freely do with me in all things after thy will.

Thy creature I am, and in thy hands, lead and turn me where thou will.

Lo, I am thy servant, ready to do all things that thou commaundest: for
I desire not to live to my self, but to thee.

Lord Jesus, I pray thee, grant me grace, that I never set my heart on the
things of this world, but that all worldly and carnal affections, may
utterly dye, and be mortified in me.

Grant me above al things, that I may rest in thee, and fully quiet and
pacify my heart in thee.

For thou lord art the very true peace of heart, and the perfect rest of the
soul: and without thee, all things be grievous and unquiet.

My lord Jesus, I beseech thee, be with me in every place and at all times,
and let it be to me a special solace, gladly for thy love too lack all
worldly solace.

And if thou withdraw comfort from me at any time, keep me, O lord, from
desperation, and make me paceintly to abide thy will and ordinance.

O Lord Jesus, thy Judgments be rightous, and thy providence is much better
for me, then all that I can imagine or devise.

Wherefore do with me in all things, as it shall please thee: for it may not
be but well, all that thou do.

If thou will that I be in light, be thou blessed, if thou will that I be in
darkness, be thou also blessed.

If thou vouchsaue to comfort me, be thou highly blessed: if thou will I live
in trouble, and without comfort, be thou likewise ever blessed.

Lord, give me grace gladly to suffer, whatsoever thou will shall fall upon
me, and pacientely to take it at thy hand good and had, bitter and sweet,
joy and sorrow: and for all things that shall befall unto me, heartily too
thank thee.

Keep me lord from sin and I shall then neither dread death nor hell.

O what thanks ought I to give unto thee, which have suffered the grievous
death of the Cross, to deliver me from my sins, and to obtain everlasting
life for me.

Thou gaueste us most perfect example of patience fulfillynge and obeiyng
the will of thy father: even unto the death.

Make me wretched sinner, obediently to use my self after thy will in all
things, and patiently too bear the burden of this corruptible life.

For though this life be tedious, and as an heavy burden to my soul: yet
nevertheless through thy grace, and by example of thee, it is now made much
more easy and comfortable, then it was before thy incarnation and passion. Thy
holy life is our way to thee, and by followyng of thee, we walk to thee that
art our head and savior: and yet except thou had gone before, and showed
us the way to everlasting life. Who would endeavor him self to follow thee?
Seeing we be yet so slow and dull, having the light of thy blessed example,
and holy doctrine to lead and direct us.

O Lord Jesus, make that possible by grace, that is too me impossible by nature.

Thou know well that I may little suffer, and that I am anon cast down,
and overthrown with a little adversity: wherefore I beseech thee, O lord, to
strengthen me with thy spirit, that I may willyngly suffer for thy sake al
manner of trouble and affliction.

Lord, I will knowledge unto thee all mine unrighteousness, and I will
confess to thee all the unstableness of my heart.

Oftentimes a very little thing troubles me sore, and makes me du^le, and
slow to serve thee.

And sometime I purpose to stand strongly but when a little trouble comes,
it is to me great anguishe and grief, and of a right little thing rises a
geeuous temptation to me.

Yea, when I think my self to be sure and strong, and that (as it seems) I
have the upper hand: suddenly I feel my self ready to fall with a little
blaste of temptation.

Behold therefore good lord my weakness, and consider my frailnesse best
known to thee.

Have mercy on me, and deliver me from all iniquity and sin, that I be not
entangled therewith.

Ofte^tymes it greueth me sore, and in manner confounds me, that I am so
unstable, so weak, and so frail, in resistyng sinful motions.

Which although they draw me not away to consent, yet nevertheless their
assaults be very grievous unto me.

And it is tedious to me to live in such battaill, albeit I perceive that
such battle is not unprofitable unto me.

For thereby I know the better my self, and mine own infirmities, and that I
must seek help only at thy hands.

O lord God of Israel, the lover of all faithful souls, vouchsafe to behold
the labor and sorrow of me thy poor creature.

Assiste me in all things with thy grace, and so strength me with heavenly
strength that neither my cruel enemy the f^ende, neither my wretched flesh
(which is not yet subject to the spirit) have victory or dominion over me.

O what a life may this be called, where no trouble nor misery lacks? Where
every place is full of snares of moral enemies?

For one trouble or temptation ouerpassed, an other comes by and by, and the
first conflicte yet during, a new battle suddenly arises

Wherefore Lord Jesus, I pray thee give me the grace to rest in thee above al
things, and to quiet me in thee above all creatures, above al glory and
honor, above all dignity and power, above al cunnyng and policy, above all
health and beauty, above al riches and treasure, above all joy and pleasure,
above all fame and praise, above al mirthe and consolation that man's heart
may take or feel besides thee.

For thou Lord God, art best, most wise, most high, most mighty, most
sufficient, and most full of goodness, most sweet, and most comfortable,
most fair, most loving, most noble, most glorious, in whom all goodness
most perfectly is.

And therefore, whatsoever I have beside thee, it is nothing to me: For my heart
may not rest, ne fully be pacified, but only in thee.

O Lord Jesus, most loving spouse, who shall give me wings of perfect love,
that I may fly up from these worldly miseries, and rest in thee.

O when shall I ascend to thee, and see and feel how sweet thou art.

When shall I wholly gather my self in thee, so perfectly, that I shall not for
thy love feel my self, thee only above my self, and above all worldly
things, that thou majesty vouchsaufe to visit me in such wise, as thou do
visit thy most faithful lovers.

Now I often mourn and complain of the miseries of this life, and with sorrow
and great heaviness suffer the^.

For many things happen daiely to me, which oftentimes trouble me, make me
heavy, and darken mine understanding.

They hinder me greatly and put my mind from thee and so incomber me many
ways, that I can not freely, and clearly desire thee, ne have thy sweet
consolations which with thy blessed saints be alwaie present.

I beseech thee, Lord Jesus, that the sighynges, and inward desires of my
heart, may moan and incline thee to hear me.

O Jesus, king of euerlaking glory, the joy and comfort of all Christian
people, that are wa^dring as pilgrims, in the wilderness of this world my
heart cries to thee by still desires, and my silence speaks unto thee, and
says: how long tarieth my Lord God to come to me.

Come, O Lord, and visit me: for without thee I have no true joy, without
thee, my soul is heavy and sad.

I am in prison and bounde^ with Fetters of sorrow, till thou, O lord, with
thy gracious prsence vouchsafe too visit me, and to bring me again to
liberty, and joy of spirit, and to show thy favorable countenance unto me.

Open my heart lord, that I may behold thy laws, and teach me to walk in
thy commandments.

Make me to know and follow thy will, and to have always in my remembrance thy
manifold benefits that I may yield due thanks to thee for them.

But I knowledge and confess for truth, that I am not hable to give the^
condign thanks of the least benefit that thou have given me.

O lord all gifts and virtues, that any man has in body, or soul,
natural, or supernatural, be thy gifts, and come of thee, and not of our
self, and they declare the great riches of thy mercy and goodness unto us.

And though some have no gifts then other, yet they al proceed from thee, and
without thee, the least can not be had.

O Lord, I account it for a great benefit, not to have many worldly gifts,
whereby the laud and praise of men might blind my soul, and deceive me.

Lord, I know that no man ought to be abashed, or misco^tente, that he is in
a low estate in thsi world, and lacks the pleasures of this life: But
rather to be glad, and rejoice thereat.

For so much as thou have chosen the poor and meek persons, and such as are
despised in the world, to be thy servants, and famili^r freindes.

Witness be thy blessed Apostles, whom thou madst chief Pastors, and
Spiritual governors of thy ^locke which departed from the counsel of the
Jews, reioysyng that they were compted worthy to suffer rebuke for thy name.

Even so O Lord, grant that I thy servant may be as well content to be
taken as the least, as other be to be greatest, and that I be as well pleased
to be in the loweste place, as in the higheste, and as glad to be of no
reputation in the world for thy sake, as other are to be noble and famous.

Lord, it is the work of a perfect man, never to sequestre his mind from
thee, and among many wordelie cares to go without care: not after the manner of
an idle or a dissolute person, but by the prerogative of a free mind, alwaie
myndyng heavenly things, and not by inordinate affection to any creature

I beseech thee therefore my Lord Jesus, keep me from the superfluous cares of
this world, that I be not inquieted with bodily necessities, ne that I be not
taken with the volupteous pleasures of the world, ne of the flesh.

Preserve me from all things, which hinder my soul health, that I be not
overthrown with them.

O Lord God, which art swetenes, unspeakable, turn into bitterness to me,
all worldly and fleshly delites, which moughte draw me from the love of
eternal things, to the love of short, and vile pleasure.

Let not flesh and blood overcome me, ne yet ye world, with his vain glory
deceive me, nor the feinde, with his manifold crafts supplante me: But give
me ghostely strength in resistyng them, patience in sufferyng them, and
co^stauncie in perseueryng to the end.

Give me for all worldly delectations, the most sweet consolation of thy holy
spirit, and for all fleshely love indue my soul with feruente love of thee.

Make me strong inwardly in my soul, and cast out thereof all unprofitable
cares of this world, that I be not led by unstable desires of yearthly
things, but that I may repute all things in this world (as they be)
transitory, and sone vanishing away and my self also with them, drawing toward
mine end.

For nothing under the Sun may long abide, but all is vanity, and
affliction of spirit.

Give me Lord, therefore heavenly wisdom, that I may learn to seek and
find thee, and above all things to love thee.

Give me grace to withdraw me, from them that flatter me, and pacientlie to
suffer them, that unjustly grieve me.

Lord when temptation, or tribulation comes vouchsafe to succoure me, that
all may turn to my ghostly comfort, and pacie^tly to suffer, and alwaie to
say, thy name be blessed.

Lord, trouble is now at hand, I am not well, but I am greatly vexed with
this present affliction, O most glorious father, what shall I do? Anguishe
and trouble are on every side, help now I beseech thee in this hour, thou
shalt be lauded and praised, when I am perfectly made meke before thee, and
when I am clearly delivered by thee.

May it therefore please thee to deliver me, for what may I most sinful
wretch do? Or whether may I go for succor but to thee?

Give me patience now at this time in all my trouble, help me, Lord God, and
I shall not fear ne dread, what troubles soever fall upon me.

And now what shall I say but that thy will be done in me? I have deserved to
be troubled and grieved: and therefore it behooves, that I suffer as long as it
pleases thee.

But would to God that I might suffer gladly, till the furious tempests were
over passed, and that quietness of heart might come again.

Thy mighty hand lord is strong enough to take this trouble from me, and to
assuage the cruel assaults thereof, that I be not overcome with the^, as
thou haste oftentimes done before this time, that when I am clearly delivered
by thee, I may with gladness say: the right hand of him that is highest, has
made this change.

Lord grant me thy synguler grace, that I may come thither, where no creature
shall let me, ne keep me from the perfect beholding of thee.

For as long as any transitory thing keeps me back, or has rule in me, I
may not freely ascend to thee.

O lord, without thee, nothing may long delight or please: for if any thing
should be likyng and sauourie, it must be through help of thy grace, seasoned
with ye spice of thy wisdom.

O everlasting light, far passing all things, send down ye beams of thy
brightness from above, and purify and lighten the inward parts of my heart.

Quicken my soul, and all the powers thereof, that it may cleave fast, and
be joined to thee in joyful gladness of ghostly rauishynges.

O when shall that blessed hour come, that thou shall visit me, and glad me
with thy blessed presence, when thou shall be to me al in all? verily until
that time came, there can be no perfect joy in me.

But alas, mine old man, that is in my carnal affections live still in me, and
are not crucified, nor perfectly dead.

For yet strives the flesh against the spirit, and moves great battle
inwardly against me, and suffers not thy kingdom of my soul to live in peace.

But thou good lord, that haste the Lordship over all, and power of the Sea,
to assuage the rage, and surges of the same, arise, and help me, destroy the
power of mine enemies, which always make battle against me, show forth
the greatness of thy goodness, and let the power of thy right hand be
glorified in me. For there is to me none other hope nor refuge, but in thee
only my Lord, my God: to thee be honor and glory everlasting.

O Lord, grant me, that I may wholly resign my self to thee, and in all
things to forsake my self, and patiently to bear my cross, and to follow
thee.

O lord, what is man, that thou vouchesaueste to have mind of him: and to
visit him.

Thou art alwaie one, alwaie good, alwaie righteous and holy, justly and
blessedly disposyng all things after thy wisdom.

But I am a wretch, and of my self alwaie ready, and prone to evil, and do
never ab^de in one state, but many times do vary and change.

Nevertheless, it shall be better with me, when it shall please thee: for
thou, O lord only art he, that may help me, and thou may so confirm,
and stablishe me, that my heart shall not be changed from thee, but be surely
fixed, and finally rest, and be quieted in thee.

I am nothing else of my self but vanity before thee, an inconstant creature,
and a feeble: and therefore, whereof may I rightfully glory? Or why should I
look to be magnified?

Who so pleases him self without thee, despises thee: and he that deliteth in
men's praisynges, loses the true praise before thee.

The true praise is to be praised of thee: and the true joy is to rejoice in
thee.

Wherefore thy name (O lord) be praised, and not mine.

Thy works be magnified and not mine, and thy goodness be always lauded and
blessed.

Thou art my glory, and the joy of my heart, in thee shall I glory and
rejoice, and not in my self, nor in any wordlie honor or dignity, which to
thy eternal glory compared, is but a shadow and a very vanity.

O Lord, we live here in great darkness, and are sone deceived with the
vanities of this wordle, and are sone grieved with a little trouble, yet if I
could behold my self well, I should plainly see, that what trouble so ever I
have suffered, it has justly comen upon me, because I have often sinned, and
grievously offended thee.

To me therefore confusion and despite is due: but to thee laud, honor, and
glory.

Lord send me help in my troubles, for man's help is little worth.

How often have I been disappoineted, where I thought I should have found
friendship? And how often have I found it, where as I least thought?

Wherefore it is a vain thing to trust in man: for the true trust and health
of man is only in thee.

Blessed be thou lord therefore, in all things that happens unto us, for we
be weak and unstable, sone deceived* and sone changed from one thing to an
other.

O Lord God most righteous judge, strong, and paciente, which knoweste the
frailty, and malice of man, be thou my whole strength and comfort in all
necessities: for mine own conscience (Lord) suffices not.

Wherefore, to thy mercy I do appeal, seeing no man may be justified, ne
appear righteous in thy sight, if thou examine him after thy justice.

O blessed mantion of thy heavenly city, O most clerest day of eternity,
whom the night may never darke^.

This is the day alwaie clear and mearie, alwaie sure, and never chaungyng
his state.

Would too God this day might shortly appear, and shine upon us, and that
this worldly fantasies were at an end.

This day shines clearly to thy Saints in heaven with everlasting
brightenesse, but to us pilgrims in earth, it shines obscurely, and as
through a mirror or glass.

The heavenly Citezeins know how joyous this day is: but we outlawes, the
children of Eve, weep and wail the bitter tediousness of our day, that is,
of this present life, short and evil, full of sorrow and anguishe.

Where manne is oftentimes defiled with sin, enco^bred with affliction,
inquicted with troubles, and wrapped in cares; busied with vanities, blinded
with errors, ouerchanged with labors, vexed with temptations, overcome with
vain delites and pleasures of the world, and greuouslie tormented with
penury and need.

O, when shall the'nde come of all these miseries?

When shall I be clearly delivered from the bondage of sin.

When shall I (lord) have only mind on thee, and fully be glad and merry in
thee.

When shall I be free without lettyng, and be in perfect liberty, without
grief of body and soul.

When shall I have peace without trouble: peace with in and without: and on
every side steadfast and sure?

O Lord Jesus, when shall I stand and behold thee: and have full fight and
contemplation of thy glory?

When shall thou be to me all in all? And when shall I be with thee in thy
kingdom that thou haste ordained for thine elect people from the beginning?

I am left here poor, and as an outlawe, in the laud of mine enemies, where
daily be battles, and great misfortunes.

Comfort mine exile, assuage my sorrow, for all my desire is to be with thee.

It is come an ^npleasant burden, what pleasure soever the world offreth me
hoar.

I desire to have inward fru^sion in thee, but I ca^ not attain thereto.

I covet to clean fast to heavenly things, but worldly affections, pluck my
mind do^neward.

I would subdue al evil affections; but they daily rebel and rife against me,
and will not be subject unto my spirit

Thus I wretched creature fight in my self, and am grievous to my self, while
my spirit desires te be upward and contrary my flesh draws me dounward.

O, what suffer I inwardly? I go about to mind heavenly things, and straight
a great rabble of worldelie thoughts rush into my soul.

Therefore, Lord, be not long away, ne depart not in thy wrath from me.

Send me the light of thy grace, destroy in me all carnal desires.

Send forth the hot flames of thy love, to burn and consume the cloudie
fantasies of my mind.

Gather, O Lord, my wits and the powers of my soul together in thee, and
make me to despise al worldly things, and by thy grace strongly to resist and
overcome all motions and occasions of sin.

Help me, thou everlasting truth, that no worldly gile nor vanity hereafter,
have power to deceive me.

Come also, thou heavenly sweetenes, and let all bitterness of sin flee far
from me.

Pardon me, and forgive me as often as in my prayer, my mind is not surely
fixed on thee.

For many times I am not there, where I stand, or sit: But rather there,
whither my thoughts carry me.

For there I am, where my thoughts be, and there as customablie is my
thought, there is that, that I love.

And that oftentimes comes into my mind, that by custom pleases me best,
and that deliteth me most to think upon.

Accordyngly as thou do say in thy Gospel: where as a man's treasure is,
there is his heart.

Wherefore if I love heaven, I speak gladly thereof, and of such things as
be of God, and of that, that appertains to his honor, and to the glorifiyng
of his holy name.

And if I love the world, I love to talk of worldly things and I joy anon
in worldly felicity, and sorrow and lament soon for worldly adversity.

If I love the flesh, I imagine oftentimes that, that pleases the flesh.

If I love my soul, I delight much to speak, and to bear of things, that be
for my foul health.

And whatsoever I love, of that I gladly hear, and speak and bear the Images
of the^ still in my mind.

Blessed is that man, that for the love of the Lord, sets not by the
pleasures of this world, and learneth truly to overcome him self, and with the
favor of the spirit, crucifieth his flesh, so that in a clean and a pure
conscience, he may offer his prayers to thee, and be accepted to have company
of thy blessed Angels, al yearthly things excluded from his heart.

Lord, and holy father, be thou blessed now and ever: for as thou will, so
is it dooen, and that thou dooest, is alwaie best.

Let me thy humble and unworthy servant, joy only in thee, and not in my
self, ne in any thing else beside thee.

For thou Lord, art my gladness, my hope, my croun and all my honor.

What has thy servant, but that he has of thee, and that without his deserte?

All things be thine, thou have created and made them.

I am poor, and have been in trouble and pain, ever from my youth, and my
soul has been in great heaviness through manifold passions, that come of the
world, and of the flesh.

Wherefore, Lord, I desire that I may have of thee, the joy of inward peace.

I ask of thee, to come to that rest, which is ordained for thy chosen
children, that be v^ed and nourished with the light of heavenly comfortes: for
without thy help, I ca^ not come to thee.

Lord give me peace, give me inward joy, and then my soul shall be full of
heavenly melody, and be devout, and feruente in thy lauds and praisynges.

But if thou withdraw thy self from me (as thou haste sometime dooen) then may
not thy servant run the way of thy commandments, as I did before.

For it is now with me, as it was, when the Lantern of thy ghostly presence,
did shine upon my head, and I was defended under the shadow of thy wings
from all perilles and dangers.

O merciful Lord Jesus, ever to be praised, the time is come, that thou will
prove thy servant, and rightful is it, that I shall now suffer somewhat for
thee.

Now is the hour come, that thou have known from the beginning, that thy
servant for a time should outwardly be set at naught, and inwardly to lean to
thee.

And that he should be despised in the fight of ye world, and be broken with
affliction that he may after arise with thee in a new light, and be
clarified, and made glorious in the kingdom of heaven.

O holy father, thou have ordained it so to be, and it is done as thou have
commanded.

This is thy grace (o lord) to thy freinde, to suffer him to be troubled in
this world for thy love, how often soever it be, and of what person so ever
it be, and in what manner so ever thou will suffer it to fall unto him: for
without thy will or sufferaunce, what thing is done upon the earth?

It is good to me (O lord) that thou have mekened me, that I may thereby
learn to know thy righteous judgments, and to put from me all manner of
presumption and stateliness of heart.

It is very profitable for me that confusion has covered my face, that I may
learn thereby rather to seek to thee for help and succor, then to man.

I have thereby learned to dread thy secret and terrible judgments, which
scourgeste the righteous with the sinner, but not without equity and justice.

Lord, I yield thanks to thee, that thou haste not spared my sins, but
haste punished me with scrourges of love, and have sent me affliction and
anguishes within and without.

No creature under heaven may comfort me, but thou (Lord GOD) the heavenly
leache of man's soul, which strikeste and healest, which bryngest a man nigh
unto death, and after restorest him to life again, that he may thereby learn
to know his own weakness and imbesilitie, and the more fully to trust in
thee (Lord.)

Thy discipline is laid upon me, and thy rod of correction has taught me,
and under that rod I wholly submit me.

Strike my back and my bones, as shall please thee, and make me to bow my
crooked will, unto thy will.

Make me a meek and an humble disciple, as thou have sometime done with me,
that I may walk after thy will.

To thee I commit my self to be corrected: for better it is to be corrected
by thee here, then in time to ^ome.

Thou know all things, and nothing is hid from thee, that is in man's
conscience.

Thou knoweste all things to come before they fall, and it is not needful,
that any man teach thee, or warn thee of any thing that is done upon the
earth.

Thou know what is profitable for me, and how much tribulatio^s helpen to
purge away ye rust of sin in me.

Do with me after thy pleasure, I am a sinful wretch, to none so well known
as to thee.

Grant me (lord) that to know, that is necessary to be known: that to
love, that is to be loved: that to desire, that pleases thee: that to
regard, that is precious in thy sight: and that to refuse, that is vile before
thee.

Suffer me not to judge thy mysteries after my outward senses, ne to give
sentence after the hearing of the ignorante, but by true judgment to discern
things spiritual: and above all things, alwaie to search, and follow thy
will and pleasure.

O Lord Jesus, thou art all my richesse, and all that I have I have it of thee.

But what am I (lord) that I dare speak to thee? I am thy poor creature, and
a worm most abiecte.

Behold Lord, I have naught, and of my self I am naught worth, thou art only
God, righteous and holy, thou ordereste all things, thou give all things,
and thou fulfilleste all things with goodness.

I am a sinner, barren and void of godly bertue.

Remember thy mercies, and fill my heart with plenty of thy grace, for thou will not that thy works in me, should be in vain.

How may I bear the misery of this life, except thy grace and mercy do
comfort me?

Turn not thy face from me, defer not the visityng of me, ne withdraw not
thy comfortes, least happily my soul be made as dry earth without the water
of grace.

Teach me lore to fulfill thy will, to live mekely, and worthelie before thee,
for thou art all my wisdom and cunnyng, thou art he that knoweste me as I am,
that know me before ye world was made, and before I was borne, or brought
into this life to thee (O Lord) be honor, glory, and praise for ever and
ever. Amen.

Laus deo in aeternum. Amen.
A devout prayer to be said daiely.
O Almighty and eternal God, which vouchsauest that we as it were heavenly
children, should every one of us call thee our heavenly father: Grant that
among us be pureness, and example of i^nocent life, thy most holy name may be
sanctified, that all other nations, beholding our goodness and virtuous
deeds, that thou workest in us, may be stirred to hallowe, and glorify thee.

Grant (O lord) that the kingdom of thy grare and mercy, may reign
continually in our hearts, so that we may he worthy to be partakers of the
realm of glory and majesty.

Grant that unto the very death, we refuse not to follow thy divine will, and
that we, according to the example of the celestial citezens, agreyng together
quietly united in spirit, all controversy in opinions laid aparte, the lusts
of the flesh being subdued, and the flatteryng assaults of the world and the
Devil overcome, never wrastell against thy most holy will, but obey it in
all things. Grant (O Lord) for our body needful sustenaunce, that we
may the more freely serve thee. Give us, we beseech thee (O merciful father)
that heavenly bread, the body of thy son Jesus Christ, the very food and
health of our souls: give us the bread of thy divine precepts, that we may
truly walk, and live after them.

Give us the bread of the heavenly word, which is thy strong buttresse, and
sure defense of our souls, that we being well fed, and filled with this
food, may worthily come to the celestial feast where as is no hunger. Grant
(O lord) that we patiently bear, and suffer our enemies, and such as hurt
us, and willyngly to forgive the offenses committed against us, that so we
may find thee lord in forgiving us our trespasses, mild and merciful.

Grant O lord, that we be not utterly led into temptation, that thereby we
should be lost: but in all perilles of temptation, and in the mids of the
stormy tempests and tribulations, let us thy children, perceive and feel thy
fatherly succoure, ready to help us, least that we (overcome with the
naughty crafts, and deceiptes of the temptour) should be drawn into
everlasting destruction: but when we be well assaied approved, and pourged with
the fire of temptation, then let us finishe our course, and so well and
valiauntly fight, that we may for evermore, live with thee in that heavenly
city, where and against thee, which no manner temptation can prevail.
Finally, grant most merciful father, that we, through thy benign
goodness, may be delivered from all evils present, and to come, both of
body and soul, and that at the last, the yoke of the foul feinde being
shaken of, we may possess the heritage of the heavenly Kingdom, which thy
soonne, with his precious blood bought for us thy children: and there for ever
to have the fruitio^ of celestial delectations, accompanied with Angels, and
blessed saints, through the help benignity, and grace of our savior Jesus
Christ, to who^, and to thee our father, and to the holy ghost, be glory and
honor, now and ever. Amen.

An other prayer.
O Heavenly father, God almighty, I pray and beseech thy mercy, benignly so
behold me thy unworthy servant, that I may by gift of thy holy spirit,
fervently desire thy kingdom, that I may know thy will, and work thereafter.
Give me O lord, wisdom. Make me constaunte, pacient, and strong in thee. Keep
me lord, from the sleightie inuasio^ of the old wily serpent. Defend me from
the counsels, and cursings of evil tongues: let thy mighty arm be my
shield against all the malignitie of this wicked world. Remember not (O Lord)
mine offenses: instruct, prepare me to repent, to be sorry for my sins.

Make me to love Justice, and hate wrong, to do good and abstain from all
euilles: that I may be worthy to be called thy child.

To thee be honor and glory, for ever and ever. Ame^.

A devout prayer.
Lord, harken to my words, consider the thought of mine heart. Behold, hold
loud I cry unto thee? Let my just prayer enter into thine ears, which
unfeignedly comes fro mine heart. Hear me Lord: for I am poor, and destitute
of man's help. Take care for my soul: save me thy servant which wholly
trust in thee, have mercy upon me (o lord) for I will never cease criyng to
thee for help. For thou art mild, and more merciful then any tongue ca^
express, as often as adversity assaileth me, I will cry and call for help
unto thee: I will call upon thee in the day time: and in the night my cry shall
not be hid from thee, O thou God of the heavens, and maker of the waters,
and lord of al creatures, hear me a poor sinner calling upon thee, and
puttyng my whole trust in thy mercy. Have mercy upon me for thy manifold
mercies sake forgive me al mine offenses. Amen.

The Letanie.
O God the father of heaven, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the father of heaven. etc.

O God the soonne redemer of the world, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the son redemer. etc.

O God the holy ghost, proceeding from the father and the soonne, have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O God the holy ghost, etc.

O holy, blessed, and glorious trinity, three persons and one God, have
mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed, and glory. etc.

Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers, nether
take thou vengeance of our sins, spare us good lord, spare thy people, whom
thou haste redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for
ever.

Spare us good Lord.

From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the
Devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting dampnation.

Good Lord deliver us.

From blindness of heart, from pride, vainglorie, and hypocrisy, from envy,
hatered, and malice, and al uncharitableness.

Good Lord deliver us.

From fornication, and all other deadly sin: and from all the deceiptes of the
world the flesh, and the devil.

Good Lord deliver us.

From lightninges and tempests, from plague, pestilence and famine, from
battle and murder, and from sudden death.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all sedition, and privy conspiracy, from all false doctrine, and
heresy, from hardenesse of heart, and contempt of thy word, and
commandment.

G^od Lord deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy incarnation, by thy holy nativity and
Circumcision, by thy Baptism, Fasting, and temptation.

Good Lord deliver us.

By thine agony, and bloody sweat, by thy cross, and passion, by thy
precious death, and burial, by thy glorious resurrection, and ascension, and
by the coming of the holy ghost.

Good Lord deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth in the hour of
death, and in (...) day of judgment.

Good Lord deliver us.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us (O Lord God) and that it may please
thee to rule and govern thy holy Church universally in the right way.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee, to keep and strength in the true worshippyng of
thee, in righteousness, and holiness of life, thy servant Elizabeth our
most gracious Queen and governor.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee, to rule her heart in thy faith, fear and love, and
that she may always have affiaunce in thee, and ever seek thy honor and
glory.

We beseech thee to hear us etc.

That it may please thee to be her defender, and keeper, giuyng her the
victory over all her enemies.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee, to illuminate all Bishooppes, Pastors, and
Ministers of the church, with true knowledge, and understanding of thy word,
and that both by their preaching and living, they may set it forth, and
show it accordyngly.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee, to indue the lords of the counsel, and all the
nobility, with grace, wisdom, and understanding.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee, to bless and keep the Magistrates, giuyng them
grace to execute justice, and to maintain truche.

We bes^che thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee, to bless, and keep all thy people.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee, to give al nations, unity, peace and concord.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee, to give us an heart, to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy commandments.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee, to give all thy people increase of grace, to hear
meekely thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth
the fruictes of the spirit.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee, to bring into the way of truth, all such as have
erred, and be disceiued.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee, to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort,
and help the weak hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat
down Satan under our feet.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee, to succor, help, and comfort all that be in
danger, necessity, and tribulation.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee, to preserve all that travail by land, or by water,
all women labouryng of child, all sick persons, and young children, and to
show thy pity upon all prisoners and captives.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee, to defend, and provide for the fatherless
children, and widows, and all that be desolate and oppressed.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee, to have mercy upon all men.

We beseech thee to hear us etc.

That it may please thee, to forgive our enemies, persecutours, and
slau^derers, and to turn their hearts.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee, to give and preserve to our use, the kyndelie
fruictes of the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them.

We beseech thee to hear us etc.

That it may please thee, to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our
sins, negligences, and ignorances: and to indue us with the grace of thy
holy spirit, to amend our lives, according to thy holy word.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

Soonne of God: we beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us.

O lamb of God, that take away ye sins of the world.

Grant us thy peace.

O lamb of God: that take away ye sins of the world.

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ hear us.

O Christ hear us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in. etc.

And lead us not into temptation.

But deliver us from evil. Amen.

The versicle.

O Lord, deal not with us after our sins.

The answer.

Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray,
O God merciful Father, that despiseste not the sighyng of a co^trite heart,
nor the desire of such as be sorrowful mercifully assist our prayers that we
make before thee, in all our troubles, and adversities, when soever they
appresse us, and graciously hear us, that those evils, which the craft and
subtlety of the devil, or man works against us, be brought to naught, and
by the providence of thy goodness, they may be dispersed, that we thy
servants being hurt by no persecutions, may evermore give thanks unto thee
in thy holy Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord, arise, help us, and deliver us for thy names sake.

O God, we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us the
noble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before
them.

O Lord, arise, help us, and deliver us for thine honor.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost As it was in
the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.

From our enemies defend us, O Christ.

Graciously look upon our affliction*

Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts.

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorably with mercy, hear our prayers,

O soonne of David, have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ.

Graciously hear us, O Christ.

Graciously hear us, O Lord christ

The versicle.

O Lord, let thy mercy be showed upon us.

The answer.

As we do put our trust in thee.

Let us pray.
WE humbly beseech thee O father, mercifully to look upon our infirmities, and
for the glory of thy names sake, turn from us all those euilles that we
most righteously have deserved: and grant that in all our troubles, we may
put our whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in
holiness, and pureness of living, to thy honor and glory, through our
only mediator and advocate Jesus Christ our lord. Amen.

A prayer for the Queens Majesty.
O Lord our heavenly father, high and mighty king of kings, lord of lords,
the only ruler of princes, which dooest from thy throne, behold all the
dwellers upon the earth, most hartly we beseech thee, with thy favor to
behold our most gracious Sovereign Lady queen Elizabeth, and so replenishe
her with the grace of thy holy spirit, that she may alwaie incline to thy
will, and walk in thy way: indue her plentifully with heavenly gifts:
grant her in health and wealth long to live, strength her that she may
vanquishe and overcome all her enemies. And finally after this life, she may
attain ouerlasting joy and felicity: through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty and everlasting GOD, which only workest great marueiles, send
down upon our Bishappes and Curates, and all congregations committed to their
charge, the healthful spirit of thy grace, and that they may truly please
thee. Pour upon them the continual dew of thy blessyng, grant this, O
Lord for the honor of our advocate and mediator Jesus Christ. Amen.

A prayer of Chrysostom,
Almighty God, which have given us grace at this time with one accord, to
make our common supplications unto thee, and do pramise, that when two or
three be gathered together in thy name; thou will grant their requests,
fulfill now, O Lord, the desires, and petitions of thy servants, as may be
most expedient for them, grauntyng us in this world, knowledge of thy
truth, and in the world to come, life everlasting, Ame^.

ii Corinth. xiii. THe grace of our lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God,
and the fellowship of the holy ghost, be with us all evermore. Amen.

In the time of any common plague or sickness.
O Almighty God, which in thy wrath, in the time of king David, did slay
with the plague of Pestilence, three score and ten thousand, and yet
remembryng thy mercy, did save the rest: have pity upon us miserable
sinners, that now are visited with great sickness, and mortality, that like
as thou did then command thine Angel too cease from punishyng: So it
may please thee too withdraw from us this plague, and grievous sickness:
Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O GOD, whose nature and property is ever to have mercy, and to forgive,
receive our humble petitions, and though we be tied, and bound with the
chain of our sins: yet let the pitifulness of thy great mercy looce us,
for the honor of Jesus Christ's sake our mediator and advocate. Amen.

FINIS.

