Mr. GEORGE BLACKWEL, (Made by Pope Clement 8. Arch priest of England) his
Answers upon sundry his Examinations: Together, with his Approbation and
taking of the Oath of Allegiance: And his Letter written to his Assistants, and
brethren, moving them not only to take the said Oath, but to advise all
Romish Catholics so to do.

IMPRINTED AT London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1607.

royal blazon or coat of arms

THE FIRST EXAMINATION OF Mr George Blackwell Arch Priest, assigned by the Pope
for England.
Taken at Lambeth by the most Reverend Father in God, the L. Archbishop of
Canterbury his Grace and some others, the 25. day of June, 1607.
Being demanded, M Blackwel was apprehended near Clerken well on Midsummer
day at night, viz. 24 Iunij.
Whether his name were Blackwel, He answered out of a place of (...)
Chrysostom writing upon those words, Estote prudentes si(...)t serpents, and
simplices sicut columbae; That before he came into trouble, he was to use all
caution for the preservation of his head, that is, of his faith: but now that
he is apprehended, he is to deal simply without any duplicitie. And there
upon he acknowledged his name to be George Blackwell, and that he was
Archpriest, which Office he has borne about nine or ten years.

Georgius Blackwellus Archipres-byter.
The second Examination of M. Blackwell taken at Lambeth, etc. the 26. of June
1607.
He confesses, he has not his Pardon, but says that he labored to have
obtained it: but no man durst move for it, his name being so known.

Being demanded, How he durst take such an Office upon him as he has, to
direct and command, first her late Majesty's, and now the Kings Subjects
without their consent, he answers; That it was laid upon) him without his
seeking for it: That he undertook only to keep the Priests in order, and to
stay all unlawful attempts so far as he was able etc.

Georgius Blackwellus Archi presbyter.
The third Examination of M. Blackwell, taken at Lambeth, etc. the last day of
June 1607.
MAster Blackwell being required to deliver his knowledge (...)hing a Book
lately come forth, Entitled, Quaestiones duae de sacris alienis non adeundis,
ad vsum praximque, Angliae breuiter explicate: concerning the occasion, and
author of it, says, that as he thinks, M. Parsons is the author of it; and
that he so thinks, by reason of the subscription, R. P. and upon no other
information.

That the occasion of the treatise (as he supposes) was a certain short
Pamphlet of a sheet and an half, as he guesseth, written by Thomas Wright a
Priest, containing certain reasons, to prove it lawful for Recusants, to go
to the Church here in England; which reasons being sent to Rome (but not by
this Examinate, nor with his priuitie) were answered in such sort, as in the
said Treatise does appear.

Being hereupon demanded, whether the said treatise written by M. Parsons as
aforesaid, be generally received by the Priests here in England, as
containing a true decision of the points it handles: he answers, that the
same notwithstanding, unus quis que abundat in suo sensu, as he supposes, etc.

Georgius Blackwellus, Archi-presbyter.
The fourth Examination of M. Blackwell, taken at Lambeth, etc. the first of
July 1607.
Master Blackewell confesses,
THat he was appointed Archpriest by Henry Cardinal Caietane, as appears
(...) the said Cardinals Letter, beginning, The effect of this Breue and of the
other, is set down in the latter end.
Scitum est etc. and dated from Rome the 7. of March, 1598.

That the said Cardinal together with the said Letter, sent unto him certain
instructions for his direction, and better execution of his Office, the first
whereof begins thus, Cum praecipua intentio suae sanctitatis sit, etc. They
bare the same date with the said Letter, viz. 7o. Martij, 1598.

That he received the said Letter and instructions the 9. day of May
following, viz. anno 1598.

That upon the receipt thereof, he acquainted two Priests with the contents of
them, and from that time forward did execute his Office for peace, and for
restraint of the stubbornness of some.

That in November following, another Letter was directed unto him from the said
Cardinal, beginning, Admodum Reverend, etc. and bearing date 10. November,
Anno. 1598.

That the year after he received a Breue from Pope Clement the 8. for the
Confirmation of his Office. The Breue began thus: Ad futuram rei memoriam, etc.
and bare date 6o Aprilis, Anno 1599.

That he made the same known unto some of his Assistants; that the same year
he received certain Spiritual Faculties from Cardinal Caietane, in number,
eight: which he sent unto some of his Assistants. The Faculties were thus
entitled, Facultates concedendae Sacerdotibus, etc. and his Letter which he
sent unto his Coadiutors, began thus: Dilectiss. Coadintores, iam tandem a
superioribus deducta est ad me potestas communicandi facultates, etc. My
beloved Coadiutors, now at the last, is brought unto me from my Superiors,
authority to grant Faculties, etc.

Memorandum, that the Copies of all the said Breues and Letters were in the
hands of the L. Archbishop of Canturbury, and acknowledged to be true by M.
Blackwell.

Georgius Blackwellus, Archi-presbyter.
The fifth Examination taken at Lambeth, etc. the second of July 1607.
Master Blackwel confesses,
THat he received another Breue from Clement the 8. beginning, Cum nobilissimum
Angliae Regnum, etc. and dated from S. Makes in Rome, 17. Augusti Anno 1601.

That he published the said Breue, wherein he is declared to be Archpriest in
the whole Realm of England, and to be placed by the same authority the Prefect
over all the Catholics in England. This Breue, he says, did afterward
appear unto him, to have been unlawfully sent into this Realm.

That certain Books being printed Permissu Superiorum, he certified the
Catholics, that they might with a safe conscience read them, as not being
within the compass of the said Breue.

That he received from Rome another Breue, beginning, Venerunt nuper ad Nos
nonnulli Sacerdotes Angliae, being dated, 5. October. 1602.

That he published the said Breue, which had been published before, and printed
by the discontented Priests that procured it.

That he gave order for general prayers to be had for the good success of
that which was intended by himself in his prayers: which was not (as he
says) for any good success toward the Rebels in Ireland in the late Queens
time: but forasmuch as there was a certain report given out of the Infanta her
being with child, that she might have a safe deliverance: adding, that he
ever detested those courses in Ireland.

That upon the late Queens death, when his Majesty was proclaimed King, he
was very joyful; sent wine to a bonfire not far from him: and afterward,
fearing some evil intent, because he perceived some, who had been always too
forward in disobedient attempts, to go with great attendance upon them in
gallantrie, he divulged his letters of persuasion and commandment (so much
as lay in him) to all Catholics and Priests, that in any wife they should be
quiet, and attempt nothing, but live as became Subjects, in duetiful and
peaceable obedience.

That upon the publishing of the oath of Allegiance made the last Session of
this present Parliament, he divulged his judgment and direction for the
lawfulness of the taking of that oath: and many Priests did concur with him
in opinion therein, though there were some that dissented.

That when M. Singleton was banished, this Examinate, as fearing that his
former direction should be disliked in Rome, did deliver unto him the reasons
of such his opinion, and directions to be imparted even unto the Pope himself,
if occasion should require.

That matters were handled with such speed, as that M. Singleton in his
journey toward Rome met a Breue from this Pope Paul the fifth, at Sienna,
coming toward the Low Countries, to be sent from thence hither.

That after the departure of M. Singleton, this Examinate not contenting
himself with that which he had committed to his relation, prepared one
purposely, to have been sent to Rome with all his reasons in writing: and in
the mean while, till his said messenger might be ready, he wrote his Letters
and reasons with a more speedy passage, to have stayed all directions or Breues
against the taking of the said oath of Allegiance.

That when his said Letters were come to Rome, none durst present his reasons
to the Pope: that M. Singleton sent him word, how he himself having had speech
with the chiefest Cardinals, and most of the learned men in Rome, did find
them to be in opinion contrary to this Examinate: and that his this Examinates
said opinion is condemned already in Salamanca, as he has been informed.

That afterward the said Breue which M. Singleton met at Sienna, came to this
Examinate: but with no more particular direction to him, then to all other
Catholics.

That this Examinate having received the said Breue, as others likewise had,
did show the same unto some persons: but he says, that he did never publish
it: and, that he has bin challenged both at home, and from abroad, and
greatly blamed in that respect: adding, that when some have urged him in that
behalf, his answer was, that he would not thrust his head into the halter
wilfully: and that therefore he utterly denies the This Letter co^teineth the
publication of the said Breue, against the taking of the oath aforesaid.
Letter showed unto him dated 28. Septem. 1606. to have proceeded from him, or
that ever he had any knowledge of it, but says it was falsely given out in
his name.

Georgius Blackwellus, Archi-presbyter.
The sixth Examination taken at Lambeth, etc. the third of July 1607.
BEing demanded, whether upon the receipt of the said Breue last mentioned,
his former opinion for the lawfulness of the taking of the said oath of
Allegiance, be altered: After a due time of deliberation he says, that his
said opinion is not altered by the said Breue, or by any other reason which
hitherto he has seen.

Being further asked, whether he do hold this a lawful oath to be taken by
Catholics in England, and whether he himself, if he shall be required, will
take the same, he says, that the oath carrying that sense, His Majesty's speech
in the Parliament, letter C. page 1. Their point of doctrine is that arrogant
and ambitious Supremacy of their Head the Pope, whereby he not only claims to
be Spiritual head of all Christians, but also to have an Imperial civil
power over all Kings and Emperors, dethroning and decrowning Princes with his
foot as pleases him, and dispensing and disposing of all Kingdoms and
Empires at his appetite. The other point which they observe in continual
practice, is the assassinates and murders of Kings, thinking it no sin, but
rather a matter of salvation, to do all actions of rebellion and hostility
against their natural Sovereign Lord, if he be once cursed, his subjects
discharged of their fidelity, and his Kingdom given a pray by that three
crowned Monarch, or rather Monster their Head.
which his Majesty's words, touching the doctrine of the Church of Rome in that
behalf, do seem to import in his speech before the Lords and the rest in
Parliament, 19. Martij 1603. His judgment is, That the same may and ought to
be taken by all the Catholics in England, and that he himself, if it shall be
tendered unto him, will not refuse to take it.

And hereupon he wished, that he might but have spoken with Master Drury before
his death: in that he understands his life had been preserved, if he would
have taken that oath.

Being further demanded, forasmuch as his said former opinion for the
lawfulness of taking the said oath is not altered, whether he can be content,
to write to the Priests as much as heretofore he has delivered unto them by
word of mouth, touching that his opinion: he says, that when he first
delivered his said opinion, he did rely upon certain reasons sent by him to
Rome, (the brief whereof he has before set down in one of his former
Examinations:) and that, his opinion continuing the same it was before, he
could be content to write as much concerning the lawfulness of taking the said
oath, as before he has delivered in speech to some Priests, were it not, that
he should therein subject himself to great opposition: and therefore now
adds, that relying upon his Majesty's said words, as formerly he did, and
now perceiving, how the Parliament did purposely avoid in the penning of the
said oath, to call into question the Popes authority to Excommunicate, but did
only intend to prevent the dangers which might ensue by the supposed doctrine
of such inferences, as thereupon have been made, and are mentioned in that
oath; he can be content to publish in writing under his seal to all the
Catholic Priests in England, that in the sense above by him expressed, he
thinks it lawful for them to take the said oath: and does himself take the
same accordingly: viz.

IGeorge Blackewell do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify,
and declare in my conscience before God and the world, That our Sovereign Lord
King James is lawful and rightful king of this Realm, and of all other his
Majesty's Dominions and Countries; And that the Pope, neither of himself, nor
by any authority of the Church, or See of Rome, or by any other means with
any other, has any power, or authority to depose the King, or to dispose any
of his Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions, or to authorize any foreign prince to
invade or annoy him, or his countries, or to discharge any of his subjects of
their allegiance and obedience to his Majesty, or to give license, or leave to
any of them to bear arms, raise tumult, or to offer any uiolence or hurt to
his Majesty's royal Person, State, or government, or to any of his Majesty's
subjects within his Majesty's Dominions.

Also I do swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any Declaration or
sentence of Excommunication or Deprivation made or granted, or to be made or
granted by the Pope, or his Successors, or by any Authority derived, or
pretented to be derived from him, or his See against the said King, his Heirs
or Successors, or any absolution of the said Subjects from their Obedience; I
will bear faith and true allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, and him and them will defend to the uttermost of my power against
all conspiracies and attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his or
their Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of any such
Sentence or Declaration, or otherwise, and will do my best endeavor to
disclose and make known unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all
Treasons and traitorous conspi(...)ies, which I shall know or hear of to be
against him or any of them.

And I do further swear, That I do from my heart abhor, detest, and
abjure, as impious and heretical, this damnable doctrine and position, That
Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or
murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do believe, and in conscience am resolved, That neither the Pope, nor
any person whatsoever, has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part
thereof, which I acknowledge by good and full Authoritit to be lawfully
ministered unto me, and do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the
contrary.

And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear
according to these express words by me spoken, and according to the plain and
common sense and understanding of the same words, without any Equivocation, or
mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever. And I do make this
recognition and acknowledgment heartily, willingly, and truly, upon the true
faith of a Christian: So help me God.

George Blackwell Archpriest.
The seventh Examination, taken at Lambeth, etc. the 4. of July 1607.
MAfter Blackwell being urged to explicate himself more fully touching the
sense he relieth upon out of his Majesty's words 19. Martij 1603. since
published in print: in that he may so understand them, as notwithstanding his
oath formerly taken, that duty which is expected is no way satisfied: because
his Majesty's meaning is evident, that he does account it to proceed from
appetite, and rashness in any of the Bishops of Rome whosoever, who presuming
to excommunicate any King, shall by the same either absolve his Subjects from
their obedience, or excite them to bear Arms against him, or authorize them
to lay violent hands upon his Person, or to stir up any sedition or tumult
within his Kingdom, or to assist any that shall make such Attempts either
against the King, or the State of the Kingdom:

He answers for the further opening of his meaning, That no lawful
Excommunication can ^roduce such effects, nor ought to enforce the same. And he
further says, First, that he is verily persuaded in his conscience, that the
Bishop of Rome will never Excommunicate his Majesty; and yet that if he should
so do, and in the same take upon him to discharge his Majesty's subjects of
their allegiance, or require them to bear Arms against him, or to offer
violence unto his Royal person; he this Examinate would nevertheless for his
own part continue his Majesty's faithful Subject: and that in his judgment,
all Catholics ought to concur, with him therein, notwithstanding any thing
in the said Excommunication that might be inserted or threatened against those
Catholics, that should so do. For he verily thinks, and therein is
resolute, that no lawful Excommunication can be justly denounced or published
against his Majesty, that can or ought to work any such effects: but that all
his Majesty's Subjects, the same notwithstanding, do continue obliged unto
him, as fully to all intents and purposes, as ever they were before, or as if
the said Excommunication had never been either framed, denounced, or published.

Georgius Blackwellus Archi-presbyter.
M. BLACKWELS Letter to the Priests his brethren for the lawfulness of taking
the Oath of Allegiance.
7. July 1607. My very reverend Abetaistants and dear Brethren, M. Blackwell
being sent for to Lambeth the eighth time, upon some speeches with him, did
think it fit to write to his Assistants the ^u(...)e in general of all his
former examinations: as by the letter it self does appear.

YOu know how many years I have passed over among you in much tribulation,
and how often under God his holy protection I have escaped dangers, albeit they
were still imminent, and hanging over my head. But now of late it has pleased
our gracious Lord to suffer me to fall into the mouth of one, who long has
gaped after me: for the sasetie of whose soul, if I be as careful, as he has
been forward upon the apprehension of my body, I shall but perform the duty
of a good Christian. I thank God, that in all my afflictions, of twelve days
close imprisonment, and of eight Examinations at Lambeth, I have given no
occasion to any person to speak evil of me; neither (as I trust) shall I
run upon your hard censures for any thing I have done. I must confess, but
not without much grief, that in the course of my Examinations, I espied great
defects of sincere dealing among our selves: for the Lord Archbishop made an
heavy present unto me of his holiness Briefs, and of the copies of my Letters
about the publication of the same, with such other pressing evidences of all my
proceedings, that I could not avoid, without a reproachful note, and much
discredit, the force of truth in the points objected against me. But the
urging supereminent point was, to know, whether I had altered, or retained
still the continuance of my former opinion about the lawfulness of taking the
Oath of Allegiance: For answer; finding what hatred, and iealoufnesse we have
incurred, in the opinion of his Majesty and the State, for the refusal of the
Oath; and thereupon making a reuiew of the reasons, drawing me into the former
public approbation thereof; and relying upon very moving considerations
delivered by his Majesty the nineteenth of March, An. 1603. which are now in
print: And further, being informed how the Parliament did purposely avoid to
call into question the authority of the Pope to Excommunicate, but did only
intend to prevent the dangers which might ensue by the supposed doctrine of
such inferences as thereupon has been made, and are mentioned in that Oath:
Upon these respects and others, I granted and made known the admittance of my
former Opinion, and did accept of the Oath of Allegiance, and have taken the
same, word for word, as it is set down in the Statute. Afterward, falling into
speech of Excommunication, I delivered my mind: First, that I thought his
Holiness would not at any time Excommunicate his Majesty: Secondly, that no
lawful Excommunication can or ought to produce, or to enforce such grievous
effects as have been made, and are mentioned in that Oath: Thirdly, that if
any such Excommunication should come from his Holiness, that, by the virtue
thereof, it should be thought that his Majesty's subjects were discharged of
their Oaths and duties of Allegiance, or that they were bound to bear arms
against him, or to offer uiolence unto his Royal Person, or to commit any
treachery or treason against any of his Dominions; I would hold my self
nevertheless, for my part and estate, bound by the Law of God to continue his
Majesty's most loyal and faithful subject. And my judgment further is, that
all good Catholics ought to concur with me herein, and to do the like. For
this is my conscience and resolution, that no lawful Excommunication can be
justly denounced and published by the Pope against his Majesty, which can or
ought (as I have said) to inculcate, command or work, and bring forth any
such effects. And that all his Majesty's Subjects, the same notwithstanding,
(if any such should ever happen) do still continue as firmly obliged to his
Majesty to all intents and purposes, as they were ever obliged at any time
before, or as if such an Excommunication had never been thought of, framed,
denounced, or published. And therefore not knowing whether ever I shall have
opportunity again to write unto you, I have thus at large discharged my
conscience in this matter: persuading my self, that you (my Assistants and
dear brethren) will take the oath, as I have done, when it shall be offered
unto you; and that you will instruct the lay Catholics, that they may so do,
when it is tendered them. So shall we shake off the false and grievous
imputations of Treason, and Treacheries: So shall lay Catholics not overthrow
their estates: so shall we effect that, which his Holiness desires, that is,
to exhibit our duties to God and our Prince. Surely this will bring us gain,
and increase of many comforts. And so to conclude in the Apostle his words,
Charitas mea cum omnibus vobis in Christo Jesus. Amen.

From the Gate House. 7. Iulij 1607. Georgius Blackwellus Archipresbyter and
protonotarius Apostolicus. Here his Seal was fixed.
Endorced, To my reucrend Assistants and loving brethren.

8. Iulij. 1607.

This being read in the presence of Master Blackwell, It was thought fit, for
the avoiding of some inconvenience, that M. Blackwell should acknowledge this
his Letter before some of the Lords, whereusto he very willingly yielded.
he does acknowledge it to be his own hand writing, and to be agreeable to his
Conscience and Judgment, voluntarily by him set down, without any indirect
means used, or constraint.

R. Cant: T. Ellesmere Canc. T. Dorset. H. Northampton. Salisburie. E. Wotton.
Iul. Caesar.

THE SVMME OF THE BREVES before specified upon diverse occasions in the former
Examinations.
The effect of the first Breue mentioned in the fourth Examination beginning,
Scitum est, etc.
THe sum of this Brief is, that the Pope bade Cardinal Caietane, the
Protector of the English Nation, by the example of the College at Rome, to
think of some course for concord amongst Priests in England: that thereupon,
after some deliberation by the Cardinal and others, it was thought fit by the
Pope, that there should be a subordination constituted for the governing of
the Priests of the English Nation, both in England, and Scotland, and M.
Blackwell was appointed to be the Archpriest over them: that his authority
was to direct, admonish, reprehende, and chastise those Priests; to depose,
remove, and change them from one residence to another; to convent any Priest
before him; to summon many together; to be the chief over them assembled; and
to correct them by Ecclesiastical censures: that for the better managing of
the affair, twelve Assistants should be chosen: that he and his Assistants
should write to Rome every six months, of the state of their matters, for the
Popes better information: that one particular end of this subordination was,
for the mainteining of peace and union betwixt the Secular Priests and the
Jesuits; because they the said Jesuits do travail for supporting of the
English cause, by erecting Seminaries, etc. it being the deceit of the devil,
for any to stir up emulation against them: and that if any shall weaken this
concord, he may either be reformed, or corrected.

The sum of the Cardinals instructions to the Archpriest, mentioned in the
said Examination, is as follows:
THat the Popes intention by the said subordination, being, that the Archpriest
and his Assistants should preserve peace, they should inform him (the
Protector) of such as were contentious: that the Archpriest should do nothing
of any great importance, without the counsel of his Assistants, if it might be
had that thenceforward none should give faculties to the Seculars but the
Archpriest, nor to the Jesuits, but their Superiors that neither the
Archpriest nor his Assistants, should use their authority, but when it was
necessary: that if any thing were amiss among the Jesuits, the Archpriest
and his Assistants should deal with their Superior; and finding no redress,
should write either to the Protector, or to the General of the Jesuits: that
the Archpriest in causes of greater importance, should use the advice or the
Superior of the Jesuits, because he was a man of great experience in the
affairs of England: that they should send their Letters to the President of
Doway to be conveyed to Rome: that the Archpriest should do his best for the
compounding of the controversies betwixt the Priests of Wisbich, and others:
that the Archpriest should, as he thought fit, place and displace Priests for
their residence in houses of Catholics.

The sum of the Cardinals letter, mentioned in the Examination aforesaid,
beginning Admodum Reverend, etc.
IT seemeththat the Archpriest with some that approved his subordination,
together with the Jesuits, did write a Letter of thanksgiving to the
Cardinal, signifying unto him, that the same was commonly here received:
whereunto the Cardinal for answer relates the great joy, which the Pope had
in that behalf. But withal, he takes notice of some opposition and
contradiction against it, wherewith he says the Pope was grievously moved: and
therefore requires the Archpriest in the Popes name, to send true information
thereof, with the names of the contenders and causes of the reluctation: and
wishes him not to faint for meeting with some difficulties, and contradiction
in his regiment.

The sum of the Breue sent by Pope Clement the 8. mentioned in the
Examination aforesaid, and beginning, Ad futuram reimemoriam, etc.
THere having grown many disputations, and difficulties against the
subordination of the Archpriest, and against the Cardinals authority so to
aduancehim; The Pope does in this Breue acknowledge all to have been done by
the said Cardinal at his direction: and does furthermore by the plenitude of
his Apostolical Authority for remoouing of all afterquestions, of his
certain knowledge and mere motion, ratify all that the Cardinal had done:
pronouncing all void that has, or might be attempted to the contrary.

The effect of some of the faculties mentioned in the said Examination, viz.
TO absolve in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, from all
censures, referued by the Bull of Caena Domini: to grant Apostolical
benediction, with plenarie Indulgence, to those whom they had reconciled: to
change simple vows to another good use, except the vows of Chastity and
Religion: to dispense with Marriages in the third and fourth degree: to hallow
Vestments and other things appertaining to the sacrifice of the Mass, besides
those that require Chrisme: to give license to Catholics to read Books of
controversies, written in English by Catholics: to dispense with Priests when
they cannot without danger carry their Breuiaries, and say their Service, to
supply the same by repeating some Psalms, or other prayers which they can say
by heart.

The effect of the Breue sent from Pope Clement the 8. mentioned in the fifth
Examination, and beginning, Cum Nobilissimum Angliae Regnum, etc.
THe Pope in this Brief does summarily recite the effect of his two former
Briefes, touching the causes of them both: he takes particular notice of the
great opposition, that continued betwixt the Secular Priests, M. Blackwel and
his Adherents, as also of the Treatise of Schism, written by one of M.
Blackwels part against the rest of the Secular Priests. Likewise that M.
Blackwel would not recall the said Treatise of Schism, which caused greater
strife: that the Secular Priests upon his two Briefes before mentioned were
quiet: that the Adherents to the Archpriest did notwithstanding their said
quietness, term them Schismatickes, which they complaining of, the Archpriest
would not reform, except they the Seculars would give some satisfaction,
before they received the benefit of absolution: that thereupon the former
dissentions began to be more hot: that the Seculars so moved, appealed to
Rome, and made their griefs known: And therefore the Pope does in a sort
blame the Archpriest, telling him that he gave him that Authority to
edification, and not to destruction, to feed the flock and govern them, not
as by force but gently, not to tyrannize over the Clergy, but to be an
example to his flock: and after some other admonitions and precepts for a
Church governor to observe, he does advise him to mingle courtesy with his
severity, and charge him that he do not, either by word or writing, condemn
any man, but after mature deliberation: that he suffer no contentious Books to
be published, but use his best endeavor for compounding controversies, as soon
as they arise. Also he admonishes the Priests, which did adhere to the
Archpriest, to study for peace, not to arrogate too much to themselves, nor
condemn others of their brethren, nor offend them either by word or writing.
The same course also he holds to the Priests in opposition, persuading them
to concord, and to forgive one another, and telling them, that he admits not
of their Appeal, because he foresaw it would minister matter of further
contention: he suppresseth the said Treatise of Schism, commanding that no
such matters should be written from that time forth or divulged, or kept in
the hands of any, under pain of Excommunication: the name of Schism he
abolisheth, prohibiting the mentioning of it, under the like penalty: and so
after diverse persuasions to Charity and carfulness in their duties, he
ends.

The sum of the Breue sent from Pope Clement the 8. mentioned in the fifth
Examination, and beginning, Venerunt nuper ad Nos, etc.
NOtwithstanding the said last Breue, the discontented Priests did prosecute
their Appeal, and sent some to Rome to that effect: where their cause being
heard after a sort, the Pope did write to the Archpriest, admonishing him,
that heeshould use the Authority given him warily, and wisely: that he should
not exceed his faculties, as in some things he had done: that from thence
forward he should not exercise his Authority upon Priests not brought up in
the Seminaries, or upon Laymen, nor have any faculty to inflict censures, or
to make Statutes, nor to proceed against any of the Priests appellant which
went to Rome, except first he received direction so to do: from the
Protector, nor take away or suspend the faculties of the Priests appellants
without the consent of the said Protector, nor remove the residence, without
great cause. Also he commands him in the virtue of his obedience, to use his
Authority without any offense, and with more quietness, peace and concord,
and that he should not intermeddle any further in any matter with the
Provincial of the Iefinites, or any other Religious person in England, lest
new discordes might arife; nor that he should write any thing touching his
regiment to any of the Jesuits, either in Rome or in any other place, but to
him or to the Protector. Furthermore he makes it lawful to the Rectors of the
Colleges, to give their Letters testimonial for their Scholars of the
Society, to the Archpriest, and takes order for their entertainment in
England: he commands the Archpriest, that as the places of his Assistants
become void, three of the Appellants should be admitted to them: but the Alms
bestowed bountifully in England, should be rightly distributed; that he should
admit of Appeals, as there was cause, to be deuolued to the Protector. He
condemns and prohibiteth all Books, wherein there is any thing against the
Institution of the Jesuits, or against any of their Persons, commanding that
none such should be hereafter written in the behalf of either side, under
pain of Excommunication: and so admonishing the Archpriest, and all other
Religious persons and Priests to peace and humility, he finisheth his Breue.

The effect of the Breue sent from Pope Paulus the fifth, and mentioned in the
fifth Examination.
THis Breue contains a resolution against M. Wrights reasons for going to the
Church, mentioned in the third Examination; and likewise an admonition against
the receiving of the oath of Allegiance; but no censure is inflicted upon any
that shall notwithstanding take the said oath.

IT has been thought fit to publish the premises, to the end, that they who
peradventure will make doubt of some thing therein contained, may be satisfied
(if they list) from M. Blackwel himself now prisoner in the Gate House.

FINIS.

