AN EPItome of the title that the kings Majesty of England, has to the
souereigntie of Scotland, continued upon the ancient writers of both nations,
from the beginning.

M. D. XLVIII.

CVM PRIVILEGIO AD IMPRIMENDVM SOLVM

To the most noble* and excellent prince, Edward the vi* by the grace of GOD
king of England, France, and Irelande, defendor of the (...) and upon earth
supreme head, of the Church of England, and Irelande* your humble and obedient
subject Nicholas Bodrugan otherwise Adams, wissheth long life, and the same
prosperous and happy.
ALthough I know right well (most noble Prince) that there be diverse which
both by their cou^saill and writing, do to their vttermoste powers swade the
union of Scotland unto your highness, by the marriage of their Queen, a mean
thereunto both honorable and Godly: Yet nevertheless, the same study and
further declaracio^ of your majesty's title to the superiority thereof, seems
unto me to be so indifferently perteinyng to all men, which do profess
obedience to your highness, that no man's study ought to be taken as vain or
unthankful, which humbly brings furthe to that common use, whatsoever
judgment, profit, or knowledge, he supposes to have found, either by study,
or inquisicio^: foreseyng that in tempestious vpswellynges of water or
shipwreck, fire, or other like calamities of men, right acceptable unto us is
the labor of those and thanks worthy, which willyngly do run to help us,
although in the mean time there be other sufficient nombre, to deliver us from
the peril objected. Herefore most noble prince, perceiuyng the ancient (...)
this great Britaigne, and ^^^ding such plenty of writers co^fessyng your
superiority of Scotland, as could not by any entendement so fully consent upon
any untruth, I thought it my deutie to offer up the same unto your highness*
which histories like as almighty God has from time to time, in favor of the
truth and of your title preserved: So has his Godhed signified no less favor
to your highness, vouchesauyng to nobilitate the same, in the person of your
majesty conserved unto this your time, the noble house of Seymour, whose
auncester Eldulph de Samour being then Earl of Gloucester, many hundredth years
a gone, in the time of King Aurelie Ambrose lewe Hengest the Saxon, capital
enemy of the Briton nation: ^y which noble service like as this Realm was
delivered from the tyrany of Saxons, and restored to the whole Empire and name
of great Briteigne: so we your obedient and loving subjects trust, that the
right noble duke of Somerset, and the lord Seimour of Sudeley, your graces
high Admiral, your Majesty's dear uncles, shall in the service of your
highness, for the like restitucion of the name and Empire of great Briteigne
unto your highness, show themselves the worthy successors of such an au^cester.
Neither have I purposed herin with opprobrious words to skolde with the
Scotts, and thereby to wipe of one dirt with another. Neither (...) build
upon our own Eng^^^^^ auethors, but all my purpo^^ ^^, by indifferent writers,
with plain and evident truth (which thing both time and manners do evermore
require) to publishe your majesty's right and their defense following therein
for the more part Veremu^d, Camphil, Cornelius de Hibernia, and Boecius their
own auethors: which peines because I have assumed rather as a necessary
service to my country, then for mine own glory, I trust I shall offend none
but such, whom it should be ashame to please. Mine inclinacio^ is to have the
good word of every man, but the diseased malice of some cannot say well of
any. Albeit, touching the phrase and style of this my writing, if the same to
any man shall not satisfy his expectacion, let him consider that in part it
behooves to use the words of the history, in which I am restrained by
promise of an Epitome: and that in the residue it was not my mind to trisle
with the five flowers of Rethorike, but to bring rather faithful, then painted
gliteryng ouerture, unto things afflicted. The verity of the Histories I
trust shall so hereby appear, that both the good men of Scotla^de, by reason,
and thenemies (if any such be) by their own shame shall be driven, to confess
this mine assercion to be true, and the same such as thoug the marriage by the
iniquity of some take not effect, yet to publishe to the world sufficient
cause, for the (...) naunce of your majestie^ (...) against them, wherein the
honor of a king may not give place to their wilful rebellion. And for recovery
whereof, undoubtedly almighty God for your sincere favor to the auauncement of
his holy word, will by his promise as he has begone, continue your highness in
felicity and victory, over all his and your enemies, where unto all your true
subjects do say.

AMEN.
IF the verity which ancient and indifferent writers have made common to all
nations, might as well persuade the Nobles and Commons of Scotland, as it has
reason, both to charge the^ and disprove all their obieccio^s, they would
right sone lay down their weapons, thus rashely received, to fight against
the mother of their own nacio^: I mean this realm now called England the
only supreme seat of the^pire of great Briteigne. In whose bosom cast with
us, as both in one moulde, they have received the same toungue, law, and
language: for as much therefore, as now touching the marriage of their Queen,
there is nothing of our part left undone, that ought to persuade them to
concord, and the same by diverse of them hitherto wholly neglected, they shall
of my part easily perceive that to increase their error, approve their folly,
or allow their obstinacy, I am not disposed: but contrarily by ye verity
(where in their own writers shall be no defense to them, but mere
condempnacion) to publishe to the world the state of these contencions, our
title and their defense: pursuyng the which, I will follow ye words of
thistorie as follows.

THE ancient writers of the Histories of this whole Isle of great Briteigne,
confess that after our first progenitor Brutus, the year from the beginning
of the world.iiii. M. xxvii. had arrived in this Isle, and after his own name
had called it Briteigne, he had issue three sons, Locryne, Albanactus, and
Camber, between whom, after his death they agreed in this particio^, that
Locryne had this first and worthiest part, which now is called England,
Albanactus the second part, now by the Scotts possessed by him called Albania,
which their own writers confess: and to Camber chanced the third part now
called Wales: the two better parts to be holden of the first, as of the
worthiest of the blood, according to the Troyan law, from whence they were
descended, which superiorite also by their different bearyng of the Arms of
the father, leuyng the entier cote in the eldest brother, is sufficiently
testified until this day. The particion in this wise established, Albanactus
possessyng Albania was by Humbre, his subject miserably slam, with out issue of
his body: to punish which traitery, Locrine and his brother Camber assembled
their power and entered Albania, and there slew this Humber, whose body they
threw into a great river. Some write that this Humber being desperate, threw
himself into this River, but all confess, that in this river his body was
drouned, and that hereof took the name of Humber, which it keeps to this day.
This Locrine herupon seized Albania into his own hands, as excheated wholly to
himself, not yeldyng any part thereof unto Camber his brother, whereby also
evidently appears the entier seigniory over it to consist in himself,
according to which example, like law among brethren ever since has
continued, preferryng the eldest brother to the only benefit, of the
collateral assencion from the youngest, as well in Scotland as in England unto
this day. Locryne reigned in this state over them.xvii. years. Ebra^ke the
lineall heir from the body of this Locryne, that is to say the son of
Mempris, soonne of Madan, son of the same Locryne, builded in Albania the
castle of Maidens, now called Edenbrough: and the Castle of Alcluth or
Alclude, now called Dunbriton, as the Scottishe Hector Boecius confesses:
whereby most evidently appeared: that this Ebranke was then thereof seized. This
Ebranke reigned in this state over them.lx. years, after whose death this
Albania as annexed to the Empire of Briteigne, descended to the only king of
Brito^s, until the descent to the two sisters sons, Morgan and Conedage,
lineall heirs from thesaied Ebranke, who brotherly upon the first example
divided the realm Morgan had Logres, and Conedage had Albania: but shortly
after Morgan thelder brother ponderyng in his head, the love to his brother,
with the love to a kingdom, excluded nature and gave place to ambicion, and
thereupon denounced war to his brother: in which war as the rereward of his
untruth, death miserably ended his life: whereby Condage obtained the whole
Empire of al Briteigne, in which state he remained.xxxiii. years.

APTER whose time the same lineally descended to thonly king of Brito^s, until
after the reign of Gorbodian, who had issue two sons, Ferres, and Porres,
which Porres requiryng like particion of the land, affirmyng the former
particions to be rather of law then favor, was by the hands of his elder
brother, both of his life and hoped kingdom bereued at once: but their
unnatural mother vsyng her natural malice, that for the death of her one
son, would be revenged by the losyng of both, miserably slew the other.

Cloten by all writers as well Scottishe as other, was the next inheritor to the
whole Empire, but lackyng power, the mean in those days to obtain right, he
was contented to divide the same among.iii. of his kinsmen, so that Scater had
Albania. But after the death of this Clote^ his son Dunuallo Moluncius made
war upon these three Kings, and at last overcame them, and so recovered the
whole dominion, in token of which victory, he caused himself to be crouned
with a croune of gold, the first that was worn among kings of this nation.
This Dunuallo erected temples wherein the people should assemble for Prayer, to
which temples he gave benefit of Sanctuary: he made the law for wager of
battaill, in cases of murder and felony, whereby a thief that lived and made
his art of fightyng, should for his purgacion fight with the true man which
he had robbed: but he believed that the Gods (for then they supposed many)
would by miracle assign victory to the innocent party, the privilege of
which first law and benefit of the latter, as well in Scotland as in
England, be enjoyed to this day few causes by late positive laws among us
excepted, wherein the benefit of wager o^ battaill is expelled: by which
obedience to his laws, it does manifestly appear, that this Dunuallo was then
seized of Albania now called Scotland: this Du^uallo reigned in this state over
them.xl. years. Beline and Brenne the sons of this Dunuallo, did after their
fathers death, favorably divide the land between them: so that Belyne had
Logres, and Brenne had Albania: but for that this Brenne a subject, without the
consent of his eldre brother and lord, aue^tured to mary with the daughter of
the king of Denmark. Belyne seized Albania into his own hands, and thereupon
caused the notable ways priuileged by Dunuallos, Laws to be newly wrought by
men's hands, which for the length was from the ^urder part of Cornwall,
unto the Sea by North Cathnes in Scotland. For Religion in those days, he
constituted ministers called Archeflamines in their funccions most like the
authority of Bishops (...) of all their own writers, is six hundred years
lackyng.x. years. After that Brutus had reigned over the whole Islande, being
the same land enjoyed by him and his posterity before their coming, during
discentes of kings of this Briteigne, and this intrusion into a land so many
hundred years before inhabited, and by so many discentes of Kings quietly
enjoyed, is the best tule that all their own writers allege for them. This
Fergus hereupon immediately did divide al Albania among his capitaines and their
people: whereby also most evidently appears that there were no people of that
nation inhabityng there before, in prosse whereof, the same particion shall
follow.

THE lands of Cathnes liyng against Orknay, between Dummesbey and the Water
of Thane, was given unto one Cornath a Captain and his people. The lands
between the Water of Thane and Nes now called Rosse, liyng in breadth from
Cromart to the mouth of the water of Lochte, were given to Lutorke another
Capitain and his people. The lands between Spay and Nes, from the Almayne seas
to the Irelande Seas now called Murray land, wet given to one Vvarroche and
his people. The la^d of Thalia now called Boyn Aynze, Bogewall, Garyot,
Formartyne, and Bowguhan, were given to one Thalis and his people. The lands
of Matr* Badezenoche, and Lochquhaber, were given to Martache and his people.
The lands of Lorne and Kyntier, with the hills and mountains thereof, liyng
from Mar to the Irelande seas, were given to capitain Nonaunce and his people.
The lands of Athole were given to Atholus, another capitain and his people.
The lands of Strabraun, and Brawdawane liyng West from Dunkell, were given to
Creones and Epidithes. ii Capitaines. The lands of Argile, were given to
Argathelus a capitain. The lands of Linnox and Clidisdale, were allotted to
Lolgona a capitain. The lands of Siluria now called Kile, Car rike and
Cunyngham, were given to Silurche another Captain. The lands of Brigance now
called Gallowaie, were given to the compaignie called Brigandes which as their
best men, were appointed to dwell next the Brito^s, who afterward expulsed
the Britons from Annandale in Albany, whereby is confessed it to be before
enhabited by Brito^s. The residue of the land now called Scotland, that is to
say: Meirnis, Angus, Steremo^de, Gowry Strahern, Pirth, Fiffe, Striuelyng,
Callender, Calderwoode, Lougthian, Mers Teuedale, with other the reme^t Dales,
and the Sherifdo^e, of Berwicke were then enjoyed by a nation myngeled in
marriage with Britons, and in their obedience whose capitain called Berynger,
builded the castle and town of Berwicke upon Twede, and these people were
called Pightes, upon whom by the death of this Coell, these Scotts had
opportunity to use war, whereof they ceased not, until such time as it
pleased God to appoint another Coell King of Britons, against whose name,
albeit they hoped a like victory to the first, yet he prevailed, and ceased
not his war, until these Scotts were utterly expulsed out of all the bounds
of Briteigne, in which they never dared to ree^tre, until the reign of
Scicill King of Britons, which was the.xiii. King after this Coell. During all
which time the same country was reenhabited by the Britons. And then the
Scotts turnyng to Civil discord of this realm, between this Sycill and his
brother Blede to their best advantage, newly arrived in Albania, and thereof
made one Reuther their king: from the beginning of the world.iiii. M ix. C.
lxxxxv. years, which from their first entry was.iii. Clxxiiii. years, upon
this their new arrival, new war was made upon them, by this Sicill King of
Britons, in which war Reuther their new King died, to whom Thereus
succeeded, against whom the war of Britons ceased not, until he freely
submitted himself unto ye said Sicill king of Brito^s at Ebranke that is York,
where shortly after the tenth year of his reign he died. Fynn^ne brother of
Iosine succeeded by their eleccion to the kingdom of Scotts who shortly after
compelled by the wars of the same Sicill, declared himself subject, and for
the better assurance of his faith and obeisaunce to the King of Brito^s,
delivered his son Durstus, into the hands of this Sicill: who phantesiyng
the child and hopyng by his own succession to alter the subtilitie (I will
not say duplicitie) married to him Agasia his own daughter, this Sicill reigned
in this state over them two and twenty years.

THIS Durstus was their next king, but for y^ he had married a Brito^ woman,
though she a kings daughter, the Scotts hated him for ye same cause ye they
ought to have liked him the better, and therefore not only traiteroussy slew
him, but further to declare the end of their malice, dishenherited as much as in
the^ was, the issues of the same Durstus and Agasia, whereupon new war spro^g
between them and us: which ceased not until they were contented to receive
Edeir to their king, the next in bloudde then living, descended from Durstus
and Agasia, and thereby the blood of Britons of the part of the mother, was
restored to the croune of Albania: nature whose law is immutable, caused this
band of love to hold. For shortly after this Eder attended upon Cassibelane
king of Britons, for the repulse of Julius Caesar, as their own aucthor
Boecius confesses commanded the same as his subject, but Julius Caesar after
his third arrival by treason of Androgeus, prevailed against the Britons: and
thereupon pursued this Eder into Scotland, and as himself says in his
Comme^taries, subdued all the Isse of Briteigne: which, though the living
Scotts deny it, their ded writers confess that he came beyond Callender
wood, and cast down Camelon the principal city of Pichtes, and in token of
this victory not far from Carron, builded a round Temple of stone, which
remaigned in some perfeccio^ unto the reign of our King Edward called the
first since the supposed Conquest, by whom it was subverted, but the monument
thereof remains to this day. This Cassibelane reigned in this state* xvi
years.

Aruiragus King of Wales, brother of Guyder.c. is and son of Kymbalyne,
descended from Androgeus the son of Lud, an ancient king of Britons, was by
iusse succession shortly after king of Britons, against whom Claudius then
emperor made war but this Claudius at last gave his daughter Genuissa or
Genissa in marriage to this Aruiragus. This Claudius subdued Orknay, and all the
remanent Isles about Briteigne, which he gave to his son Aruiragus, and so
left him king of the whole Islande: this Aruiragus reigned in this state over
them.xxiiii. years.

Marrius the soonne of Aruiragus and Genissa, was next king of all Briteigne,
in his time one Roderycke a Scythian with a great rabble of vacabo^des, came to
the water of Frithe in Scotland, which is an arm of the sea, deuidyng
Pentlande from Fiffe, against whom this Marrius assembled a power, by which he
slew this Rodericke, and disco^fited his people in Westmerlande, of which
victory he was also after written, by the name of Westmer, but to those that
remained in life, he gave to be enhabited, the Country of Cathenes in
Scotland: which proves it to be within his dominto^, this Marrius reigned in
this state over them.xxv. years.

Coell the son of this Marrius had issue Lucius, coumpted the first Christian
King of this nation: he created three Archeflamines, whose office is before
declared, the first remained at London, and his power extended from the
farthest part of Cornwall to Humber water, the second remained at York, and
his power stretched from Humber to the fardest part of all Scotland. The third
remained at Careleon upon the river of Oose in Glamorgan in Wales, and his
power extended from Seuerne through all Wales. Some write yt he made but two
Archeflamyns, and turned their names to Archbishoppes, the one to remaigne at
Cantorbury, the other at York: but they confess that he of York had
iurisdiccion through all Scotland, either of which is sufficient to prove
Scotland, to be then under his dominion: This Coill reigned in this state
over them.xi. years.

Seuerus, by birthe a Romayne but in bloudde a Briton, and the lineall heir of
the body of Androgius, son of Lud and nephew of Cassibelaine, was shortly
after Emperor and king of Britons, in whose time the people to who^ his
auncester Marrius gave the land of Cathenes in Scotland, conspired with the
Scotts and received them from the Isles into Scotland: but hereupon this
Seuerus came into Scotland, and meting with their faith and false hearts
together, drove them all out of the main land into isles the uttermost
bonds of al great Briteigne, but notwithstanding this glorious victory, the
Britons considering their servitude to ye Romans, imposed by treason of
Androgius, auncester to this Seuerus began to hate him, whom, yet they had not
time to love, whereupon beside York they suffered him to be slain: After that
he had for their defense and surety, slain of the Scotts and their
confederates in one battle xxx. thousands: but such was the consideracion of
the vulger sort in those days, whose malice no time could deminishe, nor
desert appease.

Anthonius Bassianus borne of a Brito^ woman, and Gera borne on a Romayne
woman, were the sons of this Seuerus, who after the death of their father, by
the contrary voices of their people, contended for the Croune, few Britons
held with Bassianus, fewer Romans held with Geta: but the greater nombre
with neither: they fought, Geta was slain, and Bassianus made King, but
hitherto the daily memory of perpetual servitude in the Brutus, thought the
death of the father no sufficient revenge, to the injury dooen by the
graundefather: and therefore they deposed this Bassianus, and made Carassius a
Briton their king, who upon victory had against this Bassianus, gave unto ye
Scotts, Pichtes, and Scithians, the country of Cathenes in Scotland, which
they after inhabited, whereby appears his season thereof.

Coill descended of the bloudde of ancient kings of Briteigne was shortly
after king of Britons, whose only daughter and heir called Helen, was married
unto Consta^cius a Romayn, who daunted the rebellion of all parts of great
Briteigne, and after the death of this Coil, was in the right of his wife king
thereof and reigned in his state over the^ xv. years.

Constantyne the son of this Constance and Helen, was next king of Britons,
he passing to Rome to receive the Empire thereof, deputed one Octauius king of
Wales, and Duke of Gwisscop, which some expou^de to be West sex, some
Cornwall, and some Windsore, to have the government of this dominion, but
abusyng this kings innocent goodness, this Octauius defrauded this trust, and
took upon himself the Croune, for which traytorie albeit he was once
vanquished by Leonyne Traherons, uncle to Constantyne: yet after the death of
this Traherons, he prevailed again and reigned over all Briteigne. Constantyne
being now Emperor, sent to Maximius his kynseman hither to destroy the same
Octauius, whom in singular battaill discomfited this Octauius, whereupon this
Maximius, as well by the consent of great Co^stantyne, as by the eleccion of
all the Britons, for that he was a Brito^ in blood, was made king of this
Briteigne. This Maximius made war upon the Scotts and Scythians within all
Briteigne, and ceased not until he had slain Eugenius their King, expulsed
and driven them out of the whole bounds of Briteigne and newly inhabited all
Scotland with Britons, no man woman or child of the Scottishe nacio^, suffered
to remain within it, which as their Hector Boecius says: was for their
rebellion and rebellion properly could it not be, except they had been
subjects, he suffered the Pychtes to remain his subjects, who made solemn
oaths to him after, never to erect any peculiar king of their own nation, but
to remain under the old Empire, of thonely king of Britons: He reigned in the
whole state of this Briteigne.xxxiiii. years.

ABOUT. xlv. years after this, being long time after the death of this
Maximius, with the help of Gouuan or Gonan and Melga, the Scotts newly
arrived in Albania, and thereof created one Fergus the second of that name to
be their king, but because they were before banished the contine^t land, they
crouned him king of their adventure in Argile, in the fatal chater of Merble,
the year of our Lord.CCCC. xxii.

Maximian soonne of Leonyne Traherons, brother to king Coill and uncle to the
holy Helen, was by liniall succession next king of Britons: but to appease the
malice of Dyonothus king of Wales, who also claimed the kingdom, he married
Othilia eldest daughter of this Dyonothus and afterward assembled a great power
of Britons, and entered Albania, and invaded Gallowaie, Mers, Annandale,
Pentlande, Carrike, Kill, and Cunyngham and in battaill slew both this Fergus
then king of Scotts, and Durstus the king of Pichtes, and exiled all their
people, out of the continent land: whereupon the few nombre of Scotts then
remainyng on live, went to Argila and made Eugenius their king.

WHEN this Maximian had thus obteigned quietness in Briteigne, he departed with
his cosyn Conan Meredecke into Armorica where they subdued the king, and did
depopulate the country, which he gave to Conan his cosyn, to be afterward
inhabited by Britons, by the name of Briteigne the less: and hereof this
realm took name of Briteigne the great, which name by consent of foreign
writers, it keeps unto this day.

AFTER the death of this Maximian, dissencion being between the nobles of
great Briteigne, the Scotts swarmed together again, and came to the wall of
Adrian, where this realm being divided in many fashions, they over came one:
and hereupo^ their Hector Boecius, as an he^ne that for laiyng of one egg,
will make a great cakelyng, solemply triumphyng of a conquest before the
victory, and allegeth that hereby the Britons were made tributaries to the
Scotts, and yet he confesses that they won no more land, by that supposed
conquest, but the samle porcio^ between them and Humber, which in the old
particions before, was annexed to Albania, it is hard to be believed, that
such a broken nation as the Scotts at that time were returnyng from
banishment within four years before, and since in battaill lost both their
kings, and the great number of their best men, to be thus suddenly able to
make a conquest of great Briteigne, very unlikely if they had conquered it,
they would have left the whote son of the East parts, to dwell in the cold
Snow of Scotland. Incredible it is, that if they had conquered it, they would
not have deputed offices in it, as in cases of conquest behooves. And it is
beyond all belefe that great Briteigne or any other Country, should be won
without the coming of any enemy into it, as they did not, but tarried at ye
same wall of Adryan: But what need I speak of these defenses when the same
Boecius sca^tly trusts his own belife in this tale. For he says that
Galfride and sundery other Autentique writers, so^derly vary from this part of
his story, wherein his own thought accuses his conscience of untruth: Wherein
he further forgettyng, how it behooves a liar to be myndefull of his assercion
in the fourth Chapter next following, wholly bewraieth himself, saying that the,
confederate Kings of Scotts and Pychtes, upon civil wars between the
Britons which then was following, hoped shortly to enjoy all the land of great
Briteigne, from beyond Humber unto the fresh sea, which hope had been vain,
and not less then void, if it had been their own by ye conquest before.

Constantine of little Briteigne descended from Conan king thereof, cosyn of
Brutes blood to this Maximia^, and his next heir was next king of great
Briteigne, he immediately pursued the Scotts with wars, and shortly in
battaill slew their King Dougard, the first year of his reign, and so
recovered Scotland out of their hands, and took all the holds thereof into
his own custody.

Vortiger shortly after obtained the Croune of Briteigne, against whom the
Scotts newly rebelled, for repressyng whereof, he mistrustyng the Britons, to
hate him for ye treasonable death of King Constance, son of this Constantyne:
as one that to avoid the smoke, does fall into the fire, received Hengest a
Saxon, with a great nombre of his nation into this Realm, with whom and a few
Britons, he entered Scotland and over came them, whereupon they took the
Isles their common refuge, he gave much of Scotland, as Galloway, Pentla^de.
Mers and Annandale, with sundery other lands to this Hengest and his people to
inhabit, which they did accordyngly: but when this He^gest afterward thursted
after the Kingdom he was banished, and yet afterward being restored, he
conspired with ye Scotts against Aurilambrose the son of Constantyne, the
just inheritor of this whole dominion, but his untruth and theirs both were
recompensed together, for he was taken prisoner by Eldulph de Samor then Earl
of Gloucester, and his head for his traitory, stricken of by the same Earl, by
commandment of the same king Aurilambros, in this field the Scotts were
vanquished: but Octa the soonne of Hengest was received to mercy, to whom and
his people this Aurilambros gave the country of Galloway in Scotland, for
which they became his Subjects: And hereby appears that Scotland was then
again in his hands.

Vter called also Pendragon, brother to this Aurilambros was next King of
Britons, against whom, these sworn Saxons new forsworn subjects, confederate
with the Scotts, newly rebelled: but by his power assembled against the^ in
Galloway in Scotland, they were discomfited, and all Albania recovered into
his hands. This Vter reigned in this state over them.xviii. years.

Arthur ye son of this Vter begotten before ye marriage, but lawfully borne,
after succeeded next to the croune of great Briteigne, whose notable acts
though many vulger fables have rather wondered at, then credited: yet all the
Scottishe writers confess that he subdued all great Briteigne, and made it
tributory to him, and subdued the Saxons then scatered as far as Cathenes in
Scotland, and in all his wars against them, he had the service and
obeisaunce of Scotts and Pightes: but at the last setting their feet in the
guyle of their predecessors, they newly rebelled, in the repressyng whereof he
deposed their King, and conquered all the countries, of Scotland, Islande and
Orknay, and made one Angusia^ his kynseman king of Scotts, Vrian king of
Isla^de, and Murefre^ce king of Orknay, he made one Pyramium Archbishop of
York, whose authority exte^ded through all Scotla^de: Thus Arthur reigned in
this state.xxii. years.

Malgo shortly after succeeded, to the whole kingdom of great Briteigne upon
new resistaunce, he newly subdued Ireland, Isla^d Orkades, Norway and De^marke,
and made Ethelfrede a Saxo^ king of Bernicia, that is: Northu^berla^d,
Louthia^, and much other land of Scotland, which Ethelfrede by the sword
obtained at the hands of the wilful inhabitauntes and was true Subject to
this Malgo.

Cadvva^ succeeded to the kingdom of great Briteigne, who in defense of his
subjects the Scotts, made war upon this Ethelfrede, but at the last they
agreed and Cadvvan upon their rebellion gave all Scotland unto this
Ethelfrede, which he thereupon subdued and enjoyed: but afterward in the
reign of Cadvvallo, that next succeeded in great Briteigne he rebelled,
whereupon the same Cadvvallo came into Scotland, and upon his treason reseazed
the country into his own hands, and having with him all the viceroys of
Saxons which the^ inhabited here his subjects, in synguler battaill slew
the same Ethelfrede.

Osvvald was shortly after by Cadvvallos gift made King of Bernicia, and he as
subject to Cadvvallo, and by his commandment disco^fited the Scotts and
Pightes, and subdued al Scotland. Osvvy the brother of this Osvvald was by the
like gift of Cadvvallo, made next King of Bernicia, and he by like
commandment newly subdued the Scotts and Pightes, and held the^ in that
obeysau^ce to this Cadvvallo during.xxviii. years. Thus Cadvvallo reigned in
the whole Monarchy or great Briteign xlviii years, having all the vii. kings
thereof, as well Saxons as others his subjects: for albeit the number of Saxons
from time to time greatly increased, yet were they always either expulsed, or
else made tributory to the only kings of Britons, for the time being all their
own writers confess, and he died in the year of our Lord. 676. And so
reigned in this state over the^.xxviii. years.

Cadvvallader was next king of the whole great Briteigne, he reigned.xii.
years over all the Kings thereof in great peace and tranquillity: and then
upon the lamentable death of his subjects, which died in sundery deceasses
innumerably, he departed into little Briteigne, whose son and cosyn Iuor and
Iue being repulsed from this England by the Saxsons, went into Wales, where
among the Britons they and their posterity remained Princes: upon this great
alteracio^, wars being through the whole dominion between Britons and Saxons,
the Scotts thought time to slip ye collor of obedience, and thereupon entered
in league with Charles then King of France, in this wise.

1 The injury of Englishemen done to any of these people, shall be perpetually
holden commen to both. 2 When Frenchemen be invaded by Englishmen, ye Scotts
shall send their army in defense of France, so that they be supported with money
and victailes of France. 3 When Scotts be invaded by Englishemen, the
Frenchmen shall come upon their own expenses, to their supporte. 4 None of
these people shall take peace or truce with Englisheme^, without the advice of
other. etc.
MANY sufferable opinions may be had of war, without the praisyng of it, as
only admittible by enforced necessity, and to be used for peace his sake
only, where here the Scotts sought war for the love of war only, for
their league gives no benefit to themselfes, either in fre trafique of their
own commodities, or benefit of the French, or other privilege to the people
of both: what discommoditie lofyng the intercourse and exchau^ge of our
commodities, being in necessaries more abundaunt then France, the Scotts
feel and we perfectly know. What rewyn of their Tounes, destruction of
Countries, slaughter of both our people, have by reason of this bloody league
chanced, the Histories be so lamentable, as be to hortible among christian
men to be remembered: but God gave the increase according to their seed, for as
they did hereby sow discencion, so did they shortly after repe slaughter. For
Alpyne their King possessyng a light mind, that would be a loft with a little
wynd, hoped by this league shortly to subdue all great Briteigne, and to that
end not only rebelled in his own kingdom, but also usurped the kingdom of
Pightes, whereupon Edvvyn king of England, made one Brudeus King of Pightes,
whom he sent into Scotla^de with a great power, where in battaill he took this
Alpyne King of Scotts prisoner, and disco^fited his people: and being this
Alpyne their king found subject and rebel, his head was stricken of at a place
in Scotland, which thereof is to this day called Pasalpyne, that is to say,
the hedde of Alpyne, and this was the first Cropes of their French league.

Osbright King of England, with Ella his subject, and a great number of
Britons and Saxons shortly after for yt the Scotts had of theimselfes elected
a new king, shortly after entered Scot land, and ceased not his war against
them until their king and people fled into the Isles, With who^ at the last upon
their submission, peace was made in this wise.

THE water of Fryth shall be March between Scotts and Englishmen in the Est
parts, and shall be named the Scottishe sea.

THE water of Clide to Du^ briton, shall be March in the West parts betwenethe
Scotts and Britons, this castle was before called Alclude, and now Dunbriton,
that is to say: the castle of Britons, so the Britons had all lands from
Sterlyng to the Irelande seas, and from the water of Fryth and Clide to Cumber,
with all the strengthes thereof. The Englishemen had the lands between
Sterlyng and Nothu^berland: thus was Clide March, between Scotts and Britons
on the one side, and the water of Fryth named the Scottishe sea, March between
them and Englishemen on the other side, and Sterlyng common March to three
people, Britons, English men, and Scotts. King Osbright had the castle of
Sterlyng, where first he caused to be Coined Sterlyng money. The English men
builded a bridge of stone, for passage over* the Water of Frythe, in the mids
whereof they made a cross, under which were written these verses.

I am free March, as passengers may ken.
To Scotes, to Britons, and to Englishemen.
ABOVTE xvi. years after this, Hunger and Hubba Danes, with a great no^bre of
people, arrived in Scotland and slew Constantine, whom Osbright had before
made king: whereupon Edulffe or Ethelvvulph then King of England, assembled his
power against Hunger and Hubba and in one battaill slew them both, but such
of their people as would remain and become christians he suffered to tarry, the
rest be banished or put to death.

THIS Ethelvvulph granted the Peter pence, to which albeeit, Peter and Paul
had little mede and less right: yet the payment thereof continued in this
realm ever after until now of late years, but the Scotts ever since unto
this day, have, and yet do pay it, by reason of that grant, which proves
them to be then under his obeisaunce.

Alurede or Alfrede succeeded to the kingdom of England, he reigned peacebly
over the whole Monarchy of great Briteigne: He made Laws that persons
excomunicated, should be disabled to sewe or claim any property, which Law
Gregour whom this Alurede had made king of Scotts obeyed, and the same law
as well in Scotland as in England is holden to this day, which also proves him
to be high lord of Scotland.

THIS Alurede constreined this Gregour King of Scotts, to break is league
with France for generally he concluded with him, and served him in all his
wars, as well against Danes as others, not reseruyng the former league with
France.

THIS Alurede after ye death of Gregour, had the like service and obeisaunce of
Donald King of Scotts, with five thousand footmen, and two thousand
horsemen, against one Gurmond a Dane that then infested this realm, and this
Donald died at this faith and obeisaunce with Alurede: This Alurede reigned in
this state over the^.xviii. years

Edward the first of that name called Lou^yll, son of this Alurede succeeded
next king of England, against whom with Citrike a Dane the Scotts conspired,
but they were subdued, and Constantyne their king brought to obeisau^ce, and
held the realm of Scotland of this King Edward, this does Marion their own
country manne a S^cotte, confess: this Edward reigned in this seigniorie
over the^, and they in his obeisaunce.xxiii. years.

Athelstane soonne of this Edward was next king of England against whom
Constantine king of Scotts, being as their writers confess corrupted with
money, sold his faith and falce heart together to the Danes, and aided them
against this king Athelstane, but he met with all their untruths together at
Bronyng feld in Scotland, where he discomfited the Danes, and flewe Malcolme
depute in that behalf to the king of Scotts, with.xx. thousand Scotts: in
which battaill the Scotts confess to have lost more people, then were
remembered in any age before: this Athelstane followed this his good luck,
throughout al Scotland and wholly subdued it, and being in possession of it,
gave land there liyng in Annandale by his deed, the copy whereof follows.

I king Athelstane, geues unto Paulan, Oddam and R^ddam, as good and as fair,
as ever they mine vv^re, and thereto witness Maulde my wife.

BY which course words, not only appears the plain simplicity of men's
doings in those days: but also full prove that he was then seized of
Scotland.

THIS Athelstane at the last received homage of this Malcolme king of Scotts,
but this Malcolme for yt he could not be restored to his whole kingdom
entered into Religion, and there shortly after died.

This Athelstane for his better assurance of that country there after,
thought best to have two stringes to the bow of their obedience, and therefore
notonely co^stituted one Malcolme to be their king, but also appointed one
Indulph, son of Constantyne the third, to be called prince of Scotland, to
who^ he gave much of Scotland: This Malcolme did homage to Athelstane, and
then did this Athelstane Reign in this state over them.xxv. years.

Edmu^d brother of Athelstane succeeded next King of England to whom this
Indulph then king of Scotts, not only did homage but also served him with ten
thousand Scotts, for the expulsion of the Danes out of this realm, this
Edmu^d reigned in this state.vii. years.

Edred or Eldred brother to this Edmunde succeeded next king of England, he
not only received ye homage of Irise then king of Scotts, but also the homage
of all the Barons of Scotland, this Eldred reigned in this state.x. years.

Edgar the son of Edmund brother of Athelstane being now of full age, was next
king of England: he reigned only over the whole Monarchy of great Briteigne,
he received homage of Keneth or Kynald king of Scotland for the kingdom of
Scotland, and made Malcolme prince thereof.

This Edgar gave unto the same Keneth the country of Louthian in Scotland,
which was before seized into the hands of Osbright king of England for their
rebellion as is before declared. This Edgar enjoined this Keneth there king
ones in every year, to repair unto him into England for the making of laws,
which in those days was by the noble men or piers according to the order of
France at this day: to which end this Edgar gave him a piece of ground
liyng beside the new palace of Westminster, upon which this Keneth builded a
house, which by him and his posterity was enjoyed until the reign of king
Henry the second, in whose time upon rebellion by Willyam then king of
Scotts, it was resumed into the king of Engla^des hands, ye house is decayed,
but the ground where it stood is called Scotland to this day.

This Edgar made this law, that no man should succeed to his patrimony or
inheritance holden by the service of a man called knights service, until he
accomplished the age of.xxi. years, because by intendement under that age, he
should be hable in person to serve his king and country according to the
tenor of his deed and the condition of his purchase. This law was received by
the same Keneth in Scotland, and as well there as in England is observed to
this day, which proves also that Scotland was then under his obeisau^ce.
This Edgar reigned in this state. xxvi years.

Edward the son of this Edgar was next king of England, in whose time this
Keneth king of Scotts, caused Malcolme prince of Scotland to be treasonably
poisoned; whereupon this Edward made war upon him, which ceased not until
this Keneth submitted himself, and offered to receive prince of Scotland whom
king Edward would appoint, where upon this Edward proclaimed one Malcolme to be
prince of Scotland, who immediately came into England and here did homage to
the same King Edward. This Edward reigned in this state by some writers xii.
years, and by some others but ii. years.

Etheldred brother of this Edward succeeded next king of England, against whom
Swayn king of De^marke co^spired with this last Malcolme then king of Scotts:
But shortly after this Malcolme sorowfully submitted himself into the defense
of Etheldred, who considering that that which could not be amended must only
be repented, benignely received him, by help of whose service at last
Etheldred recovered his realm again out of the hands of Swayn, and reigned
over ye whole Monarchy xxxviii. years.

Edmund surnamed Ironside son of this Etheldred was next king of England, in
whose time Canut a Dane invaded ye realm with wars, but at last Canut married
with Eme sometime wife of Etheldred and mother of this Edmund: this Eme as
arbitrice between her natural love to the one and matrimonial duty to the
other, procured such amitee between them, that Edmund was contented to divide
the realm with Canut and keeping to himself all England on thisside Humber
gave all the rest beyond Humber with the seignorie of Scotland to this Canut:
whereupon Malcolme then king of Scotts after a little customable resistance,
did homage to ye same Canut for the kingdom of Scotland, and this Canut held
the same over of this Edmund king of England by the like services.

This Canut in memory of his victory and glory of his seignorie over the
Scotts, commanded this Malcolme their king, to build a church in Buchquhan
in Scotland (where a field between him and them was fought) to be dedicate
to Olanus patron of Norway and Denmark, which Church was by the same Malcolme
builded accordyngly.

Edward called the confessor An. M. lvi.
soonne of Etheldred and brother to Edmund Ironside was next king of al
England, he received the homage of the same Malcolm king of Scotts for the
kingdom of Scotland.

This Edward perused the old laws of the realm, and somewhat added to some
of them, as to the law of Edgar for ye wardship of the lands until the heir
should acco^plishe the age of.xxi. years, he added that the marriage of such
heir, should also belong to the lord of whom the same la^d should be holden.

Also that every woman mariyng a freman, should notwithstanding she had no
children by that husband, enjoy the third part of his inheritance during her
life, with many other laws which ye same Malcolme king of Scotts obeyed, and
which as well by them in Scotland as by us in England be observed to this
day, which directly proves ye whole to be then under his obeysau^ce. But
here to make some digressio^, though ye more part of these Eldredes laws be
both godly and politic, yet this addicion to Edgars law touching the marriage
of the heir, except in cases of princes, in whose persons the common weal of
people and countries depend, among men either civil or politic, seems to
depend more of lucre then godlynes: for that thereby, he to whose years nature
does not give discrecion to refuse, must take and that a wife and she
peradventure of the like age or under, in which choice every of them must
judge by another man's affeccion, see with another man's iye, say yea with
another man's tongue, and finally consent with another man's heart, for none of
these senses be pertited to the parties in that minority, and so the eleccion
being vnfree and the years unripe, each of the^ almost of necessitee must hate
other, whom yet they have had no judgment to love. To declare what innumerable
inconveniences, deuorces, yea and some murders have of these ungodly marriages,
or rather no marriages at all, proceeded, the present time shows so many
examples as we may see sufficient cause to bewail the time present* but the
greatest injury is to God, the redress only belongs to a king in whom like
as the same God has caused more virtues to mete, then in any other king or
creature at those years, so we doubt not but that his Godhed will vouchesafe to
preserve his highness with then crease of knowledge to ye godly redress of these
and all other enormities and abuses, to the comfort and rejoice of us his
loving and happy obedient subjects: But I will return to the Scot.

By reason of this law Malcolme the son of Dunkayn next inheritor to the
croune of Scotland being within age, was by the nobles of Scotland delivered
as ward to the custody of this king Edward, during whose minority one
Makebeth a Scot traitorously usurped the croune of Scotland, against whom this
king Edward made war, in which the same Makebeth was overcome and slain,
and thereupon this Malcolme was crouned king of Scotts at Stone, in the.viii.
year of ye reign of this king Edward.

This Malcolme by tenor of the said new law of wardship was married unto
Margaret, by the disposicion of the same king Edward, and at his full age did
An. M. lxi.
homage to this king Edward for the kingdom of Scotland.

This Edward having no issue of his body, and mistrustyng that Harold ye
son of Goodwyn descended of the daughter of Harold Harefoote the Dane would
vsurp the croune if he should leave it to his cosyn Edgar Edling, being then
within age, and partly by ye peticio^ of his subjects, who before had sworn
never to receive any kings over them of the Danes nation, did by his
substanciall will in writing, devise the croune of great Briteigne unto Willyam
then duke of Normandye and to his heirs, co^stitutyng him his heir
testamentary. Also there was proximitee in blood between the^ for Eme daughter
of Richard duke of Normandy was wife unto Etheldred, on whom he begat Alured
and this Edward, and this Willyam was son of Robert, son of Richard
brother of the whole blood to the same Eme: by this appears that this Willya^
was heir by title and not by conquest. Albeit partly to extinguishe ye
mistrust of other titles, partly for the glory of his victory, he chale^ged ye
name of a coqueror, and has been so written.

This king Willyam called the co^queror, to bring the Scotts to just
obeisaunce after his coronacion as heir testame^tary to Edward the confessor
entered Scotland, where after a little resiste^ce made by the Scotts, the said
Malcolme then their king did homage to him at Abirnethy in Scotland for the
kingdom of Scotland: This Willyam reigned in this state.xxii. years.

Willyam surnamed Rufus son of this Willyam called the conqueror, succeeded
next to the croune of England, to whom the said Malcolme king of Scotts did
like homage for ye kingdom of Scotland, but afterward he rebelled and was by
this William Rufus slain in the field, where upon the Scottishmen did chose
one Donal or Dunvval to be their king, but this Willyam Rufus deposed him and
created Dunka^ soonne of Malcolme to be their king, who did like homage to
him: but this Dunkan was slain by the Scotts and Dunvvall restitute, which
ones again by this Willyam Rufus was deposed, and Edgar soonne of Malcolme was
by him made their king, who did like homage for Scotland to this Willyam Rufus:
This Willya^ reigned in this state over them xiii. years.

Henry called Beauclerke the son of Willyam called the co^queror, after ye
death of his brother Willyam Rufus, succeeded to the croune of England to who^
the same Edgar king of Scotts did homage for Scotland, This Henry Beauclerke
married Mawde the daughter of Malcolme king of Scotts, and by her had issue
Mawde afterward empress. Alexandre the son of Malcolme brother to this Mawd
was next king of Scotts, he did like homage for ye kingdom of Scotland to
this Henry the first, This Henry reigned in this state over them.xxxv. years.

Mawde called the empress An. M. C. xxxvii.
daughter and heir to this Henry Beauclerke and Mawde his wife, received
homage of David brother to her and to this Alexandre next king of Scotts for
ye kingdom of Scotland.

This Mawde the empress gave unto this David in marriage, Mawde the daughter and
heir of Voldosius earl of Huntyngdon and Northunberlande, and herein their
evasion appears, by which they allege that their kings homages were made for
the erledome of Huntingdon, for this David was the first that of their kings
was earl of Hu^tyngdon, which was since all the homages of their kings before
recited, and at the time of which marriage and long after the said Alexander
his brother was king of Scotts doing the homage aforesaid to Henry Bewclerke.

Henry called Fitz Empress the soonne of Mawde the empress daughter of Mawde,
daughter of Malcolme king of Scotts was next king of England, he received
homage for Scotland of Malcolme soonne of Henrye, soonne of the said David
their last king, which Malcolme after this homage, attended upon the same king
Henry in his wars against Jews then king of France: whereby appears that
their French league was never renewed after the last division of their country
by Osbright king of England. But after these wars fynyshed with the French
king, this Malcolme being again in Scotland rebelled, whereupon this king Henry
immediately scazed Huntyngdon and Northumberland into his own hands by
confiscacion, and made war upon him in Scotland, in which the same Malcolme
dyed without issue of his body. Willyam brother of this Malcolme was next king
of Scotts he with all the nobles of Scotland which could not be for any erledome
did homage to the son of this king Henry the second with a reseruacion of ye
duty to king Henry the second, his father: also therldome of Huntyngdon was
as ye have heard before this, forfaited by Malcolme his brother, and never
after restored to the croune of Scotland.

This Willya^ king of Scotts did afterward attend upon the same king Henry
the second in his wars in Normandy against the French king, notwithstanding
their French league, and then did him homage for Scotland, and thereupon was
licensed to depart home into Scotland, where immediately he moved war against
the same king Henry being yet in Normandy: but God took the defense on king
He^ries part, and delivered the same William king of Scotts into the hands of
a few Englishemenne, who brought him prisoner to this king Henry into Normandy
the x. year of his reign, but at ye last at the suit of David his brother, he
was at this fine for the amendment of his trespass, to pay.x. M. pound
sterlyng* and to surrendre al his title of the erledom of Huntyngdon
Cumberland, and Northumberla^d, into the hands of this king Henry, which he
did in all things accordyngly, and here upon he ones again did homage to the
same king Henrye which now could not be for the earldom of Huntyngdon, the
right whereof was already by him surrendered, and for the better assurance of
this faith the stre^gthes of Berwicke, Edenbrough, Roxbrough and Striuelyng
were delivered into the hands of this king Henry of England which their own
writters confess: but Hector Boecius says that this trespass was amended by
fine of xx. M. pounds sterlyng and that therldome of Huntyngdon, Cu^berland,
and Northumberlande were delivered as Morgage into the hands of this king
Henry until other.x. M. pounds sterlyng should be to him paid, but though
that were true, yet proves he not that that money was paid, nor the land
otherwise redeemed, or ever after came to any Scottishe kings hands. And this
it appears yt therldome of Hu^tyngdon was never occasion of the homages of
the Scottishe kings to ye kings of England either before this time or after.

At this time Alexander bishop of Rome supposed to have general iurisdiccion
ecclesiastical through christendom, conferred the whole clergy of Scotland
according to the old laws, under the iurisdiccion of the Archbishop of
York. This Henrye reigned in this state over them xxxv. years.

Richard surnamed Cure de Lion soonne of this Henry was next king of England,
to whom the same Willya^ king of Scotts did homage at Cantorburye for the
kingdom of Scotland, and in the ^nde of the wars of this king Richard, did
send David his brother with.v. M. Scot tishemen.

This king Richard was taken prisoner by the duke of Ostriche, for whose
redemption the whole realm was taxed to great sums of money unto the which
this Willya^ king of Scotts as a subject was contributory, and paid two M.
marks sterlyng, This Richard reigned in this ^^ate ix. years.

John the brother of this Richard was next king of England, to whom the same
Willya^ king of Scotts did like homage for the kingdom of Scotland upon a
hill beside Lyncolne, taking his faith therefore upon the cross of Hubert then
Archebishoppe Anno M. CC. iiii.
of Cantorburye, a great number of people being there assembled for ye purpose.
This Ihon reigned in this state over them.xvii. years.

Henry the third of that name soonne of this king Ihon succeeded next to the
croune of England, to whom Alexandre king of Scotts did homage for Scotland
at York. This Alexandre dyed at this faith with this king Henry.

After the death of this Alexander king of Scotts, Alexander his soonne being
of.ix. years of age, was by the laws of Edgar in ward to this king Henry, and
by the nobles of Scotland brought to York, and there delivered to this king
Henry, during whose minority this king Henrye governed Scotland, and to subdue
a co^mocion in this realm, used the aid of.v. M. Scottishmen, but king Henry
dyed during ye nonage of this Alexander, whereby he received not his homage
which by reason and law was respited until his full age of.xxi. years: this
Henry reigned in this state.lvii. years.

Edward the first since the supposed conquest son of this Henry was next
king of England, immediately after whose coronacion this Alexander king of
Scotts being then of full age did homage to him for Scotland at Westminster.

This Alexander king of Scoties died, leuing one only daughter called Margarete
his heir, who before had married Hanygo soonne to Magnus king of Norway, which
daughter also shortly after dyed, leauyng one only daughter her heir, of
thage of.ii years whose custody and marriage by the laws of king Edgar and
Edward the confessor, belonged to this king Edward, whereupon the nobles of
Scotland were commanded by this king Edward, to send to Normandy to convey
this young queen into England to him, whom he ente^ded to have married to his
soonne Edward: as our king in his own person ente^deth with their Queen now.
Their nobles at that time considering the same tranquillity, y^ many of them now
refuse, stood not upon shifts and delays of minority nor contempt, but most
gladly consented, and thereupon sent two noble men of Scotland into Norway
for her to be brought to this king Edward, but she died before their coming
thither, they required nothing but to enjoy the lawful liberties that they had
in the last king Alexander his time: I believe that the dead bodies of these
noble men and of all the kings of Scotland would rise from their sepultures
against the enemies of this godly union* if they knew with what wilful
contempt they deface their doings, and with what wicked obstinacy they
deteigne ye people of Britaigne in perpetual war, enmity and discord.

After the death of this Margaret, the Scotts were destitute of any heir to ye
croune from this Alexander there last king, at which time this Edward
disce^ded from the body of Mawde daughter of Malcolme sometime king of Scotts
being then in the greatest broil of his wars with France, minded not to take
the possession of that kingdom in his own right, but was contented to
establish Balioll to be king thereof, the weak title between him Bruise and
Hastynges being by the humble peticion of all the realm of Scotland committed
to the determinacion of this king Edward, as by autentique writing thereof
co^fessyng within the superiority of Scotland to remain in this king
Edward, sealed with the seals of.iiii. bishops.vii. Earls and.xi. Barons
of Scotland, and which shortly after was by the whole assent of the three
estates of Scotland in their solemn Parliament confessed and enacted
accordi^gly as most evidently does appear.

This Baliol in this wise made king of Scotland, did immediately make his homage
and fealty, to this king Edward for the kingdom of Scotland: but shortly
after defraudyng the benign goodness of this king Edward he rebelled, whereupon
this king Edward invaded Scotland, seized into his hands the greater part of
the country, and took all the strengthes thereof, whereupon this Baliol king of
Scotts came unto this king Edward at M^untrosse in Scotland with a white
wande in his hand, and there resigned the croune of Scotland with all his
right, title, and entrest to the same, into the hands of this king Edward,
and therefore made his Charter in writing dated and sealed ye fourth year of his
reign, whereupon all the nobles and ge^tlemen of Scotland repaired to Berwicke,
and there did homage and fealty to this king Edward beco^myng his subjects.
For the better assurance of whose oaths this Edward kept all the stre^gthes
and holds of Scotland in his own hands, and hereupon all their laws,
process, al judgment, all gifts of offices and others, passed under the name
of authority of this king Edward, he reigned in this state over the^ xxx.
years.

Edward borne at Carnaruan son of this Edward was next king of England, who
from the beginning of his reign enjoyed Scotland peaceably, dooyng in all
things as is above said of king Edward his father, until toward the latter
end of his reign, about which Bruise conspired against this king Edward and
with the help of a few forsworn Scotts, forswore him self king of Scotts,
whereupon this Edward made war upon him, but being unfortunate in his first
wars against him, he suffered Edward the soonne of Baliol to proclaim
himself king of Scotts, and nevertheless held forth his wars against
Bruise, before the endyng of which he dyed.

Edward borne at Wyndsore soonne of this Edward was next king of Scotland at
the age of xv. years, in whose minority the Scotts practiced with Isabell
mother to this Edward and with Roger Mortymer Earl of the March to have
their homages released, whose good will therein they obtained, so y^ for the
same release they should pay to this king Edward.xxx. thousand pounds sterlyng
in three years next following, that is to say.x. thousand pound sterlyng
yearly: but because the nobility and commons of this realm would not by
parliament consent unto it, their king being within age, ye same release
proceeded not, albeit the Scotts ceased not their practices with this Queen and
Earl, but before those three years in which their money (if that money had
taken place) should have been paid were exspired, this king Edward invaded
Scotland and ceased not war until David the son of Robert le Bruise then by
their eleccion king of Scotland absolutely submitted himself unto this king
Edward, but for that this David Bruise had before by practice of the Queen and
the Earl of March, married Jane the sister of this king Edward, he moved by
natural zeal to his sister, was contented to give the realm of Scotland to
this David Bruise, and to theires that he should begette of the body of the said
Jane, saving the reuersion and mean homages to this king Edward and to his
own children, wherewith the same David Bruise was right well contented, and
thereupon immediately made his homage for Scotland unto this king Edward, but
shortly after causeless, co^ceiuyng cause of displeasure, this David procured
to disolue this same estate taily, and thereupon not only rebelled in
Scotland, but also invaded England, this king Edward being then in his wars
in France. But this David was not only expulsed England, but also suspecting
no place sufficient defense to his untruth, fled out of Scotland: and the
countries of Anna^dale, Gallovvay, Mars, Teuydale, Twedale, and Ethrike were
seized into the king of England his hands, and new Marches set between England
and Scotland at Cockeburnes pathe and Sowtry hedge, which when this David went
about to recover again his power, was disco^fited, and himself by a few
Englishemen taken and brought into England, where he remained prisoner.xi.
years: during which time, this king Edward enjoyed Scotland peaceably, and
then at the co^te^placion of ye weary suite of his sorrowful sister wife of this
David, he was contented ones again to restore this David to ye kingdom of
Scotland, whereupon it was concluded, that for this rebellion David should pay
to this king Edward the sum of one C. M. marks sterlyng, and should also
destroy all his holds and fortresses sta^dyng against the English borders,
and further should assure the crown of Scotland to the childer of this king
Edward for lack of heir of his own body, all which things he did
accordyngly: and for the better assurance of his obeisaunce afterward he
delivered into the hands of this king Edward sundry noble men of Scotland his
pledges: this Edward reigned in this state over them.li. years.

Richard the son of Edward called the black prince soonne of this Edward
king, was next king of England, who for that the said Jane, ye wife of the
said king David of Scotland was deceassed without issue, and being informed
how the Scotts devised to their uttermost power to break the limitacion of
this inheritance touching ye croune of Scotland, made forthwith war
against them, he brent Edenbrough, spoiled all their country, took al their
holds and maintained continually war against them unto his death, which was
Anno domini. M. CCC. xcix.

Henry the fourth of that name Hector Bo^, lib. xvi. cap. xv.
was next kyngof England, he continued these warresbegon against them by king
Richard, and ceased not until Robert king of Scotts the third of that name,
resigned his croune by appointment of this king Henrye, and delivered his son
James being then of thage of.ix. years, into the hands of this king Henry to
remain to his custody, wardship and disposicion, as of his superior lord
according to the old laws of king Edward the confessor, all this was done
Anno domini M. CCCC. iiii. which was within v. years after the death of king
Richard: This Henry the fourth reigned in this state over them xiiii. years.

Henrye the fifth of that name soonne of this king Henrye the forth was next
king of England he had wars against the French king, in all which, this
James then king of Scotts attended upon him as upon his superior lord, with a
convenient number of Scotts, notwithstanding their league with France, but
this Henry reigned but.ix. years whereby the homage of this James their king
having not fully accomplished ye age of.xxi. years was by reason and law
respited.

Henry the sixth the son of this Henrye the.v. was next king of England in
who^ the seignorie of Scotland and custody of this James being by law and
reason disce^ded, he married the same James king of Scotts to the daughter of
Henry Beauford then Earl of Somerset, and took for the value of this marriage
the sum of one hundredth thousand marks sterlyng.

This James king of Scotts at his full age did homage to the same king Henry the
sixth for the kingdom of Scotland at Wyndsore. This Henry the sixth reigned in
this state quietly seized of this seignorie over the Scotts without any
challenge or interrupcion by them.xlix. years, and so thereof quietly dyed
seized.

Since which time unto the days of King Henrye the.vii. graundfather to our
sovereign lord that now is, albeit this realm has been molested with
diversity of titles, in which unmeet time neither law nor reason admit
prescripcion to the prejudice of any right: yet did king Edward the forth next
king of England by preparacion of war against the Scotts in the latter end of
his reign sufficiently by all laws induce the co^tinuaunce of his claim to
the same superiority over them.

After whose death, unto the beginning of the reign of our late sovereign
lord king Henry the viii. exceded not the number of xxvii. years, about which
time the impediment of our claim chanced of the Scotts part by the nonage of
James their last king, which so continued the space of.xxi. years, like as
whose minority was by all law and reason impediment to him self to make
homage, so was the same by like reason impediment to the king of this realm to
demand any, so that the whole time of intermissio^ of our claim in ye time of
the said king Henry the viii. is deduced unto the number of xiii. years.

But what need I to examyne the intermission of our claim by any length of
time, since this superioritte passed the consentes of all Scotland by their
solemn act of Parliament, against which neither law nor reason can enhable
them to prescribe.

This have I declared and proved unto you how Brute our first progenitr, ohis
people and their posterity enjoyed the whole Isle of great Britaigne in.xlii.
discentes of kings almost.vi. c. years before any Scottisheman came within it.
I have also proved un to you how after their coming into it, immediate war was
made upon them by the kings of this Briteigne, which ceased not until they
were expulsed, all the bonds of it, and albeit at diverse times they entered it
again, yet did these wars never cease against them until they became
subjects in which state they have remained about, xvi. C. years. I have also
proved unto you how from time to time since ye beginning the Scotts received
and obeyed the old laws and customs of this realm, most of which remain
among them to this day. I have further proved how their kings have been
contributorye to the redemption of kings of this realm, which is the duty
of only subjects. I have also proved unto you how the general iurisdiccion
ecclesiastical of Scotland many hundredth years after ye beginning was subjected
to ye dioses and rule of tharchebishoppe of York in England, whereby also
appears the same to be then under this dominion. I have likewise proved unto
you that Willya^ called the Conqueror, of whom our king is linially descended,
was heir testame^tary of the whole dominion by the testament of king Edward
the co^fessor, and though which were not true, yet was ye obedience of
Scotland from the beginning inseperably appendaunt to the croune of this
realm, and followed the possession of ye seignorie as things annexed, like as
the dignities of the Roman Empier follow the state of Rome, according to which
their homages and our claymes have been continued to this day. I have proved
unto you also how thearldome of Huntyngdon was only atteined but by one of
their kings, and that at the latter end of his time long after ye king his
brothers homage, done for ye croune of Scotland, and fortified and surrendered
by the next, since which time it never was restored again into any of their
kings hands: and yet to satisfy them further therein, the tenor of all their
kings homages does follow.

I D. N. king of Scotts shall be true and faithful unto you lord E. by the
grace of God king of England, the noble and superior lord of the kingdom of
Scotland and unto you I make my fidelity for the same kingdom, the which I
hold and claim to hold of you, and I shall bear you my faith and fidelity
of life and lymme and vvorldly honor against all men, faithfully I shall
knowledge and shall do you service due unto you of the kingdom of Scotland
before said as God so help and these holy euangelies.

I will not here plede the several resignacions and surrenders of the mere
possession of ye kingdom of Scotland made by their lawful kings, to our
kings Edward the first and Edward the third: nor yet allege our kings
pedugre from Mawde the the daughter of Malcolme their king, nor yet argue the
right of remainder of the kingdom of Scotland in our king for lack of issue
of the bodies of David and Jane so entailed by the same David then king thereof
as is before declared: nor yet obeicet a forfaiture upon their rebellion, for
our kings majesty that now is does far otherwise by marriage require it at
their hands. Now, because some of the Scotts allege that they disagre to
this marriage fearyng the severity of our laws, I have thought good to
remember in this place one or two of theirs, sufficient example whereby to judge
the nature of all the rest.

They have a law that if the father (though by the kings license) infeffe or
give lands to his son, yet if afterward the same father trespass the law,
his offense shall forfeite this land, notwithstanding that the son was by all
solemn law assured of it before the offense of the father.

Another, that if any man dye only suspected of treason without any other fact
done, yet may this cause be examined after his death and he somoned at his
grave, and upon condempnacion, his lands and goods co^fiscat as if he were yet
living, of both these laws innocents have no less cause to fear the
malice, then trespassors have to dread the pain.

I have studied a great while the laws of this realm, and beit said without
arrogancy, have red them all both old and new and therefore I dare affirm
that the most wicked law that ever was given in this realm, co^teineth not
half somuche iniquity as the best of both these do.

Wherefore if they mistrust the severity of our laws, chiefly as they be
mitigated at this day, none can better trust, then they yt so do mistrust: but
the likyng of their laws stands to the^ selfs in them there is none
alteracion sought: for policy in sundry places must of necessity require
sundry laws, like as in diverse places of England to this day be enjoyed
diversity in customs and have been without alteracio^ offered since their
beginning. Our title in this wise published, and their obieccions as ye have
heard answered, I will with your favor in this wise turn my tale unto the
Scottishman. It were an infinite work (nobles and commons of Scotland) nor the
tale should ^euer have an end to declare what an inestimable evil concord is,
as that whereby all things in the world, yea and also the world it self
stands and agrees together, and whereby as the famous Salust says, small
things grow to ye greatest wealth: whereby discord her contrary, all greatest
and best things come to distruccion and desolacio^, as by the civil wars
between Silla and Marius, ye ruin of Rome is sufficient example to all the
world. Wherefore I would now wish and desire, which is all that I am able to
do, that these cruel and bloody watres between us may shortly cease, which
shall much ye sooner come to pass if ye trust not your own wilful affeccio^,
which being blynder then blyndnes it self has closed up the lies of your
reason, and ledd your selfs into yt desert of obstinacy, wherein as your way
lies, so has your folly extended.

Nature the wise mother of all things, when she ordained all beasts with some
natural municion, as horn, spur, tothe or nail: she would not create man
either cruel or vengeable by any of this outward things, but gave him reason,
and so to rule without anger or armor: she endowed you with gifts to the
maintenau^ce of concord, and will you use them to discord? is it war that
you think profitable? is it discord and mischief that being hateful to
other men seems to you pleasant? what differs war from all (...)
comes the end that it is mente for, but to the contrary, and that like as a
while their faith has deceived us, so will it shortly beguile them selfs,
for nature never gave like virtue to things counterfeicte, as to true in deed:
all the wise writers of your own nation lament the wickedness of your clergy
and condemn their vicious and profane lives, but by hypocrisy they always had
this gift to show their virtue to the uttermost and hide their faults to ye
secretest, so that their virtue appears more then it is, and their vice
less: well, God is the only wreker of secret injuries, whom no man may doubt
shortly to open all your eyes, and he in the mean time I trust will make your
governor (being naturally descended of an English house in king Edward the
second his days as your own writers confess) again to become a good
Englishma^, which undoubtedly he shall be, and a true Scottishma^ also,
whenever he shall depely consider the iustnes of our cause, his faith, and
your affliccion by the miserye of this present war between us, to compare*
which with a greater euiil, possibility suffers not, to match him with a
like eiuil, his own nature abhors to show what is in degree of evils, under
him should seem sufficient dispraise, if ambicion, if malice, if glory, if
envy, do only drive thither men to wars, whether will temperaunce, godlynes,
honesty, and wisdom draw a christian manne? And now me thinks I here our
country the common parent to us all, say unto you in this wise.

An Scottishemen, how long shall I bear your unnatural cruelties, how long
will ye remain rebellious children, when shall there be end of your malice?
Alas what wickedness is it among christen men, and those the neighbors in one
kingdom, that the greatter part cannot be contented with the best thing, but
by the light argument of evil, leave the way that leads to perpetual
tranquillity. Al men would live in beatitude, but to foresee ye way how they
may so do: ye go far awry. Know ye not how evil a master he serves of the
twain, discord, or misery of the which evermore the one follows the other,
be not discord and miserye of the same nature that other vices be? always at
disce^cion within themselfes, making the man unmeet for all other things, and
at last unmeet for discord it self, though nature to the obtainyng of folly gave
every man to many gifts, and to the following of virtue to few, yet she never
better deserved toward mankind, then knowing how many miseries she ordained
him to dwell among, to teach him by reason remedy against them al, and whereby
they may receive no less ablenes to do well then before they had redynes to do
evil: be not all men that be born to dye, the same also ordained to live by
reason? and who of you by reason or otherwise is able to desist my persuasion
of this union, except he will say that the worst war is better then the best
peace, malice meter for Christian men then love, and generally al discord
better then concord, which things how different they be, God knows and I
perfitely feel. Can England offer you more reasonable, more honorable, more
godly conditions of peace then she does? except she had that from God which
makes all his Godhedde called perfeccion? can men offer more then your
lawful liberty, peace, tranquillity and amity? do not these bring forth
wealth, security, and perpetual concord? and do not all things in the
world, yea, and the world it self stand and agree together by concord?
where is your reason, where is ye love that Plato and Cicero require in you to
be borne to me your country? Finally, where is the right knowledge of love
that ye ought to have to your selves? is not my tra^quilitie thassuraunce of
your wealth, and my trouble thassurau^ce of you misery? The wicked moath bred
in the clothe destroys the same. The cruel Vipar in procreacion kills his
mother, and yet he that believes their civility to be less then yours, little
co^sidereth their cause to be of nature, and yours of wilful disposicion. I
did sow you the good seeds of concord but there is sprung up among you
cockle and fatche, the wedes of discord, and thus your corrupcion of a good
thing has engendered an evil, whereupon your infelicitie is ye more, because you
see it not* but if you saw it with reason as well as reason sees you, you
would consider the peril, for I say it is your own cause, therefore neglect not
my monicion.

Spurn not against knowledge, rebel not against your wealth, more honor is
offered unto you then ever chanced to the Scottishe nation, the time serves
it, reason requires it, the consent of all good men desire it, and God pitiyng
my long affliccion has offered the occasion, which being of your parts
thankefully received, brings wealthful security to your selfs, your wives,
children, your goods* and all your posterity* and whereby you shall avoid
calamity, misery, exileme^t or death, which otherwise by the injustice of
your cause, will undoubtedly follow: therefore in this choice, let it be no hard
thing to make you consent to your own wealth. And on that condition I do
require the whole members of all great Briteigne, that like as these many
hundredth years ye have prosecuted each other with fire, sword and slaughter,
that so ye do from hensfourth prosecute each other with amity* love, and
friendship, all old and new displeasures between you to be here after none
otherwise considered then if your hand offend the eye, or the to the the tongue,
in which case to punish, the revenge should be against your selves. And
finally, let your whole contencion hereafter be, which of you both shall with
better will deserve ye frendshippe of the other, to the glory of God, the
tranquillity and wealth of your selves, and utter discorage of my common
enemies.

FINIS.
EXCVSVM LONDINI, IN AE DIBVS RICHARDI GRAFTONI, TYPOGRAPHI REGII. M. D. XLVIII.

CVM PRIVILEGIO AD IMPRIMENDVM SOLVM


