Certain Secret wonders of Nature, containing a description of sundry strange
things, seming monstrous in our eyes and judgment, because we are not privy
to the reasons of them.

Gathered out of diverse learned authors as well Greek as Latin, sacred as
profane. By E. Fenton.

Apres fortune espoir.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed.

Imprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman dwelling in Knightrider streat, at the
sign of the Mermaid. ANNO. 1569.

CVM PRIVILEGIO AD IMPRIMENDVM SOLVM.

To the right Honorable and his singular good Lord, the Lord Lumley, Edward
Fenton wishes a happy life, with much increase of honor and continuance of
the same.
THe most ancient and famous Philosophers (right honorable) albeit they never
had any certain knowledge of God, yet nature by her instinct of reason, dealt so
beneficially with them, that beholding the wonderful power of God in all his
creatures, they douted not to confess that there was one who had made these
things, and with all had a special care over them: Besides this, after the
dissolution of this life, they aimed very near at the immortality of the
soul: who in the end being overcome with the depth of so divine a Mystery,
as a matter not to be measured by man's reason, were constrained to leave of
to be curious in the inquiry after such questions, and fell to the study of
such things as they thought would serve best to stay their appetite from the
attempting of any uncomeliness, and stir their minds to the attaining of
most commendable virtues. Wherein as they have left behind them so great store
of necessary precepts, as we can not (so long as we direct our doings by their
good discipline) but of necessity we must tread the path that leads to
perfect happiness. So besides this (as men reputing it a shame to be ignorant
in any thing that by travail they might attain unto) they have found out to
their great praise and our singular profit and pleasure, the secret and
hidden reason of many things, which nature has kept unknown from us (as it
should seem of set purpose) to the end we might the rather find our selves
occupied in the search and knowledge of the same. And like as some of them by
reason they are ordinary and common, the cause thereof being also natural,
together with the familiarity and acquaintance we have with them, and that
they happen as it were of custom, do move us the less or nothing at all to
have them in admiration when they chance or happen: Even so on the contrary
part there are other effects of nature, which when we behold, they do the
more amaze us, because we be not able to comprehend the causes and reasons
thereof, but imagine straight way that nature is abused, or at least has lost
her rule who in deed is always one and uniform, and cannot be but one cause
working diversely, according to the diversity of her subjects. Touching things
supernatural or above nature, we are to think they are not so called in respect
of nature, as though she had made ought by chance, whereof she was not able to
yield a reason, but rather having regard to us, whose weak understanding cannot
conceive her secret means in working. And therefore we must think they have
their proceeding from God or some divine inspiration, either directly or
indirectly, immediately or by a mean, seeing that God oftentimes both to warn
us of his justice and to punish our offenses, lays his hand and rod upon us
in diverse sorts, as when we feel the raging whirlewindes and tempests by sea,
the terrible earthquakes by land* the fearful flames of lightning, and crackes
of thunder in the air, and all these things without us. But to come nigher
unto our selves when we feel any distemperature in our bodies, whereupon do
grow some grievous diseases: All which albeit they have their being and motion
by natural means, yet seem they the rather prodigious because they be rare
and happen but seldom. But those things which are called supernatural because
the reason is hidden from us, they come by the permission or special
appointment of God, as when we be troubled with wicked spirits offering to
abuse our simplicity with false mi^acles, fained visions, and other such
devilish illusions. Whereof as I shall not need to speak either particularly or
in general, so seeing that besides the reasons and aucthorities which are
gathered together in this slender volume, the writers of Histories in both
kinds have given out sufficient matter touching an absolute resolution that
way, which as I hope may suff^^^ to discharge me of a second trauail, with a
particular d^scription of such things as the book it self does amply and more
at large contain: So leaving to deal in the offenses of some such persons
as use and abuse their bodies through an inordinate lust against the prescripte
of nature, whereupon happens oftentimes both a superabunda^ce and default in the
creatures brought into the world: As I hope also it is nedelesse for me to
mention in this place the generation of precious stones with their sundry
properties, the force and virtues which by experience we find to be in plants
and herbs proceeding out of the sap and substance of the earth, with sundry
other qualities, serving against the inco^ueniences that come by the air, by
fire, by scalding lead^ or other m^ttals molten and burning, because the volume
following discribes them sufficiently in their several places. The judgment
whereof with their several reasons, I humbly submit to the censure of your
wisdom, the which if it shall in any part be to your liking, I have the
chiefest part of my desire, and shall the less need to regard the variable
fantasies and opinions of the multitude: For as much as my travail bestowed
herein has been only in respect of your Lordship, to whom as well for my
self as diverse of my friends, I am very much bound. Notwithstanding I would be
glad that my private travail might universally either profit or pleasure all.
For the book it self I am of opinion that neither the description of many
things therein (...) is so commonly known, that the strangeness thereof is not
able to delight a great many, neither yet the matter (...) that ^t shall not
yield much fruit that may be applied to sundry purposes. We see in daily
experience, with how great earnestness and delight the unlearned sort run
over the fruitless History of king Arthur and his round table Knights, and
what pleasure they take in the trifeling tales of Gawin and Gargantua: the
which bisides that they pass all likelihode of truth, are utterly without
either grave precept or good example. Whereby I am in better hope that this
book containing such variety of matter both pleasant to read and necessary
to know, being sprinkled throughout with great wisdom and morality, shall be
the rather embraced and allowed of all. And in the mean time trusting that as
I have taken upon me the translation of this small book, only upon consideration
both to acknowledge the duty I owe your Lordshippe, and signify the good
meaning I bear toward you, so you will vouchesafe to undertake the patronage
thereof, and when your waightier affairs shall give you leave to have recourse
thereunto and read it for your recreation. I leave your good Lordship until
such time as my better knowledge shall embolden me to present you with a
greater matter and more worthy your reding: wishing unto you and the whole race
of your noble house, increase and continuance of honor, with the attainment of
perfect felicity.

Your Lordships most bounden, Edward Fenton.

The Authors Preface.
MY Lord, amongst all the things which may be viewed under the coape of
heaven, there is nothing to be seen, which more stirs the spirit of man,
which rauisheth more his senses, which does more amaze him, or ingendreth a
greater terror or admiration in all creatures, than the mo^sters, wonders and
abominations, wherein we see the works of Nature, not only turned arsiuersie,
misseshapen and deformed, but (which is more) they do for the most part
discover unto us the secret judgment and scourge of the ire of God, by the
things that they present, which makes us to feel his marvelous justice so
sharp, that we be constrained to enter into our selves, to knock with the
hammer of our conscience, to examine our offenses, and have in horror our
misdeedes, specially when we read in Histories sacred and profane, that
oftentimes, the elements have been harolds, trumpetters, ministers and
executioners of the Justice of God. As when we see the waters ouerflowe their
chanells, and that the veins of heaven open by such outrage, that they
surpass.xv. cubits, the highest mountains of the earth. And the fire in like
manner, obeying the commandment of his Creator, consumed five famous Cities,
committing them presently into cinders. The air also has been found so
corrupt, venomous and infectiue in diverse provinces, that piercing from one to
an other it has in effect smoothered and choked the most part of humain kind,
leaving the earth inhabitable. The earth likewise opening her throat, has
swalowed up an infinite number of proud Cities, with their citizens. And
albeit these wonders he but small, yet if we consider, y^ when the furor of God
is enflamed against our sins, he does not so much respect us, as to chastise
us by his elements, But the better to bridle and correct us, he makes the
most weak and a^iect creatures of the earth, the executioners and punishers of
our offenses: As that great Monarque Pharao proved at such time as the Frogs,
Flies, and Grasshoppers did assail him even in his bed. Wherefore like as we
have showed you before these fearful and strange chastisements, even so we
could bring to memory others no less marvelous, tha^ worthy to be noted of
those specially which have felt some apprehension of the judgments of God: as
when we s^e living creatures borne amongst us, who have had two heads knit and
fastened together in one only body, like two bows in the trunk of a tree.
Others so well conjoined and glued the one to the other, that by no Art of man
they were to be separated. Others be so abominable and deformed, that they
seem to be brought into the world as well in contempt of nature, as to the
perpetual infamy and grief of their parents. These things being very lively
apprehended by the Prophet Oseas in his.ix. Chapter: where he writes, these be
the deeds of their abominable loves, and when they have norished their
children, I will destroy them in such sort that they never shall become men. I
will give them an over timely birth, and their pappes shall be dry, and their
root withered, so that they shall be barren: but if they fortune to engender,
I will then destroy the fruit of their body. The like is confirmed by the
Prophet Esdras the.v. Chapter, where amongst other cruel cursings, wherewith
Babylon was threatened by the Angel, it is expressly said, that women defiled
with blood, shall bring forth monsters. But for yt the mystery of these
secrets is somewhat to hard, and therefore requires a further leisure, I will
leave the rest to the discourse that I have made in my Histories, which be
enterlarded with no other things, than these strange accidents and wonderful
chances, wherewith all the provinces of the world have been astonished since the
nativity of Jesus Christ, unto this our time. But now (my Lord) having fought
with Labor, and in mine opinion become thereof victorious, there rests in me
none other thing for the final accomplishement of the same, than to tender,
consecrate and give the fruit sprung of my Muses and just tribute of my
pains, being drawn thereunto not only by sundry particular bonds, which I
will keep secret for this present, but also for the merit of an infinite
number of Heroical virtues, which makes you so marvelous, that you deserve
to be celebrated of all those which have written. For besides the Noble blood
of the ancient house de Rieux, where you took your first beginning, you are
endued with such excellent gifts of the mind and of Nature, a singular
knowledge in diverse arts and disciplines, bearyng an earnest frendshyp to such
as makes those their profession, yet have you besides these, so noble a desire
to martial affairs, such affection and devotion to the service of your
Prince, as there has been no assembly made or addressed in your time to any
assault of town or City, skirmish or other Sail into Italy, or else where,
where you have not been found the first in rank with such assurance and little
regard of your life, that those which knew you, expected no less in you,
than of that great Marshall de Rieux, your graundfather, to whose fame the
Chroniclers and writers have sowned so many praises. Neither ought I in this
place to pass over with silence the worthy exploites and valiant acts of
Monsieur de Gue de Lisle your brother, who has accompanied you in all your
perils and travails of Fortune, and even in this his young age, has given such
sufficient witness of the same, by so often sheadyng of his blood in the
service of his prince, that for his magnanimity and virtue he meriteth never
to be buried in the grave of oblivion: Albeit having reserved to make a more
ample description thereof in an other work which I have prepared, so this (my
Lord) may suffice for the present, beseeching you not only to take this work
in good part which I offer unto you, but also serve to the same as a defense
and safe conduct: To the end that it being fortified by the shadow and
brightness of your nobleness and virtue, it may the rather pass assured
thorough the perilous straightes of our Countreye of France.

A Table of the principal matters contained in this Book.
IN the first history are contained sundry abuses and wonders of Satan. Fol.
1. In the second, the wonders and aduertisements of God sent upon the City of
Jerusalem, to provoke them to repentance. 4. In the third, mention is made of
the death of sundry Kings, Bishops, Emperors, and Monarques, with the
wonderful death of a king of Poloigne, and an Archbishop of Maience. 5. In
the fourth, is described the history of Nabuchodonozer, wherein is sheed in what
peril they be which command, and have the government of public weals. 10
In the fifthe, is declared the causes of the bringing forth of monsters, and
other histories to that purpose. 12. In the sixth, is recou^ted a notable
history of two maidens engendered in our time, the which were knit together by
the forheads. 14 In the seventh, a wonderful and horrible monster of our time,
upon the discourse of whom, the question is asked whether Devils can engender
and use the works of nature. 16. In the eight, sundry sorts of Lightnings,
with wonderful thunders and te^pests happening in our time, with the peril and
harms proceeding of the same, and certain defensible means against their
fury. 19. In the ninth a wonderful history of a man in our time, which washed
his hands and face in scalding lead. 24. In the tenth, wonderful and strange
histories of the Jews. 26. In theleuenth, Floods and wonderful inundations of
waters which (...) happened in our time. 29. In the twelfth, the wonderful
death of Pliny, with a brief description of the causes of fire, which come
of certain openings of the earth. 30 In the thirtenth, wonders of certain
horrible Earthquakes chauncing in diverse provinces, with a deceit of Satan,
who by his craft and subteltie made a Roman knight to throw himself
headlong into a gulffe. 33 In the fourtenth, wonders of two bodies knit
togethers like two graffes in the trunk of a tree. 35 In the fiftenth, a
history of a monster, who appeared to S. Anthonye in the desert. 37 In the
sixtenth, a wonderful discourse of precious stones, their nature and property,
which reasons of their procreation, and other strange things breding in the
bowels of the earth. 38 In the seuententh, a wonderful history of two
Princesses, being committed to the flames, unjustly accused, who were delivered
by the virtue of their innocence. 45 In the eightenth, a wonderful history of
sundry strange fishes, Monster^ Mermaids, and other huge creatures, found and
bred in the Sea. 47 In the ninetenth, wonders of Dogs which did eat
Christians. 54 In the twentieth, a wonderful history of diverse figures, Comets,
Dragones and flames, which appeared in heaven to the terror of the people, and
whereunto the causes and reasons of them be assigned. 56. In the.21. Flames of
fire which have spronge out of the heads of diverse (...) 61. (...) 22. A
history very notable, of (...) loves, with a description of the dissolute life
of three renoumed Curtisanes. 62 In the.23. A wonderful history of a monster,
out of whose belly issued an other man, all whole reserving the head. 69. In
the.24. Notable histories of many plants, with their properties and virtues,
together with a wonderful rote of Baata, written of by Josephus the Hebrew
author. 70. In the.25. Wonderful and excessive Bankets. 76. In the.26.
Certain wonderful discourses worthy of memory touching Visions, Figures and
Illusions, appearing as well in the day as in the night and sleeping as waking.
82. In the.27. A wonderful history of a monster, seen by Celius Rhodigenus.
98 In the.28. A monster on live, whose intrailes and interior parts, were to
be seen naked and uncovered. 100 In the.29. Of a prodigeous Dog which
engendered of a Bear and a mastiffe bitche in England, seen by the Author at
London, with the discourses of the nature of this beast. 101. In the.29. A
wonderful historye of certain women which have brought forth a great number
of children: and an other which bare her fruit v. years dead within her
belly. 108 In the.31. A wonderful history of a mo^ster having the shape of the
face of a man, who was taken in the Forest of Haueberg, in the year.1531.
whose purtraicte Georgius Fabritius sent to Gesnerus, naturally drawn. 110 In
the.32. Of wonderful and strange famines. 112 In the.33. Of a Bird which has
no fete, and lives continually in the air, being never found upon the earth,
or in the sea, but dead. 114 In the.34. Of a certain monstrous Serpent,
having.vij. heads, bought by the Venetians, and sent into France embalmed.
117. In the.35. A strange and wonderful history of two maids knit and
conjoined back to back, seen in diverse places, the one at Rome, the other at
Verona. 123 In the.36. Of wonderful cruelty, in the which is a discourse of
As^iages who caused Arpalus to eat the flesh of his own son. 125 In the.37.
Of a mo^ster brought forth into the world alive, having the shape of a man
from the navel upward, and the rest like a dog. 128 In the.38. A notable
complaint made by a monstrous man to the Senate of Rome, against the tyrannies
of a Ce^sour, which oppressed the pore people of the river of Danubie with
rigorous exactions. 130 In the.39. Of a monstrous child having.iiij. fete
and.iiij. arms brought into the world the same day that the Geneuois and
Venetians were reconciled. 136 In the.40. A wonderful discourse of
covetousness, with many examples touching that matter worthy of memory. 137 In
the.41. A monster having the. wings and fete of a bird, brought forth at
Rauenna, in the time of Pope July the second, and king Jews the twelfth. 139
Of a strange monster taken up in the river of Tybre, in the year.1496. Fol.
140 Of a strange child borne in Almain in the year.1548. having but one leg
and no arms, with a creuise or chinke where his mouth should be. 140 Of a
child borne in England in the year.155^. which had two bodies, two heads,
four hands, and three legs, and but one belly. 141. Of a wonderful and strange
monster borne in the year.1554. eod. Of two wonderful monsters brought forth
into the world in the year 1555. the one in Germany, the other in Sauoye.
142 Of a monstrous Calfe brought forth in Germany, in the year.1556. 143 A
monstrous child borne in Germany in the year.1556. 144 Of a monstrous calfe
having the head, beard and breast of a man. eod. Of three Suns seen at one
time. 145 Of a shining Cross with a star at the top, and a Moan at the
lower end, seen in the year.1567. eod. Of two monsters. 146 A wonderful
Dance. 147
The end of the Table.
SUNDRY ABUSES and wonders of Satan. CHAPTER. j.
ALbeit Satan since the creation of the world has performed his tirannous
reign in most provinces and places of the earth, with sundry subtilties and
sophistical sleights to draw unto him an honor of the people, under a form
of diverse beasts and other creatures, yet it is affirmed both by sacred and
profane authority, that the sovereign and omnipotent God has given him more
scoape and liberty of rage against his people, in two places, than in all the
world besides, whereof the first was in the Oracle of Apollo (a place very
famous by report of hystories) where he kept his schole and open shop of
villainous cruelty, for the space of 1000. or 1200. years, drawing the people
not only to fall down and worship him, but also (according to his bloody
disposition) he took upon him to give answer to their demau^ds, with constraint
for ye most part, that before he performed resolution of their questions, they
should honor and perfume his house with incense and quick sacrifice of men,
maids, and sometimes the fathers became murderers of their simple and innocent
children, such was the blindness of the people, and such the sleight of this
subtle serpent to enchaunt and charm their understanding: wherewith
notwithstanding not satisfied, he kept a common storehouse of filthy gain and
ravenous covetousness, and that under the pretense of religion, in such sort,
that the most part of Kings and Monarchs of the earth came to worship him in
that place, enriching his temple with infinite treasures, and gifts of
precious value, besides a number of stately Images formed of massiue Gold, the
same so enlarging his territory, that of a little cave or hollow vault, wherein
he kept residence at the beginning, within a small time he raised it up to a
huge and proud City, wherein he so traffiqued and practiced his abominable
trade with Pilgrims and strangers that came from far, setting such price of
the pelf wherewith he abused the simplicity of the people, that (as Diodorus
writes) there was found at that time of his treasure above ten thousand
talentes, amounting (according to the order of our account) to six Millions of
gold. And now touching the description of the site or situation of the place
where this monstrous enemy to the life of man, performed his oracles, it was a
desert and traggie mountain planted in Grecia, upon the breach or tip of a
high and hard Rock (out of the which issued a sulphur or strong breath)
whereupon was hong on high a cold spirit or figure wavering as the wind, and
the mouth of this infernal cell did bestride certain graund paunches or big
belied priests, cowring one close by an other, as though they would hatch young
fry like them selves, who receiving the air or breath of the wind, and
participating with the spirit and power of the devil, became as men enraged
and without sense, braying out answer to the people upon their demaundes. This
also gave further cause of wonder, touching the place, that he was so carefully
guarded by devils, that no mortal man durst assail either him or his treasure
amassed from so many parts of the world, the same moving cause of fear to
Princes of the greatest power, and also to the mighty conqueror Xerxes, who
notwithstanding being upon his conquest of Greece, following his covetous
inclination to enrich himself with the spoil of Satan, attempted to pill his
Temple, which as he was striving to bring to pass, that part of the Rock
where Satan sat in his throne, upon a sudden overwhelmed and fell down upon
his soldiers, the Elamente began to open and cast forth flames of fire, with
such terrible threats of thunder and lightning, that those which were upon the
mountain fell down, some schortched to death by the vehemency of the fire,
and some torn in pieces by other violence, that (as Trogus affirms) that
assault was the bane of.iiij. thousand of his soldiers, which happened not only
to him, for that the Frenchmen undertaking the like enterprise under the
conducte of Brenus, who vowing to skale the mountain and sack the temple of
Delphos* was resisted with a horrible quaking of the earth, which so shaked and
disordered the hill, that the greatest part fell upon his army, and smotheryng
who so ever was found either upon or under it, whereupon followed such terrible
motions in the Elament, with storms, tempests, wind and hail mixed with
sulphur and fume of fatal fire, that the most part of the army was consumed,
and Brenus himself so sore wounded, that what with the anguish of his hurt, and
impacience of his repulse, he sacrifised himself upon the point of his sword.
The other special place where Satan kepes his majesty, usurping upon the
people with a reverence as to a God, is yet in being in Calycut, one of the
most rich and famous cities of the Indyans, but after a more strange and
hydeous fashion than in the Oracle of Apollo, for that there he was rather
masqued than seen openly, where now (ielous belike of the honor of his
creator) he is seen and worshipped under the most terrible and monstrous form
that ever we see him drawn and painted in any place. And here he has so
surely seeled the eyes of this miserable people of Calycut, that although they
acknowledge God, yet do they worship and reverence the Devil with Sacrifice,
incense, perfume and erection of Images, as if he were one of the Deity in
deed. And albeit all that Province, which is of great circuit, together with
their Kings and Rulers of the same, are resolved of the unity of one God,
maker of heaven and earth, with other Elamentes and the whole World besides, yet
Satan the father and first founder of all untruths, has so prevailed amongst
them with such subtle and sinister persuasions, that they believe that God being
weary to debate the causes and controversies happening among men, has
committed unto him the charge of judgment upon earth, the same inducing this
pore and ignorant people to think that God has sent down that spirit of
torment with power to do justice and reason to every cause and question amongst
them: they call him by the name of Deumo, whose portraite the King kepes with
great devotion in his Chapel, as a sanctuary or holy relike, placed in a
stately chair with a Crown upon his head after the form of a Meetre, with a
garnish of four horns, four huge teeth growing out of a monstrous mouth, a
nose and eyes of the like proportion, his hands like to the paws of an Ape,
and feet fashioned like a Cock, whose form (as you see) is both fearful and
monstrous: so it agrees with the furniture of the chapel wherein it is
enclosed, being garnished with no other tables or pictures, than figures of
little devils of the like regard. And yet is not this all: for their priests
which they call Bramynes, have express charge to wash this Idol with sweet
water and odoriferous balmes: and then upon the sound of a bell to fall
prostrate, and do sacrifice: neither does the King eat any meat which is not
offered before by iiij. of those Priests to the mouth of the Idol, wherewyth
not satisfied with this ambicious abuse and usurpation of reverence in the
Oratorie of the King, is content (in more derogation of the honor of God) to
suffer them to build him a stately Temple in the midst of an Island, formed
after the ancient manner, with.ij. rows of Pillars, like to S. John's Church in
Rome, wherein is placed with great ceremony, a huge Altar of stone, upon the
which (by an ordinary custom is offered the.xx. of December, being
Christmasse day, yearly by all the Gentlemen and priests within.xxv. days
journey about, sacrifice and incense, with great assistance of al degrees of
common people, who coming thither to get pardon and remission of their sins,
are first anointed in the head with a certain oil, and then (by
commandment of the Priests) they fall down before the said Image set in great
pomp upon the Altar, whom having worshipped in this extreme devotion, every
man returns to his place of aboade: besides (during the time of these
ceremonies, which lasts.iij. days, there is free liberty proclaimed through
all the land, that all murderers and heinous offenders whatsoever, shall come
with assurance to this general remission, the same making the assembly so great,
that (according to the witness of such as write of it) there are found
yearly during that time above an hundredth thousand persons, whom this enemy
to mankind has so enchaunted, with illusions, that they believe their
sacrifice is done to God, and merits pardon at his hand, where in deed they
honor the chief enemy to their own salvation: which ought to serve for
example to such as participate with the light of God and his Gospel, to the
end they labor to make appear their talent, and make a special treasure of
the grace wherewith he has endued them, seeing that the servant which knows
the will of his Lord, and does it not, stands in more danger of blame before
God, than he that is ignorant of it. And now to prevent al doubts and
suspicion in such as may think these wonderful discourses to be made in the
air, or matters of vain devise above the sun, I commend them to the
authority of Paulus Venetus, Ludouicus Patricius Romanus, and of Vartomanus,
in their Chronicles of ye Indyans, by whom is set out a more large description
of those wonders, not as understood by others, or red in any author, but as
things seen and assisted by themselves, and in their presence, assuring (for
mine own part) all such as shall peruse my translation, not to commend
thorowout this whole book, any thing which is not confirmed with sufficient
credit by some notable author, either Greek or Latin, Sacred or Profane.
Some late writers affirm that this people of Calycut have been reduced of late
years to our true Religion, by the great and charitable travail of certain
Ambassadors which the Kings of Portingall did send to discover those
countries.

Wonders and aduertisements of God sent upon the City of Jerusalem, to provoke
them to repentance. CHAP. ij.
LEt us a little consider, Christians, how much this Oracle and wonder divine is
differing from that going before: the one habitable, the other decayed: the one
lost, dyspoyled and sacked: the other kept, repaired and dwelt in. And
although we have proved how great and wonderful is the bounty and clemency
of our God, whom albeit we have offended by an infinite multitude of
abominable sins, yet notwithstanding he holds us his hand, calls us,
warns and wills us to return to him, showing by sickness and particular
afflictions, sometimes by signs and wonders, which for the most part be
messangers, trumpets, and forerunners of his justice, as it is euidentely
showed upon this miserable City of Jerusalem, which remained still so drowned
in her sin, that for any strange advertisement sent to her by God, she would
not at any time be withdrawn from those vices. The signs and wonders by which
the Lord foretold of the destruction of their City, be those which follow,
written by Joseph in the.vij. book of the Wars of the Jews, and by Eusebe
in his history Ecclesiastical. The first message which was sent them from
heaven, was a Comet or blasing Star, in the fashion of a sword, which
continued the space of a year, casting and houering his beams over their
City. The second chanced the.xviij. day of April, even when the people were
assembled to solemnize the feast of the Azimes, at what time was seen so
great a light about the Altar of the Temple, at the ninth hour of the night,
that it seemed to them as if it had been plain day, and continued so clear
the space of half an hour. The same day of the said feast an Ox (which they
had sent to be sacrificed) calued in the middst of the Temple: and besides
that, a door of the temple of brass, which was so heavy that there must be.xx.
men to make it fast at night, being tied with bars and locks of iron, opened
the same time of it self, about the sixth hour of the night: Besides, the said
Joseph affirms further, which peradventure might seem a fable or dream, if
those that saw them were not at this day living, and that these calamities
were not come upon them, as worthy of so unhappy messages. It came to pass
that a certain time, before the Sun set, they perceived in the air
Chariots running through all the regions of Heaven, the armies which trauersed
the clouds, and environed certain cities. And the day of the feast, which
they call Penticost, the Priests, having done the service divine, heard a
certain brute, and incontinent heard a voice which said: Let us go from hence.
But the last wonder is most fearful of all, that is: A simple man of the
country, of base condition, the son of a peasant, called Nanus, the city
being in peace, and full of al wealth, being ^ome to this feast, began at one
instant to cry: A voice from the coast of the Orient, a voice from the coast
of the Occident, and a voice from the four quarters of the wyndes: a voice
against Jerusalem and the Temple, a voice against the new married men and new
married women, a voice against all that people: and howling and crying in this
sort, went through all the streates of the City: whereof certain of the
chief not brooking this sommons of their City, made him to be beaten: but he
would not answer any word to those that whipped him, but continued the same
cry with extreme obstinacy: whereof the Magistrates astonished, knowing well
enough that the same proceeded of some divine inspiration, made him to be carried
to him which had the government of the Romans, the which made him to be so
tormented, that his flesh was pluckte from the bones: which notwithstanding,
he continued so firm and constant that he would not let fall a simple tear,
nor require them to stay their punishment: but to every blow of the whip which
they gave him, he exclaimed the more, evil Fortune evil Fortune upon Jerusalem:
and being asked of Albyn which was Judge, where he was borne, and wherefore he
so lamented, he made no answer, not ceassing to bewail according to his
accustomed manner the desolation of that miserable City. Which was the cause
that Albyn judging him mad, suffered him to pass. And that which is most
strange, he continued in this sort the space of seven years and five
months, until the very destruction of ye said City, without ceassing to use
his accustomed cries, or making himself hoarce, not yelding thanks to those
which gave him meat or drink. But rehearsing this doleful song to al such
as came unto him, until the very time the City was besieged, and that Titus
had given the assault and encamped before it: and then turning himself to the
walls, began a fresh his noise, crying with a horrible voice: Evil Fortune
upon the City, temple and all the people: after he had made an end of these
words, and evil hap upon my self, a great stone cast by the enemies,
suddenly slew him: and incontinent the Emperor Titus sacked and burnt the
City, where ye slaughter was so great (as Joseph writes) that during that
siege there died eleauen hundred thousand persons. And the ire of God was so
fervent upon the poor Jewish people, that after they had eaten all the filthy,
sluttish and unclean meats they could get, in the end they were constrained,
not only to eat the latchets of their shoes, but also their shoe soles dipped
and stieped in water: and also the filthy Rattes have served them for meat,
and that which was most horrible, the mothers forced to make meat of the flesh
of their children: so much was the fury of God kindled against this miserable
City.

The wonderful death of sundry Kings, Princes, Bishops, Emperoures and
Monarques. CHAP. iij.
AS amongst all the dignities of the world, there is not any to be found more
excellent or wonderful than the magnificence of Kings, nor wherein is figured
in more perfect form the very Image of divinity. Even so there is no state
more perilous and subject to eclipse or mutation, nor that finds more sharp
the ^rrowes and judgments of God, than those which degenerate from the
excellent degree of honor, whereunto the voice of God has called them. The
which is sufficiently verified by a number of examples both sacred and
profane. Wherein Croesus that great King of Lydie, (if he were risen from
death) knew well what to say, the which publishing himself in all places to be
the most fortunate King of the world, was in the end vanquished, overcome and
burned by Cirus. Policrates the renoumed King of the Samiens, (as Valerius
witnesses) did not feel at any time so much the pricks of Fortune, being
vanquished by Darius, as when he was betrayed and killed by his own Provost
upon the height of a mountain. Valerius Emperor of the Romans overcome by
Sapor king of the Perses, ended his life in such servitude, that the said Sapor
made him not only his fot^stoole, but also used him as a stiroppe to alighte
upon his horse. Also the Emperor Diocletian, having left the Empire, died of
the poison which he himself had prepared. But where is now that great King
Xerxes, whose Nauies and Sails of war ouerspread the whole Occean? Or where
is that invincible Hannibal, who by his extreme labor trenching the mountains,
and making great hills equal with the valleys of the earth, and forced also the
frozen Alps to yield passage to his army? In like sort Paulus Emilius,
Julius Caesar, Pompey, with others of infinite number amongst the Greeks and
Romans, what is become of them, or what other pomp remains of their ancient
glory and former Majesty, if not a simple fame to feed the succession of
their age? yea, what other remembrance have we of them and their doings, if
not a monumente or register of report, for the which also they are bound to the
Historians, in leaving to their posterity so large a pawn and witness of
their painful life. Their bodies alas clothed with Purple, their Diademes,
Perfumes, and other such vanities be (...) consumed to bones and ashes, leaving
worms as heirs to the rest of their glory, the which in the end shows her
self so vain and slippery, that those which accounted their lives most
fortunate, and judged even now to have raught the height of their prosperity,
do feel them selves most sharply wounded by their malice. Hercules, albeit he
passed so many perils both by sea and land, with the mortal encounters of
huge monsters, yet did he embrace his bane in the arms of his delicate
Deianyra. Alexander the great, who was of force to make a general conquest of
the whole East world, passing each straighte and danger of war without any
mortal hurt to his person, was not able to shun the fatal cup of poison
presented unto him. After Julius Caesar had triumphed in.52. batailes, with
intent to sound the last retreat of war, with expectation to retire his
bones from further toil, was killed in the Senate. Zeno, the.xij. Emperor of
Constantinople (albeit the sundry famous victories which he obtained) died not
in his bed, but by the cruel and unnatural commandment of his wife was
buried quick, not able to be succored of any. Asclepius, the brother of
Pompey, having ben a continual pyrate on the seas, the space of.22. years,
and escaping the surging waves and terrible tempests of the same was in the
end drowned by drawyng water at a Well. Mempricius, a King of England, being
on huntyng, and lost of his company, was by the cruel fate of Fortune, denied
other harbor of princely sepulture, than the bellies of the ravening Wolves.
Drusus, having vanquished by valiant courage the Perthes, albeit he died not by
any wounds gotten in those conflicts, but received with great po^pe and
triumph upon a Chariot at Rome, was in the end killed with a tyle stone.
Bazileus, the.xxv. Emperor of Constantinople, did not end his life in the
cruel wars he had with the Sarazins, but having taken truce with worldly
vanities* was in hunting killed by a Heart. Charles king of Nauerre, albeit he
died not in performing sundry noble and valiant acts, yet being troubled and
tormented with the pain of the gowte: for whose help it was devised by the
counsel of all his Physicians, to wrap the said King in a linen cloth dipped
in Aqua vitae, which being kindled, instead of present succor of his disease,
he received his fatal bane, by being burned quick in the same. Otho, the
third Emperor of that name, not so well able to forsee the subtle deceipts of
the wife of Crescentius, as to withstand the force and cruel assaults of war
he endured at Rome against Cresce^tius, was poisoned by a pair of gloves which
he received of her. Neither was the fearful and dangerous storms of wars,
which Henry the.vij. Emperor proved during his life, such an impediment to the
state of his health, as the cruel and subtle disposition of an abominable
Monk, who gave end to his days, by the impoisoning of an host he ministered
to him. John the.xj. Pope, ended not his days by the painful reading of the
holy scripture or preaching Gods word to his flock and charge, but he finished
his term in a cruel prison, smoothered with a pillow. Pope Benet the sixte,
died not in pa^pering himself with sundry delicious and dainty banquets, as
the most part of those Romish prelates do at this day: but he ended his days
in prison by the pinching and gnawing pain of extreme famine. Pope Victor the
third, deceased not from this vain and transitory life, as sommoned by the
messanger of old age, but celebrating the Mass, was compelled to yield up his
vital breath by an infectious poison given him in the Chalice. Then if so many
Monarchs and renoumed princes have ended their lives by so sundry and strange
kinds of death, it is nedeful for those which follow, exactly to consider of
the warnings and judgments of God, and especially such, by whose vile and
detestable order of living, may be seen as in a glass, the due reward
appointed for the same: for as ye noble Marcus Aurelius says, that after every
evil fortune follows a good hap, and after every ignominy ensues great
glory: even so I assure you (says he) that for my self, I had rather my life
were less glorious and my death more honorable: for as by an unfortunate death
grows great suspicion of a good life: so a good death often times excuses
an evil life. Wherein if so many kinds of deaths both of Kings and
Emperors by us written, seem strange and fearful unto you, then those
following will deserve more admiration, the same agreeing with our intent, for
they be wonders, by y^ which we are instructed, that when the Justice of God is
inflamed against us, and that he shootes his arowes as a sharp punishment for
our offenses, he makes his ministers and executers of his just anger, the
little and insensible worms of the earth, neither does his wrath fall
altogether upon the vulgar or people of mean condition, but has also like
force upon Princes and degrees of great callings, whereof appears a familiar
experience in the monstrous death of a King and Bishop, recorded already under
the seal and authority of 40. or 50. Historians, of no less credit than
undoubted truth, all which agree in one, that King Popeil reigning in
Poloniae, 246. years after Christ, was wont amongst his particular curssyngs to
use this blasphemous oath: If this be not true, I would the Ratts might gnaw
me: wherein he received the just hier of so execrable an oath, for in the end he
was devoured as you shall read hereafter. The father of King Popeill feeling
himself to decline from the vanities of this miserable and uncertain
pilgrimage, left the government and state of the Realm to the disposition of
the two uncles of his son, men no less honored of all the cuntrie for the
nobleness of their hearts, than well liked for their sincerity of life toward
God. Popeill being come to his full age, his father deceassed, and the young man
having caught betwixt his teeth the bitte of the bridell, began to give him
self unto all wantonness and riottous living, in such sort that in few
days he became so shameless in evil and abominable doings, that he left
no kind of vice unassayed, in so much that in the end he cruelly poisoned his
two uncles: which wicked and unnatural fact performed, caused himself to be
crouned with a cap of flowers perfumed with precious ointments: and the more to
solemnize the first entry of his reign, he caused to be prepared a su^ptuous
and delicate banquet, whereunto all the Princes and nobles of his Realm were
somoned: And as they were banqueting, behold, an infinite multitude of Ratts
risyng from the dead and putrified corpses of his two uncles, the which he with
his wife had impoysoned, began to assail that cruel tyra^t amidst his
delites: the Archers of his Guard offering to resist the same with maine hand,
travailed in vain, for they encountered him day and night, that the poor men
cried alas, being altogether unable to defend their master from the rage of
these beasts, by reason whereof, it was thought good by the advice of his
counsel to enuiron the Prince with fire, and not knowing that the power of man
is any way able to resist Gods appointment, they performed their devise, which
was no impediment or let to the ratts, who passing the hot flames of fire
without any let, to the admiration of al men, ceased not to gnaw and devour
this miserable murderer of his uncles. His counsel seeing their first intent
frustrate and of none effect, caused him to be carried in a boat into the
middst of a river. But these beasts not fearyng the rage of the water, assailed
the boat on every side with such rage and impetuositie, that the boatemen
defending the same in vain, understanding it to proceed of some divine fury,
were constrained to thrust the boat to land, committing the king to the mercy
of these beasts, and he seeing himself abandoned of al human succor, not
knowing what to do, he and his wife fled into a tower, where in the end by the
fury of these little creatures they received the just guerdon of their
unnatural and malicious murder. In like manner the Almain^ in all their
Chronicles and reports, make mention of the like history of one Hato.
the.xxxij. Archbishop of Magence, at what time there was a cruel famine in the
land, this Bishop or ravening Woulfe, seeing the poor people surpressed with
the gnawing rage of famine (and especially those of his province) determined (I
can not tell by what instincte of the devil) to gather together a great number
of them into a graunge, where instead of relief in this their great and
miserable dearth and hunger, he committed them to the mercy of the furious and
raging flames of fire, whereupon he being asked, why he had showed so vile and
execrable tirannie on these miserable and innocent creatures, he answered: That
he burned them, for that they differed little or nothing from Ratts, which
served for no other use than to consume corn. Albeit God (as witnesses the
Prophet, having care of the little sparow) would not suffer this great tyranny
unpunished, for immediately he stirred up an infinite number of Ratts to the
utter destruction and ruin of this vile murderer, who fleeing for his more
safegarde into a tower builte in a water, was by the express commandment of
God eaten by these ratts to the very bones, which remain at this day, enterred
in the monastery of S. Albyn, in Magence, and the Tower where this abominable
pastor ended his days, is yet in being, and is called Ratts tower. Whereof
Munster, amongst many others, makes mention in his universal Cosmographie, to
be the place where he was borne. This needs not seem strange to those which
have red histories: for Lice (which be much less than Ratts) could not be
prevented by no kind of physike or medicines, from devouring and consuming the
Emperor Arnoull, leaving him nothing but synewes and bones. In like sort, the
great Monarche Antiochus, willing to blot out of memory the name of God forth
of the ^inagoge, and bring in the worshyppyng of Idols, saw issue out of
himself a great number of worms, and thereby not only plunged in great dolor,
but also his whole army infected with the stink of that corruption which
issued from him. You may also read in the second book of the Machabees and
the.xix. chapter, of a King who being full of pride and ambition (took upon
him not only to stay the waves of the Sea, and peyse in balance great
mountains, but also thought him self able to touch the Stars of Heaven) is
now by the just judgment of God so much imbased, that there is no man able
to endure the stink and corruption of his body.

A wonder of a monstrous King, wherein is showed in what peril they be which
command, and others that have the government of the public weal. CHAP.
iiij.
ARistotle, Xenophon, Plato, and generally all those which have treated or
written of the policy of man, affirm by their writings, that there is
nothing more hard and difficulte, than to govern well or command a public
weal, for (say they) the abundance of goods and honors into the which most
Princes be customably converted, liberty to do evil without controlment,
together with the corrupt counsel of those which assist the^, be the true
matches to light them to al vices: so that if we would but diligently search in
order the discourses and histories of both kinds, we shall find the number of
evil Kings, Emperors and Monarques given to sedition and wickedness, exceed
far the proportion of such as have governed and lived well: for being once
invested with the roabes of authority, and supping the pleasant juice
distilling from the grape of Regal state, they seldom or never bridle their
affections, but suffer themselves so to be overwhelmed and fall hedlong into
the Laberynth of sundry vices. For an experience whereof we may be bold to
prefer the example of S. Paul, whose life and virtue remains of great fame by
the sacred records, until the Lord made a trial of him, by calling him to the
government of his elected people of Israel, when he fell from the path of his
ancient virtue, and became an enemy to his maker, and a contemner of his
laws. Solomon in the beginning of his reign, how wonderful was he? whose
renoume, remembrance and wisdom is spread through all the parts of the world,
and being once stalled in the theater of glory, gave himself over to the
delites of women, by which means he became deprived and void of the happy
blessing and grace of God. Calygula, Mitredates and Neron, gave not they
sufficient shows at their first entry or beginning, of much nobleness and
bounty? but the sequel and issue was such that all the earth was infected with
their detestable tyrannies and abominable cruelties: and of.xxij. Kings of
Judah there were scarcely to be found above five or six which followed the true
path of godly living and virtue: wherein who so list carefully to read the
lives of the Kings of Israel from Jeroboam the son of Naboth, until the very
last, which were in number but.xix. shall find that they were evil ministers
and husbands of the public weal. In like sort the Romans, whose common
wealth has been accounted to flourish most of all the world with good
governors, have found amongst them Augustus, Vespasian, Titus, Antonius Pius,
Antonius Verus and Alexander Seuerus: but as their lives make just declaration
of their noble and virtuous living and politic government, even so the rest as
far surmounteth them for wicked and abominable kinds of living. And if you
will behold with due regard and judgment, the lives and renoumes of the
Greeks, Assirians, Persians, Medes and Egiptians, you shall find more evil
spoken for their wickedness, than honor for their virtuous living. All which
matters be sufficiently proved and avouched by the great king Antiochus, who the
first time he was presented with the Regal scepter, and before he was therewith
crowned (as Valerius writes) he beheld it with good judgment, crying with a
loud voice, said: O Diadem more noble than fortunate, if the most part of the
Princes of the earth which by sword and fire seek to obtain thee, were as
willing to search with good advise and due regard to shun ye miseries and
calamities, which (as companions) be annexed unto thee, they would the^ scarce
vouchsafe to lift thee from the earth: and not without cause, for if any
ambicious man will measure according to right, and weigh in just balance the
delights and honors with the dangers and perils which follow the crown, he
will find for one pound of Honey, ten pounds of Wormwood, not compting the
peril incident to the poor people wherewith he is charged: for if it chance
the Prince be dysordred and of wanton life, the people most commonly frame
themselves to imitate his doings, who (as Herodianus writes) be but the badges
of Princes, and do nothing but what they see their Princes do before. Wherefore
seeing that Princes Kings and Monarques be the common fountains whereunto al men
should resort and drink, and they be theaters whereupon all the world ought to
look for pureness of life, and further serve as torches to give light to all
men walking in the dark cave of wicked doings, if these sin (as Plato says)
the example is no less hurtful to all their subjects, than to be abhorred in
themselves. Let them therefore use such regard and moderation in their doings,
with such respect to an integrity of life, that they be found perfect in the
account which they have to yield to the Lord, least he set abroche the vessel
of his anger, and rain the shoure of revenge as he did upon the miserable King
Nabuchodonosor the.iiij. King of the Babilonians, who (as Daniel witnesses in
his first chapter) felt so sharply the heavy hand and justice of God, that
he was exiled and banished from his kingdom the space of.vij. years, wandering
and living in the deserts with brute beasts, and being naked, remained in that
estate beaten not only with heat and cold, but also with hayle and dew, until
he was covered with hair like unto the Eagle, and his nails like to birds.
Here all men may see as in a glass, an example, spectacle and wonder worthy
to be noted, that he having at commandment a whole kingdom, and served as a
King with all delicat viandes, was taken into the deserts, and there fed and
banqueted with wild beasts. Yea, he which had been invested with purple and
decked with precious Jewels, was by the hand of God so much imbased, that he
was covered with no other garment than with hair, a clothing natural to all
brute beasts.

Of the bringing forth of Monsters, and the cause of their generations. CHAP.
v.
Having showed in order in these Chapiters before, how Kings, Emperors, Bishops
and Monarchs be no more exempted from the wonderful judgment of God, than the
common or vulgar sort: It rests now according to our purpose, to search and
sift those matters more near a truth, to the end we may bring to light the
horrible monsters and fearful wonders found amongst the common people. And
that the philosophy and contemplation of those things might be made more
manifest, and painted in their true colors, it is needful before we pass
any further, to declare the causes whereupon they proceed and are borne. It is
most certain, that these monstrous creatures, for the most part do proceed
of the judgment, justice, chastisement and curse of God, which suffers that
the fathers and mothers bring forth these abominations, as a horror of their
sin, sufferyng themselves to run headlong, as do brute beasts without guide
to the puddle or sink of their filthy appetites, having no respect or
regard to the age, place, time or other laws ordained of Nature, wherein S.
Gregory amongst diverse other examples taught us in his Dialogues, shows
the incontinencie and abominable desire of a Nourse, who made her self with
child, by an Infant of the age only of.ix. years: And for a proof herein, S.
Hierom affirms by oath, that there was an other infant of the age of ten
years, the which was so inflamed by the wa^ton regards and amorous
countenances of his Nourse, that she made him to lie with her, being of the age
as before, and got her with child. These be the matters that Osee cries out
of in his.ix. chapter, saying: These abominable doyngs, according to their
loves, even when they have nourssed their children, I will destroy, in such
sort that they shall never become men, yea I will plague the womb where they
took their beginning, the breasts that gave the^ suck, and dry up the very
root, that it bring forth no more fruit: and if they c^aunce to engender, I will
also commit to death the fruit of their belly. Al which is confirmed by the
prophet Esdras in his.v. Chapter, where amongst other cruel cursings, wherewith
the Angel threatened Babylon, it is expressly said: That women perfourming the
desire of the flesh being in their Sanguine menstruali, bring forth these
monsters. And although this monstrous fruit be very often a witness of the
incontinencie and sin of the parents: yet it is not always true, nor happens
in one place: for there be many fathers and mothers chaste and continent,
which bring forth their children defective, as S. John shows in his.ix.
chapter, of a poor man which was blind from his nativity, who having
received his sight by the merciful goodness and grace of Jesus Christ, was
asked of his disciples, whether his own sin, or his parents, were the cause
that he was borne blind. But Christ willing to declare to them, that they
ought not to accuse the parents for the defaultes of their children,
answered, that it was neither the sin of him, his father or mother, but to
the end to show in him the wonderful and marvelous works of God. The
ancient Philosophers amongst others, which have serched the secrets of Nature,
have declared other great causes of this wonderful and monstrous
childbearing, which Aristotle, Hypocrates, Empedocles, Galene, and Pliny, have
referred to an ardent and obstinate imagination, which the Woman has, whylest
she conceiues the child, which has such power over the fruit, that the
beams and Charrecters, continue upon the rock of the infant, whereupon they
find an infinite number of examples to prove the same, worthy of memory, the
which albeit may seem but iestes or fables, if the authority and truth of
those which write them, were not their sufficient warrant. And for a further
certainty thereof, Damascenus a grave* author does assure this to be true, that
being present with Charles, the.iiij. Emperor and king of Boeme, there was
brought to him a maid, rough and covered with hair like a bear, the which
the mother had brought forth in so hideous and deformed a shape, by having too
much regard to the picture of S. John clothed with a beasts skin, the which
was tied or made fast continually during her conception at her beds feet. By
the like means Hippocrates saved a princess accused of adultery, for that
she was delivered of a child black like an Ethiopian, her husband being of a
fair and white complexion, which by the persuasion of Hippocrates, was
absolved and pardoned, for that the child was like unto a Moore, accustomably
tied at her bed. Read of this in Genesis upon S. Hieroms questions, without
musing or being curious to bring in the testimonies of Philosophers and other
doctors, verifying the same by the authority of Moses the great prophet and
secretary of GOD in the thirtith Chapter of Genesis, where he plainly
shows, how Jacob deceived Laban his father in law, and thereby enriched
himself with his cattayle, having pilled a rod, and put the beasts to
drink, to the end the Goats and Sheep, beholding the diversity of the
colors of this rod, might bring forth their little ones, marked with sundry
several marks. Besides these causes spoken of before of the generation of
Monsters, the best learned in the secrets of Nature, have yet assigned us
others: for Empedocleus and Dephilus do attribute the same to come of the
superabundance or defaulte and corruption of the seed and womb, whereof they
prefer diverse similies by the disposition of sundry metals and other things,
which melts and yeldes with the heat of fire or sun, for if the matter or
substance which a man goes about to melt, be not well boiled, purified and
confected, or the moulde be not well cast, the image or effect of such work
will appear imperfect, hideous and deformed. The Astrologians (as Alcabitius)
have referred these monsters to the influe^ce of the stars, judging that if
the Moon be in certain degrees and conjunctions when the woman conceyueth,
her fruit shall be monstrous. Even so Julius Maternus writes, and after him very
learnedly the lawyer Alciates, upon the title and signification of these words
and matters, that sometimes these monsters be engendered of the corruption and
filthy unsavory meats, as burning coals, man's flesh, and other like
things that women desire after they have conceived, the which is very
contagious and hurtful to their fruit: whereof we have a notable example in
Leuinius Lemnius in his first book of the hidden Secrets of Nature, in a
certain Matrone of Belges great with child of two infants, who lusting to
eat the flesh of a fair boy, whom she beheld at unawares, and fearing he would
refuse her demand, being pressed without measure of that unruly appetite, fell
upon him, tearing the flesh of his hand with her teeth, and devoured the same
suddenly: Al which the infant abode in respect to satisfy her longing. And as
she returned to play the like part again, the child grieuing at her
cruelty, withstode her. Whereof being ashamed and full of despite, after she
had lived certain days in continual melancholy, she brought forth two twins,
the one alive, and the other dead. Whereupon the physicians called together, to
argue upon the cause of this child bearing, found that the denial of the
second morsel of the boys flesh was the occasion thereof. Behold in effect the
causes most frequented, touching ye bringing forth of monsters, gathered
according to the opinion of the best learned authors, both Greeks and Latins.
Resting yet over and above al those kind of artificial monsters, who be most
familiar to these vacabunds and uncertain people, traueling through al
provinces, with diverse abuses and deceiptful legerdemains, wherewith they abuse
the simplicity of the people, in getting their money. These masked pilgrims, or
rather absolute hypocrites, studying nothing but the philosophy of Satan, as
soon as their children be borne, and whilst their sinews and bones be tender
and flexible, with small force, will not stick to break their arms, crush their
legs, and puff up their belly with some artificial powder, defacing their
noses with other parts of the face: and sometime pecking out their eyes, and al
to make them appear monstrous, whereof besides the familiar examples of our
miserable time, there was great experience in Asia, in the time of Hippocrates,
as apereth in his book, de aere and locis.

The general causes of the generation of Mo^sters, with many notable Histories
touching the same. CHAP. vj.
THe Ancients of old time had these monstrous creatures in so great horror,
that if they fortuned to meet any of them by chance in their way, they judged
it to be a foreknowledge of their misfortune: and to bel^eue it ye more, the
Emperor Adryan, chancing to see a Moore at unawares, assured himself to die
immediately. The soldiers of Brutus, being ready to join battle with the
army of Octauus Caesar, having encou^tred an Ethiopian in their way,
prognosticated that they should lose the battle, which happened according to
their imagination. In like manner, the ancient Romans had these deformed
creatures in such disdain, that they straightly charged, that the misshapen,
or having any other vice upon their body, should not be received amongst the
virgins Vestales, Gellius lib. j. cap. 12.
as Fenestellus teaches in his book of the Magistrates and worthy men of
Rome. But that which is most to be marvelled at, is that God forbad Moses, not
to receive them to do sacrifice amongst his people, as you may read more at
large in the first chapter of Malachy, and the.xxj. of Leuit. Wherein S. Hierom
having fully considered these abuses, in an Epistle written to a virgin called
Demetriade, complains of those Christians which offer unto God those
children, or put them into religious houses, being crooked, lame, and deformed,
having yet a matter more strange, which Julius Obsequius, and other authors
have written of among the Roman wonders, wherein they credibly report, that
the ancient Romans had these little monstrous creatures in such abomination,
that as soon as they were borne, they were immediately committed to the river
of Tyber, there to be norished. But we being better brought up, and fostred in
a schole of more humanity, knowing them to be the creatures of GOD, suffer
them to be brought to the church, there to receive the holy sacrament of
Baptism, as may be seen in the figure of these two Maids, embracing each
other, joined together by a strange infirmity of nature, who were seen to
live in our age of many thousand persons, in form or shape such as you see
them portraicted. And to the end the history of their nativity might be the
better understood, I will declare that which Sebastian Munster writes, who
saw them, and beheld their unnatural order at large, in the year, as he
said, a thousand four hundred fourscore and.xv. and in the month of
September, A woman brought forth a monster nigh to the city of Worms, upon the
right side of the river of Rhine, in a village called Bristante, which was two
maids, having their bodies entier and knitte together by the forheade, so that
there was not any artificial or human policy to divide them asunder, as mine
author saw them at Magence, in the year.1501. and being six years of age were
constrained to go together, which was pitiful to behold: for as the one
marched forwards, the other of force reculed backwards: they rose together, and
slept together, their noses touching so nigh, that they could not turn their
eyes but one way, their forheades joining togethers, hanged over their eyes,
letting thereby the just course of their sight: and living till they were ten
years of age, the one of them died, who being separated and taken from the
other, the hurt she received in the separation from her dead sister, was the
only cause she died immediately. Behold here (says he) the cause of this
monstrous birth, two women talking together, the one of them being great with
child, there came a third woman (not knowing that either of them were with
child) and suddenly thrust their heads togithers as they talked, wherewith she
with child was astonished, whereupon grew this monstrous child bearing. And to
confirm the same to be of more troth, Cardan affirms in his books de
Subtilitate, saying: That the astoonishment was some help to tie these.ij.
infants togithers: albeit he alleged further cause of this unnatural birth.

A wonderful and horrible monster of our time, upon the discourse of whom, the
question is asked, whether Devils can engender and use the works of Nature.
CHAP. vij.
THis hideous mo^ster, whose portraict is here set out, was born in base
Pologne, in the noble city of Cracouie, in ye month of February and year of
grace.1543. or as some write) 1547. and upon the even of the conversion of S.
Paul: who although he were begotten of honorable parents, yet was he most
horrible, deformed and fearful, having his eyes of the color of fire, his
mouth and nose like to the snoute of an Ox, with an horn annexed thereunto
like the trumpe of an Elephant, all his back shagge hairde like a dog, and
in place where other men be accustomed to have breasts, he had two heads of an
Ape, having above his navel marked the eyes of a cat, and joined to his knee
and arms four heads of a dog, with a grenning and fierce countenance: the
palms of his feet and hands were like to those of an ape: and amongst the
rest, he had a tail turning up so hie, that the height thereof was half an
elle: who after he had lived four hours died, saying only: Watch, the Lord
comes. And although this creature were monstrous, yet have not sundry learned
authors failed to deck him with their pens, as Gasparus Pucerus in his
books of Teratoscopia, of Hieronymus Cardanus, of Munsterus, and amongst all
the rest very excellently written of in the Latin tongue by Gasparus Bruchius.
But albeit Egidius Facius, having made mention of this monster in his book de
Cometa, says that he can not be persuaded, that a creature so horrible and
monstrous should be begotten of a human creature, but rather of some wicked
spirit. Me seems that in searching and canuasing this matter, the most
excellent and learned Philosophers since the creation of the world, till
our time, have greatly molested and troubled them selves, in deciding the
doubts of this question, which is, Whether devils can engender, conceive, and
use the works of nature as other creatures do. Some thought they could: and
for a more testimony therein, do assure us by their writings, that Plato was
begot of a maid, by one in the likeness of Apollo, wherein the ancient
Annatists and Chroniclers, which have committed to memory the sundry acts of
Almayne, have thereby showed, that the women of the Goathes as they were
wandering by the deserts of Scythie, were got with child of Devils, whereupon
one of them brought forth a monster. And others, as Pisellus, were not content
only to say, that devils could engender, and that the most part of the
beasts of the earth were by them brought forth and engendered. Wherefore
Lactantius Firmian a grave author, whom S. Hierom before exalts, believes yt
these devils were capable of generation, and that they have engendered, as he
shows in the.x. chapter of the second book of his divine institutions.
Agrippus in every of his books, and Hieronymus Cardanus in his treatise De
rebus contra naturam, seames to have followed this opinion: and the more to
confirm his saying, he recites one history of a young damsel of Scotland
which was got with child of an enchaunting devil, thinking that he had been a
fair young man which had lain with her, whereupon she brought forth so horrible
a monster, that he feared all those which assisted her in her trauail, in such
sort that the midwife and all the rest of the sage and grave women, were
constrained inco^tine^t to cast him in the fire: the said Cardanus recites yet
an other like example, rehearsed by Thomas Liermont, of an other woman which
was got with child of a wicked sprite, and for confirmation of the matters
heretofore rehearsed, all the writers of the Cronicles of England, marvel not
so much at any thing, as at the strange nativity of the prophet Marlin, who
persuade absolutely that he was begotten of a devil: which with many other
like matters although many notable persons have assured to be things of truth,
yet truly they be altogether false, deceitful, and not only repugnant to
nature, but also to our religion, by the which we are taught to believe that
there was never any man begotten without human seed, saving ye son of God.
But as Cassianus says, what an absurdity, repugnancie and confusion would it
be to nature, if it were lawful for devils incube and succube, to conceive
men, or men to be conceived and brought forth of them: and although that
since the creation of the world, even till our time, devils have begotten
monsters through out al ma^kynd, casting therein the intrailles of beasts,
believing that by the perturbations of their seed, they have brought forth a
great number of monsters and wonders, confessing very well: (such as S.
Augustine has not denied) that these devils transforming them selves very
often into the shapes of men and women, may use the works of nature, and have
to do with women and men, for to entice and stir them to the filthy lust of
the flesh, the rather by that means to beguile and deceive them, as the
ancients heretofore have not only proved, but it is also experimented at this
day, in diverse provinces and places, that devils by transforming them into the
shapes as before is rehearsed, have to do with diverse persons: whereof James
Ruffus in his books De conceptu and generatione hominis, testifies, that in
his time there was a wicked sprite had to do by night with a common woman,
being transformed into the likeness of a man, whereupon she becam immediately
with child, which when she perceived, she fell into so strange a kind of
disease, that her intrailes fell from her belly, which could not be help or
made sound by any device of physic. He writes an other like unto this of the
servant of a butcher, who being extremely plunged in the vain cogitations of
filthy and wicked lust, and thereby astonnished, he saw incontinent before
his eyes a devil in the shape or figure of a fair woman, with whom he had to
do, and immediately his privy part and members were in such sort inflamed,
that he judged there was burning within his body a continual fire, whereof as I
have brought forth these two examples, so could I justify the same with diverse
others, written not only by Philosophers, but also by the Ecclesiastical
writers, who confess that devils by the permission of God, or rather for a
punishment of our sins, might so abuse both men and women: but to say, that
any such conjunction could engendre any such matter as we have aforesaid, that
is not only false, but altogether repugnant and contrary to our law.

And as concerning the Prophet Marlin, and many other like examples, whose
nativity has abused very many, steadfastly believing that he was begotten of a
devil, we confess therein as we have done before, that his mother might have
the company of a devil, but that she could engendre is no less unlikely than
impossible, albeit it may be presumed and believed that she was with child,
considering the authorities of diverse histories, approving therein chiefly
the legerdemaine and subtlety of the devil, to whom they allow a certain
possibility with the assistance of his Charms to make the belly swell,
troubling and corrupting the humors of the body, which women taste in the time
of child bearing, and at the instant of delivery he may so enchaunte the
eyes of the wives and company assistant, having also a strange child stolen
from some other place, to exchange for the creature new borne, that the
simple mother may also be persuaded that such conception and generation
proceeded of the devil: whereof, besides the confirmation of antiquities, we
have a familiar example remaining yet within memory and view, in a young
Damsel of Constance called Magdaleine, in service with one of the richest
magistrates of the town, who, reporting to all men in common, that the devil
one night had lain with her and gotten her with child, was by and by put in
prison by the officers, to see an effect and end of her big belly, the
painful hour whereof being come, after she was pinched with every pang,
which do happen to women in that torment, and the women in expectation to
receive the fruits of nature, her womb opened, and yielded into the hands of
the Midwife certain iron nails, thick tronchions, or ends of knotted
staves, glass, bone locks of hair, hardes of flax, hemp and stones, with
other trumperie of lothsom and hideous regard, whereof the devil by his
coniuration and other hellish art, had made an assembly in that place, to
abuse the simplicity of such as are apt to repose certainty in such vain
and deceitful charms: all which is aduouched by Licostenes Amberlachius, and
Jacob. Ruffus, a notable physician of Zurick in his book de hominis
generatione. Neither need it seem either strange or incredible to such as have
noted the epistles and records of S. Paul, where he did only change his shape
into the likeness of an Angel of light, to deceive the people, but also in
diverse places addressed himself to our savior Christ, with intent to seduce
him. But because we have better occasion to discourse at large of such
villainies in an other part of this work, where we mean to move question
whether they have bodies or no, we will end for this time, with this
resolution that albeit such wicked sprites may co^municat with the lusts and
prouocations of the flesh, yet are they both void of seed, and without mean
of generation: for that as there is no difference nor division of kind between
them, so they can not be neither man nor woman.

Sundry sorts of lightnings, with wonderful thunders and tempests happening
in our time, with the peril and harms proceeding of the same, and certain
defensible means against their fury. CHAP. viij.
WHo goes about to make particular description of the desolation and
destruction of diverse ancient and rich Cities, Theaters, Castles, towers,
piles, pillars, and churches, of sumptuous and of stately regard, overthrown
and defaced by the violence of lightenyng, thunder, and other raging fury and
tempests of the air, had need of the assistance of long time, and a large
volume to pack up such great and strange matters, which makes me leave all
antiquities and records of ancient date to a long leisure, and touch only in
this treatise such things as hapnyng amongst our selves, are also confirmed by
our own view and memory, the same being of familiar experience, may also
stir up in us speedy remorse of conscience, with a more dutiful regard and
fear of the marvelous effects of the infallible justice of god. At such time
then as the french garrison was within Milan, which according to the chronicles
was anno. 1521. the said town was so assailed with sundry strange storms of
lightning, that ye citizens dispairing of longer life, yielded to ye mercy of
God, with expectation to be presently consumed with the flame of that torment,
which amongst other places of the town, seemed to thu^der his most force upon
ye castle, wherein was kept both ye treasure of the town, munitio^, and other
furniture of war, with great store of Canon powder commonly called Gunpouder,
which, being of it self rather apt to yield to ye least spark of fire that is,
tha^ able to contend with any thing that is hot, was immediately al in a flame
by force of such flashes as came from the opening of the element, and so raged
upon the tower wherein it was laid, that in one instant it was razed and made
flat with ye earth, burning and blowing up sundry lodgings and bulwarks of the
Castle, in such sort, that what with the strength of the powder and fury of
the fire, there were forced up into the air stones of an unreasonable bigness,
whereof certain of them fell and redounded upon the.ij. chief Prouosts, whom
they bruised and burned to ashes: other brake in pieces the arms, legs, and
other parts of al such as unhappily were within their power, the same
performing such effects of mortality upon the garrison there, that of two
hundred soldiers, were scarcely (...) on live a dosen, being also of no less
marvel to behold the number of huge corner stones cast out into several
places of the city and fields therabout, the space of.v. or.vj.C. passes, of
such weight and greatness, that the strength of.xx. Oxen were scarce able to
remove them from the earth: and yet is there not such cause of wonder in these
terrible messangers and tokens of Gods wrath, as we read fell upon the late
miserable and desolate city of Malynes* parcel of the dominion of the Spanish
King, within his Duchy of Brabant, the.vij. of August.1521. about.xj. of the
clock in the night, which was afflicted with such horrible calamity that way
for the time, that the like has not ben remembered by any report, nor seen in
any age before. For the thu^der made tremble and shake in such sort this
miserable city, that the townsmen looked when the earth should open and swalow
them into her intrailes: After which fearful brute and horrible noise in the
clouds, began to appear in the bottom of the Element, a flame resembling a
burning torche, casting a stink or lothesome smell like unto sulphur and
brimstone, driving the people into such indifferent fear and amaze, that they
were neither able to take counsel of the case, and much less judge the cause
of so tragical a view, until at last the cry was through the whole town, that
the fire of heaven was fallen upon the strong tower and gate of brass, wherein
did lie.viij. or.ix. barrels of gunpouder: which immediately grew to such a
mortal confusion of all degrees of people within the walls, that the very
remembrance of so monstrous a slaughter, may move terror to any heart with
what metal of hardness soever it be stamped: for ye noise was no sooner
begoon, but the tower was converted into ashes, and the gate divided into
10000. pieces, with like fury upon ye walls next adioining, who were so thoroughly
defaced and turned up, yt the very fu^dation was disclosed, and their greatest
stones conveyed furthest from the City, their diches and pondes full of water
drained and made dry by the extreme heat of the fire: the day after were found
(according to the authority of ye chronicle) about the said tower and gate
above.400. dead bodies, besides.140. mortally wounded and almost torn in
pieces, amongst which was found a big bellied woman stricken dead, whose
womb being ripped, did yield a child on live, and after baptized, whose
picture or figure appears in the portraicte. Some had their heads taken from
their bodies, as cuningly as it had been carved with a sword or sharp axe for
the nonce: other some as they were playing at cards in a Tavern or tippling
house, were all destroyed with the lightning, and converted into cynders,
except the hostess or her maid that was gone into the cellar for wine. Amongst
such as were reserved on live in this horrible slaughter, was one man, who
hiding himself in a stony vault during the extremity of the storm, durst
not come out for any persuasion, for three days after the tempest, when he
demanded with great fear whether the world stood still or not. To conclude,
there was neither temple, chapel, nor other place of sanctuary free from the
fury of this tempest, nor any corner of the town dispensed withal for his
malice, the same raging indifferently upon the whole city, leaving it so
tottered and defaced, that if there were pain in enduring the afflictions,
there is no less cause of pity now to remember so great a desolation.
Neither is it enough for the contentment of the reader, nor sufficient to the
discharge of my intent, to prefer (as it were) paterns and familiar
experience of these monstrous quarrels (skirmishes of the air and Element above
(if in some sor^e I make you not privy to the causes and motions of the same*
Whereof for a first authority, Aristotle in his Metheors and books of the
world, gives this reason: There be.ij. sorts of vapors (says he) which
ascend continually from the earth into the air, whereof the one is hot and
moist, and withal very massy and heavy, which makes a stay of the^ in the middle
region of the air, where they are converted into a heavy thickness or gross
corruption, and in the end dissolved into watrie humors, as rain, hail,
snow, and other like: the other exhalations derived of the humors of the
earth, and drawn up by the violence of the air, be of a more dry and hot
disposition, which makes the^ lighter in weight, y^ same procuring them to a
higher Mount, even to ye uttermost regio^, where the extremity of the heat
forces them to a fiery flame, whereof proceed those blasing Cometes, dragons,
and other like wonders in the Element, which stir up an amaze in the people
being ignorant of the cause. And if it happen that those dry vapoures get
place within any cloud, they do so pierce and penetrate the most subtle part
of it, that there is forced a present vent, which is the lightning and
tremblyng of the heaven, from the vehemency of which conflict within the
clouds, do proceed the thunders and rattling of the skies, in such sort,
that it seems most often that the noise is in the air and the trembling in
the earth. And yet be not all tempests and storms of wether, referred
altogether to causes natural (albeit it be the opinion of Aristotle, and by
him very diligently serched: for that at certain times, devils and evil
spirits) (whose dominion and power (as S. Paul writes) is chiefly in the
air* do stir up and breed such monstrous motions, when God is contented to
give them that liberty, which is very well approved by diverse examples* as
well of profane as sacred record. And first of all in Job, where Satan having
obtained (as it were) a license or saufe conduict of the Lord, consumed by
tempeste and fire, the servants and cattail of the Prophet: the like being
also in experience amongst the Ethnikes, for that (according to diverse of
their records of credit) at such time as the temple of Hamon, of so great
estimation among the Lybians, flourished, Satan abused the people by many
false miracles and sleightes of slender substance, making them worship him
under the form and figure of a Belier, or by which means having heaped
together an infinite treasure, and Cambyses king of Persia, sendyng his army
to spoil it, and sack the temple: the Devil stirred up such storms and
angry motions in the Element of thunder and lightenings, that the fury and
flame thereof, consumed and smoothered above Fifty Thousand persons. Pliny
also, with diverse others of the ancients affirm, that the Hetrurians did so
curiously observe and mark the signs and motions in the Thunders, that they
did not only calculate of the success, but also gave judgment of the effect
of diverse things, and seemed able (as it were by a predestination and
forewarnyng appearing in these mystical influences of the Heavens) to
determine and appointe the very day of the death and life of sundry great
estates: for example whereof, not long before the fatal day of the Emperor
Augustus Caesar, the thunder had defaced the first letter of his name, as it
stood engraued upon a pillar within the wall, which the Augurers construed to
a speedy destruction of the emperor, and that he had but a hundred days to
live, the rather because C being taken away, there rested but Esar, which
signifies in the Hetrurian tongue God, and the Romans by the letter C, account
an hundred, so that they both agreed, that by the stroke of that thunder taking
away C, was figured the death of Caesar, and that within the hundredth day he
should be with the Gods. Which chanced accordingly, for that the day of his
death agreed with the sentence of their prediction. A thing sure of great
wonder, the rather for that therein appears a marvelous power and subtlety
of the Devil, who by his Art seems to discover, and prognosticate the
death of so great an Emperor. Aristotle, with diverse others of exquisite
skill in the study and revelation of such mysteries, have divided the
effects and operations of those Lightenings and Thunders into three degrees:
the one burns and consumes all that comes within his power: the other
scorcheth and makes black every thing it touches: the third exceeds them
all in nature and quality, and is almost utterly unknown to all the
Philosophers, for that it drayneth and dries up the Wine or other lycour,
without hurtyng the vessel, or gyuyng it any vent, how close so ever it be,
it is of such subtle force that it pierces thorough every thing: it melts
Gold and Silver in the bag without hurtyng the pursse: it burns and
consumes the apparel, without touch of harm to any part of the body that
wears them: it smoothereth also the child unborn within the womb, without
doing harm to the mother: whereof the chiefest reason we have of Record, is
brought in by Cardanus, in his first Book de Subtilitate, and his fourth
book de Varietate rerum, wherein are described at large certain causes and
occasions of those things.

And touching the examples I have alleged, albeit they seem strange and
wonderful for the effect of Thunder, yet are they of undoubted truth. Besides
we have read and also seen in our time many valiant men put in fear with
Thunder, and diverse great personages broken in pieces, murdered and slain by
such kind of death. The Pope Alexander, celebratyng his Mass on Easter day at
Syenna, and the devil belyke pronouncing the passion, or rather communicatyng
with his Papisticall ceremonies, as he was upon this word or clause of
Consumatum est, behold such a sudden noise in the clouds, and opening of
the Element, began to houer and pierce into the Temple, with such terror,
that the Pope being driven to take day in perfourmyng the residue of his
prayers, habandoned the Church, left his book vnshutte for haste, and
forsook his Cope and surplesse to make him self lyghter to flee away, the
same being also done by his Cardinals, and every other assistant. Zoroastes,
king of the Bractiens, was killed by the fury of a Tempest. Capanus by like
means dyed at the war of Thebes, the emperor Anastasius, after he had
reigned.27. years, did end his days by semblable stroke, like as also Carius,
and diverse other Emperors were subject and consumed by the like force. Marcus
Claudius Praetor was burned within his ship by the thunder that fell upon it.
Julius Obsequens recites a wonderful example (as here under appears) in the
stock of Pompeius Liuius, a Romain knight, who returning with his daughter
from certain plays which had been performed at Rome, saw his daughter being
on horsbacke suddenly smothered and stricken to death with thunder and
lightning, and making her be turned naked to the view of all men, saw her
tongue come forth at her secret parts, as if the fire had entered in at her
mouth, and forced a vent for it self below: which shall suffice for this time
both for examples and causes of these terrible motions of the Elame^t: and let
us now make the ignorant sort privy to some principal means to deliver and
defend them selves from such furies. The Ancients amongst their secret
experiences, have made prouf of diverse things resisting both thunder and
lightnings, as amongst the foul and flying Creatures certain feathers of an
Eagle, but chiefly such as she bears in her panche are ready defenses against
the blast or bolte of thunder. Pliny and other writers more familiar,
describing the disposition of diverse great fishes affirm diverse to have been
saved from the violence of lightning and thunder, by wearing a girdle made of
the skin of a Seacalf. The Laurel or bay leaf amongst trees, has his
privilege of special defense against such assaults, for which respect the
ancients have used to plant it as an assured porter of sauetie at the entry
or door of their houses. Augustus Caesar was always crowned with it: vsinge
also to carry certain branches in his hand, for continual fear he had of
that fury. Albeit certain Latins write, that since his time, one wearing
Laurel was stricken with thunder at Rome, which they put amongst their
wonders or matters of admiration. Tarcon Etruscus witnesses that by a certain
secret property the white vine defendes from the thunder, affirming that for
the same cause in diverse countries subject to such terrible effects, men use
to enuiro^ their houses with the branches and bows of the same: and yet are
not all these in deed of such virtue against such fury of the heavens as the
true Hiacinthe, which according to the opinion of Serapio and other old
physicians, is of force not only to defend men from peril that way, but
also gives assurance by diverse proves that the Wax stamped or graued with the
same, withstandes the thunder: which they agree to have been proved in the
countries where many perished by such accident, seeing that no man has ever
been touched which has carried the true stone called Hiacynthe. And now to put
to the last seal to our beadroll of these injuries and angry influences of
the heavens, I have to prefer certain monstrouse stones falling from the
Element, of the color of iron, singed and burned, not much unlike that which
the Auncientes affirm to fall in Thracia, being by estimation of the
thickness of a chariot, whereof the great Philosopher Anaxagoras
prognosticated many years before. Besides, within our age and memory, and
also in a country sufficiently known to sundry trauailers. I mean in
Sugolye confynyng upon the borders of Hungary, the seventh day of September
in the year a Thousand five hundred and fourtene, in a horrible clappe of
Thunder and lightenyng, there fell down from Heaven, a huge Stone, of the
weight of two hundredth and fifty pounds, the which the Citizens have made
fast with a great chain of iron within their Temple, using to show it, as a
thing of great wonder to strangers visityng their province in sort of
perigrination. And to make an end, Cardanus in his fourth book De varietate
rerum, says that he has seen in a field in Italy, a number of hard stones
of the color of iron, castyng a smell of Sulphur fallen out of the Air,
whereof some of them weighed a Hundred and twentye pound the piece, and others
three score, the which being showed to the French King (as a thing of great
wonder) in his Royal voyage to Naples, put him into a great marvel how the
Heavens could sustain so great a waighte the space of two hours, seeing
that the noise ceased not, nor the flames to flashe out of the Sky from
three of the clock until five, when the fall of the stones appeased the brute
and horrible Rumbling which was in the Air.

A wonderful History of a man in our time, which washed his face and hands
in skalding Lead. CHAP. ix.
HIeronymus Cardanus writes a wonderful History in his sixth book De
subtilitate, as I might say, repugnant to nature, saving that the same was
done in the presence and sight of the whole company of a City, which makes
it of more faith and credit. When (says he) I wrote my works of subtle
inventions, I saw a certain man at Millan which washte his face and hands
with skalding lead, having washte them before with some other water: wherefore
Cardanus, (as he was accustomed with great diligence enforcing himself to
search and try out that secret in nature) was of opinion y^ of necessity it
must be, yt ye water wherewith he first washed was extreme cold, and withal,
had a certain obscure and hidden virtue, the which did with stand the heat
of the lead, not suffering ye same to cleave or stick to his body: and some
(says he) affirm that the water wherein he washed, was made of the sap of
Pourpie and Mercuriall, for because of the sliminesse and lightness thereof,
which to me seems not to be true, for that he used the same water very often
to wash his whole body, putting but a little on the place where he poured the
hoate lead, taking a crown for the sight thereof, of all such as came to see
his doing therein. And surely if ye water had been made of these two herbs,
which be of small estimation, in respect of such goodness and virtue, he
would have cast a far more quantity on his body than he did. But to
conclude it, is thought that the water which he used was metical as that of
Stybium. Co^ferring ye particularities thereof with ye saying of Carda^ and
other authors which I have read, I find that in times passed, these doings
were not had in so great admiration as they be at this day, seeing we see by
common experience, that there be diverse things which of nature have not only
power to resist the force of fire, but also will not be consumed thereof, as
the poulse of Pirrhus, which when his body was broiled, it could not be
consumed by the fire, men's teeth and the diamont cannot be executed by fire.
And there springs a certain gum of the Pine male, the which as Theophrastus
writes, being rubbed upon the tables of woodde, defendes them from the force
of the fire, whereof there was sufficient proof made by Silla with his army
brought against Archelaus, who having environed on all sides a tower of woodde
of the said Archelaus with the burning flames of fire, was not thereby hable to
endomage the same, which Silla much marvelled at. Isidorus and many others
writes that there was brought into the presence of Pope Alexander a white
linen shirte, the which for pleasure and admiration, he caused to be cast
into the fire, at such time as the strange Ambassadors came to see him,
sometimes leaving the said shirte in the fire the space of a day, without any
hurt to it, but that the same taken from the fire, was become thereby more
fairer: whereof some affirm, that the cloth of this shirte was made of the
worm, Silemander, a worm living in the fire.
which men name Salemander, who (as Aristotle teaches) lives in the fire, but
whether it be true or no, I leave that to the judgment of those which have
waded further in searching the hid mysteries and secrets of nature, than I.
Albeit I know that S. Augustine has made mention in his.xxj. book, named the
City of God, in the.v. chapter, of a Lamp, which was in the Temple of Venus,
the which although it were exposed and brought into the wind, A Lamp burning
without the aid of oil or match.
rain or other weather coming from heaven, yet it burned with so much the
more efficacy, without consuming, having neither aid of oil or match. But
after the said S. Augustine had by diligent search, sought the marvelous
cause of that fire, which did not consume, he resolved in the end in this
sort, either it must be (says he) that there is in the said Lamp some
piece of the stone called Abseste, growing in Arcadie, the which being lighted,
cannot be quenched, or it must be (says he) that the same Lamp was forged by
magical art, or else that this wonder was devised by some devil under the name
of Venus, to the end not only thereby to make him self worshipped, but still
to keep and entertain the people in the same error, whereof, as Ludouicus
Viues upon the exposition of the same chapter, which has heretofore added
learned commentes to S. Augustins books De ciuitate Dei, affirms in the same
to have seen in the time of his study at Paris, matches which the fire could
not consume. And for a more proof thereof, it has been told and recounted in
the time of our fathers yt there was opened a sepulcher enclosed in the earth,
wherein was found a burning La^pe, which had remained light without going out
y^ space of four or v. hundredth years (as it appeared by inscription or
authority of time, ingraued upon the stone) the same, dissoluing into powder
as soon as it was toutched, which I could confirm by diverse like examples and
authorities of proof, as well ancient as familiar, who have left sundry
experiences of diverse things of virtue and force able to resist the fire, like
as who dippes or rubbes his hands in the juice of Mauue or Mercurial, shall
never be endomaged with the fury of any flame or fire.

Wonderful Histories of the Jews. CHAP. x.
THis wicked sect of the Jews has from time to time so much disquieted and
molested our Christian public weal, that the Historians of our time have
attainted the^ in their writing of sondrie misdemeanors and abuses in living,
that whosoever shall read their cruel blasphemies and abominable execrations
which they continually publishe and set forth against Jesus Christ the Savior
of all the world, in a certain book common in their Sinagoges) which they
call Talmud, will judge the same a cause sufficient, to exile and abandon them
out of all the Provinces and places where Christ is to be honored. For like as
these poor people blinded and led in the mist of error, have not only gone
about to defame the name of our Savior by their writings, but also that which
is worse, they have most shamefully travailed to extirpe and blot out the
remembrance of him for ever. Even so in the year a thousand, a hundred and
four score, and in the reign of king Philip, these wicked people in the
despite of the passion of Jesus Christ, upon good Friday, when they judged
that the Christians were most occupied in celebrating that day, they enclosed
them selves yearly in a cave, where having stolen a young child, they whipte
him, crounyng him with thorns, making him to drink gall, and in the end
crucified him upon a cross, continuing in this sort of cruel doings, till the
Lord grudging greatly with the death of so many poor innocents, suffered them
as thieues to be taken with the deed, and after he had caused them to be
examined and tormented for the same, they confessed that they had used this
many years before, murdring a great number of infantes in this sort, whereof
king Philip being ascertained, caused them not only to be chased from his
realm, but also broiled of them, to the number of.lxxx. in a hot burning
caudron. After that king Philip seeing him self oppressed with wars, and
wantyng money to maintain the same, for a better supply of his necessity, he
(for a sum of money paid to him in hand by the said Jews, for their
outrageous living) licenced them to return and trauail into France. But even as
vices be chained together, drawing one another, so these wicked people yet
smellyng of this first injury which they had received, determined and fully
resolved amongst them selves, to extirp at one instant the name of Christians,
destroying the^ all by poison: And for a further help in these their wicked
practices, they allied them selves in consorte with diverse Lepres, by whose
succoures and means they made an ointment, with a confection of the blood of
man's urine composed with certain venomous herbs, wrapped within a little
lynnen cloth, tying a stone to the same to make it sink to the bottom: they
nightly cast in the said infection into all the fountains and wells of the
Christians. Whereupon this corruption engendered such co^tagious diseases in all
Europe, A great infection thro^ghout all Europe by reason the water in their
wells was ympoysoned.
that there died well nigh the third person throughout the same: for this
plague passing suddenly from city to city, by the contagiousnesse thereof
destroyed and smoothered al things bearing life, encountering it. But after the
Lord had suffered to reign for a time, the tyranny of these wicked and evil
disposed persons, he stopped so their cruel enterprises, that they passed no
further therein. And like as in time diverse of those wells and fountains became
dry, by which means the impoisoned bags were found in the bottom of the
water: Even so by conjecture and suspicion, diverse of these malefactors were
apprehended: and being grievously tormented, confessed the fact, whereupon grew
such sharp and severe punishment, as well to all the Jews, as Lepres, thorough
out all the province of Europe, being found culpable thereof, that their
posterities smell thereof til this day: for they having proved so many kinds of
torments and martirdoms, that upon their imprisonments, they had greater desire
to kill and broile one an other, than become subject to the mercy of the
Christians. And as Conradus of Memdember, of equal fame in the study of
Philosophy and arts Mathematical writes, that there died in Almayn for this
cause above xij. thousand Jews. Wherefore as it was strange to behold their
afflictions: Even so it was as extreme to see the poor Christians have in
horror and abomination the water of their wells and fountains, that they
rather choosed to die of the drought, than to receive any drop thereof into
their bodies, but having recourse to rain water, or to rivers, whereof they had
greater want than any store or plenty at all, finding not at al times to serve
their turns, they prevented sundry times the peril of the poison. And as
these false deceivers were of all nations much detested, so they often times
proved diverse kinds of calamities (as the Historians testify:) the same
Co^radus Licostenes amongst others, recites a strange device hapening in the
year.434. about which time he found by fortune in the Isle of Cre^e, a seducer
and false prophet, or rather a wicked spirit* as they might conjecture by the
issue of his enterprises. This prophet preched openly through all the Isle, that
he was the same Moses which brought the Israelites from the servitude of
Pharao, and that he was sent again from God to deliver the Jews from the
bondage and servitude of the Christians: wherein having thus planted the roots
of his pestilent doctrine, he thereby won the people by false miracles and
other diabolical illusions, that they began to forsake their houses, lands,
possessions, and all the goods they had, to follow him, in such sort, that they
found no other matter in that country, but a great troop of Jews,
accompanied with their wives and children, which followed this holy man as their
chief. And after he had well led the^ in this miserable error, he made them
mount in the end to the height of a rock, joining to the sea, and there told
them, that he would make the^ pass through the sea on foot, as he had tofore
brought the people of God thorough the floude of Iordain, which he colored so
finely by his deceyuable art, that he persuaded them very easily, and in such
sort, that the pore people gathered together on a heap, did cast them selves
headlongs into the sea. Whereby the greatest part of them were drowned, and
the rest saved by certain christen Fishermen, which were then in the sea.
Whereof the Jews perceiving the great deceit whereby he had abused them,
could not by any human Art hear any news, nor discover where was become
their prophet, which gave occasion to many of them, not only to think, but
also write, that he was a Devil under the shape and figure of a man, which had
so deceived them. Sebastian Mu^ster writes in his book of universal
Cosmographie an other history of them set out in a more gay and brave fashion,
saying: That in the year of health.1270. when the County of Steruembergh was
bishop of Mandeburgh, one of the chief Priests of the Synagoges of the Jews,
fell by chance upon their Saboth day into a deep Iakes, out of which he
could not get, and thereby constrained to call for the aid of his companions,
who being arrived, said unto him with grievous complaints, that it was their
Saboth day, and that it was not lawful for them as that day to yield him the
benefit of their hands, but willing him to use patience til the next day
following, which was sunday. The bishop of Mandeburgh advertised of this, being
a very wise man, gave commandment to the Jews by the sound of a Trumpet,
that upon pain of death they should from henceforth keep holy and solemnise as
their Saboth day the Sunday. By means whereof, this poor martyr remained
parfumed till the Monday.

Floudes and wonderful Inundations of Waters. CHAP. xj.
THe antiquities of forain times have sufficiently proved the horrible rage of
waters, that if I should go about to declare them in order, I should rather
want Eloquence to describe them, than matter whereupon to entreat. The first
and most worthy of memory, is sufficiently showed by Moses, in the.vij.
chapter of the book of Genesis, at what time God opened the veins of heaven,
and sent down such abundance of water upon all the earth for the purifying and
clensyng of the sins of men, that the same ouerflowed the highest mountains
above.xv. cubits. And in the reign of king Henry the fourth, the waters raged
with such impetuositie within the provinces of Italy, that there was not
only thereby drowned many thousand men, but that which was more strange (as
the Historians make mention) the tame and household beasts, as hens, geese,
Pehens, and such like, were by the terror thereof so frighted, that they became
savage, wa^dring in the deserts and forests, and never after to be reclaimed.
Whereof S. Augustine in the third book called, the City of God, makes mention,
that in the year of health 1446. and on the.xvij. day of April, in the time of
Federike the.iij. Emperor, at what time printing was first found out) there
was in Hollande, so great an inundation of water, and the sea ouerflowed the
banks with such fury, that it brake the causeys running behind Dordrech,
covering all the land, as well cities as villages, in such sort that there were
drouned not only xvj. parishes, but also.100000. men with their wives,
children, and beasts. And in ye year 1530. in Hollande, Flaunders, and
Brabant, the sea so swelled, that it brake not only bulwarks and rampires, but
also violently carried away both cities and villages together with the creatures
in them: and bisides made all the haven towns no less nauigable, than the
open and main sea: which not only chanced in Flaunders, but also the same
year the river of Tyber so flowed in Rome, that it mounted above the highest
towers and estages of the city, and withal not only breaking down the bridges,
but endamaging their goods, as gold, silver, corn, wine, cloth of silk,
flower, oils woull, and other riches, to the value of three millions of gold,
bisides the loss of three thousand persons, as well men as women and little
children, which were thereby smoothered and drouned. Wherein as all these
matters were marvelous: so the auncientes and writers at this day, have not
made proof of one more strange since the universal flood of Noe, than this
which chanced in Phrygia, in the year of grace.1230. For even as when they
thought them selves most happy, and were banketting, drinkyng, and giving them
selves over to all kinds of pleasure, behold all the land, nigh to the sea
of Phrygia and Halderich, were in one moment so covered with water, and the sea
so peopled with men and beasts, crying with pitiful vehemency, that it
seemed by them, that God had forgotten his vow made to Noe, wherein he
promised never to destroy mankind by water again. Albeit the rage was so
cruel that men were forced to climb trees like birds, others ramped upon the
mountains, the mothers cast their children upon the ground, to the end they
might with more speed flee and shun the fury of the element. And to be
short, the desolation was such, that there was not only an infinite multitude
of men, women, children, and beasts drowned: but that which was more to be
lamented, the corruption which sprang of the putrified bodies, after the waters
were retired to their old chanel, so infected the air with a sudden plague,
that the rest which were saved from drownyng, were destroyed by the miserable
infection thereof, in such sort that the Province remained almost deserte and
inhabitable. Wherein who list to behold Floods more fresh in memory,
wherewith other Cities have been tormented, let him read Carrion in the
Abridgement of his Chronicles, and all those of Gasparde Contarenus, in his
learned book of Philosophy, which he made of the four Elements.

The wonderful death of Pliny, with a brief description of the causes of
fire, which come of certain openyngs of the earth.
LIke as it is strange that the fire falling from heaven should burn those
places which it touches: Even so it is more monstrous to see the same issue
from the earth, without knowing where it first took her nouriture, beginning
and birth, as this, whereof Titus Liuius and Orseus make mention, which sprang
of the intrailes of the earth, in the territory of Calene, which ceased not
burning by the space of three days and three nights, until it had committed
to cinders about five acres of ground, drying so much the moisture and humor
of the ground, that not only the Corn and other fruits, but also the trees
with all their roots were burnte and consumed. Diverse Historians write, that
in the old time the most part of the Realm of Scotland was by the like
violente irruption of fire springing from an unknown opening and cave of the
earth, quite consumed and burned. The cause whereof, the Philosophers have
searched with great diligence, and in the end found that Sulphur, Allom,
Pitche and Water be the cause of the entertaining of that fire, together with
the very fatness of the ground, and that fire after it has found a vente,
can not long continue without issuing with a wonderful violent force. And for
the most part these flames have been diverse times seen of the people (with
great wonder and terror to them) commonly about the Sepulchers and
Churchyardes, and other fat and moist places, which was engendered of the
fertility and moistness of the dead bodies, who were there buried: for men
amongst all other creatures, be of a very subtle and fat substance, as is
plainly showed by that which is discovered in our time of the Sepulcher of
Alexander Duke of Florence, which, although it were made of white Marble both
massy and heavy, yet notwithstanding, the fatness of ye body pierced and
distilled through the said Sepulcher, piercing the bottom of the pillours
thereof. In like manner the moisture of the body of Alphonsus Aualus, albeit
the Physicians had dried the same with salt and sand, and inwrapped his body
in lea^de, yet the fatness thereof spotted and spoiled not only the stones
above the Tomb, but dropped through every part of the lead. And there is
also a mountain called Hecla in the Isle of Islande, whereof one George
Agricola, a man amongst others of our time worthy of memory, has made
mention reporting the same to cast such flames, and making so great a a noise,
that it seems to be made, the same casting and darting great stones and
withal vomitteth Sulphur, smothering, as in a gulphe, all those which approach
to behold the nature of that fire: whereby the common people of that cuntrie
be brought in such an error, that they believe that place to be ye prison of
the damned. Besides also many Historia^s write, that there appeared in that
place visions, which show themselves visible, and make their service to men:
they appear for the most part in the shape and figure of those which by some
violent adventure have been either killed or drowned: and when those which they
know makes their return to their houses, they answer them with marvelous
complaint and weepingins, willing them to return to the mount Hecla, and so
suddenly pass and vanishe away. But for my part, I have always thought, that
they be certain disciples of the devil, which have vowed them obedience in
that place, to deceive the people, being by nature of a Barbarous and gross
capacity: whereof, as we have declared before yt the cause of these hideous
and pepetuall flames is natural, so it also comes of the fertility of the
ground, together with the plenty of Sulphur wherewith the merchants load so
many ships, carrying them into strange countries. And moreover, the fatness
of the ground of this Islande, as the Ancients and Historians at these days
write, is such (and especially in the low country) that they are constrained
to feed their cattle but a small time, least they should surfeit of the
sweetness thereof, and so die, as is daily proved. Neither let us muse or be
to curious in searching the cause of these flames of the mountains so far
from us, for we have the mount Vesuue near to Naples, whereof Martial,
Strabo, and Xiphilnius in the life of Seuerus the Emperor have very often in
their writing made mention to be in times pastmost fertile, is now by the
continual embracements of the fire utterly ruinous and consumed, and in the
time of Titus Caesar, it cast forth such plenty of fire, that it burned two
Cities, and the smoke thereof rose so thick and high, that it had welnigh
darkened the Sun, making the days like to the night, and all the fields
thereabouts were so full of cinders, that they seemed in heighte equal with
the trees. Wherein Pliny (who reigned in the time of Vespasian the Emperor)
desiring to know the cause of the continual burning of this mountain, went
to see it, and approaching too near the same, was at the sight thereof so
astonished, that he was immediately surprised with the flame, and his body
thereby committed to ashes, as you may behold in the pourtraite before: and
that which is yet fresh in memory, in the year 1538. where it began again to
make so great an irruption, that it feared all the people bordering upon it. We
can in like manner bring in amongst these wonderful mountayns, the mount Aetna,
otherwise called the mount Gibell, in Sicile, whereof S. Augustine has made so
often mention in his works, and which Strabo witnesses, as one that has not
feared to mount to the very heighte to behold and consider the marvelous
effects thereof, whereof Sueton affirms, that Caius Caesar, Caligula Emperor of
the Romans, having beheld this great store of fire, that the mount vomited
forth, was therewith so feared, that he fled by night to Messane, and not
without cause, for after the winds had gotten within the events of this
mountain, it darted forth mighty stones, and great flakes of burning fire,
which consumed all things it encountered. Thucidide makes mention of three
notable embracementes of this mount Aetna, which was after the Greeks had
gotten to Sicile. And Orose recites, that in the time that Marcus Aemilius and
Lucius Oresteus were Consules, the same mount suddenly threw out such a
quantity of flames of sulphur, that all the country theraboutes was
destroyed: by means whereof, the Romans remitted the ordinary tribute which
they received of those of Casine for the space of ten years. And the men at
those days thought that the matter wherewith the fire was nourished, was quite
consumed, for that ye same ceased for a time: but in the year.1570. they very
well proved the contrary: for as they were astoonished at the great mass of
fire, with the light darkened. Even so that light of the sulphur fell from the
height of the said mountain to the lowest part thereof, the which by a certain
coldenesse could not be so well governed, but that running here and there, it
burned not only fields, stones, forrestes, but also two villages, and all that
it encountered, and the fire being at this time extinguished, the ground by
that means brings forth much good fruit, and withal is become fertile.

Wonders of certain horrible earthquakes, chancing in diverse provinces, with a
deceit of Satan, who by his craft and subtlety made a Roman Knighte to
throw him self headlong into a gulf. CHAP. xiij.
THe Histories and years of Romans, Greeks, Parthains, Medians, Persians,
and others like, have so often made mention of the ruinous chance of many
Cities and Provinces, by the trembling of the earth, that I could bring to
memory, very near the number of five hundredth greatly renowned, which
perished and were destroyed by this kind of torment, as Epheseus, Magnesus,
Sardos, Cesaree, Philadelphius, Mirimneus, Apolonius, Nicomedius, Antiocheus
and many others, in such sort, that in one night in the time of Tibereus the
Emperor under whom ye savior of the world was crucified, twelve of the most
proud Cities of Asia were made ruinous in one night by the sudden trembling of
the earth, as Plinius and Cornelius write. In like sort at what time Flaminius
warred against Hanibal, and as their hosts were ready to join battle ye one
against the other, the earth began so vehemently to euente and shake, that many
of the strongest parts of the Cities, and diverse of the highest mountains
were battred and made flat with the earth: and yet (as says Titus Liuius)
these two armies were so enraged the one against the other, that they forbear
not to continue their fury, making no account of these wonders: whereof who
lists to read Dion Niceus and Xiphilinus, in the life of Anthony the
Emperor, shall find so strange earthquakes happening in Hellespont and
Bithinie, that it cannot seem otherwise, but yt those provinces should be
devoured and swallowed up. The Isle of the Rhodes so much renoumed by writings,
has been very often decayed by earthquakes, in so much that the great Idol and
Image of the Sun, which shone so greatly in Rhodes, made by Chares Lindius
scholar of Lisippus, when he was twelve years of age, the which was in heyghte
three score and six cubits, was defaced and broken by trembling of the earth,
the.lv. year after the setting up thereof, which was once again laid on the
earth in the time of Pliny, to the great marvel of those which went to see it,
in such sort that the very thombe of that Image, surpasses in bigness ye
greatest Image which they could find, and the riches of that Image was so
marvelous, that when the Soudan of Egipte invaded Rhodes, he loaded with the
fragmentes and relics of Brass of that Image which he found battred, nine
hundredth Camels, which he sent by land into Alexandria. And moreover Josephus
in his first book of the wars of the Jews, makes mention of an earthquake
which chanced in Iudee, by the violence whereof there was killed a thousand
men, wherein as the Ancients under the government of Eudoxius, willing to
celebrate a second Council at Nice, to undo the articles agreed upon by ye
general council, were suddenly stonished even when their Bishops and Prelates
were assembled, with the sudden moving and shaking of the City of Nice,
wherein many building sounke, and many thousands of men were devoured and
choked, who perceiving that god was not co^tente with their enterprise, were
forced to desiste from their purpose, and return to their Provinces, (as
Fuctius writes.) Also in the year.1345. and the day of the conversion of S.
Paul, was so horrible an earthquake in Venise (as Sabellique writes) that by
ye space of five days together, they saw no other thing but houses and
building decay, and besides that, all the women being with child during that
time, were delivered before their times, and their fruit lost. But to the end
we should not consume much time in committing to memory the hurtes received in
ye old time by those shakings of ye earth, we have in our age proved ye like
in ye year of our Savior.1538. the.xxvj. day of January, where the Realm of
Portugal was so shaked, by the thrusting together of ye earth, yt there fell at
Lisbone (as the writers at this day report) very near a thousand or.xij.
hundredth buildings, besides more than.ij. hundredth others which where half
decayed, and that torment continuing.viij. days, ye assaults thereof
renewed.v or.vj. times a day, by means whereof al ye poor inahbitants were so
frighted, yt they aba^doned their houses and lodged in ye fields. Titus Liuius
in his vij. book and.j. decade, Oroseus in his.ij. book and.v. chap. Julius
Obsequens, Polidorus Virgilius and many others, have made mention of a strange
earthquake in Rome, which me seames worthy of memory in this place for the
novelty of an act so strangely happening. They write that in the time of
Seruilius Hala, and Lutius Genutius being Consulles, the City of Rome was
besieged with a sudden shaking of the earth, which being ceased, left a
certain cave or depth in the midst of a place of the City, which by no means
could be closed or shut up with all the earth or other matter they could
cast into it besides: there issued out thereof such a stink of diverse
pestilent and infectiue vapors, that the most part of the Citizens of the
City were therewith infected: and after they had searched all the means they
could to remedy their evil, they determined (as their last refuge) to
demand council therein of their divines and soothsaiers, who after they had
done to them their accustomed ceremonies, they answered that it was not
possible by any artificial means to close it up, unless the most precious
Jewel in all the City were cast into it: wherefore, after that the Ladies
and other Romain Citizens had liberally cast into it the most precious
Jewels that they had in their closets, without profiting or appeasing the fury
of that gulphe, Marcus Curtius an excellent and valiante Romain Knight, armed
at all points, and mounted upon the best horse in his stable, cast himself
headlong into that depth, the which immediately closed up, and so ceased to
rage. So much is the deceit of the devil in this world, that men thinking to do
sacrifice to their Gods, to deliver their country from captivity, make their
souls a willing sacrifice to the devil. Wherewith ending these earthquakes, it
rests now to show y^ causes of their beginning. Aristotle, Pliny, and
generally all those who have treated of the motion of the earth, attribute the
causes of that evil fortune to the vapors and exhalations which be enclosed in
ye intrailles of ye earth, by whose force searching to euente and to come
forth, the earth is moved and stirred, which is of power in some places to
dissunder strong walls and buyldyngs, and make them fall into the earth: and
in some place it leaves a hollow hole or cave, like to that in Rome, whereof
we made mention: sometimes these fires issue before any assault or warning
given, where diverse times at the very same instant, may be heard an horrible
sound and murmr, like to the mutterings or clamors of men, according to the
quantity of the matter which is shaken, or the forume of the cave by the which
the vapor passes, leauyng sometimes a cave which shows the thing swallowed:
and sometimes the earth is made so firm suddenly, that they can find no token
thereof, and at other times deuoureth whole villages, swallowyng sometimes the
most part of a country. And that which is to be noted, these earthquakes
happen for the most part, rather in the Spring time, and in Autumn, than in
any other season of the year.

Wonders of two bodies knitte togethers, like two graftes in the tronke of a
tree, whereof S. Augustine in a book of the City of God makes mention. CHAP.
xiiij.
Such need not to be astonnied at all of the figure of this monster, which
have read the eight Chapter of S. Augustine, in his.xvj. book written of the
City of God, where a little before his time was borne an infant in the east
parties, which was double above, and single below, having two heads, two
breasts, four hands, and the rest of the body in the shape of one, that is
to say, two thighs, two feet, one belly, and the rest from the navel
downewarde, had not but the figure of one man (as he witnesses in a place
before) and living so, many went to see it for the renoume and fame thereof.
And that whereof also I thought somewhat to speak, for that this whose portraict
is presented, is like unto that which S. Augustine writes of, saving that
that had the figure of a man, and this the form of a woman, who was engendered
upon the confines of Normandy, and England, at what time Henry the third
there reigned. Whereof, if you will well consider, you shall find the same to
be a strange spectacle in Nature: for behold, these two bodies were knit
together from the top of their heads to their navel, like.ij. graftes in the
trunk of a tree, having two heads, two mouths, two noses, with their faces
fair, well formed and made in every point requisite in nature even to the
nauel, and from the nauel downwardes, it had but the figure and shape of one
only, that is to say, two legs, two thighs, one nature, and one only conduict
whereby the excrements were discharged. And that which was more pitiful, is
that they differed in all the actions of nature: for sometimes when the one
wept, the other laughed, if the one talked, the other held her peace, as the
one eat, the other drank: Living thus a long season, till one of them died,
the other being constrained to traile the dead body after her for certain
years after, where by the stink and corruption of her who was dead, in the
end she was infected, and died also. The Authors of this be Cuylerinus,
Mattheus Palmerius, Vincentius in his.xxvj. book and xxxviij. Chapter.
Hieronymus Cardan, an excellent Millanois Physician, searching greatly the
secrets of Nature, which at this day is living, affirms in his.xiiij. book
of his books of diverse histories, that in the year.1544. and in the month of
January, the like monster was engendered in Italy, which he describes in
points like unto this, and the mother brought it forth in the end of the.ix.
month, very well formed in all respects, and withal corpulente,
notwithstanding it died immediately after the mother was brought to bed, by
means that the sage women had used to much force and violence in taking the
same from the body of the mother. And further he describes afterward a thing
worthy to be noted: which is, that there was a surgion named Gabriel Cuneus,
a man very expert in his art, who heretofore had been his disciple, made an
Anatomy of this monstrous maid, committing her into pieces: and after he had
opened the interior parts, he found a double womb, all the intestines
double, saving that which they call rectu^, bisides he found two livers, and so
almost all the other parts, reserving the heart, which was single: the which
moves us to think (says Cardan) that Nature would have created two, saving
that by some defecte she imperfected the whole.

A History of a Monster, whereof S. Hierome makes mention, who appeared to S.
Anthony in the deserte. CHAP. xv.
SAint Hierom, Licostenes, and Isidorus make mention of a monster, who upon a
sudden appeared to S. Anthony, whilst he did penance in the desert, having
(as it is written) the form of a man, his nose hideous and hauked, two horns
on his head, and his feet like to a goat, according to his figure appearing
in this portraict, whereof that holy man being afraid to behold so wonderful a
creature in the desert, he coniured him in the name of God to tell him what he
was, who answered him, I am a mortal man as thou art, appointed to dwell in
this wilderness, which the common people (deceived) are persuaded to be one of
these hurtful Satyrs, wandering by the deserts, or else some enchaunting
devil: whereof also the holy man S. Augustine in his first book and third
question of Genesis makes mention, in that he reports so diversely of certain
devils (hurtful specially to women) that it is neither easy nor seeming to
pronounce a resolution, albeit in the.xxv. chapter and.xv. book of the city
of God, he speaks more frankly, affirming by the authority of scripture,
that angels have appeared to certain men with mortal shape, and have not only
been seen of them, but suffered them selves to be touched by such as they have
appeared unto. Bysides there be many of opinion now a days by report of others,
and thousands who have proved it true by experien^e in themselves, that there
be certain impes and gliding spirits in the woods and savage places, which the
common sort call Nymphs, who desire the company of women, and have had to do
with them, deliting chiefly in such unclean and filthy exercise: which albeit
is sufficiently and absolutely approved by so many, that it is not almost to be
denied, yet for my part I dare not affirm, and much less assure, that the
spirits that have their bodies of the air, and participate with that element,
can either desire or perform effects of such unclean pleasure: wherein
notwithstanding, who seeks to be more largely resolved, let him read
Guilielmus Parisiensis, in ye third part of his treatise de succubis and
Incubis, who albeit he has gathered the opinion of most of the Theologians,
yet Lodouicus Viues in the.xxiij. chapter of his fifte book de ciuitate Dei,
despising such vanity, makes them of the I Will of Cypres, a mockyng stock,
because they glorify their original, as mouyng first from the Dyuels succubi
and incubi, whereof you have heard a large description before.

A wonderful discourse of precious stones, their nature and propretie, which
resoneth of their procreation, and other strange things, breedyng in the
bowels of the earth. CHAP. xvj.
Amongst all and every cause of wonder in Nature, there is none that more
moves marvel in men, nor half so meritorious of philosophical contemplation,
than the excellent propretle of precious stones, who being once drawn out of
the intrailes and womb of their mother and nurse the earth, do so amaze our
sight and rauishe our senses, that they seem to contain some charm or new
mystery sent by nature to dazell our eyes* Ludouicus Vartomanus a Romain
writes, that he has seen the king of P^g^, a famous city in India, have
Carbuncles, which the Gretians call Pyropi, so great and shining, that who
beheld them in any dark or shaded place, seemed to have his body distempered,
and almost transformed by imagination: such was the light and piercing
glimmers of these stones, seeming of no less force to penetrate than if they
had been assisted with the most hoate and vehement reflection of the Sun.
The most part of the Greek and Latin philosophers, as Theophrastes,
Mutianus, Pliny, Ruffus, with other of no less credit than they, have so
precisely searched the propretie and procreation of stones, that they affirmed,
that they do not only engender, but also do suffer diseases, old Age, and
Death. And touching the procreation, they are of diverse opinions. For some
say, they engender between rocks, when the sap or juice of other stones
distilles within the creuices or hollow places of she same, even as the child
takes his beginning of his mother: some affirm, that they conceive of the sap
and mary of precious metals, like as oftentimes is found the reason in diverse
mines of gold and silver: some again, who take upon them to sifte more narrowly
the secrets of Nature, are of opinion, that they come and grow in the earth,
as knots in wood, waxkernels in men, or seed in herbs: whereunto as there may
be credit given according to reason that moves it, so there be other
Philosophers, either more ignorant of the truth, or more precise than stands
either with learning or natural persuasion, The Adamant smells and ^^eleth.
who doubt not to assure absolutely, that they have sense and motion, whereof
they prove the first by the Adamant, which smelles iron, and draws it to him,
whose virtue shall follow at full hereafter. And for the second, they make good
their opinion by a common experience in a little stone not rare in France and
Italye called by them Astroites, which being put within either vinegar or wine,
moves of himself, with crooked pace not unlike to an Ox or Cow reeling here
and there: and yet I think these several opinions, inte^de rather to advance
the estimation and property of stones, than to persuade a credit that they
have either motion or feeling, albeit touching this stone called Astroites, it
is most certain that it stirs being put in wine: whereof notwithstanding
mine eyes have been often witnesses, yet is it not sufficient to assure, albeit
it is not altogether void of cause and reason in nature to prove his moving,
seeing it is not clear nor shining, but covered with spots or stains like
ashes prese^ting a duskish hue or complexion, ye same being made of an humor
very subtle, which may be converted into vapor by force of the wine, which
vapor searching ways to go out and can find no issue, thrustes (as it were
and gives motion to the stone which is light,) like as the true sign and
argument of the subtle vapor is proved chiefly in that ye stone is full of
little knobbes which persuades it to be corrupt or rotten, and to have both
hoales and conduites* Here as it may be that some have a precise opinion of my
diligence in searching so narrowly the cause of moving in this stone, (which
notwithstanding), as I acco^pte such Philosophy neither unnecessary, nor
unprofitable, seeing it gives cause of wonder to such as see it stir alone,
without understanding the reason. So, were it not that tediousness would take
away the delight of the readers, and peradventure include some discredit
touching the thing it self, I could prefer matters of more wonder in stones,
and such as have passed by proof and familiar experience. Hector Boethius makes
mention of a spunging stone in Scotland, which being dipped in the Sea,
alters the taste thereof, and makes it pleasant. Other historia^s bring in a
kind of stone which is piercing and somewhat pale, which they call Nicolaus,
the same making him that wears, it sad and melancholic, and so wrestes the
sprites and inward parts that it stirs up wonderful passions in the mind:
they have left also remembrance of a wonderful virtue in the Jewel hanging
about the neck of Hermion, which makes as many perish as wear it: it is most
certain that in Archadie a cuntrie in Scotland, there is a kind of stone,
which being laid any small time upon straw or other like dry substance, it
kindles and grows to flame without the assistance of fire: all which because
thy seem wonders exceeding our reason, and things rather mystical than
agreeing with our capacity, I will now stay to commit them any more to the
judgment or contemplation of the reader, and enter into the search and
discourse of the being and property of those that be both familiar with our
selves and common in our use. Amongst the most rich and precious treasures
which the earth bred in her intrailles, or cast up for the use of man, the
Diamont deserves most estimation, who besides his violent clearenesse which of
it self has power to dim our eyes as if it were the sudden flashe of a
thunder, is of a hardness so infringible, that it resistes not only the hammer
or stroke of other metal, but it is also invincible against fire or flame.
Pliny in his last book of his natural histories writes, that in his time,
the Diamo^t was not found but in the Courts of Princes, and that very rarely:
but now nature, which since his age is become more bountiful, does yield us
such plenty of it, that there is not so mean a merchant man's wife at this
day, whose fingers are not decked with that Jewel. Ezechiel and Zachary, two
of the most famous Prophets in the Church of GOD, have given great honor
to this stone, and not without cause, for besides his common properties to
withstand venom, poison, charms, dreams, enchauntementes, and visions of the
night, yet has he a most wonderful virtue to resist fire, according to the
opinion of some Philosophers, whose experience warrantes it to be of force to
endure amyds the most hot burning coals that be, for nine days
continuallye, without diminushing any part of it: such is the excellency of
this stone that way, albeit in this place it cannot seem impertinent to my
intent of true descriptions of stones, to impart to the readers, wherein both
the Ancient and late writers have erred touching the reservation of the
properties of this stone. Pliny, with most that were before him, and Francisce
Ruell professor of Phisike, with Morbodeus a latter Poet, (writers not long
since) have greatly abused the simplicity of a number of people, in
persuading, that the Adamant has no power over the iron, neither to smell nor
draw it, if the Diamont be in place, seeing the contrary is proved by common
and daily experience, even so they have erred no less in that they assure the
Diamont not to be vanished either by fire, iron or other mean, except only
by the blood of a^ he goat, for it is most certain that the hammer is of
force to bruise and bring him in pieces, being stricken with a strong hand. I
will not deny but that it exceedes all other stones in hardness, and that it
deuides and confoundes all other precious stones by his soliditie, neither is
he with ease to be polished or framed with other thing tha^ with his own lime,
powder or duste, with this further argument of his subtlety and hardness,
which ye Ancients did practice with great marvel, that ye point of a dart,
dagger or other instrument cutting, being dipped in the powder or forge of
Diamont, does penetrat or pierce any armor, for ye iron and steel being
chafed or stirred with the blow, with the vehement hardness of the forge, makes
it of power to pierce easily whatsoever resistes it. Nature has yet given to
the Diamo^t another secret and singular property, no less marvelous than the
other, which is, that being cha^ed it draws a rushe or light straw, as the
Ieat does, but not with such vehemency. Many other strange condicio^s in a
diamont could I prefer, and the same approved both by foreign and familiar
writers: but because they bring with them a suspicion of lightness or
discredit, I will reserve them for an other use and time, and note unto you in
this last discourse of the diamont, how nature in counterpaise of the sundry
graces and good gifts bestowed upon it, has infected it with one special and
mortal vice, for that it is most venemouse, and of such fatal operation,
that it stoppes breath as soon as it is drunk in powder, which some affirm to
proceed of his extreme coldness, and other hold it to move by a violent
gnawing in the bowels. The greatest diamo^t that ever was seen, exceedes not
in greatness an Almonde, which as I have heard, remains amongst the Jewels
of Solomon, late Emperor of the Turks. The nature of the Emeraud.
Most writers have given the second place of honor for stones to ye Emeraud,
because that by his liuelye verdure he does not only solace the eye more than
any other stone, but also for delight and flourishing view, it so surmountes
both forests, trees, and herbs, that nature seems to contend with the
earth, to whom the price of greenness is due, either to the Emeraud or ye
plants. Touching the exellencie of this stone, they write that it abhorres all
unclean and filthy livers, The Emeraud enemy to uncleanness.
and is a special friend to chastity: the which they make good by an example
and experience in the King of Hungary, who lying with his wife, and having an
Emeraud on his finger, marvelled to see it break and convert to many pieces,
which might also happen as well by chance, as come of any virtue in the stone,
seeing that (of all other stones) it is most frail and tender. The most true
and credible properties attributed to this stone by most learned men be these.
First Aristotle gives council to hang it at the head of him that has the
falling sickness. Rabie persuades that if a man drink ix. grains of it, it
dries up evil humors. Sana Verola affirms that if it be laid to the thighe
of a woman feeling the pain of child bearing, it procures delivery. Rasis
and Dioscorides will such as be infected with leprosye to drink the powder of
an Emeraud, whereunto as are diverse other singularities, so because they be not
grounded upon good substance, let them persuade credit, according to the
wisdom of such as can judge of them: for my part in such causes of
difference and doubt, I had rather be careful than curious: but for a familiar
example of the estimation and valewe of the Emeraud, I may boldly commend
and bring in the honor of King Edward, who having received a book from
Erasmus, presented him with an Emeraud, valued after his death at three
thousand crowns, whereof that famous clerk made so dear account, that he
had it on his finger even at the instant of his death. Suetonius writes that
Nero was wont to discern the eyes and looks of ruffians and dashebucklers
within an Emeraud. Good Emeraudes do prove them selves by the touch stone
called Lidia, which if they be natural and true, they leave a mark like the
touch of brass. Saint John in his Apocalipse has given great honor to this
stone. That which the Ancients called a Carbuncle, is no other thing than that
which we commonly call a Rubie, which takes his name by the similitude he has
in light with the burning coal: the same being committed to the flames does
not only resist their force, but exceedes them in clearenesse: touching his
gifts and properties, the Philosophers most commonly commend it of a virtue
to chase away melancholye, defend dreams and illusions of the night, and to
serve for a counterpoison against all corrupt air. There be of them diverse
kinds, as the Grenat, and such other, whereof I will speak particularlye
hereafter. The Sapphire gyues no place at all to the Rubie, seeing that as the
one representes unto us fire when he is in his most vehement and penetrant
heat: so in the other we discern a likeness of the azured Sky being most
calm and clear. Besides, there was no stone of more price amongst the
Auncientes for the use of P^^sike tha^ the true Sapphire. For Auicenne
witnesses that it is of a virtue so binding, by reason of his coldness, that
it staunches presentlye bleeding at the nose. Galene and Dioscorides assure it
to restrain webbes, pushes or boyles, and other things yt else would offend
the eyes. The Physicians of late time have put it with great effect under the
tongues of such as have suffered hot and burning fevers, finding that the
great cold in the stone has mortifyed the heat of the disease. It serves as
a country poison against all venoms, and defendes all infections of air from
such as wear it in pestilent times, as Isodorus and Rufus write: some say
they have read in Dioscorides, that the Saphyre enclosed in a box with a
spider, killes her sodainelye, such is his power over her poison. The Amatist
in Aristotle's time (as it is written) was not commended, for any thing, saving
that it resisted drunkenness. The Hiacintha, withstandes thunders, as is
already showed in the History of thunders, for a more proof whereof,
Serapius affirms that no man has been ever offended with thunder which
carried the Hiacinthe about him. The Turquise (according to the most
Philosophers) is of no singular property, but to chase away thoughts and
troubles of the brain. The best of them come from a town in Persia, called
Balascha, where there is great store. For the Agat, this is the most wonder
and virtue that I find in it, that the Arabians used to try the maydenheade
of their wives before they married them, by gyuing them of the powder of the Agat
in wine, which according to their lightenesse I pass over for this time, like
as also I forbear to enterlarde my treatise with descriptions of pearls, the
stones of Aquilin, Alectre with many other, because God willing, many years
shall not pass before I set before your eyes an universal description of all
the ^^^cious stones whereof the Arabians, Egiptians, Hebrews, Greeks and
Latins have left memory in their writings, together with the secrets in
making artificial stones, which I doubt not will be of profit to the common
wealth, seeing that by that means shall be cut of every mean and way to the
fine Italiens and others, whose study tendes not but to corrupt,
counterfaicte and abuse that which is sent unto us by Nature, both perfect,
sincere and without spotte. Besides the peculiar pleasure redounding to noble
men and Gentlemen, who in their private houses may discern the devises in
artificial stones, and practice the like if they list, and that at small
charges by the aid of my endeavor only, which according to my talent, I will
frankely impart amongst them: wherewith leaving to treat further of the
virtues in stones, till their time agree to bring them to light, it is now
necessary to distribute (in manner of a counterpoyson) their several faults
and vices, with means to discern the true from the false. The most common
faults which are found in stones, consiste for the most part, in fumes
shadows or clouds, which do so darken them, that in some part they do
diminishe their beauty and clearenesse: some again be thick, fourmed with a
sharp point, enterlarded with certain veins and strokes, wihich do some
way take away the estimation of their value. You may discern the true and
perfect from the false and corrupt, by the judgment of the eye, lime,
substance and touch: by the view, because the clerenesse of ye true stone is
more shining, co^sta^t, and of greater contentme^t to the eye, and not so dym
or dull by the light of the candle, as that which is formed of artificial
matter, the same in deed being the best mean to try a perfect stone. They
are also known by their lyme, being of force to resist the liuelye temper, so
that, that hardness cannot be counterfeited by any artificial imitation. The
third judgment of stones is by their substance and touch, because they be
more light and cold than those that be imperfect: which is a direct experience
amongst the Indians, who being the most excellent Lapidaries of the world, do
prove them by the touch of the tongue, buying such for the best as they find
most cold. There be also certain precious stones found in the bellies of
beasts, which Georgius Agricola witnesses by a stone called Alectorius,
found in the intralles of old capons, whereof also Pliny makes mention,
speaking of the conqueste of Milo Crotoniatos. In an other cuntrie of the
Indians is found a stone in the heads of old and great toades, which they
call Borax or Stelon, which Brasauolus approves, is most commonly found in
the head of a he toade, and yet is of opinion that it is rather a boane than a
stone, which some affirm to be of power to repulse poisons, and that it is a
most sovereign medecin for the stone. There is a certain stone found
within the gall of an ox, and the same in ordinary practice of phisike at
this day in Turkey: some such be found in France, but not so common. There
is a late writer of phisike who affirms that not long since there was a stone
found in the bladder of a man's gall, infected with leprosy: which I may
boldly affirm with the like, for that I saw in Paris, an Anotomie of a man's
body, dead upon the disease of the stone, which had in his bladder a stone as
big as a pigeons egg. There be stones engendered in the heads of fishes, as
Aristotle writes of the Maigre and many other, which I reserve (as I said
before) to describe more plentiful hereafter, treating lastly and for end of
our disputation, of stones of the virtue of the Adamant, which has so amazed
many of our late Philosophers, that they doubt not to believe, that it has
both vital motion and feeling. The ancie^ts for want of knowledge of the true
property and condition of this stone, have been so troubled in their
navigations, that they have not been able to discover either country or
company on the sea, whether it were in peace or war, but by judgment of the
Sun or stars: but now that God has more plentifully set abroache the vessel
of his grace by the benefit of the Adamant, navigations is both so easy and so
plain, that a man of mean courage or skill may be bold to prove the peril
of the sea, and hazard him self and goods in a little pinnysse against all
assaults and dangers of storms, which the Elders durst not do, because
their needle and quadrante was not tipped or wrought with the Adamant stone: in
whom also are found two virtues of a contrary disposition, for one of the
ends makes the needle behold always the north, and the other the south. He
that first found out the use of this stone was named Flauius, but the first
that wrote of his virtue was Albertus Magnus. Aristotle knew well that it was
of a nature attractiue, and could draw iron unto it, but yet he was ignorant
to use it in the Art of Navigations: for if he had understood so far of it,
he had prevented a number of miserable shipwracks and dangers of sea, which
overwhelmed his countreyme^, for want of direction by virtue of this stone.
Neither was it without cause that Pliny (giving singular estimation to this
stone) did form his cruel complaints against nature in that she was not only
content to give a voice unto rocks to send or return certain cries and calls
in manner of an Echo, but also to give feelyng, motion, and hands to stones, as
to the Adamant, wherewith he smells and holds iron, and seems to be
jealous when any offers to take it from him: he not only allureth iron, and
holds it when he has it, but also is contented to imparte and transfer his
virtue to any thing that touches it, which has not been only an experience
among the profane, but Saint Augustine him self confesses to have seen the
Adamant draw unto it a ryng of iron, which being rubbed or touched with the
Adamant, drew another ring, and so the third drew the fourth, and so
consequently, in such number, as he made a large collar of rings in the form
of a chain, by the only aid and touch of this stone, such is his propretie
and such his wonderful virtue, which also has been verified by many familiar
experiences, and chiefly by a late trial, which I saw in France in this
sort: There was a knife laid upon a square thick table, and underneath the
bourde was held in a man's hand, a piece of an excellent good Adamant, whose
virtue piercing thorough the table that was between it and the metal, made
the knife move and turn alone, to the great wonder of the assistantes. These
propreties of the Adamant be common, therefore we will syft out of it a more
secret wonder, which with the profit may also bring pleasure to the Reader.
There is now a days a kind of Adamant which draws unto it flesh, and the
same so strongly, that it has power to knit and tie together two mouths of
contrary persons, and draw the heart of a man out of his body without
offendyng any part of him, with this further propretie, that if the point of
a needle be touched or tempered with it, it pierces through all the parts of
the body, without doing any harm, which would not seem credible, were it
not that Experience did warraunt it with great wonder. Hieronymus Cardanus
writes, that a Physician of Tours called Laurentius Crascus, had of this stone
promised by the mean of the same to penetrate any flesh without grief or
sorrow: which Cardanus did either doubt or lightly believe till the
experience assured the effect, for he rubbed a needle with this Adamant, and
then put it thorough his arm, where he let it remain without any sorrow many
days after, but that which makes this experience and virtue of the Adamant
more famous, is, that he respected neither veins nor sinews, but thrust in his
needles or yro^s indifferently without sparyng any place. This Adamant which he
had, exceeded not the bigness of a bean, and was of color like iron,
distinct of veins, and peysing about the weight of.xij. grains of corn. By
this Admant many people were deceived, like as also it was the occasion to
entertain an error amongst many persons, which mine author confesses to have
seen by experience about.xv or xvj. years past, being in the university of
Poyctiers, whether came in great pomp a stranger, naming him self to be a
Greek borne, who in the presence of the people, gave him self many and great
blows with a dagger, both upon his thighs, arms, and almost every part of
his body, which being rubbed with a certain oil, which he called the oil of
Balsamyn, it did so refresh and consolidate his hurts, as if the iron had never
touched the^. There is also at this day in Italy one Alexander of Verona, who
practiced the like artificial experience with his servants, who pinched them in
the presence of the people, with pinsers, tongs, daggers, and other tormenting
instruments, and that with such horror, that it grieved the eyes of the
assistants, and then rubbing their wounds with a certain oil, he made them
hole again presently, which so abused the simplicity of the assistants, that
they bought of his oil, which he assured to be as profitable to all kind of
diseases what soever, which was such a gain to him, that there escaped no
day wherein he gat not ten or twelve crowns above his hire for the cure of
those that were sick. The mystery whereof, did drive Cardanus into such a
wonder, that he was very curious to search the cause: and falling for that
matter into an intricate Labyrinth of Philosophy, he could not find nor give
any other reason of it, than that the people were enchaunted: touching the oil
which he sold, and wherewith he fained to heal his servant being hurt, he
confessed it was a fiction and a thing nothing worth, for that those that
bought it of him, could do no cure on themselves, or any other. And now to
draw to end and resolution of al these things, it is most like, that this
Greek and Alexander of Verona, and all the rest that have been seen to cut
and tear their flesh in pieces in sundry parts of the world, did not heal them
by either their oils or balmes (as they feign) but it is more likely they
rub their daggers, pinsers, and instruments wherewith they hurt them with
this second kind of Adamant, the same having a certain secret and hydden
virtue to consolidate that part that is hurt, and to resist all sorrow and
grief in the wound: wherein for a more credit I commend you to the
authority of Plaudanus in his second Book De Secretis orb^^, and rerum
miraculis.

Wonders of certain Princesses, being committed to the flames unjustly
accused, who were delivered by virtue of their innocence. CHAP. xvij.
IT is no new thing, neither chau^ceth it often, that the innocent creatures
could not be endomaged by the flames of fire, as it is verified in many noble
persons found and spoken of in the holy Scriptures. But it is a strange thing
at these days, wherein sin so abounds, and we seldom see such miracles,
that such like should happen amongst us. For as Polydorus Vergilius witnesses
in the eight book of his histories of England and as others write before his
time, making mention of one Goodwyn prince of England, who accused unjustly of
many vices, Emnia mother to Edward the second, King of England, and wrought
therein so much by his false suggestions and accusations, that the King her son
despoiled her not only of all her goods, but in process of time, as one sin
draws another, he so continuyng his wicked enterprise, would not be satisfied
with her goods, but sought to deuest her of her honor, accusing her a fresh
that she had committed adultery with the bishop of Winchester: whereof king
Edward storming out of measure to hear her accused of such execrable vices,
who had given him suck within her intrailes, resolved to put her to death, and
in the mean time whilst all the court was molested with the inquisition of
this offense, he committed her and the bishop into several prisons, where she
being grieved, demanded one day amongst others, to talk with the king her
son, in whose presence she cast her self headlong into the burning flames,
crying with a loud voice, yt those hot burning flames might consume her body*
if she were culpable of the faults whereof she was wrongfully accused: and
having ended this talk, she issued out of the fire in good safety, without
diminishing any part of her body. Whereat ye king was much astonished. Crantius
in his chronicles of Almayn and many others which have written of their
Histories, report the like of lame Henry the.xv. Emperor of the Romans, a man
very religious, who married with the daughter of Sigeroy, Palatin of Rheyn,
called Gunegonde, a woman chaste, and of good life, if ever there were any, with
who^ the emperor lived in marvelous continency and chastity, loving her
only. Albeit, a certain Gentlewoman of his house, persuaded by some wicked
spirit, repinyng to see their co^tine^cies, determined to sow some ielousy
betwixt them: who findyng the Emperor at convenient leisure, told him that
she did behold the Empress using the company of a knight in dishonest manner.
Whereof the Queen being advertised, commanded there should be made ready
secretly, six great Culters of iron, and to bring them into the presence of
the Emperor, who ignorant of the occasion, was suddenly amazed to see his
wife march so hardly barefooted, and without any fear at all, and stand upon
those burning yrons: Whom she beholding attentively, said unto him: Behold
Emperor, as I am not hurt with this fire, even so am I clear from all
immundicitie. Whereof the Emperor was astonished, and began to think of the
vain superstition, the which he had believed, prostrating him self suddenly
upon the earth, and required pardon at Gods hands for his rash judgment in
the same. Wherein as these innocent doings proved by those flames seem
strange, so do the lives of these two persons, whereof the Historians write,
seem to me no less wonderful, for that they lived togethers like maids,
without knowing one the other, during al their lives, in such sort, that the
Emperor feeling death to approach, caused her parents to be sent for, and said
to them: Like as ye first day ye gave me your daughter in marriage she was a
maid, eue^ so I render her unto you again a maid, with commandment to use
her in faithful and trusty manner. The Emperor with his maide^like wife were
buried in the cathedral church of Bambergh, which heretofore was subject to the
archbishop of Maiencey. Preferring further as of good right into ye number
of.ij. virtuous princesses, ye history recited by Eusebius Cesarie^sis, in his
ecclesiastical history of Policarpus, Volateranus writes a like example in
his geography
which during the great butchery and persecution of the christians which they
made under ye emperor Verus, were brought to ye fire to be burned quick: and
after they had lifted their eyes to heaven, and made their prayers to god, they
were cast hedlong into a great hot burning fire: albeit in the place where ye
flame ought to have consumed the^, and brought the^ to cinders, it began (with
great marvel) to revolt: flying far off from the bodies of ye martirs in manner
like the sail of a ship, which is tossed and carried by the winds in the
midst of the sea, which appeared as evidently as the gold or silver which
they melte in the furnace. And when these wicked monsters saw that their
bodies consumed not, they commanded the tormentor or hangman to thrust them
thorough with a sword, when behold (says he) there issued out of their
bodies such quantity of blood, in such great abundance, A wonderful
providence of God.
that the fire was clean extincte, giving to the lookers on, such a grievous
remorse of conscience, that they fled altogethers: whereof you may read more
at large in the fourth book of the History Ecclesiastical of Eusebius, and
the.xlj. chapter.

A wonderful history of sundry strange Fishes, monsters, Mermaydes, and
other huge creatures, found and bredde in the sea. CHAP. xviij.
Amongst most of those things which merit Philosophical contemplation,
touching the universal subject of creatures without reason, I think such are
most wonderful, whose nature is furthest from our understanding and judgment,
as especially huge fishes and other monsters of the water, who being shrined in
the bottom and bellye of the Sea, and buried in the depth of diverse lakes, do
exceed most commonly the opinion and iudgemeat of such as be most curious to
search and fifte their manners and conditions, the same being so rare and
strange, and specially in the exercise of their natural actions, that I think
they be of force to move equal delight and desire to many men to participate
for a time with their society in the Elament where they dwell, to the end
they might come to a more free and perfect knowledge of their virtues, which
was plentifully approved by the Emperor Antonine, who having received a
certain work of Opian, treating of the order of fishing and disposition of
fyshe, gave him as many Crowns as there were verses in his books. Conradus
Celtis and after him, Gesnerus showing the desire and affection that the
Aunciente Emperors had to be privy to the property, age, manners, and
condition of fishes, write, that in the year.1497. was taken in a poole near
to Haelyprum the Imperial City of Sweura, a Brochet, which had a hoope or
ring of leather tied to his ears, wherein was written in Carracters of Greek
this which follows. I am the first fyshe that was put into this River, by
the hands of Federike, second Emperor of the World, the fifte of October, a
thousand two hundred and thirty, which proved by the witness of those
letters, that the said Brochet had lived in that water 297. years. Wherein
also it seems that this good Emperor Federik observed in fishes, that which
Alexander used in Hearts or dear, who (according to Pliny) would cause very
often chains of gold with inscriptions to be tied about their necks, and
then gave them the liberty of the wild forestes the same being found a
hundred or two hundred years after, keeping the same collar and letters about
their necks. The Romans for the estimation they had of fishes and pleasure to
behold them, would sometime cast condemned men all quick into their rivers
and Lakes, to the end that those little creatures might be the executioners of
their offices, others for delight sake would make the^ so tame, that at the
sound of a whistle they would leave the water, and come and take meat at
their hands upon the banks of their rivers, having them in such delight, that
Lucius Crassius Censor, lamented no less the death of one of his little fishes
dying out of his pondes, than if it had been for one of his daughters. It is
not unknown also that the Romain Emperors held fyshes in such honor and
affection, that in their most Royal and pompous banquets, they made more
dainty and dear account of fish, than of any kind of foul or other
flesh, reserving such reverend observation to some of them, and specially the
Sturgeon, that (as some say) he that brought it to the board used to do it
bareheaded, saving a Cornet or garland of flowers, and for a more honor of the
thing, the Trumpettes and dr^^mes ceased not to sound and blow, so long as
that dishe stood on the table. At this day in Greece and Turkey, ye people for
ye most part be more desirous of fish than of flesh, which was also the custom
of ye Auncientes, whereupon both the Greek and Latin Physicians do most
commonly in all their treatises prefer the nouritures and sovereign goodness
of fish before flesh, and have given also the inferior place of estimation to
flesh. Like as at this time also the Egiptians do abstain all their life from
eating of fish, observing the order of our Monks in their abstine^ce from
eating of flesh, which shall suffice for this time for the dignity and
commendacion of fishes, following in order to describe how ye Seas bring forth
their wonders with more marvel tha^ ye land, whereof I will lay before you in
this place only the principal, and such as have moved cause of astonishme^t in
ye most precise Philosophers of ye world. Amongst the most wonders of ye Sea,
it may seem miraculous and almost incredible, that fishes do fly, and that
those du^me creatures do lift themselves from out of their moist Element to
pierce and break the air, as birds do with their wings: whereof although
there be diverse kinds according to the experience of the Sea, yet I have not
figured the pourtrait of any in this chapter, save only the Arundel or
swallowe of the Sea, and that as Gesnerus and Rondelet in their histories of
fishes have drawn it. Who desires to have a more large description of this
fish, let him read Rondelet in his first chapter of his vj. book, where he
affirms this fish to be so called by reason of his color, greatness in
proporcio^, and pinions like to a balde Mouse, yet (says he) who co^sidereth
thoroughly of this fish, and manner of his flying, he may seem rather to
resemble a swallow than a balde Mouse. Opianus says he flies out of the water
for fear he be devoured of the great fishes. Plinius writes that there is a
fish flying called Arundelle, which is very like the bird which we commonly
call a swallowe, which as he is rare, and shows himself by great wonder with
his great wings, so being taken, they use commonly to dry him and hang him up
in their houses: which I think was more rare in the time of Pliny than now,
because there be diverse found in sundry houses in Spain, Italy, France,
and elsewhere. Claudius Campensius, Physician to the Lord Marquis of Trans,
said, yt not many years past, the Lord Admiral of England, made him a banquet,
where he presented him with a flying fish. And in our time those that have
sailed by the pillars of Hercules, affirm that there is such store of flying
fishes thereabout, that they seem rather birds with wings than fishes of the
Sea. Besides it is not inconvenient to set forth in this place the pourtrait of
a fish flying, or rather a water monster, which is the chief cause that I
have undertaken this treatise of fishes. This fish or rather monster of the
Sea, I have considered with long view and judgment, and have caused him to be
drawn as near as I can according to his natural proportion, wherein I may
boldly prefer as witnesses above two hundredth persons who saw him in
Paris, as well as I.


Amongst the things of wonder to be seen in this beast, it has chiefly a
hydeous head, resembling rather in figure a horrible Serpent than a fish,
with wings, resemblyng rather the pynions of a balde mouse, saving they be
far more thick and massiue: he contains near a foot and a half in
length, neither is he so well dried, but he yeldes some savor or smell of a
fish: the rest is to be discerned in his figure. Many learned men of the,
university who considered largely of him and his form, assured me, that it
was a kind of flying Fish, the same notwithstanding agreeing in nothing with
the description of the Auncientes touching the Arun^elle of the Sea, nor of the
Mugilatus, nor of other flying fish, which makes me think that it is a sort
of monstrous fish unknown to the elders. Neither am I ignorant that there be
that can counterfaict by art diverse forms of fishes, Dragons, Serpents and
other like things, wherewith many are abused: like as master Gesnerus has
acknowledged by his writings to have been circumuented with the like. Yet of
all those which beheld this fish, and argued upon his condition, there was not
one that could discern other artificial sleyght than as Nature brought him
forth, and formed him.

The Sea has also other monsters, which be more wonderful than these, as the
fish which they call in Latin Torpedo, most common in Haven towns, and is
accounted to resemble most of all those fishes that be hard skinned: and she
has a hidden property, which is very strange, for being hidden within the
sand, or moudde, she slepeth by a secret virtue, and making also all the fish
that be near her immouable and without sense, she feeds upon them, and
deuoureth them, neither does her charm of sleep extend only against
fishes, but also against men, for if a man touch her with his Anglerod, she
enchaunteth forthwith his arm. And if she feel her self taken with the line
and hook, she has this policy, to embrace the line with her wings, and so
making her poison mount all along the line and the rode, so tormenteth the
arm of the fisher, that often times he is constrained to abandon his prize.
The authors hereof be Aristotle in his ninth book and xxxvij. chapter, De
historia animalium. Pliny in the.xxxij. book and second chapter: Theophrastus
in libro De his quae hyeme latent: Galen, Opianus, Plutarch in libro vtrum
anima etc. Plato also makes like mention in Mem^o, where Socrates is compared
to the Torpedo, in that by the violence and subtlety of his arguments, he so
grauelled those against whom he maintained disputation, that they seemed to
participate with the enchauntement of the Torpedo, of whose properties although
the authors had made no mention, yet the common experience of every fisher
makes good no less of him: It is defended to sell him in the open market at
Venise, because of his poison. Most part of our Physicians now a days
write, that his flesh is moiste, soft, and of an unpleasant taste. Yet Galen
in his third book, de Alimentorum facultatibus, and in his book de
Attenuante Victu, and in the eyghte of his Methodes does allow it: only there
has been great controversy amongst the Ancients, to know in what part of
his body consistes the venom of his charm, that casts both fish and the
parts of men into a sleep: some give out that it lies in one part, some say
in an other, but most agree that it is divided throughout even unto the gall,
which they confirm by the witness of Pliny, which says, that the gall of a
Torpedo on live, being applied to the genitors or priuye parts, represseth the
desire of the flesh: wherein we will end the discourse of that fish and his
property, and visit other maruels found in other fishes.

Although the water is the proper Element, mansion house and place of abode
for fishes, where they feed, live, disporte, increase and exercise all their
other functions, yet is there of them which leave the Sea, floudes and rivers,
and leap upon the land, eat and feed upon herbs, use recreation in the
feeldes, and sleep there now and then. Theophrastes affirms, that near unto
Babylon, when the rivers retire within their ba^kes, there be certain fishes
left within caves and hollow places, which issue out to feed, marching upon
their wings, or with their often moving of their tail, and when any offreth to
offend or assault them, they fly forthwith into their caves as their refuge.
The ancient Philosophers affirm, that there have been found fiishes under
the earth, who (for that cause) they called Focilles, whereof Aristotle makes
mention, and Theophraste speaking of Paphlilagonia, where men draw fish (and
they be very good to eat) out of deep diches, and other places wherein no
water does remain. Polybe writes in like sort, that near to Narbone has
been found fishes under the earth. We may also bring in amongst other
wonders of the Sea, a kind of fish called Stella, or Sea star, because it
has the figure of a painted star: this fish is of a Nature so hot that he
endures as soon as he has devoured, which Aristotle approves in his.v. book
De Historia anima. where he gives such hotnesse to this fish, that she boyleth
what she takes. Pliny, and Plutarch do likewise affirm that the star by
her only touch, does melte, boil and burn whatsoever she touches, and
knowing her virtue, she suffers her self to be touched with other fish, to
the end she may burn them. Monsieur Rondelet, a man living at this day, and
as well worthy of credit as the best that write, in his histostorie de piscibus,
affirms that he has seen many stars of the Sea, but one amongst the
rest containing almost a foot in length, which he opened in manner of
Anotomie, and found in his bellye three Coquylles whole, and two Remollies
half digested, such is the great and furious heat of this little creature,
all which may seem wonderful examples of the wonders of the Sea, and yet are
they nothing in respect of those which we mean to treat hereafter, the same
moving both fear and amaze to such as have most nearely sifted the secrets
of the Sea. For this little beast which so amazeth ye world, is called in Greek
Ethneis, and of the Latins Remora, to whom is given that name, because she
does stay Ships, as hereafter you shall hear more at large. Opyanus and Aelian
write that he delites most in the high sea: he is of the length of a cubite,
of a brown color like unto an Eele. Pliny makes him like to a great
Limace, which he proves by the witness of such as saw one of them that
stayed the Galey of the prince Caius Caesar. In his.ix. book he brings in
diverse opinions of sundry authors touching this fish, who although they differ
in his description: yet they agree all that such one there is, and is of power
to stay ships. Whereof also many Philosophers of late days, which have
travailed by many ports and havens in Asia and Africa, bear witness, in that
they have seen him made an Anatomy, and proved his virtues with wonderful
effects. It is sure a marvelous and monstrous thing in Nature to find a fish
or creature in the water of ye gretnesse of a Limace, which is of force by a
secret propretie of nature to stay immediately what she touches, be it the
most huge and tal ship or galey that uses to scumme the sea, which made
Pliny cry out in this sort: Oh strange and wonderful thing (says he) that
all the winds blowyng from all parts of the world, and the most furious
tempests raging upon and over the waves, and contendyng with extreme violence
against the vessels that sail thereupon, stand in awe of a little fish of the
greatness of a Limace, whose power prevails over their fury, can restrain
and bridle their rage, and is of more force to stay the strongest ship that
is, than all their ankers, cables, tackles, or any other engine employed or
used about the same. This fish encountered Anthony in his wars, and
restrained his ship. Adamus Louicerus Lib. de Aquatilibus, co^firming Plinies
opinion, ravished (as it were) with such strange conditions in a fish, has
travailed with great pains to search out the cause in nature, whereof being
not able to give any reason by any learning or diligence he used, gave it over
with this exclamation: Who is he of so dumb and gross judgment, which will
not enter into admiration, if he behold at leisure the propreties and power of
this little fish: I know (says he) that the Adamant has power to smell and
draw iron, The natures of sundry stoues.
the Diamont sweateth, and distilleth poison, the Turkeys does move when there
is any peril prepared to him that wears it, the Torpille infecteth and makes
sleep the hand and arm of the Fisher, and I know that the Basilicke is so
venomous, that with his only view and regard he poisoneth man: of all which
notwithstanding their strangeness, a man may yield some reason, but of the
virtue of this fish we may not argue, because it is supernatural: for he
lives in the water, takes his nouriture in the water as other fishes do, and
does no exercise but in the water: his little stature approves, that he can do
no great violence, and yet is there no power equal with his, nor force able to
resist him, there is neither storm nor engine by hand, of power to move a ship
after he has once plied him self to it, were it that the whole winds and
violence of the Element were assembled in one, and blew with maine force
against the sail: and yet after he has left off to hold the ship, she moves
and saileth as before: biside, in this little fish is discerned a fatal
prognostication, wherein she seems to give us some forewarnyng of the evils
that are like to befall us. For did she not stay the Ambassadors ship of
Periander? and also the bark of Caius Caesar, who soon after was killed at
Rome, seemyng thereby in her kind to take pity of the missehappe whereunto
she saw him predestinate: the which is all in effect, that Adamus Louicerus
writes of this fyshe. I know again, that Aristotle, Pliny, and others, do
give unto her sundry other propreties, as to serve in special use in matters
of love, to draw children from the wombes of their mothers, with other like
qualities, which according unto their small credit, I do pass over for this
time. Plutarch in Symposiacis.2. problem.7. searches the reason why that this
fyshe does stay ships, which shall also give end unto the description of
his Wonders. And because the Reader may be fully satisfied touching the
maruelles of the Waters, we will now enter into the treaty of a chief
membre thereof, the same since the creation of the World until this age,
having much troubled the Philosophers and other learned men by the curious
search, to know whether there have been in the sea Seamen, Tritons, Nereides,
and other like Monsters, carrying the figure of man, which in times paste the
Auncientes do witness to have seen in Floods, Ryuers, Fountains, Rocks,
and Lakes. Those which have persuaded them selves, that there is none such,
justify their opinyon by the authority of the Scripture, which making no
mention of such things, affirms absolutely, that the earth is the only house
and tabernacle of man, wherein he is to remain and keep his residence until
that it please the Lord to call him home, as the Prince or Captain does by
the Soldier that he puts in his Garryson. Those which defend the
contrary, do prefer the Experience and witness of so many learned persons,
whose gravity and wisdom would not leave to a general posterity, their
books full of such vanities and dreams, to entertayne the children,
parents, friends, and universally all such as should come after them, in
error. Besides (say they) it is no less impertinent to believe, that there
be Men monsters in the sea, than to give faith to those that write, that there
be woody Nymphs, Satyrs, and other savage Monsters, approved for truth by
some of our Ecclesiastical writers, like as also the other is given out for
a matter of faith by sundry men of credit, who have seen them with their
eyes. Pausanias amongst other of the auncientes does affirm, that he has
seen at Rome, a Triton. And those which have recorded the chronicles of
Constantinople, whereof one part concerns the state of Europe, write that in
the.29. year of the Emperor Mauritius, the provost of Delta in Egypt, walking
amongst other people against the rising of the Sun, was astonished when he
saw upon the bank of the flood of Nile two creatures, bearyng the figure of
humanam figuram, whereof the one that did most resemble a man, seemed of fierce
and stout regard, with a curled hair standing right an end, and oftentimes
in their presence would show him self above the water, to the secret
parts, and then suddenly sink again into the water unto the navel, giving
(as it were) to know unto the people, that for a duty and reverence to
nature, he sought to cover the rest. Which moving such indifferent marvel and
fear to the Provost and rest of his company, that they adjured him in the
name of God, that if he were any wicked spirit, he should retire to the place
ordained for him by his creator: but of the contrary, if he were one of those
which were created for the glory of his name, that he would make some aboade
there for the contentment of that poor people so desirous of such a strange
sight. This creature bound (as it were) by the virtue of this coniuration,
remained long amongst them. Immediately after which time, chanced a sight no
less strange than this: it was an other creature representing the form and
shape of a Woman, who began to cut the waves, and approach the bank of the
River, having a great bush of hairs dispersed, a white face, and of pleasant
regard, her fingers and arms well proporcioned her dugs somewhat round and
big, showing her self in this order, namely until the navel, the rest
(with a like reverence to nature as the other) she concealed within the waves.
And after these two creatures had long delited the eyes of the people with
their sight, they gave place to the darkness of the night, and vanished away,
without ever being seen afterward. Whereof after the Provost had taken
witness of the assistants, he dispatched immediately a messanger to the
Emperor Mauritius with the news. Baptiste Fulgose, writes a like history of
a Sea monster, which was seen of a number of men, in a certain port or haven
of the sea, in the time of Eugenius the fourth. This monster (says he) was a
man of the sea, who having left the water, made a road upon the land, and
caught a child as he disported him self upon the bank, which being desirous
to carry with him into the sea, he was so speedily pursued with men, and hurt
with stones, that he was not only forced to leave his pray, but also had much
to do to recover the water: his figure resembled the form of a man, saving
that his skin was like the sloughe of an Eele, and had two little horns on
his head: he had on either hand but two fyngers, and his feet did end like
two little tails, and on his arms he had two little wings, as a balde Mouse
has. Conradus Gesnerus writes that there was seen at Rome in the great
river, a sea man, or monster of the sea. Theodorus Gaza, a man learned, and as
well studied as any of our time, writes, that on a time when he was in Greece
upon a certain coast of the sea, after the rage of a wonderful tempeste,
having taken upon the shore a good quantity of fish, he saw amongst
certain other wonderful things, a Mermayde or fyshe, having the face of a
woman, fully perfect in every thing requisite in Nature unto the wast, from
which part dounward she carried the form of a fish, finishing in the tail
like an Eele, even as we see them ordinarily drawn by the painter. This
Mermayd (as it is written) was upon the gravel or sand, and showed by her
iestes and countenances to suffer such passions, as the said Theodore Gaze
moved to pity, considering that she had a desire to return to the sea, took
her, and conveyed her into the water. Pliny likewise writes, that in the time
of the Emperor Tyberius, the inhabitants of Lysbona, a town in Portingal, sent
Ambassadors to the Emperor to certify him that they had seen many times a
Tryton, or man of the Sea, hyde and wythdrawe him self into a cave, near unto
the Sea. There was also advertisement sent to the Emperor Octauian Augustus,
that upon the coast of France were found certain Mermaydes dead upon the
bank of the river. In like sort Georgius Trapezuntius, a man very famous in
learning, affirms to have seen upon the border of the River, appearyng out
of the water in the form of a Woman until the nauill, whereof seemyng to
marvel, and beholding her somewhat nearely, she retired into the water.
Alexander ab Alexandro, a great ciuilian Philosopher in the.viij. Chapter of
his third book assures for certainty, that in Epyre, now named Romain, is a
certain fountain near the Sea, from whence young Maids for the necessity of
their houses, did draw water, and that hard by issued a Triton or Sea man,
and caughte a little damsel, whom he carried oftentimes into the sea, and
after set her on land again: whereof the inhabitauntes being advertised,
used such watch and guarde, that they took him, and brought him before the
Justice of the place, before whom being searched and examined, found in him
all parts and members of a man, for which they committed him to certain
guard and keepyng, offering him meat, the which he refused with sorrowful
lamentations after his kind, not tastyng any thing that was offered him, and
lastly dyed of hunger, seeing him self restrained from the Elemente wherein he
was wont to dwell. Many writers now a days do witness a thing more strange
than any of these, if it be true, which is, that the Archduke of Austriche,
third son of the Emperor Ferdinando, made to be carried with him to Gennes, in
the year.1548. a Mermayd dead, the same so astonishing the people, that the
most learned men in Italy came to visit and see him. I could yet make of
more Watermonsters seen in our time, as that which was figured like a Monk,
an other like a Bishop with other of like resemblaunce: which importe the more
faith, because they are preferred by three of the most notable Fishers in
Europe, being also figured so amply in the universal History of Fyshes, that
I need not to enlarge their descriptions, for they have so lernedly discoursed
of the propreties of the same, that they have cut of all hope to such as
shall come after them, to advance it with further addition.

Wonders of Dogs which did eat Christians. CHAP. xix.
IF the bones and ashes of all those which have been persecuted for the name of
Jesus Christ, Damascen writes, that in the time of Maximinian there were
killed and martyred in.xxx. days.xvij. thousand christians.
were at this day in being, and to be seen with our corporal eyes, we might
then confess, that they were able to build a great and proud City: and
withal, if all the blood which has been shed for his name, were gathered
together into one certain place, it were sufficient to make a great flood. For
who soever will read in Eusebius, and S. Augustine, the ^^rsecutions,
burnings, butcheries and slaughters which were made of the poor flock of
Jesus Christ, in the time of the Emperor Domitian, Traian, Antonius, Seuerus,
Maximinian, Decius, Valerian, Aurelian, Diocletian and Maximian with many
others, he shall not find so many thousands slain in the cruel wars of the
Tirau^ts, as he shall read to have shed their blood for ye name of Jesus
Christ: neither is the sacrifices of so many Martirs and companies of the good,
so amply spoken of by Saint Augustine in his.xviij. book.lij. chap. of the
City of God, or by Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical history, or that Orseus
writes, so much to be wondered at or strange, Cornelius Tacitus lib. 15.
as this whereof Cornelius Tacitus makes mention is wonderful and worthy to
be put in memory amongst the most celebrate pourtraicts and monsters of this
world. For it did not only suffice the infamous Tiraunt Nero, to make to be
burned the bodies of the poor Christians, making them serve as torches and
blazing linkes to give light to the Citizens of Rome, but also made the^ to be
wrapped quick in the skins of certain savage beasts, to the end that the
dogs, thinking they had been beasts in deed, might tear and commit their
bodies to pieces. Which you may now see by the furious assaults that Satan,
and his accomplices have builded against the members of Jesus Christ: for
there is no Religion which he has not so furiously persecuted since the
beginning of the world, as this of ours, wherein although he has set abroche
all his subtilties, frauds, malices and inventions to undermine it, yet
notwithstanding it remains whole and sound, by the virtue and aid of the
Son of God: who has and can bridle and repress the envious rage of his
enemies. And although he has procured the death of many members of the
Church, as Abell, Esaie, Jeremy, Zachary, Policarpius, Ignatius, and many
thousand Martirs and Apostles: yet notwithstanding he could never deface any
jot thereof: for it is written in like manner, that the gates of hell could not
by any means prevail against her, albeit that for a certain time she was
put in some peril, and was shaken and tossed like a little bark, by the rage
and te^pestes of the Sea: yet surely Jesus Christ did not forsake at any time
his espouse, but always assisted her, as the head of his body, watched her,
guarded her, and maintained her, as is witnessed in the promises made unto her:
when he said, I will not leave you, my Orpheus, I will be with you to the
very last consummation of the world. And further he says in Esaie, I will
put my word into your mouth, and defend you with the shadow of my hand, and
those words which I put into your mouth, shall not be taken from your seed,
now nor never. Wherein seeing then that our only religion is true and purified,
and that it is signed by the blood of so many Prophets, Apostles and Martirs,
and confirmed besides with the blood of Jesus Christ, whereof he has left to
us the true Charecter and witness of his death, and that all others be
unlawful bastards, and invented by the Devils, and men their ministers, to the
utter confusion of ours: wherefore if it be so pure and holy, let us then
endeavor our selves to conserve and kep^ the same, to the end we may say in
the last day to God, as the good king David said, Lord, I hate them that hate
thee, I am angry with them that rise against thee, and I hate them with a
perfect hate, and hold them for mine enemies.

A wonderful history of diverse figures, Comets, Dragons, and flames, which
appeared in heaven to the terror of the people, and whereunto the causes and
reasons of them be assigned. CHAP. xx.
THe face of Heaven has been at diverse times so much disfigured by blasing
stars, torches, fireforkes, pillours, Lances, bucklers, Dragons, two Moons
and two Suns at one instant, with other like things, that whosoever would
recompte by order, those which only have appeared (since the nativity of
Jesus Christ,) together, searching the causes of their beginning and birthes,
the life of a man would not perform the same: albeit the most notable and
worthy to be celebrated, of al others, is the star which co^ducted the.iij.
sage Kings of Perse, to the place where Christ was borne, the which feared not
only the common people, but the sight thereof ravished and brought into
admiration the most learned of the world, for that it, against the Nature of
all other stars (which draw them selves from the Orient to the Occident,)
addressed her course into Palestine, which is situated toward ye North,
causing S. John Chrysostom to think, that that star was none of them which
we see in heaven, but rather a virtue invisible, figured under the form of a
star. Notwithstanding let us leave of to discourse of this star, and come
to other strange things, which have appeared from heaven, whereof Gaguin in
his sixte book of ye gestes of the Kings of France, makes mention of a very
marvelous blasing star, which appeared in the Septentrion in the time of
Charles the.vj. In the year.597. which was in the year of the nativity of the
false impostour Mahomet, at Constantinople was seen a hearie Comet, so hideous
and fearful, that they thought the end of the world approached. An other
like president was seen a little space before the death of the Emperor
Constantin, whereof Orseus in his.vij. book and.ix. Chapter, and Eutropeus in
his second book makes mention: that in the year that Mitrydates was borne,
and in the year wherein he received the Scepter Royal, there appeared a Comet
from heaven, as Justin and Vincentius write, which for the space of xxiiij.
days, occupied so well the fourth part of heaven, casting such a clear
light, that the brighnesse of the Sun was thereby darkened. And also in the
year that Tamburlan the Tirant killed so many men and women in one overthrow
of the Turks, that of their heads only he made a great wall (as Matheolus
writes) there appeared a marvelous blasing star in the Occident, A wall of
dead men's head.
whereof Pontanus and Ioachinus Camerarius in his book de ostentis, learnedly
writes. Herodian a Greek author, in the life of the Emperors makes mention
that in the reign of Commodeus the Emperor, they saw by the space of a whole
day, a number of stars shyning as though it had been night: likewise in the
year that Jews the stutting French King died, they beheld from heaven
shining a great number of stars at nine of the clock in the morning, wherein
as Hieronimus Cardanus in his.xiiij. book De veritate rerum, assures to have
seen in the year 1532. the.xj. day of April, being at Venise, three suns
together, clear, bright and shining. Even so in the year that Francis Sforce
died (after whose deceasse grew great wars in Italy) there was in like
manner seen at Rome three suns, which did so frighte the people, that they
fell immediately to prayer, thinking the malice and ire of God were kyndled
against them for their sins. Also the Pope Pius, second of that name, who was
called before he received that dignity, Aeneas Siluius, who died in the year
460. writes in his description of Europe the.liiij. chap. that in the sixth
year after the Iubile, there was seen amongst them of Sienne and Florence,
twenty clouds in the air, who being stirred of the wyndes, fought one
against another, every one in his rank, reculing and approaching according to
the order and manner of battaill, and during the conflicte of these clouds, the
wind was not unoccupied in dispoiling, battering, brusing and breaking trees,
houses, and rocks, besides lifting of men and beasts into the air. The
antiquity of time cannot report or make mention of a more wonder in the air,
than of a horrible Comet of the color of blood, which appeared in the West,
the eleventh day of October in the year 1527. being so wonderful and
fearful, that it engendered so great terror to the common sort, that diverse
not only died with the sight, but others fell into strange and miserable
maladies. This strange Comet was seen of many thousand, continuing the space
of an hour and a quarter, and in the end began to bring her self to the side
of the sun, after drawing toward the Midy, the Occident, and the
Septentrion, appearing to be of an excessive length, and of the color of
blood, there was seen in ye height of the Comet the Character and figure of
the stumpe of an arm, holding a great sword in his hand, as he would have
stricken: about the point of the said sword, were three stars, but that which
was right upon the point, was more clear and brighte than the others: on the
other two sides of the beams of this Comet, they saw a great number of
hatchettes, knives, swords of the color of blood, about the which were a
great number of human faces very hideous, with their beardes and hair
stirring, as may be seen before figured. Shortly after ye view of this
hideous and wonderful Planet, all the parties of Europe were welnigh bathed in
human blood* so much prevailed the invasion of the Turckes, besides other
hurtes which Italy received by the Lord of Bourbon, when he committed Rome to
sack, dying at the same instant: like as Petrus Creuserus and John Litchber
excellent Astrologians interpret by writing the signification of this
wonderful Planet. Even so for that we have promised in the induction of our
work, to show the causes and beginnings of these wonders, it is therefore now
requisite to search more narrowly the matter, and to decide the question so
often debated amongst the Ancients and learned Philosophers. These
fantastical figures, as dragons, flames, Comets, and other like of diverse
forms, which are seen so often in the Element according to the opinions of
many wise men, do give to understand, foretell or show many things that shall
and do happen, as Albumazar, Dorotheus, Paulus Alexa^drinus, Ephestion
Maternus* Aomar, Thebith, Alkindus, Paulus Manlius, Alberanger, and generally
the most part of the ancient Greeks, Hebrews, Caldees, Arabec and Egiptians,
who have written and attributed so much to the stars, and their influence,
that they have assured the most part of the human actions, to depend of
the celestial constellations. Whereof Cicero in his first book De fato^,
seems to favor them much, when he affirms darckely* that those which are
borne under the Planet De Canis, shall not be drowned. In like manner Faber
Stapulensis in his Paraphrase of Metheores, makes mention that the Commettes,
which appeared from heaven, signified scarsitie of goods, abundance of
great winds, wars, effusion of blood and the death of Princes, Hieronimus
Cardanus a late Philosopher, writes in his fourth book De subtilitate,
and.xiiij. book De veritate rerum, that the hearie and bearded Comets and
other like monstrous figures which appear from heaven, be as foretellers and
messengers of famine, pestilence, wars, mutations of Realms, and other such
like hurtes which happen to the generation of man. And he further beleues, that
the greater and hideous these figures appear, they purporte and show the
greater evils. Whereof, Proculus one of the most excellent Astrologians which
Greece at any time norished, follows the interpretations of such predictions,
by all the signs of heaven, recompting by order the marvelous powers which
these stars have upon the actions human. And there be others as Ptolome,
which have written, that if any infant in his nativity be borne under
certain constellations, he shall have power over devils: there be also others
of opinion, but they be most shameless and full of blasphemies, who have so
much referred themselves to the disposition of stars, that they have not
feared to write, that if any from their nativity were borne under the aspect
of certain stars, that they should have the gift of prophecy, and should
foretell things to come. And that Jesus Christ the savior of all the world, was
borne under certain fortunate co^stellations, being ye cause yt he was so
perfect and wrought so many miracles. Here you may see the cruel and horrible
blasphemies, which these detestable and infamous Astrologians judicial bring
forth, which is ye cause yt S. Augustine has banished the^ from the City of
God. Basil and S. Ciprian deteste the^. Chrysostom, Eusebius, Lactantius, and
S. Ambrose abhor them. The council of Tollete reiecte them. the civil laws
punish them by death. And the Ethniques also, as Varro, Cornelius Celsus, and
many other, defame them. But far more diversely amongst Princes than any
other, has Picus Mirandula showed him self, who has so very well brought to
light, and discovered the Labyrinth of their dreams in a Latin work, which he
made against them, that they scarcely dare once lift up their horns. Wherefore
let us now return to our purpose and show so near as we can, whether these
strange figures and Comets which we see from heaven, be foretellers of things
which shall happen, or that they be natural: wherein as Aristotle in his
first book of Metheores, treating very learnedly of the nature of Cometes, and
of these other impressions, Characters, and figures which be made from heaven,
says, that they be made only by nature, without making mention that they
either foretell or appoint any thing which shall happen: even so it is to be
presupposed, that if Aristotle, who is the first and most excellent of all
those which have written at any time in this Art, had found never so little
conjecture or reason in nature, that they were appointers of any thing which
should come to pass, he would have kept them no more secret or hidden, than
he has done the other secrets of philosophy, which he has left to us by
his writings. Wherefore it is then certain, that these fantastical flames and
other figures, which we see from heaven, be natural and grow upon this
occasion following. There be three regions in heaven, one which is most high,
who receives into her a marvelous heat, for that she is next neighbor to
the Element of fire: the other which is lower, receives the beams of the
Sun beaten back of the earth, whereof I have made mention in my description
of the cause of thunders. The third is in the mydst of these two, to the which
do come the force of the heat, which comes from the uppermost part, like to
the heat of the beams of the Sun, beaten back when it comes from the
lowest or inferior region. For as Pliny witnesses, the stars be continually
nourished of the humor procedyng of the ground, which be the chiefest causes of
these celestial flames: for the earth as Aristotle shows in his first book
of Metheores, being chafed of the Sun, renders double ayrely substance, the
one vapor which we may proprely name exhalation hot and dry, the other is
hot and moist: and because the first vapor is most light, she is suffered
to come to the highest region of the air, where she is set on fire: whereof
proceeds these fyres and flames from heaven, which in the forms of diverse
strange shinyngs appear in the Clouds in sundry figures, as in the shape of
burning torches, of ships, heads, lances, bucklers, swords, bearded and
hairie Comets, with other like things, whereof we have made mention here
before: The cause of the flames of fire from heaven.
the which engenders great terror and astonishement to those, who be ignorant
of the causes, wherein as it hapened oftentimes amongst the Romans, in the
wars of the Macedons, who being brought into such fear and terror, The
Romans fearful of the Eclipse of the Moon.
by the sudden appering of the Eclipse of the Moon, that their hearts began to
fail them: Even so Cneius Sulpitius seeing the^ continuing in this fear (by a
wonderful eloquence) showed unto them by probable reasons, that such mutation
in the air was natural, and that the Eclipse proceeded of no other thing, The
cause of the Eclypse of the Moon.
than of an interposition of the Moon betwixt the Sun and us, and of the
earth betwixt us and the Moon, by which means they were delivered of their
error, not knowing til that hour, the cause of the said Eclipse. The like may
be said of the raining of blood, the which has so much frighted the people in
the years passed, for because they were ignorant whereupon it proceeded, as that
which fell from heaven, in the year of health 570. in the time that the
Lumbards were under the conduct of Albuyn, traueling through Italy. And also
there fell the like yet fresh in memory near Fribourgh, in the year.1555. the
which stained and made the garments and trees which it touched, of the
color of read, and notwithstanding although that this seems wonderful,
yet oftentimes it is natural. For like as the earth gives diverse colors to
many bodies: even so she colors the water of the rain, for if the earth be
read, she renders those vapors and exhalations read, the which being
converted into rain, the heaven in like manner sends them to us read, and
colored as they were attired and lifted in height: and falling so upon
certain habites, she makes them of the color and die of read. Wherefore many
Historians, as well Greeks as Latins, amongst their great maruels and rare
wonders from heaven, have made mention of these bloody shoures. It rests now
to put to the last seal this chapter, and to appoynte the causes of the
number of Suns and Moons, which appear oftentimes from heaven, as the three
Suns, iij suns seen by Cardanus.
the which Cardanus reports to have seen in our time, being at Venice. And
like as we have said, that these figures which appear from heaven be natural,
even so we must speak of the multitude of Moons and Suns, the which
appear, for that oftentimes, and specially when a certain thick cloud is
ready to rain, The causes of the shows of so many su^nes and moons.
being found on the side of the Sun, the same by a like reflection on her
beams, imprinteth her image in the same cloud: by the which means we judge
to see diverse suns. We may also see the like in a table well painted and
polished, which when we behold, there appears to us the shape of two or.iij.
being but one in deed, and as much we may say of ye Moon. Thus have we
declared the very true causes wherefore appear so often.ij. or.iij Suns and
Moons: let us therefore now from henceforth search in nature the cause and
beings of these things, and stay no more at these fripperies, deceiptes, and
dreams of the Astrologians judicials, who thereby have so oftentimes deceived
and begiled us, that they ought and deserve to be banished and exiled from all
common wealths well governed: for what trouble, perplexity and terror have
they engendered in the consciences of a number of poor people. As for example,
in the year 1514. when they feared not with obstination to publishe openly in
all places, that there should be in the month of February well nigh an
universal flood, for that the conjunction of all the planets were in the sign
of Pisces, and notwithstanding the day which should have brought forth these
waters, was one of the most fair and temperate days of the year: albeit many
great personages, fearful of their prophecies, made provision of biscuit,
flower, ships and other like things propre to sail withal, fearyng to be
surprised and drowned with the great abundance of water, which they before
had told of. Let us further from henceforth learn with Henry the.vij. king
of England, who reigned in our time, making no account of their deceytes, but
chastised their dream, who upon the sudden being made to understand, that
one of the most famous Astrologians of England had published in all places,
that he had found amongst the most hidden secrets of Astrology, that the King
should die before the next feast of Christmas, commanded that he should be
brought before him, who after he had asked him whether this talk were true,
and that the prognosticator had answered him that it was certain, and that he
had found this infallible in his constellation and nativity, I pray thee then
said the King, tell me where the stars tell thee thou shalt keep thy
Christmas this year? To whom he answered, he should be in his own house with
his family: but I know very well said the King, that thy stars be liars: for
thou shall neither see Moon, Sun, Stars, heaven, nor thy family this
Christmasse, putting him presentely in the most straight and dark prison, in
the great tower of London, where he continued till the feast was past. Here you
may see how this true Astrologian was used, remaining prisoner in extreme
misery, until after the feast kept of the nativity of Jesus Christ.

A wonderful History of Flames of fire, which have sprung out of the heads
of diverse men. CHAP. xxj.
IF there were but one only Author which had made mention of the History
followyng, although the truth thereof be sufficiently proved, for which cause
I have the rather at this time placed it in these my wonders, as a chief
argument or conjecture in nature, whereupon may be founded the cause:
notwithstanding, seeing so many learned men have busied themselves to write
thereof, together with so great a number of faithful authors witnessing the
same in their works, we ought the rather upon their credit to believe that
which they have said therein. Titus Liuius in his third book and third
Decade, Cicero in his second book De diuinatione, Valerius the great in his
first book and.vj. chapter, Frontinus in his second book and.x. chapter,
write, that after the Scipions were surprised by their enemies, and overthrown
and killed by the Spaniards, and that Lucius Martius, a Roman knight, making
an oration to his soldiers, exhorting to reue^gement, they became astonished
to see a great flame of fire issuing from his head, without doing to him any
hurt, which caused the armed men, being moved with the sight of this wonderful
flame, to take heart and run so furiously upon their enemies, that they not
only killed xxvij. thousand, but also had a pray of a great number of
captives, besides an inestimable riches they took from the Carthaginiens.
Neither have such fantastical fyres sprung from the bodies of certain men, or
appeared in one only, but in many. Whereof the same author Titus Liuius writes
(in his first book of things worthy of memory since the foundation of Rome)
the like to happen to Seruius Tullius, who succeeded in the imperial seat
Tarquinius Priscus from whose head (being yet but young) and as he slepte, they
saw issue a flame of fire: whereupon the Queen Tanaquil, wife to the foresaid
Priscus, affirmed to her husband, that this flame promised to him great good,
honor and prosperity, which afterward chanced: for he married not only her
daughter, but after the death of her husband, he was King of the Romans. And
Plutarche and others have written the like of Alexander, when he fought
against the Barbariens, being in the most heat of the skirmish, they saw him
all on fire, which caused a marvelous fear and terror to his ennimies. Even
so I know a certain Physician at this day, who writes of the like in diverse
of his histories, chauncing in our time to a nere friend of his in Italy, not
only at one time, but at many. Whereof, as Plinius not only in an other
place, makes mention of the river Trasimenus, which was seen all on fire,
but also makes a certain discourse of these wonderful flames, which be seen
about the bodies of men. Also Aristotle in his first book of Metheores,
treats in like manner. But to tell you mine opinion therein, I can not any
ways gather the cause or foundation either of the one or other, although I
have promised to show the causes and reasons, whereupon these wonders proceed
and take their beginning. For if we will say they be made by Art: As we have
seen very often in our time certain Ruffians vomit and cast forth of their
mouths, certain flames of burning Fire, which Atheneus in the first book of
the Dipnosophistes and fouretenth Chapter does witness, which could not
happen (as I think) to the Histories before mentioned, for that it has
chanced to great lords, upon whom these wonders have been most proved, by
which means, they being attended upon with a great number and multitude of
persons, the fraud thereof was easlyer discovered. Wherefore it is most
expediente then to believe, that they be wonders and deceytes of Satan, who
was so familiar in the world passed, that he invented daily new wonders, as
is wytnessed in Exodus of the Magitiens of Pharao, which converted Maids into
Serpents, and floudes of water into blood, which be matters as difficulte, as
to make flames of fire issue or come from the bodies of men.

A History very notable of Prodigeous Loves. CHAP. xxij.
I Am ashamed and almost confused in my self, that I must declare the
wonderful love of three of the most renoumed Philosophers that ever were at
any time in the world. Whereof the one of them so well studied in the
perfectness of the soul, Plato.
and of the nature divine, with a wonderful diligence in giving wholesome laws
for a commonwealth, that S. Augustine dare write and affirm of him, saving in
some respects, to be a perfect Christian. The second so well seen in the
Element, Aristotl^.
treating also very learnedly of the secrets of Nature, and other sensible
things, that he shone amongst the rest of the Philosophers, as the sun
amongst the stars. The third as he was nothing inferior in learning to the
other two, so had he besides such a kind of holiness, Socrates.
and other ornaments of Civility, that he was nu^bred amongst the seven fages
of Greece, which notwithstanding although they had curiously searched the
secrets of the heavens, of Nature, the being and resort of all things
contained within the compass of the earth, yet were they not so finely studied
nor so well armed in the secrets of their sciences, as either they understand
the Nature of so fair and delicate a creature, as a woman is, or other ways
be able to defend them selves from their cruel assaults. All the great
Mass of Philosophy, wherein Aristotle was so deeply plunged and greatly
studied from his birth to his sepulture, was not of sufficient force to subdue
in him the motions of the flesh, for he became in love with a common woman
named Hermie, the love of whom had so much enflamed him, that he not only
consumed in the sight of all men, but that which more was, he became not only a
stranger for her sake to Philosophy, which deserves to be noted amongst these
wonders, but also worshipped her and made to her sacrifices, as Origene
writes, whereof being accus^d by Demophilus, he was constrained to abandon
Athens, where he had remained and written xxx. years, and saved him self by
flighte. Plato (who only amongst the Philosophers merited the name of divine)
was not so supersticious, but he would as well know what was humanity, as he
had been diligent to search the secrets of the heavens, that he would often
times behold and remain with human bodies, as is well notified of him by
keeping company with A^chenasse, who although she had given her self over to
a number in her youth, notwithstanding when she was aba^doned of others, Plato
received her, being so much assotted in her, that he not only loved her, but
made certain verses in her praise, lamenting that he should so much in the
sight of al men embrace the love of so many old wrinkels, as Atheneus ye
Greek author writes in his.xiij. book de ses Dipnosophistes. Socrates whose
majesty and gravity was so much renoumed and celebrated by ye Auncie^ts, yt
they write this wonder of him, that he was always one man, in sort that for
any Eclips of fortune, prosperity or adversity, they never at any time found
mutation in him, notwithstanding he was not so stern or severe in his actions,
but the love of his Aspasie did at all times mollify the same, as Clearchus
makes report unto us by writing, in the first book of his Amors. And like
as I have brought these three to light, so could I rehearse a great number
of others, as Demosthenes, Isocrates, Pericles and many others, whose amorous
and lascivious loves the Greek Historians have sufficiently discovered, that
in reading of them, I have much marvel that the greatness of their study,
science and wisdom, could not moderate such motions and flames, but that the
smoke of their wanto^ dealings remains to their posterity. Wherefore Lays,
so much renowned amongst the lost women, was one day in a great collar
against diverse which praised very earnestly the life and manners of all the
learned and wise Philosophers of Athenes, and said unto some of them, I know
not (says she) what is their knowledge, neither what is their science, neither
what books your Philosophers study, whom you so much commend, but I know
this very well, yt I being but a woman, and besides yt I never red in ye
schools at Athenes, yet have I seen very often the wise men come here to my
school, where, of grave Philosophers they became folishe lovers. Let us
therefore leave these Philosophers at rest, and search out others: for
whosoever would make a Callender of al those, who have made them selves
subject to love, should rather make a whole book thereof, than a chapter.
Menetor (as Atheneus recites) makes mention of an amorous history, worthy
to be noted in our wonders, for that there is nothing more rare in Nature, than
to see her which loves well, willing to make partition to an other of that,
which was so dear unto her, the which some times chanced in a notable
history that we have to write of. Atheneus makes mention of a common woman,
greatly renoumed for her beauty, whose name was Plangon Milesienne, and as she
was beautiful, so was she desired of many great Lords: But amongst others,
she had a young man called Colophomen, a man exquisite in beauty, whom she
commonly played withal, and who above all others enjoyed the best part in her.
Notwithstanding, as these lascivious loves be for the most part grounded on
tickle and uncertain foundatio^s, yt all the building comes in ye end to
utter decay and ruin: even so there happened such a Jealousy betwixt Pla^gon
and her friend, for yt she understood he loved an other called Bachide
Samienne, one nothing inferior to her for beauty and other douries of Nature.
Wherein being assailed with this new Jealousy, she determined to make truce with her
love, and to give ye farewell to this yo^g ge^tlema^. Whereupon this young man,
who wished rather to die tha^ to become a stranger to her, in whom co^sisted ye
comfort and solace of his life began to embrace and cherish her as he was wont
to do, but she as cold as ye yse of ye mountaigne, made no acco^pte of al his
plaints, sighs and lame^tatio^s, requesting yt he would shun al places of her
repair, without making him further to understand the cause of her
displeasure: ye young man touched more near ye quick with her new refusal,
prostrated him self at her feet all bedewed with tears, exclaming that if
she deferred to give him remedy, or otherwise relieve him by the influence of
some gracious beam of pity, he should presentely perish. Plangon moved with
rage, pity, and love, said unto him, let me not find thee during thy life
in my presence, unless thou present me with the chain of gold, so much
celebrated of Bacchide Samienne: wherefore the young man without other reply
went to Bacchide, to whom having made understand from point to point the
fury of the flames and ardent amity which he bare to Plangon, vanquished of
pity and love, gave unto him her chain, with charge that he should forthwith
present it unto her, who had so grievously tormented him: wherein she showed her
self very liberal and bountiful, seeing that the Historians write, that all
the treasures which she had gathered by little and little during all her life
of those which loved her, was melted and put into that Chain, which was of
monstrous greatness, and also kept of her with great care for the only relief
of her in her old age, if fortune suffered her to be pinched with poverty. The
young man having thus caught the pray he most desired, went to find out
Plangon, to whom he offered the chain, making her to understand the
liberality of his ancient friend, between who^ neither time nor distance of
place, nor other sinister accident could extinguishe their friendship:
wherewith Plangon, maruelling of the love and liberality of her companion,
having a noble heart, and not willing to give place to Bacchide, neither in
good will nor bounty, sent to her again her chain, loving then more fervently
the young man, tha^ she had done at any time before: and that which is most
wonderful, imparted her love to Bacchide, being content the young man should
be common to them both. Which made the Greeks with great admiration to name
her after Pasiphyle. Wherein being now so ancred in matters of wonderful loves,
we must search the most rare and marvelous histories, amongst whom I do not
remember, there have been any dames in all the world, which have demeaned
their love with more great wonder, neither which have ^^te a more eternal
witness to their posterity of their wanton and lascivious lives, than Lamie,
Flora and Lays, of whom I will write the life according as Pausanias the
Greek, and Manilius the Latin, have written in their books entreating of noble
loving women. But above all others I will follow Anthonius of Gueuare, Bishop of
Mon^demo, in a learned treatise which he has made of this matter. These three
Dames have been three of ye most fair and most famous women of the world,
which at any time were either borne in Asia or nourished in Europe, and of
whom the Historiographers have most talked, and by whom most Princes have
come to ruin and perdition. It is written of them for a wonder, that they so
well charmed those which loved them, that they were never left of any Prince
which loved them, nor denied at any time, any thing they required: and
further it is written that these.iij. women as they never mocked any man, so
they were not mocked of any. The Historians write that these.iij. Courtizans
during their life, were.iij. of the most rich Courtizans of the world, and
after their decease left most great memory of them, for every of them where
they dyed, did erecte a great pillour of stones, to continue a remembrance of
them: and besides that every one of them were by Nature beautiful, yet had they
a further particular gift to allure and entice their lovers to love the^. The
engine wherewith Lamie entrapped her lovers, proceeded of regard, for by the
drawing of her eyes she enflamed the beholders. Flora wanne hirs by her
wonderful eloquence. And Lays allured by her sweet and pleasant hermonie.
Wherefore the King Demetrius, suddenly receiving ye glaunce of the eye of
Lamie, was taken in the net, and that new fire in process of time gained so
much over him, yt he lived not but in her, and not only gave her all he had,
but also abandoned his wife Euxonie to follow his Lamie. Wherefore Plutarke
recites in the life of Demetrius, that the Athenians having given unto him.xj.
talents of silver to aid and pay his great army, he made a present of all
the said su^me to his Lamie, whereat ye Athenians were maruellously grieved, to
see their money so evil employed. This miserable King Demetrius doated so
extremely in the love of his Lamie, that he honored her as a God, swering by
her, as he accustomed to do by his Gods, till death and fortune which cuts
asunder the fillet of those delites, and sends end to all such enterprises,
suffered Lamie to die, whereupon that poor King, felt himself so griped, that
as some write of him, he kissed her, and embraced her after her death: and not
content with this Idolatry, he made her be buried before one of ye windows of
his house, and when any of his friends asked the occasion wherefore he buried
her in that place, he answered them, sighing dipely: the law of friendship of
Lamie is so strongly graffed in my heart, that I know not wherein to satisfy
the love she bare me, and the bond which I owe to her for ye same, if not to
put her in such a place, that by view thereof my poor eyes may bewail daily
the death of her, and my sorrowful heart continually think thereof. Whereby the
dolor and sorrow that Demetrius had for ye death of Lamie, was so great and
extreme, that all the Philosophers of Athens were to dispute thereof, whether
of these two things were most to be esteemed, either the tears and sorrow
which he suffered for her, or the riches which he spent in the obsequies and
pomps of her burial. Within a year and.ij. months after the death of Lamie,
died King Demetrius. The second amorous Dame, named Lays, spoken of before, was
the daughter of a great Sacrificatour of the Temple of Apollo, a man so expert
in the art Magical, that he prophesied the perdition of his daughter
incontinent after her nativity. This Lays (as her companion) had a King for
her friend, who was the renoumed Pirrhus, with whom she went into Italy, in
the expedition and wars he made against the Romans, remaining there a long
time in his camp, and after returned with him from the wars: notwithstanding
it is written of her, that she never gave her self to one man alone. This Lays
was so sufficiently furnished with all perfections of beauty, and ornaments of
Nature, that if she would have been continent, and not common in her love,
there had not been so constant a Prince in ye world, which would not have
desired her, and not denied to perform what she had demanded of him. Being
returned from Italy into Greece* she remained at Corinthe as Aulus Gelius
writes, and there was sought unto of many Kings and noble men, whom she
courted and dandled with such dissimuled sleightes in love, that if her lovers
were unfeignedly passioned and burned extremely in the desire of her beauty,
she took a singular pleasure to smile and ieste at their simplicity and
folly, being besides, noted for one of the women of the world, who exceeded
the rest in making gain and proffit of her love I have red one wonder of her,
which I never heard of in any but in her, that is, that she never showed
affection to any man, neither was she in love with any man, which could be
known. This Lays died in ye City of Corinthe, being of the age of lxxij.
years: the death of whom, as it was much desired of many honest Matrones,
so was it as much lamented of many wanton lovers. The third Dame of the world,
was named Flora, which was an Italian, far surmounting the two others in
generositie and noble disce^t: for she was issued of a certain Romain Knight,
greatly renoumed in the feats of war, who deceassed with his wife, leaving
this young maid of the age of xv. years, no less charged with riches than
endewed with great beauty, and the only daughter of her parents: In such
sort that as the young Damsel was young, rich, beautiful, and enjoying a
liberty without controlement, which be the greatest baudes of the world, and
chief means to make a woman glide in such slippery paths ^ seeing all these
means, she did determine to go unto the wars of Affrique, where she made
sale both of her person and honor: and so flourished in the time of the first
wars of Punique, when the Consul Manileus was sent to Carthage, who spente
more money in making love to Flora, than in the conqueste of his enemies. And
like as this Damsel was issued of a more gentle and noble race, than the other
two before recited: even so she showed her greatness in the choice of her
lovers, for I never red that she gave her self over to mean and petty
Companions, as Lays or Lamie did, but caused to be set up a^scrol over her
gate, which said: King, Prince Dictatour, Consul, Censour, Bishop and Questour
may knock and enter, not speaking of Emperor or Caesar, for these two famous
names, were not of long time after created by the Romans, in such sort,
that she never committed her self, but to men of high degree, dignity and
great richesse, saying always that a woman of great beauty should be
as much esteemed, as she values and accomptes of her self: Albeit Lays and Flora
were contrary in doings, for Lays would be paid her hire before she had
performed her work. But Flora, without making account either of gold or
silver, would be governed of her lover. And being one day asked the cause of
that, she answered. I commit my person to Princes and noble men, to the end
they may deal with me, as noble men ought to do, for I swear by all our
Gods, that there was never man gave me so little, but that I had more than I
looked for, and double to that I demanded: saying that a sage woman ought not
to make price of her love, for the amorous pleasure she does to any man, but
rather for the love she bears to him, for that al things in the world be
priced at a certain rate, except Love, which can not be paid but with love.
Wherefore all the Ambassadors of the world which came into Italy, carried back
as great and several reports of the beauty and nobleness of Flora, as of the
Public weal of Rome, for that it seemed as monstrous a thing to see the
riches of her house, her beauty, the princes and noble men who daily required
her, as also to behold the great presents they made unto her: for look what
day she passed on horseback in Rome, the view of her and her attire, gave
sufficient occasion to all the Citizens to talk thereof one month after. She
dyed at the age of.lx. years, leaving her wealth and riches to the people of
Rome, as her only heirs, which was esteemed not only sufficient to have
edified the walls of Rome, if they had been utterly in ruin and decay, but
also to have redeemed the common wealth. Wherewith giving end to the discourses
of these Women, there rests to search out some other cause more strange
and rare in our wonderful loves. Cornelius and Suetonius write, that the
abominable tyrant Nero, did not only offend grievously in the abuse of a
number of honest and chaste virgins, but also causing to be gelded a fair young
boy, whom he named Sporus, with intent to transform him into the use of a
woman, he married him with open solemnity, using him in the place of his wife,
touching the exercise of marriage, and assigned dowry and portion according to
the order. And whether may we term it an act of wonderful love or effect of
doting folly? Herodotus reports of the daughter of Cheopes King of Egypt,
who having consumed his treasure and revenue in the supply of a hundred
thousand workmen, laboring upon a most sumptuous Pile which he made, and
being as destitute of money, as void of means to get it, commanded his
daughter to commit her self to sensual prostitution, and that with charge,
that she should not only rack her honor to a high price, but also refuse
none, whose company brought commodity, which she performed accordingly,
demanding of every one that dealt with her, a stone, by whose gain was raised
so much as builded the Pyramides, or hill which carries in the front a
hundredth and fifty foot. Ludouicus Vartomanus writes, that there is an other
manner of making of love at this day in use in a certain province of Indie,
named Tarnasseri, which is no less wonderful tha^ the precedent before
recited, if ye experience were to be seen: he declares, that when a young man
is enamored of any dame, desiring to make her understand the flames of his
love, he takes a piece of woullen cloth dipped in oil, and putting thereto
fire, coucheth the same upon his naked arm, enduring that flame until the
cloth be clean consumed, without showing any kind of dolor, testifying by
this, that he is so strongly embraced with the love of his lady, that there is
no kind of torment or martyrdom under the heavens, which he would not taste
or be partaker of for her sake. But to the end we should not taste too much of
these filthy and stinking loves, I will show you, that there is to be found as
great wonders in chaste and virtuous love, which is sufficientely proved by
sundry examples, of late written by my brother G. Fenton, in his book of
Tragical Discourses. For what is more strange in Nature than to see a man
sacrifice him self to accompany to death the person whom he loves? And
notwithstanding they have found a number of examples of women, which be more
tender and fearful tha^ men. The chaste Porcia, daughter of Cato, loved so
entierly her husband Brutus, yt after she understood he was slain in Thessaly,
in ye fields Phillipiques, V^serius Max. lib. 4.
for yt she could not presently get a knife to kill her self, she devoured
burning coals. Cleopatra, late queen of Egypt, nothing inferior in friendship
to ye party aforesaid, having heard of ye death of her husband Anthony,
although she was warely guarded by Octauius Caesar, who would not she should kill
her self, yet notwithstanding their great care to prevent such a mischief, as
Apianus Alexa^drinus writes, she was destroyed by a cruel kind of torment,
for she made her self to be devoured of serpents. Neither let us forget
Arthemise queen of Carry in Greece, who after she knew ye king Mausolus her
husband was dead, she dreyned well nigh al ye watrishe powers of her body by
tears: and after she had sufficiently lamented, she caused to be made so
excellent a sepulcher, yt it was put amongst the maruels of the world: and not
content with this, esteming ye body of him that had been ye organ of her life,
not sufficiently honored with so su^ptuous a to^be, unless she served him as a
sepulcher her self, caused al ye bones of her husband to be subtly beaten to
powder, which she ordinarily used in her meat and drink till they were
consumed. We should not marvel of these wonderful flames of love, which
enchau^t and charm so well ye humain sense, yt they do not only walk incurable
by all ye most sensible parts of our friends, but ye more is, they make us very
often to become mad, fra^tike, and without reason, as appeared by a young
gentleman, issued of ye best house of Athens, who of extreme sorrow died, for
that they would not suffer him to cherish and love an image of Venus, of which
he was greatly enamored. And bisides, it is most strange, yt the co^tagious
tickling of this amorous venim, does not only touch ye humain creatures
reasonable, but also ye infection thereof corrupt's brute beasts. Which Plutarch
witnesses in an experience of an elepha^t, who with Aristophanes of
Alexa^drie, ^oued a maid, to whom ye beast did as liberally and frankly
impart his amorous desire and zeal by secret and simple signs, as
Aristophanes by all the eloquence he could devise: neither is it so strange
altogether, that brute beasts do love creatures reasonable, seeing they are
oftenti^^^ so pressed and pricked forward with their amorous (...), that they
are seen in diverse sorts and kinds to use force against women. Whereof Edouart
in his histories of beasts, gives an example of a certain kind of rough or
shaghaired apes in some countries of India, against whom, the people use a
special defense to keep them from their towns and houses, for that when they
feel any motion of nature, or rather provoked with desire of filthy lust, they
neither spare maid, widow nor wife, nor regard estate, condition, or degree
of women. Whereof have been found diverse proves in sundry unhappy women that
stand not upon their gar^ against the fury of such beasts. Saxonius in his
tenth book of the history of the Danes, writes (as of most credit and truth)
that a Bear in Swetya, serching his pray upon the Mountains, met by chance a
Shephierds wife, whom he carried to his den, where in place to devour her,
he converted his hunger into pleasure and use of her body. And it is more
marvelous, that the fury and violence of Love is so great, that the wild,
brutall and cruel beasts do not only feel the same: but (which more is) the
Trees and lively Plants of the earth, the which we see, show a certain
likeness and affinity of love: in such sort that as Theophrastus and Pliny
have written, there be diverse Trees and Plants, which if you take away the
males, and place them far from the females, they presently wither, and
continue in perpetual barennesse. As we may see of the Uine, who imbraceth the
Elm, ioying and rejoicing much at his presence. In like sort the Iuie, which
is so great a lover of certain Trees, that it accompanies them after their
death: Which gave occasion to the Ancients, that when they took upon them to
depaint perfect friendship, they expressed the same by the trunk of a dead
tree, environed about with Iuie. Wherefore to put end to these most wonderful
things, the secretaries of nature do acknowledge, that there is also a secret
amity amongst metals and stones: for proof of ye Adama^t loving iron draws
it to him, and having caught it, holds it insuche sort, that it seems to be
grieved and touched with a certain ielousy, when they offer to take it from
him. There is also showed marvelous puissance of friendship in metals, which
discovered, show wonderful effects of amity, the which is sufficiently
experimented in gold which we see so manifestly affected to quicksiluer, that
being plunged therein, seems incontinent ravished and captive thereunto, by
force of some furious flame of Love.

A wonderful History of a Monster, out of whose belly issued an other man,
all whole, reseruyng the head. CHAP. xxiij.
OCellus Lucianus, a Greek Philosopher, in a certain little work which he
made, treating as well of the nature of all things, as of generation, showing
unto us, that we ought not to go to the holy state of matrimony for
voluptuousness and pleasure (which oftentimes is not absent) but yt our
principal intent ought only to be for procreation, which is not ordained of ye
Almighty for pleasure only, but for ye perpetual conseruatio^ and permane^cy of
humain society: wherefore being impossible, yt a mortal man should live always,
God supplied that default by continual and perpetual generation, to the end
yt the earth might be multiplied, the commonweals peopled, and the humain
societies co^serued. In consideration whereof, we must cut of al these
generatio^s, which be made against ye ordinance of nature: for by ye means it
often happens, that ye fruit springing thereby is unclean, miserable, monstrous,
vicious, odious and detestable, as well to spirits and devils, as to men and
families. And of these unlawful copulatio^s and licentious dealing, oftentimes
were borne monstrous infantes: As we may see in beholding this before figured,
out of whose belly issued an other man, well formed in all proportions and
members, reserving the head. Like as this man was of the age of.xl. years when
he was seen in France, in the year 1530. Eue^ so he bare ye body betwixt his
arms with great marvel to al ye world, which assembled in great troops to
see him. Whereupon they said, he was begotten of some common woman, who had
given her self indifferently to al co^mers. Min^ author seems to have seen
him at Vale^ce, in ye very same form you see him here pictured, at such time as
mo^sier de Coras red ye Civil laws there: afterward they saw him nigh Paris,
in a town called Montlehery, as many have witnessed: besides yt the good man
John Longis, printer in that university, assured me, yt having with others
taken the said person at ye said Montlehery, deuoyde of the said monster,
^nquired of him what was become of ye deformed creature which they had seen in
times past spring out of his body.

Notable histories of many Plants, with their propreties and virtues, together
with a wonderful root of Baara, written of by Josephus the Hebrew author.
CHAP. xxiiij.
IF there be any thing worthy to be considered of in all the principal parts
of physike, certainly it is that which brings us to the knowledge and searchyng
forth of the nature and propretie of Plants: for bisides the common utility
which they bring to mankind, yet shall we discover therein an antiquity so
great, as we can not learn or attain unto, without extreme admiration: for
like as every art was inverted almost as soon as God had created man, and
afterward augmented by the industry of man: Even so the herbs and plants
immediately after the creation of the elements at such time as there lived no man
upon the earth, sprung (following the commandment of the Lord) from the caves
and entrails of the earth, garnished with their propre and divine virtues.
Which besides that Moses the great Lawyer of God, sufficiently proves in
Exodus, we may also allege the opinion and witness of the ancient Greek
poets, as Orpheus Museus, and Hesiodus, who have treated of the praise of
Penyroyal, as also has done Homerus of Alisier, and others, as in like manner
Pithagoras, has commended the Eschallottus, Crisippus, Chou, and Zeno the
Caprier: besides it is a thing most strange, that Solomon king of the Jews,
Euax, king of the Arabians, Iuba king of the Mauritans, were so curious, not
only to know the names and propreties of plants, but also the most part of
them have diligently written thereof. Others have entertained great
philosophers, and A^borists in diverse deserts of Asia, Europe, and Affrike, for
to discover the secrets of herbs and plants. Further it is a thing most
marvelous, that a great number of plants much renoumed, have taken their
names of many kings, as Gentiane took the name of Gentius king of the
Illyrians, Lymachie of Lyzimachus king of the Macedonians, Teucriu^ was
invented by Teucer, Achilea of Achilles, Arthemisia, of Arthemise queen of
Carry. But now it rests for us as me seems, having searched very narrowely
the Antiquity and praises of Plants, to be as diligent, following our
custom, in seeking forth if we can find amongst herbs, any thing monstrous,
wonderful or strange, as we have ^one in the most part of other things
contained under the concauitie of Heaven. The Ancients have reknowleged, I
know not by what means, ye marvelous efficaci^ of a plant, which they called
Agnus castus, whose leaves are like unto the Olives: for all those, who have
written of the Nature and property of this plant, say that it resists the
sin of the flesh, and that those which either carry the same about them, or
drink the juice thereof, be never tempted at any time to incontinencie: for
which occasion the maids in old time, bare the branches and bows of that
herb in their hand, and made garlandes thereof to wear upon their heads,
thinking thereby to make die and estinguish the heates of the flesh. Wherefore
Discorides in the.xv. chapter of his first book, treating of ye Nature of
plants, says that the Greeks named this tree Agnos, that is to say chaste,
for by that the Ladies sometime in the City of Athens, guarded their chastity,
by making their beads thereof, and doing sacrifice therewith to Ceres. Even as
we have described the singularity of Agnus Castus which defends the chastetie
of such persons as use the same: so are we now to make mention of an other
herb altogether contrary to the Nature of Agnus Castus, and as who would
say his mortal enemy, for it makes such as use the same, lascivious,
prompte and ready to the Uenerian acts: The Ancients have named this herb
Satirium, for that the Satires and savage Gods, were the inuentours of this
plant, for the better satisfying of their lusts and concupiscence when they
went to play by the forests and caves with the Nymphs. Albeit the Greeks
call it Orchis or Cmo^orchis, for that, that this root is like the two
genitories of a dog, in such sort that it seems that Nature would have
left some mark and token in this root, for to show the marvelous effects
or works natural. Wherefore those then, says Discorides in his third book
and.xxij. chapter which he writes of plants, which desire to have the
company of women, ought to use this root, for that it makes men prompte and
ready to the exercise and work of Venus, and as they say, this root being
holden in the hand, provoke a man to desire the pleasure of a woman.
Bisides, there is one thing worthi^ to be considered of in this root, and as
who would say wonderful, that is, that as one of these two roots, which
rese^bleth (as we have said before) the genitories of a dog, excites and
stirs a man immeasurable to the wanton acts of Venus, so the other root
which is a little lesser, extinguisheth and hinders the desire of the flesh,
in such sort, that as one of these roots provoke the evil, so the other
gives remedy. Plinius, Dioscorides and Galen be authors of this, and
Dioscorides writes, that the women in Thessalie, gave to men to drink of that
most fleshly root, the rather to provoke and stir them to the lusts and
abominable desires of the flesh. Wherefore reader, I will not forget to
declare that thou shall not need to doubt of me in all this treatise of the
wonders of plants, the descriptions, faculties, temperaments and divisions of
them, for that this work would be excessive and excede the limits of my
meaning: Wherein Dioscorides, Theophrastus, Galen, Pliny, Matheolus Fuscheus,
Ruel and many others have so well spoken in that, that there is nothing to be
desired more than they have written thereof, which I would gladly have told
before unto those which think that I had here confounded the diverse kinds of
Satirium, like this that the Greeks have called Orchis Serapias, whereof Paulus
Aegineta, and Aetius have made mention, which others say to have received that
name of Serapius, God of the Alexandrians, by reason of the great and impudent
lasciuitie, for which cause they worshipped him in a place called Canope, there
where he had his Temple of great reverence, and Religion, as Strabo recites
in his.xvij. book of his Geographies. Wherefore it suffiseth me in this
chapter to write simply, that there is more cause of marvel and wonder in
some particular plant, than in every plant. The Ancients as Chrisippus, have
found cause of wonder, I can not tell by what means, in the plant which we
commonly call Basil, who were of opinion that it makes a man, senseless and
mad: the goats refuse to eat thereof, which gives just occasion to man to
fly the rather from it. They add further, that brusing it and putting the
same under a stone, it engenders a Scorpion, or if they chawe it and set it in
the Sun, it brings forth worms. Furthermore, some say, that if a man be
stoung of Scorpion the day that he eats of Basil, he shall never be hoale,
likewise some assure, that brusing a handefull of Basil with Cancres marins,
or of the River, that all the Scorpions far or near will come unto him.

Wherefore I am not ignorant, that those which came after Crysippus, did so
abhor Basil, that they never used the same. The herb called of the Latins,
Herbae pulicaris, has such a cold virtue, that being cast into hot boiling
water, it will kill the heat thereof. In like manner, as Chameleon albus,
serves unto men instead of Treacle against poison and all venims: Even so
notwithstanding it kills and destroys Ratts and dogs eating thereof. It is
in like manner a little Thistle growing by the ground, without any stalk,
putting up pricks like an Hedgehogge, having in the middle a knap full of
pricks, in which do appear purple flowers, that grow into plumes, fleeing away
with the wind, like as of other thistels, having a white root and sweet,
grows on old lands and bare hills. Also Dioscorides, Pliny, and
Pithagoras write, that the herb called Scylla, and of the Apothecaries
Squillae, being hanged in a house, delivers men from charms, sorceries, and
enchauntments, the root whereof is like a onyon. Wherefore the good searchers
out of the secrets of plants have found by experience that our Persley, which
the Latins call Apium ^ortense, and the Greeks Selinon, by a certain se^ret
propretie engenders in us the falling sickness, in such sort that Simeon
Sethy writes that it is necessary for such as be subject to that evil, to
take heed they use not ye same, for it often happens that those which he
delivered from that disease, by using of Persley, fall a fresh into the same
again. In like manner Pliny writes, that nurses ought not to eat thereof,
for ye infant (says he) by sucking the milk of her breast which eats
thereof, very often is persecuted with that disease. Furthermore the Consyre,
which the Apoticaries (commending with so many barbarous words) do call
Consolida mayor, has so great a virtue to knit, and make to grow and join
together fresh hurts, for as Pliny and Discorides witness, being put in a
pot with sundry pieces of flesh, it will knit and join them together: for
which cause the Greeks called it Symphiton for the great virtue it has in
knitting and joining togethers. Even so the Greeks and Romans celebrated
always amongst their excellent plants, that which is called in Greek
Peristereon, in Latin Verbenaca, and in French Veruaine, it has been named
aunciently Hierabotane, and Sacra herba, that is to say, a holy herb, for
that at Rome in times paste, it served them not only to purify their houses,
but also their familye was dressed with it, and for a more supersticious
estimation of this herb, they hong the altar of Jupiter with it before they
performed their sacrifice. Their ambassadors that went upon holy messages
were crowned with it, because as Discorides writes, it was very proper to
withstand wicked spirits, and purge the houses, hong or garnished with it.
Dioscorides and Pliny be of opinion that the house sprinkled with the water of
Veruaine makes the people joyful, and those which assiste the ba^quet where is
either d^awe or mention of this water, shall be replenished with mirth and
gla^nesse. The plant which the Apoticaries call Ne^uphar, and the Greeks and
Latins Nymphea growing most commonly in Pooles and rivers, bearing a great
green leaf, has so great virtue against the hot and wanton motions of
youth, that being taken in broth once a day by the space of xl. days, it
mortifieth altogether the appetite of sensuality, and eating it fasting among
other meat, it defend^s you from unchaste thoughts and dreams of Uenery:
provided always that this must be wrought of the first kind of Neniu^r
which has a yelowe flower like to a Flowerdelice, whereof besides the
authority of Pliny and Dioscorides (first authors hereof) experience makes
it of faith and credit. For in the old time it was applied to Monks and
Nuns, and other people of devotion in Religious houses, to pull down and
mortify their flesh. The Ancients named it Nimphea, because the virgin Nympha
being jealous of Hercules, became lean, pale and so full of mortal passions,
that death gave end to her sorrows, and afterward (as they believed) she was
changed into this marrishe and waterie herb to delay her heates: It is
common in every place and of.ij. sorts, the one has a white flower, and the
other carries a yealowe flower. Iuye called in Latin Hedera, and in Greek
Cysses, is a common herb, yet it contains in it many things worthy of
commendation, first it troubles the mind if a man take too much of it: it
brings forth an humor or gum, which as Galen says, burns secretly as a
hoate plaster, without being perceived: besides it serves for a depilatour to
make fall the hair in every place about man and woman: the little grains or
seeds of Iuye taken in broth make men become barreine. Pliny adds besides to
the virtue of this herb, that men that be melancholic and subject to
diseases of the Spleen, are easily healed if they do but drink in cups or
goblets made of the wood of this Iuye. The Mandrake has moved great cause of
wonder to such as have written of his properties and power, Pithagoras calls
it Antropomorphen, by reason it has a root which resembles the form of a
man, others have named it Ciroea* as of Circes, persuading that the root was
good to make men love, and that there was in it a certain amorous charm. I
saw in a fair at Saint Germains in Paris, a root of a Mandrake, so well
counterfaited by art, with roots and branches one linked within another,
that it resembled properly the form and shape of a man, which brought such
value and estimation to his practice of deceit, that he sold of them for
twenty crounes a piece, by which unreasonable gain, his abuse was discovered,
and he constrained in the end to carry his root into Italy, from whence he
said it first came, which may suffice for the deceits in this root, and
now let us return to his singularities and virtues. Dioscorides writes that
it is of force to mollify the Iuorye and make it apt to plye and turn, and
fashion in any work or form that a man will, boiling it with the Iuorye the
space of six hours. It is most certain that it is of a marvelous virtue to
cast men on sleep, and so to entrance such as are to be opened or cut in
any member, that they shall not feel the pain, if first they taste of the
juice of this Mandrake: some do use it in parfume for the same purpose. There
be.ij. kinds of Mandrake, which grow in many places on the mountains in
Italy, but specially in Powylla. Whereof diverse grafters and setters of
plants have brought away both Apples and roots. It is as strange, which the
Philosophers attribute unto the plant which the Latins call Nerion, the
Greeks Rhododendros, the Frenchemen Bosage, and we Roselaurel, it has the
flowers of a Rose, and leaves of a Laurel: but that which is most wonderful,
those leaves kill Dogs, Asses, Moyles, and many other four footed beasts:
and to men or women, if it be taken in br^ath with wine, it serves as a
counterpoyson or sovereign Medicine against the bytings of all venomous
beasts: and yet if goats, sheep, and such like weak beasts do drink of
the water wherein those leaves have been dipped, they do swell and dye
forthwith. Lentile the which of the Latins is called Lens or Lenticula,
procures fearful dreams, specially upon his first decoction as Pliny and
Dioscorides affirm: and those which have not mean to eat of this meat,
become Leepers, as Galen and Pliny say.

This may suffice (in mine opinion) for the curious searching of the strange
properties of Plants. There rests now to discover unto you the wonderful
virtues of such as have power to confound and kill man, for the use of whom,
not only all plants and herbs, but all other things contained within the
pourprise and compass of of this visible world are and have been created, and
yet to keep him under, and that he lift not up his horn too high nor swell
with pride and ambition, the Lord has caused to appear out of the earth,
certain little roots and plants with power not only to be master over his
pride, but also every moment of the day, to threaten him with death and
perform it. The Hemlocke called Cycuta of the Latins, sufficiently known to
most men, is of a propertye to smother and kill such as do drink it in any
broth, whereof the Athenians made a pruofe in Socrates at such time as he was
falsely accused by Auytus and Meluycus for speaking blasphemy against the Gods,
using this herb (as a common punishment) and made himself perform the
office of executioner. Dioscorides in his treatise of poisons and their
remedies, does exaggerate wonderfully the accidents and Symptoms of him that
has eaten of this herb. For (says he) such as have either drunk or eaten
of it, have a visible virtue in their eyes, although they be blind and have
their minds so troubled that they are notable to discern any thing, and blood
continually, and suffer all extreme colds of the body. And lastly, the poison
of this Plant does so restrain the breath and blaste in the reed of the
lights that the patientes do die as though they were strangled: and therefore
(says he) this poison ought at the first to be drawn out of the body by
vomitte, and then by glisters, to the end that, that which is descended to
the bowels, do also come out. That which some call Thymeo, and the Latins Tapo,
being received at the mouth, is venomous, driving the whole body into such a
cold, that it stops the breath in a short time. The herb of Sardania eaten,
makes a man become incensed, and breeds a certain wanness in the lips, in
sort that who has eaten of it seems always to laughe, from whence moves the
wicked proverb, the laughter of Sardanya, which appears at large in Solyn,
Dioscorides and specially in Erasmus Chylyads: in like sort the plant which
the Latins call Hios^iamus, the Greeks, Hiosciamos, and the Frenchemen
Iusquiane, but chiefly that which has the grain black, makes a man sleepie,
and to loase his sense according to Pliny and Galen, and as Dioscorides says,
it stirs up such vain ^^llyes as commonly we see in a dronken man. Aelian
writes in his History, that the wild Bears feeding of this herb are
ready to soune, and that not without danger of death if they wash them not
presently in water. And now there is a kind of plant called in Latin
Aconitum, in French Aconit, and in English a Libardbaine or Wolfbaine, which
as last shall seal up our description of venomous herbs, because it is of a
more ready and sudden nature of death, than any other, and specially that
which they call Pardylyanches, which kills ye Libarde and bears, a leaf
like to a wild Coucumber, but it is somewhat less and more sharp: an other
kind of Aconite is called Lycothonon, because that wolves having eaten of it
die immediately: the first kind growth in every place, but the second is
found (and that but seldom) in deep valleies between mountains. Al kinds of
Aconit perform their poison most by gnawing the intrails, and putrifactio^ of
good humors: The first kind kills wild Bores and other savage beasts: and
those which hunt wolves do often use it to make them die. It is most certain
(according to Pliny) that as Aconyt is the most sudden poison that is, so the
females of any beast whatsoever, touching it in any sort with their secret
parts, do die presently. He says again, that Aconyt given to a man in hot
wine, is present poison and kills, if he find not some thing in the body of
man, which can kill it: for having encou^tred any thing of like substance to
himself, he stirs and quarelleth as if he met with an other poison in the
intrailes of the man: but that which makes it of more marvel is, that two
mortal poisons meeting in the body of one man together, the one kills the
other, and saves the man on live. Wherewith we will now knit up our Discourse
of venomous herbs, and bring in those that be more familiar and friendly to
man: amongst the which the auncientes had in most estimation the Balm, as
most wonderful in his virtues. Some write that this excellent herb of the
Balm has heretofore grown only in the town of Ferico, from whence he
fetched his name, for Ferico in the Hebrew signifies good smell. Pliny
prefers it before all the other oders, and says there is none of it now but
in Judah: it grows speedily, and must be underpropped and tied as you stay a
vine, or else it will fall to the earth: the leaf of a Balm is always
green, and resembles most the Herb Grace, it can not brook that one cut or
hurt it with any instrument of iron. Whereof Cornelius Tacitus writes an
experience and says: that if one offer to touch it with iron, it seems to
shrink for fear, and therefore it must be handled with instruments of bone,
or some other like substance: for if you touch it with iron to have either
liquour or oil, it dies forthwith: but cutting it with instruments agreeing
with his nature, it yeldeth a suck or sap which they call Opobals^mum,
which is wonderful sweet, although it bring but a little taste. The
principal virtue of this Plant consists in the humor, the second in the
seed, the third in the bark, and the last of all in the weed After Titus the
Roman prince had destroyed Jerusalem, revenging the death of Jesus Christ,
the herb and plant of the balm were transported into Egypt. Petrus Bolonus, a
diligent sercher of rare things writes, that in the time of his pilgrimage
from Leuant, he went to see the garden where grew the Balmes, being a good
league from Caire, where he said, he saw not above nine or ten plants, and the
same very curiously guarded and enclosed with great and high walls. The last
precious virtue of this plant is, to preserve (a long time) from corruption,
any flesh that is either rubbed or perfumed with it. There is an other herb
which has been heretofore very rare, albeit now somewhat familiar, called Lions
foot, which grows in mountains, and has leaves like unto the leaf of a
Mallowe, saving that they be more hard full of sinews, and crispie: it springs
in May, and flowers in June: it is most sovereign to consolidate all kind of
hurts, and much employed that way by the surgeo^s of Almayn. The physitio^s of
late put it among the rare and wonderful plants, because of his wonderful
power to consolidate all hurtes: they write that if either maids or wives that
be corrupted or have forfaited their virginity do use of it, it makes them
seem maids as at the first, specially if it continue any time in his
decoction: as if there be pieces of canuas or linen cloth dipped or bathed
within the water of it, and applied or laid upon their dugs, it makes them
shrink and retire, and become round and hard: it begins now to be commonly
known in Italy, and of special delight with certain women that stand in need of
it. The Coral which is called Lythodendron, that is to say, a Treestone, is
no less meritorious for estimation tha^ the rest, seeing it is a plant that
grows in ye sea, which as Dioscorides writes, being drawn out of the botom
of the sea, becomes hard with the air, and so is made a stone. This little
tree or plant of Coraile is green, and soft, being in the sea, and bears a
fruit like unto hor^es, as well in bigness as in figure: this plant when it is
drawn out of the water is all full of moss, and is not red, but coming after
into the hands of workmen, they polishe it artificially either upon the tornell
by force of the file, and so smoothe him with the powder of trypoly, to give
him his glee and beauty. Al kinds of Coral be very common in Italy, because
that ye people there do fish for them in the sea Tyrenum. The Corralls have an
hidden virtue against the Epilepsia, or foul evil, being an infection in the
head, they defend houses from harm by lightning, they restrain the flux
menstruall, they are good for gnawing in the gummes, for blaines and biles in
ye mouth and for the flux of seed. Auicen holds them most sovereign to glad
and comfort the heart. Dioscorides makes mention but of two kinds of Coral,
that is red and black, and yet we read, that in diverse seas in Europe, are
found of them that be very white, and they be sponging and light. Dioscorides
Schylyen in his.xvii. book tells a wonderful history of a plant yt was
showed to Alexander in a vision, wherewith he healed his people yt were hurt with
venomous weapons, which me think not much impertinent to put in this place by
reason of his wonderful effect. After Alexander (says he) had victory against
ye Brachmans, whereof ye most part were either killed or taken prisoners, he
found sundry of his Macedonians sore hu^te and in danger of death, by reason
that the end of the Darts and Arrows of their enemies were poisoned, the same
moving courage in them to attempt the battle against him. The venom was made of
certain serpents, which they killed, and laid them to dry against the Sun,
the heat whereof made issue out a sweat, with the which sweat also distilled
the poison of the serpente, the which was of such violence, that who was
hurt with any weapon dipped in it, lost incontinent his f^elyng, and by and by
turned into wonderful torment by the retraction of sinews, and tremblyng of
all his body, his flesh became black like lead, and by continual vomit,
cast up a marvelous deal of choler, bisides the which came out of the hurt
a black scumme, whereof engendered a putrefaction, which as it was fermed and
iellied gained forthwith the noble parts, and made the paciente die in great
martyrdom. The King was not so sorrowful for all the rest of his people, as it
grieved him in the pain of Ptolomeus, at that time one of the kings minious,
and after his death supplied his place, with no less love and awe of his
people than he. And as there was thoroughout the whole army general sorrow for
the martirdom of Ptolomeus, there chanced a strange case, and the same of
more marvel, because (as Diodorus says) many refer it to an express
providence of the Gods. The King sleping in his tent, not without great care
for the grief of his Ptolomey, a great dragon seemed to houer before him as in
a vision, holding an herb in his thr^ts, whereof he taught him both the virtue
and the place where it grew. Alexander awaking upon this vision, went
immediately to seek the herb, and having found it, he ordered it in sort of a
plaster, and applying it to the body of Ptolomeus, gave him also to drink of
the juice, whereupon he with others were restored and made hole in few days.
Diodorus, although he recite the History, yet he fears to tell the name of
the herb: but Pliny treating of a like accident, declares the name of a
certain herb, which was good to cure the hurtes of soldiers, speaking in
this manner: Sometime (says he) the use and experience of herbs are found by
chance, or rather to speak the truth, by a certain Oracle of the gods, as
has been written of the plant called Cynorthombi, which is a kind of a wild
Rose, very good to heal the biting of mad Dogs, his virtue and operation
was found by chance: For a woman ha^ing her son in the wars of Spain,
and so bitten with a mad Dog, that he was in great peril of life, the
which they judged because he began to fear water, or any thing that was
moist. This woman dreaming by night on the disease of her son, did imagine
in her sleep, that she sent him this herb Cynorthondon, which she had
seen the day before, under a woodde side, to drink in Milk (conceyuing some
hope in the effect of her dream) wrote unto her son the next day what
had happened her in her vysion. Her son obeying the contents of her
Letter, was healed by the mean of this Herb, whereupon after it grew to be
a common remedy against the like disease. A thing truly of more wonder in
that we came to the knowledge of it by such means, approving also the
unspeakable goodness, who in sleeping does reuele unto us remedies to
preserve our health. Theophrastes makes mention of a certain herb of
India, which so stirs and moves in the body of a man, that it drayneth
all the seed of nature: Whereupon some have taken occasion to write, that
Heracles defloured in one night a great number of virgins by the only help of
this herb. The Scythians in like sort have an herb very common in their
country which they do call by none other name than by the herb of Scythia,
which being kept in the mouth, represseth hunger and thirst for ten or.xij.
days.

Aelyan, a Greek Historian makes mention of an herb which discovers
treasures that be hydden: And Pliny of an other which opens the conduictes
that be closed.

And now as we have largely dilated upon the virtues and propreties of many
wonderful herbs and plants, so it is not necessary to omit the noble and
wonderful dignity of the root of Baara, so much celebrated by Josephus the
Hebrew, who because he is of more faith than the most of the rest, and of
less suspicion than they all, being a recorder of the Ecclesiastical
histories, I thynk^ him as worthy of this place as any other. In times past,
says Josephus there grew a Root in Judah, called Baara, having a color and
bryghtenesse of a flame* of fire, and gave light in the night like a Lamp, and
that in such a wonderful and strange order, that who so went about to touch
or gather it before that it were sprinkled with either the blood or urine of a
woman, dyed presently, and yet was not that a sufficient defense or surety.
Whereupon after such experience of the poison of this Herb, they were
constrained (for their own safety) to tie a Dog to some part of the
Plant, who offering to follow his Master, plucked it up by the roots. Such
again was the wonderful propretie of this Plant, that being once plucked up,
a man might handle it without peril: And being hanged at the neck of such
as were infected with the Falling syckenesse, or possessed with an evil
spirit, it did deliver them presentely. Hieronymus Cardanus a Physician of
Millane, fyndeth it not strange, that it killed such as did gather it,
enforcyng his opinion by reasons of Philosophy, but in this sort: Baaran,
whereof this root of Baara has taken his name, is a Ualey in Judea, a
country very hot and haboundyng with Pytche, of which the portion or liquour
being very subtle, and too much boiled, did distill from the Mountain:
whereof (as it is most like) this Root was engendered, and because that it did
grow in continual shadow and darkness, the poison was the more violent,
being of a substance exceedyng the fire in heat, the which being styrred in
the pluckyng up, and fumyng up with an ardente and corrupt vapor, to the
brain of him that gathered it, smoothered him presentely. But touching his
reasons for the vryne and Milk of a Woman, the which seemed to have some
power over the fury of this Plant, although they be strong, and carry with
them a great lykelyhode of credit and truth: yet I think that it is neither
in him nor in all the Philosophers of the World, if all their learnyngs were
set in judgment of the matter, to give other reason, than with the Prophet,
saying: The Lord is marvelous in all his works, who has known his
secrets, or who has been his Counselor? The portraict of this Plant is in
the beginning of this Chapter, where the Dog is tied to the Herb.

Wonderful Bankette^. CHAP. xxv.
IF I have not sufficiently treated in my first book of the Theater of the
world, of the infirmities and maledictio^s thundered upon us wretches, by that
wicked and unfortunate vice of glutonie, I have now a larger field to walk
in, and a matter more ample, to dilate upon, to the fullness of my pen: but
without singing so often one so^g, it shall suffice me for the present, to
describe in this place not only the prodigalities, but also the wondrous and
monstrous feeding of the throat, whereof the Ancients and gluttons of late
time, have used in their feasts and bankets. The Persians and Greeks (as
Herodotus witnesses) have been so dissolute in their feasts, that they caused
them to be proclaimed in public by the cry of an Harolde, and reserved a
special price to such as could invent new delites, or drink or eat with
most excess: bisides they forbad one an other by the way of mockery and
bravery, that they should not depart at any time from their feasts, hungry:
And their reason was, for that that they should so well stuff their bodies of
all kinds of meats and drinks, that they were constrained to render account
to nature, and make an inventory of that which they had received before they
parted from the table: and so having discharged their stomachs, became hungry
again. Atheneus making mention of the excessive prodigality of Xerxes, king
of the Persians, assures, that after he had remained one day in a City, and
that he had dined and supped, the common poor people smelte thereof a year or
two after: As if that they had had a certain famine or barennesse of goods in
their provinces. And after continuing his purpose, he made mention of the
superfluity and sumptuous expenses of Darius king of the Persians, who (says
he) had many times to accompany him at supper fiftene thousand men: of whom
if you will make division, you shall find every one of those guests spent at
his supper.xvj. crounes. Wherein that great cormorant Alexander was nothing at
all inferior to Darius or Xerxes, in banketting or excessive ^harge^: for
after he had pierced the Indes* he began to give himself in pray to
delites, and proclaimed open battle to good drink, with reward to him that
got the price or victory of that combat, the same amounting many times to the
value of thirty Mines, being three hundredth crowns: or of one talent, A
drooken combat.
the which is six hundredth crounes. And although the danger of that bataile
consisted most in the blows of cups or glasses* yet he found it in the
end so tragical and bloody, that for that time there died to the number of
thirty and six, who ended their lives most miserably by the excessive
drinking and gurling in of wine, as Charles Mitileneus writes in the gestes of
Alexander. Although Esope was not equal to these before rehearsed, neither in
goods nor in dignity, yet Pliny recites in the tenth of his books, that
amongeste the most renoumed delicacies and prodigality, the dishe of Esope
has been in greatest admiration. That dishe was of a strange and wonderful
invention: for he searched with great curiosity, for the furnishing of one
banquet which he made in Rome, all the little birds enclosed in cages, which
were to be found in all the City, as Linettes, Larkes, Estourneaux, Merles,
Calendres, and other like, who were sold more dearer than gold, because of
their pleasant and armonious singing, together with the pleasure which men
received in the hearing of them, who know very well how to imitate the voice
of man: which birds (if we will believe Pliny) did cost six thousand
Sesterces the piece, which were prised (acccording to Budee) at fyftene
thousand^ crounes. Which may seem strange, or not true, to them which have
readde those authors, that not only that tragical Esope was so rich, but
also after so great^ expenses and charges, he left his son so welthi^* that
he was nothing inferior in prodigal allowance to his father.

These things be marvelous: but there is nothing read of, so monstrous in
Nature, as the riches and nobleness^ of Pithius, who neither was King, Prince,
nor had any^ title of dignity: and notwithstanding he received and entertained
by the space of a whole day the host of Xerxes, son of the great King
Darius, who were in number.vij. hundredth, four score and eighte thousand
(...) the same being no less strange unto that which Herodotus, Pliny and
Budee write of him, when he offered to Xerxes (parting from his house) to
relieve and furnishe his camp fifty months with Corn. But least we should
excede ye bonds or forsake the path of our first intention, let us retire
where we left, to our pompes and banquets, amongst whom, for a first, it
behooves us to place in rank Cleopatra, Queen of Egipte, who (as Plutarch
says) had so pleasante and delectable a phrase in talking, that when she would
dispose her tongue to entertain any great Lord, she framed her reason so
tunably, as though it had been an armonious instrument of many strings: which
was the first gin or snare, wherein the Pigeon Marcus Antonius was taken: for
after he was infected with the sweetness of her divine eloquence, mixed or
seasoned with a rare and wonderful beauty, together with an incredible
magnificence in feasting and banqueting, determined in place to pursue his
causes of importance, to make court unto her, and so being captive to her good
behavior, stood more need to be pitied, than of other help: and although
he was at the first master and Lord, yet in the end he became vanquished and
overthrown. But now to commend the nobleness of Cleopatra, you must
understand, what Plutarch writes, that Antonie going against the Perthes, he
sent to summon her to appear personally before him, at such time as he was
in Cilicie, to answer to the faults and charges whereof she was accused,
knowing that she had given aid and comfort to his enemies against him: but
^he being of a noble mind, and nothing fearful or abashed of his threats,
put not on the ap^^^ell of a person accused (as was the custom of the
Ancients) but decked her self with ye most sumptuous habits she had: and to
(...) nothing unperformed, y^ appertained unto the settin^ forth of so great a
Princess, she caused to be trimmed a galey, wherein she sailed to him by ye
flood Cydius, ye powpe whereof was of gold, the ores of silver, and the sail
of purple, being shrouded under a tente trimmed with gold, environed with
singers and other heavenly instruments of music, besides all other things
which might move pleasure or co^tentement to a man. Whereupon Antonius knowing
of her coming, sent to desire her to supper, but she being of hautie mind,
feeling-hir self tickled with such request, sent him word that if it pleased
him to come to her, he should be most welcome, so much was her confidence in
her beauty, eloquence and good behavior: for besides her glistering beauty,
Nature had so endued her with the perfect understanding of diverse languages, yt
she was able to answer the Arabians, the Syrians, the He^rues, the Medes, the
Partheans, the Ethiopians, and the Troglodites, without interpretour or
construer: which was the cause that Antonius (seeing such stoare of
perfections in this wonderful creature) was incontinent surprised: whereof we
have left hereunto to speak, because the magnificence of the banquet made
afterward by Cleopatra to Antonius hangs thereupon. Which with the sudden
encountre of of this new beauty of Cleopatra, made Antonius to commit to
oblivion Octauia sister to Octauus Caesar, his lawful wife, the remembrance
and regard of whom he seemed forthwith to exchange, for a wanton delight in
the braueries and flatteries of his new friend, who by treat of time governed
so well his amourous dispositeon with allurementes of contentation, that if I
would describe particularly her liberal beauty which she used in the
entertainment of Antonius (according to the authority of Artheneus a Greek
writer) I fear the nobility of it would take away the credit, such was her
pomp in her self, and such her prodigality in expenses. Albeit what I prefer
therein: I appeal to the testimony of the whole troop of writers, that have
dealte in the doings of Antonius and Cleopatra: who having employed all his
sleightes and policies, in the device of new delites, for the more honor of
her Antonio: she became extreme in one thing, which was, as they were in
argument of the bounty of the feast, she said, it was not equal and much
less excede that which she was able to do upon far less warning than this:
for (says she) you cannot take me so unprovided, but that I shall be able to
entertain you at the charges of a hundredth Sesterces in one banquet. Two
hundredth and.l. crowns and some value them at.ij.C.xxx. and iiij.M.iij.C.lx.
and v. Duca^s.
Antonius which was a very patron of prodigality, provoking an experience of
her saying, argued against her: whereupon were judges chosen on both sides, and
pawnes put in for the proof of the contention. Not long time after, Antonius
observing his advantage of time, with intent to visit her without warning, came
upon a sudden to sup with her, when albeit he found his table furnished with
sundry choices of exquisite meats, yet was he of opinion, that it was far
under the value and estimation of her promise, until he perceived her to take
from her ears two great and Orient pearls, whereof she dissolved immediately
one, and drunk it in his presence, and offering to perform the like of the
other, she was stayed by the judges, who assured her the victory. This pearl
was of such monstrous greatness (that as Pliny affirms) it waighed half
an ounce, which contained 80. quarettes, A pearl waying half an ounce.
the same being so massiue, that it exceeded in weight the hug^st at this day
by a quarter of an ounce: which is the cause that Pliny (commending the
excellency of that pearl) calls it ye only chief and principal work of
Nature in that kind, and not without reason, seeing the most part of them
which have valued it, do give it an estimation of 2500. crounes. And yet was
this prodigality little or nothing in respect of the magnificall pomp which
the Emperor Gecta used in his public banquettes: for he caused himself to be
served at the b^rd^, with diversity of meats, as fish and flesh in order of
the Alphabet, for all foul and fish that he could recover* that began with A,
he caused to be set on his table as a first service, as Austriges and such
others, practicing the like in the second course with B, as Bustarde, Bitter
and such like, the same not failing to come immediately after ye first service
was taken away, and so consequently every letter was honored with a service
till the whole Alphabet was performed, having in deed, Cooks and cators
appointed for that purpose only. But what stand we so long in the search of
foraine prodigalities in banquets, seeing (amongst a number of others) our
time has stirred up a monstrous example that way, in Auignon, at such a time
as mine author studied the law under Emilius Farretus, in whose time there
was a Prelate stranger, whose name I will concele, A wonderful prodigality
in an Italian Prelate.
as well for the honor of his profession, as to much superstition in him self,
who one day invited to a banquet, the nobility of Auignon, as well men as
women, where for a first beginning of his pomp, at the very entry into the
hall where the banquet was appointed, lay spread upon a curious board a great
beef with his head pulled of, and purged in his intrailes, having in his
belly a whole Heart or dear of the like dressing, stufte full of little
birds, as Quails, Partriches, larkes, Feasants and other like, the same being
so conningly enclosed in the belly of the second beast, and they so
artificially conioined ye one within the other, that it seemed some excellent
Mathematitian had been the workman thereof: But that which made the matter
both strange and wonderful, was, that all the birds so assembled, did roste
and turn all alone upon a broche, by certain compass and conduites without
the aid of any man: For the first course and order of the table, his gestes
were presented with store of curious pastrie, wherein were wroughte and
enclosed many little birds quick, who as soon as the cruste was taken of,
began to fly about the hall: there were besides, sundry sorts of silver
plate, full of Iellie, so subtillie conueighed, that a man might have seen in
the bottom a number of little fishes quick, swimming and leaping in sweet
water and musk, to the great delight and pleasure of the assistaunts: neither
is it less strange, in that all the fowls which were served upon the table,
were larded with Lampraye, albeit it was in a season when they cost half a
croune a piece: but that which seals up the superstitious pomp of this
proud Prelate, was, that there was reserved as many quick birds, as he was
served with dead fowls at his table, the same containing such indifferente
number, that if there were a Fesant sent dreassed to the board, there were
Gentlemen (appointed for the purpose) which presented an other alive, and al to
show the magnificence of the priest, to whom, what remains for the
consummation of his prodigal delites, but that the Gentlemen which served him
had their faces covered with a veil, least their breath should offend either
him or his meat, all which I have preferred in this place (as most
prodigious and monstrous,) not for immitation sake, but rather that all good
Christians should deteste him and his example, seeing it might be, that
whilst his Ship went with full sail, and he in the middeste of his Epicures
delites, the poor Lazarus perished at his door, for want of food and fire.
But alas what could the faithful Saint John, and Peter think of this, who
had not one Deniere to give in alms to the poor lame man that did demand it
at the Temple gate? or what would the other Apostles (constrained with
extremity of hunger to eat the ears and awnes of Corn) if they had seen
their successor in so hot a kitchen so diversely garnished with delicate
meats. This had been a time and place and fit occasion for the wicked Judas,
if he had been there, to have cried against them, Vt quid perditio haec?
potuisse^ hoc multum vendi and dar^ pauperibus. Who list to be privy to the
pomp of other Prelates, let him read Platinus in his treatise De honesta
voluptate. There was besides, a Cardinal no less famous this way, than our
Italian Prelate, who in the time of Sixtus the Pope, consumed into two years
in banquets, ionquets and such other bellye vanities 3000. crowns: wherewith
many poor members of Christ, and sundry needy scholars and students might
have been relieved and kept long time at their books. Let us leave to report
of these disorders in our time, and return to our ancestors: who the more
manifest their vices were, the greater was their slander, and the tragedy of
their life less honorable. Wherefore all that is spoken of before, is but as a
shadow or figure of magnificence, in respect of those monstrous and
diabolical feasts of that great glutton and deuourer of meats, Heliogabalus
Emperor of the Romans, who was so disordred in his delites, that s^arce the
life of an excellent Historiographer would suffice to dilate thereof at large.
That wicked and unhappy minister of Satan, drowned as it were in the ^^nke of
insatiable eating, never made dinner after he was created Emperor, wherein he
spen^ less than.60. marks of gold, which (according to our computation)
amounts to the sum of 2500 Ducats: besides he was so fantastical and
unruly in his appetites, that he used no common meats at his meals, but was
^edde with the combs of cocks, the toungs of peahens: and also being made to
understand that there was but one thing rare in the world (which they
declared to be the Phoenix) he sent for her to eat, promising I kn^w not how
many thousand marks of gold, to him who could furnishe him thereof, and
said in a common proverb, that there was no sauce but dearth. Wherein not
suffising him self to feed^ of these rare and exquisite meats, he feasted like
wise with as great abundance his gentlemen and champions, causing also his Dogs
and Lions to be nourished with the flesh of Phesants, Pehens, and birds: not
ceassing to use only this prodigality in daintiness of his mouth, but (which
more is) he was as lascivious and extreme in all other furnitures of his
service: for he caused to serve him at his table four maids naked, who were
oftentimes carried in that sort through the city of Rome: he neither drank
nor eat at any time above once in one vessel or dishe, although the same, and
all the rest of the implements of his house were of pure gold or silver, the
stool wherein he did his excrements not excepted. And in the place of wax
candels to give him light, he caused to be put into his lamps an excellent
balm, which he caused to brought from Judah and Arabia. That unhappy Emperor
was so frantike and mad in all his actions, that he invented things which
devils themselves could never devise before: for he made to be counterfaited
artificially meats of marble, wood, and other things, causing not only the
people to be kept hungry, but also to sit at the table, beholding these
meats in pitiful sort. He made many bankets to the which he invited.viij.
balde men.viij. crooked men.viij. lame men viij. deaf men.viij. dumb
men.viij. black men.viij. white men.viij lean men, and viij. fat men, to the
end that those which did assist the ba^ket might have cause to laugh:
sometimes he made his guests drunk, and then shutting the doors and gates of
the place where they were a sleep, put in unto them Bears and Lions without
nails or teeth, to the end that when they awaked, they might die for fear,
to see them within the danger of such ravenous beasts: some others he would
make drink till they burst: and of some again when they had well drunk, he
would tie their legs and their hands, and all the conduits of their urine, and
so let them die. And being reprehended of these folies, and warned to avoid
such extraordinary expense, least hereafter it were revenged upon him with
poverty. His answer was, that he was not subject to any thing he had, Some
writers have referred this to the Emperor Tyberius.
neither would he have other heir than himself and his wife, not caryng for
children, least they should conspire against him. These were the charities and
deeds of devotion, wherein this reverend Emperor consumed the revenue of his
state, which by reason of their monstrous order, if they seem incredible to
any, let him read Aelyus Lampridius, Sextus Aurelius, Victor, Eutropius,
Julius Capitolinus, and Spartian in the life of Septimus Seuerus, by whom
albeit the matter is plentyfully aduouched, yet have they not brought to
memory the moytie or one half. There rests now to discover the end of
these delites, and what bitter gall attended the pleasant taste of such sugared
vanities. Xerxes killed by his provost And Darius poisoned after by Alexander.
What other end had Darius and Xerxes, (whereof we have first spoken) than
after so many duties and gluttonous delites done to their filthy bellies, they
were miserebly confounded, the like happening rightly to Alexander, whom one
drop of poison made digest in one cup, that which he had excessiuely devoured
all the days of his life. Mar. Anto. killed him self.
And did it happen better to that prodigal Marcus Antonius, or his liccorishe
Cleopatra? What mirror, what spectacle, what example to such as live in this
world as in an eternal Paradyse of delites? but what more shameful
punishmente and just hire could he receive of his Epicures life, than to be
the bloody butcher of himself, the like end attending his Companion in
wantonness: Cleopatra was stong to death
which according to her dissolute life, was at last devoured of an Aspick, the
most venomous of all other creatures. And that sink or gulf of gluttony
Heliogabalus, Helioga. slain and cast into Tyber.
did he escape the fury or justice of God? no no: for as he had devoured an
infinite number of sundry sorts of creatures, he was in the end^ torn in
pieces of them, seeing his own people after many hard experiences of his
tyrannies, conspired against him, and killed him, and trailyng him as a dead
dog along the streets THe figure and portraict of Denis Heracleot, who becam so
gross, that he was costrained to have his blood drawn from him by
Horsleaches, as appears further in the leaf 82. Galene reports the like
history of Nicomachus Smyrneus, who was so gross and monstrous that he could
not remove.
of Rome, threw him at last into Tyber, where his body was a pray to fishes,
whereof his throat (whilst he lived) had murdered an infinite number. The
Emperor Iouian and Septimus Seuerus, (as Baptista Ignatius witnesses) died of
the disease of drunkenness. There be also other kinds of banketters, which
albeit have not died upon any surfete of eating or drinking, yet they became so
monstrous fat, that they were little better in ef^ect, amongst whom the
Emperor Maximyn, may challenge first place, as their chief patriarch, whom
they affirm to have such store of grease and kitchen stuff within his
paunche, that the breath that came from him, seemed of force to turn about a
Windmill, having continually two men to bear up his belly, his hands, and
other members by succession of time, being so great, and charged with
fatness, that his wives bracelettes scarcely served his fyngers for Ryngs, as
the Histories affirm. In like manner Denis Heracleot gave him self so over to
the desire of meat and drink, and other fleshly delites, that he became so
monstrous huge and fat, that he durst not show himself to the people, for
fear of contempt. By which means and continual keepyng in his close house,
he became so gross and swelled through all the parts of his body, that he was
forced to apply continually to certain parts of his body both day and
night, a great quantity of Horsleaches to draw the humor that fed his
fatness: for otherwise he had died, as may appear in this Portraict
adioynyng.

Certain wonderful discourses worthy of memory, touching Visions, Figures
and illusions appearing as well in the day as in the night, and sleping as
waking. CHAP. xxvj.
I Account it to small purpose to argue in this place whether the shadows of
dead men do return, or if the spirits having passed the wrack of this
mortal life do visit us sometimes or no: Wherein notwithstanding, as it is
most credible, that the two most famous pillars of the church Saint Augustine
and Saint Hierome, and almost the whole route of the Ecclesiastical writers
have stand upon the dissolution of the doubt of Samuel, I mean whether it
were the true spirit of the Prophet that appears by the invocation of the
enchauntresse, or some sleightes of Satan, to abuse their judgments. For my
part, I mean to give out mine opinion touching such doubts in order and
terms of a philosopher, and with the authority of the most ancient and
learned writers now a days, who (for the first) have made of great estimation
by their Histories, the discourse of the two Arcadians, whereunto they give no
less faith than if it were an Oracle of truth. As also Pope Pius the second
of that name avouches the same with probable arguments and reasons. Amongst
the ancients, Valerius and many other that recorded the affairs of Greece and
Rome, affirm, that there were two Arcadians which loved so dearly one an
other, with such an affinity of actions and humors, that it seemed they had
but one heart divided between them both: They came one day to Megare, a city
in Greece, to perform certain business there, where they repaired to several
places of abode, the one to a friends house of his, the other (according to his
custom) took harbor in an Inn: he that went to the place of his acquaintance,
after supper feeling a vehement motion or desire of sleep (the same moved by
the weariness of the way) went to bed, where he fell forthwith into a
profounde sleep of two hours continuance, which notwithstanding was not so
quiet, as it escaped without a terrible and fearful dream: for he seemed to
see standing before him, his Companion, pale and of a hideous regard, crying
with tears to give him aid against the distress and danger of his host:
wherewith he awaked, and gyuing faith to the vision, and solicited bisides with
the vehemency of mutual love between them, arose and put him on the way to see
his companion, albeit arguing within himself the vanity in dreams, he
changed his purpose, and went to bed again, where he had not long lien ere he
was assailed with a second remembrance of his first apprehension, but in a
more strange order: for he seemed to carry the shape or figure of a dead man,
all to be bathed in the bloody floods of horrible murder, preferring this
lamentable request: A dead man speaks to his companion in a dream.
seeing thou have used so small care to succor my life, at the least discharge
the office of a friend in reuengyng of my death: for this body which thou
see so murdered and dismembered before thee, is at the gate of the City in a
charyot covered with dong by the cruelty of mine host. This second summonce
or rather importunity was of such force in the troubled mind of the other
Arcadian that he arose in great sorrow, and with no less compassion,
requested diverse friends to accompany him to the gate of the City, where as
they found the dead body of his friend, hydden in the dong, in such sort as
he appeared to him in his dream. Whereupon the Host being taken and examined,
avouched the murder, and received his hyre by the loss of his head. The like
is affirmed by Alexander ab Alexandro, in the ninth chapter of his second book
De ses iours geniaux, which he understood of a familiar and dear friend of
his, a man whose learning and virtue acquit him from just imputation of
untruth in any sort whatsoever. This man being at Rome, was required by one
of his very friends, to accompany him to the bathes of Cumes, the intent of
which journey, as it was to seek remedy for a disease which had troubled
him many years before: So the other agreed to his request in sort to his own
expectation. Neither had they travailed many years together, but this
disease grew to such extreme debilitie thorough all his body, that what with
the anguishe of it, and weakness in him to endure the pain, he died, and
gave up the goast in an Inn. To whom after the other had performed such
funerals as agreed with the time and place, seeing no cause of need to pass
further to the bathes, returned to Rome, and being overtaken with extreme
weariness of the first days travail, took up his lodging in an Inn by the
way, An other vision appearing to a man that was not a sleep.
where he was no sooner in bed (and before he had desire to sleep) than the
image of his friend, whom he had put into the earth the day before,
presented him self before his eyes, beholding him with most earneste and
pitiful regard, and that in the same lean and defourmed estate he was in,
during the extremity of his sickness. The same strikyng such mortal dread
into the other, that he was ready to dye for fear, and yet was not void of
courage and remembrance to ask him what he was: who without making him any
answer, put off his ghoastly apparaile and roabes of a ghoast, and went to
bed to him, offering to embrace him with great familiarity: which forced
the poor man half dead with fear, to leap suddenly out of the bed, and
save him self by flight, without that the vision appeared to him afterward.
Which notwithstanding could not so well assure him, but the remembrance of
that fear, made him fall into a mortal disease, which albeit brought him to
the extreme hazard of death, yet the worst being prevented by special
remedies, and he returned (...) health, amongst the wonderful reports of this
vision, he ^^yd, he never felt ice more cold than the feet of that dead body,
touching him in his bed. The same author in the.xj. chapter of his first book
confirms this discourse with a like example which he has neither red nor
learned by report, but seen the experience him self in one of his trusty
servants, a man both virtuous and of upright living, who laid in his bed and
fast a sleep, began upon a sudden to sigh, lament and complain in such sort,
that he awaked all those in the house. His master in the morning asked him ye
cause of his trouble, to whom he answered, that these complaints were not
vain, seeing that he seemed to see before his eyes to be buried the dead body of
his mother. Whereupon as his master observed ye very day and hour to the end
he might know whether it did prognosticate any harm to his man: so within
certain days after, there came a servant of his mother (the messanger of her
death) who discoursing her disease with the order of her dying, and conferryng
the times together, it appeared that the hour of her death agreed with the very
instaunt of the vysion, which (says Alexander) need not seem either vain or
doubtful to such as know certain houses in Rome, at this day of great hate
and horror, Certain houses at Rome haunted with spirits.
by reason they are hau^ted with spirits. Whereof Plurarch makes mention of
Damon, in the beginning of the life of Cymon: The same also being confirmed
with like example written of Pausanias, Cleonices, and Bizantia the maid,
bisides the authority of Pliny in his.vij. book of his Epistles, touching a
vision appearing in a house in Athens, and that which Suetonius writes, when
Caligula was killed, whose house was troubled with prodigeous monsters and
visions many years after until it was burned. And lastly, such like is
approved by Marcus Paulus Venitian, who writes, that at this day, the
Tartarians be very strong by enchantments of spirits, being able to change the
day into darkness, and bring either light or darkness when and into what
^^ace they list: wherewith whosoever has been at any time circumue^ted, escapes
hardly without mortal danger. Whereof Hayronus is a sufficient witness in his
history of the Sarmares, wherein he shows how the Tartarians being almost
overthrown, were restored, and became victorious by the enchauntment of the
Ensign bearer, who made such a darkness ouerwhelm the army of the adverse
part, that it dimmed their sights, and mortified their corages. But here me
thinks we stand too long upon profane examples, seeing we have sufficient
confirmation by Ecclesiastical authority, S. Augustine approves enchaunting
by example.
as Saint Augustine in his twelfth Book and seuententh Chapter upon Genesis,
in the History of a frantike man, prophesying upon the death of a Woman, who
as he was banqueting in his own house among^^^ certain his familiar friends,
falling into question of a woman known to them all, willed them to end their
talk of that woman, because she was already dead, which as it moved them, the
rather because some of them saw her not long before, so being asked how he
could assure it, said he saw her pass before him carried by such as put her
in the ground, which happened accordingly within.ij. days after, for that the
dead corpse of the same woman passed before his gate to be buried, without that
she felt any motion of sickness at the hour of the prediction. In like sort
the said S. Augustine in the same place treats so strangely of prodigeous
visions, that were not the holiness and authority of him yt wrote them, they
deserved small credit. There was says he in our City a young man so vexed with
a pain in his coddes, that by the fury of his grief, he seemed to endure a
marvelous torment, having notwithstanding his memory perfect and sound, and
yet sometime with the mortal assaults of his passions he became immouable as
a tronke or block, having his eyes open, with perfect knowledge of all the
assistaunts, his feeling albeit so far withdrawn that he would not stir or
move what pricking or pinching so ever was offered him, but the pange being
retired and his body returned to his former state of health and quiet, he
would tell of many wonders in that qualme, but most of al of.ij. men appearing
before him as in a^^ision, whereof the one bare the figure of a child, and the
other seemed to have a more perfect age, who also in the beginning of Lent
appeared eftesoones unto him, with these words in order of special charge,
that if he would cause to be cut the prepuce he should not feel any pain
for.xl. days, which he did, and accordingly was delivered of grief for that
time, in the just end whereof his sorows began to return, in sort as they
did before, and likewise the same.ij. men presented themselves before him
invisible saving to himself, counsailyng him to cast himself into the Sea
unto the navel, where tarying a certain time, his grief should cease, and
only should remain a certain slymie humor which would pass away,
which he did, and found an effect of their advise: what wonderful
Philosophy is this of Saint Augustine, and what strange apparaunce in
visions. But what more cause of wounder can be, than to see them privy to the
secrets of Physic, all which sure as they breed indifferent doubt and
fear in such as read or hear of them, and yet for my part I have not
heard nor read either in profane or sacred report any thing more
marvelous that way than the vision of Cataldo, Bishop of Tarento, the same
appearing in our time, not without infecting many men's consciences with great
scrupule and doubt, seeing that that vision has left sufficient matter to
trouble the most Theologians and Philosophers of the world. This Cataldo, a
man holy in life, being buried a thousand years past within the Bishoprike of
Taronto, appeared notwithstanding after* the end of such time, in a night to
a young infant given altogether to God, with express charge to uncover a
certain vaulte in a place in the earth which he assigned him, wherein he had
hidden (whilst he was in the world) a book written with his own hand,
which as soon as he had taken out of the ground, he should offer it
immediately to Ferdinando, first King of Aragon and Naples reigning at that
time. This child (for the small faith he gave to the vision) performed not
the charge give him. Whereunto albeit he was eftesones solicited at sundry
times, yet he never used regard to the persuas^^n, until one morning before
day as he was in his prayers in the Church, he beheld Cataldo in his
Bishops weed and countenance of threatening severity, who appeared and said
unto him: as thou haste given slender credit to my words, with less regard
to search the book and deliver it to Ferdinando, so assure thy self (this
time for all) if thou refuse to perform the charge, or once stay to attend
an other sommonce, thy punishment will be to great for thee to endure: which
last threate stirred such fear in the child, that the next morning he
imparted the vision to the multitude, who according to the strayte and too
strange terms of the same, assembled very curiously to accompany the child
to the place of charge, where being arrived, and uncovering the earth, they
found a little coffer of lead so close and curiouslye wrought, that the air
or sound had no place to enter, in the bottom whereof they took up a book,
wherein were written in form of a prophecy, the miseries, plages and curses,
which should happen to the kingdom of Naples, to the King Ferdinando and his
children, the same having so directly happened and succeeded since, as it may
seem the bishop did not err or write false in one syllable: For such was ye
infortune of this miserable King Ferdinando, to fall so deep and desperately
into the ire of God, that he was killed in the first conflicte, the like
happening not long after to his eldest son Alfonsus, The effects of the
bishops prophecy.
who before he could settle himself within the state Royal, was put to flight
by his enemies, and dyed in miserable exile. Such was also the chance of
Ferdinando his younger son, to whom as the kingdom was due by inheritance,
so death prevented his use and possession of it, and that in the flower of his
age, being so environed with wars, that he had skarce leisure to take breath.
What ot^^r good was reserved to Federike, sons son to the said Ferdinando,
than that he saw sacked and burned before his eyes, his country, his people
bathing in the suddes of their own blood, and his own life in the end
committed to the mercy of his mortal enemies. And lastly if we well consider
what fortune has governed this kingdom of Naples, and withal give faith to
the authority of such as have written truly of it, we shall find that of all the kingdoms of the earth, only this state of Naples has exceeded in
revolution, mutation, persecution and loss of blood, the same making it seem
in deed, and as it is and may be most properly termed, the very but and mark
whereat fortune has delited to vnloase her cursed and sharp arrowe a very
gulphe and sink out of the which were drawn all the miseries which infected
the whole body of Italy: this was in effect the Prophecy and vision of the
Prelate Cataldo, according to the witness of Alexander ab Alexandro in his
book of the general days, which with the other before recited, as me think,
may suffice for the examples of our visions appearing to men, both by day and
night, sleeping and waking, as well in sickness as health. So there restes
now (according to our general intent touching all other matters in this book)
to search out the cause of the^^ fantastical illusions, and of what
substance they are founded or do proceed, which because it does not include
an indifferent or equal respect to all men, I think it most sure and best to
follow and march under the enseigne of S. Augustine, who (above any other)
has used a more learned diligence to discover this matter, and yet is it
necessary before we pass further herein, (for ye better exposition of the
circumstaunce) to make an universal partition, in the deduction whereof we will
follow that which he has written against Adamantum, where he proceeds in
this sort. There be (says he) diverse kinds of visions avouched by the holy
Histories, whereof some do make themselves appear before the eyes of the body,
as the three men which appeared to Abraham, that which Moses saw burning in
the bushe, and lastly that of Moses and Elyas to the Apostles at such time as
Christ was transfigured upon the mountain. The second kind of visions
consiste in imagination, as when we imagine those things which we feel by the
body: seeing that our thought being ravished and lift up to Heaven, and that
the beams and reflection of divinity do pierce into the soul, many strange
things are manifest to her, and that not by the eyes of the body, ears or
other members of the flesh, but seem in deed to be revealed by a divine
influence and celestial inspiration: according to that which Saint Peter saw
in a vision, the great Uessell descending from Heaven in a sheet, wherein
were contained all sorts of beasts, Act. 11.
and immediately he heard a voice which said unto him, Peter, rise, kill and
eat, and so according to the text. The third sort of visions may be called
intellectual, because it consistes also in the thought, as where the King
Balthazar saw a hand writing upon the wall, and many other like visions of
Nabuchodonosor, which (...) large set forth in Daniel: wherewith having laid
thus the first foundation of these fantastical apprehension^ rests now to
declare by order what has been the advice (...) ^ugustine touching the same,
which he does above all (...) places most amply dilate in (...) ^^iij.
chapter of his book entitled De cura pro mortuis agenda, there are (says he)
so many and strange opinions of visions of the night, that the disputation
may seem tolerable, seeing the question is doubtful: for some say that
dead ghoastes have appeared to men on live, showing the place where their
bodies lay shrined, to the end they might provide their own Sepulcher:
which things if we hold to be either false or vain, we resist impudently
the authority of a number of faythfuil writers, whereof albeit some have
heard, and some assisted such matters with their own eyes, yet ought they
not to persuade a belief that such visions participate with either sense
feeling or motion: for do we not see sundry times, men on live appear to other
in sleeping or wakyng? and yet being asked whether they have so done or not,
they answer that they are utterly ignoraunte of such matter, neither know
they what it means. Then it must follow as Saint Augustine says, that
those visions come by the operation of Angels, to whom it is suffered by the
Lord to use such power, which is the effect of the Latin text as near as
I can construe it, and yet am I not ignorant for all that, that sometimes
these illusions move no other way, although Saint Augustine leave it out in
that place, the same notwithstanding being a matter proper to the
Ecclesiasticals to whom I refer my self for these things with the judgment
of the catholic Church, wherein I pray to the almighty to persiste
immouable so long as Nature lendes me one breath of life in this world. (...)
also we are deceived by ^he illusions of evil and wicked spirittes, as Saint
Augustine teaches in his third book de Trinitate, showing b^ a (...) art,
Cap. 11.
the power of Satan and his accomplices with these (...). It is an easy thing
(says he) for the wicked (...) their bodies of air, to do many marvelous
(...) things, which exceed the compass of our understanding, being wrapped
and buried in bodies of death. And if sometime (says he) we be drawn into
admiration with the view of strange things presented upon theaters or stages,
which also we would not believe though they were told us by others, because
they are so far without the compass of our understanding, why ought we to
find it strange if Devils and their Angels (with their bodies of the
Elemente) do abuse our fragilitie in showing us visions, Idols, and figures,
as well sleeping as wakyng, to make us fall: their functions says he be
diverse, seeing that some of them do trouble our thoughts, some offend our
bodies, others infecte our blood, some assail and attempt our heart,
suggesting infinite follyes and conceits, and lastly by some we are pressed
with diseases according to the text of S. Luke, Luke. 11.
where the woman that Christ healed, was so persecuted with pain and grief,
that for the space of.xviij. years, she was so courbed yt she was not able to
lift up her head and behold the Elemente above, adding besides in the
antiquity of the Devils, In his book of the Divination of Devils.
the nobleness of their creation, seeing they be Angels of Nature, their long
experience gotten since their creation, the continual conflict which they
have with Angels, which makes them able to the wars, the agilitie of their
bodies of air by the which they pass all other beasts and birds in
lightness, the sharpness of their wits, their knowledge in all disciplines,
as well divine as human, a perfect and exquisite skill in the property of
plants, stones, metals, and many other like things, all which as they be
^^eir instruments wherewith they forge and fashion their illusions and engines
which they bend every hour against us, so they be also snares and baytes
which they cease not to lay every moment and minute of a day to entangle our
poor souls. And by the same mean (says he) they do prognosticate sometimes
things to come, and perform certain holy miracles by which they deceive
such as give faith to their dreams, as it happened to those poor women, who
seduced with the illusions of Satan, persuade them selves that they go all
night on horsacke when thed worship Devils, transfigured into Angels of
light, the better to play their part, and sometimes they show themselves in
diverse other shapes and figures, presenting unto them sometime pleasante and
goodlye things, and sometimes sorrowful things, sometimes they prefer to their
eyes persons known, and sometimes shapes unknown. All which sure, albeit
they are very strange and are found of hard digestion to such as measure the
work of God according to the capacity of their gross and rude understanding,
yet the discourse of Saint Augustine in his City of God is no less marvelous
to my judgment, whereof (plunged in a profounde contemplation of the power of
wicked sprits) he brings in certain women instructed in the art Magical,
reigning in Italy in his time, who giving to eat such as passed by them, a
certain fish mingled with cheese, the passengers immediately were turned into
mares, and carried their necessaries until they had performed their voyage, and
discharged their burdens, when they returned to their former shape. The like
happening to the father of Prestantius, who being turned into a horse, carried
corn with other victuals of certain knights. All which notwithstanding
(says S. Augustine) ought not persuade, that either the body or thought of the
man, could (by any Diabolical illusion) be converted into a beast, or take
th^eir shape or members, but rather that their fancy did abuse them in making
them seem like unto beasts. And touching the burdens which they carried, it
might be (says he) that the Devils themselves carried them, to entertain the
rather the error of those miserable creatures. But now to prevent such
opinions as may importe that there were no evil spirits: but in S. Augustines
time, or other Auncientes, I will infer things of no less wonder, whereof
the experience has happened in our own time. Gasperus Pucerus in his
commentaries de Diuinatione, after he has long argued the resons touching the
Artificial deceyte in Devils, brings in an authority no less marvelous than
of terror: There was (says he) a certain maid at Bolonia, who by the
excellency of her art, carried a great name thorough all Italy, and yet
could not so prevent infirmities in her self, but being overtaken with a
mortal disease she died: An other Magitian her co^panio^, knowing what profit
moved by her art in her life time, with intent to make the same common to her
self, by the help of certain evil spirits, she conveyed a certain charm
under the dugs of the dead woman, the which made her seem to be on live in
every respect: for in common assemblies she was seen play upon the harp,
sing and dance as she was wont to do, with other actions and gestures
differyng in nothing from one bearing life, saving that her color was
wonderful pale. There happened certain days after to come to Bologna an other
Magitian, who desiring to see whether the excellency and skill of this Woman,
agreed with the fame she had in every place, went amongst other to hear her
sing and play. But after he had some small time assisted her doings, he cried
suddenly to the people: What madness is this? what abuse to your simplicity?
what do you hear? or why do you wonder at such deceit? she that feeds your
fond eyes with these pastimes, is no better than a stinking and vile dead
carrion. Wherewith before he had fully ended his exclamation, she fell dead to the
ground. Whereupon the sophistry of the devil and the inchauntresse were
discovered. There was also in Pauia, an other woman enchauntresse in the time
of Leouicenus, of no less marvel in her art than this, but somewhat more
cunning, because no evil could be so secretly committed in Pauia, which by
her means were not forthwith reveled, the same making the Philosophers come
from far to visit her: and yet was there in the same university a public
professer of Philosophy, a man of very holy conversation, who refusing
continually of him self to visit or hear this woman, was won at last by the
importunity of his dear friends to see her: and being before, with intent to
sound her to the deapth, desired amongst other things, which was the best
verse that ever the Poet Virgile made? She answered him with small leisure,
that Discite iustitiam moniti, and non spernere Diuos, was the best and most
excellent verse that ever he writ. The same so amazyng the Philosopher and
his company, that they returned without other reply, maruellyng not a little
how she could form so precise an answer, having never learned so much as
to write or read. Such a like Histarie is verified by Hieronymus Cardanus, and
the experience to be justified at this day by all the Citizens of Myllan, where
(says he) is at this day living, a woman called Margareta, the wife of a
Paynter, who is not ashamed to publishe openly, that she has a Devil or
Familiar, which follows her continually, saving that he is absent for two or
three months in the year. This Woman lives of no other revenue, nor feeds
of no other gain than of the experience and pleasure, the which this Spirit
gives to the people, who for the strangeness of this sight, will call
oftentimes this Woman into their houses. And she when she calls this Spirit,
either puts down her head into her bosom, or lappeth it in some cloth:
and so begins to adjure her familiar after her Italian order, neither does
he refuse to appear and answer unto her euocation only his voice carries not
a sound as though it were near her, but seems drawn from far very
hollow, as if it were spoken out of a creuise in the wall: and if any man
draw near the place, from whence this sound comes, he may marvel to hear
and understand it more plainly in the uttermost corner of the house, than
fast by the place which is thought to yield it: Such is the propretie of the
voice, that it is not articulated, nor otherwise formed, but it may be
understood, albeit it is very soft and weak, in sort that it may more
proprely be called a murmr and sound than a voice: she becomes an
interpreter to his sayings, impartyng the same in plain language to the
people: whereof be some women dwelling in the house with her, who observing her
use and dealing with it, say, that sometime she encloseth it in a sheet, and
that customably it biteth or sucketh her mouth, the same confirmed chiefly in
that she has most commonly sore lips. This History makes me remember that
which the auncientes have noted of the spirit of Socrates, which imports
some vanity in them, because Socrates carried always such regard to the
truth, that for any thing he would neither suggest nor supporte a lie: and
yet it is confessed by himself, that he had one, as granted him to follow him
from his infancy, the same being a voice (as he confesses) that is already to
dissuade him against any thing that is contrary to him, and yet never move him
to do the thing which he ought to do: he affirms further of his spirit,
whereof he chalengeth the witness of Thymarcus to kill Nyceas,
(notwithstanding he had warning by the spirit of the inconvenience that fell
of it) in his condemnation confessed, that if he had believed the counsel of
Socrates, he had both avoided the fact and danger of the deed. Franciscus
Picus Mirandolanus, an excellent Philosopher of our time, affirms, that
there was a Priest of the age of.lxxij. years, the which for.xl. years
together had always a Famyliar in his company, who drunk with him, lay with
him, spoke to him, and so directed him in all his actions and doings, that the
people (not able to conceive the mystery of those things) gave their judgment
that he was a fool. This Priest called his spirit by the name of Hermelina.
Cardan also avouches no less of his father Facius Cardanus, who for the space
of.xxviij. years, used the conference of a Familiar in most of his business.
Plutarch in the life of Cymon writes, that after Damon was slain by treason
within the Bathes or hot house, there appeared long after spirits with such
lamentable voices and sighs, that notwithstanding the gate and entry were
rammed up to bar access, yet it is affirmed at this day, that fearful
visions be seen, and doleful cries heard. There appear at this day many
strange visions and wicked spirits in the metal Mines of the great Turk in
Sydero Capsa, who sometime present themselves in the form of great Goats, to
the terror of^ such as draw metal out of the Mines: They are of diverse
kinds, and even so they differ in disposition, for some of them will appear
and do no harm to the workmen: but some have so offended their work, and
tormented themselves, that they have abandoned the place, and so lose the
revenue of their Mines. The like avouched by Georgius Agricola, a notable
Philosopher, and by whom passed the convey of the Emperors Mines in Almayne,
who amongst other places writes, that in the Mine at Anneberg was a metal
spirit which killed.xij. workmen, the same causing the rest to forsake the
mine, albeit it was very rich. There were also such like wicked Spirits, at
such time as our Savior Christ was on earth, who keeping most commonly in
the graves of dead men, became so terrible* that few durst pass that way.
This is most certain, that Porphyrius, Psellus, Plotinus, Proclus, Iamblicus,
and certain other of late days, assure, that the vppermoste region of the air
swarmeth as full of spirits, which we call in Greek Daemones, as our air is
full of birds, foundyng their opinion, I think, in that the air and skies
whereby the Quindecines be as great, and the regions so delitefull and full of
pleasure, as we see the earth replenished with lively substance, metals,
stones, and plants. The water has her fishes, and the weak air here below,
brings forth creatures that breath and live. Whereupon may be persuaded, that
the great mass of the superior air is full of those spirits, whose
excellency far excedeth the inferior creatures, because their region is
more clear and pure, which because they seem things unworthy of our
christian Philosophy, we will cease to argue so far as the matter
requires. And because none may justly think that we give such scoape to
devils, as they have power to abuse the creatures of God (bought so derely (by
the precious blood of his son) it is needful so to tempre and direct the
reason of those things, that we give them not such authority over us as the
Cat has over the Mouse, or the fool is fearful of the whip: for if it were
yt their power were not governed by ye mighty hand of God (hating so mortally
the kind of man in who^ is graue^ the very image of God) their tira^nies and
cruelties had long ere this extirped both stock and root of such generation:
for if they could not of themselves enter within ye bellies of hogs, without
asking leave according to ye scripture: how much more ought we to be assured,
yt without the permission of God, they cannot offend us, who are ye paunes of
his redemption, his house wherein he has taken harbor, and carry his mark,
figure, and affinity: besides, what greater witness can we have of the
debilitie and small power of the Dyuell, than that which he does acknowleage
in Job, where demanding leave to persecute that Prophet, he said not Suffer
me to hurt him: but craving of god to stretch forth his hand and touch his
flesh, said: Mitte manu^ et tange carnem eius, as though he were not but the
organe to execute the will of God, calling his permission his hand: whereof
also we have a like testimony in S. Luke, where our Savior, comforting Simon,
Cap. 22.
told him that Satan had asked leave to torment him and to syfte him as they
fan corn, but he prayed for him, to the end his faith should not fail.
Which may sufficiently persuade, that the Dyuell can not offend us without
leave, seeing he durst not address him to the Apostle, without he obtained his
saufconduict of God, wherein that great Oracle of God. S. Augustine who
oftentimes had endured many and furious assaults of Satan, gives us one
special consolation, saying: Genesis lib. 1^. cap. 14.
Let the Devil forge and stir up both day and night so many illusions as he
will, and present thee with visions of bodies, which be none in deed, what
does all that hurt thy soul, seeing thou do not consent to the vision? live
then assured, for thou art not within his danger without leave, and yet the
permission which is given him, is not to condemn thee, but rather to rebuke
thy sins, and make a proof of thy faith. S. Paul also in his second Epistle
to the Corinthians and.xij. chapter affirms, that God suffered Satan to
buffet him, for fear he should be lifted up above measure, doing yet more as
himself witnesses in his first Epistle to Timothe, where he gives Timothe to
understand, that he has given Hymeneus and Alexander to Satan, to the end
they learn to blaspheme no more. Whereby we may see how the Lord does use
sometimes wicked spirits as good for our health, which are oftentimes
transfigured in diverse fourmes and fygures of day and night to resist us,
and draw us to the Combat: But none shall wear the Crown, that does not
manfully fight. Let us then learn from hensforth of ye apostle to put on the
armor of God, seeing we have not to make war only (as it is written in the
Ephesians, against flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers,
and such as govern the world and the darkness of the same. Let us then stand
upon our guard, least we be circumuented and abused by that false enchaunter,
who is now more shameless and of greater rage and fury than ever he was*
Whereof what greater witness can we have than that which is written in the
Prophet Micheas, 3. Reg. 22.
where he sees him before* God, crying and houlyng: I shall go forth, and
become a liar before the face of all the prophets of Achab? And in Zachary, who
is always upon the right hand of the Priest to let that there descend no
benediction upon Jerusalem, which being very lively apprehended by that great
bishop of Hipponenses. S. Augustine crying after the Lord, saying: Deliver us
(O Lord) of our common enemy, who whether it be in riches or in poverty, joy
or sadness, speaking, or in silence, sleeping or waking, drinking or eating,
or in any other our humain actions, does watch us, follow us, prompe and prick
us, lay his netts to entrap us, discharge his arrows to hurt us, and dress
his engines and snares to entangle our poor souls. And then with the Psalm he
concludes and cries again: Deliver us good Lord from the snares of the
hunters. But now seeing (contrary to our hope and expectation) we be so depely
anckred in the profound depth or Labyrinth of visions, it is also convenient
before we hoyse sail to bring in the last member that they depend upon. There
is yet an other sort of visions, Visions of the imagination.
which do not proceed of any diabolical illusion, nor by any other secret
mystery of the Angels, but they engender of the corruption of humors, or by
some indisposition of the imagination, or some other infirmity of nature, as
when we seem to see those things which be not in deed: and such kinds of
imaginatio^s do torment most commonly the melancolike men, as Galene wri^eth of
him that thought him transformed into a Cock, seeming to be amongst them, song
when he heard them crow, and beat him self with his arms, as they do with
their wings: As also some other that persuaded them to be transfigured into a
vessel of earth, who keeping continually upon the plains and champaines, dare
not come near houses or trees, for fear to bruise or break them in pieces.
There was a certain Damsel* whereof Alexander Trallianus writes this history,
that by a corruption of the imagination, Lib. 1. cap. 20.
she persuaded her self to have devoured a Serpente sleeping, neither could
she be delivered from the disease of such thought, until, being provoked to
an extreme vomit, there was secretly conveyed into the basin, a quick
Serpent: immediately after the which, she was delivered of her disease,
persuading that she had vomited the Serpent that stirred in the basyn. There be
yet visions, which proceed by eating certain poisons, as Pliny and Edwardus
witness of him, of those which did eat the brains of a Bear, which being
devoured, they imagined that they were turned into a Bear. The like happening
in our time to a Spanishe Gentleman, who having eaten of a Bear, went
wandering by the deserts and mountains, thinking to be tra^sformed into a
Bear. Yet there be other sorts of visions which (according to ye opinions of
certain Physicians,) proceed upon certain Natural causes, as when any man
is killed and buried not very deep in the earth, Visions by natural cause.
there come (as they say) from the dead body certain exhalations and
vapors, which ascend into the air, and do seem to represente the figure or
form of him that was put in the earth. We have also many other things,
which under the color of illusions, abuse our understanding, as when the
air is troubled with contrary winds, by whose agitations is engendered a brute
or murmr, resembling properly the lowing or noise of beasts, or not much
unlike to the complaints of women and little children: sometimes also the air
pierces within the creuisses and vaultes of rocks and old walls, and being
sent back again by his own violence, gives out so distinct a sound, that
it seems a precise or set voice, as we prove oftentimes in that which we call
Echo, the same pronouncing for the most part v. or.vj. words with so great
marvel, that it easily persuades such as know not the cause, but specially
in the night, that they be some spirits or Devils, the like happening in our
time to a counselor and secretary of a certain Prince, the which by reason of
his ignorance in the cause of his Echo, was in danger to be drowned
according to Cardanus, in his book of marvelous inventions, who writes of
one Augustinus Lauisarius, Counselor to a certain Prince, who being in the
country and out of his way, In his book of marvelous inventions.
and lastly overtaken with night, found himself greatly passioned, and riding
all along a River side, began to lamente his distress, and after the Italian
manner, cried Oh, the Echo which came from a certain rock thereby, replied
unto him incontinent with Oh, Lauisarius somewhat comforted with the voice,
thinking it was some man which spoke, demanded in his language, vnde debo
passa? the Echo answered Passa, then the poor secretary being in greater
pain than before, demanded, Chi, which as much to say as hear: the Echo
replied chi: but being yet not well assured, he asked him again, debo passa
chi? passa chi? says the Echo: which words fed him with such comfort of
his way, that he took the river, being astonished notwithstanding that his
horse at his first entry lost the bottom and began to swim, and had it not
been the goodness of his horse, and mercy of the waves that seemed to take
compassion upon his distress, he had taken a moist lodging in the bottom of
the river, from the which albeit he escaped so hardely, yet being brought
with much ado to the other side, he passed the rest of the night in cold and
prayers, without comfort, sauinge for the pleasure he took in the
remembrance of his peril past: whereof certain days after, (being come to
Millan,) he made discourse to his dear friend Cardanus, in sort as if it had
been the malice of an evil sprite that went about to drown him: and telling
the place and every circunstance in order, Cardanus smelled forthwith the
ignorance and simplicity of the secretary, knowing that in that place was a
wonderful Echo, which yielded such a plain and perfect voice, that it
seemed to be formed out of the mouth of some creature: for a more assurance
and proof whereof, he led him eftesones to the same place, where they found
that his Passa that guided him was none other thing than a reuerberation of the
Echo: wherein seeing we are now so deeply fallen, I will not forget to
infer the authority of mine author in an example, whilst he write this
book at Paris: I have says he, heard a sound in the borough of Chalenton
near Paris, Of.vij. voices or soundes.
which yeldes and returns, the words that are spoken, whole, entier,
distinctly and plainly, and that.vij. times one after an other, like to the
Echo septuplex of the Ancients, and specially commended of Pliny. I have
also often marueled yt those which have written the Antiquities, and things
worthy of memory in Paris, have left such a strange thing without
remembrance in their writings, seeing I have neither heard nor seen so rare a
thing in all the voyages I have made over the high Alps of Italye and
Germany. But now there rests (to put a last seal to our difference and
diffinition of visions) to make some discourse of artificial illusions,
Artificial visions.
the which being wroughte by sundry secret and Sophistical sleightes of men,
move no small terror to such as behold them, as that, whereof Hector Boethius
in his Histories of Scotland, makes mention, wherein as there was a help and
furtheraunce by art, so the effect was no less marvelous and strange, and
at last the only cause of conservation of a whole Kingdom in sort as
follows. The Pictes (according to the Histories) have always borne a mortal
hate to the Scots, killing after sundry battails and skirmishes) the first King
of that country, with the overthrow of most of the nobility of that
country. Cenethus second King of the Scots, and son to him whom the Pictes
had murdered, desirous to revenge the death of his father, used many
persuasions to incense the nobility to fall into arms against them: who in
respect of their late infortune in the war, and their lack of power to
maintain the quarrel, would not agree to the persuasions of the King, in whom
as there remained a more grudge against the death of his father, than in the
rest, so finding him insufficient to work it by words or incitation, he
reposed a last help and refuge in art: and to give a beginning to his
devise, he fained a cause of conscience and consultation, for the which the
nobility were sent for to assiste the counsel, where being lodged all
together within a castle, and himself also, he gat to favor and further his
co^spiracy, some.iiij. or.v. men (whom according to the trust he put in them)
he made to be hidden in certain secret corners of the chambers appointed for
the noble men, having first attired them in horrible order with skins of
seawolues (whereof is great stoare in that country by reason of the Sea) with
every one a staff in his right hand of a kind of old and dry wood which
shyneth in the night, and in their left hand a great horn of an Ore pierced
hollow: these, according to their commandment, kept very close and secret
until the Princes were in their first and fast sleep, when they began to
appear and discover, with their staves glimering like the glaunces or flames of
torches, braying out of their hollow horns a hydeous voice, containing that
they were sent of God to sommon them to the war of the Pictes, against whom
the sentence of victory was already pronounced, and agreed by the heavens. And
so these artificial sprites assisted with the benefit of the night, which is
the mother nurse to all illusions, used so fine a convey in the dispatch of
their business, that they escaped without being disclosed, leaving the poor
Princes so passioned with fear, that they passed the rest of the night in
prayers, until the morning when every of them with great solemnity imparted
his vision to ye king, who also for his part to aggrauate the matter with
further credit, notwithstanding he was the first founder and forger of the
mystery, approved their sayings with the like appearing to himself, albeit he
was curious to reveal the secrets of God, until he had more sure
advertisement thereof: wherewith some other persuasions on his part to enforce
their forwardnes, they became as eger and earnest to begin the war, as if
Christ himself had been their captain, and so assailed their enemies that they
did not only overthrow them in battle, but also made such mortal
extermination, that the memory of the day ever since has been utterly extinct.
There be some now a days, that put lighted candels within the heads of dead
men, to fear the people, and others that have tied little wax candels lighted
upon cockles, tortures and snailes, which they put in that order within the
church yards by night, to the end that the simple people seeing these beasts
move a far of with their flames, might believe that it were some dead sprite
returned for some special cause into the world: by which villainous means as
they have gotten money of the common and ignorant sort, so let them be assured
to render account of their doings to the soueraign judge for abu^^ng the pore
flock of his dear son under ye color of visions. There has been yet of
late time in Italy, an other practice of Diabolical visions performed by
certain candels made of the grease or tallow of a man, which so long as they
were light and did burn in the night, the pore people seemed so overwhelmed
with enchauntments and charms, that a man might have taken any thing out of
their house, without that they were able to stir out of their beds to reskue
it: but our God who according to his justice does leave nothing unpunished,
has suffered that the authors and executors of such vanities, have been taken
as the thief with the manner, and being condemned, have yielded tribute to such
offenses, with the price of their life. And lastly there is an other sort of
artificial visions, which are made with an oil or licoure, which comes of
certain worms we see shine in the night, which because they be things not
worthy to be handled in argument amongst no christians* I will make silence of
them for this time, maruelling notwithstanding that sundry learned men
heretofore have used so large a liberty in discovering such vanities, the
rather for that our natures for the most part are more credulous of such
shadowed things, than apt to believe a truth.

A wonderful history of a monster seen by Celius Rhodiginus. CHAP. xxvij.
TO the end we should taste of these wonderfell visions (which may be thought
very strange to the Reader) me seems good to show here the pourtrait of two
marvelous monsters, the one a man, and the other a woman, seen in diverse
provinces by two as excellent Philosophers, as have reigned in our age. The
first being the man, was seen by Ludouicus Celius Rhodiginus, as he writes in
the iij. chapter of his.xxiiij. book of ancient lessons, following in this
manner: There was (says he) brought forth a monster at Zarzara in Italy, in
the year of grace, 1540. and the.xix. day of March, worthy to be considered
off for many causes: One, for that it was brought into the world at such time
as Italy was afflicted with the plague and scourge of civil wars. And that
this monstrous child was a certain forerunner or messanger, which showed unto
them the miseries of those domestical quarrels: the other causes for the which
it deserved to be diligently noted, were for the strange and marvelous
effects that nature exhibited in this little subject: for in the first place
the mother of this infant brought it forth within.iij. months well formed,
which is a thing monstrous in nature: Secondarily, he had two fair heads well
proportioned, and two faces joined one to an other, and tied upon the top of
the neck with a proportion marvelous in every of those parts: he had his
hair a little long and black: and between these two heads, he had a third
head, which exceeded not the length of an ear. And for the rest of his body,
it was so well made and proporcioned in all things requisite, that it seemed
that Nature delited to frame and make him so fair. Who after he had soiorned a
certain time in this miserable world, died: wherein, as he was made a present
to one of the king of Spaynes lieutenants, governing in that country, so he
thought it good to have him ripped and his belly opened, and intrailes seen,
which being done, he represented unto the sightes of the lookers on, things no
less marvelous than the presidents written of before: that is to say, he had
two livers, two milts, and but one heart. Wherewith ends the description that
Celius has made of that monster. The second monster is a woman, having two
heads, whose figure is before to be seen with the other, and more to be
wondered at than the first in one thing, for that she lived many years, which
is contrary to the nature of monsters, who ordinarily live not long, for the
abundance of melancolike humor, which abundeth in them, to see them selves so
opprobrious to the world, are thereby so dried and consumed, that their lives
be short. Which happened not to this maid, which thou see here
portraicted: for at such time as Conradus Licostenes, came into the Duchy of
Bauiere, which was in the year 1541. she was of the age of.xxvj. years. That
learned Philosopher Licostenes writes one marvelous thing of that monster,
for reserving the duplication of the head, nature otherwise had left nothing in
her imperfect. These two heads (as he writes) had desire in like to drink,
to eat, to sleep, and to talk together, as also did all her other affections.
Wherefore this maid went from door to door searchyng her living, to whom
they gave more willingly for the novelty of so strange a creature, and so new
a spectacle: Albeit she was chased thorough the Duchy of Bauiere, to the end
she might mar the fruit of women with child, for the apprehension which
remains in the imagination of the figure of this monstrous Woman.

A Monster on live, whose intrailes and interior parts were to be seen naked
and uncovered. CHAP. xxviij.
IN the time that Seruius Galba, and Marcus Scaurus were Consules, a noble and
famous woman in Nursiue, brought forth a son on live, which had the uppermost
part of his belly so open, that men might see his intrails naked and uncovered,
and it was so hard and entier in the nethermost part, that I believe if you
have red all the Authors Greeks and Latins, which have written of the wonders of
nature, you shall scarcely find his like. And although the Romans were always
superstitious in those things, yet was this monster a certain Augure and
soothsayer of the victory which they obtained against Iugurth, as Iules
Obsequent writes in the hundredth Chapter of his book of the wonders of the
Romans Wherefore if the Greeks and Arabes, (which were so fine in serching out
the secrets within the shop of man's body, that they demanded of the king the
bodies of the condemned, to open them alive) had had that little monster at
their commandment, they need not have exercised such butchery, tira^nie and
cruelty on the behalf on living creatures as they did: for casting their eyes
only upon that little monster, without making further openyng or incision, they
might have seen and discerned the substance, the greatness, number, figure,
situation, commodity and action of all the principal parts of man's body,
the lively spirits being within: the which is not of small consideration in
nature, seeing that by the ignorance of those things, if that a sinew or muscle
be cut, for the most part the feelyng is lost, sometimes the moving, and
sometimes both the one and the other, and very oftentimes death thereby
follows. Wherefore the ancient kings and princes, as Marcus Anthonius, Flauius,
and Boethius, (as Galene witnesses) took so great pleasure in Anotomies and
cuttyng of bodies, that they themselves used that art, who as they observed
not the same carefully, so they made err the most renoumed Philosophers in the
time past, as Aristotle in his first and third book of Histories, treatyng of
Creatures, the.vij. chapter, where he writes that the seames of the head, by
the which the moist matters of the brain do euapour, be not like, but differ
in men and women, notwithstanding we see by common experience the contrary:
whereby the same author is also deceived, in that he writes, that the heads
of Dogs have no sinews, although in anotomysing of them, we find they have
seames so well as in the head of man: In like manner Cornelius Celsus one of
the most excellent, which has written of physike in Latin, is beguyled in the
same matter of seames, in his eyghte book and first chapter, where he writes,
that those heads which have no seames, be the most sound, and least subject
to sickness, though the same be utterly false, as witnesses Hipocrates, in
his first book of men, where he writes, that the heads which have the gretest
number of seames be the most healthful: wherein as I have showed the mistakyng
of the two matters of the cutting of the body: Even so could I discover unto
you a number of other errors, which be found in Mundinus Carpus, and others,
who in their writyngs have been often beguiled in the opening of the shop of
man's body. But for that we are to entreat of wonders, we will therefore make
an end of that matter, without setting before you the falts gathered in the
Harvest of Physike.

An history of a prodigious Dog, which engendered of a Bear and a Mastife
bitche in England, seen by the Author at London, with the discourses of the
nature of this Beast. CHAP. xxix.
LIke as mine Author in the beginning of this Chapter seems to prefer in
sort of a French flourishe or commendation to him self, his being in
England, with sundry honors that were done to him by the Queens Majesty,
and certain nobility, at what time he was brought to the view of this Dog,
so (for certain respects, I account it as necessary to leave it out, as to
fill or cloye the Reader with such vain folly.) In England then (according
to mine Author) was bredde this monstrous Dog, whose figure seems to
resemble indifferently a Dog and a Bear, which argues him to participate
both of the one and the others nature: the same not seemyng very strange to
such as have observed their conditions at London, Paris Garden.
where the Dogs and the Bears do lie in little Cabinets or vaultes of wood,
one fast by an other: and being in their heates, those that do govern them,
will not stycke oftentimes to put a Bear and a Dog in one house together,
when being prycked with their natural impressyons, they convert their
cruelty into love: of which conjunctions are engendered oftentimes creatures
like unto this, although very seldom: amongst which mine Author has observed
two: Which as they were given to the Marquess of Trans, so he made a present
of the one of them to the County of Alphestan, the Emperors Ambassador, and
the other he made to be carried with him into France, where mine Author caused
this portraict to be drawn, omitting nothing that was necessary to be seen:
In whom albeit may appear some cause of wonder by the strange effect of
Nature: yet the attestation of sundry famous authors makes it neither rare nor
new. Like as Aristotle, who is of opinyon, that diverse beasts may have
Coitum, and join together, so that their natures do not much differ, as do
the Dog, the Woulfe, and the Fox. He writes in an other place, that the
Indian dogs be engendered of a Dog and a Tiger, which is also approved by
Polux, and Pliny. Patritius and Senes in their third book of their common
Wealth, have affirmed, that the Indians have not only made cover their
bitches with beasts of an other kind, but also the ancient Frenchemen used
to have them engender with Woulues, to the end that the fruit of such fierce
commixture and seed, might be of the more strength and fury, the same
being also confirmed by Augustus Nyphus, in a History, assisted with his own
eyes, and not gathered by any report. On a time (says he) that the Lord
Federike of Montforce and I returned from hu^ting, we lost one of our dogs,
which we could not recover by any sound of horn or hallow of the hunters, and
yet after we had long sought him, we found him joined* with a she Wolf in a
corner of the wood, his fierceness being vanquished with the delight he had in
her company. Hierom Cardan assures to have seen a Fox gotten of a Bitche
and a Fox. But to return now to the description of our beast, whose figure as
it resembles a cutted Bear, so had he the gestures and other disposit^ons,
more participating with a a Bear than a Dog, and exceeded (as mine Author
affirms) all other beasts in fury: For there is neither Lion, Bear, Bull,
nor other beast, how cruel so ever, which he dare not assault, using withal
such a fierceness in his fight, that after he has fastened his teeth upon
him, he will be rather dismembered and torn in pieces by piece-meale, than
suffer himself to be taken off. Whereof mine Author prefers an experience at
London, in a battle between him and a Bear, the same also making me
remember that which the Ancients have written of a Dog that was given to
Alexander, in the Indies, which (as some say) was engendered of a Tiger and a
Bitch: but because there is diversity of opinion touching this History
amongst many Authors, as Aelyan, Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, Plutarke,
Patritius, with others, I will bring in only that which most resembles a
truth.

In the journey that Alexander had in the Indies, he was presented by one of
the noble men of the Country, with a great Dog, engendered of a Tiger, who
as he did seem of a huge and fierce regard, likewise Alexander, desiring to
prove his doughtinesse and disposition of heart, presented him a Bear tied at a
stake, where at the dog being couched on the ground, neither moved nor
angry, vouchsaued not once to rise from the earth: the king commanded eftsoon
to offer him the Bull, and then the wild Bore, which seemed to move the dog
no more than the rest, what provocation so ever was made the assistantes:
Alexander, enuyin* (as it were) that nature had planted so fearful a heart in
such a huge and massy piece of flesh, commanded to kill him: Whereupon the
Lord that first ought him and gave him to the king (bieng more privy than
they, to his valiant disposition), desired Alexander that before the dog were
killed, he should be offered the Lion or Elephant, which being done forthwith,
the dog began with a wonderful fury to assail the Lion, and so claw him in
his cruel kind, that where he once imprinted his teeth, the caracters remained
and could not be defaced, being also so fierce upon the Lion, that he could not
be taken off by any means, whereat the king seeming to marvel, and the Indian
Lord desirous to increase the pleasure he took in his pastime, commanded to
cut of his tail, and his four legs one after an other, tearing in effect
one leg from an other, notwithstanding which horrible torments he endured, he
gave not over the battle, but continued as constant as in the beginning,
wherewith to prevent a displeasure in Alexander, who seemed to grieve to see so
valiant a dog so lothsomely dismembered, the Lord told him he had two other
of the same litter, whereof he made at the same time offer to ye King, with
charge, that according to their natures, he must prove them against either
Lions or Elephants, seeing customably they contemn all other beasts, yelding
no glory to ye victory which is got of others of baser condition. The Ancients
have given special commendation to these creatures touching their faith and
fidelitye to their master, whom they do not only know by view, but
understand their whistle, they ^latter them, fawn upon them, are ielous of
them, follow them through out all the world, and be such sure keepers of their
goods, that they will die rather than suffer them to be taken away. Which is
very well verified in a dialogue wherein Plutarch seems to dispute whether
beasts have reason or not, confirming it by an example of the faith of a
strange dog, the same being of hard belief, were it not the authority of
him that writ it. The Athenians (says he) had a Temple called the Temple of
Aesculapius, garnished with great treasure and riches, for the guard whereof,
they keep only an excellent dog called Caparus, notwythstanding whose
barking and other means of defense used by him, certain thieves brake in one
night, and took away ye most precious jewels that were in the temple: the dog
seeing the Sexteus with other Wardens of the church, were not moved with his
barking at the thieves, runs out of the Temple as enraged or mad, and
pursues the thief that fled before him, not leaving to follow him,
notwithstanding his threats and stones which he cast at him. The day being
come, the dog stayed always where the thief rested, without coming near
him for fear of harm: which being well considered of the fellone, who to
prevent yt which would not be avoided, offered bread to the dog, which he did
not only refuse to touch, but also did not forbear to bark without
ceassing: which being heard of certain passengers that way, the report came
to Athens, by which means hue and cry was sent forth, and the thief taken at
Cromion: but the sport was to see the dog skip and leap before the fellon,
rejoicing as though the thief were his pray, and taken by his means: for
which cause the Atheniens ordained him to be nourished at the charges of the
City, and gave him in custody to the Priests of their Temple. There is also
spoken of in diverse Historyes, a like discourse of the fidelity of a dog,
found by the king Pirrhus as he passed with his army, garding the dead body of
his master slain by the high way side, being not so much astonished at the
view of the mortified ghost of him that lay dead, as double amassed when he
understood by certain paisantes of the Country, that the dog had not
stirred out of that place for three days, without desiring either to drink or
eat. The king for compassion of the dead carkas commanded it to be buried, and
the dog for his faith to his master, to be nourished in some convenient
place. And as no inquisition or policy could try out the murder, what
diligence so ever was used: so it chanced that certain days after, the King
taking a view or muster of his people, assisting it in his own person, the
dog attended the King, and lay very still and quiet at his foot, til it came
to their turns that had killed his master, to pass along by the king: when
the dog upon a sudden (venting as it were the murderers) assailed them with
such fury, as if strength had agreed with his good will) he would have torn
them in pieces: but being not able to perform the effect of his meaning, he
looked here and there, giving out such arguments of pity, according to his
dumme kind, as if he had demanded justice of the murder at the kings hands.
The same moving in him and the rest of the assistants such suspicion of the
fact in them whom the dog assailed, that what with torment and other
examination, they confessed the matter, and were punished accordingly. A thing
very wonderful, and wherein our God shows himself most just in his judgments,
having in such horror such as do spoil and spil man's blood, that he stirs
up sometime little beasts to be his ministers of revenge of their iniquities.
Plutarch, Aelyan, and also Tretzes, in the third Chiliade and a hundred
thirtye and one Chapter, write, that after Darius the last king of the
Persians was vanquished by Alexander, and hurt in many places by Bessus and
Nabarzenes, he was forsaken of all the world, and void of human suc^ors,
except a dog, which he had norished and brought up, who never forsook the
body of his master, but became no less faithful to him being dead, tha^ he
was whilst he lived.

The Roman histories give also great commendation to the fidelity of the
dog of Titus Fabius, who being condemned by the justice of the Senate, and
his body laid dead upon the ground, the dog did not only accompany the dead
carcass, but made such a pitiful howling and crying, that he stirred the
assista^ts to compassion, who (to appease him) if they offered him bread, he
took it, and in the presence of them all by such means as he could, he opened
the mortified mouth of his master, and put in the bread, thinking that as he
saw his distress, so he would relieve it by means as he best might: but that
which is more wonderful touching the faith of this dog, was, in that the
body of his master being cast into Tyber (according to their custom at that
time to bury dead men) the dog leaped also into the river, not ceasing to
conte^d with the waves, till he had got hold of his master, whom by maine
strength he did not only support and keep from sinking, but also drew him out
to the shore, thinking he had the^ delivered him from peril. By this and such
other may we discern in some respects a more great faith and amity in these
brute beasts, than in reasonable creatures, who for the most part now a days
observe the order of the swallow, shunning (as they do the roof in the
winter) their friends touched with any adversity or sinister fortune: for which
cause also Masinissa the great king of Numidia, would never commit the guard of
his body by night to the faith of men, but used for his sauetie that way the
company of.viij. or.x* great dogs, whom he brought up for the nonce, and made
them be shut in his chamber by night, to the end that by their barking he
might be warned of any peril: which remains in practice at this ^ay in S.
Maloes in Britain, a town of defense environed with the Sea, wherein only a
great number of dogs of England do keep watch, and that so truly that the
whole guard and protection of that city consists no less in the fidelity of
those dogs, than in their strong bands of their old soldiers of Piemont,
neither moves any charge by them, for either armor or weapon, seeing they
content themselves only with their lives, which are reserved by common order,
and they nourished continually in certain dark caves, where they are barde to
see any light, to the end to give increase to their fierceness: the same in
deed giving them such a woodnesse, that they neither know, nor use regard to
any, but such as are appointed to nourish and feed them, in such sort yt at
night when they are drawn out of their dens, they are driven to sound
drums and trumpets as a warning to every body to retire, which has bred
such a custom in those dogs, that after the last retrait be sou^ded, there
is none so hardy to be found before them, which escapes not their jaws,
without great hazard and danger of his life. There is also mention made in the
Eccles^asticall histories, how the Emperor Aurelian, forcing Benignus the
Martyr to worship Idols, made to be kept fasting for.iiij. or v. days,
certain great mastiues, whom he reserved only to feed upon christian men's
flesh, before whom he caused the body of the said Martyr to be brought forth
bound: but the dogs refusing to become the mynisters of the sin of such a
tyrant, in place to devour or tear him in pieces, they licked his hands, and
smelled to his body, without either offer or effect of other harm. Which makes
me remember an History commended by Appius the Greek, and Aulus Gelius ye
Latin, Iouianus Pontanus lib. 1 amoru^, and lastly Anthonio de Gueuuare bishop
of Monodemo. Al which albeit they treat of an other beast than a dog, yet
because the discourse is no less prodigious, than confirmable to our former
arguments, I think it no time evil employed to describe it in sort, as they
have left it behind them.

Titus the Emperor, son to Vespasian, upon his ret^rn from the wars of
Germanye, determined according to an ancient custom of the Nobility there,
to solemnise at Rome with great pomp the day of his nativity. For a first
entry or beginning whereof, he caused royal triumphs to be made to the Senate,
with a bountiful distribution of treasure amongst the Romans: He enjoined
withal by special charge, to make provision of Lions, Bears, Hearts, Bulls,
wild Bores, Wolves, Camels, Elepha^ts, with a number of other savage and
fierce beasts, found most commonly in the deserts of Egypt, and valley of the
mount Caucase. In like sort it was decreed sometime before by the majesty
imperial, that to all thieves, felons, murderers, periurers, traitors, and
rebels, their lives should be reserved, to be punished and torn in pieces y^
day by those beasts: by who^ should not only be thundered upon them due
revenge of their wicked life past, but also in the combat should appear
equal pleasures and delight to the lokers on: wherein this was the order that
was observed. One of those miserable men was let out after an other, and
committed all alone to a place, which is at this day being at Rome called the
Collisea: after the which in the view of all the assistantes, was let loose in
the same place one of these cruel beasts, who if by chance he tare the man
in pieces, the same was the sentence and punishment of his offense: but if the
man subdued the crueltye of the beast, and killed him, it served as an
absolution or dispense from further punishment. And as they kept hungrye of
purpose (long time before) these cruel beasts, to the end to add a more
fierceness to their woodde nature, so amongst the ^est that were brought to
the combat, the Emperor seemed chiefly to see fight a Lion brought out of
the deserts of Egypt, who was of a huge body, horrible in regard, fearful in
his cries and yelling, and most desperate and cruel in fight, having already
committed to morsels.v. or.vj. me^, without devouring them, least withal he
should lose his appetite and delight to fight: albeit the Emperor not lyking
to keep him any longer without meat, commanded to let loose unto him one of
the Captives, whom if the Lion overcame, he should also devour him: whereupon
was committed into the place a poor slave, so lean and mortified with
imprisonment, that he seemed to delight in no other felicity than sudden
death: This fierce Lion setting up his brussels, and making two or three turns
about the Coll^sea, seemed to whet his teeth and stomach, to pray upon ye
miserable man: but yt which is no less strange to hear, than wonderful to
see, this cruel beast approaching near his prisoner, seemed at a sudden to
gase in beholding his face with great judgment, which having performed and
viewed with such leisure as he thought good, he did not only refuse to do him
any harm, but also with great humility, he smelled to his hands, and licked
his fingers, and falling prostrate before him, he seemed not only to know him,
but acknowledge most thankefully in his kind an ancient debt and good turn
done unto him. This brought such indifferent comfort and courage to the poor man, that he converted his former fear into present assurance of safety. The
same moving him in token to be thankful of his part, to stroke and cherish
the Lion, as if there had been an ancient familiarity between them, which
bredde such cause of amaze in the Emperor and the assistantes, (as never
having seen nor heard of the like) that they imagined him to be some
Nycromancien, or by some Art to have enchaunted the disposition of the Lion.
And forthwith called the slave unto him, and asked what he was, of what
Country, and his name, what was his offense, and for what cause he was there
delivered to such distress of the wild beasts: what (says he) have you
nourished this Lion or have thou heretofore stand his life in stead, or
delivered him from any mortal danger? Or if then be some enchaunter, I enjoin
thee upon pain to be here disinembred quick, to yield us a truth, seeing it
is now happened to thee, which never has been seen to chance in Rome since
the first foundation. Wherewith the wretched prisoner, having yet the Lion
couched at his fete answered the Emperor with an assured and stayed
countenance in this sort: Albeit sir, I bear here a miserable body of the
malice of my time and fortune, the same with other mortal distresses in
prison, making me rather resemble the ghoast to a dead man, than seem of state
as I have been, yet (sir) the extremity of my case does not take away the
estimation of the house yt bred me, being not long since a knight of the
country of Eselauonia, and of the line of the Androniques, of no less honor
in that country, than the famous Quintus Fabius and Marcus Marcellus through
your province and part of Rome: the city whereof I am. is called Mantuca, who
as she revolted against the obedience of the Romans, so all such as remained
of that miserable calamity, became servile to your city, whereof my fortune (as
you see) made me a miserable partaker: but touching your demand to be privy to
the discourse of my tragical life, It is now.xxvj. years since I was first
prisoner in my country, and as long since I was brought in that order to this
city, and sold in ye field of Mars, to a sawyer of wood, who finding me unapt
to supply yt trade, sold me to the Consull^ Dacus living at this day, whose
commendation as it co^sisted chiefly in wisdom, and profound experience, so
had he for a counterpoise of his virtues a vice most familiar to him, y^ same
eclipsing all the rest, as the clouds do the clearenesse of the Sun: for his
covetousness was so great, that I was at a point to sterue with hunger in his
service, and my toil and travel both day and night so painful and extreme,
that during the space of a xj. years (which was the time and scope of my
miserable life) I never ioyed in other thing than in the desire of death, which
being withstanded by my destenie, I thought to abridge my desolation by means
as I best might: whereupon I tendered a request to my master, either to sell me
to an other, or by some other way to give end to my myserie. Wherein if I
prevailed, it was in increase of further rigor on his part, seeming rather to
aggrauate his villainy, than diminish any part of his cruelty: and for my
self, feelyng the threats of age, and fall of my former strength, I resolved
desperately to bury my self and sorrows in the solitary deserts of Egypt:
wherein fortune favored me with a most convenient occasion, for that the
Consule my master, leauyng Rome, to visit a country called Tamutha, situated
between the confines of Egypt and Africa, from whence as he rested one night,
and was in the depth of his sleep, I departed without other leave, than that I
came with as slender noise as I could, and so taking only with me some reasons
dry, and a bottle of water, I committed me (in that state) to the mercy of the
night and guide of fortune: But at the dawning of the day, fearing some search
to pursue me, and being pressed withal with a wonderful desire of sleep, I
laid me down in a cave which I found by chance in that desert place,
wherein I had not rested many hours, but I saw enter into my lodging a huge
and cruel Lion, having his throat and feet embrued with blood, the same
addyng further dread to my former, the rather because I saw me as void of
means to flee his fury, as unprovided of force to resist his fury, which
made me pronounce secret sentence of mine own death, with contentment that
the bowels of ye Lion to become the sepulcher of my bruised bones. Wherein as I
was in the depth of these mortal cogitations, behold the Lion, which had a
little paused at the entry of the cave, began to draw near the place where I
was, drawing one of his legs after him with great grief as it seemed: and
houering over the place where I lay upon the earth for fear, he laid his
hurt leg upon my hands, in sort as the wisest man would that sought to
discover his grief i^ an other: which made me take heart, the rather for that
ye fear which I had of this proud beast, was turned into a desire in him self
to demand succors at my hand. His grief was in his foot, by reason of a great
thorn which lay within the flesh, the same making it swell, that it was at
point to yield matter, to the which I gave a vent by breaking the impostume, and
took out the prick with the point of my knife, and lapt up his wound with a
band or shread of my sheart. And having performed this work of charity upon
the poor beast, he lay with an extreme patience by me all that day and next
nght, til the morning following: when I unfolded eftsoons the sore, and pressed
out the corpuption with no less suffra^ce in him tha^ before, who after.ij.
or.iij. hours in the morning, seeming to be pinched with hunger he left me and
the cave, and went to the desert. When I seeing the honest departure of my
guest, prevented ye like peril and saved my self by flight: wherein (sir) I
could not be so precise as to escape the hands of such as pursued me, by whom
I was presented to my master: and from him (amongst others no less
unfortunate than my self) I was passed prisoner to Rome, where if my good
fortune have brought me into the danger of this Lion, and he to return the
benefit of my good turn with a compassion and safety of my life, I humbly
beseech thy majesty royal to consent to the same, and suffer not thy decrees
given out by thine own mouth to be violated with any respect of cruelty. Which
moved such indifferent pity and co^mpassion to ye assistants, yt there was not
(...) amongst them al, which with great intercession were not suitors to ye
Emperor for his liberty and safety of the Lion. Whereunto he did not only
agree, but also enjoined from that hour, that Andronique and the Lion should
use their liberty to pass at all times through the streets of Rome: whom the
people beheld, not without a singular pleasure, the rather to see the Lion
contented to carry great wallets full of bread, and other relief given them in
alms. And sometime to get money to his keepers, he would suffer children to
leap upon his back: The same moving such cause of marvel to the strangers yt
came to Rome, that there was question touching the meaning. Whereupon, to
satisfy the^ and al men, was written a little bille, and fastened to the breast
of the Lion with this inscription: Hic Leo est hospes huius hominis. And upon
the breast of the man were written these words, Hic est medicus huius leonis,
whereof the one signifies: This Lion is the guest of the man, and the other:
This man is the physician of the Lion. This is sure a wonderful example of
charity in a beast without understanding: wherein is also approved the opinion
of an Indian Philosopher named Dephilus, who was wont to say, That ye great
workman dame nature had graued certain laws in beasts, which might be
applied to men, as examples to direct ye estate of their life: for if we
consider and view with discretion the order of doing of diverse beasts, we shall
find them to exceed men in many things, and have (as it were) a natural virtue
in every affection of courage, wisdom, force, cowardice, clemency, discipline
and erudition. They know one an other, and are able to decerne amongst
themselves: desire things that be profitable, and eschew such as be hurtful,
forsee what will fall, and make provision of such things as be necessary for
their relief. Al which being considered by the ancient Philosophers, they have
not ben ashamed to dispute and make a doubt whether brute beasts did
participate with reason or not: which made Solomon send some of them to the
schools of the Philosophers. Like as also Esaias reprochyng the unthankfulness
of the Israelites toward GOD, lays before them an example of the Ox and
Ass, which acknowledge their master, but Israel has mystaken and not known
her Lord.

A wonderful history of certain women which have brought forth a great
number of children: And an other which ^are her f^^te five years dead within
her belly. CHAP. xxx.
LIke as that great Philosopher Aristotle does most firmly assure in his
writings, that a woman can not bring forth at one time above five children, and
that very rare. Even so (says he) that happened on a time to a seruante of
Augustus Caesar, who at one burden brought forth five children, who (besides the
mother, lived but a short time after. In remembrance whereof, the Emperor
Augustus caused to be made and erected a monument, writing on the out side
thereof, the number of the children which she had born. Wherefore though
Aristotle did believe that a woman could not bring forth at one time above the
number of five children, notwithstanding the contrary has been proved in many,
as is witnessed by many grave authors. Amongst whom, that notable learned
Prince Picus Mirandulanus in his commentaries, upon the second hymn assures,
yt one Allemande (called Dorothee) brought forth in Italy at two several times
twenty children, that is to say, at one time.xij. and at an other.viij. who
during the time yt she was with child, her belly was so great, that she was
constrained to payse ye weight thereof with a towel bound about the same for
the succoryng of her charge. There is none of those which have read the
chronicles and histories of Lombardie, which knows not that in the time of
the reign of Algemont first king of the Lombards, there was a certain common
Woman brought forth.vij. boys at one time, who for the horror of her sin,
cast them into the water. But God by his almighty power and wonderful
providence not willing to blot out of memory this wicked and detestable act,
brought the same to light, who permitting the king Algemont to walk by fortune
nigh the water where she had cast them, espied one of the children in the water
on live, who with the crook of a staff which he held in his hand, he
plucked out, causing the child to be nourished and brought up in learning and
virtue: who as he grew in years, so he in like manner perseuered in all
perfectious and good gifts: and as the historia^s make mention, succeeded
Algemond, and was named Lanytius second king of the Lombards. And if thou
would read the History of Martinus Cromerus in his sixth book of the worthy
acts of Poloigne, thou shall find an history of a woman of the county of
Virboslaus, which surpasses all the precedents before recited for the
multitude of children, wherein like as all these histories be wonderful for the
great nu^bres of children borne at one instant: even so I have not red amongst
all the Historians which have written thereof, that for the great nu^bres of
children which they have had, they have had cause to open, bruise, and anatomize
or put an iron into their bellies to pluck forth their fruit, as it was
strange and marvelous to behold, that a woman for one only child has been
opened, for that she by the space of.v. years carried her fruit in her body
dead, as thou may understand by the discourse of this history following
worthy of remembrance, the which Mathias Cornax, a learned and excellent
physician of Vienne, writ in a Latin work, which he sent for a wonder to
Ferdinando, Emperor at that day. And although he have dilated on this History
sufficiently, yet notwithstanding, I will write thereof more at large in that I
shall be able. He writes to the Emperor Ferdinando, that in the year.1545.
there was at Vienne in Austrice, a certain woman named Margareta, the wife of a
Citizen of that town called George Wolczer, who being quick with child from
S. Bartholomew day to S. Luce, and then upon point to be delivered, she began
to feel ye sharp and dolorous pangs, which women accustomably taste and suffer
in the bringyng forth of their children, caused her mother and certain other
sage women to be called for her better help therein. But when they came to the
great conflict of Nature, and hoped to have received the child, they perceived
such a brute and noise as it had been a thunder clap within the belly of that
poor martyr, yt which made them to think, that the child was dead with the
great striving and battle that it had with Nature. The noise being at last
appaised, they could not perceive or judge any moving or life in the infant,
which was cause after they had employed all their labor and art in vain,
thynking to draw the child out of the mothers belly, they were constrained in
the end to abandon and leave her for a time to the help and mercy of
almighty God. Albeit after certain days her dolor and grief renewed, that
she was not only forced to use for help herein, the aduises of the most
excellent and best experime^ted physicians in that province, but also all
others elsewhere, whose fame was most renoumed and celebrated for their
excellency in that art: who with all their physike resolutiue, attractiue,
suppuratiue, were not able to deliver her from this misery, or otherwise
comfort her, than with that which the angel said to the Prophet^: Dispone domus
tuae, quia morieris. Whereupon she seeing her self void of hope to receive help
at man's hands, determined to take truce which nature, and persevere constantly in
this her martirdom, the which she continued with extreme dolor the space of
four yer^^, carrying this dead caryon in her belly: which being ex^^ed she
resolved in her self that it was most expedient to expose some ready death
rather than to suffer her self continually to pine by the cruelty of that
torment. Wherefore resting upon this deliberatio^, she made to be called the
Surgions and Physicians, at whose hands she requested to be opened. And in the
year.1550. the.xij. day of Noue^ber they opened her belly, from which they
drew the child half rotten, which she had carried the space of five years:
And after purging and phisiking her, they restored her by the aid of God to
such perfect health, that she remains at this day on live, and so whole,
that she may yet conceive and bring forth children. As it is more amply
declared in the Latin work sent unto the Emperor Ferdinando.

A wonderful history of a Monster, having the shape of the face of a man, who
was taken in the forest of Haueberg, in the year.1531. whose portraict
Georgius Fabritius sent to Gesnerus, drawn naturally, as he is here figured.
CHAP. xxxj.
LIke as those which admeasure the greatness of the works of God according to
the capacity of their understandings, could scarsly be persuaded, that this
monster which is here figured, should be natural: Even so in my judgment as I
have oftentimes protested, that I will not fill or pester my wrytings with any
fabulous matter or history, whereby I shall not be able to verify the same by
the authority, either of some famous author, Greek or Latin, sacred or
profane: for as Gesnerus in his History, de quadrupedibus viuiparis, writes
that in the Forest of Saxony in the coast of Dace, there was taken certain
monstrous beasts, having ye shape of the face of a man, whereof the female in
chase by chance was killed of hunters, and the male taken by them, was brought
alive, who afterward became domestical and tame, in such sort as he began
to talk a little, albeit his words were imperfect and host, much like unto a
Goat: and touching the rest of his actions, they were more brutall than
human. For at such time as he was moved by ye ardent heates and motions of
nature, the women were not in safety with him, for he would endeavor himself by
force to viola^e them openly. And as an other like to this, was taken in the
year.1531. in the Forest de la seigneurie de Sal^ebourge in Almaine, who would
never be made tame, nor yet endure the look of a man: but living in such sort
certain days, in the end died of hunger, refusing to be fed of any living
creature. Even so in the time that James the fourth king reigned in Scotland,
which was in the year 1409. and yt he sent Iacobus Egilinus in embassage to the
French king, who by tempest of the seas was cast on land in a certain Isle of
Norway, where he saw mo^sters like unto these spoken of before, as he witnessed
at his return: and enquiring of the people of that country what kind of
creatures they were, they answered, that they were certain beasts having the
shape of the face of men, who accustomed very often to come by night to their
houses, which being not repulsed by dogs, would devour as well their men as
children. And I remember that S. Augustine in his book of the City of God,
makes mention of sundry monsters of straungo forms, who were found in
deserts or elsewhere, whereupon grew a question, whether they were descended of
the first man Adam, or that they had a reasonable soul or not, or whether they
should rise as others shall at the general day of resurrection: But for that
this matter is a little to long to entreat upon, by reason of the shortness
of this Chapter, I will therefore reserve it for a another place more fit and
apt for the dissolution thereof.

A wonderful History of sundry strange famines. CHAP. xxxij.
I Do remember that I have treated in my third book of the Theater of the
world, how famine is one of the most cruel ministers of the justice of God,
as he himself witnesses very often by his Prophets and Apostels, sometimes
threatening to give them for their wickedness a heaven of brass, and the earth
of yro^, that is to say, that it shall bring forth nothing: albeit I will not
forget in this place to make mention of two notable famines, noted in the book
of Ecclesiasticus, to the end that drawing our Histories out of the lively
springs of the scripture, the same may move us yt rather, and touch us the
more with remorse, even upon the hammer of our conscience. It is showed in
the.iiij. book of the kings and.vj. chapter of a famine which happened in
Samarie, in the time of Elizeus, which was so hard and extreme, that the head
of an Ass was sold for.xxiiij. pieces of silver, and the fourth part of a
measure of Doves dunge for.v. pieces: but that which is most far from all
humanity, after that all their victuals were consumed, ye mothers eat their
children: In such sort that a pore woman of the city, se^ing the King of Israel
upon the wall, made her complaint unto him, that one of her neighbors would not
perform covenant and agreement made betwixt them, which was: that they should
eat together her child, and having so done, that they should also devour the
child of her neighbor, which she told the king she had already done, for we
have boiled and eaten my son, and now she hides and conceales hirs, for fear
she should feed or relieve me. Which when the King had understand, his heart
began to die for sorrow, and he entered into mortal war with his hair, flesh,
and garments: saying: God deal so with me, and so according to the rest of the
text. Josephus an Hebrew writer, in his.vij. book and iij. chapter of the
wars of the Jews, declares a history almost confirmable to this, but
performed in a more strange and bloody manner. He writes that there was a
noble and rich woman, at such time as Jerusalem was besieged, who had pacte
together some remainder of her goods, which she had in a certain house of the
City, and lived husbandlyke of that little which remained: but the soldiers
and men at arms spoiled her of all within an hour, in such sort that they
constrained her to beg: but that which gave increase to her misery was, when
she had any thing growing to her by the alms and charity of others, the
souldioures took it from her with violence, with the extreme oppression of
hunger, and small hope of means to be sustained, forced her to arm her self
against the laws of nature, in such sort as beholding with pitiful regard
one of her little children, whom she embraced between her arms, cried out
with great compassion in this sort: Oh unfortunate child, and me most
miserable mother, who have unhappily harbored thee in my flanks? What shall
henceforth become of thee, considering the desolation of our state, which so
rages against us both, that albeit I had will to save thy life, yet would thy
desteny make thee subject to a continual thraldom of the Romans? come then
my child, and serve for food and nouriture to thy pore mother overcome with
hunger. And after she had pronounced this tragical sentence of the death of
her child, she stretched her cruel hands over his tender body and killed him,
put him on the broach, roasted him, and at one instant eat ye one half of him,
in which mean time came in again the soldiers, and tasting in their nose the
smell of roasted meat, began to threaten her to death, if she did not impart it
with the^: but she resolved in her rage, and as one most desirous to accompanye
her dead son, without any astonishment or fear of their threats, said unto
them: be content soldiers says she, for I have reserved a more faith and
loyalty than you think, seeing I have kept you as great a part as to my
self, wherewith she brought forth the rest of her child, and set it on the
table before them, which moved such confusion and remorse of conscience in them
all, that they stood as men enchanted, and had not the heart to answer any
one word, but she on the contrary side, as a Tigresse full of amaze and cruelty
having lost her young ones, preferring in her face both fury and fiery looks,
said eftsoon unto them. Now masters: this which you see is the fruit of my
body, it is my child, my blood, my flesh, yea and my bones: it is a creature
formed of my substance, and a regeneration of my self. Why are you more
scrupulous or delicate than his tender mother yt has brought him into the
world with so many pangs? Do you refuse to eat whereof she has and will make
a taste before you? which struck such pitiful terror into all the soldiers,
that they ran away, leaving her alone with the one half of her roasted
child, which was all in ef^^ct which their cruelty had left her touching her
goods and comfort. And this as it is the proper text of Josephus, which I have
as near as I could, drawn out according to the contents of ye same, so the
view of this makes me remember an other Historye which I have red in Auenzouar
a Physician of Arabia touching an extreme hunger which so afflicted the place
of his nativity, that after that miserable people had stuffed their bodies
with diverse sorts of filthy and corrupt meats, as dogs, horses, rattes,
mise, and such like as they could find by any devise or travel, and yet not
being satisfied, nor having wherewithal to quench the rage of their hunger,
did not forbear to turn up, and open graves and sepulchers, and feed of the
mortified carions of dead men: for as soon as any were buried (the porest sort
most pinched with hunger) would rise by night and vnshroud ye ghoastes, which
made ye magistrates at last to establish a solemn watch to guard the sepulchers
from such unnatural violation.

A wonderful History of a Bird, which has no feet, and lives continually
in the air, being never found upon the earth, or in the sea, but dead.
LIke as this bird, whose figure is here depainted, is both monstrous and
wonderful: eue^so she yeldes sufficient matter to trouble al ye Philosophers in
the world: wherefore who so will consider ye great maruels of nature which be
found in this little foul, need not dout to confess yt the air wherein she
makes her continual abode, norisheth nothing at all more strange or worthy of
admiration: For, for ye first part, there has no man ba^dled her alive, she
lives alwais with the dew, and has no fete, which is wholly repugnant against
the opinion of Aristotle, who writes that there is no bird without feet, but
for that I never saw it before this present hour, I will therefore write
simply, that which I have red in the Latin authors at this day, who have
seen, handled and written thereof. Gesnerus in his Latin history of Birds
(from whence I have taken this portraicte) writes that which follows: that
Bird whereof thou see here the portraict, is called the Bird of Paradise, or
Apis Indica, whose figure was showed unto me by the most Noble and well
learned personage Conradus Pentigerus, who affirms to have seen one dead
like unto this. It is not long since there was a Chart at Noremberg, wherein
was figured the form of a Bird like to this which is here depainted, the
which was sent hither with this inscription: the Bird of Paradise, otherwise
called Apis Indica, is of the greatness of a Gripe, but of such wonderful
swiftness and light condition, that no ship how so ever she be assisted with
winds or weather, is able to make sail equal with the wing of that Bird,
whose wings in deed are long and thin, but of a meruellous reflection and
light, whose feathers (or more properly shagge or long hair) be almost of the
hardness of a horn: this Bird has no feet, she flies continually without
resting in any place, saving that she stays against a tree or bough upon the
which she hangs and stays by a lock of her long hair: she is of great
price, by reason of her strau^gen^sse and rarietie: the great men of Leuant for
a bravery do deck the crests of their armors with the plumes of this Bird:
they saw it at Noremberg by John Cromerus. The Almaines call this bird in their
language Luffruogel, which signifies a bird of ye air, either by reason yt she
lives in the air, or that they make account she is releued thereby, the most be
of opinion yt the female has one receptacle or retreat under her wings where
she lays and hatcheth her eggs. Wherefore the kings of Marmin in the Isles of
Moluques, not long since were persuaded and did believe yt their souls were
immortal, by the consideration of this Bird, being moved by no other argument,
if not that they observed one little bird of extreme beauty, which at no time
touched the earth, but sometimes fell dead from the height of heaven. And as
the Mahometists travailed with them, they showed them this bird, persuading
them that she came from Paradise, which was a delicious place, where the dead
souls took their repose: whereby that people gross and barbarous, believing
that which the Turks declared to them, began very curiously to examine of
their law, and in the end became Mahometists, and follow at this day the
Mahomet law: for which cause they name that bird Manucodiata, that is to say,
the bird of God, which bird they have in such reverence and honor, that the
Kings having her about them, account themselves sufficiently guarded from all
peril and danger of war: whereupon the Kings of the Isles aforesaid, did
send to Charles the fifth Emperor, five of these little birds dead: for as we
said before, they were never taken by any man alive. Maximilianus Transsiluanus
Gesnerus, pursuing the History of this bird, adds yet that which follows:
I have (says he) attained to write these things by the letters of Melchior
Guillandin Beruce, a man great in science and doctrine, which were brought
unto me to Padoue, by the which he writes her the bird of Paradyse, as here
follows: Albeit those which have left in writing the navigations of the
Spaniards to strange countries, assure and affirm, that there is a little
bird bred and borne in the Isles of Moluques, very pleasant and of singular
beauty, whereof the body is but little, notwithstanding by reason of the
hugeness of her feathers, she seems more great, which be broad and houering,
disposed in a round, in such sort that they represente the circuit of a
circle. That little bird represents in greatness and form a Quail, being
adorned and decked with feathers of diverse colors most fair and bautifull,
contenting very much the eyes of those which beheld her: her head
proportioned to the body, somewhat more great than a swallow, her feathers which
deck the height of her, from the vppermoste part of the bones of the skurfe of
her neck to the mydst of her beak, be short, great, hard, thick, and of a
yealowe color, and shines like the purest gold, or the beams of the Sun:
the others which cover her chin be most delicate, tender, and resemble a
piercyng color like to the green, and not much unlike to those which we see
upon the heads of Canardes, being directly against the sun. That bird has
no feet, and is very like a Hearon, touching the feathers of her wings, saving
that they be more tender and long, holden of a broune color, participating
with read and black. The male of that bird has a hole upon the skurfe of
his back, where the female puts and hatcheth her eggs, and not relieved by
other meat, than the dew of heaven, which serves them for meat and drink.
And who list to visit the inward parts of this bird, shall find her full of
fat or grease, whereof I may boldly talk, because I have seen two, without
legs, which is contrary to the writing of Aristotle, who affirms, that no
bird wants feet: he dwells always in the air. I am sure this would
amaze you to write wholly the form of this bird by his particulars, as Gesnerus
writes, according to the witness of the foresaid authors. Albeit, who is
desirous to see a more ample description thereof, read that which the said
Gesnerus has written in the chapter, where he treats of the bird of
Paradise, or in the book of Auium natura. Hieromeus Cardanus in his books de
subtilitate, or place where he writes of perfect beasts, reports the like to
that which follows. In the said Isles of Moluques, they have found upon the
la^d or in the sea, one dead bird called Manucondiata, which is as much to say
in the Indians tongue, as the bird of God, or Bird of Paradise, which they
have not seen on live, for that it has no feet. Which for my part I have
seen three or.iiij. times, and always wanting those members: she dwells
continually in the air, and that very high and far of. She bears a body
and a beak much like the sea swallowe both in bigness and other form, the
quilles of her wings and tail be full as big as those of an Eagle, when she
aduaunceth or stretches them abroad. Her feathers be very small, and most
like (reserving their litlenesse) to the plumes of a Pehenne or a she Peacocke,
and differing in that point from the Peacocke him self, because these feathers
have not such stars or eyes as we see in the tail of a Peacocke. The back
of the male of this bird is holowe: where by most reason the female does
lay her eggs, seeing her belly is also hollow, the same arguyng that by the
hollownesse of the one and other, she lays and hatcheth her eggs: there is in
the tail of the male, a threede of the length of three shaftments, black in
color, neither round nor square, of an ordinary bigness, not much unlike to
a Shoemakers threede, by the which it may be presumed, that the female is tied
and joined to his back, whilst she lays and hatcheth her eggs. It is most
certain, that as she remains continually in the air, so likewise when her
wyngs and tail be drawn into a roundnesse, she supporteth her self that way,
and being weary, she becomes as she was before. She does live by none other
food than by the dew of Heaven, which serves her both to eat and also to
drink, the same arguing a wonderful diligence and marvel of Nature, to make
such prouysion for this bird in the air. It seems not that she should be
nouryshed of pure Air only, because it is too subtle, and it is not likely
that she should be nourished of small Beasts and Flies, because the
substance whereupon these Creatures be fourmed, is not engendered in the
air, neither has there ben found any such digestion in the belly of this
Bird, as they have written of her that have seen her dead: she has not her
relief of the vapor which ascends from the earth, because she was never seen
to descend so low: besides, there is often peril in vapors, and this bird
is not consumed but by old age: all which prove, that she is only fed and
preserved upon the dew that falls in the night. Wherewith end the opinions
of Galene and other late writers touching the properties of this bird. Neither
can it much disagree from our purpose of strange birds, to auouche in this
place the authority of Hector Boethius, and Saxo, who write, that they found
certain Trees in Scotland, whose fruit being lapped within the leaves, and
the same falling into the water in some convenient time take life, and turn
into a living bird, which they call a Tree bird. This tree grows in the isle
of Pomonne, which is not far from Scotland, toward the north, the which is
verified in some sort by Aeneas Siluius, affirmyng that he has heard, that in
Scotland is a tree growing for the most part upon the bank of a river, which
brought forth fruit of form and likeness to a de Caunes reed, which being
ripe, fall off themselves, some into the water, and some upon the land, and
those which take the water, are seen to have life, and swymme upon the waves:
and after certain time to take wings and fly into the air, which
notwithstanding by diligent inquisition has not ben found in Scotland but
rather in the Isles of Orchades.

A Monstrous Serpent bought by the Venetians in Africa, and sent afterward
into France, embalmed as our late writers affirm. CHAP. xxxiiij.
According to the testimony of Conradus Licostenes (of whom I have borrowed
the portraict of this horrible Serpent with vij. h^^^es) this monster was sent
out of Turkey to the Venetia^s embalmed, who not long after made a present of
it to Francis de Valoys, the French King, by whom for the rareness of it, it
was valued at six thousand ducates. Wherein like as (for a more certainty and
truth of the matter) I have been curious to search whether there has been any
such monstrous thing within the court or not: so if it be true (as it is to be
presumed, in respect of the authority of him that wryt it) I think nature has
never brought out or formed any thing more marvelous, amongst all the
monsters that ever were: for besides the monstrous and fearful figure of this
Serpent, there is yet a further consideration and regard touching the faces,
which both in view and judgment seem more human than brutal: but touching
the multitude of her heads, me thinks it ought to argue no great
strangeness, to find serpents with two or.iij. heads, seeing we have and
mean to make mention of both men and women that have had no less, the same
being also witnessed by certain of our late writers, who trauailyng into
India, have seen the same. Ludouicus Vertomanus in his book of the
peregrinations of the Indians says, that he has seen in Calycut, fourfooted
serpents breeding within certain marshes, which contain for the height of their
body, the bygnesse of a Hog, but of an ugly foul and deformed head: he makes
also mention of an other kind of serpents which be so venomous, that as soon
as they touch or pierce the blood of a man, he falls forthwith dead to the
ground. He says, that if the King of that country, could discover the place
of habitation of these serpents, he would build them little caves or cabinets
to defend them from the violence and inundation of waters when there happened
any such: besides he held them so dear, that if any of them were oppressed or
killed by any of his people, such as committed the fact were sure to pass the
same way, the same moving of a fond and superstitious opinion of the king and
inhabitants there, that these serpe^ts were certain spirits of God, which if
they were not such in deed, they persuaded that their biting or poisoning could
not work such spedy death and destruction to man, which makes that those
venomous beasts walk and pass through their towns without peril or hurt:
and albeit in some one night there has perished about nine persons of their
venomous biting, yet can they lose no credit or estimation with the King or his
people: who besides all these vanities, if they meet any of these ugly
creatures in the beginning of any voyage or enterprise, they do account it a
special good speed in their business, such is their blyndnesse, and such is
their mserable superstition.

Iambol, a notable Merchant of Greece, affirms yt in his trafike to the
Indians, he found certain flying Serpents, of the length of two cubits,
with wyngs in their foreparte, the which fly by night, and be of so mortal
a poison, that if they let fall or distill but one drop of their urine, it
kylleth forthwyth the creature whereupon it falls. Certain late Ambassadors
of Portingale have brought from thence to their Prince, one of these Serpents
embalmed, the same carrying such a terror with it, that albeit he were not to
be feared, and without cause of fear, yet very few durst approach him. The
Ancient Histories enlarge very far touching the wonders of the monstrous
Serpent which appeared in Africa to Attylius Regulus, whose fear and force of
venom was such, that notwithstanding any strength, torment of war, engine or
other policy which he or his people could devise, he could not be
vanquished till he had torn in pieces and murdered the most part of his
army. They agree all, that the skin of that Serpent contained.xxvj. foot in
length, whose jaws were hong up, and remained there for a miracle until the
war of Muancya. Diodorus Siculus in his.iij. book treats of a serpent yt
was carried on live into Alexandria to ye king Ptolomeus Philadelphus, no less
wonderful tha^ true, which I will describe particularly, according to the text,
the rather because it confirms in many respects the circumsta^ce and effect
of our purpose: Seeing (says he) the noble and bountiful consideration of the
King to such as brought to him any strange or monstrous Beasts: certain
Hunters determined to present him in his own country with a quick serpent,
wherein although the enterprise imported almost an impossibility, yet fortune
so favored their intent, that within certain days after, by diligence they
brought their purpose to effect: for they came to the knowledge of a great
Serpent, near the water, of the length of.vij. toises and an half, who being
withdrawn into a circle, and as other beasts went to the water, he advanced
him self upon a sudden, and swallowed certain of them forthwith, the rest he
kept within the circle of his tail to pray upon afterward. These hunters
beholding at large and with discretion the orders and doings of this Serpente,
whom they accounted without policy or understanding, began to march near
him, thinking to take him with their coards and chains: but being come within
his full view, and that they saw his eyes flame as fire, his huge and great
teeth: and being astonished withal at the hideous noisemade by his hard scales or
finnes when he moved on either side, and lastly notyng his other fearful
regards of his head, they began to stand in more awe of the danger than able
to attempt it to the uttermost effect of their meaning: and yet notwithstanding
this fear, they cast forth their hooks and coardes upon his tail, which so
kindled his fury upon a sudden, that he assailed them forthwith with hissing
and horrible noise at his mouth, devouring at one morsel him that was next
him, throwing his tail about an other of the company, who likewise passed the
same way: the same so amazing the rest that they reskued themselves by flight
without intent eftsoons to practice their devise: albeit not long after the
hope of gain and profit overcame the present peril and danger they were in,
for that they proved against him a second experience rather by art and
policy than strength, making of great cords hollow as a bow net sufficient
byg by their estimation, to contain within it the said serpent: and then noting
diligentely his place of retire with his times of coming and going, as soon as
he was gone abroad to hu^t for some pray, they stopped the entry of his cave
with stones and earth, and by and by made a vault or hollow hole in the
ground, near to the other where they laid their net: the effect and success
answered fully the meaning of their devise, for after the serpent had fed
sufficiently abroad, and repairing toward his place of rest, was amazed when
he heard himself pursued with a great noise of trumpets, horses, dogs and
men, whose brute made the whole air sound after him, and thinking lastly to
save himself in his den, was forthwith overthrown in the net, and so
ouercharged with blows (notwithstanding his force) that he yielded unwillingly
to the snares of the hunters, who, to prevent any mischief by his mouth,
knocked out his teethe, and so wrapped in his net as he was taken, they
carried him into Alexandria, and presented him to the King, who wondering no
less at ye stra^genesse of the beast, than their policy in taking him, gave
order from that time forward, to preserve him with a thin diet, to the end to
diminishe his strength, which being justly observed, made this horrible
Serpent, by succession of time so tame and familiar, that he made him to be
showed as a thing of great miracle to strangers, that came to visit him: it
appears in a volume or remembrance of the acts of Alexander, that in the
pursuit of Porus king of India, (who fled before his fury) he found among the
deserts and burning sands many Serpents called C^rastes, and other whose
terrible hissing procured a fearful brute in the air, and had eyes sparkling
with venim, who charged the soldiers with such fury, that notwithstanding
their resistca^e every way, they killed well nigh.xx. me^ of war and.xxx.
servants: there be also found in hot places an other sort of Serpent, which
some call Dipsas, and other Prester, the which is very short, white in color,
with three strokes of black in his tail: such as are bitten of them, become
immediately so oppressed with an extreme drought, that they be never afterward
satisfied with drinking, being so distempered that way, that the more he
drinks, ye more he desires to drink: the same being the cause (as
Dioscorides writes) that the ancient Physicians, finding no remedy able to
encounter this venomous infection, have left it at large and incurable. There
is a kind of Serpent considered of by the Historians, which is called Boza, who
feeds most commonly of ye milk of a Cow: He, if he have time to assist his
inclination, becomes very huge and big, which was very well approved in the
time of Claudius Caesar, when one of them was taken and killed, in whose belly
was found a whole child. Plutarche is of opinion, that even as Honye flies are
engendered of beasts, waspes of horses, and hornet of asses, so may it be, yt
of the marrow and carrion of men certain kind of Serpents are bred: which he
justifies in that he affirms, that many (by reason of this corruption) have
been bredde in graves and Sepulchers of men. Which (according to mine author)
happened in Auignon, in the time of his study there, where a simple Artisian,
opening the lidde of a coffer of lead, wherein was a dead man included, was
bitten of a Serpent, which was of such mortal operation, that if he had not
ben spedely rescued, he had dyed of the infection. Conradus Lychostenes, in his
prodigious works, writes that in September, the year a thousand four hundred
ninety and four, there was a woman in Cracouye in a place called the holy
Ghost, who was delivered of a dead child, having tied at his back a quick
Serpent, which ceased not to devour and gnawe the dead bones of the child:
neither is that of less marvel whereof Baptista Leo makes mention in the time
of Pope Martine the fifth, when he says was found amongste a sort of rocks
or stones, a great Serpent on live, the same being so enclosed with a heavy
stone, that there appeared neither place to discern him, nor hole from whence
he might either take or yield breath: the wise men which were there assembled
to pronounce a reason of his being there, held opinion that he was engendered
of the moiste substance of the stone, which being putrified, brought forth
such deformity: But when they should resolve touching his respiration or
taking of breath, they seemed greatly troubled, because the stone being massiue
and heavy, had also neither vent nor conduicte whereby he might either cast
up, or receive any breath, no more than that which was found in the Sepulcher,
whereof I have made mention here before, which was so surely closed and stopped
with lead on every side, that the air could not pierce into it. But now
albeit our sundry histories have here preferred diverse cruel and venomous
Serpents, yet I think nature and the earth have formed none more marvelous
than the Basilick, to whom all antiquity has always given the name of king
of the Serpents: this is a kind of those Serpents, which bear in their head a
white mark or stroke, seeming upon them in sort and manner of a crown: her
head is very sharp, her throat red, her eyes and other color drawing
somewhat near a black: she chaseth with her hissing (as Pliny says) all the
other Serpents: she makes trees die with her breath, scorcheth herbs, breaks
stones, and so infecteth the air where she remains, that no bird can use
wing there without perrill: she kills men with her only regard, like as an
unclean woman infecteth and spotteth a glass. And although she contain not
above one foot in length, yet is her poison so strong and venomous, as she
kills other Serpents with the very breathe that comes from her fore end:
she is so mortally venomous, that she infecteth and ouerwhelmeth great Cities
with the air or breath of her mouth, the same approved not only by the
historians profane, as Dioscorides, Pliny Aelian, Lucian, Isidorus, with many
mo, but also confirmed in some sort by the Ecclesiasticals.

Hieronimus Cardanus in his books of diverse Historyes, treating of the wonders
of this beast, brings in a strange thing happening in our time which he
describes in this sort.

At such time (says he) as I made my books of diverse Historyes, the.xxiij. of
July happened a thing no less worthy of admiration, than memory, which I did
assist with mine eyes and presence. Iacques Phillippes Cerunse caused to be
made under the earth, a valt or cave, which because it should consolidate the
better, he made stop very close, and within.xviij. or.xx. days after, made
the same to be opened to draw forth certain arches of wo^de which sustained
it, whereunto as one of his workmen disposed himself to descend by a ladder,
and being in the midst of the same, he fell down dead, the master seeing no
return of his man, would prove the experience in himself, who likewise being
come so low as the other, fell also dead, after whom the assista^ts (not
doubting any mortal peril) sent a third, a fourth, with many other, which al
passed one way: this albeit it gave great indifferent cause of suspicion and
fear, yet was it no such terror to the people without the hoale, as to make
them desist to send any more, but chose out amongst the^ al a strong huge man
of no other regard with them all, than as a fool, who discending as low and to
the place of the others, fell not, but with a crook of iron drew one of them
that were dead, which gave him such courage yt he would once again go down,
and being within the mouth of the vault, he began to sink and fall, albeit he
was prevented by the diligence of the assistants, who by special remedies
recovered him of his trance, but not of the use of his speech till the next
day, when I perceiving (says Cardan) that he began to speak, I asked him many
things, but he seemed not to remember to have said or done any thing save only
his going down: there was let fall in a cord, a dog whom they also plucked
up again half dead, whereby every man that was not able to comprehend the
cause of these wonders, judged that there was within the cave a Basilicke,
which otherwise is called Serpens Regalis. Wherein as we have now (as I think)
treated sufficiently of certain strange and monstrous Serpents found in
sundry provinces and parts of the world, it is no less necessary (in mine
opinion) to search out certain singular things which are found in some
particular kinds of them: those which have treated of the nature of Serpents,
have observed chiefly that their excrements smell sweet, which by natural
reason may proceed of their dryness: for Serpents of their own nature be
dry, the same arguing that their excrementes be well boiled by reason of the
straitness of their intrails. Some affirm that Serpents have so odiferous a
breath, that it seems as sweet as Musk. There be Serpents which keep their
venom after their death, as the Uipers, for otherwise their flesh could little
profit to the composition of Triacle, if they were altogether without poison.
Besides, whereupon could come the excoriation in the Leper that has eaten them,
if they did not reserve some poison? It has chanced in our time that such as
have taken of the hide from a beast, that has perished of the biting of a
Uiper, die also of the like disease. Dioscorides in his sixth book where he
treats of poisons and venomes, says that immediately after a man is bitten
with a Uiper, the biting swells and becomes dry, and of a whitish color:
there appears in the beginning of the biting a fiery anguishe, all died with
blood, which does force out of the flesh round about it, certain blisters, as
if they had been burnt with fire, then follows an viceration, then they bleed
and swell, touching those parts that be about the liver, whereupon are
procured vomites of choler, heavy sleep, shaking through the whole body,
Passions of the urine and cold sweat. Certain late Physicians are of opinion
that the Uiper is no other thing than the Serpent which we call in France the
Aspic. Some do affirm that the Uiper does abhor a naked man, and fears him
more than if he were clad with garments. The Physicians are of opinion that if
a man's eyes be rubbed every morning with the skin or flough of a Uiper, his
sight shall never be dim nor hurt with suffusion, affirming besides, that if
an old floughe be burned when the Moon is full, and in the first part of the
sign of Aries, and that the cenders be sprinkled upon a man's head, it
stirs up terrible dreams. Pliny and Dioscorides auouche that the earth
never receives within her entrails, the Serpent that has once bit a man,
seming (as it were in respect and reverence of a certain royal benignity)
to have in horror him that has offended the King, chief and Prince of all
beasts. Pliny writes that the spittle of a man, specially of him that is
fasting, is venomous to a Serpent, in so much that if he but taste of it never
so little, he dies, and that which more is, if a man but pour it upon him, it
offendes him no less than if he had skalding water cast upon him. All the
Physicians and writers observe that the venomous Serpents hide them selves, or
abide within the three leaued grass, bi^ause that herb is mortiferous to
them. Those that will handle serpents without danger, let them wash their
hands first with the iuise and sap of Turnips, the same being so great an
enemy to their poison, that they had rather die, than once cease upon the
place that has been rubbed with Turnips, whose only smell does take away both
his life and force. Cardanus in his.xviij. book de subtilitate, and in the
Chapter which ^reateth of marvelous inventions, says: that the wild
Cowcumber, black neesing powder called Eleborum, and the great Serpentine
called Drachontiu^ mains, be of so great force against serpents, that such as
be anointed or rubbed with their iuise, be seldom or never offended or hurt
with Serpents: for better confirmation whereof I may boldly bring in a History
which I have neither red nor understood, but was privy to ye experience of it
my self in the time of Pope Iulia that died last.

Such as have hau^ted Italy, know (I am sure) that there be certain charmers
which they call Enchaunters of serpents, who use to carry about their necks,
great boxes full of quick Serpents, under the pretense whereof, they live and
sell certain Oils, which they say are most sovereign against the bitings of
mad dogs and serpents: amongst those I noted one chiefly at Rome, who had
many of those creatures, amongst which he had one of a foot and a half long,
whom in the presence of a thousand persons he made bite him by the tongue,
which began forthwith to swel as big as his fist, and besides the swelling it
became black and scur^fie, in such sort that every one judged it to be
infected with poison: soon after he began to rub his tongue with a certain
oil which he called oil Balsamium, which did so qualify the swellyng, that
in one instant it appeared as fair and natural as before: by which miracle he
sold his Oil at what price he desired: wherein as I was very curious to try
if he performed that wonder by either Art or sophistical slight, and not able
to discover any deceit at all, even so Plaudanus a notable Physician in Italy,
and from whom we atte^d every day some learned work of such matters avouched
unto me by oath, an History very like to this, whereunto I give as great faith,
as if mine own eyes had assisted it, the rather by the fidelity of him that
told it me, who besides he saw the experience, yet his learning demeth him to
be abused or deceived by either policy or Art: he said that in the
year.1533. there was in the famous City of Bresse (governed at this day by
the Venetians) two of these Enchanters of Serpents sellyng their oils in the
very same streat, wherein for more credit and authority of their traffic,
they showed to ye people sundry quick serpents, whereby their gain grew the
greater: but one of their company borne in Verona, ielous belike of the
profit of his fellow, gave it out to the multitude that it was but a deceit,
and yt the oils which they sold, were a vain substance, co^fected by
sophistical means, which he offered to prove if the Magistrates would assist
him with warrant or authority, whereunto they agreed with small entreatie,
as well for a desire they had to have the disceit disclosed, as special delight
in seeing the effect of the devise. This galland of Verona, at the day
appointed, having made to be set up a little Theater, to the end the
assista^ts might behold the experience of his promise, mounted with great
majesty upon the scaffolde, where calling the other of Padua, who was no less
ready than himself, said unto him: If thou have of the true Oil of Balm (as
thou haste given out to the people, to abuse their simplicity, and win their
money by deceit) stick not to show in this place and presence an unfeigned
proof and trial thereof, wherewith he drew out of his box with his bare hand
a great Toade quick swelled with poison, and holding in his hand a certain
root, bad him choose whether of those two things he had rather eat, either the
root or the Toade, for for my part (says he) look as thou do devour the
one, I will eat the other, and then shall it be seen which of us two escapes
the best cheap, wherewith the Padouan albeit greatly amazed, yet being pressed
with compulsion to do the one, took the root and eat it. The Veronian at the
same instant, tare the Toade in pieces with his teeth, and swallowed her into
his body, retiring immediately both of them to their drugges, and arming them
albeit with their Antidotes or counterpoisons, could not so cunningly convey
their sleights, but one remained dead as a pawn, for within.2. or.3. hours ye
Padouan began to change color and lose strength so fast, yt he was taken in a
sound from the Theater, and (what remedy so ever could be aplied to him) within
24. hours after he died, being swelled as one diseased with the dropsy. The
other yt devoured the toad, understanding ye tragedy of his companion, saved
himself by flight, being seen notwtstanding.2. or.3. years after, selling his
drugs and other confections in diverse places in Italy according to his wont:
some also which the Greeks call Ophirgenes, are wont to heal the bytings of
such Serpents with only laying their hand upon the hurt body, from whence they
drew the venom, as also do the Psilles and Marciens, a people of Africa, whose
Ambassador called Exagon, for an experience of the matter, being come to
declare his message to the Romans, was put naked into a Town full of
Serpents, Uipers, and other venomous beasts, who being thus amongst them, in
place to offend or do him any hurt, they began to lick and cherish him.
Constantine Caesar in his books of Husbandry writes, that to draw or gather
together all the Serpents of a country, it is needful to make a hole or cave
in the earth, and to put therein a pot or vessel, wherein has been of those
confections, which (as the Adamant does the iron,) is of a virtue to draw all
the Serpents of that Country into that place.

A wonderful History of two maids knit and conjoined back to back, seen in
diverse places, the one a^ Rome, the other at Verona. CHAP. xxxv.
THe Indians and Brachmans have showed them selves for the most part very
ceremonious in observing the natiuities of their children: For two months
after their birth, they caused the^ to be brought in public, beholding them
very diligentely whether they were perfect or imperfect, fair, or deformed,
mete for war or peace, after which ceremonies so observed, knowing that
according to their education, they would be mete to serve in the common wealth,
caused them to be instructed and norished in those arts and sciences which
best agreed with their inclinations: but contrary, if they found them
monstrous, deformed or wanting any member, repugnant to nature, they caused
them immediately to be murdered and killed, like as the Spartins in Greece by the
laws of Licurgus, caused those children whose shape and members were well
formed to be brought up and norished: but if nature had not don or performed in
them her duty, they being thereby monstrous or broken, were immediately carried
into strange regions, or into some Isles and deserts, and so committed to the
mercy of their fortune: even so the Athenians immediately after they found any
monstrous child in their City, caused him to be cast headlong into the sea,
purifiyng not only their city with a number of maids, who went through the
same, singing hymns and Psalms, but also making sacrifice to Juno. The
ancient Romans following the ordinance of Romulus, used to cast such monsters
into Tyber, burning their bodies and blowing away the cinders: wherein the
Emperor Mauritius (although he were a Christian) followed in this the laws of
the Ancients, who forthwith upon the sight of any monstrous child, caused it
not only to be killed, but kissed the knife wherewith he committed the
butchery. All which I have preferred to memory in this place for the respect
of these.ij. maid twynnes, whose portraict is here to be seen, for if they
had been brought forth into the world* in the time of the ancient Indians,
Brachmans, Spartins, Lacedaemonians, or in the time of the Romans, or in the
reign of the Emperor Mauritius, their history and figure had be^ buried with
their bodies, and had not be^ seen in deed of so many thousands of people. In
the year of grace.1475. these two maids that you see so knyt together by the
raines, even from their shoulders to their haunches, were engendered in Italy,
in the famous City of Verona. And for that their parents were poor, they were
carried through diverse Cities of Italy to get money of the people, being very
desirous to see that new spectacle and wonder of Nature. Wherefore some write,
that that monster whom you may here see, was a show and prognostication,
foretelling sundry marvelous mutations which happened after in those
provinces: for in the same year that they were engendered, Charles Duke of
Burgoyne, occupied and governed the country of Loraine. Ferdinande the great
king of Spain divided the realm with Alphonsus, king of Portingale. Mathias
and Vladislaus kings, made peace with the Hungarians and Bohemians. Edward
king of England, was procured by the Duke of Burgoine to come into France,
where was a peace concluded betwixt^ him and king Lewys. And in the year of
grace.1453. an other monster like unto this was brought forth at Rome, with
great marvel to all the people, in the time of Pope Alexander the sixte, (who
as Polidorus writes) prognosticated the evils, hurts and miseries which
should happen and come to pass in the time of that Bishop.

A wonderful History of Cruelty. CHAP. xxxvj.
MAny be astonished to see the great number of marvelous examples of Cruelty,
which have reigned not only amongst the Ethniques, but also (the more to be
lamented) amongst us Christians, which be all issued out of one vine, formed
of like elements, incorporate in one church, having one head and Lord Jesus
Christ, being the children of one father celestial, of one spirit, raunsomed
by one blood, regenerate of one baptism, norished of like Sacraments,
participating of one Chalice, and fightyng under the cross and banner of Jesus
Christ, having one common enemy Satan, being called a like to one heritage,
and yet notwithstanding we be not ashamed to dismember and tear in pieces one
an other, with such horror and confusion, that it seems we would fight
against nature, and drenche the earth of humain blood, leauyng it besides as a
deserte or place inhabitable. But because you shall not marvel of that yt the
Historians write of the great effusion of blood, which was shed in the batail
which Edward the.iiij. king of England made against the Scots, where he killed
and murdered three score thousand men, I will show you a more horrible spectacle
in nature, whereof also Sabellicus writes of Charles Martell king of France,
and Abidaran, where in one conflict was killed and murdered three hundredth and
fifty thousand. But what a butcherie and slaughter had the poor flock of
Jesus Christ in the battle which Ladislaus king of Pauonie had against
Amurath Emperor of the Turks? seeing that of the party of the same Turks
being victorers, was found.iiij. hundred thousand dead carcasses, as
Sabellicus witnesses, There is scarsly to be found such a wonder or horror in
nature, as that whereof Josephus writes in ye wars of the Jews by that great
butcher Alexander, in the bloody battle which he had against Darius, where was
slain a million of men. In like manner Cyrus king of Perses was so unfortunate
in the battle which he had against the Scythians, that of two hundred thousand
men, which he had in his army, was not found one man to report the news of
the overthrow. Albeit reading now amongst the Historians of those that Sylla
killed of the Mariens, those that Pompey slew of the soldiers of Mytridates,
those that Ptolomeus ouerthrewe of Demetrius, of those that Caesar cut in pieces
in ten years, when he sent to fight against the Gauls, those that Lucullus
slew in the war which he had against the Armenians, those that Attilla
killed, those that Miltiades slew, those that Marcus Claudius and Cornelius
killed, with an infinite number of like slaughters, which be found by the
Historians, Greeks and Latins, you shall find, that if you could see them
all put in account, there must needs be inverted a new Arithmetike to number
them: and I believe that if they had made a roll of all the bieues, muttons,
veales, goats, and other fourefooted beasts which have been killed in a
thousand years within all the butcheries of Europe, their number would not
exceed the dead carkases of men slain and murdered: yet it is not sufficient
so to kill men in battle by sword, but that they must search new means and
inventions to murder them, as Eusebius does show in his Ecclesiastical
History of that infamous butcher Dioclesian the Emperor, who seeing that the
Christians which reigned in his time, would not renounce the name of God, and
worship his ydoles, was not content to cut of their noses, and their ears,
causing spelles of wood to be put under their nails, pouryng hot lead upon
their privy parts: but in like manner he caused to be bowed by great force
four trees, to the which he made to be tied their feet and hands: who being
left in this sort, were by the violence and force of those trees dismembered and
plucked in pieces, as may be seen by the portraict and figure here before, the
which torments have also been practiced and put in ure in our time in Piemont,
against a certain soldier, which would have betrayed a city, as le seigneur
de Launge writes in his art of warfare. Astiages that great king of the Medes,
has not only surpassed that president in cruelty, but has also executed
that, which you will not only have in horror to read, but also in as great
detestation to conceive in your heart. At what time the great Patriarch of
tira^ny, happening to dream one night of a certain thing touching one of his
little children, which he could hardly digest, and withal fering yt it should one
day take effect, determined to prevent his misfortune: and the better to
execute his intent, he made to be called Arpalus, one who^ he most favored,
and the best of his realm, to whom he gave secretly in charge forthwith to
kill one of his own sons, without making any man privy thereunto, for
certain causes which he would make him to understand more at leisure. Arpalus
understanding the sorrowful commandment of the father against his child,
began to feel as it were a furious war in his mind: for as the pity and
innocence of the infant, withdrewe him on the one side, so the commandment
of his master tormented him on the other: albeit reason and remorse of
conscience in the end so much prevailed, as pity obtained the victory: in
such sort that he resolved not only to save the life of the child but also to
cause him to be brought up in some secret place, without the knowledge of his
master: notwithstanding he could not so well play his part, but that within
certain days after, the king Astiages did discover his friend, and that
against his will, how he had saved the life of his son, which he dissembled
for a time with a good countenance, in such sort, that poor Arpalus thynking
him self clear from suspicion, and living in that liberty of mind, was
astonished, that his master caused him to be called to accompany him at
dinner, having besides made to be killed one of the children of Arpalus, which
he caused to be so well seasoned and disguised by his Cooks, that it was hardly
to be discerned what meat it was, causing the same to be served at the table,
without any knowledge to him thereof: by reason whereof, the poor Arpalus
mystrustyng nothing, did eat thereof willingly. But that infectiue tyrant
Astiages, never glutted in his cruelties, was not content to cause him to eat
the flesh of his own propre child, so abundantly dressed with store of
delicate fruit, but made to be brought in in platters, the head, the feet and
hands of that little innocent, to the end that the father understanding that
it was his flesh, blood and bones which he had eaten, after his rage and
cruelty a little appeased, he demanded pleasantly, and in manner scoffingly,
if those meats were not well seasoned and well liked of him: to whom poor
Arpalus, troubled of an extreme compassion in his mind, fearing him to be
angry, answered him soberly, that all was good at the table of a King. These
cruelties he great: but those which Maximilian Emperor of the Romans used, were
nothing inferior to the rest, who was not only content with the killing of an
infinite number of persons, by the fury and force of the four Elements, as
broyling some, drowning others, burying some quick, and making others to be
smothered: but besides, searching out more great and horrible wonder in nature,
he caused the dead to kill the living, by tying the bodies of living men to the
bodies of the dead, face to face, and mouth to mouth, leaving them so, till
that those which were dead, by their putrefaction had killed the living. Let us
pass under silence that butcher of Satan, Tiberius the Emperor, who me
seems has surpassed in cruelty all those whereof the Historians have at any
time made mention: for he forbad upon pain of death, (that which no man has
read of other, but of him, which was) that for the great number of innocent men
which he caused to die, there should no man lament, weep, sigh, or make other
like dole: and he had of Satrapaes, and ministers expressly deputed to execute
these cruelties, who had no other charge than to spy and mark with regard
here and there if any man wept, or sighed from his heart, or gave any other
witness of sorrow or grief, to the end he might be brought forthwith to the
place of execution, to be punished with the like pain to him, whose innocence
he lamented. All these cruelties and tirannies before specified, be extreme,
but those which follow be most brutal, and executed of a rare and strange
fashion: for in the first they touched but living creatures, but in these that
follow, they fight with those that be dead. Cambises King of the Persians, was
not satisfied with the cruel murdering of Psamenitus king of Egypt and many
others: But besides that being at Caire, be caused the carkas of Damasus to be
drawn out of his tomb, causing the same not only most shamefully to be
whipped, pricked full of bodkins, as though he had been alive, but in the end
broiled it (as Herodotus witnesses) which he proved not only on the behalf of
men, but performed the like on women, to whom the laws of pity be for the
most part most familiar. For after that Cyrus king of the Persians had killed
in battle the son of Thomiris Queen of Scithia, having a new supply of
soldiers* she pursued the king with such fury, that she cut al his rout and
army in pieces, whom she encountered, and king Cyrus himself was also slain:
but for all that, her rage was such, as it was nothing thereby appeased, for
she felt yet the death of her sons, for which cause she caused the head of
Cyrus to be separated from his body, putting ye same forthwith into a
vesse^lful of humain blood, and afterward beholding it with a furious regard,
said unto him: Cyrus, thou have already drenched the blood of my sons, and
have thyrsted for mine, but now fill thy self of blood. Tullia the daughter of
Tarquin, King of the Romans, has yet surpassed all the rest in cruelty, for
she caused her father to be killed, to the end she might inherit his realm,
and please thereby her ruffian or champion: wherefore seeing the body of her
dead father lying on the ground, being mounted on her chariot, she passed
therewith over him, and although that the horses, (fearful of the dead person)
refused to pass that way, and that ye Chariter who did guide them, finding in
himself some pricks of pity, would have turned them an other way, to the end
they should not tear the body of the king, yet that infamous tirannesse,
surpassing the horses in cruelty, did constrayne them by force to march over
the body of him which had engendered her.

A wonderful History of a monster brought forth into the world alive, who
from the navel vpwardes, had the shape of a man, and the rest like a dog.
CHAP. xxxvij.
THe ancient Ethnikes have had in so great horror adulterers and fornicators,
that there was not amongst them either people, nation, or Province, which were
not chastised by some severe law: for like as Strabo writes in his sixtenth
book, that the Arabes punished adultery by death: even so also did the
Lumbardes and the Egiptians, causing the whooremonger to be whipped through
the City, cutting of the woman's nose so taken, to the end her face might by
that means become the more deformed. Wherefore Justin witnesses, that the
Parthians amongst other vices, punished most severely adultery: so the
^ocrenses plucked out the eyes of those, who were apprehended and taken
committing that vice, which their king Zeleucus (who was the author of that
law) approved both justly and severely in his own son who being taken for
that offense, had one of his eyes plucked out. The ancient Almains (as Tacitus
writes) cut of the hair of their adulterous women, causing the^ afterward to
be whipped through the streates. In like manner the Romans gave liberty to
the husband, of his own proper authority, to kill the whoremo^ger and his
wife, if he took them committing of that abominable vice. Macrin the.xix.
Emperor, caused al such as were apprehended in adultery, to be broiled
quick, who being informed, that diverse souldioures had violated their hostess
chamber maid, he caused the bellies of two great Beefes to be opened alive,
and made the souldioures to be sowed and enclosed therein, saving their heads
which appeared out, to the end that all men might see them, and the one talk
with the other. And Aurelius the.xxix. Emperor, being made to understand yt a
soldier of his army had defloured the wife of his host, invented for him to
make him die by a new kind of cruel punishment: for he caused two great trees
by force to be bowed and plied, whereunto the souldioure was tied, to ye end
that the trees returning to their place, might tear and pluck him in pieces.
Confer these punishments with those written of before, and you shall find no
adulterer receive ye reward of a better hire: for in ye sacred historyes* by ye
law of Moises they were smoothered, murdered and stoned to death. S. Paul in
his.xiij. to the Hebrews, cries that God will condemn fornicators and
adulterers. After in his first book to the Corinthians and.vj. Chapter, he
writes thus: Do not disceiue your selves, for neither fornicator, Idolatour or
adulterour shall not possess at all the kingdom of God. Wherefore amongst the
most principal causes that moved God to drown the world, was chiefly this
wicked vice of whoredom: five famous Cities (as it is written in the book of
Moses) became ruinous and overthrown for their disordred and wicked lives. In
the book of numbers xij. kings were hanged, and.24000. men killed for
comitting of whoredom. It is written in Leuiticus xxviij. chapter, how the
Chananeans were afflicted and punished for their whordome: well nigh all the
line of Benjamin, (as you may read in the.xxxix. of the Judges) was afflicted
for committing fornication with the Levites wife. Diverse grievous punishments
were sent unto David, for his whoredom, as you may read in the book of the
Kings. Solomon for the same cause and committing Idolatry, became reprobate:
wherefore S. Jeremy the Prophet recompteth very often ye whoremongers and
fornicators, were the chiefest causers of the destruction of the City of
Jerusalem. Diverse and many Realms (by this detestable vice) have received
change and alteration, and become subject to others. Troy the proud became
ruinous for the rauishment of Helen. In like manner Thebes the populous was
afflicted and scourged for ye abusing of Chrisippe, and the incest committed by
Eclipus. The Kings of Rome were extirped and banished for the rauishment of
Lucrecia. Aristotle in the.v* of his politiques, says: that adulterers and
fornicatours be the principal and chiefest causers of the ruin and mutation of
realms. The King Pausanias so much renoumed in Licaonien, who first defiled a
maid at Constantinople, and after killed her, was advertised by an Image, of
his end and destruction. A thing very strange, that whoremo^gers should be
warned of the pains prepared for them by wicked spirits to their own
confusion, which Pausanias proved true, for that the Ephores constrained him to
die by famine. Wherefore if the Histories both sacred and profane be so fully
replenished of grievous pains, cruel punishments, irefull cursings sent by God
commonly upon whoremongers, what may then the Sodomites and others look or hope
for, who join them selves in the ignominy of God and nature, with brute
beasts, as is most plainly showed unto us by this shameful History, whose
portraict thou may behold in the beginning of this Chapter, of a child who
was conceived and engendered between a woman and a dog, having from the navel
upwards, the form and shape of the mother, so well accomplished, that nature
had not forgotten any thing unperformed, and from the navel downwards, it had
the form and figure of the beast who was the father, who (as Volateranus
writes) was sent to the Pope which reigned at that time there, to the end it
might be purified and purged. Conradus Licostenes writes a like History in
his wonders, of a woman which brought forth in the time of the Emperor
Lothairus, a child and a dog, joined and knit together, by the nether
parts, that is to say, from ye rains or tippe of the back to the ha^ches. And
Celius Rhodiginus in his.xxv. book and.xxxij. chapter of his ancient lessons,
writes that there was a Priest called Crathin in Ciba^e, having had the
company of a Goat, with whom he used this brutal desire: and afterward
within a certain time brought forth a Goat, who had the head and shape of a
man, resembling the Priest which was the father, but the rest of the body was
like the Goat. Whereupon S. Paul says in the fourth Chapter to the
Ephesians, that the plague ordained for whoremongers, is, that they become
blind and mad, after that they be once forsaken of God, and will not be
reconciled by good and wholesome council, but persevere still in their
wickedness, provoking thereby Gods wrath and indignation against them.

A notable complaynt made by a Monstrous man to the Senate of Rome, against the
tyrannies of a Censour, which oppressed the poor people of the river of
Danube by rigorous exactions. CHAP. xxxviij.
THat great Monarch Marcus Aurelius, who was as well a philosopher as an
Emperor, retiring himself into the fields with a great number of wise men, as
well to deceive certain envious times of the year, as to moderate the heat and
burning of a fever, which had vexed and troubled him many days, with intent
not to be idle, they began to talk of diverse matters amongst themselves, as
of the corruption of princes, the alteration of commonweals, and generally of
the universal disorder, which was found amongst all the states of the
world: wherein after every man had touched particularly that which seemed good
unto him, it pleased the Emperor to become therein a party, and continuyng
the tal^e, he said unto them: My fr^end, although each of you have very
learnedly spoken of the question propouned touching the corruption of Princes
and public weals, so it is notwithstanding (as me seems) that the original
of that contagious evil proceeds of others, as of flatterers, which serve
rather to feed the affections of Princes, and content their delites, than to
make them bold to utter unto them the truth. They fill their heads with good
words, they are ready to claw before they do itche, they lull them a sleep with
the harmony of their false praises, and fade them fat with their own
faults, in such sort, that I know them at this day, whose legs and feet can
carry no more, neither the force of their bodies hable to sustain them
vprighte, neither their hands sufficient to write, their sight to read,
their teethe to pronounce, their jaws to eat, their ears to hear, nor their
memory unoccupied: who want no toungs at any time to require for them selves
or theirs at the princes hands, either one good benefit or other: In such
sort that these miserable creatures are so much drowned in covetousness,
that they neither know nor perceive at all, that even as their greedy desire
to heap riches grows daily in augmentation: so in like manner, their life
shortneth and slippeth away. Which is in deed in effect (my friends) the just
cause of the abusing of princes and weals public. And the better to make you
understand the difference of the ancient liberty of speking to kings, and of
the covetous servitude and weakness, which reigns at this day amongst those
which assist them, I will recompt unto you one history, which I learned of no
man, neither read in the books of the ancients, but I saw the effect in my
presence: In the first year wherein they did me honor in creating me Consule,
there came to Rome a poor villain of the river of Danube, demanding justice
in the Senate against a Censor, who tormented the people with tirannous
subsidies and exactions: who was so hardy and barbarous to frame his complaint,
that neither most assured captain, nor eloquent Orator in the world knew
better how to speak. This villain had a little face, great lips, hollow eyes,
a dusky color, his hair staring, his head uncovered, his shoes of the skin of
a porpentine, his cote of goats hair, his girdle of bulrushes, his bearde
long and thick, his eyebries covering or drawn over his eyes, his stomach and
neck ouergrowne with hair, and a staff in his hand, who being in this attire,
when we saw him enter into the Senate, we judged him to be some beast having
the shape of a man: but after we understood ye majesty of his talk, and the
grauenesse of his sentences, we thought him to participate with god. For as his
shape was monstrous, so his talk was wonderful. That villain having paused a
little, and turning here and there his ghastly looks, said unto us: Most noble
fathers, and people most happy, I a rusticall and unfortunate wretch, dwelling
in the cities which be nigh Danube, and you other Senators of Rome, which be
here assembled, God save you, and I pray to the Gods immortal, not only to
give you grace to govern well the common weal, to the which you are now
appointed, but also that they will so guide my tongue at this present as I may say
that which is necessary for my country, my sorrowful desteny permitting the
same, and our angry gods not forsaking me. Our country of Germany was
subdued by you Romans, wherein as your glory is now the greater thereby, even
so shall your infamy be a^ extreme in the world to come, for the cruelties and
tirannies wherewith you have plagued us. And if you see not what you know
(neither would know it before this hour) that when we unhappy wretches were
brought before the chariots of your triumph, and cried Viue Rome, bisides an
other part of poor and miserable captives, sheading drops of blood in their
hearts, crying to the Gods, Justice, Justice, Romans Romans, your
covetousness is so great to rauine and take away the goods of your
neighbors, and your pride so unmeasurable in commaundyng the lands of
strangers, that neither the seas with their deapths, nor the land with her
largeness be able to contain the same: but be ye assured, that like as you
without reason, cast out others from their houses, lands and possessions, and
some do sell them: Even with the same reason in the end shall you be chased from
Rome and Italy: for it is a law infallible, yt a man which takes by force ye
goods of an other, shall lose by right that which is his own: and bisides, all
that the wicked have heaped together by their tyranny in many days, the just
gods shall take it away in one day: and contrariwise, all that the good lose
in diverse years, the gods will restore to them in one hour. Wherefore if you
think to enriche your children by evil gotten goods, and leave the same to
their use, you are much deceived. For the Ancient proverb has been always
true, that by the unjust dealyng and gain of fathers, does come afterward
just to loss their children. Heap then what ye can heap, and let every man
obey your commandments, and know for a certain, that where you think to
make them lords of strange provinces, you in the end shall find them but
slaves of your own proper riches, and thieves of the sweat and labor of other
men's trauail. Notwithstanding I would demand (Romans) what action has moved
you, being borne nigh the River of Tiber, to have desire to plant and enlarge
your borders to the river of Donnue. Have we showed any favor to your enemies?
Have we conquered your lands? Or have you found any ancient law, which
affirms that the Noble country of Germany ought of necessity to be subject
to the proud City of Rome? Are we not your neighbors? And if there has been
any thing amongst your selves, which has stird up this quarrel, truly, you
are not thereof indifferent judges: Nor think not (Romans) though you be made
Lords of Germany, that it is by any industry of war, for you are no better
soldiers, neither more courageous, hardy, or valiant than we: but as we have
offended our gods, so have they ordained in their secret judgments, you to be
scourges unto us for our disordred livings. And seeing then we be ouercomed,
not in respect we be cowards, fearful or weak persons, but only for our
wickedness, and that we trusted not in our Gods, what hope may you have you
Romans, being as we are vicious, and having as you have the Gods angry with
you? And if I be not beguiled, we have endured sufficient misery, for the
apeasing of ye gods: but your cruelties be so great and terrible, that the
lives of you and your children, can not suffice to make recompense for your
offenses. Suffiseth it not (Romans) to take from us our ancient liberty, and
to load us with insupportable impositions and subsedies, heaping upon us from
time to time all kind of miseries, but you must also send unto us judges that
be so bestiall and ignorant, that I swear unto you by the Gods immortal, that
they neither know, nor can declare your laws unto us, and much less they
understand ours: And that which worse is, they take all presented unto them in
public, and refuse nothing given in secret, and under color they be Romans,
they fear not to rob all the land. What means this (Romans) shall your
pride in commanding have never end? nor your covetousness he withdrawn from
your neighbor? If we be disobedient, and our services not content you,
command to take away our lives: for to be plain with you, cruelty to cut our
throtes can not so much offend us, as your tyrannies do continually grieve us.
If you do it in respect of our children, tie them on your backs, and use them
as your slaves: and when you have so done, they can carry no more than they
can carry: but of commandments and tributes you have given us more than we be
able to sustain or suffer. Wherefore know ye (Romans) to what extremity your
tirannie and cruelty has brought us, that all those of our miserable realm,
have sworn togethers, never to inhabit with their wives, and to kill their
children before they suffer them to fall into the hands of so cruel and
ungodly tyrants as you be: for we rather desire that they may enjoy liberty,
tha^ that they should live in thraldom and bondage: besides, as desperate, we
have determined to endure as yet ye furious motions and assaults of the flesh,
by sequestryng our selves fro our wives, to ye end they may become barren:
thinking it much better for us to continue so.xx. or.xxx. years, than to
leave our children perpetual slaves, for if they should suffer that which
their poor fathers have endured, it were far more better and profitabler,
they were not borne, than living to prove so many wickedness and torments.
Wherefore will you understand (Romans) how your officers govern here? If the
poor come to demand of them justice, having no money ^o give, nor wine to
present, neither oil to promise, nor Silk to offer, neither favor to aid
them, nor revenue to relieve them, yet they find the means to make them
consume that little they have, nourishyng them by (...) vain hope or other to
obtain their matters and thus being once brought in, they cause them to
consume the best part of their life by dilatorie delay^ and afterwarde^
altogether become ruinous and overthrown: the most^ part of them assuring his
cause to be right, and at last pronounce against him a contrary sentence, in
such sort that the poor miserable man, who comes to complain of one,
returns again into his country, crying out of many, not only cursing his
perverse and unhappy Fortune, but also exclamyng against the pitiful add just
gods. I have not yet made an end (Romans) but before I proceed further, I
will recompt unto you my life, and make you to understand and know what be
the delites of those in my country: I gather in the Summer Acornes, and
sometimes fish, as well for necessity, as to pass the time, in so much that
I spend the miserable course of my life alone in the fields or mountains,
and if you desire to understand the cause, hearken, and I will tell you. I have
seen such tira^nies amongst your Censours, such willing robberies and spoils
made of the poor miserable people, so great discentions in our realm: so many
hurts and miseries in our common weal, that I am determined (unfortunate as I
am) to abandon mine own house and wife to the end I may not see with mine
eyes such lamentable things, loving far better to wander alone in the fields,
than every hour to understand and hear the sorrowful complaints, sighs and
bloody tears of my unhappy neighbors: for being thus bestowed in the fields,
the cruel beasts will not offend me, if I offer to them no wrong: but the
wicked men in my public weal, though I serve them, will annoye and torment
me. Cruel Romans, Romans, do you not understand the things I have spoken of
before, seeing that only in bringing them to memory, mine eyes be blind, my
tongue foltereth, my members quiuereth, my heart pants, my intrailes break,
my flesh consumes? yet is it a more grief unto me to see them in my country
with mine eyes, to hear them with mine ears, to touch them with my fyngers,
and to understand them by proof. Behold (Romans) the iniquity of our
Judges, together with the misery and desolation of our poor Realm and
country: the one of these two things ought to be done, either to chastise me
if I lie, or to put your officers from their offices if I have spoken the
truth: and if my tongue have offended, having spit out the poison of my heart,
I am ready in this place to loase my head, desiring rather to win honor by
offering my self to die, than you should gain the same otherways in taking
away my life. Wherewith the rusticall person ended his matter, and incontinent
the emperor Marcus Aurelius cried out, and said: How seems it unto you my
friends? What kernel in the nut, what gold in the mine, what seed in the
straw, what rose in the thorns, what marie in the bones, what reasons so
high, what words so well framed, what sentences so aptly applied, what
allegations more like a truth, and what covert so well discovered? I swear
unto you (says Marcus Aurelius) that his discourse brought such amase to us
all, that there was never a man so hardy to answer one only word, which
made us to determine the next day to provide new judges for the province of
Danube, and to do punishment on those which had so corrupted their common
wealth: commanding for end, that he give us his oration in writing, to the
end it might be recorded in the book of good sayings of strangers, which
were in the Senate: and the Rustic was enfraunchised, and made rich of the
Common treasure. Behold Christians, what holiness, what oracles under the
bark of the words of an Ethnike. But have we at this day of such rustikes
for to refourme our Christian public weal, and to discover the deceits,
subtilties, frauds and iniquities of the mercenarie judges which be found in
these provinces? For who would describe plainly ye tromperie, sdeceites,
enimities and dangerous end of processes, there should be no one man hable
to write the same with black ink, but rather with lively and pure blood,
because that if every man which follows the law, suffered as much for the
christian faith, as he endures in the pursuit of his process, there should
be as many martires in courts, Chaunceries, palaices, and Justices of
princesses, as there has been at Rome, in the time of the persecutions of the
ancient emperors: in such sort that to search or begin processes at this day,
is no other thing than to give sorrow to his heart, to his eyes occasion to
weep, to his feet and legs to run, his tongue to complain, his hands to be
always in his purse, to request and desire his friends, his men to run, and to
all the rest of his body pain and travail: besides, he that knows not what
is ye pursuit of a process, let him learn and understand that the effect and
conditions of it include no other thing, than of a rich man to become poor,
from joy to fall to melancoly sorrow, of a free man to become servile and bond,
in place of courage, to be infected with cowardice, instead of liberal
bounty, to use ambitious covetousness, of one beloved indifferently, to be
hated generally, and from an honest fear to fall into a miserable despair.
In such sort that as we read that the Egyptians were sometime scourged and
afflicted with ten plagues at Gods hand: so we may say by good right, that the
miserable suitors and solicitoures of the law, do partycipate daily with
ten thousands, whereof there is no difference as touching their torments,
saving yt the Egiptians plague, was moved (through their own occasion) by the
providence of GOD, and this of the Pleaders, is incensed by the malice of men:
besides, if the Egiptians were afflicted by the biting of beasts, rivers
running of blood, their lands swarming with Grassehoppers, flies and gnatts,
and their people annoyde with Leprosy, Botches, and other loathsome diseases,
our poor pleaders are persecuted in attendyng the Presidentes, paying the
Notaryes, brybing the Solicitoures, and anointing their clerks in the hand
with double fee, to use duty and reverence to the judge, to clap and knele to
the door kepers, and lastly pawn his land and credit to borow money to
discharge it. All which, beside the toil and travail of their bodies, are
incident to the poor pleader, without yt he makes any reckening upon what
points he must form his accusation, what delays are awarded to his cause, how
he must tender his demand of the one side, and challe^ge his exceptions on the
other, make inquisition, examine witnesses, endure reproaches, and make perfect
his process, and after that he must take a copy of it, record it, abreuiate
it, and lastly bring it to the opinion of the judge, from whose sentence (for
diverse respects) he may appeal and remove his process, and bring it to a
higher Court, with such infinite toil and disquiet of mind, that who
co^siders of them according to their value and merit in deed, ought rather to
be contented to lose one part of his goods, than to get or buy any other at
so dear a price, which is the cause in deed, why this learned bishop of
M^nodemo, Anthony de Guauara, writ in a certain book of his, that the pleaders
were the only true Saints and Martirs of the world, seeing that of the.vij.
mortal sins they are not to be accused but of.iij. only, because touching ye
other iiij. although they would commit them, yet had they neither the mean ^or
leisure. For how is it possible yt they should be proud, seeing that they go
continually with their hattes in their hands, and sometimes with great
humility solicit the judge, reserve a solemn reverence to a pelting
procurer, and lastly perform a fat payment to a scribbling Notarie. And how
can they be touched with the sin of covetousness, seeing their pursses be
never shut, nor their hands come empty out of them, but making Idols both of
master advocate and his wife, do never cease offering unto the^, till they
have left their pursse without a living? And touching the sin of sloth and
idleness, they are void of infection that way, seeing that most commonly in
place to pass the night in sleep and natural rest, they are tormented with
sorrows, sighs, and other passions of grief, and the day slippes away in
drudging toil, trotting from one place and other, to procure expedition to
their cause: And lastly and least of all are they infected with gluttony,
seeing they must observe neither times nor hours, to feed their stomach, or
procure them an appetite, and most commonly for expedition sake they eat
standing with great and gross morsels, ill swallowed, and worse disgested, and
all to be ready at the pallaice gate to salute his counselor, pull his
advocate by the sleeue, and make a sign to his clarke to remember his cause:
wherewith he concludes lastly, that a process is so dangerous and venomous a
Serpent, that who would wish any evil or heavy fortune to his enemy, let
him not desire to see him poor or miserable, hated of others, banished his
Country, afflicted with diseases, nor threatened with present death. But let
him pray to God, to give him some crooked or intricate process: for in all the
world can not be found a more cruel revenge for a man's enemy, than to see
him plunged in a troublesome cause in the law.

A wonderful History of a monstrous child, which was borne the same day that
the Geneuois and Veniciens were reconciled. CHAP. xxxix.
ALthough that nature (as Galen witnesses in his.xiiij. book de vtilitate
partiu^) had an earnest desire that her work should have been immortal, if it
might have been performed, but for yt it was not lawful both by the corruptible
matter of the elements and sprite of the air, she made therefore a forge or
help and supuly for ye immortality: for she found out a wonderful mean, yt in
place of ye creature yt should die, there should be a supply of an other, and
therefore nature has given to all creatures convenient instruments as well to
conceive, as engender. But it is so that these instruments so ordained by
nature, although yt she had a care to make them perfect, yet there is found in
them both vice and default, as is afterward showed by the form of this
creature: wherein Hippocrates witnesses in his book De genitura, where he
shows by the similitude of trees, how these children issue from the belly of
their mother monstrous and deformed, saying thus: that of force those bodies
which cannot move by reason of the straightness of the place, must become the
rather misshapen and deformed: like as trees before they issue out of the earth,
if they have not liberty and scope to spring, but be with holden by some let
or hinderance, grow crooked, great in one part, and small in an other: Even so
it is of the child, if in the belly of the mother the parties where he is
nourished, be more straight one than the other: and that vice (says he)
comes of the narownesse of the place to straight in the womb. Whereupon
arguing a little before of the same matter, he shows other reasons, by the
which children be made monstrous and deformed, as by the natural diseases of
the parents: for if the four kinds of humors, whereof the seed is made, be
not wholly contributorie to ye secret parts, there shall be then some party
wanting. Besides this, he adds further other reasons touching monstrous
birthes, as when the mother receives some blow or hurt, or that the child
fortunes to be sick in the belly of his mother, either that the nourishment
wherewith he ought to be relieved, happen to slip out of the womb: al which
things be sufficient causes to make them hideous, wanting or deformed. And if
we would consider with judgment, these reasons of Hippocrates, treating upon
the generation of monsters, we should without all dout find, that this whereof
thou see the portraict, is engendered so misshapen by one of these causes which
he showed: that is to say, by the narownesse of the place, wherein nature
willing to create two, found the womb to straight, which is ye cause that she
is found to want, in such sort that the womb is congealed and gathered in
one, whereupon grows this form and superfluity of members, in this little
male mo^ster, whom thou see here figured, having four arms, four legs,
and but one head, with all the rest of his body well proportioned: who was
engendered in Italy, the same day that the Venetians and Geneuois (after the
sheading of much blood, both of the one side and the other) confirmed their
peace, and were reconciled together: and which was baptized and lived a certain
time after, as writes Iacobus Fincelius in his book de miraculis post renatum
Euangelium. And in the same year that Leopolde Duke of Austrich, vanquished of
the Swizers died. And Galea was created Uicount of Millain, after the death of
Barnabone.

A wonderful History of Covetousness, with many examples touching that
matter worthy of memory. CHAP. L.
DIogines Laerce writes that there was a Rhodian jesting one day with the
philosoper Eschines, saying to him: I swear by the immortal gods ( Eschines)
that I have great pity and compassion of thy poverty. To whom he replied
suddenly: and by the same gods do I make ye like oath, that I more bewail
thee, to see thee so rich, seeing that riches once gotten, breed not only
pain, torment, care with heaviness to keep them, but also a more great
displeasure to spend them, peril to preserve them, and occasion of great
inconveniences and dangers to defend them. And that which yet seems to me more
grievous and horrible, is, that where for the most part thou hidest thy
riches, in the same place thou leauest thy heart buried. And like as Herodotus
writes, that the inhabitants of the Isles Baleares, watch and defend with
great care, that no man entering into their Country, bring or leave behind
them, either gold, silver, silk or precious stones: which happened so well unto
them, yt during the space of.400. years wherein there was most cruel wars not
only amongst the Romans and Carthaginois, but also the French and Spaniards,
never any of the said nations were once moved to invade their lands, for that
they could not find either gold, silver, or other thing of price or value to
rob, pilfer, or take away: even so there is yet one other thing more
strange, that is, that Phalaris Agringetin, Dionyseus Siracusan, Catilmus
Romanus, and Iugurth Numidien, being.iiij. famous tira^ts, never maintained
their estates and realms by any virtue which they used, but only by their great
gifts and presents which they bestowed on their adhere^ts: wherefore I would wish
yt al such as be favored of Princes, should note well this saying, yt it is
impossible for one being in great favor to continue long therein, being
overwhelmed and accompanied with the wicked vice of covetousness. Neither am I
out of my matter, having touched ye same in the Historyes before, for yt in
these our days, ye world is so co^rupted therewith, as there is no other talk
in our commonweals of any thing, but only of the burning rage of
covetousness, which reigns in all ye estates of ye world, namely amongst ye
Ecclesiastical persons, as our high father with his Cardinals, a thing much to be
lamented, considering that they ought to be rather distributers of the goods of
the Lord, tha^ affectionated and burning as we see with this greedy desire of
riches, yt it seems yt they would drain all the wealth of ye world into their
gulphs, and in ye end bury the same with their bodies in the grave: whereof I
have written more largely in my other works, making mention of the cardinal
Angelot. But now I will return to my matter, for since that ye pestilent
venom of covetousness has sprinkled her poison through ye world, yt the most
part of the provinces remain and be so much infected therewith, yt they by that
means stick not to make marcha^dise of men's bodies to obtain money: whereof
Celius Rhodiginus in his iij. book of ancient lessons and.lvj. chapter is a
sufficient witness, who declares yt in his time diverse wicked persons sold
the flesh of men so well seasoned, yt is seemed to be the flesh of Porke: in
which wickedness as they continued til God by his almighty power discovered
the same, by suffering them to find the finger of a man mingled amongst their
meats, which was the cause that they were taken and cruelly punished: even so
this needs not seem strange, or a fable to those which have red
Galenes.xiij. book of Elements, who shows ye man's flesh is so like unto
porke, having the very taste and savor of it, that those which have eaten
thereof, judged it to be the flesh of a Porke. Wherefore in the History of
Caelius Rhodiginus it is not strange, but most apparent, that covetousness
has so blinded man, and rages even to the very tippe of iniquity, that they
cannot add any thing more thereunto. Albeit Conradus Licostenes recompteth yet
one other wonderful History of covetousness, which is nothing inferior to
this before, who writes that in the Dukedom of Wittemberge, there was a
wicked host, who presented at supper all his gests, lodged in his house, with
the flesh of a Porke, bitten of a mad dog, which was so greatly infected
with the venim of that beast, that all those which eat thereof, became not only
mad, but also pressed in such sort with the fury and rage of their evil,
that they eat and tare in pieces one an other.

A Monster brought forth at Rauenna, in the time of Pope Iule the sec^nde, and
king Jews the.xij. CHAP. xlj.
REader, this monster which thou see here depainted, is so brutall and far
differing from human kind, that I fear I shall not be believed in that I shall
write there of hereafter: notwithstanding, if thou will but confer this with
those having faces like Dogs and Apes, whereof I have written in the Histories
before, thou shall then find the other far more monstrous. Jacques Ruell in
his books of the conception and generation of me^, from whence I have this
figure. Conradus Licostenes in his treaty of wonders, Ioha^nes Multiuallis,
and Gasparus Hedio affirm and write, yt in the year 1512. at what time pope
Iule ye second, stirde up and caused so many bloody tragedies in Italy, and
that he had made war with king Lewis, even at the journey of Rauenna, this
monster was engendered and borne at Rauenna aforesaid, (a city most ancient in
Italy) having one horn in his head, two wings, and one foot, like to the
foot of a ramping bird, with an eye in the knee, it was double in kind,
participating both of the man and woman, having in ye stomach yt figure of a
Greek Y, and ye form of a cross, and no arms. And like as this mo^ster was
brought into ye world in ye time yt all Italy was enflamed and molested with
wars, and not without bringing great terror to the people, in such sort yt all the provinces of Italy and Greece came to see and behold this miserable
creature: even so they entered into diverse judgments thereof, whereupon amongst
the rest, there was found sundry learned and holy men, which began not only to
decipher the misery of this infant, but also ye monstrous shape thereof in this
sort, saying, yt by the horn was signified pride and ambition, by the wings
lightness and inconstancy: by default of the arms, want of good works: by
the ramping foot, rauishment, usury, and covetousness: by the eye in ye knee,
too much love or affection to worldly things: by both the kinds, the sins
of the Sodomites. All which vices and sins reigned at that time in Italy,
which was the cause they were so afflicted with wars: but by this figure Y,
and the cross, they were two signs of salvation, for Ypsilon signifies
virtue: the Cross shows that al those which will return to Jesus Christ, and
take up his cross, shall not only find a true remedy against sin, but a
perfect way to health and salvation, and a special mean to mitigate thereby the
ire of the Lord, who is enflamed and ready to scourge and punish them for
their wickedness and abominable sins.

THere is found by sufficient authority in writing, that in the year.1496.
was taken up out of the river of Tyber, a monster, having the tronke of the
body of a man, the head of an Ass, one hand and arm like to a man, and the
other of the fashion of an Elephantes foot: he had also (according to the
portraict you see) one of his feet like the foot of an Eagle, and the other
like the hoof of an Ox, his belly like a woman with two duggs and the rest of
his body with skales: he had also growing out behind him, a head old and
hairie, out of the which came an other head of the form of a Dragon.

WE read also, that in the year.1548. was borne a child in Almayne, which
had his head divided from his body, he had one leg only, with a creuise or
chink where his mouth should be, and had no arms at all: The same happening
(as we may easily presume) by a want or default in the seed, as well in the
quality, as in the quantity of the same.

IN the year.1552. was borne in England a child, which had two bodies, two
heads and four hands, and yet had but one belly, and one navel: On one side
of the body came two perfect legs, and on the other, but one, the same having
one foot made like two, tied the one against the other with ten toes.

THere was borne in the year 1554. a monster of this proportion, having a
great mass or lump of flesh in place of a head, and where one of his ears
should be, came out an arm and a hand, he had upon his face writhen hairs
like to the Moostachoes of a cat, the other arm appeared out of one side: he
had no form of body nor breast, saving a line al along, the ridge of his
back: there could not be discerned any figure or likeness of either sex, nor
ioints in his arms or legs: the ends of his hands and feet were soft and
somewhat hanging, as appears by his portraict.

AMongst the rest we must not forget two monsters which came forth in the
year.1555. the one in Germany and the other in Sauoy, the first was a horse,
who (according to his portraict had all his skin checquered and divided into
great panes, after the order of the Dutchemens hose, his neck and body
covered with a collar of the same: This is affirmed by John Foucet in his book
which he has made of the maruels of our time.

THe other Monster of the said year.1555. had two faces, in sort as the
Poets feigned the God ^anus had. He had like two great pocketts hangyng
upon his back, wherein were his bowelles: He was Vtriusque generis, and that
of the one side a male, and the other a female. Also he was so huge above
order, that it was impossible to draw him whole from the belly of his mother.
It is most likely that this imperfection happened by too great a quantity of
matter sufficient to form two children, which might also have happened of a
right shape, if by some inconvenience the substance had not ben mingled, so
that that which should have served for two, made but one creature.

THe monster that was brought forth in Germany.1556. (...) so wonderful as
this touching the shape of his body, which makes it not easy to judge
whether there were default of nature in his generation: It was (as you may see
by the portraicte) a Calfe of perfect form in every respect, saving that he
had no legs before: and yet such was his wonderful lightness, that having
but two legs behind, he exceeded all other beasts of that kind in
swiftness. The same arguing that nature had considered and supplied his other
wantes with a marvelous agilitie of his two legs. I remember I have seen
heretofore a mo^ster of the same shape, albeit formed by some artificial
slight, it was a young Goat, whose forelegges being broken, was brought by
custom and necessity to march upon his hinder legs, whereby the simple sort
was more than half persuaded that it was a Satyr.

THere was borne in the same year.1556. at Basle, a child sufficiently formed
of his body, saving the head, which was so monstrous, that it seemed rather
the head of a dog or a Catte, than a creature human: Besides the which,
that year was so fertile of prodigious accidents, that according to the
witnette of such as recorded them, there happened above fifty monsters, as
fires in the air, horrible tempests, burning of towns by fire from Heaven,
armed men appearing in the air; fearful Cometes, inundations of waters,
threatening voices from heaven, skirmishes in the air, as well with men as
beasts, with a monstrous show of many Suns at one time.

THis as you see (resembling most a Calfe) has the head of a man, bearing a
beard, with a breast like to a man, and two dugges well formed.

THe year wherein mine author writ this book, seemed no less plentiful of
monsters corporal, than wonders spiritual: for it is affirmed that the.xxvj.
of January, there appeared about.ix. of the clock three Suns upon the town
of Caffa, a City situated between the Pont Euxin, and the Sea Zabach^,
otherwise called Pailus Mertis, in the place which the ancients call Taurica
Chersonessus. these iij. suns remained by the space of.iij. hours: and had
above them a white bow, and an other underneath the colored red, green, yelow
and Azure, and about noone, the two uttermost of either side vanished and went
out of sight, the one toward the East, the other toward the West.

IN the same year.1567. and.28. of the same month, there appeared in the
Element, and over the same place at.x. of the clock in the night a shining
Cross, with a star in the top, and a Moon at the lower end, retiring
immediately after it began to be day, without being seen any more at ye time:
but touching these sights and visions in the air with their causes, which move
in deed by natural means as we behold the figure of our selves in a glass,
or the Rainbow in the Element, I shall not need to use large description of
them here, because they are avouched by the Astronomers, Philosophers and
others of like profession: beside for mine own self I forbear to wade far
therein, until a time and cause more convenient for such purpose.

THe monsters which are this year come to knowledge be two, the one was in
Prouence at Arles, and wandered besides through France. It was a child rough or
hairy on all the body, having the navel in the place where the nose should
stand, and the eyes where naturally should stand the mouth: between the which
was a certain opening: his ears stood on either side the chinne, and his
mouth at the end of the same.

THe other monster of this year.1567. was seen in Flanders between Anwarpe
and Macline, in a village called Vbalen It was a child which had.ij. heads
and.iiij. arms, seeming.ij. maids joined together, and yet had but.ij. legs.

Of a wonderful Dance.
LIke as I am greatly in dout whether so infer in the number of wonderful
Histories that which we now write, not for the matter, but that it is short,
and yet worthy of no less memory than admiration: Even so, for that the
History may seem of less credit and truth, the same being written in that
time, wherein men would scarsly suffer it to be imprinted or taken as a witness
of antiquity, albeit it were aided and assisted by a truth or other probable
arguments to the like effect, having withal sufficient color to make men
believe that they speak to be such as they recite: notwithstanding for that we
be able to justify the truth of this present History by one who as be
assures to have seen it, so has he taken pain to write thereof him self,
which is Othopertus of Saxony, and after him Vincentius witnesses the same in
his xxvj. book and.x. chap. and besides Antoni. in his fourth chap. his.xvj.
titles and second tome of his works, where as I need not fear to recite it
as it is, or to aggrauate the opinion or belief of any further than a truth:
So nevertheless I have to prefer and make mention of one History very
strange, and not heard of, yet albeit true. Whereof Othopertus writes, that
the year.1012. which was in the tenth year of the emperor Henry the second,
in a certain borough or town of Saxony, where he himself, accompanied
with.xvij. other of his friends, which by computation were.xviij. he accounted,
did see.xv. men and iij. women dancing of a round in a Churchyard, and
singing of Wanton songs, not meet for the solace of honest Christians. And
albeit there passed by at that instant a Priest, who cursed them in such sort,
that they daunced and song there the space of a whole year. Yet that which was
most marvelous, is, that as it rained not (said he) upon them, neither were
they hot or desirous of meat or drink, nor left from doing that exercise
or labor, so their garments and shoes in all their dancing were not worn or
consumed: albeit in the end they sonke into the earth, first to the knees, and
lastely to their middles. The year expired, and their dance ended, and they
withal come to a perfect understanding in what sport they had spente the
year paste, one of the women and two others of that company dye^ suddenly,
and all the rest slepte continually three days and thr^^ nyghtes: Whereupon
some of them immediately upon their wakyng, dyed, and the others deferred to the
end to taste more their folly, remained in a continual tremblyng, thorough
all the parts of their bodies, during the term and space of their miserable
and unfortunate lives.

FINIS.

