The Castle, or picture of policy showing forth most lively, the face, body
and parts of a commonwealth, the duty quality, profession of a perfect and
absolute Soldier, the martial feats encounters and skirmishes lately done by
our English nation, under the conduct of the most noble and famous Gentleman M.
John Noris General of the Army of the states in Friseland. The names of many
worthy and famous Gentlemen which live and have this present year. 1580. ended
their lives in that Land most honorably.

Handled in manner of a Dialogue betwixt Gefferay Gate, and William Blandy,
Souldiars.

Faber est quisque fortunae suae. Anno 1581.

AT LONDON Printed by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

TO THE NOBLE, AND virtuous Gentleman M. Philipp SIDNEY.
WILLIAM BLANDY Wishes to his happy increase of knowledge, the hoped and
looked for fullness of wisdom.
RIght Noble Sir (for what lets me to yield you that title, since your own
actions that I touch not herein your blood and Parentage whereof you are
descended, may challenge as your especial and proper right, the same) in my
wandringes I found in an old monument this written: I give that, I have not.
Which Paradox or Riddle caused me to muse, with an earnest bent of my
Imagination and judgment, to the search and resolution, of so intricate and
difficult a positio^. Laboring a long time (as in a labarinth) in the diversity
of sentences long since taught, delivered, and received, I called at length
to mind the verse of Horrace.

Ego sum instar Cotis, acutum
Quae reddat ferrum, tamen expers ipsa secandi.
And so persuading my self that it was meant of a whetstone, I took shortly in
hand to play the whetstone my self: whetting and setting on edge (by this my
slender and simple devise) the blunt minds of my countrymen, who are made able
if they used wisely and a right the benefit of Nature, to cut most deeply into
those causes which concern the honor of our Prince, security and safegarde of
this commonwealth: most humbly praying you, who in my opinion is able and
sufficient to be both the whetstone and the sword, I mean both to do your
self, and to move and persuade other to all worthy and laudable actions, to
take the tuition of these my well meant labors and study. The courteous and
favorable acceptatio^ whereof, shall bind me evermore to be at your beck, and
happily stir up other of more knowledge and deeper judgment to the attempt of
some greater good.

Desirous, (if it be in him) any way to do you service. WILLIAM BLANDY.

The copy of a letter sent by William Blandy, before the imprinting of his
book, to his assured and worshipful good friend, EDWARD MORRIS, Captain.
HANIBALL exiled Carthage, sought the supportance of Antiochus king of Ephesus.
Antiochus embracing Chiualrye, would Haniball to be honored of all his people:
as one whose worthy acts, and noble enterprises, filled at that time the
world with fame and glory. This king, whether he did therein respect his own
profit and wonted exercise, or pleasure and recreation of this valiant and
famous warrior, brought him to hear Phormio read, appointed at that time to
discourse of some high point, and difficult question of Philosophy. Antiochus
and Haniball accompaned with many nobles, and brave courtiers of his nation,
entered the place of audience: Phormio laboring then no less in the waightynes
of his Argument, then a tall shipp richly and heauely laden, tossed in the
midst of the Ocean. Whether the Majesty of his king, the countenance of so
great, and honorable a person as Haniball was, rushing in of so glittering and
glorious a troop, or a vain conceit of poor praise should move in a deep
and approved Philosopher, such chaungeablenes or no: Phormio suddaynely
declined from his intent and purpose, converting himself to the speech of
wars. After whose oration made and finished, Antiochus demanded of Haniball
what he thought of Phormio. I have heard (said Haniball) many a Doter speak,
but a more dreamer then Phormio is, shall I never hear again. Which history
my good Captain, is a president to me, (since I write of the Martial affairs
of our Countrymen) to stand in doubt, how this attempt of mine may be taken:
for that there are among our nation many Haniballs, but few of Phormios mind,
and I, least able of all other, to sustain on my part, the weight of this
comparison. My drift and desire therefore is, it would please you to peruse
these papers, and especially view that part, wherein is disclosed the
propertye, nature, and qualitye, of a good, and perfect Soldier. Your will, or
nill, shall cause me to follow or forsake my purpose intended. My business, and
being here in this land (as you know right well) is such, that I have no long
tarying. Wherefore return I most heartily pray you, as speedely as you may an
Answer. Fare you well.

Most ready and willing to pleasure you. William Blandy.

Edward Morris to his loving friend, William Blandy.
IPHICRATES THE ATHENIAN Captain, leading forth his Army against the
Persians, caused them to stay, to behold the fighting of two Cocks. Which when
they had fought a long time, delivered to his Captains and Souldiars this
manner of speech. Behold said Iphicrates, the fight of two seely fowls,
contending neither for wife, nor children, Country, liberty, glory, house
goode^, Church goods, nor holy things, but for only victory. Much more ought
we therefore (who are endued with a more excellent nature, and have by the
instinct thereof, no less care of wife, and children, liberty, fame and
victory, then of piety, and Religion of the Gods) fight and puissantly stand
against the force and furye of the Enemy. If the example of Cock fighting,
yielded to this noble Athenian Captain, an argument and reason, to provoke and
enkendle the minds of his souldiars to prowes and valiantnes, who can justly
controlle your attempt in this discourse of wars: albeit I grant you are in
respect of an old trained Soldier, but a very Cockerell. What I have perused,
my notes and pen detecteth. Your endeavors cannot be but commendable, desert
greater, if you were well employed. My good Blandy, in conclusion, so far is
it, that I may call your studies into reprehension, that I could wish other
your Elders in Military discipline, disposed as you are, and furnished with
your skill and facultye.

Your assured, and good friend Edward Morris.

Lodowick Flood.
MIght man ascend to see the sun, to vewe the stars in sky:
No doubt unsweet the sight would be, might he not that discrye.
Things long desierd are sweet, things far unknown are sought:
Things secret seeks themselves to show, as nature them has taught.
Where learning utters wit at will, and will to council yeldes:
There council charge strength to stand, with sword, with spear and shield.
Of no less praise the pen in town, then is the sword in field:
For to the pen, as to the sword, each Commonwealth must yield.
A Castle calde of Pollicye, a glass, a myrrour lo:
Where nature first commendes the man, then Art the work does show.
Where Mars does fight with sword in hand, where Pallas pleades with quill:
Where Neptune cutts the surging seas, where Ceres shows her skill:
Here runn^^ the streams, here strives the states, here all are viewed with
eye:
Here triumph sitts, here Trophes stands, here virtues thrown on hye.
The force of foes, the fence of friends, the paths of Pollicye plain:
Where valiant minds, where worthy wightes, the crown of fame may gain
Since Blandy seeks by Pollicye, his native soil to save:
Yield due to Blandy worthy praise, which Blandy ought to have.
Some saueye Zoilous here will swell, some peevish Pan will poute:
Some fond Suffenus fault will find, some carping Creete will doubt.
Alas poor man say some, and so in verdit pass
How might he write of Pollicye, that Pollitick never was.
Can any make Mausolus toumbe, that Cetiphon did not view:
Or who can frame a Labarinth, that never Dedalus knew.
All colors are not fit nor fine, Alexanders shape to take:
All kind of woods serves not the turn, Mercurius frame to make.
Who thinks Gordius knot to vnknitt, must first with Phoebus talk:
Who strives to fish with Vulcans nett, he must to Cuma walk.
Tush, tush, his truth, his traeuell tryde, his care, his zeal you see:
His faith, his love, his pain with pen, must here commended be.
Who in Treponius cave does live, shall with Cymmerians dye:
Who drinks of Lethens flood always, the world shall him destroy.
Were it not report of praise, of fame, of glory, of gain:
Few or none would war or write, that could not praise attain.
Had Decius died as he had done, had Perseus ventured so:
Had Theseus gone to Minotaure, had fame not bad him go:
Had Hercules Cerberus sought in hell, had Jason gone from Greece:
Had Caesar Hasard sword and fire, had fame not favored these:
The laborer looks to have his hier, the venturer hopes for gain:
The writer well may wear a Crown, which ever shall remain.
Since fame does sound the golden trumpe, and holds the Crown in hand:
Let them approach to claim the Crown, which next to fame can stand.
FINIS.
Geffray Gate, William Blandy, Speakers interchaungeably.
GAte. Sir, I am as glad of your safe ariuall, as any one of your best, and
assured friends.


Blandy. You had past by (I promise you) unknown, had not your courtesy
exceeded my memory. But now that I call you to mind (my good and approved
friend) no man (believe me) can be more welcome to me, then you, no man more
beloved of me, then your self: wherefore let not my forgetfulness (I pray
you) bring our friendshipp vnsteyned, so long and so deeply fixed, in question.


Gate. No feebleness of memory can purchase suspicion, or breed mislyke
there, where inward affections join, and meet sweetly together: Sense, and
feeling, is frail and slippery, what the mind records, and caryeth in it
most faithfully imprinted, that I hold most dear and precious.


Blandy. Had I not always noted in you that secret and excellent instinct, of
the good and better understanding: I had never been so much inclined toward
you.


Gate. I thank you heartily of your good opinion, but chiefly I joy in this:
that you and I agree in the only ground and foundation of true and perfect
amitye, wherehence the causes of all noble actions whatsoever do flow: that
whatsoever we purpose, attempt, and adventure, rests wholly in the excellencye
of the mind, and of that part of the mind, which reason persuades, pietye
directs, honor rewards, felicitye crowns.


Blandy. What mean you sir, where you say of that part of the mind? Is not
the mind a complete and entire thing? Is it not in his proper nature most
pure, and free in it self from contagion? Or having more parts, is there a
pre-eminence and superioritye?


Gate. The mind according to the opinion of Philosophers (the true and
diligent searchers out of natural causes) is sorted twofoldly. The partition
whereof, stands chiefly of reason, then of sense: the one has less, the
other more communion with the body. The reasonable part in every well governed
body, has the dominion, and rules principally. The duetye and action of the
other, may not unfitly be compared (albeit in a contrary manner) to a faithful
Corporal, who diligently attends the watchful, and careful call of his
Sentenell, or to a ready and valiant soldier, who executes most speedely the
will of his commander. The office of the one, as of a chief, is to command,
rule, and controlle: the duty of the other to obey, and cherefully prosecute
the charge to him committed. So that as to an army encamped no greater peril
can happen, if the Corporal sleep, when the Sentenell calls, or the
Soldier disobey, when the Chief, or Captain commands: in like manner, a
miserable confusion cannot but follow that mind and body, where right is
abused, and the course of nature violated.


Blandy. I cannot but assent (except I would strive against reason) to your
good opinion. For where fancy is planted without judgments appoynting, where
lust takes his pleasure without reasons lyking, where furye raungeth without
polityke direction, to conclude, where any affect is found fantastic: there
unlooked for misery ouertakes the mind forethinking, there soueraignetye
lamentably sobbeth, through the ryott of indignitye.


Gate. I perceive by your assertion, that every man in this life (as on a
Theater or stage) plays one part or other, which meriteth shame and obloquie,
or deserves (as his own right) due commendation.


Blandy. It is an undoubted veritye. O that men knew, and daily presented
before their eyes, the sweet and glorious garland that is purchased by virtue,
and chiefly, by Magnanimitye. There would not be then that unseasonable, and
loathsome puffing, such stryuing, and wrestling would not be then for so vile a
wretch. The complayntes of the poor would not be then so many, and so
pitiful, the complayntes of the rich would not be found then so few and
beggarly. Gentlemen of great value, should not then wander as Pilgrims, in
forrayne lands, suspected as bastardes, and children borne in have. Women of
gentle kind and noble blood, should not be reputed as blasted blossoms. O
miserye, O mischief, O wickedness.


Gate. What tempest, what stir, what tumult is this? what cursed caytife is
it you speak of? wherehence proceeds your woeful cry?


Blandy. I stand in doubt, whether silence were my best: my mind
notwithstanding, indeuoreth to offend none, most carefully willing my Countries
good.


Gate. I commend in no wise silence in him, whose mind is so well bent, and
disposed: for his manner is to produce good and fruitful reason. wherefore
say on, if you have conceived aught, worthy the hearing.


Blandy. Being in Friseland it was our happ (if you well remember) wherein you
took at that time no small pleasure, to be often rancked together: Where,
partly to make our labors more pleasant, but chiefly to sift and feel each
others drift, you with many more of sound and ripe experience, moved questions
too and fro of no small importau^ce. All which had relation to pollicye, and
civil government.


Gate. I cannot easily forget the diversity of those discourses, interlaced
with so many pleasant and pithye speeches. In ye varietye of which invention,
a castle by you artificially erected, was, of as many as heard your discourse,
extolled to the skies. wherein you (as some other Amphion) moved, removed,
drew, withdrewe the ears of your hearers, whither the progress of your
understanding (delivered in so deyntye and trym words, in so decent and comely
order, in so sugared and sweet a tongue) bent it self. Wherefore recount, I
most heartily pray you the same again.


Blandy. I think it not best.


Gate. Why so I pray you?


Blan. Were it not (think you) a point in me of great follye and rashness, to
committ to the view of wise and learned men a repetition of a wearisome tale
and fond Imagination, especially knowing my self to have received the least
portion of learning, wherewith infinite numbers of our own Countrymen and
straugers are plentifully endued? Again, what fruit will you reap, or who
will the more account of us, if you and I speak, or write of knowledge, in a
world replete and glutted with letters? Farther who will now almost look
upon, and regard any invention, except it senteth like a flower,and in show,
and hue be like unto a Lillye? Lastly, do not you hazard greatly your credit,
to join with so poor and simple a man, any way as my self, you being through
many dangerous and bitter bruntes, in the field approved, in Martial affairs
expert, for your skill and pollicye reputed?


Gate. Discreet and sober men pardone imperfection, where the mind
andinclination is good. The fruit that I purpose, and hope hereby to reap, is
the weal of my Country. Which honest and upright intent, thousand more writers
can no wise prejudice. And whereas many favor pleasures, and therefore covet
such letters, which you have not improperly compared to flowers, and Lillyes
(which by nature are good, yelding a sweet but yet a short sent, pleasing
rather the sense of some, singular persons, then profiting the soul of a
Commonwealth) yet all are not so ledd and minded. Wherefore unto those other,
these labors shall be dedicated, who are of a more high and lofty spirit:
your pouertye which you mean, and speak of, hinders not, but that you may be
much more, for that inricht in mind. Simplicity is the ground and root of
heavenly wisdom. In conclusion who could fit me to address and finish this
good and honest enterprise so well as he, that has been my fellow Soldier in
the wars, who has also (except I be deceived greatly) more then tasted of
the streams and rivers of learning? Wherefore be of good courage, my powers
are pressed to uphold your pen.


Bla^dy. I am altogether won to your good desire: building my labors (as on a
sure and immovable rock) upon your deep and tryediudgement. Yet so, that we
both submitt whatsoever shall be by us uttered, to the verdite and censure of
those who prevail in wit, excel in knowledge and learning. The absolute
frame and building therefore, whereof I in our March discoursed, consisted of
six Romes and Chambers.


Gate. Before you enter further into this discourse, show me (I pray you) the
form and figure of the frame.


Blandy. It was sphericall, or round.


Gate. How were the lodginges divided?


Blandy. The Roof and highest covering contained three especial Chambers with
their peculiar offices, directly underneath were other three by squares and
spaces distincted. And to the end you should hold it to be the only monument
in the world, (believe me) the rarest Mathematitian in Europe, vewed first the
place and according to the sweet and safe constillation of the stars drew
the Platt: delivering to posterity this testimony for his perpetual honor and
memory, yt if the parts within did always observe and answer the face of
the frame, they should fear no force, no fury, no brauado, no bullett, no
battery.


Gate. The figure of this frame is so absolute, the stateliness so sumptuous,
the beauty so seemly and exceeding rich, that I may deem it, for right good
cause, the only pattern and peereles Palace in ye world, what name has it?


Blandy. This Architecture hight Pollicye.


Gate. For whom was this sumptuous and curious work wrought, who shall
possess a Palace so peereles?


Blandy. A King, A Iusticer, A Soldier, A Merchant, An Artificer, A Tiller of
the ground.


Gate. Are these the parts you spoke of before? is this the power that shall
possess and defend with security this invincible forte? May no one of greater
skill and deeper reatch control this division, add unto, or diminish the
number?


Blandy. In no wise.


Gate. Why so?


Blandy. The workmanship is so rare, the strength whereof stands on the
combination of the parts within contained.


Gate. What is that? of what kind and excellency is it, that has so fast
glued them together, and is to the frame so great a stay and firmament?


Blandy. I will show you. To every part before rehearsed, belonges his proper
and peculiar virtue and qualitye. To the Prince, pre-eminence, to the Iusticer,
judgment, to the Soldier, puissaunce, to the Merchant, desire to be
enriched, to the Artificer, delight in his occupation, to the Tiller of the
ground, true obedience. That which does most firmly and strongly join and
knitt these parts together, is Proportion: which broken and defaced, not only
renteth and plucketh in sunder the frame, but tottereth withal, and tumbleth
down the Prince, peruerteth justice, poysoneth and plucketh down the good and
upright mind of the Soldier, robs the Merchant, ransacketh the Artificer,
spoyleth utterly the simple and poor laboursome man.


Gate. Is this that you call Proportion, a thing of so great perfection?


Blandy. Proportion is of that force and stretches forth so largely, that no
man without an especial regard of it, can well govern himself: in a Family,
City, and common wealth, the power thereof does more eminently appear.


Gate. What is Proportion (I pray you) show me?


Blandy. Proportion is the just, right, and natural measure of things,
directed to their original and first creation. So that what soever is more, or
less, greater, or smaller, then Art has devised, and course of kind kept
and observed in all ages, limited to the first and successiue shape, not only
of men, but of all other things created, is in no wise to be called
proportioned.


Gate. Then all things have according to your opinion, a right or wrong, a
just or unjust proportion.


Blandy. In no wise so. For this opinion I defend that all things proportioned
are straightened and made upright through knowledge and wisdom: all other
crooked and misshapen things are to be termed Monsters, not adding there unto
the name of proportion: for that they are made and engendered through error and
blindness.


Gate. If you would in a simile or example more plainly disclose your drifte,
you should do me a right acceptable pleasure.


Blandy. As there is in the body a fair or foul, a neat or less fine, an
amiable or odible feature, that is, when every part according to his accustomed
and natural proportion answers other, or as superfluous lumpes resulteth:
So there is in the mind (betwixt which, in excellency and creation of nature
there is no comparion) a dim or daynty, a clear or cloudy, a rough or
royal, a hard or gentle and haughty Image, for both which, according to their
unseemly or sweet, clean or corrupt state, some are lothed, some loved, some
refused, other raised to honor and dignity. Whose heel exceeds his head in
quantity, whose arm swells, and has in it as it were a blowing billow as
bigg as his wast, we (not reckoning so much of his miserye and wretchedness,
wherewith he is most pitifully wrapped in) scarce number him (and that for right
good cause) among men. In like manner, in whose mind there is an intrusion
made, that is where lustful pleasure, fond faneye, wilful desire, takes
reason with all her powers and faculties prisoners, and bring them in most
lamentable and mourning manner like Captives fast chayned to the loathsome and
darcke dungeon of scilence: there the excellency of Proportion in that part is
as much euerted, as if the earth should become no more ye Center, and violently
contrary to kind challenge the chief and superiority of fire, and fire,
contrary to all reason, fall down and uphold the water.


Gate. Your reason resoundeth their saying who affirm, that no corrupt, can
suppress a finer creature.


Blandy. Me thinks, as they judge: howbeit sometimes casually or rather by the
sufferance of God, the earth and water contains an aerie part: which
notwithstanding, in those lower caves and dens beneath, in his kind strives
most egerly, and at length breaks out to the terror and amasing of men:
flying (as one: redeemed out of thrall) up again to his wonted place of rest.
So that every thing disordered, comes either to inevitable loss and ruin,
by the extremity of riott, or by natures good grace and gouerme^t, receaueth
again his accustomed light and beauty.


Gate. You have to my thincking done well.


Blandy. If what I have said, be to any available, it shall please me right
well to receive the same (as from a clear and changeable welspring) of your
own lips again, wherefore, repeat (for the singular love you bear me)
briefly what I have disclosed.


Gate. You have spoken of the mind and body: betwixt the beautye and
deformitye whereof (as you have declared) there is no comparison. For I hold
the calamity of that mind and body incomparable, were the outward parts
never so improper, the pearcing eye of whose mind sense has blered, whose
glistring looks lust has obscured, the light of whose understanding and
memory, error springing of earthlynes, has overwhelmed with palpable
darcknesse.


Blandy. You rehearse nothing else, but whereunto I most willingly assent.


Gate. You have most friendly satisfied the moyetye of my demand, the other
branch, whereof I shall taste some finer fruit, I desire with zeal to see it
spread forth.


Blandy. What part and branch is that?


Gate. You have spoken of the deformitye of the mind, Now it is convenient you
tell us of a conformed mind, or (as you please) of a mind proportioned: that
the seemly shape thereof being known, might enamour us with the grace and
bravery of her beautye.


Blandy. When I consider the wonderful greatness, and worthynes of the mind,
garnished with all precious gemmes of noble virtues, I find no flourish of
eloquence, no lights of learning, no trym speeches, or Khetoricall words
sufficient for his description. For if the sharp wits of those who have
professed Eloquence, when they would describe the praises of any human
virtue, were with the weight of the matter sometimes so cloyed, that their
senses (to their great shame and rebuke) were clean overwhelmed: how much more
ought I then poor seely and simple man, stay and stagger, fearing, foltring,
dreading to be drowned (as in a deep lake) in so ample high and grave an
argument.


Gate. I commend truly herein more your modesty, then courage and wisdom.
For I hold this the property of a well disposed, and good natured young man,
earnestly bent in the study of most worthy knowledges, not to rest contented
with things of mean account, but earnestly prosecute and clime unto the
highest causes: and then to bestirre himself, and labor fervently, when he
sees himself to be entangled with greatest difficulty. Wherefore albeit you
are in your own opinion, (by reason of any wit and exercise) able little to
do, seeing that you have taken in hand so great and difficult a matter, I hold
your blame in giving over, greater, then holdenesse in taking it in hand.


Blandy. Your persuasion, (since what you have said is true) has won me
altogether: and the rather, that the action is right good and honest. Wherefore
I am addressed (as my poor ability will serve) to discourse largely of the
excellency of the mind, and his creation.


Gate. Say on, I shall bend and recline my ear diligently.


Blandy. The most excellent power and majesty of that heavenly mind, which
being most high and everlasting, we worthily reverence and adore as our God, as
the everlasting fountain of life, as the maker and creator of all things,
when it did seem good to his unspeakable wisdom, to deal bountifully,
imparting his benefits to many (for nothing shows so much the goodness and
virtue of God as his free beneficence) in the beginning he created the
invisible world, beautified with holy Angels, who beholding always his
incomprehensible light and brightness do live in everlasting blessedness.


Gate. Came all those his creatures to the same estate of glory and immortality?


Blandy. In no wise. Those only enjoyed that pleasant plott of infinite rest,
who reposed the stay and Castle of their safety, the lightness of their
brightness, the cause and end of their blessed life, in their Lord and maker.


Gate. Did any of those holy and heavenly wightes fall from the true honor of
their creator?


Blandy. Holy scripture learneth us of an infinite number, the chief of whom
was named Lucifer.


Gate. What was their impiety (I pray you show) declaring withal their
punishment?


Blandy. These first fell to ye neglect and contempt of God, being enamored
with the beauty of themselves, and maintayning still this rebellious spirit:
yielded at length to their own natures a kind of pre-eminence in glory, not
unlike to the very God head. Wherefore they were deprived of that passing
clear light, whereof they were most unworthy, and thrown down into the place
of perpetual and everlasting misery, and into the darcke dungeon of that night
that shall ever continue. So that after God had made the highest heavens and
wonderful work thereof, which no eye has seen, then he framed this world
most beautiful and of exceeding fayrenesse, garnishing it with all pleasures
and commodities. In the making whereof he used no other engine or devise then
his own will and pleasure.


Gate. To what purpose, and for whose use that most high creator and Lord of
all things has made this so beautiful workemanshipp, this so excellent form
and shape of heavenly bodies, this so large and spacious greatness of sea and
land? For it is not the practice of his infinite wisdom to do any thing in
vain, but for some excellent end and purpose. For whose sake then, did (he
after a most wonderful order) frame that most goodly and seemly substance of
things, dislike in nature, and yet agreeing among themselves? For his own
sake think you, because he would have a trimmer habitation?


Blandy. In no wise, For it were not only a wicked thing, but a point of
extreme madness, to think so of that most blessed mind, then the which
nothing more perfect and absolute may be imagined: the virtue and power whereof
is infinite and inscrutable, to have needed any earthly and bodily tabernacle,
or that at all times before he wanted somewhat to accomplishing of perfect
blessedness, or to the fulness of his glory, or that God could be enclosed
within any certain rome or compass.


Gate. What then? were these things provided for the Angels and Saints of
God?


Blandy In no wise. For they being severed, and free from all fellowshipp and
conjunction of the body, desire nothing else but to behold their maker, neither
can they reap any commoditye, or conceive any pleasure of things beneath in
these lower parts. And to think this great and wonderful work to be made
for unreasonable creatures, or for the use of trees and plants, for fishes,
birds, and fowls, it were to to absurd. God has not therefore devised this
so goodly and beautiful a frame for himself, for Angels, for the fruits of
the earth* for creatures void of reason, but for man.


Gate. In all this season, where was man, for whom God had prepared so
beautiful, so rich, so bountiful a kingdom?


Blandy. Man was in the mind, virtue, and judgment of God. So that, when at
length the world it self was finished, he made first a body of earth, the^ he
breathed therein a mind finely fashioned, according to his own Image and
similitude. Sir see you not manifestly the beginning and creation of the most
excellent and noble mind of man?


Gate. I behold it (as in a glass) derived and taken out from no other thing,
then the spirit of God: and being enclosed in the body (as in a worthy
vessel) retains a divine form, pure, and deuoyd of all filthy corruption.


Blan. This was (I assure you) man's first estate, this was the first beginning
and foundation of that excellencye whereunto man aspired, wherein no man can
note any thing, but that which is right honorable, and worthy of high
estimation. Then the body was not infected with any vice, whereby reason might
be disturbed, or the mind obscured with darcknes. Man knew then, all
sciences, understood the causes of all things, was sufficiently learned in
the rule and discipline of life, being instructed by no other teacher the^ God
himself, the geuer of all knowledge and wisdom. And he did not only excel
all other creatures in the comely shape and feature of his body, but he was
far beyond them all in the amiable, most excellent, and divine form and
figure of the mind. For there was in the mind no error, no motion in the
sense, whereby the rule of reason might be disordered: whereas reason it self,
as it were in a perfect and flourishing Commonwealth, so in a peaceable and
quiet estate, could very easily restrain all raging affections. The mind
therefore had no kind of let and impediment, whereby it might be hindered
from daily contemplation.


Gate. As your speech has in a manner surprised me with joy, to think of our
original, to call to memory, how graciously the power of the almighty, dealt
with us (and to speak the uttermost) that we proceeded from the nature and
substance of God him self: so I feel out of measure a touch of grief, when
I consider that we remain not in the estate of our former felicitye* the
choice so happy, the change being so lamentable. Wherefore, open (I pray you)
the cause of so grievous and great a calamitye.


Blandy. After God had showed himself so liberal, and bou^tifull toward
man, he made him president and chief ruler of the earth, appoynting him a
princely place for his habitation. The Greeks call it Paradise: a Garden
flowing with most pleasant and siluerlyke springes, most delectable, and
decked with great store and varietye of sweet senting flowers, most fit to
live in all felicitye and pleasure. In this most pleasant seat, Man was
placed, that by that place, (which as some say) was high, and mounted aloft, he
might learn not only like a ruler and governor, wisely to guide the stern
thereof: but also thereby be admonished we discrete government and free
liberty, to take upon him the charge and rule over all other living creatures.
He had therefore a princely jurisdiction over earth, he served only the Lord
of heaven, and being a holy one, wholly dedicated to God, he was the expounder
of his holy will and pleasure, and the chief Prince, and first parent of all
mankind. He had a law given him, that he should exercise that free will in
the practice of virtue, that at length he might by his own demerites, deserve
to be of the number and company of heavenly Saints. And the law was, that he
should not presume to touch the fruit of a certain exceeding goodly apple
tree, which contained the knowledge of good and evil.


Gate. Did God give him this commandment, that he disdayned, that man whom
he had manifoldly blessed, should have no understanding thereof?


Blandy. In no wise: but that by that means he would the better foresee and
provide for those things which apperteyned to his good estate and
preservation. For he knew right well, that if man were set at liberty, he
would straight way work his own confusion. So therefore, God did moderate his
liberty, by ordayning that necessary and expedient law. Neither did he so
much forbid him to eat of that fruit, as that he should not slipp into that,
which by that fruit was meant and signified.


Gate. I could never yet hear, or have imagined any other meaning thereof,
then the letter testifies.


Blandy. Whether this may be construed of the not eating of the fruit or no, I
leave it, and stand to the judgment and correction of other: that is, that he
should not meddle with those causes, or search by his own industrye to attain
the knowledge of those things, which his capacitye could not reach and
comprise: Or that he should not in the choice of good, and refusal of the
evil, use rather his own judgment, then the will and pleasure of the
Almightye, by whose wisdom he should yield himself to be governed: Or this,
that he should not incline himself to the love of those good things which are
mixed and intermedled with a number of evils: therefore I say, whether he gave
that commandment to Man, that he embracing that sovereign good, that is not
intermedled with any enill, should utterly refuse other good things which
appear fair and pleasant, and yet are corrupt and poisoned: what more
wholesome precept and commandment might have been ordained more profitable
for Man.


Gate. Your saying is most true. For our wits are utterly confounded, and
cloyed with the search of those causes, the exceeding deepnes whereof our
capacity may not be able to compass, and in any affairs, to follow our own
brain, and not to be ledd by the light of the wisdom of God, it is a most
undoubted token of our fall and utter confusion. But to be leadd away from that
good thing which is most principal and the only pillar and firmament that
holds up this proportioned mind you speak of, being deceived with the
sweetness of any vain and transitory pleasure, it is to be holden generally
a thing most dangerous and deadly.


Blandy. This therefore was the estate of our first parent which should have
been most happy and blessed, if he had not acquaynted himself with that huge
and cruel monstrous beast, yt has brought to all nations pestilent
infections. For when the Prince of darckenesse (the chief Captain of those
Angels as I have declared) who through the puff of Pride fell into the
lamentable and pitiful pit of perdition, who understood and saw man made of
earth, ascend into that place of glory from whence he fell: he through malice
waxed hoate, imagining all kind of means to overthrow utterly the state of
mankind. Taking upon him therefore the shape of a Serpent assaulted through
guiles and feigned sleightes, the woman our first parents fellow mate, whom he
thought to subdue with less labor, for that she was frail and the feebler
vessel, he therefore inticeth her, and with sweet and sugared words allureth
her, to the eating the fruit forbidden: bearing her in hand, that as soon as
she should take a taste of that most pleasant Apple, she should eftsoone be
inspired with that heavenly knowledge, of good and evil. The woman therefore
being marueiloulsy allured with the fayrenesse of the tree, and also inflamed
above measure with the desire of that heavenly science and wisdom, was easily
induced to drink that cupp of deadly poison, offered unto her, by that most
subtle and pestilent Serpent. Thus, the woman neglecting the commandment of
the most high God, and gracious geuer of all goodness, followed the counsel of
her most deadly enemy, inuiting also her husband to that woeful and bloudye
banquett. This was the original and beginning of the misery of man. Herehence
came all trouble some motions of mind, hereby was inge^dred in the flesh all
chau^geable and wavering desires, herehence came all kind of corruption,
herehence sprang all foolish and vain opinions: from this root rose
mortality, most bitter and grievous lamentations, sorrows, sobbes, and groans,
for fear of death grew from this foundation: which the seely and wretched
mind of man incontinently felt. For this was most justly deereed, that he
which had broken the commandment of his Lord, and most impudently and
wickedly stood against his will and pleasure, in like manner should have those
parts which before were obedient, rebellious and contraryly disposed, assaying
most desperately to invade and overthrow the fortress of reason. And whereas
two things especially belonged to man, that is to exercise himself in action
and co^templation, and therefore was endued with a reasonable mind, that in
whatsoever he took in hand, he should wisely govern every affect of the mind
and employ all the power of his mind in searching out of heavenly wisdom: he
in both these parts was deeply wounded. For the mind, when the clear light
thereof was extinct, wherewith it before glistred gloriously, lay now ouercast
with darckenesse and obscurity, and the whole order of life being (as it were
with darcke night) overwhelmed, was wellnigh yut beside his rule and
soueraygnety, so that although in that darckenesse some glimse of light
appeared, yet could it not thereby be guyded to the end desired. Then shameful
silthynesse showed it self, before that time unknown, by the ougly sight and
monstrous aspect whereof, our first parts being dismayed, shrouded themselves
in darcke woods, and covered those parts with leaves of trees, which they
felt to be most striving against reason and understanding. Nothing was done in
those days for a great season by due order of reason and discipline, but all
matters were executed violently whereas frantique and furious headiness had
the upper hand. Then Robberyes were rife, then rapes common, then incest not
accounted of, then murders infinite. Then those, who in force and sturdines
past other, took it no offense at their pleasure to afflict and punish the
weaker sort. In this great darkness, in this common miserye, in this universal
woefulnes, there appeared a man, who through his clean and unspotted hands,
his clear and pityfull eyes, his straight and upright mind, drew many
extremely handled, to his reverence, love, and honor. Whom when they noted,
not only to abstain himself from villainy, but bend to Caytiues and
Murderers a stern and irefull countenance, and take commiseration of the
afflicted: then these wretched worms crawled unto him, making a scritch and
woeful cry. Of whose suits and lamentable complayntes, when he had taken
compassion, and sought by wit and policy to aid and assist, became unto
them at length, a lantern of Justice, a mirror of mildnes and courtesy. This
supporter of right, when he had taken on him the charge of those s^lye souls
miserably, and supplyantly yealding themselves to his order and direction: and
declared unto them the earnest desire he had to take away all injurious
invasions, and to repress violent murders, and valiantly to revenge wrongful
oppressions, and to link under like laws, both the mighty men and simpler
sort: it came to pass, that as many as tendered their peculiar liberty, and
sought their own securitye and quietness, supposed him to be the defense and
bulwark of their safe and prosperous estate, whose fame most flourished for
justice and equitye. Behold here (my good friend) the fountain and head
spring, from whence has flowed the power and authority of kings, the
pre-eminence, and prerogative of princely government. Herehence soueraigntye,
and the cause of all renown and glory was derived.


Gate. I perceive by your discourse, yt the original, from whence has issued
this high and stately government of Kings, is worthy all reverence, honor,
and obedience: and that there is no one stock more ancient, or more excellent,
then the Petegree of Princes, which through their own virtue and valiantnes
abandoned all barbarous crueltye, reducing the people to good order and
ciuilitye.


Blandy. You see therefore manifestly how Principalitye grew first, and that
equitye and puissance were the roots and raysers of royalty, and that no king
can hold long his scepter sure, if his mind become base through injustice and
dastardly fear.


Gate. Do these two virtues only make in a Prince the fulness of a flourishing
fame? needs the Majesty of a King no more, for the setting forth of his
glistring and shyning glory?


Blandy. There are other twoe most necessary, which also must accompany the
other spoken of before, as special and chief virtues.


Gate. What name have they?


Blandy. The one is called Prudence, the other Temperaunce.


Gate. If you would more at large, display their singular conditions, and
private natures, you should do me a right acceptable friendshipp, and percase
your report should bring no small profit to many other of the simpler sort.


Blandy. No will (I assure you) shall want in me, to pleasure you, or profit
any, reckoning my self most fortunate, if the meanest man may reap of my penn
the least fruit,


Gate. You speak most friendly, wherefore I heartily pray you, say on.


Blandy The excellency therefore of justice, stands of force, and virtue: the
virtue of justice rests in the measure of things ordered, according to
reasons prescription, which teaches that all men should bear the like
affection to other, as they would be affected of other. The force of justice is
to make of many, one, to unite and knit many parts in one: which evidently may
appear, if we call to mind that in the beginning it did so greatly excite and
stir up men's minds, that for her love they surre^dered their goods and
possessions into the hands of one especial man, in whose amiable face this
virtue did through flashing flames show forth her clear light of glory. I
read of Numa Pompilius a Roman of mean estate, who by upright dealing, and
supporting of Justice, was thought and proclaimed by the whole consent of the
Romans, worthily to succeed Romulus in the state of Royal Majesty. What
needs me here to speak of Licurgus, Draco, and Solon, that I omit in mean
while to make mention of Mercury, Phoroneus, Pittacus of Millen, and diverse
other, who by justice have been advanced to great honor, and have thereby
purchased to their posteritye, perpetual fame and memory. Therefore, to
persuade our selves that no one virtue deserves the like prehemine^ce, either
is alyke to be honored, it is hereby to be seen, that each kind of virtue
being void of Justice, has lost his honor and estimation, whereas Justice
alone secluded from other virtues, retayneth still his especial grace and
dignity. Whereby it is evident and plain, that there is no way more cercayne
then this, to enlarge our honor, no way more readilye to commend to posteritye
our fame and memory.


Gate. I rest satisfied with your not so short as sweet discourse. It
remains that you speak of fortitude.


Blandy. Fortitude rests in an invincible mind, attempting for the love of
some excellent thing, great, difficult, and dangerous actions. Which high and
lofty courage has been in all ages worthily magnified. For it is a matter of
no small importance, so little to esteem of life, (which we all in general
deem to be sweet) as to bestow it willingly, and cherefully for the safeguard
and preservation of a few, and to refuse and fear for the wealth of our
Country no danger and terror of the enemy. The records and ordinances of
antiquitye, do plainly and manifestly show, that there has been no glory
so great, no renown so honorable in any well governed Commonwealth, as that
which has been attributed to valiantnes and fortitude. On the other side there
were for Cowards eue^ by very good laws, bitter tauntes and reproaches, most
justly appointed. There was in old time among the Macedonians a law ordained,
that he who had not in fight of battle overcome one, should in the sight of
all men be trust up with an halter. Therefore, most wisely was it thought of
Solo^ greatly honored among the Grecians for his deep judgment, that the
securitye and preservation of a Commonwealth, did consist in preferment, and
punishment. For by this, wicked and desperate persons are restrained and cut
of, by the other, noble natures and flourishing wits are vehemently styred up
to ye embracing of virtue and honestye. It has been therefore by divine
providence established of our forefathers, yt in what kind of men soever this
virtue eminently appeared, the same should be with many worthy and noble
ensigns, and titles honored. And that I speak something of the Romans, Can
any man be able to recite so many Images of men of Arms, So many garlands
either given to them that scaled the walls, or first entered their enemies
Tents, or to them that by maine force saved the life of any one Citizen, or to
them, that victoriously triumphed over their enemies? Is any man able to
recompt so many ensigns of virtue, so many pryses of Prays, as to prowes and
puissaunce were by the Roman laws assigned?


Gate. It is not therefore to be maruailed at, that that City grew to be so
great and large in Empire, wherein prowes and valiantnes was so honorably
rewarded.


Blan. In that people, this is also greatly to be noted, that not only noble
men were wonderfully inflamed with the love of glory, but very many of the
common people. And that I may, of a great and infinite number, call a few to
memory, the two Decii by race and birth no gentlemen, for their rare and
singular fortitude, aspired in the common wealth to the highest degree of honor
and dignity: and in ye end, in their countries quarrel, consecrates themselves
as valiant and vowed vessels, to glory and immortality. Lucius Marcius, even
he, which in Spain recovered ye Roman Empire, therefore shrunken and fallen
down to the ground, was borne of simple and poor parentage, yet through
puissaunce obtained in his country great honor and a principal dignity. What
should I recite Marcus Porcius Cato, a man much commended for his wisdom and
policy? To what end should I speak of Marcus Marcellus who first gave Haniball
the overthrow, and showed plainly, that the way to overcome, was by prowes and
valiantnes. Again why should I omit Marius that worthy wight and a thousand
more being no gentlemen borne, which notwithstanding through their passing skill
and experience in feats of Arms were advanced to honor, and promoted to
high estate, leaving to posterity fame and immortalitye. Herehence the arms
and cognizaunces of honor and nobleness, which even in these our days are
borne, and had right worthily in estimation, did fetch their original and
first beginning. For when any man had in battle showed some notable point of
a good valiant soldier, he was by the General made a gentleman, and had some
badge or token thereof assigned unto him, whereby his blood might be ennobled,
through the praise and glory whereof his offspring might be in like manner
pricked with the desire of fame and commendation. Therefore some have in their
scochins, Castles engraue^, giving forth thereby the strong holds, fortes,
straightes, sco^ces and passages, that were by them in war won and
vanquished: other some, ringes or bendes, or any other thing for the number of
enemies which they had in some doubtful and dangerous battle subdued. Other
have in their schochins stars, signifiyng percase that they brought in some
darcke and cloudy calamity, no small light and comfort to the miserable
afflicted state of their native country, by this it is plain that fortitude
opens the way to worship, and brings us most redyly to the beholding the
exceeding bright and clear nature of true nobility. And to the end you may
undoubtedly discern the true value of a man, and know assuredly where
fortitude is, where puissaunce, where that high and lofty mind dwells: the
calamities which do equally assault as well the noble as baseborne, some with
grief, some with fear some with terror, some with trembling, may yield us a
plain and undeceivable marck and testimony. For where puissaunce and
fortitude is, there is ingraffed a mind not to faint for any trouble, not to
despair in any perrill, not to languish in any woe and grievous misery, yea if
Fortune frown, if danger and death ensue, a worthy mind will not be
forgetful. So that nothing may alike show a gentle and valiant heart, the^ not
to be vanquished: which is seen in sorrow, tried in trouble, proved in
persecution.


Gate. Nothing might have been said (in my simple opinion) more truly and with
better proof. For even as contented sufferaunce in the extremest and bitterest
cruelty, proves the mind to be high and divine, as stedfastnes in a state
never so unstayed and tottering, argues an vnco^quered value: So truly,
timerousnes interror and danger bewrays the faint and feebleness of a base
and cowardly nature.


Blandy. No marvel is it therefore if they which have not been dismayed at the
terror of death, they which have with most valiant courage suffered bodily
torments, they that would for no manner of grief be disturbed in mind, and
do any thing to stayne their honor and estimation, have been always had in
great admiration. The praise and glory whereof, springs from the contempt of
death.


Cate. Is the contempt of death in all men equally honored? Or may all those
alike be worthily commended, that would willingly dye?


Blandy. You have (I assure you) moved me a question right profitable, and not
unfit to be handled in this place. For many, yea to to many there are, who
being thrown down from an happy and pleasing state of life, do abide that
hardness, and feel in their flesh and natures such unaccustomed bitterness,
that they have received into their hearts a voluntary disposition to depart
from life, and therefore in an extreme desperation of change, and better
fortune, do themselves to death: who notwithstanding are of many through
ignorance vnderseruedly commended, whereby you may note, that the strength and
force of true virtue is such, that the counterfayte show thereof stirs up
some, both to admire and comme^d a lot, rather lamentable, then laudable. For
I condemn them utterly guilty of dastardly cowardice, for that they hasten
their dying day, not at all showing thereby their constancy, but rather a mind
vanquished and subdued through a small taste of vading misery. Other there are
which offer themselves to danger, not with judgment, and prudent advise, but
being pricked forward with a certain rage or fury of mind conceived either of
hatred, envy, or some other earnest and hot affection. Some other there are,
yt adventure a dangerous attempt, being moved thereunto with a very earnest
hope, or with a desperate fear of their present estate. Such, except t^^y had
some certain hope to escape danger, or gain some private commodity, or else
were past all hope of escaping, would be never persuaded to come to danger)
therefore since they miss the true and good purpose of Action, they may also
want the honor due unto so great and noble a virtue.


Gate. What is the purpose or mark whereunto this action, this contempt of
death should be directed, which also wins us that high renown and glory?


Blandy. The mark and end which this contempt of death ought to respect and
look upon, is the glory of Christ, the honor of our Prince, the cause of our
country, the defense of our name and honesty. They that venture their lives
for these points, are appointed in the right course and race of true honor:
for that they obtain the true and undoubted end of virtue: wherefore all other
that purpose unto themselves riches fame and glory depending on the consent of
the unlettered multitude, and respect not the true soueraygne good, they are
rather to be accounted men puffed up with vain desire, and ambition, then
valiant and courageous men.


Gate. You have (me thinks) not unlearnedly discoursed of fortitude: wherein I
cannot easelie comprehend, whether my profitt or pleasure has been greater,
both which your penn yeldeth to all those that happily peruse your labors. It
remains that you speak of Temperance and Prudence, which displayed, the
majesty of a King will appear more lively and apparent. Wherefore say on I
most heartily pray you.


Blandy. Temperance stands in the true and just moderation of our actions,
coming from a kind of propentio^, or inclynation, which is most deeply by
nature in us imprinted. And that you may more plainly conceive the property,
and worthynesse of this virtue, thus when we talk of Temperance we use to
dispute. There is in us a kind of power, inferior to reason, yet her next
handmayd, whereby we feel in us a prones to be this or that way affected. The
affection therefore that is engendered by this faculty, is such, that as it is
most fit, good and necessary, so if it watches not the direction, and as it
were the finger point of reason, it is intolerable and breeds often our woe
and confusion. For by nature we wax hoate, angry, and choleric, naturally we
love, naturally we loath, we pity, we despise, we fear, we frown, we desire,
we disdain, we are maruailously by kind stirred up with joy and pleasure.
Which affections before they become actions, least they should exceed their
just due and proportion, and turn thereby to our annoy, are to be tempered and
moderated by reasons rule and discipline. This man therefore that can thus
govern, and moderate the motions of the mind, has won the love of
Temperaunce, and shall be honored of all men as one endued with a rare, and
singular virtue. The affections therefore of the mind, as ire, love, pleasure,
and the solace it self of life, with many other are not (as ignorant men
suppose) to be raced out, but rather with the light and flame of reason in the
best and highest minds enkindled. Like as in the sea, such quiet and calm
weather is not to be desired, wherewith the flood may not be with the least
puff of wind troubled, but rather such open air whereby the shipp at the
stearne may sulck the Seas with a merry gale and prosperous wind: even so there
is to be desired in ye mind a puff, and as it were, a blowing billow to hoyse
up the sails of the mind, whereby the course thereof may be made more swift
and certain. And even as a skillful and courageous horseman does not always
delight in a soft and gentle pace, but sometimes gives his horse the spur,
to the end his stead should move more lively. So by reason, sometimes the
affections of the mind are styrred, and prycked forward, that we might more
cherefully dispatch our business. You know by these, what Te^peraunce is,
wherein it does consist, and by what means it is attained.


Gate. My mind hitherto has his content, strive and stir at all to the
contrary I may not, except you be sile^t: wherefore say on, so shall you bring
me a sweet rest.


Blandy. It follows that I show you my opinion of prudence: which virtue is
the very orname^t and garland of the other two, without which, they before
spoken of, can no wise flourish, and give out kindly their clear and bright
lights of glory, the want whereof, maymeth the mind of a king. Prudence
therefore rests in the knowledge of civil government: which learneth us not
only to govern wisely our selves, and families, but to rule poletikly great
Cittyes and Commonwealthes. And that you may fully understand, by what means
this virtue is attained, it is right necessary, and expedient you call to
mind, how men living as Barbarians, in woods and desolate places were brought
to order, and at length persuaded to live under one law embracing mutual
love, and all kind of humanitye. Wherefore, if the sweetenes and excellency
of eloquence in antiquity so much prevailed, that men were with ye mellodious
harmonye thereof, drawn from barbarousnes, to ciuilytye: If puissance in the
beginning repelled injuries, and became thereby the root of royaltye: if good
and profitable laws stayed most fastly, men thus reclaymed and brought to the
quiet and happy home of peace and rest: I hold the only redye and perfect
stepp to trace out prudence, by the love of Eloquence, by the honor of
chiualrye, by the knowledge and study of the civil laws. For these sciences
are right worthily reckoned among those which are the most chief and highest:
for yt they have been the founders of Cities, the safeguard of common societye,
the principal stay and rock of all noble and flourishing Commonwealthes. To be
prudent in a private man, is right worthily commended: in a king, in a prince,
and in the place of Majesty it gives out such comfortable beams, that
thousands and infinite numbers thereby, receive relief: For her propertye is,
to be diligent, and busy for the weal of all. They are therefore in no wise
to be deemed prudent, which seek the advancement of themselves, and the
preferment of any one private Familye. Wherefore, if you to your expectation,
and our wished and labored intent, purpose to behold the high and hautye hue
of the Majesty of a king, mark and imprint deeply in your mind, what
briefly insueth. A king therefore, as it appears by the discourse precedent,
came of no small beginning, derived, and springing of no other root, then an
honorable and royal heart, garnisht, and decked with all worthy, and noble
virtues So that this king which we speak of, and have through the view, and
consent of many famous and worthy writers, chosen to be chief in this our
Commonwealth, is such a one, whose Scepter justice raised, whose soueraigntye
fortitude defends, whose pre-eminence prudence rules, whose prerogative
temperaunce keeps in most safe and quiet estate. Which chief and principal
virtues, rest always in perpetual moving, the motion whereof brings forth
abundantly branches or rather (if you please) buddes, which cann be by no
irksome and sharp air blasted, for that the sapp and juice of this tree in
every branch and twigge thereof continually equally florisheth, being subject
to no time and season. Herehence mercy flows, herehence mildenes, herehence
courtesy, affabilitye, liberalitye, providence, love, which maruelously
graceth the majesty of a king. This is also to be required and chiefly looked
for, of a King, yt what noble act soever he take in hand, whether it
appertain to civil government in time of peace, or to martial prowes, in
time of war, his clearenes and excellencye, give most manifest notice and
signification, that he sets no store by human things, but does with most
earnest endeavor and intention of mind, affect those things that be heavenly,
and everlasting. This high and lofty intention of mind causes the Peers and
nobilitye of his nation, with all duty and reverence to behold him, styrreth
all good men with all love and honor to embrace him, forces all base and vile
minded men to fear and tremble at his sight and presence.


Gate. As you in our March discoursed in this manner, and came to the like
issue, you have hitherto bent the drift of your understanding, I with many more
(if you remember well) caused you to cut of the rest (speaking to our simple
opinions sufficiently) you would have said, of the Majesty of a king. Minding
you of a Queen by distance of place then far of, yet by nature near, by due
comparison of whose excellent clear brightness, either that have been in any
monument of Antiquitye honorably spoken of, or live at this present Christened
in magnificence, merited most high renoume: that when her excellencye was
named, all our powers and spirits were in a manner surprised with joy and
pleasure, beholding through your speech as in a glass, her great guiftes, rare
virtues, and noble government. At what time all we (most lowly prostrating
our selves) with one voice asse^ted, that Q. Elizabeth our most high and noble
maistres, should suffice, not only us her true, faithful, and natural
subjects, but all other peers, of what kind of people they sprang of, of what
noble line and parentage they descended, to behold in her excellency, the true
and absolute Majesty of a Prince and governor: wishing then most earnestly,
that one among us had a penn of that property, that either he could at once
write all la^guages, or that all nations could understand what he wrote. Then
not only Europe which at this present ringes of her glory, but all the world
besides, should have knowledge and understanding of his sovereign Lady and
Maistres.


Blandy. I can not easily forgett, what joy and pleasure we took of that
honorable report, wherein as we then rested in the cogitation of so rare and
royal an example, so I think it fit to finishe our speech of this first and
chief pillar of our Commonwealth: directing all other that would understand
more thoroughly, of the perfection of a Prince which nothing shows forth more
lively then example) to the beholding our most gracious Queen and governor:
whose faith in Christian Religion, whose knowledge in learning, whose policy
in governing, whose cleme^cy in pardoning, whose bountifulness in preferring,
whose pitiful and tender commiseration of the poorest wretch that lives
within her dominions, does not without great cause establish her loving
subjects in honoring her, pouring out daily most fervently their prayers for
her safe, long, and prosperous government. God of his infinite mercy and
goodness keep her to reign long over us.


Gate. It seems now therefore right good, you speak of the Justicer.


Blandy. I will most gladly do my endeavor. The two limbs that chiefly and
above other, strengthen the body of Princely majesty, is the Iusticer and
soldier. The charge of which is great, and honor acquired thereby right
worthily had in estimation: The one executes the will of his Sovereign upon
the offender at home, and in the City, the other wreaketh the indignation of
the Prince in the field, upon the body of his enemy. The one is chosen for his
prudence, the other for his prudence, and puissaunce, the one for his rightful
dealing, the other for his upright mind, exposing his body to all perrils, to
all poverty, to all lack. The one with his tongue keeps peace, the other with
the sword restores peace in danger, and clean lost to his former state. So
that whereas both shoot at one principal marcke (for the good and perfect
soldier has two marckes and ends of his action, the one victory, wherein he
wins honor, more private: the other peace, whereby he returns triumphantly
to receive of his Prince and country the titles due to so great desert, which
makes his former honor which I before named more private, more public, more
known, more ample and glorious) yet since the means differ not a little,
whereby the iusticer is promoted to his degree, and the soldier advanced to
an honorable calling in the commonwealth I cannot find in my poor and simple
consideration, but that the soldier in his proper right may challenge a kind
of superiority of the Lawyer.


Gate. I cannot gaynesay your position, which is that the soldier and iusticer
prefixe before their minds one end and purpose, so that I am induced to think
clearly, that whereas the means are differing, odds to be therefore betwixt
their both deserts. For what can the iusticer hassard in peace, where the
enemy is repelled, where force is subdued, where fury is put to flight? his
treasure, wealth, wife and children, are by the laws, as with a sure and
strong forte) defended his name and honesty, a number of lately richt clients
(with earnest and difficult suites subdued) guard, his health physic
preserves. On the other side the soldier so little estemeth safety at home,
content in his mate, pleasure in his children, solace with his friends, that
where his fidelity to his Prince, love to his country, honor of his upright
mind, shall be brought in question, and stand to be tried, he will not only
most willingly forgo all these, but cherefully vow and consecrate his lustye
limbs to tiresome labors, his body richly clad, to pinching nakedness, his
feeding nature, to staruing hunger, his fresh and lively looks to loathsome
languishing: his sinowes to be severed, his joints to be cut in two, his blood
to be spilt, his carcass to be stamp to dyrt and mire. Where fore I see no
reason but that the soldier may in the common wealth be preferred before the
iusticer.


Blandy. Albeit it be a matter very difficult to judge, whether should be
preferred before other, since the virtue in a iusticer and soldier are not of
one kind (although they prick at one marcke) and that it far passes the
reach of either of our capacityes to waygh their private virtues so differing,
in equal balances, leaving therefore the controversy to be decided by men of
deeper indgement, and ryper experience, notwithstanding I think it most fit
the iusticer not unworthily (if his calling and condition of life be well
examined) to have the second place in this our commonwealth. For where you
reason thus, that the soldier does hassard more then the iusticer, fearing no
force, dreading no danger, pricing no perrill whereby his honorable mind
should be more seen and appear (with lofty and high courage I cannot with
words sufficiently commend) yet your reason is infeebled by this, that it is
against the nature of peace, and therefore much against the duty, order and
course of good magistrates, to suffer (as much as in the^ lies) any such
injurious action to be committed, whereby the stomach of the least man should
be so tried and proved. The actions are not of one kind, for that they take
not the like beginning, although they have the like end and direction. Again a
reason springing of one singular Action, to conclude in generality, a better or
worse has small, or rather no force at all. Wherefore sith you made mention
of fortitude and magnanimity as though the soldier only, and not the iusticer
did regard and embrace so great and noble a virtue, and might be condemned of
dastardly cowardice, I have thought it good and expedient to clear so high and
estimable a calling, of so base and foul a crime. First therefore, whereas it
is most manifest that the mind of the iusticer and soldier is occupied about
one thing, that is, peace and tranquillity, the one to keep it always
flourishing, the other to restore it decaying and in danger, here it would be
demanded, whither the honor of the iusticer is not as great and nobler in
preserving common quiet, or the worthiness of the soldier to be more extolled
in purchasing and redeeming peace pressed and thrown down to the ground.
Wherefore (that this doubt and controversy may more clearly appear) show (I
heartily pray you) wherein honor rests and by what means it is atchiued.


Gate. Honor depends of the just measure of value showe^ in the defense of a
good cause.


Blandy. How then may value be known?


Gate. Value springs of contention, contention of two minds contraryly
affected. So that where there is an assault, and defense, the defender is to
win honor by his value, which persuades him during life to uphold and
mainetaine the right of the cause.


Blandy. If so, the value of the iusticer will anon more eminently and
clearly shine then the virtue of the soldier. Who does not hold it a harder
matter to kill a secret, the^ an open enemy? The iusticer and soldier carry
and uphold both an honorable mind. The soldier stands readely furnished to
fight in the field, where he may look round about: The iusticer is enclosed
in a little cell or studdy, where he may be secretly slain. The soldier has
warning yt the enemy approaches by the neighing of barbd horses, rattling of
me^ of arms, sound of trumpet, Phife and drum: The iusticer has
foreknowledge also, but by a more seely and feeble noise, as a doors creek,
knacke, and whisper. The soldier sees men glittering as white as silver: The
iusticer sees one man offering enbost workemanshipp like fire and Angels of
gold. The soldier fights commonly man to man. The iusticer is invaded
sometimes at once with no less the^ twenty men. And whereas the iusticer and
soldier (since we all profess Christ) direct their Actions to eternity, to
euerlastingnesse, to that blessed and endless felicity, and that the iusticer
is assaulted although after an other manner, as egerly of his enemy in the
chamber, as the soldier provoked to fight in the field with his deadly foe (I
speak not here of a bodily death, but of a death whereunto body and soul
through offense is subject) and that peace is to be preferred before wars,
for which we daily pray, the officers and magistrates in peace, and therefore
the iusticer their chief and principal, shall have the second place in this
commonwealth: as one that will not harken to corruption, much less suffer his
mind to be abused and defiled with bribery. For woe, woe, may that
commonwealth cry, if they which sit in judgment will be by any manner of
entisementes allured and won from the sweet and sacred countenance of
justice. In consideration whereof, this realm of England is in my opinion in
this point thrice happy and blessed.


Gate. Verily I think no less, if the Lawyers of this Realm for the most
part with their companies, did as well imitate the virtue and sincere dealing,
as they daily behold the gravity of the judges of this land: their order
should not at this present be subject to a deserved disgrace: such rebuke, such
reproach, should not follow those fellowshippes, and houses of court, where
gentlemen descended of noble Parentage, live, and suppose themselves to trace
the steps of honor and worshipp.


Blandy. What say you?


Gate. I speak not against the law, for without it no kingdom can stand. The
good and well minded Lawyer I greatly reverence. The young Gentlemen which come
thither either to study the law, or to approve what exercise and condition of
life may best fit their noble natures, I highly commend: wishing my self as
able to persuade the^ the best, as they are of a good inclination tractable.
The re^nant which retain no good thing, I would (with all lowly duty and
submission to the state I speak it) were well employed.


Blandy. Are any of this profession idle and unoccupied.


Gate. It were better they were idle, then so ocupied.


Blandy. Is it possible?


Gate. This is the blowing billow; you in your body proportioned spoke of
before, which deformeth all other parts. This is ye mortiferous and deadly
worm, which has almost with his eger and perpetual gnawing and biting, worn
the legs to the bone. This is the impostumation, which if it be not in time
pricked, will with his stinking contagio^ poison all. This order is the nurse
and mother of those mates, which at their seasons stir hither and thither to
move brawles. It is a world to behold, what new and strange natures they
have clapped on, how they transform them selves. There, where there is no hope
of gain, he stands as he thinks gaylye, but yet (as he is) a counterfaite,
looking to be worshipped, and will not stick (so unmannerly a puppye he is) to
take the upper place of right good gentlemen. Here, the same man hoping to
gain of a poor and simple clown of the Country fortye pence, is become his
slave and drudge. O that Georgias Leontinus did live in some English man's heart
and stomach: who reproving the rulers of Larissa because they had received into
the company of pleaders any kind of people, was wont to say: that even as
plasterers of any kind of stuff, would make Mortar, or any thing of like
sort: So there were so conning crafisme^ in Larissa, which of any condition and
kind of men would make a Lawyar. Cicero the most famous orator and learned in
the laws that ever Rome nourisht (when they brake their lists and lymits and
grew disordered) nippeth most wisely those of his own order, in this manner.
Proueniu^t nobis oratores noui, stulti adolesce^tuli. So that I pray God most
heartily, it fares not with us the inhabitants of this noble Island, as it did
after the forewarnings and shows of these two (not so faithful to their
Country, as inseene in the state of their Commonwealth) with the people of
Larissa and the Citizens of Rome. For not long after, these people and
flourishing Cities, fell down headlong to the ground. For how was it possible,
that the state of those Empires could long stand steadfast, when the chief and
principal pillars that should sustain the weight and burden of so huge, so
high, so honorable and ample a government, became rotten. Which ruin and
overthrow of the whole Commonwealth appeared then, not so much by decayed
houses which were ancient and of great nobility, as by erecting ma^nors where
dyrt and dong was found. In consideration whereof, I let to speak of the hills
and mountains raised, lands and possessions purchased, abundance of wealth
gathered and forced together by men in our nation, neither wise, nor learned,
politic, nor prudent, temperate, liberal, nor pitiful.


Blandy. Is it not a point and chief point (think you) of great pollicye and
wisdom, to advance our stock and family? Is it not in the opinion of most
men a happy thing to be rich? do not all men delight in, and therefore desire
a fair, large and beautiful house? To be Lord of many* Manors, to receive
many revenues, does it not in gender great favor, bring much worshipp and
reverence?


Gate. If you follow herein the judgment of the multitude I assent. If you
forgett their blind and gross Imaginations, and cleave to the assured and
vndeteaueable directions of wise men, you shall briefly understand, what is
seemly in, and best becomes a Lawyar. Where the the mind is styrred with a
desire to be advanced, and to raise his name and blood, from a mean to a
higher degree, there is the mind so vexed with diuersitye, that at length it
yeldeth to some great and grievous extremity. But when the mind is taught,
that the chief and sovereign good rests in an honest and virtuous life,
there are the cogitations calm and sweet, there content holds desire
restrained from any ambitious affection. This man that is thus affected,
seeks altogether to please and enrich his mind, provides for no more then
will suffice nature, holds it a perilous thing to be rich, and is assuredly
persuaded, that abundance and flowing of worldly wealth, rather hinders then
helps, rather plucketh down then erecteth the courage and aspiring mind of
a noble nature. The Iusticer therefore and Lawiar which is the right hand of a
Prince ought (if he purpose to keep the state and condition of his life clear
and vnsteyned) to live in the contemplatio^ of justice, feed and nourish his
mind with the lone of virtue: thinking it a thing far unfit for his high
calling to be deemed in his desiers a Merchant, in his order and course of
life, an artificer. The Soldier, who has the third place in this Commonwealth
(of whose life, nature, and propertye we purpose presently to treat of)
yeldeth the desire of riches to the Merchant: deeming it for his condition of
life and profession, a foul matter to be addicted to such trash, dyrt, and
pelf.


Blandy. Sir, you have spoken so truly of the life and condition of a Lawyer,
that I think the good and better part of the professors of the law, will yield
you, (not without your desert) a good opinion, so far is it unlikely, that
any other will conceive offense. I stand now atte^tiue to hear your discourse
of a Soldier, in which kind of life, you, even from your green and tender
years, have been trained, and therefore may learn me the more readily, what
is in him most decent and chiefly required.


Gate. In this case I think it most expedient and necessary, I sort a
Soldier first into his diuersitye, or rather branches, which known, you
shall more plainly understand what he is. All these therefore are contained
within the name of a Soldier. The General, high Martial with his Prouostes,
Serieant general, Serieant of a regiment, Corownell, Captain, Liuetenent,
Ancient, Serieant of a Company, Corporal, gentleman in a company or of the
Round, Lance passado: these are special, the other that remain, private or
common Souldiars. The Profession as well of the co^mmon, as private Soldier is
honorable, which rests in the maintenance to death, of a good and rightful
cause: the condition no less paynefull then full of peril, the quality,
clean, diligent, duetifull, delighting rather in brave furniture and
glittering armor, then in deynty diet, womanlyke wantonness, and vain
pleasures. It is fit he be not only skillful in the weapon he uses, but also
in any other that his strength will give him to handle and win at his
pleasure and commandment. It is also to be required he has the skill and
qualitye of Swimming, likewise in Marching, turning, retyring, fighting to
observe the order by his Captain prescribed: Such a one may be called a good
trained soldier, and if he be ignorant hereof, although he has been twentye
years in ye wars, I account him not worthy the name of a Soldier. Finally
the only and chief grace, that beautifieth the mind of a Soldier, is the
contempt of Spoil, and refusal of riches. For the corrupt opinion of wealth
and pleasures, are the enemies of verue, the allurements not to so fond, as
wicked endeavors.


Blandy. You have not unskillfully delivered your opinion of a Soldier in
general. Now, if you would briefly set down the duty that belongs to
every several officer, you should highly pleasure me. what is therefore to be
desired in a General of an Army?


Gate. A General ought first and chiefly behold the Majesty of God, and
cause therefore his true Religion in his Army to be had in due reverence: in
such sort, that his Souldiars may perceive he is in deed Religious. And let
him by all means cause the Priests and Ministers of his holy will and
testament, in his Army to retain their dignitye, and to be esteemed and
reverenced of his Souldiars. For if the very Paynims by due observations of
their feigned Religion, did keep their Armies in marvelous obedience and order:
how much more shall true Religion, delivered from our Lord and Savior,
prevail a General, and Army that loves him, to the atchieuing great and
miraculous victoryes. Also the General ought to be modest, prudent, and
temperate, given to no riot and excess, neither miserably bent to silthy
lucre. It stands greatly on him to avoid the name of a vaunter: which is
seen in this, that he do not vendicate to himself alone the praise of good
success: but do impute the same first to God. Secondly to his Captains.
Thirdly to his Souldiars. Furthermore it behooves a General to be a noble
Gentleman, trained up in those sciences, through the knowledge whereof, he
shall sooner attain that perfection, which in a General is needful. Lastly,
for that I study herein breuitye, moved thereunto, through great and wayghty
occasions, a General must be religious, temperate, sober, wise, valiant,
liberal, courteous, Eloquent, and of good fame and reputation.


Blandy. What have you to say of the high Martial.


Gate. The duty of the high martial is as great in a Camp, as the office of
a iusticer in peaceable and civil government. To him appertains the true
administration of justice, the hearing and determining of controversies, and
the punishing of disorders. And therefore as he ought of of himself to be a
man, both grave, wise, learned, and thoroughly well experienced in martial
affairs: so is it also convenient for him to have about him men of judgment,
sailfull in military discipline, and laws of a Camp, redily to resolve of
every question, according to equity and justice. This belongs next and
imediately (as part of his principal charge) to ye high martial, that he
receive the names and numbers of all the Corownets of horse, and companies of
footmen that are in the Army: he must also learnedly proportion and cast,
what scope of ground will suffice to encampe them with all their provision,
Carriadges, and Munition. The high Martial must assign every battle his
conuoy, and guide, or two, to bring them most easy ways.


Blandy. Proceed (I pray you) to the Serieaunt General, or Mayor, and
Serieaunt of a Regiment.


Gate. This Officer ought to be a man of great courage and well experienced,
that he be not dismayed with the terror of the enemies presence. For the most
part of all his actions are to be exployted even in the face of the enemy: he
ought to be a man therefore of lively spirit, and quick invention, that he
may soddenly perceive, and quickly conceive the nature of the Situation, and
order of the Enemies array, altering and disposing accordingly of his own. His
duty is to attend the Lord high martial, or Lieuetenant General to receive
direction in what sort their pleasure is, the Army that day shall march, he
ought to have a roll of all the bands, and in every band, what number of
short weapons, what Pikes, and what shot, and the same to have always about him:
that if any want, he may admonish the Muster Master and Treasurer thereof, to
the end there be according to the want, a fit and convenient supply. To this
Officer it appertains so to rank his souldiars, that the best armed inpale
the rest, and that the force and flanks of his battayles be armed with pikes,
the Ensigns well guarded with halberdes, the tail well enclosed with ye
Cariages, wings of shot on either side, and those wings more or less,
accordingly as the place is larger and straighter, stronger or weaker, on the
one or on ye other side. Those wings represent the flankers in fortification
and ought a^ orderly to flancke and skoure before the face of the battle as
bulwarks do the Curtayne of a Town or fort.


Blandy. Proceed now I pray you to the office and duty of a Corownell.


Gate. It appertains chiefly to a Corownell after the Prince has elected
him, to make a good and singular choice of his Captains and Officers, that
they may the better and more readely take good order for the good execution of
any service. It is most requisite he has nere unto his person certain wise,
expert, and valiant Gentlemen, that be able both quickly to conceive, and
plainly and sensibly to utter the cause of any new accident, or thing
whatsoever, that he shall see. It behooves him to take great heed, least the
souldiars in his Regiment be discouraged for want of necessary provision, but
in such sort be provided for, that the souldiars may grow into a liking of
their Captains. It shall be an honorable part in a Corownell sometime to lend of
his own to his Captains, that they may in like manner aid, and bind
therefore their souldiars to them in their wants and extremity. And above all
other things, let a Corownell take heed that he be not noted to be a pillar of
the souldiars, or to play the Merchant making his gain upon them: and as it
behooves him to clear himself always dythe contrary action, of so foul and
dishonorable a crime, so it stands him greatly on, that his Captains be not
infected with the like corruption. For there is nothing so repugnant to the
honorable profession of a Soldier in general, and therefore much more of a
Captain, greater of a Coronell, as to be noted miserable.


Blandy. What you have said, no man with reason or knowledge can withstand: I
desire now to be instructed of the duty of a Captain, and his Lieuetenaunt.


Gate. This deep and principal consideration ought to be in a Captain, that
a charge of the lives of men is to him committed, so that if any quayle under
his conduct, either by rashness or by want of knowledge, he is to render account
thereof before ye great Judge. He ought not to be covetous or niggardly, never
to keep back his souldiars pay, but by all means possible to procure them
their pay, and to his hability rewarding them over and above: for by that
means he gayneth honor, and lincketh them fast and assured to him in any
doubtful* and perilous service. A Lieuetenant also is an office of credit and
reputation: but in the absence of his Captain far greater and deeper. In all
factions or questions among the Souldiars, it behooves him to be newtre,
working most lovingly pacification. It appertains to him to ouersee the
Serieantes and Corporalls, that they do their duetye, and oftentimes to aid
them with his own person. He is to use most friendly and brotherly his
Ancient, he should be a man able to speak well and sensibly, and study by
courtesy rather the^ by seueritye to frame aright, crooked and perverse minds.
It behooves the Liuetenant, much more therefore the Captain to be continually
Armed, as well when no peril is feared, as in time of danger, to give example
to the rest of the Souldiars, that they may not think their Armor burthenous,
but by use to make it as familiar to them, as their clothes, shyrt, and skin.


Blandy. If you will in like manner declare, what belongs to an Ancient,
Serieant of a company, and Corporal, you shall finishe a good and profitable
labor.


Gate. The Ancient, and Ensign bearer, ought to be a man of good account,
honest, and virtuous, that the Captain may repose the rather more credit and
affiance in him: he ought to behave himself wisely, discretely, and soberly,
that he be therefore more loved of the Souldiars: considering thereby, yt not
only his own person shall be in more safetye, when he attempteth perilous
exploytes, but also the whole service more bravely and honorably exployted: for
the value and virtue of the Ancient sets forth the virtue, and valor of
the Captain and whole Company. The Serieaunt of a Company ought to be a man
chosen of quick spirit and active body: to the end he be not staggering and
astonyed upon new accidents, but prompt and ready on a soddayne, to do that
to him appertains. His duetye rests greatly, in ordering and rancking his
Company, assigning to each Soldier his due place, cutting of braules, and all
manner of contention. The Corporal is a degree above the private Soldier, and
therefore he should pass and surmount his inferiors in wit, discretion, and
diligence. The Corporal ought to keep continual company with his little
troop, committed to his charge, to lodge with them, and provide for their
want, and to instruct them how to handle and use the weapon they carry. He
ought to remember perfectly, how every one is armed, and furnished, when he
received them in charge, and to see that no part thereof be spoiled, but be
preserved neat and trymme. Finally, the nature and qualitye of all good
Souldiars is this, that they stand always of their credit and reputation,
accompting no loss of goods co^parable, to a dishonorable foil, to have a
great, high, and weighty respect of his charge, and to be no less careful and
zealous thereof, then every honest and honorable gentleman, should take of his
wife, familye, and children: In conclusion, to fear nothing so much (appeared
it never so terrible to flesh and blood) as infamy. Thus you have heard my
poor conceit and opinion, of a soldier: also the duet^es of those, who have a
superioritye in that profession: delivered I confess, not so amply and in so
comely manner, as the waightynes of the Argument would requier: but as the
slendernes of my skill, would permit me in this discourse to follow.


Blandy. Your treaty hitherto may counteruaile well, both your prowes, and
profession. And whereas some other, grounded more in knowledge, could give out
a larger, and deeper drift, wheeunto you percase (if you were not shortly to be
employed otherwise) would to your power bend ye reach of your capacitye: yet
these brief speeches may happily please, where heaped labors are found
tyresome and unseasonable. Wherefore, convert your pen I heartily pray you, to
the displaying the brave and worthy actions done by our nation in Friseland.
Which performed, you shall discharge and accomplish our both desiers.


Gate. Corownell Norris and his companyes, to ye number of xi. Ensigns of
footmen, and one Cornet of horsemen arrived in West Friseland, at a town called
Counder the xi. of July, where he was joyfully received by the Grave van
Hollock, by whose commandment and aucthoritye the Souldiars were Forraied on
the Boares for their refreshing, for the space of two days. Wherehence being
suddenly called, we marched by night, and pitched in a place called
Fornecloyster near to ye town of Colleine: wherein were three Ensigns of
Malecontentes, for the defense of that place, well and strongly fortified.


Blandy. Before you enter farther into this matter, I pray you show me what
are these Malecontentes, that trouble so much those Countries?


Gate. It is a people that fears neither God, nor man, cruel, bloody, and
beggarly, gathered together of the froth and scomme of many nations: In manners
barbarous, in opinion Turquishe, hoping with a whott and earnest endeavor to
spoil and spill all Christian blood.


Blandy. Is it possible we should have such helhoundes so near us? Herein the
mercy and loving kindenes of our heavenly Lord and Savior toward us, is to
be magnified, and sufferaunce toward so cursed and perverse a generation to
be maruailed at. Proceed I pray you, in your taken in hand labor.


Gate. Those Malcontents, whereof I made mention before, being at the receipte
of their pay, when advertisement was brought them, that the English men were
in Pome cloister, were stricken with such a fear, that omitting their pay,
took their flight as it is written, no man following them. Unto which Cloister
our Englishmen arrived. The day following our people removed, marching to
Vpslaught where five Ensigns of the enemy were strongly incoucht, furnished
with Munition and 3. small pieces of Artillarye, severed in two places. The
Grave van Hollock sent a dru^me to move them to yield up those fortes, without
condition (saving their lives) to the use of the Prince of Oringe, and the
States, which they utterly refused to do affirming their tenure to be planted
in ye right of ye Popes holiness, and the County De Lalyne. Whereunto the Grave
replied, that he would commend them over to the power and will of the English
Corownell. Whereupon, the Coronell did besett the places with his people so
straightly, that there was no way left for the enemy to escape. The
Malcontents perceiving themselves so wrapped and environed, by such as they
feared would have no compassion, sent forth a Dromme to crave mercy. The
English men were then so sharp set to destroy so hellish a brood.
Notwithstanding, whose heat and rage Coronell Norris committed the cause to
the will and pleasure of the Grave, he permitted them to depart, their lives
saved without Arms.


Blandy. Herein the steyed and resolute wisdom of Master Norris deserves as
equally to be praised, as mercy in the Grave, as Pardon in so good and
honorable a person.


Gate. On the next day in the morning our people dislodged, marching toward
Grounning, the chief and principal Cittye in Friseland possessed of the
Enemy: within three English miles whereof, we were dispersed into diverse
villages thereaboutes, and so remained till the sixth day of August. About xi.
of the clock of the same day, the Enemy gave us a Larum: In this case, least
that the enemy might think their Laru^ to have any manner ways touched us with
a shiuer of fear, but rather with a flame of furye, Coronell Morgaine, an
expert and old Soldier, a noble and valiant Captain, accompaned with
Captain Salisbury, Captain Chatterton, Captain Corn, Liuetennant Carry, and
Liuetenant Forder: with other Gentlemen and Souldiars of proof, to the number
of 200 and more, went to discover what that Larum was, with a purpose yt if ye
Enemy were a thousand, so that they were on foot, they should know and feel
ye force of English blood.


Blandy. Behold here true value coming from a courage, most steadfastly settled
in resolute minds.


Gate. In conclusion we happened on their maine battle: At what time Captain
Corn, a man always little breading the Enemies presence, cried with a loud
voice: My Masters, and fellow Souldiars, my natural and dear Countrymen, let
us now stand fast, and give yonder cursed company a Canuassado, for the honor
of our Prince and Country. Let them understand by our stomaches, what mind
and spirit remains in the rest, and by that which is found in the rest, to
be looked for of all our nation. This little said, a charge was given.


Blandy. Who can with words sufficiently commend the courage of this Captain,
the lostines of his high and honorable mind? This Corn was not great of
body, a very grain in comparison, yet yelding abundance of fine and white
flower. This Corn smelled of no cockle, for that it grew, in so fertile, and
sappie a soil. Let all souldiars therefore, that will feed their minds with
the bread, which so noble Corn has made, molded and baken for them to eat,
receive him most worthily: in praise to prefer, in fidelitye to follow, in
life to imitate, in courage to commend, in prowes and true virtue deservedly to
love, honor, and reverence. Now I pray you say on.


Gate. The Skirmish on both sides waxed great, whott, and violent. The egernes
of our men, wrought the confusion of as many as were then slain. For if they
had in time retired, we had grieved greatly the Enemy, without the loss of one
man. For at the same present, we lost many a proper Soldier and tall
gentleman. The principal whereof, was Captain Corn, Liuetenant Carry,
Master Brown, sometimes a towardly and earnest student of the Laws in
Lincoles Inn.


Blandy. To this the Corn you spoke of before?


Gate. The very same.


Blandy. I would her maiestry our most gracious Queen and governor had all
the empty barnes in England at this present, and void houses full of such
Corn, as he was.


Gate. I do wish no less.


Blandy. What of Lieuetenaunt Carry?


Gate. Carry approved in himself every way to come of a gentle and noble race,
he had to his manlynesse, joined a singular myldenesse and curtesy.


Blandy. What of Brown?


Gate. The lack of experience was not in him so much lamentable, as value,
fierceness, and courage laudable.


Blandy. Were there slain only these at that present?


Gate. There were other in that conflicte consumed whose prowes and stoutnesse
of right are prayseworthy.


Blandy. Can you name them?


Gate. Some I know right well, whose names were these, Williams, Snow, both
bearing the office of a Corporal, Waller, a gentleman of the round, Brogdayne
a private but a stout and courageous soldier, one also I call to memory
besides, a man yt deserved greatly and would (if life had lasted) have proved
an expert soldier, his name was Samuel Green, with many more, whose prowes I
comme^d to those, to whom their proper names and peculiar natures are known
as well as to us their singular manhood and rare virtue,


Blandy. What became of the enemy? was not his body in any part and member
wounded?


Gate. Yes most deeply as you shall presently understand. For one half hour
after this hoate and bloody bickeryng we being retired, immediately Roger
Williams Captain of the English horsemen, finding here and there dead carcases
covering the plain, part of whose Coats and priuye marckes gave him to think
they were of his nation, specially seeing the enemy near unto him, withdrew
his Corownet of horsemen under the nuke of a mountain, uttering briefly this
manner of language. Gentlemen and fellow souldiars, we shall presently prove the
favor of fortune. Our long desire has been to see the face of the enemy. My
dear and loving country men behold now where the body is. It is far more
honorable for us to charge them in this manner, then scattered, straggeling, or
in Ambush and Troop, let this lively sight of dead bodies, let fresh blood
newly spilt, stir and prick you forwards, let desire of revenge and victory,
lift up your minds, confyrme your courage in my valor and constancy: which (by
that sun that shines and his governor I swear) shall not shrink and
quail in this purpose intended. This said, he himself first with the rest of
his gentlemen charged, and recharged to the great loss of the enemy. He in
that conflict flew one hundred of the enemies folckes: Won two Ensigns,
brought away twenty serviceable horses. Who coming the next morning to the
Camp was joyfully received of the General, Corownelles, Captains and
Souldiars.


Blandy. His desert required no less, if his exployte be well examined:
wherein I know not whether I may commend more his hardiness and value, (which
has been always thoroughly approved) or happ and virtue, which in a leader is
as highly priced, as necessarily respected. For as it avails greatly an Army
to have a happy General so it incourageth not a little any company on horse, or
foot to be guided and lead by a fortunate commander, which comes not (as
some think) by chance and of no certain and principal cause, but rather (as
I suppose) of a suddayne and secret instinct and notice, that some man has
above another: in peril to escape, in place to pursue, in necessity to stand
fast, in doubt to be quickly and prude^tly resolved, all which proceed of a
proper and privy circumspection of mind, which rare and excellent condition
and quality I yield to this Captain.


Gate. You have yielded to him no more then he may by due challenge.


Blandy. Whereas Captain Williams gave the Enemy a sore and sharp blow
(wherein his true value eminently appeared) there were other also no doubt,
which did win at that present if not the like, yet great praise and honor: in
so much I verily think the meanest man, known least for his trial and proof,
could not then but deserve well. Among echone Captain Carellel now Serieant
mayor of the English Regiment, Cristopher Champernoone the Gitternebearer,
Brown a gentleman expert in riding, George Strawbrudge, Thomas Smith, Brook,
Argell, Thomson, Turnor Lieuetenaunt before of a Company of foot me^ were
mounted bravely with many other. These are to you well known, all whose private
virtues as it is not in you to explayne, so if you will to your ability
disclose any one special property wherein they do excel, and may (if it
please God) they safe return, be therefore well employed to their Prince and
countries good, you shall by yelding the^ a moiety of their desert, awake other
of their blood and familiarity here in England that be a sleep: and thereby
happily win them by all honorable means to ennoble their names with the like
exploytes and adue^tures. What chiefly note you worthy of praise in Captain
Carelell, what in Champernoone, what in Brown the Rider, what in Strawbrudge,
what in the rest?


Gate. Captain Carelell now Serieant Mayor in feature and limbs of body is
something inferior to Captain Corn when he lived in proportion of mind, if
you respect therein prowes, equal: if policy, attained by learning and study,
his superior far. These two principal gifts of a noble mind are in this
Carelel beautified with other two in kind and nature not so excellent, yet
most fit and necessary to be resident there, where true nobility pleases to
harbor.


Blandy. What are those?


Gate. Affability and liberality. Champernoone has his value: more Green, yet
likely to be ripe and prove good fruit. Brown according to his name is more
then Green, hardened through the proof of many perilous attempt, whose value,
courage and fury, the enemy in this conflict felt, through their fall and
flight. Strawbrudge is a man of singular virtue and stoutnesse. Doylye, Smith,
Argell, Brook, Tho^son with ye rest deserve highly to be praised.


Blandy. Show (I pray you farther) your purpose intended.


Gate. After which conflict the Malecontentes could never abide to encounter
with ye English companyes, sending to Grave van Hollocke then General of the
Army this pretyiest: Dismiss English brood with their great Ruffes, we care
not a pin for all thy Muffes. The maleconte^ts therefore wandered through
fear of English force as Pilgrims in their own country hither and thither,
according as they were informed by their spies where the English Regiment lay:
promising many times to fight with us, meaning nothing less, as the effect did
prove. In mean season Master Norris was made General of the whole Army, not
without his great desert and trial of honor, by whose virtue and policy the
enemy of late has been so plagued, that almost it is incredible to tell.


Blandy. I pray you utter briefly the truth thereof.


Gate. On Sunday before Christmas last past 4. hundred fifty and four
Malcontents were slain by the English nation, at Swarfe Sluice in the west
parts of Friseland, only, with the loss of one Captain named Else and
three other private souldiars. The glory of which overthrow and victory is
chiefly to be given to God, the honor to M. Norris and his Captains, the
praise and commendation to his officers and souldiars. In consideration
whereof, I call to mind a proverb not so old as true: As the king is so is
his people: which I may most fitly and truly apply to M. Norris now General
of the Army of the States in Frisela^d. As the General is, so are his
Captains Lieuetenauntes, officers and souldiars. For where the desire of true
honor, and glory is in the General imprinted, there the Captains, officers,
and souldiars, by a natural love and inclination that the best minds are
stirred therewith, are much more set on fire and enkindeled.

So that whereas this noble gentleman, has by his valiant acts, proved
himself to be a fountain of fame, a welspring of virtue, a river of royaltye,
it cannot be, but that his people become peerless, noble, and magnificent.
For where the General feeds his mind, with high and honorable causes, and
stands therein resolute, there his Captains and Souldiars are pressed to all
manner of attemptes, be they never so difficult: And where such Captains are
pressed, there are atchiued feats more wonderful, then reasonable. And to
speak something of our Nation, and especially, of the small and little troop
under Master Norris, it is incredible to think and report how their virtue
doubleth the worthynes of other Nations. For as their leaders, and commanders
excel in wit, prowes, and value: so have they them in more love, reverence,
and admiration. For this may be truly said of our Countrymen: that even the
rude multitude, do love their rulers, and superiors, according to their
virtues, and magnanimitye, that they see in them. No people in the world more
faithful, more affectionate, then are the English Nation, if they be retained
accordingly: neither are they euercome a whitt with the hellish furies, and
brutish crueltyes, that do generally possess all other Nations in the world.
For, it is naturally given to the right Englishman, to content himself with
the victory, and to take pittye on the vanquished. And where this virtue of
commiseration and mercy dwells, there also dwells naturally hardynes and
prowes. For it is an infallible rule, that where fear is, there is also
crueltye. So that I conclude of this principle: since our Nation does excel
other in love, gentleness, courtesy, placabilitye and mercy, they also are to
be preferred before the stranger in true value, hardynes, courage, prowes, and
magnanimitye.


Blandy. The overthrow you speak of, was great: the praises and honor you
have given to Master Norris is such, that he may in right challenge them. The
commendation of our Country, you have most firmly grounded on a sure rock of
reason. And whereas you have made mention of the General, touching his small
and little troop, to finish this work, in my opinion shall fit you best, to
give all Gentlemen, and Souldiars of our Nation a farewell, who to win their
Prince and Country honor, fear no force, dread no danger and terror of the
Enemy. The number whereof, when I call to mind, I cannot forget Master John
Seintleger: whose value and prowes joined with a princely humanitye and
courtesy, my penn cannot deservedly describe.


Gate. You have I assure you, named a Gentleman: whose valor matcheth with the
virtue of the best of our nation, that serve in the Nether Lands, although he
be not a like preferred of the Prince there: But no doubt if he endure those
services he cannot but bear a principal office, and that right worthelye in
the field. His careful pain in all exploytes, his equal labors in the
tyresome March, his dreadles attemptes in any perilous adventure have been
such, so open, and manifest, that not only his Countrymen, but Souldiars of
other nations, yielded him as his own right, among them unknown, a
superioritye. All which, Captain Morris (a man of great experience and
knowledge in feats of war) can witness. And whereas you have occasioned me to
speak something of Master Seintleger (whom in this manner, I commend and
commit to good fortune) you have minded me of a Gentleman, who if he were no
Gentleman by birth and lynage, as he is well borne, and of gentle blood, yet he
has laid for his name perpetually a foundation, of high, and true Nobility.
Blandy. What is his name?


Gate. Rowland York.


Blandy. The fame of his wisdom, and deep advise has made me more inflamed
with his person, then any former and private knowledge.


Gate. What is the report of him?


Blan. He is, says all that know the man (which cannot be few in number)
bold of courage, provident in direction, industrious in labor, and quick in
execution.


Gate. What can be more desired in a General of an Army?


Blandy. I referr that to the judgment of other, but this I may well say, that
these are the most principal points which are to be required in a Governor.
What think you of the other Captains of our Nation?


Gate. I find Captain Gaynssord foreward in the field, prudent, liberal, and
full of pollicye. Captain Sallisbury sufficient, Captain Bishop sure and
steadfast, Captain Richardes a proper and tall Soldier, Captain Bows most
sufficient.


Blandy. What of Liuetenaunt Senis? Liuetenant Forder, Liuetenant Fewilliams,
Liuetenant Burley, Liuetenant Gittens, Liuetenant Haruye, Liuetenant Kelly?


Gate. Senis is expert, paynefull, loving, and courteous. Forder, valiant and
fortunate, Fewilliams ready, and resolute, Burley hautye, Gittens stout,
Haruie hardye, Kelly well approved.


Blandy. What of Ancient Manning? Ancient Merchant, Ancient Ling, Ancient
Maskrall, Ancient Bines.


Gate. All these are through long trial and experience ripe, most fit to do
their country service.


Blandy. What think you of Dorrell, Leye, and Louelace.


Gate. Dorrell has well deserved, Leye, if you look into him thoroughly, may
be judged a man most fit to take a charge. Louelace is not behind the best of
his order. which are accounted of.


Blandy. What of Knight, Baker, Cranmer, Copwydge, Gray, Sallisburies ^oth?


Gate. Knight, for his manlynes and actiuitye, for his strength and knowledge
in every weapon that belonges to a tall and expert Soldier, may guard in peace
and war the Majesty of an Emperor. The other have by their desartes won
fame and glory.


Blandy. What of Smith, Owen, Padmore, Shepherd, Simmes, Rogers, Welsh, with
five hundred more?


Gate. Good, and well trained Souldiars, all which, so constant is their
courage, so rare and resolute their minds, so flaming their faith and
fidelitye, long since vowed and consecrated to their prince and Country,
that for her majesty's safetye, honor and securitye, they will at once most
readily and willingly adventure with Ulysses his wandringes, and doubtful
viages, six hundred shippwrackes, the great gloss, and swallowing sourge of
Caribdis, the roaring of Silla, the danger in avoiding the Antiphates, the
grievous conflict which he had with Polephemus: fill up with Curtius the gaping
and dangerous breach: Perform in action, poverty, lack, and peril, although
percase not with the like happy hap with Drake the unacquainted passage and
steep down straightes of Maielan.


Blandy. More perfection in any people cannot be required. Wherefore I commend
them all to good happ wishing them (as natural love binds me) a safe and
prosperous return hither again, if not, that fruit and success of life which
belonges unto these minds which retain true and perfect Nobility.


Gate. It appears therefore by your discourse that in a perfect commonwealth
one chiefly should rule and sit in the place of majesty, other (chosen
especially for their virtue, justice, prudence and policy) occupy a place of
honor, by whose wisdom and policy the multitude should be governed: other
some, for their skill and virtue in warlike practices be aduau^ced to high
degree. Now I think it most fit you speak of the Merchant, artificer, and
Tiller of the ground.


Blandy. When I consider with my self, how requisite and necessary it is, that
men should differ in degree and dignity, and that inumerable arts and sciences
have been devised to maintain the common society of men, and no one may excel
in all, and few at any time may attain the best: I can no less maruayle at,
then commend the divine decree of nature, whose providence has wrought and
appointed the varietyes of wits, dispositions, and qualityes. Socrates in his
book entitled Phedro calls this excellency of nature, the gold of the
Gods, whereby he is induced to think that they whose minds are of so rare and
fine a making, are unto them allied and fit of all other to be placed on the
earth in the Throne of Majesty. Dame nature therefore the mother of all things
has placed in the world principally such in the highest Rooms: of which order
are kings and Princes. Other some she has not framed in such perfect wise, for
the clearness and shining glory of virtue and nobility: yet she has imparted
unto them a most sharp wit and ready capacity, great value and singular
providence. Herehe^ce the iusticer and soldier springs, of which three lofty
and stately parts it is already discoursed. On other she has bestowed a mind
and courage, that for the magnificence of their prince, weal of their
country, honor of their City, estimation and creditt of their own private
familyes, will, by land, be the peril never so great, by sea, be the danger
never so deep and difficult, with the hassard of unknown goods and deep
expense of a rich pursse, adventure strange and untried vioges. Herehence ye
famous companies of aduenturing Merchants flows, which are the Princes of
all other which buy and sell wares. Other she has made more simple of
understanding, more cold of courage, and therefore justly has appointed unto
them, to toil in servile arts, of which sort are they, whom we term
artificers, men of occupation, Tillers of the ground with their helpers,
poor, simple, and laboursome men.


Gate. What you have said hitherto of these three parts I can in no wise
discommend.


Blandy. May not these suffice?


Gate. I am not unacquainted with your accustomed florishes, I know and am
assuredly persuaded, you can if you will and please deliver more of this matter.


Blandy. Will you that I write more then I have spoken? Would you me attempt
the commendation of their state? If so, I shall hardly avoid the suspision of
fear, or flattery: acknowledging notwithstanding how unable a man I am to
yield to the good and virtuous Merchant the true guerdon of his due desert.
Would you me instruct them in their kind of life? Should my pen pinch or
improve their daynty fare? Should I be so bold, as to enter into their
housechappell, and mangle their to to much carved Imagery, nipp their soft and
nice nightbeds? I assure you it is not my part so to do. And albeit these (as
some will) superfluities of fend more others that want such furniture, then in
right turn to the Merchants rebuke, being bought and purchased with his
paynefull and perilous travail: So no man of wise and deep judgment shall
be carried away from the good opinion of a Merchant, through the sight of those
beautiful, pleasing, and passing vanities. If the Plowman has for a short
journey at his seasan his sweet, if the laborsome man for his daily toil his
penny, if the sheppeard for his careful care his pipe: much more is it to be
granted to ye Merchant, whose endeavors are far greater, whose travail more
large, whose pains more perilous, and full of erpence, his choice and solace,
his rest and content at home, and in his private Family. All these pleasures
are to him granted, if he perform what is in him required.


Gate. What is his duty, and wherein chiefly does it consist?


Blandy. What I speak is general, and touches principally those who have
won by any knde of fortune great wealth, and yet strive most egerly to
augment ye same. I could wish such (as it becomes Merchants indeed) to make
their mart wisely with strangers in foreign lands, and not to make a pray
wyly of the wantes of Gentlemen in their own country, what makes the state
of any commonwealth more flourishing the^ abou^dance? Then, what plague is found
to the happiness thereof more pestiferous, then want and penury? If so, the
procurers of the one are to be detested as much, as ye actors of ye other right
worthily honored. And herein I pray you note, that the Merchant whatsoever,
which harkeneth after the wants, fantasies, spending humors of gentlemen of
his own country, and especially of such who do keep good and worshipful
familyes, or of such whose possessions through their Fathers untimely death,
are come unto them in the rage and fury of youth, with an earnest purpose and
intention to change launes for lands, gummy silcke for a sweet and fat farm
(abusing herein notwithstanding their own calling) give their Country to
often most unnaturally a deep and deadlye wound.


Gate. Uerely I think no less. Is there any of so vile and corrupt mind in
England?


Blandy. I can accuse none: But if there be any, and that my judgment might be
taken and accepted of, I would have all such seared in the forehead, with the
mark, and figure of death: signifiyng thereby, that whereas to this day there
is no law made, for the inquisition and punishing here on earth, of so foul
and insatiable desiers, there has been from the beginning of the world, by the
just judgment of God, appointed a death in Hell: where such malefactors shall
burn, and be tormented with everlasting, and unquenchable fires.


Gate. My business may not suffer me to stay long: Wherefore, proceed to the
Artificer, and Tyller of the ground.


Blandy. All of one nature, are not endued with the selfsame qualitye and
virtue, neither is this difference to be noted in men only: but in beasts,
trees, and plants. For trees which are of one kind, spread not their
branches in like fayrenes, every Stead does not his Carrier with the like
loftynes, neither is every Lion of like strength. In all the works of Nature,
as I have before declared, there is to be noted a varietye of value,
disposition, and qualitye: so that according to that diuersitye, and
inclination of nature we see the odds of labors, and studdye. Some therefore
according to their skill, and reach, embrace a science, which more
strengthens, and stays the weaker parts of a Commonweal, then other: in
which place, I putt the Clothyer, other work on gold and silver, other work
on Iron, other till the ground, other in this, or that science, bestow their
careful pains: all to the profitt and commoditye of their native Country. In
consideration of whose diverse dispositions, in one kind and nature, this I
judge most worthy to be reported, read, and remembered: that Nature by
disposing our affections, so diversely, brought to pass most prouidently, that
man, who of all other creatures was ordained to maintain a societye, should be
thereunto forced of necessitye. For the travail of each man thus differing,
yeldeth to other that which by his own instustrye, he could never attain.


Gate. You have generally made mention of many sciences: among them all, the
knowledge and skill of clothing, seems most worthy to be disputed of: for
that it concerns ye maintenance of thousands, whose good and prosperous
state, yeldeth to their Prince, in peace pleasure, in war, no small supply of
men, to withstand the force and furye of the Enemy.


Blandy. I assent most gladly, to your good and honest desire, wishing my self
as able, as willing, to uphold their state now falling, if the Prince, and
providence of the Peers and and nobilitye of England do not with their
pitiful eyes, and tender commiseration of so poor and approved condition of
men, propp up, and establish more strongly those thyghes, knees, and joints of
this Commonwealth.


Gate. Is the state of Clothiers infeebled?


Blandy. Their state is well nigh decayed, although they for the most part,
retain still their due, and natural intention of mind, which causes the^ to
taste of some hardynes themselves, rather the^ nombers of good and honest me^,
(which cannot be otherwise relieve, the^ by their first learned occupation)
should pearishe for want of sustenaunce.


Gate. In this action I assure you, they deserve much love and reverence. But
how comes it to pass, that men employed in so good and honest trade of life,
should want the guerdon of so long and well approved toil and lobor?


Blandy. If you would know that, I think it most fit, you sift, and search
the ground and matter of their science.


Gate. What is that, they chiefly handle and work on?


Blandy. Woll, Oil, Ode, Madder, Gall, Ware, and many other things differing
in nature, yet through the skill of yt workema^ made one, all which, as they
are not of one kind, so are they not made, or engendered in one place. Whose
qualityes also differ greatly, and therefore, needs the labor of many men to
work them, to the Artificers drift, use, and knowledge. So that where there is
a science in a commonwealth that handles so many things, to the workema^shipp
whereof men in number are required, and besides where this faculty has so long
flourished, being not stained in any crime, that the Prince or commonwealth
might conceive grief: I assure you (to speak the very truth) the overthrow
(...) throw the body of a common (...) that a body may stand without legs.
(...) could (...) science into his branches: that is, to the science of (...)
narrow and broad clothes: setting down by due comparisone their odds and
peculiar difference. But for that I hold the^ both of price, and that my poor
and unlearned pen may little prevail them in this case, I refer them, and all
other causes whatsoever, to the Majesty of God, whose unspeakable goodness,
virtue, and mercy I pray, yt (whereas it has pleased him, yt all mortal me^
should have reason, although not yt like capacity, all a mind, although not of
like understanding, yt all should live, although not in this world, in the like
state, place, degree, and dignity) it would please his divine majesty to grant
us all in disposition so differing, a mind not differing, in inclination so
much altering, the Unity of his spirit, grace, and virtue: the inestimable
excellency whereof, lies open (through earnest and careful prayer) as well to
the poor man as Prince, to the simple, as Prudent, to the weak, as mighty, to
the man that has scarce to nourish and feed his hungry nature, as to him that
abounds with all daynty and superfluous fare. Who does not know how vile all
these wordly things are, how mortal, how tra^sitory, how full of error and
conte^ptible vanity? Who does not find in himself beholding yt uncertainty of
riches the wavering condition of honor and humayne glory, the painted show of
kindred and nobility, lastly the counterfeit and deceitful Image of sweet said
pleasures, his mind and and hearts desire to be satisfied? If so, why should we
strive so egerly for those things that work our annoy and perpetual harm?
If so, why should we not earnestly pursue virtue which leads us to the life
which shall ever endure?


FINIS.
(...) the gentle and (...) (...)ader.
THus have you read (my singular and loving Friend) a discourse not truly
with wit and learning polished, in either of which, because I labor of a great
defect, I am right heartily sorry: but yet meet and convenient for thee to peruse
and know, whether thou be of a gentle or vnge^tle condition. I have studied
herein more to profitt, then to please, wherefore if thou have sought in the
reading hereof, lipp wisdom, I have failed thee: If thy peculier or
co^mo^wealthes commodity, a profitt may happily arise hereof. My desire is,
that my good meaning be not construed amiss, which if thou of thy singular
gentleness and curtesy grant, I have obtained the hier of my labor: and
thereby, I shall be encouraged to attempt the discourse of some other matter
hereafter for thy use, of greater weight and importance.

AT LONDON Printed by John Day dwelling over Aldersgate. Anno. 1581.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


