

The Book of comfort called in laten Boethius de Consolatione philosophy
Translated in to englesse tongue.

Prefatio Translatoris.
UN suffysance of connyng and of whit
Defaute of langage and experience
This labor viche ye have upon me put
Must fully excuse un to your reverence
if hit be not with craft of eloquence
Depaynted so as other books be
yet must I needs do my dilygence
with all my pouer to plese yo^ur souerente
This subtel matter of Boethius
In his book of consolation
So hye hit is so hard and curyous
Full far a bow my estimation
That hit be not by my translation
Defouled ne corrupt to god I pray
So help me with thy inspiration
That art of wysedom both lock and key
As fro the text that I vary nougth
But keep the sentens in his true intent
And words eke as nigh as may be brougth
where law of meter will thereto consent
This matter wiche that is so excellent
And passes both my conning and my migth
So have yt lord in thy government
That cannest reform al thing to rygth
I have herd speak and sumwhat have I seyn
Of diverse men that wonder craftily
In meter sum and sum in prose pleyn
Haueth this book translated dyuersly
In to englesse tongue word for word well ny
But I must use the wits that I have
Though I may not do so well / yet truly
with ye help of god the sentens will I save
To chaucer that was flower of retoryke
In englesse tongue and excellent poet
I woteful well I am no thing leke
Though I his making do counterfeit
And Gover that so craftily does trete
As in his books of moralyte
Thougth I to him in making am unmeet
yet will I she worteh that is in me
Hit leketh not me to labor nor muse
upon these old poyses derke
For christian faith such things most refuse
As witneseth Ierom the noble clerk
Hit should be no christian man's work
Tho false gods names to renew
For he yt has receued cristes merke
if he do so to criste he is untrue
Fro them that criste in heaven bless shall
Such manner works must be put a side
For certainly hit nedet not at al
To vhette now the darts of cupyde
Ne for to bydde that venus be our gyde
So that we may our foul lusts win
Lest hereafter the same to ous betyde
As did to the said venus for her sin
And certain I have tasted wonder lyte
As of the wells of calyope
No wonder though I sympelly endyte
yet will I nofte un to Tessiphone
Ne to her susters that in hell be
Besekynge after craft of eloquence
But may to god of his benignite
My spirit to enspyre with his influence Caliope as poets fayneth is one of
the sons daughters and is one and chef of the ix muses and they call her
goddas of eloquence. She has. iii. welles Gramatica / Dialetica / and
Retorica. of whom is driued al craft of eloquence Also they feyneth to be in
hell iii. fusters called furyas or vengeresses / that punish men for there
mesdedes. the one is called Allecco / a another Megner / and the iii.
Tessiphone. These also be called muses of morning that tecyth and enformeth men
to mahe souroful complayntes:

So that fro blame and confusion
Of al this foul wordly wrechednesse
He help me in this occupation
To the honor of his blysfulnesse
And in reverence of your worthynesse
Madame this work at your instance
I have begone after my symplenesse
In will to do you service and plesance
Incipit Prologus.
THe while yt rome was regni^g i^ her flores
And of ye world held all the monarchy
She was governed then by emperors
And was renouned wonder noblely
Till pride had set there hertes up on hy
Then began they to use crudelyte
And reigned by rygurnesse and tyranny
And oppressed sore the comynalte
For leke as pouerte causes soberness
And feebleness enforces continence
Rygth so prosperity and sykernesse
is the mother of vice and negligence
And pouer also causes insoleuce
And after honor changes good manners
There is none so perilouse pestilence
As is hye astate given to srewes
Of the which was Nero one and principal
That such manner tyranny began
Though he bare the diadem ymperial.
yet was he a very cursed man.
So cruelly he began to regne than
Heslew his master and his mother both.
And much he did that tell I ne can.
Ho so has hit red he knoueth well ye soth.
The chief of holy church he slew also.
Sent Peter and Paul both upon one day.
And after them full many other mo.
And of the same hit is I dare well say.
That Paul writes thus hit is no nay.
And says now is the foune of wickedness.
And figure rygth of anticristes lay.
In whom shall be al manner of cursednesse. Misterium iam operatur iniquitatis /
vt qui tenet iam teneat donec de medio fiat. Now says sent Paul vvorchet the
mystery and form of anticristes wickedness. vvych anticriste shall be leke to
him / using none other lave but vvylfulnesse / ledynge his lyffe in lusts /
finding occasions for to destroy all the good and vertuos / cruel and full of
unkindly affections drayng to him all the that be leke to him in foul
conditions.

For they yt truly techeth cristes lore.
To make men forlete there vice.
Antecriste will punysshe them therefore.
And al there prechynge set at no price.
So was he given to lusts and delyce.
That what desire came unto his thougth.
He would yt do without more advise.
For no thing then would he spare hit nougth.
And he yt would ageyn his vices speak.
And counsel him his lusts co refrayn.
withouten more anon he would bewreke.
He would him put in torment and in pain.
And he that would his Instes often withsayn.
He ne was but ded if that he would appear.
For such a cause Boecius was slain.
Of whom this process after treteth here
And rygth these days men may se this same
Of some yt have the astate of governance.
Ho so will there vices or lusts blame.
They take hit in despyte and displesance.
They will him do some myschefe or mischaunce
And tho th sat hold amend eand correct.
vice / in them hit has her sustenance.
And good folk they holds as suspecte
The year of criste. v. hundred and. xv.
when Anastasius was emperor
Boethius this same of whom I mean.
In Rome he was a noble cenatour.
But in manner as a conqueror.
Theodoricus reigned in Italy
And Rome he held as king and governor
He had yt won by conqueste in battle
For Anastasius was not leke
Ne not so strong of maney at lest
He consented that Theodoryke
Should regne in Rome and hold yt at his heste
And he would hold him self in the este
He said hit was acordynge to his hele
And for his ese in sothe he thougth yt best
For Romans be full perylous with to dele
This king of Rome then Theodoryke
Was full of malice and of cursednesse
And eke for cause he was an heretyke
The christian people began he sore oppress
Boethius with all his besynes
withstode hem alwey sparyng none offense
And him present often time express
Reuersed his unlawful iugementes
He ne spared not ye higth of his astate
But ever he spoke agenste his tyranny
wherefore the king hem had sore in hate
And him exyled in to lumbardy
To prison in the cite of papy
where as for a recreation
Between himself and philosophy
He wrote this book of consolation
In prose and meter interchangingly
with words set in color wonder well
Of retoryke endited craftily
And schewyng that these welthes temporel
Are not to be desired never a dele
Ne wordly mischeffe nothing to be dread
Enforseng ous by reason natural
So virtue fully for to taken head
Then Anastasins had made his fine
As time of age un to his death hem drew
Then aster hem was emperor Iustine
A noble knygth a faithful and a true
For cristes laues wonder well he knew
And kept them as a very christian man
And heretics fast he began persew
That arrianes were called than
His letters then in to Rome he sent
For to destroy all that heresy
And fully gave them in commandment
That they should put them out of company
Theodori^cus took this wonder hye
For he himself was holly one o tho
This message he repelled utterly
And made a vow yt should not be so
And swore but if the arrianes must
Have there pese granted to them a geyn
He would not leave one in all that cost
Of christian faith but he should be slain
And thus he bed the messengers seyn
That if he would with arrianes strive
Seyth the emperor with words plain
Of christian will I leave none a live
To constantinople he sent a none
Of senators which that him lest
And a mouges other pope John
And bid them labor for there own best
And ruthfully they made there request
That Iustyne should this mandement relese
For ye christian migth not ben in rest
But if he granted the arrianes piece
The emperor his malice understood
Benyngly he granted them there bone
And well he thougth yt yt was as good
That matter to cesse till efte sone
And better mygth yt afterward be done
By good advise of wyser ordinance
The arrianes so he let a lone
To vsen forth there old governance
These messengers to the kings pay
Turned not so hastily ageyn
As he desired at a certain day
where fore in heart he had great dysdeyne
And Boyce that lay in prison and in pain
In exyle in the cite of Papey
In Melayn he made him to be slain
In Papey ben his bones sykerly
And when these messengers at ye last
Returned were / in heart he began to brenne
Pope John in prison then he cast
Fer out in the cite of Rauenne
And made him closed in a narowe den
where he ne mygth torn him self ne wend
And soth to say he went never then
Till of his lyffe he had made an end
Also the worthy noble Symmacus
That was a man grounded al in grace
The wyche in virtue was heroicus
There left not such a another as he was
Vir heroicus is a man given al to contemplation and to virtue / in whom al
flesly passyous ben quenched and repressed.
without cause surfyt or trespace
At Rauenne eke he slew him cruelly
And after wards iu thatsame place
The next year he dyed suddenly
And as sent gregory does him self write
As yet his books makes mentyon
There was yt time a holy heremyte
As he was in his contemplation
He did se Theodoryke in visyon
Between Symacus and pope John
Right as a theffe to his dampnation
How he was led / and after that anon
In the I Will of vulcane was he cast then
That full is of a fire flam of hell
Theryn alwey in peynes sor to brenne
And with the foul fendes for to dwell
For tyrants that so fers ben and fell
Ben arayd such rewards for there mede
I sey you but as old books do tell
Now to my purpose time is that I speed
And every lord or lady what ye be
Or clerk that leketh for to reden this
Besekynge louly with humylyte
Supporteth where I have often said a mys
Corrects only there that nedful is
if word or sentence be not as hit should
My self I am vnsufficyant I wys
For if I cowde have better done I would
Explicit prologus.
Reason and intelligens purely considered in kind of there vvorching haueth them
self every again other / as practick and theoryk / or as actyf and
contemplatyf. And al tho the vvorchyng of reason leke to practyf in order and
process in us that uses process go before intelligence as practycke goyth
before theorich / and actyf before contemplatyfe / yet in worthiness and also
in perfection of blestulhed / intelligens sormounteth and is souerayn to reason.
For the same treuthes that reason seeks and fyndeth by discourse / these pure
blisful spirits (vviche ben called iutelligences) seyth and knoueth perfectly
in the mirror of eternal lygth / that is gods son vith outen any discurse
of reason. And much more viche ne may not be perceued here of ous in this
pilgremage. But rygth as a good practiser by exercise of labur and experiens of
his craft / may deserve to be made preuy of soteltes of his craft and to be
made a master / rygth so a soul coniuned to bodly matter / may by his good
labor of discourse / deserve to atteyu to be made preuy by intelligence of all the same trouthes on hye in bliss that these blesful spirits haueth of there
first creation. By nature of the resonabelte of man's soul / viche
resonabelte is the form substantial of the self soul / there should not be
denied hem that he would desire. And that may be scheued by this skyle. The
saul vhos form substaniial is reason or resonabilte / he may of proper kind
not desire but reasonable. for if he other desired / he were unreasonable. And
if he desire but that is proper to hem of kind / yt may not of reason be denied
him. But hove is hit that a soul coniuned desires often other than reasonable /
There be.ii. causes. One is for some souls for the intemperance and bosteynesse
of there material body fails in discourse In other that haueth clear discourse
yet sensualite vych us the flesly part of the soul replyeth ever a gen this
discourse of reason / askyng his lusts as proper to his kynder And togth he be
ueuer ^o often ausuered and concluded / yet ever he resorteth to his first
askyng hauyur ^o regard to all the resons that may be made agenste him. Right
as a man that fails discourse vhom men calls a mad man / tough a man make to
him never so great resons / yet is he not ansuered / he feleth them not / but
ever he resorteth to that he first began. This importunat pressenge of
sensualite of such unreasonable replications encombreth so the reason that he
leueth the true end that he had traueled for by discourse and entendethe to the
lust of sensualite desiryng things that be unreasonable / vvyche desire if yt
were grounded in sensualite vych is changeable / yt should a none bring the
soul in to endless mischef. for there may no thing stand kyndly that contrarieth
his avne kind. Ne a reasonable spirit though he be moveable in vvorkyng and in
affections yet of propre kind he may not will contradiction / that is to sey
nove this and nov the contrary for then he erred again reason So then a soul
desiryng that thyug that is unreasonable / and consequently to his destruction /
by the hy gouerne^ hit is oftentyme denied him. vherfore he falls in to a
peynful heaviness be cause he lacks that he desires / or has that him
lotheth. And were not that the sensualite bears this peyn the mischef were
endless. vherfore the sensualite that is changeable and lotheth this peyn
vyllyng to be delivered thereof / sometime reforteth to reason forsakyng such
vnskyleful desires and suffers reason to have his kyndly operations. And if
this peynful heaviness be mored in the soul and reason fully overcome / then
falls a man in despere. and so sum destroeth themself by vvylful death and
so continue in perpetual peyn vythout end. Thus fell hit of the first angel
that desired vndiseretly to be leken to god and for he migthe not have his
desire / he fell in peynful heuinesse. but in heaven may be no peyn / And he mith
not will the contraty to that he ones villed / he was so pure and simple of
nature. vherfore without remedy he was cast in to mischef in the peyn of hell
So yt be fell of this noble clerk Boyce / because he had that he would not /
that was prison and other tribulation. And also he vvanted that he would have
/ that was his astate in the cite of Rome / his house / books / and his other
goods / presens of his vvyffe and chyldern and his other friends vherof he
was vvron gfully spoiled and but out of his cite / exiled as a traitor / he
fell in to a peynful heuinesse and made his complaint sayug. Allas I vvreche.
etc^. But for asmoche as this heaviness was but the mevyng of sensualite /
viche of his nature is chau^gable. And lest he fell in to full forgetyng of
himself and in the vttermest myschef. Reason conforteth the flesly kind /
reducyng yt to knovlege of yt self / and so to forgete the heaviness that he
was so greuosly peyned with for losing of his dignyte / vvyffe / chyldern /
and goods a fore rehearsed.

Incipit liber Boetij de co^solato^e philosophy.
Metru^ primu^.
Carmina qui quondam.
ALas that I wreche vhiles I was in wealth
And used lustey dytes for to write
Now am I set in sorrow and vnhelthe
with tmornynge my mirth I must respyte
Lamentable muses techeth me to endyte
Of woo. with weeping they weteth my face
Thus has dysese destroyed al my delight
And brougth my bliss and Iolyte full bace
And though yt I with myschef now be met
That false fortune loureth thus on me
No dread fro me mygth these muses let
Me to ensue in mine aduersyte
My Joy they were in all my Iolyte
Of you the that was so glad om and so grene
Now they solaceth my drery destyne
And in my age my comforteno we they been
Unawarely age comes on me hastily
Heyngh on me for harm that I have had
And soro we his hestes has hoten to be ny
Hoar here is on my head to rathe ben spread
Al to me of blod my bodey wexeth bad
My empty skyn begins to tremel and quake
I have no cause whereof I may be glad
Thus morning for mysese my moan I make
A death of men a blesful thing yt were
if he would spare them in there lustiness
And come to them that be of heavy chere
When they him call to lake there distress
But ooh allas how dull and deffe he is
wryngynge a wey fro wrecches when they clept
And worneth then with wonder cruelnesse
The yes for to close that well and weep
But vhyle fortune unfaithful and untrue
Of lusty lyffe was to me favorable
Full suddenly my head to ground he dreu
The careful hour of death vnmerciable
But now yt she so chaungynge and unstable
Has turned un to me her cloudy face
This wrecched lyffe that is vnconfortable
Draeth alonge and taryeth now allas
whereto ye friends maden your a vaunte
So often times of my felycite
This wordly wealth is not perseueraunte
Ne never abidynge in no stabilyte
For he that falls out of his degree
Full sothe yt is yt stable was he nougth
Ne he stood never in full prosperyte
That in to mischef was so low I brought
Fortune was depaynted after fantasy of poets a lady sitting in mids of a
vhyle viche her self continuelly turned a boute / she had ii. visages / one
brygth and another dark. and in both she was blind

The co^mentor trinet assgneth iii. causes vhy that philosophy vas descryued
apperynge un to Boyce in lekenesse of a woman The first cause is for this name
philosophia as well in laten as in greek is put in the feminyne gender. The
second cause is for rygth as a woman norysseth her child with her milk /
rygth so philosophy no ressched her discyples withdraw the subtilyte of her
science.

The third cause is / for a woman is of kind more tender and compacient for
to comfort a man in mischef. And sith this clerk was fall than in to
mischef as himself seemed / he iuduced philosophy in lekenesse of a woman to
comfort him in a s^akynge of his heaviness

She was also descriued reverent / for she makes the persons reverent in
vyche she is impressed.

The yees of philosophy ben reason and understanding / vherby philosophy is
kendly perceived. They brenne by desire of co^nyng They shine clear by
possibilite of understanding.

Her myghtes been the virtue of her principles that never may be empted ne fully
comprehended. The chyre of her visage is perfection of doctrine. the color is
fullness of truth. for the hoole entente is for to perceive and conprehende
truth. She passedde man's age / for her truths ben perpetual. not subget to
time that mesureth man his age.

Prosa prima. Capitulum secundu^
Hec dum mecum
Boecius loquitur. In murnynge thus I made my complaynt
And for to write my fyngers began I fold
For drerinesse I wax al feeble and faint
That of my lyffe almost no thing I told
But upward at the last I began behold
In sothe I saw so fayer a creature
I couthe her not descriuen though I would
So femly was her shappe and her feyture
She was so wonder reverent of her chyre
Her colonr eke so lovely and so brygth
Her yene brenne semenge as for clear
Passing fer a bouen man's sygth
Al thoe she were full fresshe and clean of mygth
As she had been full yongly of courage
yet seemed she to every wordly wigth
That she was over passed man his age
Her stature was of douteful judgment
Sumtyme thus of comen men's mete
And sumtyme was her stature so extente
That with her head she seemed heuens beat
And other vhyle so hye her head she get
She perced heaven and migth no more be seyn
So that we most the sygth of her forlete
And al our lokynge after was in veyn
Her clothes were wrogthof thredessmale
By subtel cratf of matter perdurable
And with her hands by her own tale
She had them wrogth I trow for no fable
The beutey of them was full commendable
But duskey they wereforleten as for elde
As images that in smoke had stonden stable
That be oot weshe ne wyped but selde
And in ye hem by neth made she had
So as I could yt know a greeks P. O.
And in the bordure al a bow I rad
And there also she had made a ^ ^
And so by twene these letters migth I se
Leke to a ladder what that ever yt mende
whereon men migth alwey fro gre to gre
Fro there beneth upward ever ascend
Nevertheless some men by violence
Had cut this cloth and pieces boren a wey
Such as they migth without reverence
And did there with as was unto there pay
This creature of whom I began you sey
In her rygth hand small books were
A septre also of full rich array
For certain in her other hand she bare
And when this ladey saw these muses there
Un to my beds side approchynge ney
Enditynge words to my weeping chere
She began to look upon them fervently
Ho she said let in this company
Thus with there song this seek man to plese
That no thing heleth him of his malady
But rather does him greuance and dysese
Lo these yt ben she said that fowls feden
with ye sweet venem of corruption
And tender hertes makes for to bleden
with thorns of there foul affection
They sleyn the worthy fruits of reason
And only brings sekenes in usage
This is the kind of there condition
And naught at all the sickness to assuage
if ye she said with your dalyance
Had drauen fro me some foul unprofitable
Less yt should have done me displesance
I might have boren yt then as sufferable
For vhy in such a foul that is unable
May naught ben harmed of my besynes
But these that ever in studyes has been stable
Should not be founden with your folesnesse
But goes ye fylthes out of my presence
your swetnes would him bring at an end
I shall him save with the salfe of my science
That shall be more comfort un to his kende
And thus this company a wey began wend
And bytterly abashed them of there blame
Showing well the habyte of there mind
Hanging down to ground there heddes for shame
I then yt nigh for teres saw right naught
Began wonder much vhat might this woman be
Meruelynge also greatly in my thought
That so emperial of auctoryte
She made yt maney smartly fro me fle
I was abashed and henge my head to ground
what she would after done or sey to me
Then I abode and held me still a stounde
But to my bed then began she nyen nere
And on the corner down herself she set
And sadly began behold upon my chere
That so was then with teres al be wette
And right thus she began wythouten let
Complaining on my perturbation
Because of myschef wherwyth I was met
Of me she made this lamentation
Metrum secundu^. Capitulu^ tercium.
Heu quam precipiti.
Philosophta loquitur Allas she said how this man's mind
Is casten down in to full deep dullness
Forlete the clerenesse of his proper kind
And mentynge for to go to strange derknesse
As often time as noyos business
wythouten mesure gynneth to encrece
when wordly wind with myschef and destresse
Him has byrafte al out of rest and piece
This is that man yt sometime was so fre
To whom by craft was even for to conne
Up in to heuens to behold and se
And to mesure the meuynge of the son
By craft also the conning had he won
How yt the moon changes for to prymen
And what recours the sterres have run
In there speres how dyuersly they meuen
As victor has he sotelly conquered
The craft by number al he comprehends
Fro vhens also these wyndes ben a rered
The smothe see that torneth so and wendeth
why esperus at even so ascends
Este / in the weste a down a geyn to loute
And what spyryte so besely entendeth
The round world to wend al a boute
And what a tempereth so the lustey hours
Of the fair first somer seson
Araynge hit with red rose flowers
Of the vyche in winter ben very feweor none
And al this could he show by very reason
In full years ho is that our fedeth
with great grapes that the people pleson
And other fruits that them al needs
I wont he was also to seek and to know
Pryme causes for to tell of kind
Allas witles now lies this man full low
Under full heavy bonds that him bind
And now can he none other comfort find
But heuely his face he has down fold
So is he al dysmayed in his mind
That needs wrecched earth he mot behold
Prosa secunda. Capitulu^ quartum.
Seb medicine.
Philosophia loquitur. But now of medycyne quod she have we need
For in complayntes lies no remedy
Un to that purpose let our works speed
She set her ye on me ententyfly
Art thou not he she said wyche that I
Have fed with milk vhyle thou were young of age
And sith with strenger metes tenderly
Till thou were wexen a man of strong courage
And sith I gave the armor good and strong
Wych but if thou had cast a wey fro the
Thou might have be dysesed with no wrong
But have been suer fro al aduersyte
why art thou still she said knouest you not me
Is yt for shame or thou art stoned sore
The ne shameth noght I trou by cause of me
Thou art a stoned of that me dredeth more
And vhen she saw me sytten dome and still
She set her hand full safte upon my breast
As here she saed no perel is of ill
This man is with a letargy a rest
A comen sickness that many has oppreste
That out of mind themself have forlete
Full esely this euel shall be redreste
A little whate he has hemself forgete
He shall remember well and esely
if I may first me make him for to know
I shall his yeen wypen tenderly
Of clouds derke that have them over grow
And then he shall amend as I trow
A pleyt she lapped of her garnement
My yeen then that teres had beflowe
She wyped till the derkenesse was al spent
Metru^ tercium. Capitulu^ quintu^.
Tunc me discussa.
Boecius loquitur. And vhen this cloud was cleansed fro mine ye
I was a none restored to my sight
Right as vhen clouds clippeth in the sky
The son is let to leme a down his light
And reyne clouds makes in manner night
But vhen a north wind chaceth them a way
The son will show then his bemes bright
And as yt were brings ageyn the day
Prosa tercia. Capitulu^ sextu^.
Haud aliter trsticie.
Boecius loquitur But even so and in / none other wise
This drerynesse out of mine heart began reche
I looked up and began me better advise
if I might know the vysage of my leche
Than knew I well by vysage and by speech
Mine own gentyl noryshe philosophy
That me was wont to viset and to teache
And fro yought had me in company
Do quod I my worshypful masteres
Of al virtues and of honest
what do ye in this wreched wilderness
Comen thus a down out of the souereyn see
In to this exyle vhether be cause of me
As gylty made also of my trespace
Hit ne besemeth not your souereynte
For to be seyn in this unworthy place
Phia.) Oh nory quod she should I the forsake
Since thou for me art falsely put in blame
And not the charge also upon me take
The wyche thou berest for envy of my name
To philosophy yt were repreue and shame
To leave an Innocent so thus a rayed
And now at last redoute me of that game
That is not new to me ne un a said
Trouest thou that I have been not erst assayied
Of wicked folk with perel and damage
How have I ben tormented and traueyled
with fulhardinesse and foul outrage
Be foren Plato in time of elder age
And vhyle that Plato leued presently
Socrates was slain and had to wage
In my presence a croune of vyctory
The Epicures and The Stoicenes
The heretage of there opynyou
They caughten to them as for very menes
Of wealth fullness euerych a portion
And mo of wiche I make no mention
Haueth enforsed them with sotelte
Drauenge his words to there entention
Of there opynatyue felycyte
This same folk in partey of there a pray
Caught this clothe that my self had weuen
And though that I rebelled and said nay
To rent this cloth / ne would they not beleuen
And with tho cloutes yt they had me bereuen
They went there wey and though al had been well
And folysly they did themself deceuen
And went I had gone with them every dele
And so for cause that they these pieces ber^
Loo some men troued as fowls utterly
That they had been with me familyer
And in my household ben abydyngly
And so thorugh error of this company
Full many a fool is foul out of the way
And by them ben perverted perylosly
And wene that al be wysedom that they say
Haste you not herd of Anaxagoras
That was exyled for be cause of me
Of Socrates yt eke enpoysoned was
How zeno was tormented by cruelte
And though yt this be a strange thing to the
yet Canio and Seneke as I trow
And Sorane also in thy mind be
For this is a late thing and well y know
Naught else these brought in to destresse
But for they were learned in my lore
And al vnleke as in there business
To wicked folk that hated them therefore
Hit is no thing that you should wonder fore
Though we be styred with storms of desese
Since that our purpose has been ever more
These wicked folks for to dysplese
And though thereof be hugy habundance
yet nevertheless yet is to be repreued
Forvhy they ben withouten governance
And naught but flod of error has them meued
And if they by this error this contryued
Arese an host with strenght and ous assetteth
Our governor by this is naught a grieved
His tresour al in to his toure he fetteth
These fowls laboreth than ententyfly
On veyn things that may them naught avayle
And we that sytteth in this toure on hy
Full suer y noghe fro them that ous assail
In such a palace strong of apparyle
whereto these fowls may not up attain
we scorneth them of al there waste traueyle
There business is euerydele in vein
Metrum quartum. Capitulu^ vij.
Quisquis co^posito.
Philosophia loquitur. He that stands clear and ordynate
And proud happes suffers under slide
In all fortunes standing streght algate
In wealth and woo can euenlych a bide
The wood see that floueth to every side
Him dredeh nto thing of his cruelte
But what desese that may to him betyde
Him greueth naught but stands in one degree
The foul fire that out of hell reketh
In the monteyn that cleped is vesene
Ne thunder lyte that hy toures breketh
Ne dredeth not me / what is yt that ye mean
Why dredeye then ye wrecches that ye ben
Tyrants fyers that been withouten migth
Put false hope out of our hertes clean
And flesly dread puts fro your sight
For if thou no thing of a man desire
Ne what he may the don thou haste no dread
Thou shalt deserve the wrecched man's Ire
And in no wise he may the naught mysbede
Ho so hops ought or dredeth out of need
He casts a wey his shylde and is unstable
And knetteh a cheyn / hemselfen with to lead
where that them lust to him unprofitable
The covetous king Mida was made Judge betvene Apollo and Pan by there both
assigneme^t for to demen vhether the harp of Apollo were more delicyous /
other the shalmuse of Pan. And so vhen he had herd them both / he iuged that
the shalmuse was svvetter than the harp vherfor Apollo having indignation of
his leude judgment / punysshede him in that party that was semyng the cause of
his error / and gave him long ass eres. Motally Mida is every worldly man
that more appryseth the lust and lekynge of the world them he does any whit
or gostely vvysedom. vherfore such men ben dulle and insensible to reason /
leke to rude asses.

Prosa iiij. Caplm viij.
Sentis ne inquit
Felest thou not vhether my word be soft or sharp
quod she withyn thy heart ententyfly
Or art thou leke an ass to the harp
That is not meued with no melody
If thou couetest help or remedy
Thou must vnhele the wondes yt the greuen
Be then a know and show me openly
And hyde yt not for I the shall releuen
Boecius) I droe to me the might of my courage
ye ben quod I that brought me in astate
Needs yt now to tellen my damage
That haueth me had in your presence algate
ye knoueth in what degree I was but late
Ne meueth you naught the manner of this place
Is this the library where ye with me sat
when ye were al my Joy and my solace
Dyuyne things dysputynge there with the
And other sciences that full lusty were
when that I stood with you in this degree
was than this mine habyte and my chere
when I with you was wont to seek and lere
Full preuy points langynge to nature
How that the sterres meued fer or nyre
Descryuyng yt in nombers and fygures
Formynge in me the manner of my live
I leke un to the heavenly governance
And techynge me to be contemplatyue
I yield you thank with louly obecyance
This was a sentens of your ordynance
That Plato wrote if I well understand
Full blesful were thastate of governance
if only wise might yt have on hand
Or if that they which have government
would upon wysedom spend there besynes
And Plato also to the same entente
Techeth ous thus / thyn own lore hit is
To wise men a skyleful cause is this
For to desire astate of souereynte
Lest wicked folk that will govern a mys
Receive astate and harm a comynalte
For if that wise men and virtuous
Should thastate of souerente forsake
Then other wicked folk and vycyous
would be full feyn the sam astate to take
And such as they ben soueraynes would they make
And wise persons should be set at naught
Thus should vice and wickedness a wake
And treuth and virtue be to ground y brought
As showing therefore your auctoryte
I had desire to this entention
That I had lered of your benygnyte
To put yt forth in execution
witness upon your own dyscretion
And god that has you set in man's mende
I coueted never administration
But comen profet was both cause and end
The hate that I have had and heaviness
Of wicked folk is open euydence
In mayntenance of treuth and ryghtuesnesse
By very fredom of my conscience
Of wicked folk I spared none offense
when Conigast the porayl would oppress
I met him ever with mighty resistens
And often I let him of his cruelnesse
And Tranguyle prouoste of the kings house
How often I cast him down of his malice
And many a pouer man and anguissous
That weren asset by cursed couetyce
Of men that full of venem were and vice
I halpe them often in there adnersyte
For to defend them out of such foleys
Lo mine astate I put in Iupardy
There was no man yt me fro right withdrow
To wrong by favor / frenshyp / or by wage
But when I saw the contres now and now
Be put in thraldom and in foul seruage
what by trybute and what by caryage
And what by raven and extortion
As sore me grieved the harm of there damage
As them that suffered tribulation
And when the prouynce hoten Campaye
was sore oppressed in a dear year
So that no man must selle ne bye
Till that the king had sold up his garner
At snch a price so grenous and so dear
That pouer folk were harmed and a noyed
Than I withstode the kings offycer
Wetynge the king that statute I destroyed
And Paulyn eke a consuler of Rome
Whom palace hounds had oppressed so
That wrongfully his goods him benome
I received him vhether they would or no
Albyne that was a conseyler also
That was a iuged to a grievous pain
Myself a lone to sauen him there fro
Of Cypryane I suffered great dysdeyne
That had accused him (how seems you
In paleys have I hate and enmyte
For love of right and were not thus y now
For to be favored of the comynalte
Since I no frendshype have as toward me
In kings court I have no love reserved
Me seems than I should the surer be
withouten fail where I have love deserved
But now by whom was I accused thus
Forsooth of none that honest was of fame
But one there was that hight Basileus
wych that be forehand founden was with blame
And out of office was he put with shame
And sith he fell at myschef and at need
He was accept accuser of my name
Allas thereto by geftes and by mede
yet other ij. that haven me thus defiled
were Gaudencius and Opilion
The which the kings Iuges had exyled
For certain surfeit that they had don
In to the sanctuary then began they gone
Them to defend again the kings law
But knowing thus the king commanded sone
That out of sanctuary they should be draw
But if they voyded the cite of Rauenne
By time assigned at a certain day
And in there frounte an Iren should them brenne
And be compelled for to go there way
Un to these false attaynte what shall I say
Or to the kings cursed cruelte
Upon that same day yt is no nay
They were admytted to accusen me
whether that mine art and occupation
Deserved had thus falsely to be blamed
Other else thus that my dampnation
Had made them true that false were proclaimed
And was not fortune hereof foul a shamed
That she rewarded not mine Innocence
Unworthiness of them that were defamed
Should none appele have made in her presence
But perauenture ye would wit the ground
In to this exyle vhy I am remeued
I would the senate had been hole and sound
And in no manner hyndred ne repreued
This is the cause that I am sore agreued
But ye would wit the manner and the wise
By cause of letters viche I had beryued
Fro him that would the senators accuse
you masteres vhat will ye demen now
Shall I this blame forsake or call a geyn
Lest that yt should be shameful un to you
Nay sekerly I shall yt never with seyn
I have yt willed and ever shall certain
That the senate were in rest and piece
But the accuser hereafter to refrayn
Or let him often of his intent I cese
But vether to willen there prosperity
Should ben deputed for sin or felony
And certainly they self in there decre
Have put on me that point of treachery
But unwise be they that to themself does lie
They may not change the meret of my deed
Though that the fowls themself will destroy
My good will is worthy thank and mede
But un to me by dome of socrates
How so ever yt stand in there entente
I trou yt be not laful nevertheless
To deny a sothe or to a false assent
But nevertheless al this verament
Excuses not me in no manner wise
I put hit holly in the judgment
Of yowr selfen and of other wise
The process of this matter every dele
I have hit write and put in rememberance
That men hereafter may perceive and feel
How wrongfully I suffer this greuance
But ye ylke letters of there ordynance
That in my name so falsely were contrived
if I had had that lyberte perchance
There false fraud should plainly have been preued
Or had I at the examination
My self ben present vhen I was accused
Right by there own aperte confession
I trou that they should have me clean excused
This lyberte were goodly to ben used
But now what lyberte shall I a bide
Of an answer I am fully aduysed
if ever I should that lyberte abide
As Canio un to the king answered
That was accused of conspyracy
Had I quod he thereof knouen or herd
Thou shuldeste have knouen hit not sykerly
And soth to seyn the same wise would I
Mine own letters better can I bestow
And also procured them so preuely
That no thing thereof should the king know
yet has not morning dulled so my mind
That this should be the cause yt I complayn
That wicked folk ben alwey so vnkende
A genste virtue such malice for to leyn
But this is yt where I have dysdeyne
Not only for the purpose of there will
But that they may there purpose so menteyn
I meruyl much how they yt may fu^^lle
For as to wyllen (...)
That may be of thee (...)
But that they have that pouer (...)
To execute that so purposed is
As Innocence and virtue to destres
Only of that I meruele in my mind
As in his sight that al thing sees express
Hit seems me a monstre out of kind
wherefore there was with you famylyer
One that complained thus and skylefully
Sithe god is present here and every vhere
Fro vhens comes al euel this meruel I
And if that god ne were not verily
Fro vhens should al good things be
But he that causes things perfectly
May know al and none in sothe but he
Al were hit leful to tho surfetours
That al good men noyeth and dysesen
Purposynge for to sle the senators
No wonder were though they would me lesen
For ever my purpose was them to dysplesen
And let them of there foul entention
To senators yet gave I none encheson
For to conspyren my dampnation
And masteres ye remembers well
That vhatsoeuer I thought to don or sey
Both word and work ye ruled every dele
And al by you I governed me alwey
And eke the senators yt is no nay
For there defense they knoueth every one
In vhat perel I put me at one day
A gen the ye king myselfen at verone
ye knoueth well that I ne sey but so the
Though I my self had kept yt in silence
For certainly alwey I have been loathe
To be commended of my excellence
For he that will be fayn of reverence
And so receueth reward of renoune
The preuy secret of his conscience
Apereth much by that condition
But here ye may your self take heed
For innocence now what worchyp have I
For virtue loo receue I to my mede
Peynes that proper be for felony
And ho had ever for any treachery
His Iuges so concord in cruelty
For gylte that was confessed openly
That some of them ner moved with pety
Al had yt be so that I had desired
The prestes death or holy church y burnt
Or cruel death to good men conspired
Or vhat malice so that I had y mente
yet should I have been demed me present
So conuycre of my surfeit or confessed
And after this have had my judgment
Thus justly might my dome have been dressed
But then I being for that same vhyle
with all my labor and my dilygence
Fro my judgment five hundred mile
Having in court no advocate ne defense
To death I was a iuged in absence
Me being in the senators needs
And they consentyng given was ye sentence
Loo how I am rewarded to my medes
O worthy men of worchyppe and of mede
For none of them came never at that degree
To be conuyct of such a manner deed
As to withstand a kings cruelte
As I have done for there comodyte
And therefore were they of my gylte a shamed
For thy in foylyng of the dygnyte
with sorcery now they have me defamed
They sayn for couetes of hy astate
That I had used craft of sorcery
But ye that were my governor algate
ye knoueth well how falsely yt they ly
For fro my heart ye hadden utterly
A voyded clean al wordly couetyce
And in your presence might not skylefully
Such sacrilege be used in no wise
For every day ye putten in my thought
These sothfast sentence of Pictagoras
That many gods should we serve not
But one a lone that makes corn and gras
Hit neded not / ne none accord yt was
To me / but full vnsembly in your sight
The help of foul gostes to purchase
Since ye have made me leke to god almight
Also my wise that is full Innocente
And other friends of my compaygne
My wives fader also reuerente
Fro such defautes may defend me
But oh malice and cursed crudelyte
This blame they bears on you by euydence
By cause that my governor ye be
They sey that I use such enchauntementes
And this to them hit seems not y now
That reverence of you me naught profyteth
But eke my gylte they puts upon you
And mine offense fully you they wyteth
A another thing my sowres yet excyteth
That men seyth not the meret of your deed
But says alwey when yt fortune ous smyteth
Of our meret yt was deserved need
And saeth that welthes and prosperyte
Comes un to ous for our rightuesnesse
And also when there comes aduersyte
Hit falls only for our wickedness
with fortune goes our fame and worthynesse
Ow noble thing so light hit is to lose
And certainly the first thing yt is
That flees a way fro wrecches in mysese
what rumors now this folk will of me find
How diverse sentence and how varyente
Hit lotheth me to think yt in my mind
For every man of me saeth his entente
And this yt is that most my heart shente
There is no fortune greueth me so sore
As vhen that myschef is to wrecches sent
Men says yt was deserved there before
I am a way fro al my good y put
Also despoyled of my dygnyte
And to my heart yt noyeth more yet
My name defoyled in the comynalte
And for the benfet of mine own bounte
Lo now I suffer torment and dystresse
And in my heart me seems that I se
How felons folk beth on there lustynesse
And every lorel ready is and boune
Some new coniected frauds to deuyse
And good folk hangs the head a down
Lest they be served in he same wise
And every surfetour now dare accuse
By cause of favor and un punyshmente
The good men to defoulen and despise
And proudly to performen there entente
Styred thereto by geftes and by mede
And rightuesnesse may have no reverence
So Innocents leueth now in dread
Not only that / but lacks there defense
A genst malice is made no resistance
But sothfastnesse is had in all dysdeyn
That god will suffer this in his presence
A cause I have to cry and me complayn
Metru^ iiij. Capitulu^ vij.
O stelliferi co^ditor or
Phia loquitur. O maker of the sterred heaven on hy
Eternally that syttest in thy trone
Thou torneste heaven with a wonder swy
Constreynyng sterres to thy law alone
So that now in fullness of the moon
Beshened with her brothers bemes bright
The small sterres hedeth them full sone
In her presence to shine they have no might
And when she to the son nyeth nere
Full sone she must her bright horns hyde
And hesperus that shyneth bright and clear
And shows him in the cold even tide
A another year he is the sons gyde
A rysynge up full pale in the morn
Loo needs in that course he must a bide
For so thou have commanded him beforne
In winter when that leaves goen a way
Thou shortest then the fair days light
In hot somer lengthest thou the day
And make short the derknesse of ye night
And thou attemperest times by thy might
That bare branches wexeth fair and grene
which that were defouled and vnhyght
By styffe storms of the winter kene
The seeds in winter yt ben sow
Thou make them to wexen fair and hye
And when that they ben full to corns grow
Thou make them to rypen and to dry
Thyn old law there may no thing vnplye
Ne by no way there kyndly course forlete
Ow god that gouernest al certainly
Now only man's work thou have forgete
why shall fortune tornen up so down
This thing that is in thy government
These wicked folk to set in hye renoune
And driven down the good and innocent
with peynes that by ryghtuous judgment
Ben dew to catyffes for there cursednesse
Loo faithful men ben shamed and y shent
And wicked folk ben set in worthynesse
Thus false folk the faithful have oppressed
And virtue that so worthy is of name
Is put in derkenesse till yt be redressed
The rightuous bears ye wicked men's blame
Forshoren men that been withouten shame
They color there deceytes as them lust
And vsen they as for a comen game
Deceyuynge them yt most upon them trust
And after them they draeth to consent
Kings great that many a man must dread
And makes them to perform there entente
And them encombreth with there cursedhed
And as they lust rygth so they will them led
But now behold this wrecched erthly place
Thou yt knettest al in length and bread
Now sometime send ous socour of thy grace
For of thy work we ben a portion
Not foul / but fair after the form of the
we men that fortune dreueth up and down
A monge the wawes of this wordly see
Repress this flod lord what ever thou be
That knetteste al in certain ordynance
Thou reuleste heuens in tranquillyte
Now set ous somvhat in that governance
Hit belongs not a wise man to be moved with a fools word but rather to
inform and teache and comfort him / reducyng him in to the bonds of reason. So
was this clerk by excess of heaviness / in manner fallen in to foley /
forletynge the bonds of reason / vvyche philosophy calls his kende country.
for by resonablete man is made leke to angeles and a very cytesen of heaven.
vherfore lest this paynful heaviness should put him in despere / philosophy
conforted him and saeth that he is not exyle by the foresaid vyolence out of
his kende contre / but by error of his ovne false deduction. For vhy as long
as a man keeps the knouynge of his kendly principles / he may not be compelled
to leave the bonds of reason. but erren he may by his false deduccion / by vyche
he vveneth that he be necessed and constrained to that false conclusyon. But
standing the knoulege of these forsaed principles / he may return and examen
his deduction by labor or by techenge / and find out his error and
consequently return a geyn to the truth

Multitude of astates in a land or cite is cause of great confusion / for be
cause that euerych of them coueteth to be gretteste / so that after his will
may stand all the rule and governance. Hit betydeth often that lords sotellen
in destruction of other / that be cause of favor of the cominalte / by
vvysedom of governance / or by excellence of conning or of vvyt / ben
preferred or lekely ben to be preferred in to hye astates so that they may the
more freely and seketly vverken as they would as for to vvynne the astates that
they de^yren / or else the astates that they haven the more freely for to hold
/ oath for to be p^ferred in excelle^s more singnlerly tha^ other But in this
realm of resonabelte that specially belongs to the court of heaven / there is
but one lord and souereyn. the vyche is god / principle and ruler of reason /
vverfore in so much as any man leueth after reason / in how much he is
subgect to the rule of gods law. And in how much he leueth after reason /
and so much he a bydeth in his contre and in his proper cite. In vviche god a
lone is prince and governor Then ensues thus / that if a man be obesyant and
subgect un to gods law. he may not be exyle not put out of his contre.
Boethius complained him of no gostely desese but only of harms bodily / vvelyng
of his prison and vva^tynge of kys books To vyche complaynte philosophy
answers and seyth / that him ought more to complayn the perturbation of his
spiret that so erred vvelynge the lost of his temporal goods vvyche must
needs at last utterly be berafte him. Also she saeth he erreth foul vvelynge
for his books / for vhy she had put in his mind tho same things that makes
books dear and precious / sotel sentences of reason and of kende

Sienim cuius oriundus sis patrie. The realm and the very co^tre of
resonablete is the bliss of heaven. And all the vhyle we work after reason we
ben in our contre as holy and heuenlych by manner of vverkenge The realm of
Athenes first was governed by kings / vyche reigned the term of lives. And
after that were ordained princes / vyche reigned comenly.x. ye0res / After these
were made princes annual that reigned but one year / and of them should be ix.
at ones. and of these here speaks Boethius Romulus vhen he had founded the cite
of Rome / that he might make the cite copyous of people / ordained this law
that ho so would bylde in that cite / he should never ben exyled after for no
manner trespace.

Prosa quarta
Hec vbi continuato dolor.
Boethius loquitur. when I with morning thus had made my moan
She was no thing of my complaynte a meued
with pleasant chere she held her still as stone
Sothly she said while er thus I conceued
That thou were exyle and thy good beryued
Right by thy weeping chere I knew yt well
But yet how fer ne yet had I not perceived
But thou thy self had told me every dele
Nevertheless understand now well this
Thou art not exyle out of thy cite
But thou thyself haste taken thy way a mysse
A strayed out in to a strange contre
And if thou wene that thou exyled be
Than haste yt put thyself out sekerly
For that power has none over the
But thou thyself will do hit wyllyngly
For if you knew or could have in thy mind
As of what land or what cite thou were
Of which thou took thy nature and thy kende
The laws of that land I could the lere
For all the world ne may yt not conquer
Not leke Athenes that many lords had
But one lord one law and none other there
That of his multitude is blythe and glad
He is full fayn that folk will to him draw
And willyngly he will no wight forlete
For to obey under his lustey law
Is lyberte the grettest that may be get
Ne knoueste thou not or else thou haste forgete
The law yt alwey there is had and used
Ho so that lust theryn to bylde his sete
The lord he will not yt he be refused
And ho so will in that place a byden still
He may deserve none aduersyte
But also sone as he forleteth that will
He may no longer in that pales be
For he forfeteh then his lyberte
And flees his contre of his own assente
when that he sueth sensualyte
Forletynge reason in his judgment
Thou ask where the manner of this place
Me with the for to morn moves ought
Me moves more the manner of thy face
For this prison moves me right naught
Thy lybrary with glass and Iuery wrought
Nether thy books set I at no price
But I seek the habyte of thy thought
Where I have made a sete at my deuyse
For in thy heart I have no books put
But things that makes books precious
Sotel sentence of conning and of wit
wiche un to me was more delicyous
Of thy meret thou haste remembered ous
The wiche you haste on commonwealth bestow
Full sothe yt is and not suspecious
Some haste you said and yet well more I know
Thou haste also rehearsed furdermore
The manner of thyn accusation
And the gylt that thou art grieved fore
Full honest in thyn estimation
None harm deserved ne dampnation
But rather reward for thy business
And now for thy remuneration
Thou haste no thing but harm and heaviness
And shortly haste rehearsed every dele
The false frauds of thyn accusers
wiche the comen people knoueth well
The wrongful dome eke of the senators
That rather should have been thy defensours
Thou soroest also greatly for my blame
The wyche I bear for the of surfetours
Thou welest eke the lesynge of thy fame
But at last with fortune began thou chyde
That mede with meret was even wey
why surfetours ben suffered in there pride
And good men a grieved thus I herd ye sey
And in thy song to god thus began thou pray
That ye ylke piece that is in heaven on hey
This wrecched world should keep under his key
That now is ruled thus vncertenly
I understand al thyn entention
But yet sone in that other side I se
That much desire of thyn affection
Has now distracted and dystrobled the
And put thy mind out of tranquillyte
As sorrow / morning / heaviness / and Ire
And vhyle yt thou art in this degree
Thou may no mighty medicyne endure
wherefore we shall attempten and assay
Now with a little lyghter remedy
That doleful sorrow for to put a wey
That in thy heart is wexen hard and dry
with esy salfe a chafe hit and defye
A medycyne than that more mighty is
Amenden shall that malice esely
That soroful swellynge lightly shall we lose
Metru^ quintu^. Capitulu^. xi.
Cu^ phebi radiis.
Philosophia loquitur. Ho so that will in hot somer seson
when that the son in cancer is y set
Sown his corn he worcheth out of reason
And of his trust no doubt he shall be let
By that he has with winter days met
Of other purueyance he shall have need
And but he can govern himself the bet
with akernes his hunger must he feed
And when ye north wind bloueth kyne and cold
In winter time a very foul he were
In wild wode that gether flowers would
Or ripe grapes in the time of vere
Hit falls not that ceson of the year
The flowers fresh ne ripe fruit to find
For god has set al thing in earth here
To kepen ever one certain course of kind
He ne suffers not the stoundes for to melle
That he has set in certain governance
As in there office every thing to dwell
They may not faylen with no variance
what thing that leueth certain ordynance
A bydynge not withyn the course of kende
He prospers not but falls in mischaunce
He may not faylen of a feeble end
Here before has philosophy enquered the qualyte and condition of the greuance
that this clerk was in. Now here she begins to enquere the rote and the
original cause / viche sto^deth specially i^ iii. things one because he soroed
vnskylfully that is to sey of mesure the lost of his temporel goods. The
second stood in error of false opynion trouyng that vvycked mighty men to the
world were by might of wickedness vvelful. The third that he troued the
enterchaungynge of fortune by vyche often times the good ben depressed and the
wicked resed / was without rule of gods purueance. So the very ground of
al his heaviness / was ignorance or else more verily to sey forgetyng of diuyn
governance / as touching the kende of man / vich error he was fallen in / by
false deduction fro his first principles. for he granted well that god was
maker and governor of al. but be cause that he sufferedde vvycked folk to
execute there malice upon the good / vyche execution is very open wrong / to
vyche wrong god that is perfyt ryghtuous by no way may consent* wherefore
he supposed that god had forllete the governance of man / committynge there rule
to fortunes vnstabilyte Fro knouen principles by very true deduction / a man is
brought to exclusion of error by conclusions deduced of this principle. So of
this principle that god governs al as president to his proper work / viche
Boys confessed / hit ensues well that god forleteth not the gouerna^ce of man
/ but dresseth his works rightuously. To vyche conclusion this clerk feled
the contrary. The fallace of this consequent of this foul error then is
founden in iii. things. One in false deduction. A another in defaute of
knouenge of the manner of governance. And the third of knouynge verily the
kind of man. In this his deduction failed that. for cause god vvetyngly
suffers vvronges / he said other god consents to wrong (viche is
inconvenient) other he forleteth the governance / and suffers in that wise.
but this foloeth not / for he snffereth vvronges knouyngly both by rightuous
and by mercy and yet he consents not ne farleteh not his governance By
ryghtuesnes he may compelle no creature a geyn the principal properte of his
kende. But the properte of man's will is for to be fre to good or to yuel /
tha^ shall not god bereue him that lyberte. but rightuosly suffers him choose
so that for his good chose he may deserve mede / and for his bad chose he
deserves pain. if god should bereue him this lyberte the^ failed mercy / for
the^ must he needs utterly destroy him / or put him i^ to endless punesmente.
for bereuynge the principal properte of a creature / that creature is utterly
destroed. as bereue hete fro fire / then is yt no fire Right so bereue lyberte
fro fre will / then is yt no will. But sy^h a spiret may not be destroyed. if
he should lose this lyberte of will / (...) must then anon be put in to
endless punishment / and this must a void mercy. This may be proved thus. if
god left this euel vnponeshed finally / then might he seem to co^sente to euel
/ but that may he not no more ne may he leave yt finally vnponeshed. if he
berafte him his liberte / then might he never after deserve mede in releuynge
of his puneshment / and then must he needs be endless in pain / wherefore of
mercy and of rightuesnesse he suffers wickedness. But here might be saed
that god of his goodness might let the execution of such malicious purpose
/ No doubt so he does for the more partey. For though malice be executed / yet
fails yt the full intent of his execution.

Prosa sexta. Capitulum xij.
Primu^ igitur pateris.
But first she said will thou suffer me
Now with a few demaundes for to feel
The very kende of thy infirmyte
And all the ground to gropen every dele
that I may wete how you might have thy hele
Boecius) Now seyth on quod I what ye lust
That ye enserche my sore I will hit well
And I shall answer as me thinks best
Phia) Sey meshe said hou is this world demened
As vhether by fortune his variance
Or else thou trouest yt hit is sustened
By reason of some certain ordynance
Boethius) That god knoueth yt has al in gouerna^ce
This doubt I not / but truly I believe
Come never yt day yt me befalle that chance
Out of my heart that sentence for to meve
Phia) Right as you say quod she so hit is
And in thy song vhyle er right so thou mente
But neuerthelater thy complaynte was this
That god on man set no gouernemente
Ne to there works takes he none entente
That thing yt was yt thou began weep and well
Al other thing thou would well consent
That god had set hit at certain gouernele
Oh that I wonder now full hugely
Sith thou in such a sentence art y set
That thou art seek af any malady
Some thing there is whereby thy hele is let
wherefore the ground I shall enserchen bet
Sith god himself al things rules
Thus say thou while er / but say me yet
By what gouernmentes as the seems
Boecius) your sentence quod I have I not conceived
I can not answer to your question
Phia) In soth quod she now am I not deceived
The causes of thy perturbation
I know them well by estimation
But sey me yet if thou have this in thy mind
To what purpose by inclination
Draeth finally ye comen course of kind
Boecius) I have quod I herd tell yt here be forn
But drerynesse has marred al my thought
Phia) yet have you not quod she thy wit forloren
That you ne wost ho has this world y wroght
Boecius) O god quod I has al thing forth y broft
Phia) I wonder then she said how may this be
Of the beginning sith thou doutest nofte
The end may not ben vnknouen parde
This is the kind of such desturbelance
That they may meue a man out of his place
But nevertheless such manner of greuance
Ne may him not al utterly arace
Ne put him fully fro the state of grace
Might thou remember that you art a man
Boecius) In sothe quod I this were a wonder case
if I should not my self in mind han
Phia) yet cannest you quod she tellen furdermore
The kyndly properte of man what yt is
Boecius (ye quod I as I have herd be fore
A reasonable best with dedlynesse
That I am such I know and will confess
Phia) Naught else quod, she knouest you of thy kende
Boecius) In sothe quod I noft else as I gece
Ne noght but this can I have in my mind
Phia) A another cause now know I well quod she
Of thy desese and that I wonder great
wiche is the ground of thyn infirmyte
For what you art thou have thyself forgete
wherefore the reason fully have we get
Of thy desese / and furdermore a mean
How that thou shall yt utterly forlete
And thou to health be restored clean
For cause thou art confounded in thy wit
with the forgetynge of thy self / for thy
That fro thy good in exyle art thou put
Thou wenest / and complaynest pyteosly
And furdermore also as suppose I
For you ne knouest what the end of things is
Thou trouest that wrecches full of felony
That they have very might and welthynesse
Thou have forgete by wiche gouernementes
This world is led this make you thy color
That these fortunes enterchaungementes
Ben fletynge thus withouten governor
Lo these ben causes of right great vygour
Not only to sickness and desese
But un to death if that you fail socour
That may the with these bitter pains lose
yet nature has not al forsaken the
worth thanks be the auctor of thy hele
we have yet one comfort that I se
That shall thy sorrow slaken every dele
This sothfast sentence have we saved well
That god this world has in his governance
Thus you beleuest as I conceue and feel
And naught subject to happes variance
Ne dread ye naught for of this little schyn
A lyfly hete shall spryngen in thy breast
But for asmoche as mighty medicine
To give the yet the time is not best
And for as much as minds thus oppressed
Haueth this nature and condition
That when they have true conceytes lest
They clothe themself in false opinion
whereof derknesse and perturbation
May wexen up that fully will destroy
The sith of true consideration
where for I shall a say sotelly
To a void with some esey remedy
This derke cloud if yt may voyded be
Of false affection / and esely
The very lyth then migth thou know and see
Metru^. vij. Capitulum xiij.
Nubibus atris co^dita nullu^.
The sterres covered with the clouds blake
Ne may not clearly casten down there lyth
And when ye wode south wind does a wake
He waleweth up the sea with hugy might
The wawes then yt were clear and bright
Leke as the glass or as the summers day
with fylthe yt is resolved ben on hyth
And fro these wawes lets our sight always
The river rennynge out of hye montens
Is often time withstanden hugely
As by some stone enconterynge there a gens
The which is fallen fro some rock on hy
if thou therefore wilt seyn ententyfly
with true beholdynge truths for to deem
Loo / take this pathe and hold yt certainly
Gladness and dread out of thy heart thou fleyn
Ne Joy thou naught of worldly welthynes
Ne dread ye nothing of this worldly dyne
Ne hope thou not that transytory is
Ne sorrow thou naught but if yt be for sin
For every thofte that these regneth in
Troble and derke yt is and may not se
He is so wrast a way he may nofte win
And brideled so that he may not be fre
Incipit Liber secundus.
Prosa prima. Capitulum secuudum.
Post hec paulisper
THen after this a stounde she held her still
And when she by a temporet stylnesse
Saw well yt mine attention and my will
was set to heren her with soberness
Thus she began if yt be as I gese
Quod she / yt I the ground and cause know
Of all the habyte of thy heaviness
I can the tellen fully as I trow
In thy desire thou soroest and complaynest
Upon fortune that with the was a vhyle
which that has perverted as thou feynest
Thastate of thy courage in this exyle
I understand her wrenches and her wyle
Of the ylke fortune wonderly dysgesed
The wiche to them that so her lust begyle
Not first in the / but ever she has them used
She will be pleasant and famylyer
Full blandesshynge / full soft and deboner
Till that her leke for to change her chere
And atlast forlete them in despere
Al out of hope that ever she will repair
if that thou knew her kende and her deserte
That thou by her ne had no thing fair
Ne naught y lost thou should know aperte
But as I trow withouten great travail
we shall reuoken this to thy science
For thou were wont to dyspute and assail
with manly words drawn of my science
when that she blandeshynge in thy presence
So plesed the / but certain sothe is this
There falls never such soden chaungementes
That your courage somewhat ne changed is
So is yt now befalle hit is no nay
That thou art put out of tranquillyte
But time yt is to tasten and assay
Some soft things that sweet and lustey be
That when yt has his deueyr don in the
I hope yt shall the amend and dyspose
That stronger drynkes may have there enter
That shall the helen up as I suppose
Com forth now swetnesse retoryen
with sotelty of thy suasyon
Wiche only then thy ways can demene
When thou ne leuest our institution
Mysyke also with swetnesse of thy soun
That art a damsel of our own house
Attempre well thy tunes up and down
That to this man may be delycyous
what is yt man / whereof can you complayn
what is the cause of al thy heaviness
Some new or uncouth things have thou seyn
Fortune a geyn the only turned is
Now trouest thou so / than errest thou y wys
For always such her manners has be
But she has kept in the her stabelnesse
That kendly stands in mutabilyte
Right such she was with all her blandyshynge
when she such flaterynge plesance began the make
To lere the lusten in these wordly things
That passes right as does the clouds blake
Take heed / that blind goddas have thou take
with doble face of doutful adventure
For she yt is that has the now forsake
Of whose frendshep there may no man be sure
if thou approve in thyn opinion
Her goodness when she is to thy plesance
Take thou a worth than her condicyon
And use yt must thou with her varyance
Complayn ye naught make no contraryance
And if the greseth of her treachery
Than cast her of / despise her with mischaunce
That to pley is wont so harmfully
The cause yt has the now with sorrow schent
Should move the now with Joy and lustiness
She has the left / ye which er she be went
There is no wight that may have sekernesse
And hold thou this as for a welthynesse
Of preciosty / that thus a way shall slide
And now so dear to the ye presence is
Of this fortune unfaithful to a bide
And when she goes / to morn she you makes
Since halden at your will she may not be
She leueth wrecches the yt she forsakes
She is nofte else than / as seems me
That so vncertenly will fro you fle
But sign of mischef that shall after fall
Loo than / is this al your felycyte
Naught but a fair that ye foloeth al
For yt suffyseth not I the ensure
Only to seyn one thing that is present
The end of things prudens does mesure
For vhy this diverse interchaungement
For well to woo that fortune has the sent
Hit should the teache her manace noft to dread
Ne to her blandyce take rygh none intent
To her behestes take no manner hyde
For at last the behooves need
Since thou have ones in her yoke y draw
To suffer all that fortune will the bid
with esey heart and stand thy lady awe
And if thou to thy lady write a law
To go or come at thyn ordynance
Thy labor loo / avails not an hawe
Thou wrongest her with thyn vnsufferance
Now suffer then and take yt not to strange
Lest thou her feerser in her wrethe find
And sherpe ye swerdes wiche you may not change
Thou may her not compellen out of kende
For if thou have thy sail up in the wind
Thou may not choose where you shall a ryue
For what so be the purpose of thy mind
Thou must there / as the weder will the drive
if thou thy corn wolt in the feldes sow
Hit may not wexen as thy wits fayn
For in thy thought you must conceue and know
Some years ben plenteous and some bareyn
Ne for to grow thou may yt not constrayn
And if yt fail / there to what may thou done
How ever yt be / to whom shall thou complayn
Let nature al her self therewith alone
Thou have the put under the governance
Of fortune / loo she must thy lady be
Un to her manners owe thou obecyance
And if thou purpose to enforcen the
To stent her vhele of mutabilyte
Of al fowls yet art thou the meste
For when fortune stands in stabilyte
The name of fortune may no longer lest
Metrum primu^. Capitulu^ ij.
Hec cu^ superba
Philosophia loquitur. When yt thus fortune with her hands proute
Has thus her stoundes changed to and fro
As Erinus Erinus is a river that sometime renneth one way / sometime a another
so that she uses no ready course / ne certain in to nether partey. So fares
fortune byche indifferently and vncertenly gives both mischeffe and prosperity.
that renneth in and out
So wonderly her vhele begenneth to go
Full ryal kings casts she douue in woo
The which some time many a man began dread
And some that lies dyscomfet and undo
Loo these untrusty / lyfteth up your head
She thus of wrecches has no pity
Though that they weyle and weep day and night
She scorneth eke so wonder hard is she
The waylyng that herself has them dyght
Loo thus she plays thus proves she her might
To her servants showing many a wonder
For he that hye in welthes was now right
withyn an hour he lies casten under
Prosa ij. Capitulu^ iij.
Vellem autem tecum.
Philosophia loquitur. ME lnst to plede a little now with the
with such words as fortune may
Loo says she / right now look thyself and se
Me seems well such words might she say
what is ye man / complaining every day
what have I gylt / what wrong have I ye wroght
what good of thyn have I berafta way
That was thyn own or with thy selfen brought
Assign thou and I shall sone appear
Be fore a Judge that can this case redress
And if thou can thy purpose prouen clear
Of hye astate / riches / or worthynesse
To any man that leueth in dedlynesse
That these things should appropryat be
And certainly I shall the grant express
That thyn yt was that you now ask me
When yt nature in to this world the brought
Out fro thy mother where that you began
I took the nedy / naked / and with naught
And I the noryshed with my goods than
And al with favor noreshed the to man
wherefore impacient I find the now
Have I the wronged / tell me if thou can
As in vhat points / where with / and as how
with all goods longing to my right
I had the fully fret with habundance
why should yt not be fully in my might
As fro the same / wiche that I avaunce
Mine hand withdrauen after my plesance
The Joys thou had yt was of my grace
Hit was not thine / take yt for no greuance
with wrong thou the complaynest in this case
Why playnest you I do the no duresse
Ne violence as every man may trowen
well leketh me such honor and riches
Right as me leketh fully to be stawen
The main need must there lady known
with me they come and with me must they wend
This dare I say if they had been thyn own
Thou might never have lost them in this kende
where I be she yt only am forhyght
To execute the custom of my law
The heaven may the days make bright
And eke at night she may her light withdraw
The year also the earth may bestrawe
with flowers and them efte with winter shynde
The sea may now be calm withouten wawe
And now with styffe storms torn and wend
But the said vnfulsome man's couetyse
Me would now to stabelnesse bind
A genst mine own manner and my wise
But this my might is / this play is my kind
My swyfte vhyle thus up and down I wind
The hye and low to enterchaungen often
That now be forn is / efte mot be behind
That now is law / me lust to set a lofte
Now worth upon my vhele if yt the lust
But on this covenant yt I shall the say
Thou must desce^d a geyn there to thou trust
when that the reason asks of my play
Ne knew thou not my manners er this day
How Cresus that was called king of Lyde
That Cyrus often a fered with great a fray
yet Cyrus took him in his most pride
And in the fire he cast him for to brenne
Loo how ye effect was turned to reuerse
A little rain defended him fro then
what befell him after books does rehearse
And when that Paul had take ye king of Perse
This Paul began on him weep for pure pity
what cries al tragedyens verse
But playneth al on mine vnstabylyte
Tragedyes hen dytes made of certain persons / vyche begynnethe in vvelthe and
prosperyte / and ends in myscheffe and aduersyte
They wepeth yt sodenlyche I smite
And welful realms often I overthrow
Thou learned this when you were young and lyte
Thou have not yet forgeten as I trow
That Jupiter ij. tonnes had bestow
Withyn the thresfold of hes celer laid
That one was good wine every man to know
That other nofte / now have thou both assayed
And vhat if you more plenty have y take
Lo of the better part of lustynesse
what if I yet have the not al forsake
what if so be that mine vnstabelnesse
May give the hope of better after this
For vhy dysmay the no thing in thy thought
Ne withyn ye realm that comen is
Thy proper law to use / couete ye naught
Metrum ij. Capitulu^ iiij.
Si quantas rapidus.
Phia loquitur. Though plenty wiche yt cleped is goods
Of wordly good / would cast un you at ones
As many habundances of richesse
Loo as the sea has small grauel stones
Other as sterres when full many one is
Full clerly shynynge in a lusty even
yet this mankend of there ruthful mones
Ne there complayntes can they not leven
And though yt god of his benygnyte
There prayer here and gladly would them plese
And of hes goods grant them great plente
Of riches and honor fully to there ese
There couetys yet / may there no thing pese
There cruel raven gapeth after more
And always ben complaining of desese
And set at nofte all that they had before
what manner brydel might a man deuyse
This wrecched lust to rulen and restrayn
To this unthrifty men's couetyse
That ever ye more they have the more they pleyn
The thurst of having brenneth them with peyn
For he that nedeles so fereful is
And weyleth so / forsooth I dare well sayn
He is not rich though all the world were his
Prosa iij. Capitulu^ v.
Hijs igitur verbis.
Phia loquitur. if that fortune might for her selfen sayn
Right in these wise as I have said to the
Thou have not what one word to speak a geyn
And if thou have now say yt un to me
Defend thy quarrel (if thou can) let see
Thou shall be herd till that you have rehearsed
And if thou can not let thy playntes be
Vnlaful quarrel ought to ben amerced
Boecius) Certain quod I full fair is this to hyre
Of retoryke al full / and honey sweet
wiche only while they souneth in mine ere
They lusts well / but sone yt is forgete
For my desese so light is not to let
For all so smartly as your song is cessed
The gruggynge of my greuance is so great
That al my mind with morning is oppressed
Phia) Right so yt is she saed / but yet for that
This is no remedy for thy sickness
But a geyn thy sorwes obstynat
A geyn thyn health yt is a manar less
But when I see that better seson is
Of such as shall the percen to the rote
I shall the serve / and all that is a mysse
Hit shall redress and hoelly be thy bote
But lest yt thou thy self a wrecche hold
Now would I wete where you remember not
The manner of thy welthes many a fold
Boecius) I hold my pees quod I saeth on your thought
Phia) when you she saed were so low y brought
As orphelyn in manner desolate
Fortune for the so goodly had y wroght
Thou were in cure of men of hye astate
And drawn sith in to affynyte
Of princes and of men of governance
Full lefe to lords / er thou might be
Ought worth thy self in wordly suffysance
And set in hye degree of alliance
Ho saed not then that you were fully bleste
Thy fader in law whom virtue does avaunce
Thy wife also so goodly and honest
Thy sons both sitting by thy side
your worship went on every man's mouth
And for to let these comen things slide
what dygnytes thou had in thy youth
That to full old men ben werned in sothe
But I delight to tellen more express
Of soleyn things stranger and uncouth
How thou were wrapped al in welthynesse
if any thing that mortal is in kende
with any fruit of bliss be founden here
There may no myschef put out of thy mind
That day yt when thy sons both in fere
Hadden take thastate of consuyler
And with a semble fro thy hons y lad
Of senators and lords that there were
with hugy press of people blyth and glad
And than in court vhen that you saw them sytte
In setes belonging to there dygnyte
There won you Joy of eloquence and wit
As pronouncer of kings nobylyte
Of all that folk behaldynge upon the
And with thy preysynge as victoryous
So well thou feddest all that comynalte
with geftes of thy words glorious
Thou feoffedest fortune then with words gay
while she the norshed in her own delyce
And such guerdon fro her thou bare a way
The wiche in sothe was so hye a price
That never before that day at my deuyce
She granted not un to no comyner
wylt thou a count with fortune / art thou wise
Of a rereage thou shall not passen clear
For now at arst she has on the behold
And prynched on the with a bitter ye
But now considering clearly if you would
The manner of thy welthes by and by
Of al thy Ioys leuynge lustely
And in that other side thy heaviness
A counted al / yet may thou not deny
That thou ne have yet a part of welthynesse
And if thou hold thy self unfortunate
Now for asmoche as these yt welthes semen
Ben passed thus / no cause have you for that
That thou in mischef should thy selfen demen
For these sorrows yt trobeleth thus thyn heart
And haldest them as for a grievous pain
Ne doubt the naught but fro the will they stert
Then art thou set in welthynesse a geyn
And wylt thou trow that you the first be
That to this life came as a soden gyst
Or wylt thou trow yt any stabylyte
In man's life be where upon to trust
This knouest thou well yt is nothing vnwyst
That in an hour a man is at an end
Loo al your life with death so is bet wist
Now here ye ben / and here a way ye wend
And if so be as yt betydeth selde
That in fortune is any faythfulnesse
Abiding with man till he the ghost up elde
The last day yet of your life y wys
A manner death eke un to fortune is
what fors is than where she the forsakes
Fleing fro the of her vntrustynesse
Or thou fro her / when death a way the takes
Metrum iij. Capitulu^ vj.
Cum polo phoebus.
Philosophia loquitur VHen that phoebus begins for to sprede
Her bright bemes out on every side
As by the morning / the sterres for dread
They wexeth pale beginning them to hyde
Forestes eke that large ben and wide
Full fresly in the first somer ceson
The zephirus right as yt were for pride
with flowers has depaynted / you to plesen
And when that auster puts out his horns
And bitter blastes gynneth for to blow
A bateth than the beutey of the thorns
Thus al your lusts passes in a throw
The sea also as enery man may know
Now may be calm withouten mouone
And suddenly er any man will trow
with tempest is yt turned up so down
And sith the form of al this wordly things
So seldom is yt that yt stands stable
But changes by so many varyenges
And man's fortune is so transmutable
Than wolt thou trust to goods deceyuable
This is a law withouten chaungementes
There may no thing be kendly perdurable
That is engendered of these elements
Prosa iiij. Capitulu^ vij.
Tum ego / vera inquam
Boecius loquitur. Than said I thus / O worshypful noryshe
All virtue to feden and sustain
In all my wit / but if I were unwise
I can not wete but sothe is that ye sayn
And of my fortune sothe yt is certain
That wonder smartly has she me enhaunced
But here upon yt is that I complayn
That she vndoth wiche yt she had avaunced
For of myshappes to rehersen al
Hit is the worst / for to ben well
And in to myschef aster to ben fall
For this must shend a very heart of stele
Phia) Though you quod she thus in thy wits feel
By false conceyte of thyn opinion
The truth ne agreueth the never a dele
To wit yt her / yet have thou no reason
And if this Idel name of welthynesse
That so uncertain is / yet moves the
with me now come and thyn a countes guess
Of thynghes wiche as yet) thou have plenty
The wiche you had ever in most deynte
when al in richesse fortune had the fret
How migh thou plain of thy felycyte
Since that thou have thy best goods yet
yet hoole and sound the fader of thy wife
He leueth loo / honor and reverence
Of al man kende / which you with thy life
would gladly obey standing in his defense
Symmachus made of al sapience
Al full of virtue and of honest
Though he be suer of any violence
As to him self / yet weyleth he for the
Thy wytty wife so full of soberness
So chaste / so honest / and so debonaer
In short to conclude al her worthynesse
Leke to her fader as his kendly heyer
Full loath her life she ledeth in despaer
Only to the she keeps her careful ghost
This one thing is that may thy wealth apayre
This grant I well and do moan yt most
And of thy sons wiche ben consulers
what shall I sayn / but shortly yt they be
In manner prynte and as exemplares
Both of there elder fader and of the
And every mortal thing as you may se
Upon this has his princypal besynes
This live to keep fro al infirmyte
And un to man the derest thing yt is
And these to the ben derer than thy life
I dare yt well affermen certainly
Lo Symmachus / thy sons / and thy wife
Thou have them yet now let thy teres dry
For yet fortune is not thyn enemy
In all / so ferforthe as thyself faynest
Ne yet is not on the so fervently
The tempest fallen as thou the complaynest
For vhy good holdyng has thyn anchor hent
They ben full strong and cleueth wonder fast
The wiche / thy comfort of this time present
Ne hope of better / suffers not to ben past
Boecius) Ow god quod I you grant yt yt they last
For vhyle they haldeth how yt ever yt stand
Or how yt ever these wicked wyndes wrast
Yet in some manner shall we flete a land
But how great bewty of mine apparel
Is fro me gone / yowselfen seyth yt best
Phia) I have quod she if yt may ought a veil
Promoted somewhat yt thou were in rest
But if so be thou thy selfen tempest
Dysplesed with the sort of al thy life
How should than thy myschef be redrest
if thou wolt always set thyself in stryf
But I ne may not suffer thy delyce
Complaining with so grievous heaviness
Always coniectynge so in thy deuyse
That somewhat wants of thy welthynesse
For hoys that yt leueth in dedlynesse
That in his welthes stands so ordynat
That he ne stryueth always more or less
with the qualyte of his astate
Full anguesous they ben as for ye nones
The kende of wordly wealth I sey / for vhy
For other they comes not al at ones
Or they ne stands never stabelly
For these has riches loo habundantly
Him shameth that his lynage is so low
And these loo is renouned nobelly
Yet had he lever for pouerte ben unknow
Another has both renoune and riches
He has no wife wherefore he is dysplesed
These has a wife that to him lusty is
Defaute of issue makes him be desesed
He note ho with his goods shall be sesed
And these has issue to his lust perchance
yet happily of there vice he is vnesed
And weyleth of there wicked governance
wherefore in sothe there is no wight yt can
with proper fortune hold hemself a paed
For why some thing is feled of every man
That none knows but he that has assaed
And he that knoueth he is thereof a frayed
Set this thereto ye every welful wight
Full tender is to suffer and mysapayed
If al thing fall not to his will a right
And he that wordly is most fortunate
And set most hyely in prosperyte
Full little thing his bliss may abate
That is not used in aduersyte
How many trouest you in this world there be
if that they had ye lest bliss of. vij.
That I can tell of thy felicyte
They would supposen that they were in heaven
This place of exyle as you have yt named
Good contre is to them that in yt ben
And never the wors though yt of ye be blamed
Thou art no wrecche but thou thyself yt wene
Though fantasy have brought ye thus in tene
And every fortune there a geyn is good
Ho so can in patience himself demene
And suffer softly with an esy mode
Now tell me thus what wilful man is that
That stondeth in bliss as he can deuyse
That sometime nold changen his astate
when patience is put out of seruyse
what trobel with your welthes many a wise
Is menged / if ye could yt have in mind
Though they be sweet to such as them use
They will not be with hold when they wend
Than may ye seyn by open euydence
The myschef of these mortal things thus
They stands not though thou have patience
Ne lusts not in all thy anguysous
O folly / vnwyt / so erroneus
Of mortal folk seeking themself without
your welthynesse and hit so plentuous
Is set withyn yourself withouten doubt
I shall the show of thy felycyte
A soueren point / entend what I shall say
Is any thing so dear worth un to the
As is thyself thou wolt answer me nay
if thou be hole thyn own conclude I may
Thou haste that thou ne would forlete
The wiche fortune may not bereuen a way
Till thou thyself yt wylfully forfete
And that thou know yt things temporel
May not be such wherein thou should find
Thy blysfulnesse / now understand me well
And take these words hoelly to thy mind
Since blysfulnesse is souerayn good of kind
Hose life is reason and intellygence
And souerayn good is thing yt has no end
Ne may beraft the by no vyolence
Than upon this I may conclude and seyn
That these fortunes mutabilyte
To blesfulnesse may no thing atteyne
Ne is not had by such vnstabylyte
And wham so that this false felicyte
Thus carries forth / he wot or wot yt not
How false she is and always has y be
This division is immedyat
if he ne wot hit not he is deceived
what bliss may be than in this ignorance
And if so be he has well a perceived
The manner of her kyndly varyance
He dredeth than with full great greuance
To lose that thing yt lightly may be gone
So that this dread with long continuance
withdraws his bliss wiche yt he trust upon
Other if yt be so that he lose his bliss
He weneth to stand in repreffe and in scorn
And no dout full little good yt is
whose lost with esey heart may be born
And thou art he to vhom that here be forn
Hit has be showed by demonstration
That man's soul ne may not be forlorn
As thing that turns to corruption
And clear yt is that al this wordly well
As fro you men with death a way shall wende^
Than may yt not be douted never a dele
But sothe yt is by reason and by kende
if wordly bliss should be your fynal end
And very form of al your welthynesse
Than every creature of mortal kende
with death must tornen in to wrecchednesse
But we have wist of many one here be fore
To seek the fruit of bliss in there intent
That haueth yt bought full bytterly and sore
By death / by dolor / by pains and torment
How might yt be then that this lyffe present
with any lusts / might you welful make
Sith yt is so that vhen this lyffe is went
They be no wrecches wiche hit has forsake
Metrum iiij. Capitulu^ viij.
Quisquis volet
Phia loquitur. HO so that lust to byld hemself a sete
That should be mighty / sure / and perdurable
That bitter Eurus brese yt naught ne beat
Ne fers floddes make yt not meueable
The hye hills be not profitable
And moystey sands must he needs exchew
For on the mounteyn may no thing be stable
Nether in sand no thing be trwe
For vhy / the south wynd blows sore a lofte
That on the monteyn may no thing be sure
And sands that so lose ben and soft
An heavy borden may they not endnre
To fle therefore this perylous adventure
A syker sete to set thy self a pone
Take this in mind and do thereto thy cure
To byld a law house on a syker stone
That is to sayn yt thou shall set al thy mind
Upon that bliss that ever shall a bide
And though so fall that the wood wind
Torn up and down the sea on every side
In very rest / thou may thy selfen hyde
As in thy castle full of blesfulnesse
In lusty age then shall the well be tide
And set at naught this wordly wrecchednesse
Prosa v. Capitulu^ ix
Sed quonia^ rationum.
Phia loquitur. But for asmoche as I have don this
By my reason descendynge in to the
To vsen now (I trow that time is)
Some medycyne that more mighty be
Now understand / al were yt so parde
That goods wiche yt fortune has bestowen
Should standen ever in perdurabelte
How might thou ever acco^pte them for thy own
And these same that ye acompte them best
if that they were consydred as they ought
Full foul they sholden seem and dyshoneste
And ben a compted for a thing of naught
Now of riches how seems in thy thought
why ben they good / vhether of there proper kind
Or for they ben in to your ward y brought
And should ben good till yt they fro you wend
What is yt. / gold wiche that ye call riches
Or money gadred in your tresory
But these shows more there worthynesse
In putting out / then keeping pryuely
For auarous men ben hated comenly
And every wight will have them in dysdeyn
And tho that will dyspenden largly
They shall have love and worship there a geyn
And this good that you dyspendest thus
when yt is spent a bydeth not with the
Than is thy money only precious
when thou yt have pnt a way fro the
Than in dyspendynge lies the precyouste
Of your tresour and not in hepes great
Hit stent you never at no comodyte
Ne avails no thing till yt be forlete
And what if all the gold that al men han
As hit is now in dystribution
were assembled in an hepe / and than
One man hit had in his possession
This gold then by this supposition
Al other men must nedy make and bare
And one man rich this is no question
Beleuynge after all the world in care
A voice universal (I may conclude)
At ones may without apeyrement
Fulfylle the years of a multitude
your riches is not so suffycyant
For till they be departed and y spent
To many men ne may they not be taken
And these men fro whom they ben y went
They leave the^ pour when they have the^ forsaken
O streyte and pour that riches may I call
wyche al men ne may not have at ones
Ne one have al / but if that other al
For pouerte and for need make there mones
And eke I meruel that these precious stonys
That ye be haldeth them so lustely
And fayneth bewty in things where none is
And there hit is ye can hit not a spy
And what thing is hit? brightness of color
why that this perry seems you so fair
This wete ye well the bryghtnesse is not your
Ne naught of you / but only hit is there
As by a light reboundynge in the air
And much I meruel vhy ye wonder so
On things that may be a mende ne pair
Your kendly good by noght that they may do
what thing is that yt lacks lyffe and light
what may be lekened to a creature
That bears lyffe / and reason has there with
That should be demed fair as by nature
And though they draw a bewty in figure
Of him that made hit / yet in your presence
They may not worthy ben in no mesure
To be merueled of your excellence
And where these feldes that been fair and grene
So full of flowers delyteth ought your sight
Boecius) why should they not said I since yt they ben
A fair part of ye work of god al might
For so some times when the sea is bright
we wonder much / and when the heaven is clear
Upon the moon and sterres in the night
And on the son that shyneth a monge ous here
Phia) But apperteyneh quod she ought to the
May thou that bewty in thy selfen find
Dare thou reioycen that they in the be
As thing subjected in thy propre kind
Art thou depaynted seems in thy mind
with flowers of the first somer seson
Or art thou as a tree with rote and rynde
May thou noryshe fruits? trouest you this by reason
And vherfore art thou rauesshed so in veyn
As though these goods should be thyn own
The wyche fro the ben utterly foreyn
And wonder fer as every man may known
For vhy fortune (thou may hit fully trowen
Ne may not make them thyn for to ben
The wych nature has else vhere bestowen
And utterly made fro the alyen
For vhy the fruit yt does on earth encrecen
Deserves un to bestes sustynance
And little thing your need may a cessen
So that nature have her suffysance
why should you then desire abundance
And ask of fortune superfluyte
Sith that nature may have her plesance
with little thing in pryse and quantyte
And if thou wolt her suffysance oppress
with superfluyte surfetously
Other hit will the bring in heaviness
Other else the a noyen grievously
But of this one thing certain meruyl I
That thou would semen fair and glorious
As for to ben clothed ryally
In diverse shappe and color precious
For if in clothes any bewty be
where by the sight is fair and aggreable
That apperteyneth no thing un to the
But that matter hald I meruylable
Other the wit of him is commendable
That made this thing this may be cause of wond
But that you should therefore be honorable
As in your kend / ye ben full fer a sounder
Or for to walken with a hugy route
And of main to be copyous
May make the blysful / nay wythouten doubt
For I suppose that they ben vycyous
They ben a grievous charge un to thy house
And may be cause of thy destruction
And what if they be good and virtuous
And very honest of condytion
why should there virtue other honest
Be accounted as part of thy riches
Or wherefore should thou commended be
Or have a thank of foreyn worthynesse
Loo in all these rehearsed here express
The wyche as thou acomptest in thy thought
As for thy goods clearly as I guess
I have the showed that thyn be they naught
In wych things as I have said beforn
if thou no lusty bewty can find
why soroest thou yt thou them have forloren
Or of the having enIoyest in thy mind
if they be fair as of there own kind
what may that apperteyn un to the
For had they ben fro the wythouten end
Also fair and lusty had they be
For no doubt they be not precious
For thou them have and kepest besely
But for they seemed the delycyous
Thou them accompest in thy tresory
what crave ye then with so great a cry
That ye on fortune calls thus alwey
with abundance in sothe / as suppose I
ye seeks for to dryven need a way
But yet the contrary to your intent does fall
For you needs help (not little) to maynteyn
And for to keep your precious things al
Lest so be fall that ye hit lose a geyn
So much the more your labor is in vayn
That ye must live in heaviness and dread
And this is soth also that I shall sayn
Ho so myche has / of much thing has need
And little thing him needs certainly
That can his plenty mesure on this wise
Right even as nature needs kendly
And not un to the lust of couetyce
Ne can you not your selfen better advise
To se what good is set your self wythyn
But needs will ye seken and deuyse
In strange things your goods for to win
And thus of things that should be worthyest
The order is perverted up so down
The wyche is called a dyuyne best
By kendly might and meret of reason
Ne can not known his own condytion
Nor se the meret of his excellence
But by the desire of vayn possessyon
Trusts wordly riches to be his defense
Al other bestes haldeth them self a paid
Of bewty that wythyn them self is
But ye men the wyche as I have said
your god has set you in such a worthynesse
That in your souls ye bears his lekenesse
And be in kende so nobel a creature
ye seeks here by fylthe and wrecchednesse
To enblemesshe your excellent nature
ye understand not ne will not se
what wrong ye do un to your creator
Sith he man kind has set in this degree
Al erthly things to excede in vaylour
ye do your dygnyte great dishonor
To thrast hit under most unworthy things
Right as hit were a lord and governor
would make him subject to his underlings
For if ye should have this entention
That al thing wyche is had of every wight
Should more be set of reputation
Than he that has or aweth hit by right
ye do your self shame and great vnhyght
So foul things / sith ye deem them youres
Submyttynge you as in your own sight
To things where of ye ben the possessours
At your desert this falls verament
The kind of man loo stands in this degree
That only than he is most excellent
when that he knows his own dygnyte
And there a geyn eftsoon when that he
Ne can not know his own worthynesse
He is be nethen bestyalyte
And vndercast to al wrecchednesse
A rude best his nature uses thus
To may not know hemselfen kyndly
In man hit is full foul and vycyous
His nature to forleten folely
And thus your error shows openly
There ye supposes that such accydentes
your kende that is so worthy and so hy
Should make fair by foreyn ornaments
Hit may not be that reason has forfended
For if such accydentes be fair and gay
These accydentes ought to be commended
But that covered thing hit is no nay
In his fylthe a bydeth still al way
And I deny and utterly dyspreue
That any thing is good / that harmen may
Or ought the hauer noyen or a grieve
Now is this soth in certain as I guess
Thou wolt hit say / I gabbe not of this
For often hit falls that tresour and riches
Makes her lords for to fare a mysse
Sith every wrecched foul that cursed is
Such gold and tresour vhos that ever hit be
He will coueyte and will that hit were his
And therefore put his lyffe in Ieparde
And only them he holds worthyest
That of such gold and tresour haueth y now
For vhy he besyeth him with outen rest
To have that good ne recketh he not how
But thou that leuest in such a dread now
As though you should with swerd or spear be stonge
Had you ben pour hit had been for thy prow
Be fore the theffe thou may have gone and song
Oh / wonder clear is this felycyte
Of mortal thing and worthy to be soft
That reueth a man of his tranquyllyte
And makes him destrobled in his thought
I note how dear that bliss may be boght
A man to win such a welfulnesse
Thou art in pees the vhyle thou have hit noght
when thou hit have thou lesest thy sykernesse
Metru^. v. Capitulu^ x.
Felix nimiu^ prior etas.
Phia loquitur. Full wonder blysful was that rather age
what time yt men couth halde them self a paid
To feed them self with out such outrage
With mete that true feldes had a rayd
With akernes there hunger was a laid
And so they couth cessen there talent
They had as yet no quenty craft assayd
As clarrey for to make / ne pyment
To dye purper couthe they not bethynke
The white flees with venem tyryen
The rennynge river gave them lusty drink
And holsom sleep they took upon the grene
The Pynus that so full of branches ben
That was there house to keep them under shade
The sea to kerue no ships were there seyn
There was no man that marchaundyse made
Them leked not to saylen up and down
But kept them self there they were bred
Tho was full husche the cruel claryoune
with eyger hate there was no blod y shed
Ne there with was none armor yet be bled
For in that time ho durst have been so wood
Such bitter wondes yt he would not dred
wythouten mede for to lose his blood
I would our time might tornen certainly
And these manners always with ous dwell
But love of having brenneth fervently
More ferser than the very fire of hell
Allas ho was that man yt would him mel
This gold and gemmes yt were covered thus
That first began to mine I can not tell
But that he found a perel precious
Prosa. vj. Capitulu^.xj.
Quid aute^ de dignitatibus
Phia loquitur. But furdermore what shall I tell or sayn
Of hye power or else of dygnyte
The wyche ye magnyfyeth so in vayn
As though they should as hye as heuens be
Rygh as a thing of hye felycyte
And folely ye fails al a mysse
Ne can ye not wythyn your wits se
where that very dygnyte and power is
And if hit so be that a wrecched wight
As often has hit fallen hyre before
In hye astate or dygnyte be dyght
How fers a flod may harmen you so sore
The fire of Ethna may not harmen more
That blasteth out and brenneth every side
Such a wreche had better ben un bore
Than such astates should to him betyde
And certes thou remembreste as I guess
Of the consulers dygnyte
That was the hyeste astate of worthynesse
In the beginning of your lyberte
They were so full of pride and cruelte
wherefore your elders would hit have remeued
And for the same cause fro your cite
The name of king was voyded and repryued
And if so be that good men be raised
To hye astate as seldom is that chance
Ho is therefore of reason to be preysed
Not that astate / but there good governance
So than in virtue lies the suffysance
where by that honor comes to dygnyte
And dygnyte not by contraryance
Makes not virtue worshypful to be
This power which yt is so sore y soft
So dear worth and so clear in your entente
what thing is hit / and vhy behald ye nofte
To wiche things ye ben presydent
And vher upon your power is extent
what if thou saw a wrecched mouse a lone
To cleymen power or government
Of other myse / thou would laughed sone
And if thou would behalden in thy mind
what is the mortal body of a wight
A freyler thing ne shall thou none find
That less has of power or of might
How sone yt may beflayed or a fryght
Or ded by bytynge of a little fly
Or by some worm that crepen may in right
withyn a man's body preuely
And ho is he yt may do strength or fors
Or vsen might or power / say me this
But only on a corruptyble cors
Right of the same kende / that is his
Other on thing / that more unworthy is
As on fortune / or vhose might may attain
By hye astate / power ^or worthynesse
A fre courage to arteyn or constrayn
Steadfast that has hemself in rest
And knetteh himself in reason every dele
May thou his piece beryue out of his breast
un to thy will his purpose to compelle
Of such a man (zeno) as some time yt be fell
A tyrant would have arted him by peynes
A certain counsel to be wrey and tell
The wiche yt was conspyred him a geynes
But then this man bote of his tongues end
And in his face hit spete / so that he
This torment wiche this same tyrant wend
To have been matter of his cruelte
This wise mau to show his lyberte
Of fre courage that may not be constrained
He made yt cause of virtue for to be
And set at naught how sore yt he were peyned
And what is that of auger or of grame
wherewith a man a another may oppress
That he ne may sustain of him the same
if afterward such adventure encresse
As we have learned that Busirides
His own gestes often had slain
And afterward hemself of Hercules
That was his geste: was don to death a geyn
And Regulus full many one in batel
Of men of affryke / as thou have yt rad
Had taken vhen he had gouernayle
And cast them in to bonds sore and sad
And afterward in manner was he glad
For fere of pain to put forth his hands
To tho that first of him were sore a drad
Than was he fetred in the same bonds
And would you setten by a man's might
That may not let the same thing be wrought
un to him selfen of the same wight
The wiche he has in to desese y brought
And if so were as seems in thy thought
if hye astate might kendly conteyn
Any proper good / I ne doubt yt naught
To wicked folk ne should yt nener atteyn
Contrarious things yt manner has not used
As for to ben coniuned and y met
For ever yet nature hit has refused
And sith yt often wicked men ben set
In hye astate as yt will not be let
Than seweth this that no good kendly
Has that astate yt suffers to be knet
To such that ledeth there lives wyckedly
And loo the same I may well deem of al
Fortunes goods be they more or less
That most abundantly be wont to fall
To wicked people full of cursednesse
For of al these I may suppose and guess
That ho so has strength a mighty man he is
And in wham may be founden great swyftnesse
That man is swyft / so most yt needs be
Thus musyke makes a musytion
And phisyke a physician to be
Thus rethoryke makes a retoryen
The kende of every thing (we may well se
Most needs induce his kendly properte
Ne suffers not to be co^iuned to
None effects of contraryouste
But al adverse things puts him fro
But loo your wordly riches has not that
For to restrain your cursed auaryce
Neither the power of none hye astate
May make him strong that is bound in vice
That ledeth his lyffe in lusts and delyce
Ne dygnyte in shreued folk bestaued
Makes not them the worthyer of price
But rather makes them unthrifty to be knowed
And vhy is this? in soth for ye delyten
And reioycen in your fantasy
False names on things to conterfeten
Al other / than becomes them kendly
For vhy / the effects preueth openly
That dygnyte / that power / that richesse
There names bears al un properly
As I have showed / yt sueth even express
And too this same I may concluden well
Of al fortunes things (as seems me)
In which there is no bounte naturel
Ne cause vhy they should desired be
For selde yt is as every man may se
They Joins them to good and virtuous
As may thastate of good plente
Of foreyn thing to neden noght at al
But in hit self to have al suffysance
Of al good to speak in general
And furdermore what say thou / erren they
That such a thing a counten honorable
The wyche is souereyn good / for soth nay
For such a thing may not be repreueable
That to al mortal folk is desyreable
where to is set al there entention
And also power / is hit commendable
Hit is full good hit is no questyon
How should might fro such a thing be ryued
The wyche of al thing is worthyest
And noble renoune should yt be repreued
That is a thing so worthy and honest
Sith thing that is most excellent and best
Must need be worchypful and reverent
For every wight to win hit is full pressed
And there to traueleth with there hole intent
But for to speak of anger or dystresse
Or sorrow / murnynge / anguesse / other pain
Such things may not be in blysfulnesse
Therefore of ^uche hit needs noght to sayn
For in full little things men be fayn
To have and use that may them do solace
And only this to haven in certain
Al wordly men enforcen to purchase
And for this cause desires they abundance
As lordshyp / fame / delyce / and dygnyte
There by to win and have suffysance
Of honor / reuoune / might / and glad to be
Than is hit good as every man may se
That men so fast seeks in this wise
And so traueleth euerych in his degree
To win hit as they can best deuyse
In wyche desire apereth openly
How great and mighty is the strengh of kende
Sith also be yt that full dyuersly
Dyscordeth loo the sentence of there mind
yet al these consents at one end
As for to love a thing that seems best
For here to nature does there hertes tend
Till this be had they may not be in rest
Metru^ ij. Capitulu^ iiij.
Qua^tas reru^ flectat.
Phia loquitur. Hit lust to shown by subtyl songs
And by ye son of delectable strenges
How yt nature that mighty is and strong
Attempreth the government of things
This great world with al his varynges
So by her laws keeps and susteyneth
And by bonds that haueth no losynges
Full sykerly she byndeth and restrayneth
For though the lion of that strange land
That hight Pene / the fair cheynes bear
And takes mete by gefte of man's hand
And of there sturdy masters haueth fere
Of vhom they often styffe strokes bear
And softely they suffers to be beat
yet be they ones losed of that gere
There old courage will they not forgete
For if the hot blod of any best
There foul mowthes have made red
There hye courage that long has been a rest
Hit will repair in to there cruelhed
He casts then his cheynes over head
And roreth fast remembrynge as yt were
His master first of whom he was a dred
with blody tethe than wol he al to tere
The bird that syngeth on ye branch on hye
if he be closed in a cage of tree
And lusty men him serves besely
with metes that full sweet and lusty be
if he may ones skyp out and be fre
His Insty mete he casts under foot
And to the wode full fast seeks he
And begins to trute with a lusty note
A yerde that is grown up in lenght
with man's hand bowed down to ground
if that the hand remitteh of his strenght
The crop full sone will up a geyn rebounde
And when the son is passed days stound
As undergone the wawes of the weste
Full sone he has a preuy path y found
And in the morning a ryseth in the este
And so a geyn the day begins spring
Thus every thing rejoices in his kende
There recours a yenwarde for to bring
And besely to tornen and to wend
Loo this we should conceyuen in our mind
That al things must there order sew
And the beginning Ioynen with the end
And to them selfen make a cercle true
Prosa iij. Capitulu^ v.
Vos quoque terrena.
Phia loquitur. But ye erthly bestes / as yt seems
with a full thynne Imagynation
your beginning as yt were ye dremeth
I led by natural inclination
And haueth in manner blind inspection
As of the end of very blysfulnesse
But error of your false affection
Wythdraeth you to very wrecchednesse
Behalde and se now if hit may be so
where men atteyn mowen in this wise
Un to that end that nature draeth them to
Of blysfulnesse so as them self deuyse
if so be that there nyce couetyce
Of money / honor / or such other thing
May make them fully to them self suffyce
That no good lack as un to there lekynge
And than by these will I grant and seyn
That a man may leven blysfully
But than efte in that other side a geyn
if they may not performen verily
All that they have behyght them utterly
But many goods lacks that they mysse
will hit not than apperen plenerly
As a full false color of blysfulnesse
But first of the I ask this demand
As thou that were not yet full long a gone
In wordly welthes fully habundante
whether thou a monge tho welthes euerychone
As in thy courage / never feldest thou none
Dystresse or greuance no time in thy mind
Boecius) Certain quod I yt I can think upon
In that astate couth I me never find
That I ne was always somewhat in dystresse
Phia) And was not this quod she the cause vhy
That some thing lacked the as dyst you guess
The wyche thou would have had presently
And some thing eke thou had sykerly
The wyche thou would gladly have forgon
Boecius) Right as ye sayn right so hit is quod I
Phia) Thou wyllest quod she ye presence of that one
And the absence of that other than
Boecius) quod I I grant I can not go there fro
Phia) Now than quod s;he needs every man
The same thing that he desires to
Boecius) Full soth hit is quod I him needs so
Phia) Now than quod she he that needs ought
He is not suffysant (Boecius) I said no
As to him selfen he suffyseth not
Phia) when thou she said were full in thy riches
Thou suffered then this same vnsuffysance
Boecius) How else quod I so hit is express
Phia) Than is hit so quod she that abundance
Of wordly good may never a man a vaunce
As to him selfen that he may suffyse
And need naught of foreyn purueyance
And this is that they hight to a complyse
And this is to be consydred I trow
That money has no kendly resystens
For to defend the lords that them owe
That they ne may be rafte by vyolence
Boecins) I grant well quod I to your sentence
Phia) And what quod she though yt thou sedyst nay
Sith every day men does there dylygence
The strengest for to get hit if he may
For vhereof else be quarelles moved
That men al day in courts them complayn
But for there good is falsely them bereued
By fors or fraud and asks hit a geyn
Boecius) In sothe quod I hit is right as ye seyn
Phia) Loo then quod she needs every man
Of socour and of foreyn help certain
As for to keep the money that they han
Boecius) Ho is that may denyen this quod I
PHia) And then quod she should him need none
Of such defense ne ward certainly
Ne had he that money that he may forgon
Boecius) There is quod I no doubt there upon
Phia) Loo than quod she al your affyance
Is turned you un to reuerse a none
For hit bereueth you your suffysance
where by ye wene in ese for to be
And brings you in anguysse and dystresse
Of foreyn help to have necessyte
yet would I know the manner wise express
How need may ben voyded by riches
where rich men ne hungreth never a dele
Or where they may not thursten wylt you guess
where they ne may no cold in winter feel
But un to this thou wolt answer me sone
That rich men have vherwyth every day
There cold / there thurst / there hunger to for done
As un to this in all I sey not nay
In sothe this will I graunten that they may
By there good be comforted at there need
But utterly to putten need a way
That power have they not wythowten dread
For sith this need that always gapeth so
To be fulfilled / and after more hit gredeth
Is such a thing that never may be do
Of kende ne speak I naught yt Iytel needs
But auaryce that no thing fully fedeth
Ne may not be fulfilled with habundance
But in to more necessyte you ledeth
why trow ye there by to have suffysance
Metru^ iij. Capitulu^ vj.
Qua^uis fluente dives
Phia loquitur. AL were hit that the rich covetous
Had al of gold full rennynge a river
And also feel of stones precious
As in his neck he might hem selfen bear
And o^en on fylde his lands for to air
His business yet till that he shall dey
He will not leave / ne when he lies on bear
Al his riches ne shall him not convey
Prosa iiij. Capitulu^. vij.
Sed dignitates.
Phia loquitur. VHether dygnytes to such as them win
May make them fully worshypful to be
Other impressen virtue them wythyn
And make vice out of there hertes fle
Not so for soth thou may thy selfen se
Hit is not wont to a voyden wickedness
But vice that was al close in preuyte
Hit makes fully to be known express
where of hit is I have rygh great dysdeyn
That such wicked men and surfetours
Should any time in dygnyte be seyn
There fore hit was that one Catullius
when he saw one that hight Nomius
Set in a sete of worship in the town
He called him a postem venomous
Al full of atter and corruption
Ne seyst thou not what shame and velony
To such shrewde wicked folk hit is
For to be set in such honor on hye
For were not that / yet there unworthiness
Of other folk should known be the less
And what perylous would thou standen at
Er thou would bear an office / shall I guess
with a such cursed man dedecorate
Ne I ne may not demen in my wit
That such wrecches should ben honorable
And worth that worship though they have hy^
That been there to unworthy and unable
But if thou saw a wise man and an able
And hoelly al fulfilled with sapyence
would thou deem that man as repreueable
And as unworthy to that excellence
Boecius) I said no ( Phia) now certes the^ ^ she
These dygnytes belongs properly
Only to virtue and to honest
And virtue shall transporte them verily
To wyche she is conjoined sewyngly
And for as mychel as such reverence
Received of the people comenly
Accords not always with conscience
Ne to that honor wych that they receyuen
Ne may not make them worthy for to be
Than may we clearly known and conceyuen
That honor has in propre no bewte
As even worthy to that dygnyte
And most to this ye awth to taken head
The mo folk that despyseth them perde
The more abiecte they ben hit is no dread
So than as dygnyte may not suffyse
To maken srewes worth no reverence
But rather makes that men them will despise
Though they honor them in there presence
yet they despise them in there conscience
There dygnytes so makes them to be know
And clerly shows to folks there offense
Of whom they ben despised as they owe
And this is not vnponysshed sykerly
For they revenge them on there dygnyte
The wyche they have defouled wrecchedly
As with there vice and there unhonest
But that thou might thy selfen know and se
That very honor falls in no wise
By such astates that transytory be
Now understand what I the shall deuyse
I suppose that a man of hye renoune
That often has had the astate of consuler
Should come a monge a strange nation
That they ne knew what astate he bare
Trowest you they would him honouren there
For his astate thou wolt answer me nay
But if honor in such astates were
In kend a propre thing / than would I say
There kendly office should they not forlete
Though that he went un to the worlds end
As fire ne may not cessen of his hete
Vhyle that hit fire is where yt ever hit wend
But honor is no propre thing of kind
To dygnyte / but false opinion
As nyce men deuyseth in there mind
where fore a monge a strange nation
That naught ne knows of that dygnyte
He is honored as a another man
In strange land thou seyst this may well be
But look that land vher that astate began
where that hit should always his honor han
Stands hit always in his honor there
But of the prouostry what say thou than
That vhylom was astate of hye power
Now is hit no thing but an Idel name
And loo the charge of senators rent
Now at this day hit stands in the same
Though that some time hit was full reverent
A man some time was holden excellent
That had the charge of vytayl in the town
Thus up so down is the world y went
Now is hit of no reputation
As we have said a little here beforn
A thing that has no bewty properly
Now has hit honor and now hit has forlorn
After the use of men's fantasy
Sith dygnyte ne may not kendly
Inducen very cause of reverence
But often hit is defouled sykerly
By them that uses hit with insolence
And if they now be fair and now not so
As times have there transmutation
And if there bewty thus them passes fro
After man's estymatyon
what is there / after your opinion
Of bewty in them worthy to be soght
Sith that they ben of such condytion
How should they give that they ne haueth noght
Metru^ iiij. Capitulu^ viij.
Qua^uis se tirio.
Phia loquitur. Though proud Nero with his lechery
Clothed him with purpur tyryen
And with full rich perry ryally
Of lyffe he was unthrifty and unclean
That he was lothly every wight to seyn
yet gave he seytes to the senators
How sholdest thou trow them blysful for to ben
Tho that of wrecches takes such honors
Prosa v. Capitulu^ ix.
An vero regna.
Phia loquitur. But what trowest you for to ben a king
Other with kings to ben famylyer
would you hold hit for a noble thing
That may ye make strong and mighty here
Boecius) what else quod I should I trow yt were
Phia) ye quod she when that there felycyte
Shall always stonden in his welthes clear
And ever a bide in perdurabylyte
But elder age of time that is y went
Ensamples has of great vnstabelnesse
And also of this time now present
we se hit preued every day express
That kings falls fro there welfulnesse
And un to very myschef ben y brought
Ow / clear and noble thing that renoune is
To save hit seluen that suffyseth not
For if that realms of such regalte
And governance of lands long and wide
May make a man to have felycyte
what if him lacks ought in any side
Than must his wealth some vhat slake and slide
And myschef enter for vnsnffysance
And though hit be so as hit may betyde
That kings haueth in there governance
Much folk at there commandment
yet shall we find many a nation
That been to kings not obedyent
Ne haldeth them at no reputation
Than here of ensues this conclusyon
where fails might that causes blysfulnesse
There is no mean in this dyuysyon
Vnmyght is there that causes wrecchednesse
There is none erthly king this dare I sey
That is so mighty in his governance
But mo there ben that will him not obey
Than be constreyned at his ordynance
In these his power lacks suffysance
And if that both / his power and vnmyght
Should ben counterpeysed in balance
His vnpower would be the more of wight
Sith wrecchednesse comes of vnpower
As may not be wythsayd by no reason
And loo there is no king that leueth here
But his vnmyght has in proportion
As for to make a just comparyson
well much more than his power is
Than will there ensuen this conclusyon
Loo that his more part is wrecchednesse
A king there was that had experyence
Of great perel and often was in dread
He made a man be set in his presence
And made a sword to hang a boue his head
Fastened by a little sotel thread
That every man might wnderstand and se
Loo break this threde than is this man but ded
So stent a king always in Iuparde
what is this power yt noght may remewe
The bitter bytynge of this business
Ne the pryckes may he not exchwe
Of al this dread and al this heaviness
These kings loo would leave in sykernesse
But certainly they can not come there to
And ever more they seek hit as they guess
And ever the far they ben a way there fro
But they reioycen mighty to be hold
And wylt thou trow him mighty for to be
That may not worken that he faynest would
Or for to walken with a company
Of mighty men that lusty ben to se
And at his bidding al a realm a rereth
And yet him selfen stondeth in this degree
He dredeth the same that he fereth
And for he would mighty seem and strong
He must put him selfen in danger
As of the main wyche he is among
And of his lyffe he stands in a where
Or with a king to be famylyer
To what hit shall a veil I can not sayn
Sith often is hit showed a monge ous here
That kings of there main have be slain
And often times is this y showed express
Of some that with kings haueth be nigh
That these kings of there cruelnesse
Haueth them put at myschef suddenly
Some time styred by malice and envy
Of wicked folk that worse ben than fendes
And kings often stands slyperly
And if they fallen falls eke there friends
For loo Nero that cursed emperor
Made Seneca his own death deuyse
That was his master and his governor
And Antoninus in the same wise
Papynyan that had him don seruyse
And a full mighty man had long ben
He made his knights full of cowardyse
That with there swerdes al they should him slain
And both ij. yet would they have been glad
To have forlete there power utterly
And Seneca loo all the good he had
He would have given hit Nero wyllyngly
And ben exyled ever perpetuelly
Forsakynge al his occupation
And so have lived solytaryly
And led his lyffe in contemplation
But he that menteth downward for to go
His own wight will draw him down in have
And therefore nether of them both to
Ne might his purpose haven at last
This power than that every man so fast
Desires thus / what is hit would I se
Sith he that has hit is there of a gast
Ho so will forlete hit may not syker be
And vhen thou would hit wyllyngly forsake
Loo at thy will thou may hit not forgon
And friends wyche yt fortune does the make
And virtue not / what profyt may they don
when lusty fortune forth is fro the gone
Than al her friends with her goes in fere
A more perylous myschef is there none
Than is thy foo wyththe famylyer
Metru^ v. Capitulu^ x.
Qui se volet.
Phia loquitur. Ho so desires mighty for to ben
And of his foes to have the vyctory
First his courage that is so fers and kene
He must repressen well and myghtely
So that the foul lust of lechery
May have no manner mastery in his mind
For though thou be so hawte and so hye
That men the dredeth in the land of Inde
And eke the I Will that ferrest is of al
Out in the west that Tyle cleped is
Be to the suget as thy bound thral
yet if thy foul derke business
with sore complayntes of thy wrecchednesse
Thus in there bounds haldeth the so fast
That thou ne might them voyden ne repress
I say hit is no power that thou have
Prosa vj. Capitulu^ xj.
Gloria vero quam fallax.
Phia loquitur. But hye renoune how full of vanyte
How foul hit is and often deceyuable
As a tragedyen in his dyte
Not causeles thus cries in a fable
Ow / renoune seyth he false and varyable
To many a thousand of thyn homagers
In no thing else art thou commendable
But as a wind that swells in there years
For many one by false opinion
Of nyce folk have had a hugy name
But certainly a foul confusyon
Hit is / so falsely for to have a fame
For needs return to them most shame
when yt they ben commended wrongfully
And though they have deserved yet that same
what shall a wise man furdred be there by
That meteth not the mesure of his mede
By veyn rumor of folks audyence
But puts all the meret of her deed
In very virtue of there conscience
And if thou hald hit for an excellence
Thy noble renoune for to ben extended
Than will hit enswe even of consequence
That thou were foul but if you were commended
But as I said a little here beforn
That needs must be many a nation
To wyche one man's name may not be born
The wyche as in thyn estymatyon
A man of worshype is and of renoune
Loo than as for the most quantyte
Of al this little wordly regyon
He must needs vnrenouned be
I hald hit not full much expedyent
Of comen people to be commendable
That haueth no reason in there Judgment
For hit is fletynge and not perdurable
They dyscord in dryth and moisture / for fire is dry and air is mostey this
dyscord lets them for to meddle / that eueryche keeps his kendly place Also
the air and the water accords in moisture / and they dyscordeth in hete and
cold. for air is hot and water cold. vvyche dyscorde lettethe the^ to
meddle. water and earth accords in cold and dyscordeth in moisture and drythe
/ for the earth is dry and the water moystey Fire and earth accords in
drouthe so that the earth may not dysioyne fro his place / ne the fire fro his
and they dyscord in cold and hete / wherefore they may not meddle but euerych
keeps his kendly place. Also the elements that of qualyteys ben contrary / he
byndeth to gether by intermene elements acordynge in qualyteys with both /
as fire and water that been very contrary in qualyteys / ben bounden to gedres
with air that is intermene acordyng with fire in hete and with water in
moisture. Earth and air ben knet to gedres by water that is entermene
according with earth in cold and with air in moisture.

For clear understanding of this chapter / hit is for to know that he that
shall help a another / hit needs that he be mighty / wise / and well vvylled.
For if a thing be asked of a man the vvyche he may not do ne can not / ne his
will skylefully may not consent / of very right he may deny hit / for no such
thing ought to be asked. Therefore first he shows the suffysance of god in
might / in asmoche as he governs all the world / not by great labor as
creaturs governs / but by perdurable reason. For sith he first set the world
in governance the natural progression never varyed / but haldeth himself alvvay
in the first ordynance. Also in producynge of creaturs he shows his
benevolence and good will to all that is consonant to reason. In that he shows
that is to say In that he makes the elements as sede and matter vvherof ben
engendered al erthly things. And thus does he not compelled of no foreyn cause
as men ben compelled / but only of the habundance of his goodness* vvyche is
and ever was perfe^ly in himself / the vvyche goodness was so entensyfly
habundant that hit must needs of reason be exte^ded by co^munyon: Also he
shows the suffysance of his vvysedom and conning / in as much as all that
ever was / is / or shall be her after / hit is open to him / in his eternal
exsampler or mitrour of his mind that al things co^prehendeth presently at
ones. And sith so vvysely produces hit in to his being / not only in general
/ but al parts in specyal absolutely vvythout defaut or need of any exterior
cause.

And in this is shevved the vvysedom of god in asmoch as he is the formal cause
of al thing as in exsampler. After that he has shevved the suffysance of god
in might / goodness / and vvysedom / in governance of these things in specyal
/ he commends the same suffysance in general in creation and governance of
some other things of more deper conceyte of inward speculation / i^ that he
shows and reherseth the sotel knytting of the iiii. elements / as is before
said Furdermore also in creation of the mean spiret of treble kend / vvyche some
phylosophres as plato and his folders called anima mundi / the soul of the
world For cause that Plato savve his master Socrates e^poysened and put to
death for his sothe saying / he would not dyscouer his sotel conceytes ne the
preuy^es of nature to the rude people / but put the^ under manner of parables
and preuy words vvyche might enstore his vvysedo^ un to the time that men
would be better vvylled for to hyre truth. The greeks at that time wor shypped
the son and called him Apollo / god of vvysedo^ / fantasyng that he caused al
other things tobe. Fro vvyche error socrates dyssented and said that the
son was a formed creature / wherefore he was slain as is be fore said. And
before him Anaxagoras was exyled for the same cause. wherefore Plato left the
cite of Athenes and chose his habytation in a cite or place named Acadencia. In
vvyche place was often times earth quakes. This place he chose be cause his
dyscyples should ever leave in dread of there lives / vvyche dread should refrayn
foul passions of flesly lusts / and so for to a void the foul error of
Epicurenes that did put the fulfelycyte of man iu fleshly delight. Plato then
spekyng of the governance of the world in his book named Thimeus / says thus.

God of the same and ever a hydynge matter. and also of diverse matter and
varyable / meddled and made the third kende. Of the vvyche he took first one
part. sith ii. sith iii. and after iiii. after viii. after ix. and
after.xxvii. Of vyche he made the kende of this spyret or of this soul. And
the^ he fulfilled the interualles of these nombres vvythe mean proporcions / as
here after does appear.

I. dupla ii. sesqueal^a iii sesque^cia.iii. dupla viii sesqueotaua ix. tripla
xxvi^

Then this renge thus draen a long he dyuyded in ii. parts of the vvyche one
should conteyne even nombres and proporcions / and the other odd / so that the
beginning of either should be I. Then either of these nombres he brought in to
compace / and put the less Circle vvythyn the more. And the cyrcle of the same
nature that is to say of odd proportions he turned fro the right hand to the
lift hand. And the other of diverse nature that is to say of even proportions /
he turned fro the lift hand to the right hand / this may be perceived by this
figure foloyng

diagram of the celestial sphere Primu^ mobile mouetur motu vniformi ab orient
in occidentem.

Sphere planetarum mouea difformiter ab occidente in orientem.

Inter numeros exterioris sphere est proportio equalis.

Inter numeros i^terioris sphere est proportio inequalis.



Fordermore Philosophia shows her petito^n reasonable as to iii. things
asked First he asked the knowledge of soue reyn godd. He asked also i^ this
knowledge perseverance. And last he asked to be comforted by his souereyn
light. First she assigns a reason for this last petition / vvher she says
thou art clernesse / by vvyche al things ben beshened and clered. For
perseverance she assygneth the second reason and says / thou art peseable
rest to the meke.

Than assyneth she the third reason and says the to behald hit is the end to
vvyche man was made. For thou art begynner of al thou betest and conteynest al
/ thou ledest ous by natural inclination. thou art the path of the way of love
by vvyche we shall return to the. thou art all the bliss or heaven / thou art
the term and end of al our worldly labor / we seeks none other.

The understanding of this sotel conceyte is thus. where he says this saul
is meddled of the same matter and diverse / he understands that the saul of
the world was made of nature chaungeable and of nature unchangeable. Nature
unchangeable he calls the same / And chaungeable he calls diverse. The
even nombres for asmoche as they may be dyuyded in to even / he calls nature
chaungeable: And the odd nombres that may not eueuly be dyuyded / he calls
nature unchangeable. Furdermore for to shevve that this soul is princyple of
doblenesse / that is to say of vnyformyte that is in the first meueable vvyche
is the sterred fitmament that clerks callen Primu^r mobile / And also of
difformyte / that is in the planetes. he says that god cut these nombres in
ii. parts. of the vvyche one part contained odd nombres that longs to
vniformyte. And the other contained even nombres that perteyneth to difformyte
/ by cause of his diuisibilyte. And either of these parts he turned in to
compass in sign of circuler meuynge But the part of odd no^bres he turned for
the rygth hand to the lift hand in sign of vniformyte in meuynge. And the
other of even nombres / he turned fro the lift hand to the right / in sign of
difformyte. The right hend of the world is the este / the lift hand the vveste
/ the head is the southe / and the fete is the north. The meuynge of vniformyte
he put to meue fro este to west for so meueth the sterred sphere. The meuynge
of difformyte / he calls the speres of the vii. planetes / vvyche is meued
fro vveste to the este.

Also hit is to considre that both these nombres of odd and even meteth at one
/ that is callid unity / in sign of the onehed and the simplicite of god. at
whom begins and ends al creatures. upon hoos stablenesse is grounded
every meuynge / upon hoos vniformyte / al difforme and variable things ben
ryghted and reduced. Now then to the process and conceyte of Boecius where
he says thus. Thou god knettest the mean soul that is the soul of the world
of treble kend that meuythe al thing. He calls the soul of the world / the
spyret that next under god entendeth to the meuynge and governance of the
world / vvyche is mean be tuene the stabilyte of godhed and meueablenesse of
creaturs.

Of treble kind. For first he is partener of the kende of angeles vithe ben of
uniform kende / that is to say of simple nature / pure / and vnmedled: vvyche
Plato calls the same and ever a by^ynge matter / that is to seyn of perdurable
kende. The second part of his kende / may be called the alliance to these
erthly things. vvyche ben variable and corruptible and diverse in there being.
The third part of his kende / is medlede of these both / that is his alliance
to the spheres of sterres and of planetes. vvyche ben in part meueable and in
part vnmeueable. they be meueable in there kendly course / and vnmeueable in
co^tinua^ce of there course and ^e^yng of the place and order vvyche they were
set in at there first creation. How he meueth al thing the letter shows
furdermore where he saeth. Resoluynge hit in members consonant / that is to
say / departing his labor in to the meuynge of all the viii. spheres of
sterres and of planetes.

Hoos meuyng tho they be discordant in there course / co^trarious and diverse in
effects / yet be they so consonant to gedres / that none lets but rather
righteth and dresseth euerych other. For the viii. sphere meuyng west ward
rauesheth all the nether spheres and makes them to meue the same way / where
there natural meuynge is estevvarde. Also tho the effects of the planetes ben
diverse yet there kendly course of meuynge is such that euerych tempereth other
so that there fall no confusion in this worldly governance Also this meuynge he
dyuydeth in to ii. spheres or ii. cercles as is a fore said. by meuynge of
vviche / ben governed the cleme^tes with al there tra^smutatio^s and al other
things under the moon. And he retorneth un to him self / that is to say to
there where he began for there is no perfet meuynge but in compace that alvvay
retornethe in to him self / by vviche circuler meuynge or vvorchynge he
atteyneth by similitude of natural perfection to the deep mind of dyuyne
intelligence vviche is the last end of nature simpliciter. vvithoute^ other
And after this circuler meuynge by form of leke conuenience he tornethe heaven
and boute / dressynge the effects of al this meuynge after the souereyn
exempler of the hye purueance of god. Furdermore Boecius co^mendith the might /
the goodness / and the vvysedom of god / in making and gouernyng of erthly
things / and specially in the disposyng of man's soul vhee ^e says in the
text thus Thou auauncest or reysest souls and less lives of creatures and by
euenly or leke causes make them able to lift carts.

Vhen he has sotelly treted of the soul of the world than goethe he to the
soul of man and says that in manner leke as god has made the soul of the
world of iii. naturs / so has he made the soul of man.

For first he takes a matter perdurable that is to sey a nature immortal of the
kende af angeles and Joins hit to a nature chau^geable and corruptible / that
is the sensualyte drauen of this corruptible f^eshe. And of these it* resulteth
the third / vviche is in part dedly be cause of he body and also be cause of
his unstableness / And in part vndedly / be cause of the perdurable nature of
intelligence / vhereof he is partener This soul is druyded in to ii. compaces
of the vviche one is of perdurable nature that is reason / and meueth kendly fro
the right hand to the lift hand that is to say* he groundeth al his works
upon virtue / and so puts the^ in perfet execution* But the other circle of
sensualyte meueth in contrary for he groundeth al his works upon the flesh /
and so proceeds in to vicious lusts. But the reason must rauyshe the
sensualyte with him in to the way of virtue. or else must they both torn in
to mischefe

And so tho reason be stired and distract by error and rehellyon of sensualyte
/ yet must he return in to him self / beh^ldynge the excellence of his nature
/ not resting there proudly with Lucifer / but enserchynge and seki^ge by
thought and deuote prayer the de^e intelligence that is god. And there behald in
the mirror of eternal vvysedom what he ought to do. repres^ynge withdraw the
fire of love al vicious meuynges. For vhy thou god haste made the soul able to
hye carts (that is to say) to be re^ed in heaven. Thou sovvest in heaven and in
earth. First he makes the soul and puttethe hit in to this earthly body /
there for to encrese in meret and virtues. And sith when they ben ripe / he
takethe hem in to heaven: And how? For sothe the virtues that him self has
planted in the soul / he him self no^ysheth them vvythe ^yry bemes of love /
And makes them rypen in to full ^rute / and so return up to him fro vvhennes
they took there being.

Prosa x. Capitulu^ xix.
Quoniam igitur.
Phia loquitur. FOr as much as thou have seyn in this
wyche is imperfet good and to eschwe
The form of good also that perfet is
The wyche yt is to seken and to sue
Fro heuens forth our process to pursue
Hit is to shown as hit seems me
The very good that perfet is and true
what thing hit is and where hit might be
But first I hold yt nedeful to enquere
if such thing may ben in any kende
As we be forn dyffyned have while ere
Lest so be that in vayn our wits wend
And lest we be deceived at the end
As by a false Imagynation
Of thing that naught is formed in our mind
And so to lose our occupation
But yt we save our purpose hole and sound
That perfet good is / no wight may wythsayn
The wyche is in manner the well and ground
Of al good that is / thou be certain
There may no wight replyen there a geyn
if any thing have imperfection
That is be cause hit is not full ne pleyn
with perfet thing as in comparyson
For why in any general of kende
where any thing imparfet is / say I
A perfet thing also there may thou find
For if there were no perfet utterly
Sith lack of perfet is the cause why
That any thing imperfet may be preued
A perfet thing there must be sykerly
Fro wyche imperfet things be dyscryned
For why of things scars and dymynute
Nature took not her first production
But al hole complete and absolute
Fro al defaute and al corruption
And so fro thens made progressyon
Un to these lower things that we seyn
That less hauethe of perfection
And as hit were al void and empty ben
And if so be / as I have showed er this
There is an imperfet felycyte
Of frayel and feeble good / full sothe hit is
Another good and perfet must there be
Boecius) Full sothe is this quod I as seems me
Concluded also full and fermly
Phia) But now she said you must behald and se
where that this good is founden finally
The comen conceyte loo of man's mind
By reason is un to this point y brought
That god / that prince and auctor is of kende
Him self is good / in this they fails noght
Sith that there may no better thing be thought
Than god him self / this wot well every wight
That god is good and worthy to be soght
This doutethe none that reason seyth a right
yet reason will inducen furdermore
By very fors that in god perfetly
Is very good / in no wight may be more
He were not else called ryghteusly
The prince of things / I shall the tellen why
For else one were worthyer than he
That perfet good possessed pryncypally
That rather must and also elder be
For every thing that fully is perfet
Than any thing imperfet rather is
Now lest our process pass in infynyt
we be compelled for to graunten this
That souereyn god of perfet good y wys
Loo is fulfilled / than suethe here upon
Sith perfet good is very blysfulnesse
In god is perfet blysfulnesse a lone
Boecius) Full well quod I this I perceive and feel
There may no wight replyen here a geyn
Phia) I pray the quod she understand me well
How fermly is preued that we sayn
Loo / that of perfet good and souereyn
God is fulfilled by my conclusyon
Boecius) In sothe quod I this would I heren fayn
How ye hit preue by demonstration
Phia) That self quod she that is the prince of al
And full of souereyn good how seems the
That fro wythouten this good is fall
Or is hit in hem by kendly properte
And thynkest that ii. things must they be
God / the hauer / and his blysfulnesse
And in there substance have dyuersyte
This wolt thou not supposen as I guess
And if he have received of without
This blysfulnesse / then suethe sykerly
The geuer of that thing / is no doubt
Precelleth the receyuer certainly
But this we must confessen utterly
A bow al things god is excellent
And if this good in god be kendly
In substance and in reason dyfferent
The prince of things wyche yt we rehearse
Let se deuyse or fayn hit ho so may
Ho has conjoined these ij. diverse
He may no further by no manner way
But at last this dare I sothly say
A thing that diverse fro a another is
Hit may not be the same hit is no nay
Fro wyche hit is dyuersed so y wys
wherefore that thing that has dyuersyte
Fro souereyn good / in reason of nature
The same souereyn good hit may not be
And god forbede that any creature
As in his wit should passen so mesure
Of god our souereyn for to deem so
That keeps al and has ous in his cure
So perfet and so good there beth no mo
Loo this I trow perceyueth every man
That the kend of no thing utterly
May better ben than he that hit began
Than may I thus concluden finally
That he that is begynner verily
Of al thing that is / I say that he
In substance and in kende properly
This souereyn good he must needs be
Boecius) This is quod I concluded well and clear
Phia) And souereyn good quod she is blysfulnesse
Boecius) Right so quod I this granted I while er
Phia) Lo than quod she hit suethe here express
That god himself is souereyn blysfulnesse
Loo where hit is that thou so long have soght
Boecius) This must I quod I grau^ten and confess
your resons have me to that point y brought
Phia) That this quod she be preued fermly
Behald and here what I shall further sayn
ij. things that been diverse properly
They may not be ij. goods souereyn
For if there be dyscord be twene them tweyn
They may not ben the self and the same
Euerych that other is / thou be certain
Tho that they both be called on by name
if they be souereyn goods both ij.
Deuyse yt in his conceyte ho so may
if that this one good be that other fro
Imperfet ben they both hit is no nay
Sith nether ben wythouten other may
But thing that lacks of perfection
That hit be souereyn good thou wolt not say
Hit would includen contradiction
Then may they not be ij. thus ne diverse
This souereyn good as sueth here express
But blysfulnesse and god that we rehearse
This souereyn good in all wise hit is
That same thing that than is blysfulnesse
That same thing is souereyn deyte
Boecius) No thing quod I may truer be I guess
Ne worthyer of god concluded be
Phia) Than right quod she as geometres al
when they have showed there propositions
They brings in Porismus / yt they call
That been conceytes or conclusyons
And as in manner declarations
Of foresaid thing / right so shall I the feed
As suynge on my demonstrations
This correlary I give the to thy mede
Sith that by getynge of this blysfulnesse
Men ben blysful made / and wolt thou se
Blysfulnesse the souereyn godhed is
And eke the getynge of that deyte
Makes blysful / as hit is showed to the
But right as wysedom makes men be wise
And ryghtuosnesse ryghtuous for to be
I may conclude and suyngly deuyse
That by winning of dyuynyte
Men ben maked gods sykerly
Loo than is every blysful man parde
A god / this suethe also formally
Though that there be but one god kendly
In sothe yet by participation
Right well there may be many / not for thy
As in the astate of full perfectyon
Boecius) This is quod I full fair and precious
whether hit porysme or corrolary is
Phia) Hit is quod she more fair and glorious
That reason will annecten un to this
Boeus) I asked what Phia) quod she sith blysfulnesse
So much thing does in hit self conteyne
As honor / pouer / lust / fame / and richesse
whether al they ben as members will you sayn
wyche as of parts diverse in manner
This blysfulnesse compoundeth in this wise
In to a perfet body as hit were
Other thou trouest that some one thing of these
The same blysfulnesse does a complesse
In to one perfet thing substancyal
To whom these other as I do deuyse
Referred ben as to there pryncypal
Boecius) I would have this quod I declared fayn
Phia) Have we not said quod she yt blysfulnesse
Is good ( Boeus) yes said I / hye and souereyn
Phia) Add we quod she ye remanent un to this
That souereyn good before rehearsed is
Loo souereyn might and souereyn suffysance
Lust / fame / honor / one thing they ben y wys
with blysfulnesse wythouten varyance
This is that I would asken er of the
This suffysance / honor / delight / renoune
whether they be members of felycyte
As diverse parts does one thing compoune
Or thou have this consyderation
That al these wyche that we rehearsed han
To souereyn good should have relation
As to there head / this say me if thou can
Boecius) In sothe quod I now understand I well
what ye pnrposeth to enserchen here
But I desire to here of you and feel
This questyon that ye would make yt clear
Phia) I shall quod she said in this manner
if al these things wyche that we reherce
Of blysfulnesse in manner members were
Than must these members needs be diverse
For loo of parts this the nature is
That they diverse one body certainly
Shall make / but hit is showed er this
That al these ben one thing Boecius) ye quod I
Phia) They ben quod she no members sykerly
Sith they ben one / or else would hit sue
That blysfulnesse were made full wonderly
Of a membre that nature would exchwe
Boeus) This is quod I full sothe I doubt yt noght
But now full fayn the remanent would I se
Phia) Than al these things quod she must be brought
And to this good as chef referred be
And for this good full sothe hit is parde
Men desyren after suffysance
To have pouer or stand in hye degree
For hit is good they makes purueyance
The same I may deuysen suyngly
Of reverence / renoune / and lustynesse
They deem hit good that is the cause why
That they require hit with there business
Than is this good the very cause y wysse
And sum of al yt ought to be required
For thing that no good has in lekelynesse
Ne none in sothe / hit may not be desired
And there a geyn loo in contrary wise
A thing that is not good in no manner
yet if hit seems good as they deuyse
Right as they very right goods were
Men wylleth them / than will hit suen here
That bounte is the ground and cause of al
why things ought to be leave and dear
That any man of right desyren shall
And over this hit seems furdermore
That every thing that is the cause why
Loo that a another is desired fore
That cause is eke desired pryncypally
Right as be cause of hele finally
A man desires for to ride and play
His hele he does desyren sekerly
As well as for to ride hit is no nay
Sith al this thing yt thus desired is
The cause of al is pryncypal / bounte
This bounte is desired than y wys
As much as that thing in his degree
But we have granted that felycyte
is cause these things euerychone
Desired ben / then sueth hit parde
That blysfulnesse desired is a lone
Of this hit seems and hit suethe loo
That then this good and very blysfulnesse
In substance ben one thing and no mo
And verily the same thing express
Boecius) I can not say quod I in sothfastnesse
How any wight your words may blame
Phia) But god quod she and very blysfulnesse
As we have showed ben one thing and ye same
Boecius) Right as ye sayn quod I hit is full clear
Phia) Than may I quod she well and sykerly
The sentence and the sum of this matter
Loo thus concluden full and finally
That the substance loo of god on hy
Is set and founded in none other place
But in the same good eternally
To find hit there god send the grace
Metru^ x. Capitulu^ xx.
Huc oe^s pariter venite.
Phia loquitur. How comes al ye that been y brought
In bounds full of bitter business
Of erthly lust a bydynge in your thought
Here is the rest of al your business
Here is ye port of pees and restfulnesse
To them that stands in storms of desese
Only refuge to wrecches in dystresse
And al comfort of myschef and mysese
For all that ever Tagus Tagus is a river of Spayn / full of golden greynes.
does you bid
with his golden grauel stones bright
Other Erinus Erinus is a river in Asya the less / al full of greynes of gold.
with his strondes read
May given you for to plese your sight
Other the river wyche that Indus Indus is a river of India / that rennethe in
to the red see / full of perry and much precyousty*
hight
That is full nigh the hot regyon
wyche the grene stones with his might
with white perelles torneth up so down
They shyneth wonder clear un to your ye
But your insyght in sothe they makes blind
And with there derke clouds perylously
with vanyte your hertes does they bynd
For how that ever they plesith to your mind
As preysed worth full many a thousand pound
yet ben they full unworthy in there kend
As noreshed in the caves of the ground
But the shynynge of that souereyn light
By wyche the hye heaven governed is
Chaceth a way the foul derke night
That has your souls drawn al a mysse
This souereyn light if you may seyn y wysse
Behald hit well and keep hit if thou conne
And thou shall se that in regard of this
There be no bright bemes in the son
Prosa xj. Eapitulum xxj.
Assencior inquam.
Boecius loquitu TO this quod I / I must needs assen^
your words haueth me knet so fermly
By reason of your subtel argument
Phia) what if you knew quod she verily
This good / what would you than set there by
if thou might known clearly what hit were
Boecius) I would hit prese at infynyte quod I
If I might known god in that manner
Phia / I shall quod she as very reasonable
Show the that apertly er thou go
So that these things stand ferme and stable
That we be fore this have consented to
Boecius) They must quod I we may not go there fro
Phia) Have I not showed the plenerly quod she
That al these things that been desired so
Of fell folk ben full of vanyte
And sith they ben diverse hit is no nay
They be no very goods perfetly
For when that one fro other is a way
No full ne very goods utterly
To no wight may they bring certainly
But when they ben assembled in to one
In workynge and in form verily
Than is hit good and else is hit none
So that this power and this suffysance
Gladsomnesse / honor / and nobelte
Be right the same and one thing in substance
And if they lacks of this unity
There is not why they should desired be
Ne loved / if ye do look well a bowte
Boecius) while er quod I thus have ye showed perde
Full true hit is hit may not ben in dowte
Sith so hit is that good be they naught
when dyuersyte is founden them between
And when that they to onehed ben y brought
Than be they good as every man may seyne
what is that makes them good for to been
But the getynge of this unity
Boecius Right so hit is quod I right as ye mean
Phia) But every thing yt good is then quod she
why is hit good / wylt you not graunten this
That for hit has partycypatyon
Loo of this foresaid good (Boecius) I said eyes
Phia) Than must you quod she by the same reason
Grant also this conclusyon
That good and one ben one thing verily
For things lekely of condytyon
Not diverse in effects kendly
In substance ben they one thing and no mo
Boecius) Fro this quod I y may not go a side
Phia) And know you not that every thing also
That is quod she / so long shall a bide
while hit is one / and if hit so betyde
That this thing forleteth to be one
Is hit not then dyssolued and destroyed
Boecius) And how quod I Phia) I shall the tell anon
Thou seyst thy self that in a best quod she
while soul and body ben to geder knet
And so abides in there unity
This know you well a best men calls hit
But when this onehed is dyuyded
As by there bothes separation
That no best hit is / hit is perceived
But careyn tornynge to corruption
And eke also the body of a wight
while that the members stands kendly
On / in that form yt nature has them dyght
He is a man this know thou verily
But if they ben departed sykerly
So that this unity be don a way
That same thing hit is not utterly
Ne no man's body ye sothe to say
And in the same wise hit stent y wys
Of every thing to thynken in thy thought
The while hit stands one / that while hit is
And when hit fails one then is hit noght
For hit is to corruption y brought
Boecius) In sothe quod I I can not other find
Of every creature that may be soght
This must be sothe by very course of kende
Phia) But wylt you trow that any thing quod she
Has this of natural intention
As to forleten utterly to be
And lust to torn in to corruption
Boecius) To have quod I consyderation
To bestes wyche that haueth of nature
Both will and nel by fre election
I will not trow hit of no creature
That but they be constrained of without
There kendly being will they not forgon
Ne wyllyngly be ded hit is no doubt
Therefore hit is that bestes euerychone
Loo al there labor sets here upon
Them selfen for to save and keep in hele
And wyllyngly to death there wylleth none
I note ho is / with death that lust to dele
But nevertheless as yet I am in doubt
Of trees and eke of herbs and of grass
And stone that utterly is live without
Phia) There is naught why to douten in this case
Sith thou may se quod she be fore thy face
And every day thou have experyence
That trees and herbs wexyth in that place
As to there kend is most conuenyence
So that asmoche as there nature suffyseth
They suffers not to schorchen ne to dye
For some of them in fair feldes ryseth
And some wexyth in the hills hye
And some does in marreys multyply
And some to the hard roches clyngeth
And some there be that in the sands dry
That bareyn ben full plenteously spryngeth
And if a wight yt noght there kendes knows
would elleswhere them plant they dye as fast
For nature gives to euerych that him owes
And laboreth yt as long as they may lest
That they be not destroyed ne down y cast
Now and what say thou of there cheuysance
As though there mouths were in earth y thraste
So by the rote they draw there sustenance
And so the kendly moisture after this
In to the stock and rynde hit sends wide
And yet this moisture that most tender is
wythynforth always hit does a bide
A geyn the wedres hard / hit self to hyde
wythouten has hit sadness of the tree
wythouten that the bark on every side
That may defense a geynst the wedres be
Here may you well behald and taken hyde
Loo how nature entendeth besely
Every thing to nory hen by his sede
That year by year does cresse and multyply
Not only for a time sykerly
But they ben sotel gynnes as hit were
That hit may stonden perdurabelly
By generation in that manner
And things that without souls ben also
Does they not euerych besely entende
To that his nature aperteyneth to
why else does a flamme of fire ascend
Or why does heavy earth so descend
But for that euerych has conuenyence
To certain place to wyche as to there end
They meueth / so they have no resystence
For every thing entendeth sykerly
As ferforthe as hit may have suffysance
Tho things to conseruen besely
with wyche hit has in kend his accordance
Right even as thing that of contraryance
All that they may corrupts and destroys
Right so have they there kendly governance
For to exchwe al thing that them noyeth
And stones that so hard and strong ben
How they wythstandeth there partytion
And clyngeth fast as every man may seyn
To save the parts fro corruption
And things that so floeth up and down
Air and water parts esely
By vyolence / fro wyche dyuysyon
To onehed they retorneth kendly
But fire al such dyuysyon refuses
Of wylful meuynge of the soul I let
To speak as now / in that he reason uses
But of the natural intent I trete
That when ye do receyuen so your mete
ye swoloeth and haueth thereon no thought
And in your sleep when al thing is forgete
ye draueth brethe and yet ye know hit noght
Not only of the souls wylfulnesse
These bestes loves to leave and endure
But pryncypally depends hit express
Of the hye pryncyples of nature
For often hit falls that a creature
His own death will taken wyllyngly
where nedeful causes ben perauenture
The wyche that nature aborreth kendly
ye sees also that in contrary wise
The will of man wythstandeth and refrayneth
The lust of very kendly couetyce
By wyche al only nature has ordained
That dedly kend to keep and be sustained
The wyche is flesly generation
so that this love is not only contained
Pryncypally in your bestly motion
But also of intention natural
For why the souereyn gods purueance
Has given this as cause effectual
To things that been of his ordynance
That by a very kendly governance
They shall desyren always for to be
As long as nature has that sufffysance
To keep she parts in there unity
There is noght why thou sholdest dout in this
But that al thing coueyteth kendly
To keep hit self in ferme stablenesse
And to be corrupt they lothen utterly
Boeus) Loo now must I confess this quod I
For things that in doubt were before
Now I behold them well and certainly
Phia) And thing that so desires evermore
For to stand in ferme stablenesse
That self thing desires for to be
And if this one be voyded sothe hit is
Then is hit not / thou may thy selfen see
Boecius) Full soth quod Phia) then al thing quod she
Desires one Boecius) quod I I grant yt well
Phia) But one and good as thou have granted me
Loo ben the same and diverse nere a dele
Boeus) Right so quod Phia) the^ al thing requires
This one quod she yt thus may be descryued
Good is that thing that al thing desires
Boecius) No thing quod I may sother be contryued
Al thing to noght must else be deryued
As flowyng ever wythouten governor
As destitute and of there head depryued
Than were our end but myschef and dolor
And if there may be founden there a geyn
One thing to whom al other ben intended
Of al good this must be souereyn
As he that al has in him comprehended
Phia) This conceyte quod she may not ben amended
My nory dear now am I glad y wys
The point now of thy thought you have extended
Right in ye mids of very sothfastnesse
And loo in this is showed the plenerly
The thing wyche whyler thou toldest me
Thou knew yt not Boecius) and what is that quod I
Phia) what is the end of things said she
This same thing loo must hit needs be
That every thing of kend desyren shall
And sith that this is good hit seems me
That souereyn good must be the end of al
Metru^ xj. Capitulu^ xxij.
Quisquis profunda.
Phia loquitur. NO so will enserche sothfastnesse a right
And will not be deceived never a dele
The pure clerenesse of his inward sight
wythyn hem self he must reuoluen well
And al his thoghtes trenden as a whele
And leave this erthly occupation
And teache his soul to understand and feel
By dome of good delyberation
That all that ever he seeks here without
Trauelyng these truths for to know
Hid hit was al close hit is no doubt
Right as tresour wythyn hemself bestow
Tho things than that erst were ouerblow
with the clouds of error and ignorance
Hit shall to the be clerer as I trow
Than is the son and more to thy plesance
For why the body that has yt soul oppressed
As with the wight of his corruption
Has not al despoyled ne dystressed
The light of understanding and of reason
There cleueth yet a noble portion
wythyn thy soul right as an abylyte
The sede of truth in full possessyon
The wyche by techyng must enforced be
How might ye else Iugen formally
Other answer to demaundes that ye hyre
But if your heart contained verily
A lyfly noryshyng as hit were
And thing that Plato said in this manner
if hit be sothe as do his books trete
no thing else do ye when ye lere
But as record a thing that was forgete
No thing else do ye when ye lere and^. An harp well and lustly ^uned by
true accordes of musyke / al be hit in that no vvyght toche hit ne set hand
there to / yet conteyneth that harp vvythyn hem al songs ^ al tuues possible
to be song or toched upon the same harp. Or else might not the harper find
there on that was not there be fore Right so in man's soul is contained al
co^ny^ge / that of an erthly creature possible is be known. But hit is
slylled and in manner forgete / other more properly for to speke^ / forlete /
vvyche conning by labor of reason and exercise of learning is found out by
little and little. right as a man that lerneth to harp seeks out his tunes.

Prosa xii. Capitulu^ xxiij.
Tu^ ego platoni.
Boecius loquitur. TO Plato said I / must I need consent
For twyes now ye have remembered me
Of thing yt first was fro my mind y went
As by my bodily contagyouste
And sith I stood eftesone in this degree
Of heaviness / I had hit eke forlorn
Phia) if thou she said wylt behald and see
To things of the granted here be forn
Thou shall record also to thy science
Things wyche you said whyler you knwe hit noght
Boeus) and what quod I Phia) by wych gouernme^tes
This world quod she is in this rule y brought
Boecius) I am quod I remembered in my thought
Of mine uncunning that I was beknowe
And tho I have as now perceived ought
More plenerly yet would I lern of you
Phia) while er quod she thou dowted noft at al
Loo that this world by god governed is
Boecius) Ne now quod I ne never hereafter shall
As in that matter ben in doubt y wys
And what reason induces me to this
Breuely I shall you show / as seems me
Now look your self if I perceive a mysse
This world quod I stondyng in this degree
Of parts diverse and contraryous
As every wight may understand and feel
In such a form might never accorden this
But if that one conjoined every dele
That so diverse ben / this wot I well
Ne so conjoined might they not endure
But if one keeper were perpetuel
The same dyuersyte of there nature
So dyscordant should apeyr and shende
And al dysioyne as seems in my thought
But if there were one governor of kende
To keep al this that is to gedres brought
Ne such a certain order might not
Of nature / so proceed in ordynance
To meuen so / but he that al has wroght
Should have hit holly in his governance
There meuyng is so fair and ordynat
In times / stedes / space / and qualyte
And such effects causes eke algate
That wonderful hit is / every wight to se
Than is there one that this dyuersyte
Hem selfen stable that so dysposeth al
And ho so does al this / I say that he
Is god / this used name I will hem call
Phia) Sith thou quod she may this behald and feel
I trow I shall with little business
Full hole and sound the make to se full well
Thyn own country full of blysfulnesse
But that we have purposed her er this
Let ous behald / have we not long a go
Said that suffysance is in blysfulnesse
And that god is blysfulnesse also
Boeus) Right so quod I phia) and yt him needs noght
quod she un to this wordly governance
For if he of without neded ought
He had not then plenary suffysance
Boecius) Fro this quod I there is no varyance
Phia) Him self a lone al thing dysposeth than
Boecius) I may quod I now make none avoydaunce
Phia) And god is good as we deduced han
Boeus) And this also remember I well quod I
Phia) By good then he governs al quod she
For sith as thou have granted / suyngly
He that is good dysposeth al parde
Him self a lone than must he needs be
Right as hit were a ruler of a stern
Him selfen stable ever in one degree
That al this world incorrupt does govern
Boecius) Full well quod I acord I un to this
And loo whyler as by suspection
I trowed the same ye would have said y wys
And preued this in your conclusyon
Phia) I trow hit well / for thyn inspection
Is more ententyf then hit was before
As to behald a truth and good reason
But that I shall the shown furdermore
Hit is as clear and open to thy sight
Boeus) And what quod I that known fayn I would
Phia) Sith god quod she if we beleuen right
with his stern of bounte as I told
Governs al and rewleth as he should
These things al by natural intent
Ben wyllyngly subject and vnderfolde
Obeyng always un to his government
Boecius) This is quod I full true and necessary
For else were no blysful governance
if no yoke were to things contrary
That will not obey to his ordynance
Phia) Then is there noght yt does there obserua^ce
To keep them self in order of nature
That may enforcen with contraryance
A geyn there god Boecius) quod I no creature
Phia) what if so yt a geyn this gouernayle
They might enforcen them with frowardness
Might they ought a geyn there god avayle
wych that by right of very blysfulnesse
As we be forn have said almighty is
Boeus) In soth they might noght avayle quod I
Phia) quod she then is there no thing as I guess
That may or will wythstanden kendly
This soueren good what wylt thyself suppose
Boeus) I said no Phia) this soueren good quod she
Al things than full swetly does dyspose
And myghtely al thing governs he
Boecius) quod I not only I delight me
As in the sum of your conclusion
But the words wych that ye use to me
well more they does me delectation
In so fer forth that in my self I shame
And of my folly foul I am confused
So hye a thing to reprehend or blame
And that I have so masedlych y mused
That man of god was utterly refused
And that he had him not in his governance
Phia) Such fables quod she have poets used
As you have herd / that some time gyauntes
would have made there way up in to heaven
And hye hills began they to bylden fast
But god sent down a thunder certain
And al there work upon them over cast
And so they were wythstonden at last
By the might of souereyn god benign
wyche for them al dysposed so in haste
As there dysert was worthy and condign
But wylt thou now that we to gedres drive
Thesresons al and in to one them bring
And perauenture of that stroke as blyue
There may of truth a little sparkel spring
Boecius) Now says quod I as is to your lekyng
Phia) we say quod she that god almighty is
Boecius) Sith he of al quod I is lord and king
There is no wight that is in doubt of this
Phia) And he she said yt is so full of might
Is there any thing that he ne may
Boeus) Nay quod I Phia) quod she now say me right
May god do any euel Boecius) I said nay
Phia) Loo than is euel no thing I dare well say
Sith he that is almighty may hit not
Boecius) quod I whether do ye scorn or else play
And have to this labor hit y brought
your resons weueth ye so wonderly
In manner leke the house of Didalus
Full hard for to resoluen or vnplye
your resons ben so hye and curyous
that to my wit they ben full marvelous
Where ye go out ye enters efte a none
And even there as ye ben entered thus
The same way ye passes out efte sone
A wonder compace have yo knet and fold
Of the hye dyuyne ymplycyte
For thus while er when ye began ye told
Of blysfulnesse that is felycyte
That souereyn good was hit ye said to me
And that also in souereyn good hit is
That god was souereyn good then said ye
Also that he is perfect blysfulnesse
And for a gift ye took me this there to
That no wight mygh have very blysfulnesse
But if he were in manner god also
By lekelynesse of possessyng of his bliss
And furdermore also ye said this
That the form of very perfet good
Hit is the substance of this welfulnesse
And eke of god / loo this I understand
ye said also as un to my conceyte
That good and one al one thing should they be
That every kende of things must coueyte
That god eke with the stern of his bounte
Governs al this hole university
And al must to his governance a lout
That euel is no thing / also preued ye
Not seeking hereto resons fro without
But ye have this enplyed and y preued
By skyles that been known openly
And euerych makes other to be believed
They knetteth so in compace sotelly
Phia) She said then I play not sykerly
But that we have whyler of god besoght
Now have I showed the here that is so hy
And greteste that in heart may be thought
For of substance dyuyne the form is this
That he may not augment ne decresse
By no foreyn thing the so the hit is
And al yet he conteyneth never the less
But right as said Perymenydes
The round whele of things al a boute
He meueth / yet him self is in piece
And meueth noght at al hit is no doubt
if I have showed the skyles good and mete
Not fro wythouten soght / but verily
wythyn the things whereof that we trete
To wondre now thou have no cause why
For thou have herd and red as suppose I
This sothfaste sentence / Plato said hit loo
That words must be cosens kendly
To things wyche they ben referred to
Full blysful is that man that may behold
The bright well of very blysfulnesse
And well is him that may himself unfold
Fro bounds of this wordly wrecchednesse
The poet Orpheus with great heaviness
His wyffes death had weyled wepyngly
And with his songs full of carfulness
Made wodes for to run full wonderly
And made the stremes standen and bide
The hynde also fered of no perel
But suffered the lion to lie by her side
Nether the hare dreded nere a dele
To se the hound / hit leked them so well
To here these songs that so lustey were
And boldly they durst to geder dwell
That nere a best then had of other fere
And when the love began kendle in his breast
Of his wyffe most hot and fervently
His song that had so many a wyld best
Made so meke to leven comenly
They might him not conforten utterly
On hye gods began he then complayn
And said they deled with him cruelly
That they did send him not his wyffe a geyn
He went then to howses infernal
And fast his strenges there dressed he
And souned out the sweet songs all That he had tasted of the wells three
Of his mother dear Caliope
That is goddess and chef of eloquenc^
With words that most pyteoust myghe be
As sorrow had given him full experyence
And love also that dobeleth heaviness
To hell began he his complaynt to make
Asking mercy there / with lowlynesse
At the lords of these shadous blake
And Cerberus that woned was to wake
with heddes three and hell gates keep
So hadden him these new songs take
That the swetnesse made him fall on sleep
The furyes that been vengeresse of sin
And surfetours smyteth so with fere
For heaviness that this man was in
They began to morn and wept many a tere
And tho the swyft while had no pouer
To torn a boute the head of Ixyon
Ne Tantalus for thurst al though he were
I peyned long / yet water would he none
The grype that ete the maw of Ticius
And tired on hit long there be fore
This song to him was so delycyous
He cast hit of and tired hit no more
And when that Orpheus had morned sore
Tho said the Judge of hell / peynes strong
Pity me has conuicte / I will restore
This man his wyffe / this won he with his song
But with a law this geft I will restrayn
That un till he this bounds have forsake
if he behald upon his wyffe a geyn
His wyffe fro him eftesones shall be take
But ho to lovers may a law make
For love is rather to hemself a law
when he was nigh out of the bounds blake
He turned him and Erudis he saw
Allas he lost and lest his wyffe behind
This fable loo to you perteyneth right
For ye that would lift up your mind
In to the hye blysful souereyn light
if ye eftesones torn douue your sight
In to this foul wrecched erthly delle
Loo all that ever your labor has you dyght
ye lose when ye looks in to hell
As Duyde in his book of Metamorphoseos makes mention / and feynynge in manet
a fable saying that Orpheus was a curyous harper dvvellyng in Trace / that
was sometime a prouynce in the north side of Greece. vvyche Orpheus was the
son of Callyope. He harped so lustely / that not only men were drawn by
his melody / but also vvyld bestes for very delight forgete there kendly courage
of fersnesse. And not only this / but he made ryuers for to stand and forestes
for to meue and ten This Orpheus had a vvyffe named Erudis / vvyche a
shepeherde named Aristeus vvoed and desired. But Erudis refusing his love fled
thorgh a mede / and tredynge upon a serpent she was enuenemed and ded. and
went to hell. Orpheus soroynge for his vvyffe and vvyllynge for to dra her out
of hell / purposed for to plese the hye gods with his melody that they
should restore him his vvyffe / but hit auayled not. Than went he to hell /
and as this process shows in the letter / so much he plesed the gods of
hell with his melody / that at last upon a condition his vvyffe was granted
him / so that he looked not upon her / till that he were passed the bounds of
hell. But when he was nigh the bounds / so much he desired for to see his
his vvyffe / that he turned him and looked upon her / and a none she was gone a
geyn to hell vvher she was before* This fable Fulgencius exponeth morally on
this vhyse. By Orpheus is understand the hyer part of the soul / that is
resonabelte / informed with vvysedom and eloquence. wherefore he is called the
son of phoebus and of Laliope Phoebus of the greeks was called god of
vvysedo^. The same is Apollo. Caliope is asmoche to say / as gods son. and
hit betokens eloquence. so every wise man and eloquent in this manner of
speaking may be called the sorne of phoebus and Caliope. This Orpheus bythe
svvetnesse of his harp / that

Explicit Liber tercius.
Liber Quartus.
(...) But tho that haueth might to worken ylle
They may not worken all that is there will
Then is hit plain and clear y no to seyn
These wicked men that wyckedlych may
Full less of power and of might they ben
Set this there to that I shall after say
Sith might is such a thing the wyche always
Ought to be coueted and desired
And every thing that is to be required
To good hit must be referred need
As to the souereyn head and pryncypal
But power for to worken wrecchedhed
To good may not referred ben at al
Hit is noght then / that be desired shall
But power shall desired be by right
Than power of the wicked is no might
Loo of al this hit will apperen well
That mighty ben the good folk a lone
And wicked folk be mighty never a dele
But weke and myghtles ben they euerychone
The sentence than may be perceued sone
where that Plato writes in this wise
Do that them leketh only may the wise
For wicked men do works that them lust
But there desire they may not yet fulfylle
what them delyteth that them seems best
For why they do hit be hit never so ill
To there desire yet may they not a tylle
The wyche they seek in lusts and delytes
For blysfulnesse may not be had by vice
Metrum ij. Capitulu^ iiij.
Quos vides sedere celsos.
Phia loquitur. These great kings full of cruelte
Shynyng in there purpur ryally
Syttyng in the heythes of there see
with wild words thretyng cruelly
with blastyng woodnesse of there hertes hye
with much wrecched weeping by there side
Ho so would fro these princes full of pride
Spoil them of there wrecched vayn a ray
Behald and se well what they be wythyn
Though they be lords wonder stout and gay
In streyt cheynes ben they bound of sin
Fro wyche they may not them selfen win
These loo ledeth his lyffe in lechery
That all the world him speaks velony
So is he trobled by this passion
with wreth his mind is beten and oppressed
Or heaviness draeth him a down
Or slyper hope him else has destressed
Loo such an head I trou is euel y blessed
That is encombred with so much vice
His might is to be set at little price
Prosa iij. Capitulum v.
Vides ne igitur.
Phia loquitur. ANd seyst thou not the foul vycyous
what fylth the^ has defiled and vnhyght
And the good folk and virtuous
How worthily they shine fair and bright
Of this hit may apperen to thy sight
That the wicked folk fails never of peyn
Ne the good folk there mede there a geyn
That same thing that meueth any wight
For to don or worken any deed
That same thing I may hit seyn by right
Loo of that work hit is the very mede
This shall I preue if thou wolt taken hyde
For rennyng lies a garland for the game
And he that renneth best shall have the same
But souereyn good is very blysfulnesse
And is the very ground and cause why
That any manner work purposed is
As for to speak of purpose kendly
Than is this good purposed comenly
For man's work a mede for his traueyle
Fro good men this mede may not fail
Ho so lacks good as seems in my thought
Be called good of right yet may not he
The good then of mede fails noght
Sith there mede is verily bounte
Though wicked folk be wood in cruelte
And uses all the malice that they mowen
yet the wise man leseth not his crowen
For why there is no foreyn wickedness
Of men that been so perylous and proute
That may beryue the kendly worthynesse
That longs to the good / hit is no doubt
But if they had hit wonnen of without
A another then might hit take a way
Or he that gave that good / hit is no nay
But sith the goodness of a worthy wight
Of good manners must be caused need
when he forleteth them / then is hit right
That he should be despoyled of his mede
But finally in this matter to proceed
Sith al medes that desired ben
Hit is for they ben good / or as they wene
Of him that has this good ho will hit seyn
That he this mede lacks utterly
None that reason has I am certain
But what thing is this mede verily
The best thing and fairest sekerly
That may be had or heart may deuyse
This is hit that is desposed for the wise
A Corrolary hye and precious
That I the gave whyler remember the
wyche al in sum thou shall assemble thus
Loo sith that god is this felycyte
wyche that makes blysful for to be
Al tho that good works vsen
And wrecched vice will utterly refusen
And tho that blysful ben thou understand
In a manner gods that they were
Than is this gift the mede of al good
That no day may consume in no manner
Ne dymynuce hit may no power
Ne dymmen hit no other man's vice
Though wicked folk hit would of there malice
Sith hit is so hit is wythouten dread
The wicked may not be wythouten peyn
For sith that euel and good / loo peyn and mede
Contraryous ben / then is hit clear and pleyn
Sith good is sure of mede in full certain
The bad is sure of peynes and of woe
if one be sothe the other must also
Then is the goodness of the good wight
The reward and the mede of his goodness
And to the wicked by the same right
There peyn is eke there propre wickedness
what ever he be / than sueth hit express
That with such peynes is he desesed often
with euel he is infecte hit fails noght
For if the wicked would them selfen seyn
Might they trowen as hit seems the
That they wythouten bitter peynes ben
whom loo the vttermest extremyte
Of al wickedness and cruelte
Not only has infected grievously
But eke him has infected hugely
But now behald that other part upon
if any peynes have the good a grieved
Have you not learned / that all that ever is one
Is good also / as I have hit descryued
Loo consequently than hit may be preued
As seems well that every thing that is
Hit must also be good hit is no mysse
I may concluden than that al tho
That fails fro this good rehearsed here
He fails then for to ben also
The wicked then they be not that they were
For thoh thou se that man's body there
Full sothe hit is a man he was beforn
By wickedness his kende he has forlorn
But sith that only virtue and goodness
A bouen manhood may a man a reyse
Needs than ho so uses wickedness
Benethen manhood down hit does him peyse
And tho so be that many one them preyse
whom that you seyst transformed in to vice
Thou hold him not a man if thou be wise
whose lusts brenneth al in couetyce
And ryueth men there good by vyolence
I leke a wolf thou might him well deuyse
He that is fers and spares none offense
And what he says he has no conscience
To make stryffes and dyssention
He is an hounde as by comparyson
And he that will a wayten preuely
Foreyn goods how he may beryuen
A fox thou might him callen skylefully
And whom that cursed Ire does a meuen
A lion as in that thou might him preuen
He that is fered and flees wythouten need
An heart thou might him call hit is no dread
And he that uses sloth and I delnesse
And will not do no works profitable
Thou might him call a very ass express
And he that is inconstant and unstable
To fowls might thou hald him comparable
And he that ledeth his lyffe in lechory
Aswyne thou might him callen skylefully
Hit seems than that he yt has forlete
The lyffe of virtue and of honest
To ben a man in that he has forfete
And skylefully forlorn that dygnyte
And there he might a god in manner be
Or leke to god in leuyng at lest
Now is he changed to a rude best
Metru^ iij. Capitulum vj:
Vela Naricii ducis.
Phia loquitur. The southwest wynd yt blows boustesly
The sails of the Duke Naricius
But of that we have granted here before
As necessary must hit suen need
Boeus) I asked what phia) quod she now take good head
More welful ben ye wicked in there peyn
Than if they sholden none at al susteyn
But this is not my conceyt pryncypally
That comenly men have in there deuyse
That wicked folk so peyned ryghtuously
There by they ben corrected of there vice
And dread of peyn a peseth there malice
And that exsample un to other mo
whythdraeth them fro that they wolden do
But in a another manner wise I mean
That bad folk without punytion
More vnwelful sykerly they ben
Than if they suffered none affliction
Not having regard to correction
Ne to exsample / ne to dread of peyn
That much myschef often does refrayn
Boectus) quod I what manner wise may this be
Other than ye tolden here before
Phia) Loo have not we confessed here quod she
That good men ben welful evermore
And wicked folk ben wrecches and forlore
Boeus) right so quod I phia) quod she now say me thyg
What if that un to such a wrecchednesse
If any part of good were added to
were not he then more welful wylt thou say
Than he that stands al in myschef so
Fro whom al manner good is raft a way
Boecius) quod I Hit seems so hit is no nay
Phia) And what quod she if to this wrecched man
Fro whom al manner goods lacks than
Another harm were Joined and y knet
Above the myscheffe wyche has him oppressed
would you not deem him more vnwelful yet
Than of his myschef somewhat were relesed
And so by perceyuyng of good repressed
Boecius) quod I How should hit other wise be
Phia) Than have the wicked certainly quod she
Somewhat of good when yt they ben in peyn
Annexed then un to his wrecchednesse
when they ben punysshed so / that is to seyn
The same peyn that for there wickedness
They suffer / wyche be cause of ryghtuosnesse
where by that peyn is give hit is no nay
That self peyn is good I dare well say
And when that they ben spared of torment
Of this yuel then have they somewhat more
That is the favor of vnpunysment
Of ryghtuous peynes that they ben forbore
The wyche as thou have granted here before
Sith peyn is dwe reward of felony
Vnpunysment is euel sykerly
Boecius) I may not this denyen though I would
Phia) The wicked the^ unpunished so with wrong
So more vnsely ben they many a fold
Then when by ryghtuous dome they vnderfong
Vengeance for there sin and soroes strong
Sith ryghtuousnesse tormenteth trespasours
Than is hit wrong to sparen surfetours
Boeus) Denyen this quod I there may no wight
Phia) May any man quod she denyen this
That al is good that ever is don by right
And all that ever is wrong is wickedness
Boecins) And this quod I is consequent y wysse
To that ye houe concluded loo while ere
But now I pray you one thing say me hyre
When that the body resolved is by death
Shall the soul suffern any peyn
Phia) when yt the soul out of the body geth
Full hugy quod she / take hit in certain
For sum full bitter peynes shall susteyn
And sum shall be purged al with grace
To treten here of this / we have no place
But I have un to this that is in me
Full don my deuer that thou should known
The might of shrewes / wyche as seems the
In them is full unworthily bestowen
Hit is no power verily to trowen
And there as thou complaynest in thy thought
That wicked folks ben y punysshed noght
There might you seyn the wicked for there sin
To faylen never of peynes sykerly
But that they may there wicked purpose win
with license for to worken wyckedly
Thou dyst pray to ben ended hastily
And I have made the clearly for to know
That hit ne lesteth but a little throw
And that the longer that endures tho
The more wrecches ben they I the told
And if they shulden ever endure so
Than were they wrecches more a thousand fold
And more wrecches eke you might them hold
when they with wrong of peynes ben relesed
The^ when they be with ryghtuous peyn oppressed
And over this yet shall I further sayn
Loo of this sentence sueth consequent
Than ar the bad in most despytous pain
When that they seem they have no punysment
Boeus) I said than / when I with hole intent
Behald your resons how ye does them preue
No thing is sother said as I believe
But to the Judgment of man's wit
That is not meued by such euydence
Ho is that man that will beleuen hit
Or deem hit worthy any audyence
They troweth no thing but experyence
Phia) As thou have said quod she right so hit is
For yees that been used to derknesse
The light of treuthe may they not behold
As fowls that been wont to fle by night
For to be seyn a day they be not bold
For why the day is blyndyng to there sight
But nyghtes derknesse makes there yees bright
So men infect with lusts and lekynges
Have no regard to the ordynance of things
For they supposes that such sufferance
Or vnpunyshment of cursedhede
Should a man to welfulnesse avaunce
But in the law eternal may thou read
if thou do well thou have no manner need
To ask a Judge for thy recompense
For thou have set thy self in excellence
And if thou have thy selfen wyllyngly
Enclyned un to sin and wrecchednesse
To seek no vengeour of thy felony
without thyself hit needs not y wysse
For thou have set thy self in wickedness
And made the leke un to a rude best
And put the in peynes that ever shall lest
Right as thou would cast thy sight a boute
Now to ground and now to heaven light
Al other causes cessyng of without
Be cause of thine unstableness of sight
Now would thou seem with the sterres bright
And now right in this moddy ground to be
But comen people this can they not se
Boeus) I asked than what this should mean
Phia) Should we quod she consenten un to these
wyche we have showed that leke to bestes ben
if one of them wyche yt the lust deuyse
Loo had forlorn his sight in any wise
Al utterly / and also furdermore
Had al forgete that ever he saw be fore
And weneth him want no thing utterly
Of man's natural perfection
Now we that this behaldeth verily
Should we acorde to there entention
And not believe our own inspection
Should we not troue that such men ben blind
And well the blynder for there mased mind
And things that as lekely may be preued
By resons of as mighty foundement
Of such folk they may not be believed
That such wicked men and vyolent
when they desese a simple Innocent
lWel more vnsely ben they in the deed
Than tho that suffers al there wrangfulhede
Boeus) Tho resons said I would I heren fayn
Phia) Every wicked shrewde man quod she
wylt thou deny him worth care and peyn
Boecius) Nay quod I that have ye not of me
Phia) Then more vnsely must they needs be
Such that ledeth there lyffes cursedly
Boecius) Right as ye sayn right so hit is quod I
Phia) And tho quod she yt worthy ben torment
wylt thou not deem them wrecches in that case
Boecius) yes quod I hit is full conuenyent
Phia) quod she if thou sholdest. Iugen in this place
And myghtest do vengeance or else grace
whom would you demen worthy to be honge
whether him yt does or him that suffers wrong
Boeus) To him quod I yt had the wrongs don
I would a Iugen suffysance of peyn
The pacyent so should be a venged sone
That he should have no matter to complayn
Phia) More wrecched is ye worcher wylt you sayn
quod she than he that soffereth every dele
Boeus) In sothe quod I right so hit sueth well
Phia) Of these causes and of other mo
That of the self rote suyngly
Enforced ben / hit will apperen loo
That the fylthe of sins kendly
Right of the self sins proprely
Tho men they makes wrecches for to be
That uses vices and dyshoneste
The wrong also is not the wrecchednesse
Of him that suffers harms and greuance
But in sothe the wrecchednesse is his
That wrongusly has don him a noyance
But pledours don in this contraryance
That so the Iuges unto mercy meuen
A genst them yt wrongs does agreuen
For sykerly ye pity longs more
To hem that has vnthryftyfully wrought
And as the seek a leche is led before
So should he be before ye Judge y brought
Of pyteous accusours and wroth noght
That with ye peyn as with a sotel gynne
Cowde cut a wey the malady of sin
And thus the besynes of advocates
Schuld be forleten and men schuld hit refusen
Or if they would approuen men algates
Al other wise they schuld there office vsen
And tho yt so mysdone alwey accusen
And if these wrecches also furthermore
Mygth seen the virtue yt they have forlore
Since that bou^te with peynes may be had
And fylthe of vice ben utterly fordone
To suffer peynes schuld he be full glad
Ne peynes sothly schuld he hold them none
His advocates forsaken should he sone
And to the Judge he should hem self be take
That might hem hole of al his sins make
Than is hit so yt as a genst the wise
Is left no place of hate hit is full soth
Hoo will the good haten or despyte
But a fool yt wot not what he does
And though ye badde be to the full loath
To haten hem yet have ye no reason
But rather have of them compassion
for as sickness ye body does greuance
Rygth so is vice a manner malady
The wyche the soul oppresses with noyance
And as we should not demen skylefully
Him worthy hate that seek is bodily
But rwen rather on his peynes sore
Then goostly languor should ous meuen more
Hit is not conuenyent to haten ne pursue
The souls that oppressed ben with vice
But rather on there bitter peynes rwe
And ho that could (not meued with malice)
That man a menden with full good advise
Though that he put him to full bitter peyn
Of cruelte there may no wight complayn
Metru^ iiij. Capitulu^ viij.
Quid tantos iuuat.
Phia loquitur. WHat helps hit to meuen or excyte
with proper hands your happes besely
For if ye seek death hit needs lyte
For he will come hymselfen wyllyngly
He taryeth not he spedeth him hastily
Loo serpent / Leon / Tygre / Bore / and Bear
They seeks you to a racen and to tere
And ye with sword each other does assail
For cause that your manners ben diverse
Vnryghtuously so meueth ye batayl
with enterchaungyng darts for to perse
your cruelte / your reason does reuerse
wolt thou that every man his meret had
Loo love the good / and rwe upon the bad
Prosa v. Capitulu^ ix.
Hinc video inquam.
Boecius loquitur. In this quod I I perceive every dele
Both the myschef and the welfulnesse
As for the mede of them that worcheth well
And eke of them also that done a mysse
But nevertheless alday I se well this
That of fortune to wyche the people hedeth
Both good and euel full often time proceeds
Ne there is no wise man as I guess
That rather would be pour and nameles
And in exyle / than flouresh in riches
In power and in honor to encresse
And in his cite for to dwell in piece
This is the best way as I deuyse
To profyt by the office of the wise
So may there blyssfulnesse / hit is no doubt
As by the virtue of there governance
Be well transfunded in to folk a boute
That been committed to there ordynance
But than / this mine heart does greuance
Sith hit is so that lauful prysonment
Diverse Ingynnes / peynes and torment
For wicked folk were first ordained
And un to them hit longs skylefully
why is hit then that good men beth peyned
And in there stead oppressed grievously
And mede that to virtue properly
Of very right is pertynent and dwe
These medes have the wicked and vntrwe
What is the skyle of this confusyon
That so unrighteous seems for to be
Of you I would have Information
For less merueyl should hit be to me
if al things stood in this degree
Meddled al with fortune and with chance
And had at al none other governance
But god yt is the gouerner of al
Lo makes me a stoned as in this
Since Joy and welthes often does befall
To good folk. and often time y wysse
The wicked be in care and heaviness
And often time the badde there ageyn
Ben in there lusts and the good in peyn
But if there be some skyle or euydence
why god rewards folk in this manner.
As thinks me there is no dyfference
But hap and fortune rewleth al y fere
Phia) Of this quod sche I wo^dre naught as here
Since thou ne coudest ye skyle of ordynance
Though thou meruele upon the governance
And hald hit folly and confusyon
But though to the ye causes beth unknow
As of so hye a dysposytion
wham so him lust to setten hye or low
Sith he is good as thou must needs trow
That al governs / take this for a sothe
That al is ryghtuous what yt ever he does
Metru^ v. Capitulum x.
Si quis arcturi sidera
Phia loquitur. HE that knows not the causes why
Ne how hit is / in sothe he can not sayn
That the sterre arcturus goes so nigh
Meuynge a bowte the pole souereyn
And why Boetes rests not his weyn
And he his flammes plongeth down so late
And why so sone he ryseth este algate
Hit is no dowte he shall be stoned sone
As of the law of hye heaven bright
why that the horns of the full moan
So infected with the derke night
Becomes pale / and the sterres light
wyche that she hid with her bemes clear
Dyscouerynge them / she makes to ous appear
And open error makes fowls blind
That beteth bras the moon to reskewen
Men wondreth noght upon the stormy wynd
That makes the sea so fersly for to flowen
That does the brenkes beat and overthrown
Ne that the cold forsen clottes great
So ben resolved by the sons hete
The cause of this is esy to be feled
These other ar hyd / therefore ye wonder so
For all that falls suddenly and seld
Thus wondreth these meueable folks loo
And if this clowdy error pass them fro
So that they might the very causes se
They should not semen wonderful to be
Prosa vj. Capitulum xi.
Ita est inquam.
Boecius loquitur. RIght so quod I this will I not reuerse
But loo this gift is youres sykerly
These pryme causes wyche that ye rehearse
And resons hyd in clouds mystycally
To maken clear / this one thing coueyt I
Hit is a thing that trobleth most my mind
And with merueyl marred / I me find
Phia) She began to smyle a little and said than
Thou ask now of me a questyon
Loo of the highest thing that any man
May asken at mine estymation
Or may perceive by clear entention
To wyche uneaths may there ought suffyce
Of any word that I can the deuyse
Such is the matter that we ben a boute
The wyche to known thou desyrest so
That when we ben delivered of a doubt
wythouten nombre sone ryseth mo
That been well nigh as hard to a voyden fro
As heddes that one dragon encresse
The serpent that was slain of Hercules
Ne in this matter is none other end
Ne how these great doutes to redressen
But that a lyfly fire of man's mind
Must myghtly restrayn them and repressen
For otherwise thou shall them not expressen
For loo in this men uses to enquere
Thus fell as I shall the rehercen here
First of the wonderful symplycyte
Of the hye dyuyne purueyance
Of fatum that men calls desteney
Of fortune that is called soden chance
Of knowing and of gods ordynance
That is called predestination
And eke of fredom of election
How hugyous is this matter with to dele
Thou know hit well thy self hit is no nay
But sith hit is a parcel of thyn hele
To known this / I shall do what I may
Thou that the time be short I shall a say
Sith I have said the somewhat here before
I shall my self enforcen furdermore
And though so be that musyke the delight
And meter is full lusty to thyn ere
As for a time that lust must thou respyte
The while that I in order knette in fere
My resons wyche I shall the shown here
Boecius) Right as ye lust quod I / and she began
As hit were al a another process than
Phia) Loo every kendly generation
Of al things be they more or less
And every natural progress you
That in his being has chaungeablenesse
And what that ever hit be that meued is
There order / form and causes forth ben brought
Fro the stable hye dyuyne thought
This souereyn thought that al does so deuyse
Set in the toure of hye symplycyte
Has ordained many diverse manner wise
To things that been don / loo wylt thou se
And if this manner of desposytion referred be
Un to the pure dyuyne intellygence
Than is hit purueyance or prescience
But when this same manner referred is
To things that been meued and governed
As old men have called hit er this
Than is hit desteny as I have learned
Full sone is this dyuersyte dyscerned
Of him that sees the myghtes of them both
And esely he shall well se the sothe
For purueyance loo is that reason hye
Of good our aller prince souereyn
By wyche / al he desposeth myghtely
But desteny the very sothe to sayn
Loo is that dysposytion certain
wyche these things ben annexed to
That of there kendes ben meueable so
By wyche the hye dyuyne prescience
Al things in there ordynance enlaceth
This purueyance loo has this excellence
That al thing at ones he enbraceth
Fro his presence is no thing that passes
Though they be Infynyte and endless
Yet al he comprehends nevertheless
But desteny in certain time and space
Syngulerly dyuydeth every dele
Desposyng hit in meuyng time and place
And when that this desposyng temporel
Is comprehended and referred well
Un to the onehed of gods governance
Than is hit sothly called purueyance
But for to have consyderation
How they dyuyded in diverse times be
That self order of this desposytion
Than is hit hothly called desteny
And though they have such dyuersyte
yet nevertheless there may no thing be sother
Then yt one of them depends of ye other
For of ye symplycyte of purveyance
This order fatal certain does proceed
There is the form of all that ordynance
Right as a crafty man that will him speed
A work to maken / first he takes head
And all the shappe desposeth in his mind
And sith the effect he brings to the end
As he has first devised every dele
And in his thought enprented symplely
He brings forth by order temporel
Right so god al purueyeth syngulerly
And to be don desposeth stablely
And when hit fully is desposed so
By desteny he makes hit to be do
And whether this exercise destynal
By any spyrytes of the heaven on hye
That to this purueyance entendeth al
Or if the soul does hit verily
Or else nature does hit kendly
Or the meuyng of the sterres bright
Or else angeles of the heaven light
Other else by the fendes business
By some of these other by all in fere
This order destynal performed is
yet loo this is full open and full clear
And needs hit must be so in all manner
That the stable and simple ordynance
Of thing to don is called purueyance
But loo / the process of succession
In wyche they ben performed suyngly
By the simple dysposytion
Fore seyn of god be forn eternally
Loo desteny men call hit sykerly
So all that ever is under desteny
So must hit under purueyance be
As is the self desteny also
And to that self purueyance both
Some things ben subject that been y do
As after this I shall declaren to the
That a geyn stondeth desteny for sothe
And some to god approaches so by love
That order destynal they pass a boue
As diverse compace on one point y pyght
Upon the center tornyng al a boute
The Innermest compace to thy sight
The wyche next to the center is without
A center will hit seem / hit is no doubt
And seems as hit meueth never a dele
A boute wyche so meueth all the while
But this vttermest circumference
That to thy sight is largest in compace
And ferrest fro this point in dyfference
So must he meuen in a larger space
And he that negheth to that myddel place
Compressed next to that symplycyte
He cesseth for to meuen as seems the
By lekely reason he that ferrest fleteth
Fro the souereyn thought of god on hye
To desteny the faster he him knetteth
And he that can and will approchen nigh
This souereyn centre-god ententyfly
The more he stondeth in fredom and in ese
That desteny shall little him desese
Right as dyscours of reason may not be mete
Un to the Intellect of man's mind
Ne thing that is / to thing that is not yete
Ne a little stound to time wythouten end
May not be leke in worthynesse of kende
But as the point to the circumference
Between them is an hugey dyfference
Right so this fatayl mutabylyte
That always is so full of varyance
Referred to the hye symplycyte
Of the stable and souereyn purueyance
wyche that heuens has in governance
He meueth sterres / he tempereth elements
Transformyng them by enterchaungementes
And al yt nature does on earth bread
And so bydeth / shall fallen down efte sone
Renewyng them by fruits and by sede
He sees also the works that ye done
And fortunes he governs euerych one
Constreynynge with an Insoluble bond
Of causes wyche that may not be wythstonde
And sith these causes passen fro so hye
A ground / as purueyance vnuaryable
Than may I say full well and sothfastly
That needs must hit ben vntransmutable
That governance / and most profitable
when this symplycyte of dyuyne thought
Ordeyneth causes wyche that fails noght
Thus in a certain order sothe to sayn
That steadfast is and hit may faylen never
And but this order govern and refrayn
This wordly things wyche that changes ever
Full sone they shall dyssoluen and desseuer
Fletynge / right as thing of no valor
And whaueryng so wythouten governor
And though so be that we may not behold
The causes of this desposytion
Ne se the skyleful order as we should
There fore be we in perturbation
Hit seems ous error and confusion
Yet is hit dressed if we understood
And well desposed every dele to good
For cause of euel is no thing verily
Performed of the worst man that is
For as I have declared plenerly
They seeks good / but they ben led a mysse
By error of there own wrecchednesse
For why that order wyche that does proceed
Fro souereyn good / hit may no wight myslede
But un to this perauenture wylt thou say
What confusion may there wors be
Sith good and badde indyfferent alday
Now have they welthe and now aduersyte
Now that they love / now yt they wolden fle
But wylt thou trow that men be now so wise
That every thing must be as they deuyse
As whom them lust to Iugen good or badde
Of very force hit must be needs so
In man's dome dyscorde full often is had
For of these one man / these will demen loo
That he is worthy much peyn and woo
And these will deem him worthy thank and mede
And yet the one must be deceived need
But let ous graunten here that any wight
The good and badde may verily dyscerne
Now trowest thou yt they ben of such a might
For to enserche the Innermest thought
Of man's ghost and all that he has wroght
And clearly Iugen thereof every dowte
As men ar wont of bodies here without
As for to Judge there attemperure
Of dyuersyte of there complexion
As greatly wondreth every creature
That knows not by clear inspection
There kendes ne there dysposytions
why these accords well with things sweet
These other most have sour and sweet forlete
And seek folks ben y cured often
Sum with sharp things sykerly
And sum by thing that esy is and soft
But this the leche knows verily
That knows the manner of the malady
There temperure and manner of there hele
Of this dyscorde he wondreth never a dele
And what may be the health of thy courage
But honest and virtue most of price
what sickness may thy soul do damage
But unhonest and cursednesse of vice
But now what creature may be so wise
To sauen health and a voyden heaviness
No wight but god in certain as I guess
He is the very leche of man's mind
That fro the waytyng of his purueyance
He sees what is acordant to the kende
Of euerych that he has in governance
And for them so he makes ordynance
To euerych as belongs to his health
whether that ye deem hit woo or welthe
Than is this noble wondre to your thought
And merueyl of this order destynal
when god al co^nynge / has that work y wroght
Hit stoneth them that knows noght at al
For man's connyng certain is but small
And man's reason little may dyffyne
Of things in the souereyn thought dyuyne
Perauenture thou wylt demen of a wight
That he is Just and trwe in his intent
yet in the purueyance of gods sight
There falls al a another Judgment
And a dome that is fer dyfferent
Loo as Lucanus my famylyer
In his books wrote of this matter
The cause conuyct as Cato began deuyse
He demed best / that was Pompeius
But loo the gods Iuged other wise
They demed Just the cause of Julius
Wherefore they maden him vyc^oryous
So things don outwardly to thy sight
Yet is hit don by ordynance of right
But yet as to thyn opynable wit
Hit seems ouerthorte confusyon
But perauenture I suppose yet
Here is some man of such condytion
That in the dome is no dystynction
But god and man accords al in one
In Judgment that error is there none
But upon hap so feynt his courage is
That if there fall him other than he would
Hit should him causen for to don a mysse
And to forlete his good custumes old
By wyche / fortune might he not with hold
where fore the wise dyspensation
Regarding to his dysposytion
And seeing that by such aduersyte
He should be much apeyred and y shent
For why he spares him of his pity
And gives him so as is conuenyent
That he may keep him true and Innocent
And these loo stont in virtue perfetly
And as a saint is Joined god full nigh
Of these the hye dyuyne purueyance
Would deem hit as for sin and felony
To put upon him harms or greuance
He will him noght be harmed bodily
Ne be desesed by no malady
Thus said one that of wysedom was fulfilled
That virtue has a saints body bylded
And often when astate of worthynesse
And governance is given to the wise
That is for to rebuken and repress
The vice that would encressen and a rise
And some he rules in a another wise
And as him leketh enterchaungeth both
Right as best is for them hit is the sothe
And some he suffers softly to be grieved
Lest they outrage in there welthes long
And some with sharp showers to be meued
That virtue of there courage ever a mong
By use of pacyence be preued strong
And be confermed by that exercise
And some because of very cowardyce
Full nedeles of much thing they dread
wyche they may well perform ye sothe to sayn
And these loo is full hardy in his deed
Presumyng more then he may sustain
To these expedyent hit is there a geyn
To know them selfen by experyence
And these loo for a name of excellence
Full manly with death he has hit boght
And so he has sustained peynes sore
As for exsample ever to be thought
That men may seyn by things don be fore
That virtue has Inuict ben evermore
And is not harmed by aduersyte
But if defaute of men them selfen be
How ryghtuously desposed al a bowte
And loo how well these things ben y do
Ho so looks this / he may not ben in dowte
And for there profet wham they falls to
For to the wicked that betydeth so
That now they have desese and now there lust
To these same causes may be wyste
But when they ben in peynes and dystresse
There is no wight that wondreth never a dele
For why they al will suppose and guess
That (...) peynes were deserved well
And these peynes that these wrecches feel
Makes other wrecches peynes for to fere
And often foul vices to forbere
And also for there own amendment
But things falling lusty to there chyre
Hit gives men a mighty argument
what they should demen of these welthes here
Sith they to wrecches be famylyer
And certainly I suppose as in this
That god despenseth with there frowardness
For some men ben there loo perauenture
That been so importune in there malice
And eke so ouerthrowyng of nature
That need them makes fallen in to vice
But than this prescyence that is so wise
A genst the perel of this malady
By wordly plentey makes remedy
Loo these behaldeth on his conscience
Defouled so with sin and cursedhede
And seyth how great a dysconuenyence
Than is between his fortune and his deed
Perauenture he falls so in dread
Lest that the use of thing that does him ese
He may forfete and by his sins lose
He changes than his customs euerychone
Him fereth so his fortune to forlete
And al his vices he forsakes sone
And these has loo these wordly welthes great
To wyche in sothe his meret is unmeet
And suddenly the wrecche is overthrown
And set at noght as his deserts awen
And some have pouer and auctoryte
Loo whom them lust to punysshen and dystrayn
So that hit may un to the good be
An exercise of virtue the sothe to sayn
And to the wicked man a cause of peyn
For right as good and bad dyscordeth ever
Right so bad them self accords never
And why not / sith hit falteth every day
That they dyscorden in them selfen so
There conscience repreueth them always
And often time hit falls that they do
Some deed / yt when the time is over go
Them self they demeth in there own thought
That better had that deed ben vnwroght
This purueyaunce if ye hit understood
Hit worcheth here a wonder to your heart
By bad men the bad he makes good
And fro there vices wonderly convert
For when the fowls feel them felfen smert
when other wrecches has them harmed sore
Hit falls that they hates them there fore
And while they coueyt un to s^che men
To be vnleke / that uses such unright
To fruit of virtue they resorteth than
For only this is thing of gods might
Right as hit leketh him / hit is but light
That bad thing is good as he deuyseth
when good effects of the bad a ryseth
For why in order al thing embraces
And what that fleteth fro this ordynance
In to another order than hit passes
For in the realm of certain purueyaunce
That mighty god has in his governance
There may no thing be done vncertenly
Ne but hit have a skyleful cause why
For un to man in sothe hit langeth not
To know al his wonderful engyne
As of the works wyche that been y wroght
So by the hye purueyaunce dyuyne
Ne them with words fully dyffyne
No creature has that habylyte
But only this suffyseth / hit to se
That god the first founder of nature
Al thing to good desposeth he and dresseth
So fer forth that in every creature
The lekenesse of him self he empresseth
And for to kepen this / loo he represseth
Al wicked things fro his governance
A voydyng hit by fatal ordinance
For why if thou mark well in thy mind
The purueyaunce that al thing desposeth
There is no thing that you shall bad find
Though so be yt thy wits so supposes
For every thing wythyn hit self encloseth
Some manner cause of good hit is no dread
where of some other goods shall proceed
But yet whyler I saw the wexen faint
As for the wyghtes of my questyon
This long process has the sore atteynt
Some sweet thing of delectation
Thou ask for a recreation
Have taste of this and strenger shall thou be
Than / and hegher to ascend after me
Metru^ vj. Capitulum xj.
Si vis celsi iura tona^tis.
Phia loquitur. TOo if thou wylt behold ententyfly
with all the clear myghtes of thy mend
The laws of our souereyn god on hey
Up in to heaven thou must thy wits send
There every thing does keep his course of kende
The sterres with a ryghtuous allyaunce
They keeps there there old gouernauuce
And loo the bright son hit is no doubt
The cold moan lets never a dele
And Vrsa wyche that meueth round a boute
The pole artyke right as hit were a whele
Her old course she keeps wonder well
Though other sterres meue in to the west
To a byden there a boue she leketh best
And Hesperus the eve sterre clear
Loo shows him self before the derke night
And the lustey sterre Lucifer
He brings by este a geyn the day light
This perdurable course they keeps right
Thus al dyscord by enterchaunged love
Loo is exyled from the heaven a boue
This same accord of love by stoundes mete
Attempereth eke the fyghtyng elements
That drouth may accord with the wete
That hete and cold may have conuenyence
And though they keep there kendly resistance
The light fire yet algates up asceudeth
And the heavy earth contrary way descends
And by causes of the self reason
Sweet flowers spryngeth lustely
In the fair first somer season
And so the hot somer suyngly
Makes the corn to rypen hastily
And so autumpnus brings forth his blede
Lusty fruits folks for to feed
This same attemperaunce hit is no nay
The winter so be dweth with the rayn
Al leuyng thing hit norysseth soth to say
And efte with death retorneth down a geyn
The whiles sytteth the maker souereyn
well and ground both lord and king is he
Law / and wise Judge of equity
The reins of the world he has in hand
So making hit to meuen and to go
A restyng efte he makes hit to stand
For thing that fletteh ever to and fro
But if that he enstabelysshe hit so
Compellyng hit to meuen in to round
Hit must needs faylen fro his ground
And fro the order wyche they now observe
This love comen to every creature
Coueyteth them to kepen and conserve
The end of good that ground is of nature
For in other wise may they not endure
But love return them in to unity
Of god on hye that caused them to be
Prosa vij. Capitulu^ xiij.
Iam ne igitur vides.
Phia loquitur. ANd seyst thou not quod she what sueth here
Upon all that we have rehearsed now
Boeus) I asked what phia) quod she yt is full
That al fortune is good boeus) y asked how (clear
Phia) Full sone quod she that shall I show the now
Thou understand well that this is sothe
That every fortune Iustey is or loathe
Yet ben they given for an exercise
Of virtue to the good or else thus
As for a guerdonyng un to the wise
Or they ben given to the vycyous
To punyshe them that been malycyous
Or to correct them of there mysdede
This is the very cause hit is no dread
And all that ever is Just and profitable
wylt thou not hold hit good Boeus) I said yes
For why hit sueth right as reasonable
To that ye have rehearsed here y wys
Of purueyance and desteny er this
Full fermely your sentence is y knytte
But saeth me one thing if you leketh yet
As ye have put be fore a little er
Acounteth fortune now in this degree
ye sayden that a rude comyner
Can not believe / ne will hit not se
Phia) And whereto shall I speak of that quod she
Boeus quod I this speech of men is used wide
That euel fortune to some men does betyde
Phia) And wylt you quod she yt we negh nere
Un to the comen used speech than
Lest them seem that I go to far
A bouen all the comen use of man
Boeus) As leketh you quod I Phia) and she began
Demest you not good that causes good to encresse
Boeus) yes quod I for sothe I may Judge no less
Phia) Now all that virtue is enforced by
Other that corrects any deed
Does hit not profyten) Boecius) yes quod I
Phia) Than is hit good quod she wythouten dread
Boecius) In sothe quod I this must I grau^ten need
Phia) But this quod she to them does aperteyn
That grounded ben in virtue ye sothe to seyn
That takes bateyl with such auentures
whythstandyng them with mighty patience
Or hit perteyneth to tho creatures
That have led there lyffe in insolence
And so to virtue does there dylygence
There to enforsed with aduersyte
Boecius) and this quod I may not denied be
Phia) But when quod she fortune of lustynesse
To good men is given for there mede
Is hit then bad? will these folks guess
Boeus) I said nay full right they will hit read
That this fortune is good wythouten dread
Phia) And what quod she when fortune anguysous
Is bestowed upon the vycyous
To peyn them for there sins ryghtuously
whether will they deem hit good or noght
Boeus) Good will they not Iugen hit quod I
But wrecchednesse ye worst that may be thought
Phia) Behald quod she now where we ben y brought
As suynge this vulgar opinion
In to a marvelous conclusyon
Boeus) I asked what Phia) hit sueth here quod she
Of that we have confessed plenerly
Lo that there may no wicked fortune be
To such that haveth virtue perfetly
Or to tho that encresseth ought there by
Or tho that does in virtue first begin
To virtue so converted fro there sin
And they that dwells in there wickedness
what fortune that them fall of well or woo
Hit is myschef to them and wrecchednesse
Boeus) In sothe quod I hit sueth well there to
Though no man will hit grant yet is hit so
Phia) For why she said a wise and perfet man
Should not so sore grogen than
When fortune as a foo does hem assail
Right as a strong man should him not dysdeyn
When that he hyreth rumor of batayl
But thereof should he be full glad and fayn
For such destresse a matter is certain
For to conferme these one in sapience
These other in astate of excellence
For then her name virtue uses right
Al only when hit stont in this degree
when hit enforces of his propre might
To be not ouerthroen by aduersyte
And to you that in encrece of virtue be
Hit belongs not to lead a lusty lyffe
with every fortune have ye taken stryffe
And a bateyl wonder sharp and kene
Look how ye can you keep in this dystresse
To set your selfen in a mighty mean
So that her sorrows no thing you oppress
Ne that ye be not by her lustynesse
Corrupt / for all that a boue this mean a ryseth
Or is benethe / felycyte despyseth
And shall no mede as for his labor take
For in your own hands put is hit
your propre fortune / wyche ye will make
For if hit seem sharp un to your wit
Loo exercise of virtue gives hit
Or else you conuerteth fro your sin
Or punysseth you that will a bide theryn
AGamenon the vengeour of heleyue
A bateyl held of erus twyes five
So he destroyed troy and wanne a geyn
The same helyue yt was his brod wyffe
But when he first began styre him to that stryffe
Him lacked wind to sail on the flod
And sone he boght hit with his doghter blod
And so he made him selfen pyteles
In sacryfyce he sloo his doghter dear
Also when that noble Vlixes
In the sea had sailed many year
He wept his main with a ruthful chere
For Poliphemus daryng in his den
So fersly had devoured al his men
But Vlixes full warely began espy
when that this Poliphemus was a sleep
And suddenly than put he out his ye
And Poliphemus tho began to lepe
And for malice and anguyshe weyle and weep
where of Vlixes was full blythe and glad
In vengeance of the harms that he had
And Hercules gate him a noble name
By labors wyche that hard were and great
First the proud Centaurus made he tame
The Lion fers out of his skin he get
And Arpyas eke with aroes he shete
And golden apples wych the dragon kept
He gate them while the cruel dragon slepte
And Cerberus the foul hounde of hell
with a three fold cheyn he bound full last
And dyomede the tyrant fers and fell
He made his horse devour him at last
Upon the serpent Idra fire he cast
And so he brent him in to asches cold
That no man his venem noyen should
When Achilaus made him self by craft
I leke to a bole with Hercules to fight
Than Hercules his horns him be raft
And fully him despoyled of his might
Achilaus in to a river right
For shame he lepte and hyd him selfen there
And on the land he dare no more apere
Antheus the geaunt of Libie
That on the ground his myghtes would renwe
Thus Hercules him sloo full manfully
Upon his breast and to the ground him thrwe
And Cakus the thief that was vntrwe
He sloo / and Euanderus Ire he pesed
That of Cakus often was desesed
And over this he sloo the mighty bore
with hoos foom his shulders marked were
But than his last labor furdermore
was when he on his neck heuens bear
And of this labor he deserved there
That heaven for to have to his mede
ye mighty men to this ye takes head
Now hastes you the hye way to wend
Right as ye may by this exsample se
ye nyce men and mased in your mind
why will ye not fight a genste aduersyte
with virtue / sith ye may so syker be
Ho so in earth has the victory
He shall be worthy to the heaven on hye
Explicit Liber Quartus.
In this chapter Philosophia confermeth her exhortation / by exsa^ple of iii.
mighty men / of synguler deeds that they had done. Agamenon. Vlixes. and
Hercules. And for cause often times men eschevveth great acts for lack of
courage / vvyche courage is blemesshed or oppressed: by iii. things in specyal.
There fore he reherseth of these vverryours, certain deeds / in vvyche they
shevved the might of there courage not hurt ne blemesshed by none of these causes.
One thing is that often lets and vvythdraeth the force of man's courage /
fro mighty and manly deeds / that is tendrenesse of heart and affection that he
has other to worldly things vvyche he delyteth upon / Other to vvyffe and
children / kynred / or frenshyppe / vvyche he keeps not to dysplese in
vvythdrayng his presence / nether in any other thing / that might be cause of
morning or heaviness. But a geynst this carnalyte / he puts the exsample of
Agamenon. That when he was saylynge toward the sege^ of Troy / when he
came to the I Will of Aulydes / him lacked vvynde. Then was hit shevved him by
vvycches and dyuynours / that if he would have vvynde: he must slay his
doghter Ephigenie / and brenne her in sacryfyce to the plesance of Dyane. And
not vvythstandyng that he loved his doghter passing al thing / yet in hope of
vyctory / he put a way the tendrenesse of faderly affection / and made his
heart pyteles to his dear doghter / and so sloo her in sacryfyce.

And so had he vvynde to his will / and suyngly the vyctory as he desired The
second thing that lets a man's courage is: when he has seyn many peryshe
for a certain purpose: vvych him self desires / and fevve or none atteyn hit
with prosperyte. A geyn this a basshement / he puts the second exsample of
Vlixes. vvyche when he had x. years erred saylyng in the sea after the
destruction of Troy and suffered many mysse adventures / and specially in
transformation and lesynge of his feloshyppe: by the cursed enchaunteresse
Circes. Here he tellethe how the great giant Poliphemus with one ye in his
frount / had deuored and destroyed his people / And not vvythstandynge the
myscheffe that al his people had suffered / yet Vlixes a basshed him noght /
but vvayted when this giant was a sleep / and suddenly put out his ye: And
theu was he syker of him / that he might harm him no more. and so he venged
the morder of his meyne* The moralyte of this fable / is this. Poliphemus is as
much to say / as lesynge of fame: And he that recketh not of his fame / may
well be called one yeed. For he regards not that is to come: ne that is
passed. but only to his present lusts. But Vlixes the wise man / has regard
both to that is gone: and to that that is to come / and quenches in him self
this one is of these present lusts. And though so be that all the world for the
more part / by rauesshynge of this one ye / peresseth / foloynge these
momentaney lusts: and uneaths any man is that can or will refrayn the^: yet
Vlixes the wise man: will stop this ye / and not excuse him by the comen
excuse of vvrecches saying: Ho is he that may vvythstand his desires / sith so
many mighty men and wise have been dyscomfete of there lusts. But he will
myghtly repress these passions by good gouerna^ce* And so venge him self upon
his gostely enemy.

The third thing that a basseth the courage: is covvardyce: when a man
haldeth him self unable to the labor that he puryoseth / and his might
vnsuffycyant and unmeet to resyste that: that vvythstandethe his will and
enteut. Agenste this covvardyce: philosophia Inducethe the xii. labors of the
mighty man Hercules / vvyche seems to every man's hyrynge far to excede the
might of any man* yet not vvythstandyng / Hercules a basshed never his courage:
but myghtely performed his intent and purpos. wherefore as philosophia
concludes he was revvarded with a souereyn geft / and made a bright shynyng
sterre in the heaven a boue. By these mighty manues labors / is given to ous an
exsample / that there may no thing a basshe the courage of a wise man: vvher by
he should leave the labor of virtuous leuynge / ne bodily exercise in virtue
shall not seem him ouerhard to his might / but that he may perform his entente
and lust. so shall his desire be enforced with desire and full hope to heavenly
Joy.

The first labor: the proud Centaurus made he tame: Of these Centaurus is said
be forn / That Ixion gate them of a cloud / when he would have oypressed
Juno. But what wise that Hercules tamed them / hit is expressed by the
commentor thus. when that these Centaurus in a certain time were come to gedres
in the mount of Pheloe to a pley that was called Palestra / vvyche we call
vvrastelyng / Hercules so sore asset them in vvrastelyng / that they bledde.
Also another time Hercules coming out of spain was logged in the den of Tyro
Centaurus that was one of the ^heffe masters. And as this Tyro handeled an
aroe / with vvyche Hercules had slain a serpent the venomous aroe fell upon
his foot / and made him a vvonde / that was incurable. The third time hit fell
that Hercules with his love Deiamra tornyng tovvard his contre / come to the
river of Heuenu^ / And when he tarried for caryage of his vvyffe: Neffus
Centaurus bade him svvymme over before: and he would bring her after. And when
that Hercules was come to land / he looked after his vvyffe / and he savv
Centaurus a boute for to oppressen her / And a none with a venomous aroe he
shet him thoro the heart and s^vve him. And thus he tamed the proud Centaurus.
To the litceral truth of this tale. Ixion that was called the fader of the
Centaurus / was the first that ordained horsemen for to ride in greece / and
gadred of them a hundred and waste sore the country. And when the rude
people did see them so smartly pry^k^ng in and out / they vvend hit had been
bestes / half horse and half me^. And at last these mighty Hercules faught with
them and destroyed them. By these Centaurus geten of the cloud may be
understand such men as ben exalted in to hye astates / not by meret of there
virtues / but by favor of lordshyppe / and by there vayn plesaunce. They ben
half bestes and half men / bestly in there leuyng / raueners and extorcyoners:
and leke men in pleasaunce to there lords Hercules the virtuous shall spare none
offense of there hye astates / ne dread of there tyranny / but boldly repreue
them of there vices / and make them to look as men should. The second of
Hercules was that he strepte the Lion out of his skyn. The truth of this
labor was this: There was a passing hugy Lion in the forest of Nemeas: vvyche
sore a frayed the people of the country. vvyche Lion hercules slvve / and
strept the skyn: and bare with him in sign of vrctory. By this Lion is
understand / proud and fers tyrants: that delyteth al in raven and pylyng of
the people / having no pytey upon the pour. These men a virtuous man should
spoil of there pour / and suffer none such to bear astate of off^ce.

The third labor was that he sher the herpyas with aroes.

Syneus put out the yees of his sons / because they had accused there
stepmoder of adultery. wherefore by Jugement of gods he was blinded him self
/ and had certain fowls about him with maiden heddes / that defoyled his
table and bare a way his mete. These fowls Hercules slvve and drove out of
country

By these Herpyas may well be understand rennets or ryders over the contre /
covered under lordshyp / as menstrelles and Ioculers and such other / that
comes in to householdes of worthy men / and eteth and deuoreth there vytelles
/ And but they have also geftes / they vbyl defoule the table / despysyng the
persons / And when they ben passed / speak vylenously by all the household.
Such people a virtuous man should not cherysshe for fere of words / but
rebuke them of this foul manners / and so destroy that foul vice and dishonest
usage.

The fourth labor was: that he gate the golden apples fro the dragon. As
Lucanus feyneth Athlaus had vii. doghters / vvyche had a gardenful of golden
apples / vvych garden was taken to keep to a dragon / that alvvay was
vvakyng. But Hercules by craft made this dragon to sleep / and so bare a way
the apples: and brought them to Euristeus the king. By these vii. doghters of
Athlaus / ben understand the vii. arts liberal. These damseles have a garden /
that is the lybrary disperse a monges clerks. Appel trees ben books / the
apples ben sotel sentence of vvysedom / vvych the vvakynge dragon / that is the
sensualyte of man has to keep. vvych is ever vvakyng to lusts and delytes /
and so lets the soul fro connyng. But Hercules the virtuous man oppresses
his sensualyte by good governance so that hit lets him noght fro study /
And so by his good business he geteth the fruit of all the vii. science.

The v. labor was when he bound Cerberus the foul hound of hell. Of these
Cerberus the fable is this. Pirritous would vvedde the queen of hell. And he
called Hercules and Theseus / and other mighty men to help him. And when they
came to hell / lest Cerberus the porter should let them of there purpose /
Hercules bound him vvythe a cheyn of adamant: The queen of hell may well be
called worldly vvorshyp / vvych Pirritous desires. But he takes wise men to
his counsel. And Cerberns with iii. heddes Hercules byndeth / That is Pride /
Auaryce / and Lechory. These iii. head sins lets a man to be vvorshypful /
where for the virtuous man byndeth and restreyneth them with a treble cheyn
of virtues. And when that these vices be so repressed by virtues / a man may
not fail to be vvorshypful.

The vi. labor was that he made diomede to be eten of his avvne horse. The
fable is this. Diomede king of Trace / fed his horse with man's flesh:
vvher fore he used to slay his gestes for his horse. But at last came Hercules
and slvve him / * And made his horse to ete him. And finally sloo the same
horse. This Diomede betokens a vvastour that pylleth and despoyleth the people
/ for to maynteyn his great a ray / vvych passes the suffysaunce of his
astate. But a virtuous man shall besey him self for to destroy such manner
leuers / and compelle them for to leave by there avvne good: But when they may
not continue that a ray vvythoute raven and robbery / there horse and there a ray
brings them to noght. so that of need they must leave hit and leave as they
may. The vii. labor was / that he brent the serpent Idra. In the river of
Learn was a serpent with many heddes / And ever if one were cut of / there
wax ^ii. there fore. And when that Hercules had shot him and no thing a
vayled / at last he made a boute this serpent a hugey hepe of vood: and after
set hit a fire and so brent this serpent. This fable is toched be fore and in
part declared The viii. labor is of Achilaus. the fable is this. Hercules and
Achilaus vvressheled to gether for the maiden Dianer / and when that Achilaus
feld him self at the worse / he turned him self suddenly in to a serpent / and
slypte out of his hands. And Hercules eftsoon caught him and was in point to
vvery him. And then Achilaus turned him self in to a bole. So Hercules a none
took him and threvv him to the ground and break his horn. and he for shame
lepte in to the water and hyd him.

The truth of this fable is this Achilaus is a river be tvvene greece and
Calcedoyne. In this Calcedoyne reigned a king named Genus / hose doghter
Hercules rauesshed. And coming to this river when he might not pass hit he
stopped an arm of hit and dried hit / and so he passed with his love. By this
kings doghter may be understand virtue / vvyche Hercules the mighty man
coueyteth for to have. Achilaus betokens the sensualyte / vvych in youth
hyley vvythstandeth a man that would be virtuous. But first the sensualyte as a
serpent assayleth him by many side vvayes / And when this mighty man has
overcome al tho serpents deceytes / he torneth in to a bole with ii. horns /
Lechory / and Glotony. But this one horn of Lechory / the virtuous man breketh
and utterly destroys. and then is the sensualyte overcome / For the other
horn of glotony will lightly of a virtuous man be put under by good
governance. So this bole lepeth in to the river. the sensualyte is repressed
and keleth him self by penance / and so vvynneth the mighty man virtue to his
love.

The ix. labor is of Antheas the great geaunt / vvych was geten of the earth
/ And ever as he toched the earth / he renewed his strength with vvych geaunt
Hercules vvrasteled / But alvvay when he seemed dyscomfeted / falling to ground
he became as fresshe as he was before Than Hercules perceuyug this took him in
his arms / and leyd him on his breast / and so streyned him to death by
strength: and so cast him to the ground / and thus destroyed he the geaunt.
By these Antheus may be understand worldly couetyce / vvych encresseth and
renueth his strength by tochyng of the ground. For couetyce will not be
quenched by plenty of worldly good / but rather is there by renewed and enforced.
Hercules the^ the virtuous man / streyneth this couetyce vvythyn his breast /
and with draeth hit utterly fro worldly good / and so he quenches the lust
that he had there on / and puts hit holely in virtue and in vvysedom.

The x. labor is of Cakus the theffe of Libia vvych Hercules dyscomfeted and
slvve. The fable is this. There was in the mount Aucentyne a monstre / that
spete fire at his mouth / robbyng and despoylyng the people of the country.
And he was the son of Vulcane / by whom Euander king of the land was
greatly a noyed. And Hercules coming by that contre / bryngyng with him out of
spayn great plenty of bestes / this Cakus stale iiii. bolles and as many keyn:
and droe them in to his den by the tails bacvvard / that the stappes should
not be seyn Inward. And Hercules by estimation espied where they were / and
so droe Cakus out of his den / and sloo him. and so he esed the king
destroyng his enemy. The moralyte is thus. By this Cakus may be understand
pride. He speteth fire at his mouth / hye words of malice and manace: He is
Vulcanus son. For that vice is appropryat to the deuel that first hit found.
He vvasteth and deuoreth and steleth all that he may / and so harmeth the
contre* For a proud man vvasteth much in his a ray and other expenses / that
all that ben a boute him ben noyed there by. Euander the reason that is king of
the soul may not overcome him / for he will not vvorche by him / He dares in
his den: syttyng in man's heart / he steleth iiii. bolles of Hercules he
oppresses the iiii. cardynal virtues / and as many keyn / al other virtues
that been under them. For a proud man is myghtles / intemperate / vnvvare and
unrighteous. This theffe Hercules that is conscience espyeth: and draeth out
this theffe pride out of the heart / and sleyth and destroyth him / and so has
he his bestes a geyn / that be virtues. And reason that was over come / now
regneth in the soul as king in ^pece and rest.

The xi. labor is of the bore that Hercules s^vve. In archadia was a mighty
bore that waste the regyon sore. vvych Hercules hunted and at last this bore
turned un to Hercules and smote him in the shulder / and marked hit with the
foom of his mouth. By these bore may be understand the vice of the flesh /
vvyche vvasteth foul a man his substance: These vices Hercules the mighty
chaceth and hunteth / in will to destroy them: But this bore torneth and
assayleth Hercules: For hit chances often / that a full mighty man in virtues:
that pursues and hates al vices / is assailed and repted with the sin of
the flesh / and perauenture is marked falling theryn. But one vycyous deed
beryueth not the habyte of virtue: but ma^^^h a man more vvare: and dylygent for
to keep him self / and so at last he ouercometh his flesh and sleyth this
bore of lust and lekyng.

The xii. labor was this: after the fable of Duyde. Athlas the mighty geaunt
/ in the geauntes batayl / fyghtyng a genst the gods above / bare heaven upon
his shulder: And when that he savve Hercules come to him / after his other
labors / he was vvery of fyghtyng and also of this burden / prayed him to
help him to bear heaven / And he took and bare hit myghtely. vvherby he
deserved to be made a fair sterre in heaven. The truth was this. Athlas was a
cheffe astronomer / wherefore he was said that he bare heaven / the conning
of heavenly things. But when Athlas dyed / vvych death is a rest and a
refresshyng to the virtuous / Hercules took heaven upon his shulder. The
moralyte may be thus. The batayl of geauntes is the enforsynge of goostly
myghtes a genst the gods a boue / that is a genst natural inclination to
vices / vvyche is caused by constellations / But a genst these inclinations / he
may fight best / that has connyng of astronomy. For to search the myghtes of
the planetes for certain times / and knovveth also how these vycious
inclinations becaused. But at last he must leave the labor of astronomy
compelled by age / when al his passions ben cessed: and then Hercules takes
heaven upon his shulder: and gives him holly to heavenly contemplation.

And so he deserves by this labor specially to be made a cytesen of heaven.
Loo thus must every mighty man that will de seruen heaven. First loathe and
abhor the monstres of sin: both in him self: and also in other: and at
last leuyng al outvvard occupation / give him holly to serve god: in prayer and
contemplation: and so many he be syker of all that he desires.

To whom so ever the moralyte of these fables be plefau^t or unlusty were ye
well that they lacks al in some things lytteral truth. But a fable lackyng
lytteral truth vnexponed: is noght else but a lesyng. And as holy scripture
saeth / all that ever does or speaks lesyng / shall be parteners of the pytte of
hell. Vvher fore after my simple conning / I have moralysed the^ in my manner:
leuyng the correction to other that been clerks and more connyng in that
science. For sith hit aperteneth not to holy vvryt: every man vvythout offense:
may say that him seems most lekely to truth.

Explicit Liber quartus.
Sequitur Liber Quintus Boetij de co^solatone Phie.
WHen she had said she began her selfen hye
To other things treted for to be
your noble exhortation quod I
Full worthy hit is of hye auctoryte
But yet while er as I remember me
ye did speak of dyuyne prescience
How hard hit is I have experyence
And al belapped with demaundes feel
Encomberous to any man's wit
Full dangerous is that matter with to dele
But now I pray you that ye say me yet
if hap be ought / what manner thing is hit
Phia) I speed me quod she for to pay my debt
Of things that while er I the behete
And for to set the in a ready way
So that thou might return in to thy land
This matter that thou ask sothe to say
Though hit be good to know and understand
Loo yet this purpose that we have on hand
Somewhat hit is impertynent there to
And furdermore hit is to dread also
Lest of thy ways that thou faint and fail
As for thy Journey that is ouergone
And lest thou suffyse not to thy traueyle
To that thou have hereafter for to done
Boeus) Then dread ye not quod I let me alone
For this shall be right as a time of rest
To hyre of thing that me delyteth best
And namely sith your process al a boute
By dysputation so formally
Concluded is / hit may not ben in doubt
Of that ye will enducen suyngly
Phia) Right as you wylt quod she right so will I
And she began to declare in this wise
what ever he be quod she yt will deuyse
That hap is such a thing that should be fall
wythouten cause or skyle of governance
Than say I thus / that hap is naught at al
But an Idel name and of no vaylaunce
Sith god has set al thing in ordinance
Now should there any place then be
To worken things in vncertente
For tru^y nogh this sentence has be hold
Loo that there may no thing be don of naught
This sentence revoked never faders old
Of one begynner al thing must be wroght
yet this was not the conceyt of there thought
Tho al thing have a maker pryncypal
They did mean of subject materyal
For that they put as for a fundament
And that has ever reason of nature
Than will hit suen clear and consequent
This may well perceive every creature
if any thing were don by adventure
wythouten causes where of to proceed
Than must hit come of naught hit is no dread
But sith this may not be in no manner
Than hap may not be called sykerly
Such as we dyffyned have while er
Boecius) what is there than no manner thing quod I
That chance or hap is called skylefully
Or such a thing there is to folke^ unknow
where to these name belangeth as ye trow
Phia) yes mine Aristoteles quod she
In his book of physyke naturel
Breffely he shows what thing hit should be
Full nigh the truth dyffyneth he hit full well
Boeus) And how quod I phia) Lo this is every dele
quod she that writes Aristoteles
Of this matter / and hit is no les
As often as there is a work y wroght
As for a certain purpos of intent
And then of other causes vnbethoght
Betydeth other wise then was be meant
Loo hap this may be called verament
As if hit lust a man to delffe his land
And hid theryn a sum of gold he found
Of such a thing men demeth sykerly
Loo that a soden adventure hit is
yet came hit not of no thing pardey
But propre causes were be forn y wysse
The concours of wych causes this
But for hit fell unware and vnbethought
Hit seems folk that hap ^ut has y wroght
For but the telyer had dolue his ground
And eke the hyder put hit in that stead
Thou may well seyn the gold had not be found
As in that manner wise hit is no dread
These causes ben of aduenturous deed
when that they mete and ben assembled so
wythouten certain purpos to be do
For he that dalf and he that hyd hit there
Purposed not thou may suppose hit well
That gold to have been found in that manner
Never one of them bethoght hit never a dele
But right as I have said hit so befell
That in the same place where these hit hyd
That other dalf and found as hit betyde
Now then in short to make an end of al
And to make a fynal dyffynytion
Loo hap is such a thing that does befalle
No thing purposed of entention
Of diverse causes metyng in to one
In things that for somewhat were y wroght
But un to that that is be fall / noght
But this vnescheuable ordinance
wyche that the well head proceeds fro
Of the hye dyuyne purueyaunce
wythouten wyche there may no thing be do
That makes these causes to concurren so
That al thing desposeth kendly
In propre place and times certainly
Metrum j. Capitulu^ ij.
Rupis achimenie scopulis.
Phia loquitur. TIgris and Eufrates spryngeth both
Out of a cragge rock of Ermeny
Out of one well head to say the sothe
where men ben wont to fyghten wonderly
In flight they harmeth them that sueth nigh
There sharp darts in there breast fyxyng
So when they fleyth there foes most noyng
These ryuers both ben dysioyned sone
And renneth in to diverse stremes great
And after that they fallen in to one
where that they in a another place mete
The ships than and stocks that there flete
In either of these stremes down a long
Hit happeth that they mete ever a mong
This water thus Implies and (...)
Thus medelyng many chances fortunel
But of that shevey earth hit so behappeth
The wych this water sueth / wete hit well
That fletyng order rules every dele
Right so is hap unruled as demeth ye
But nevertheless hit has a law of certente
Prosia ij. Capituln^ iij.
Animaduerto inquam.
Boecius loquitur. TO this quod I full well acorde I can
And yt ye say I may hit well beleuen
But in the order of these causes than
The wych so suyngly to gedres cleueu
This would I se / if ye could show or preuen
if in out choys is any lyberte
Other else that this cheyn of destyne
Constreyneth all the mouyug of our wit
Phia) quod she in sothe then were hit al a mysse
That will I show and clearly preuen hit
For why / no kend that reasonable is
whythouten lyberte may ben y wysse
For all that kendly reason vsen may
May demen and dyscern hit is no nay
And by him self he knows kendly
what thing is to desire and what to fleen
And what thing that he demeth verily
That worthy is desired for to be
That thing loo seeks and desires he
And what he Iugeth worthy to be forsake
That will he leave / and that other take
Then every thing that reason has certain
Of will and nel has lyberte there to
But al y leke / in sothe will I not sayn
For dyuyne substances stands not so
The Judgment is wonder clear of tho
There will is incorrupt / there might is pressed
And spedy to all that them leketh best
But most in fredom is the soul of man
when he is set in contemplation
And fully fyxen al his thoughts can
In hye dyuyne speculation
And less if that his occupation
In wordly thing dystracteth ought his mind
And less when flesly bounds does him bind
But when a man is given un to vice
Than is he utterly bound and thralle
When he has set his reason at no pryse
And wylfully has let hit fro him fall
His lyberte is then lest of all
When that his sight in wordly wrecchednesse
Is cast fro light of souereyn sothfastnesse
He begenneth then to wexe derke and dulle
Of that foul cloud of Ignorance
Of foul affections than he shall be full
Encombred with the vice of inconstance
That trobeleth him with anguysshe and greuance
To wych when he consents in his wit
In seruage then him selfen has he knytte
In manner of his propre lyberte
A caytyf is becommen in conscience
But never the later he that al may se
As by his hye eternal prescience
Al thing gouernyng by his excellence
He hyreth and seyth well every thought and deed
And so he will desposen for there mede
Metru^ ij.
Puro claru^ lumie.
Phia. THe noble poet honey mouth Omere
Loo of the son syngeth on this wise
And says / for all his bright bemes clear
The sea / ne land yet may he not suffyse
To persen thorugh / so may we not deuyse
Of him that has this wide world y wroght
The heavy earth him wythstandeth noght
Fro fer and hye al thing he seyth a none
He is not let by clouds of the night
For all that is / was / or shall be done
At ones is hit al beforn his sight
Sith he alone with his bemes bright
So al things may behald and se
We may well sayn a very son is he
Prosa iij. Capitulu^ v.
Tum ego en inqua^.
Boecius loquitur. I said then / a gretter doubt now
Confounds me then did be fore y wysse
Phia) Of what quod she art you in doubt now
Now right in sothe coniect I what hit is
Boecius) full hugely quod I repugneth this
That god may known al thing er hit be
And that our will may stand at lyberte
Sith god be forn seyth all that shall be do
And his sight loo may be deceived naught
Of very fors then need hit must be so
That prescience has seyn yt is to be wroght
And not only work / but will and thought
Of every wight he knows plenerly
Than is no fredom in our arbytry
For why there may be another thought ne deed
That pnrueyaunce beforn ne seyth hit al
He fails not there of / hit is no dread
But all that ever he wot betyden shall
All that he seyth beforn hit must befalle
And if hit may be turned other wise
Hit was not seyn be fore at my deuyse
Than shall this be no very prescience
But as an uncertain opinion
But sykerly this were a foul offense
Of god to felen that conclusyon
And sum men supposes that this questyon
May ben assoyled thus / as they believe
But there resons can I not apprene
Loo thus they sayn / a thing that shall betyde
Betydeth not for god prouydeth so
But god that thing to commen does provide
And seyth beforn al thing that shall be do
And thus a geynward should the causes go
That god foreseyth this thing yt shall be wroght
But of need hit shall vetyde naught
They sayn also that thing yt shall befalle
In gods sight provided is hit need
Loo this answer assoyleth naught at al
This doutful questyon hit is no dread
Only to this entente hit does proceed
Loo of ij. diverse things to enquere
wych of them the cause of other were
Whether that the prescience of god a lone
Causes thing to fallen nedely
Other else thing that needs shall be don
Loo causes prescience in god on hye
This is no very answer sykerly
To that that I entend for to show
But nevertheless my purpose stands true
How ever hit stands of this ordinance
That wych of these the cause of other be
A thing that is forseyn by purueyaunce
Of need hit must betyde as seems me
Though hit be so that this necessyre
Be not y caused of this presc^ence
As in effect there is no dyfference
As if I sytte and thou supposest hit
Than needs sothe is thyn opinion
But my syttyng is not caused yet
As nedeful by thy estimation
And right so if thou torn hit up so down
if thou supposest sothe of that I do
Eke of necessyte than is hit so
Necessyte then must there ben in both
Un to that point loo here we ben y brought
In me of syttyng and in the of sothe
yet wotest thou well that therefore sytte I noght
As for that sothe opinion in thy thought
But rather thus / be cause that I sat
Loo thyn opyuyon was sothe in that
Than is this truth caused of the deed
And so in both there is necessyte
Loo in the same wise we may proceed
Of this purueyaunce as seems me
For cause these things shall here after be
There fore by purueyaunce he seyth hit al
And yet there fore does hit not befalle
And never the later all that shall betyde
Of god hit is provided nedefully
And efte a geyn all that he does provide
Of need hit does befallen certainly
And all the fredom of our arbytry
Loo this suffyseth to destroyen clean
Here apereth well how masedly we mean
That adventure of things temporel
Should causen his eternal prescience
But this would ben a folly thing to feel
with reason has hit no conuenyence
For hit would suen of there euydence
That things past long time seyn
Should causen god that is our souereyn
As if I know a thing that present is
while I hit know needs is hit so
Right so a thing that shall ben after this
if I hit know / of need hit must be do
Hit sueth well we may not go there fro
And so my purpose may not be remeued
That thing prescite / may not ben exchued
For if I deem thus of a certain thing
And is not so / hit is no questyon
Not only is that conceyt no connyng
But error of a false opinion
And wonder fer is that suspection
And diverse fro the truth as I suppose
But ho can save hit with a beter gloss
For if there shall a certain thing be wroght
And shall not fallen of necessyte
But is uncertain to betyde or noght
Hit is not known to ben as seems me
For knouyng / with falshed may no wise be
In no manner conjoined ne deceived
But hit must ben that knouyng has conceived
And other wise may hit not be done
For loo that is the very cause why
That in a knouyng error is there none
Sith troth then stands nedefully
And knouyng comprehends verily
what than a vayleth that we ben a boute
How knows god a thing that is in doubt
For if that god a certain thing deuyse
For to be don that no wight may exchwe
And yet hit may betyden other wise
A perylous error here of will there sue
That gods Judgment should ben untrue
But loo of god our hye souereyn
Full felones is / thus to think or sayn
And if he knows things for to ben
So that they may betyde indyfferent
As be or not be / then can I not seyn
But this is an uncertain Judgment
The prescience of god omnip^otent
what thing is hit I can hit not defend
That may no thing in certain comprehend
Than should there be no manner dyfference
As seems in mine estimation
Be twene the hye dyuyne prescience
And Tyresyes dyuynation
Of whom Ouyde makes mention
what ever I say she said / hit shall be fall
Other else shall hit not betyde at all
what better shall this purueyance be
Than the opinion of a man's wit
That demeth things in vncertente
And so vncertenly betydeth hit
Over al thing we must beleuen yet
That god is very well and syker ground
In whom no thing uncertain may be found
Than every thing in certain shall betyde
Thyt is before seyn in his purueyance
Than is no lyberte in man's side
Ne in our chesyng is no cheuysance
Dyuyne thought may have no varyance
wythouten error he behaldeth al
And byndeth ous to thing that must befall
And have we ones fully geten this
He may perceuen ho so takes head
Man's lyffe in what myscheffe hit is
And stands ever in heaviness and dread
why should there any man receyuen mede
Or any surfetour be put in peyn
Al this will semen but a thing in veyn
Sith that no wylful meuyng of there ghost
Of lyberte they naught deserved han
And things that now ben commended most
As very wrong they must be demed than
For virtue to rewarden any man
Or punyssshen any wicked skylefully
There neither has deserved wyllyngly
But necessyte them has constreyned
To things that of certain must be done
Than vice and virtue is but thing y feyned
Ne in our works meret is there none
But an indiscreet confusyon
There is no thing that wors may be thought
Sith al thing in order forth is brought
Of purueyaunce / ne un to man's wit
No thing is lefful / and our vices wood
Loo un to god they ben referred yet
wyche that very auctor is of al good
And furdermore if that this error s^ode
whereto should we prayen ought or trust
when we may no thing win that ous lust
if all that ever we can desire or say
One certain order vnreuersed knetteth
Then whereto should we hopen ought or pray
Sith purueyaunce fails not ne fletteth
That every thing so at a certain puts
This only marchaundyse is voyded than
That used is be twene god and man
Prayer and hope should ben unprofitable
But with the price of Just humylyte
we geteth of god a mede inestimable
For only that has ever the manner be
That every man may have hab^lyte
with god to speak and neghen to that light
That perced may not be with man's sight
By very reason of this prayer meke
To him we be conjoined verily
Before or then we get that we beseke
And if we should assenten utterly
That thing to come must fallen nedefully
This hope and trust of wyche we spoke beforn
Is thing of naught and al our labor loren
How should we then to that prince a boue
Aprochen or be knette by any mean
if that we may deserve of him no love
And al our labor is not worth a been
But al mankend stands dysioyned clean
As fro there head departed al with wrong
Right as while er ye said in your song
Metru^ iij. Capitulu^ vj.
Que nam discors.
Boecius loquitur. WHat manner cause of wonder dyscordance
So has disioyned thus in this manner
Our lyberte and gods purueyaunce
That neither may to other neyghen nere
What god this batayl has devised here
Be tweue ij. truths here of have I wonder
That sothe y nogh ben while they ben a sounder
But loo they may not ben to gether set
And yet dyscord in truths is there none
Full certainly they ben to gedres knette
But man's soul that so is ouergone
Enclosed thus wythyn fless^e and bone
That soppressed has her fyry light
That she yet may not lyften up her sight
These sotel knottes to be hold and se
The flesly bounds does hit so oppress
But why so fervently desires she
The notes for to find of sothfastnesse
And that she seeks so with business
wot she that her selfen knows hit
But ho desires a knawen thing to wete
Ho may desire a thing and knows hit naught
if he ne knows what seeks he so blind
Or ho may seek that is not in his thought
Or if he seek hit / how shall he hit find
Or how shall he remember hit in his mind
How may he known when he fyndeth this
And wot not of what manner form hit is
when that the saul is sole and separat
Behaldyng on that souereyn thought on hye
Then may he se / that now he may not
Al thing in sum and also syngulerly
But now she is enclosed bodily
Some part of this sight she has forlete
But utterly she has not al forgete
For why the sum she haldeth as I trow
But not so every thing in specyalte
He than that these truth would know
Al knows he not / thou may well se
Ne all the truth forgete has not he
But loo the knowing of the general
Makes him to labor for the specyal
This sum then wych she haldeth here
In her thought remembryng often a geyn
She seeks in that souereyn myrrour clear
whete every sothe may syngul^rly be seyn
Enforsyng her with labor and with peyn
Forgeten thing / if that she may hit find
To put hit to the tresour of her mind
Prosa iiij. Capitulu^ vij.
Tum illa vetus inqua^.
Phia loquitur. SHe said then / this is an old complaynt
And a full comen used questyon
To Marcus Tullius hit samed queynt
As by his book of dyuynation
He had there with great occupation
And of thy self full long hit has be soght
And none of you as yet ne fonud hit naught
Ne suffysantly have not declared hit
And sykerly the cause may this be
That the dyscours of a man's wit
May not atteyn to so hye degree
To demen of that hye symplycyte
wyche is in dyuyne purueyaunce
He is not sothly of that suffysaunce
And if this might be thought or comprehended
Thou sholdest then be never a dele in doubt
But at last I hope I shall amend hit
if that I may my matter bring a boute
This error of thy heart to a voyden out
But first I will a voyden and dyspreuen
Conceytes / wyche the to this error meuen
But first I ask the the cause why
Thou hold this reason not effectuel
Of them that shown that your arbytry
Algates in his fredom stands well
Sith presciens constreyneth never a dele
By need / things wyche that shall be done
But is contingeut for to ben or none
Loo make thou any other argument
Of thing to fallen of necessyte
But for cause that god omuipotent
Knows hit / that hit shall here after be
Hit may not be undone as seems the
And yet this presciens causes naught
The same thing of need to be wroght
That granted thou while er if you have mende
why is hit then that voluntary deed
So is constreyned to a certain end
That thing to comen must be fallen need
But that I may the to the truth led
To se what sueth here by consequence
I put this case there were no prescience
Will then thyn argument a vaylen ought
The wych in prescience thou groundest so
That things wych of fre will should be wroght
That any need compels them there to
Thou wylt not trow that Boecius) I said no
Phia) Now set we quod she prescience a geyn
So that of need hit do no thing constreyn
Than stands absolute the same will
Hole in his lyberte / this wotest thou well
But I suppose thou make me this skyle
Though prescience necesseth never a dele
Thing to come in stoundes temporel
Thou seyst hit is a very sign true
Of thing that must as necessary sue
Right so thou might concluden as by this
Though that there were no prescience at all That things wych to come hyre after is
Necessaryly hit must be fall
For only every sign shown shall
A thyug that is or after shall be seyn
But yet that sign makes hit not to ben
And if that prescience a sign were
Of every thing that needs must come
First hit needs ous to shown hyre
That no thing falls but needs hit must be done
And if hit be not so than know thou sone
That sign may there none be verily
without a thing betokened be there by
But to confirmen fully al a boute
And sadly to susteyn our intent
we may not seek signs of without
Ne fyxe ous in a foreyn argument
But of causes full conuenyent
And necessary / behooves ous to proceed
if that we should in our purpose speed
But this thou wylt replyen here a geyn
How may that thing not fallen say you me
wyche that is provided and foreseyn
By purueyaunce here after for to be
As chance that I couth none other se
But thing that prescience does provide
we trowed that hit were not to betyde
But rather this intended I for to preue
That though a certain thing befall so
yet of propre kende we do believe
So was hit not necessed to be do
This lightly may you understood loo
As many a thing* is subject to our sight
The while hit is be forn ous present right
As when a charre is ruled redely
And how hit torneth we be hold full well
And so of other crafts suyngly
Does any thing this crafts men compelle
Or any of these works can thou tell
Or if they be constreyned to be wroght
Boecius) Nay quod I they be compelled naught
Then ydel were the craft of any man
if every thing were compelled for to meue
Phia) Sith things while they ben she said the^
Ben not coacted to be / thou wylt believe
Loo by that same reason now may thou preue
That before tho same things be
Not for to comen of necessyte
Full many a thing shall ben hit is no dread
And is to come hit sueth well by this
That utterly is absolute of need
I trow that no wight this will sayn y wys
That any thing that now in present is
was not to come un to the time hit fell
Though they beforn of god were known well
In sothe yet ben they freely to be fall
For rygh as very knowing and science
A present thing compels naught at al
Right so hit stands eke of prescience
As thou may se by leke conuenyence
Though god this thing to comen does provide
yet is hit not compelled to beryde
But loo of this you say me / doutest thou
Sith things wych that shall here after ben
Be not to come as necessary now
How is that thing fore seyn thou can not seyn
Hit seems the that this dyssoneth clean
To foreseyn thing hit must needs sue
Necessyte / thou can hit not exchwe
And if necessyte should be forfended
Loo foreseyn is there no thing utterly
Ne naught by knowing may be comprehended
But thing that must betyden verily
And if there ought betyde vncertenly
And is fore seyn full certain as hit were
Thou say / no very knowing is there there
But as a derke and opynable thing
And for to trowen other wise or guess
Than very sothe / that call thou no connyng
But a wenyng of unstableness
And loo the cause of al this error is
That ye trow the cause of knowledge to be
In the thing and not in the knower perde
But in contrary wise hit stands right
For every thing that known is by wit
Hit is not known by his propre might
But by his might that comprehends hit
As by exsample may thou felen yet
For of a thing that round is verily
Loo sight and felyng knows hit dyuersly
The sight behaldeth the form fro a fer
At ones comprehendyng every dele
But he that feleth is conjoined nere
Un to that compace for to know hit well
Al a boute the sides must he feel
And all that roundnesse so he knows than
Loo / dyuersly y known is a man
The comen wits Iugen of without
Imagination a another wise
And reason other wise hit is no doubt
Intelligence passes al these
Every of them so as he may suffyse
The comen wits knows naught at al
But forms of subject materyal
Imagenyng al only comprehends
The form of man as vnmateryally
Reason then a bouen this transcendeth
Of man's kende he demeth syngulerly
with universal sight full sotelly
But al these passes yet intellygence
As by a sight of heyer excellence
He passes al a boue these kendes here
The compace of the university
And he behaldeth in that exsampler
The myrrour of the hye eternyte
The form of man in his symplycyte
But most hit is to taken hyde in this
That the same might always that higher is
Loo all the lower comprehends well
But they may ascenden naught a geyn
To know and comprehend never a dele
Of tho that been a boue sothe to sayn
For there comen wit may not up attayn
To things wych ben Immateryal
They may perceyuen never a dele at al
And furdermore Imagination
Universal kendes may not seyn
Ne reason may have none Inspection
Of forms / wych that pure and simple ben
Intelligence comprehends clean
And as hit were / behaldeth fro on hye
These forms he perceyueth plenerly
Conceyuyng than this form pryncipal
He demeth after / all that is in man
As he has in the exsampler Ideal
Conceived / that none other may ne can
The university of reason knows he than
And also forms of Imagenyng
And eke materyal sensyble thing
And reason yet in this he uses naught
Imagination ne comen wit
But with a sotel smytyng of the thought
Full formally so he behaldeth hit
And more plenerly to speken yet
The souereyn hye dyuyne Intellygence
Over al things has prospycience
When reason does behalden ought or se
As in his comen kende universal
Imagenyng / no thing yet uses he
Nether the comen wits never a dele
And never the less he comprehends well
Al thing that Imagenable is
And all that comen wit may know y wysse
Thus reason his conceytes strong and stable
Of universal loo deffyneth he
Man is a best ii. foted reasonable
Loo / this knowing as every man may se
Universal must hit needs be
And this thing also to every man's wit
Imagenable and sensyble is hit yet
But reason this behaldeth kendly
No thing by Imagination
Ne by the comen wits sykerly
But only has consyderation
By dyscours and by conceyt of reason
But this Imagynation begin does
In the comen wits his works in sothe
Forms for to shappen and deuyse
And yet these comen wits al without
Sensyble things / in a wondre wise
He seyth / and them compaseth al a boute
Not sensyblely / hit is no doubt
But by Imagination of mind
Of knowing loo / here may thou se the kind
That not ye might of thing that known is
But propre might / the knower uses need
And skylefully for every dome y wysse
Loo of the Judge / hit is the propre deed
So than of reason / if thou take good hyde
The work of man is no foreyn might
But propre myghtes uses every wight
Metru^ iiij. Capitulu^ ix.
Quonda^ porticus attulit
Phia loquitur. Some time in the porches of Athenes
were old clerks derke in there courage
wyche in there time were called stoicenes
That in the porches had maden there stages
Desputyng / that the forms and Images
Of bodily substances / as they gessed
were in to a man's soul impressed
As men ben used to written and portrayen
Letters in a pagyn fair and clean
In wych beforn were no notes seyn
But this a mased thing is for to mean
For if the soul of man / so as they wene
Of his propre might Implies naught
But suffers to ben prented in his thought
Subjected to tho notes as hit were
That bodies does in them enpressen so
And veyn Images represents there
Right as a myrrour is y woned to do
But al this knowing whens comes hit fro
By wych not only things corporal
But also forms Immateryal
He seyth and so behaldeth singulerly
As in her hye conceytes speculatyffe
And knowing things then suyngly
So he dyuydeth by a negatyffe
And after wards by an affyrmatyffe
These same things that divided be
Assembleth and a geyn compouneth he
And so this way he enterchaungeth often
For now to pryncypal proposytions
Loo / his intent he lyfteth up a lofte
And falls after to conclusions
Referryng then his own ententions
And seyth what things will of other sue
Repreuyng so the false by the true
Than is he rather cause efficient
And more of might than thing yt lies oppressed
In manner leke a matter pacyent
That notes has so in him self Impressed
But that thou have this matter more expressed
There goth before a manner sufferance
wythyn the lively bodily substance
wych that the myghtes of the soul excyteth
And makes the to understand and lere
As when that light in to thyn yeyn smyteth
And makes the for to behalden there
Or when a voice has souned in thyn ere
And so commoueth the to harken ought
Then ben styred the myghtes of thy thought
And things wyche that were yet kendely
wythyn thy selfen hid / hit is no doubt
Thou then applyest in thy fantasy
To these other notes of without
And thus remembryng in thy self a boute
Tho foreyn Images then adds he
To forms wyche that hid wythyn the be
Prosa v. Capitulum ix.
Quod si in corporibus.
Phia loquitur. THough that object qualyteys than
Co^moue and styre our foreyn Instruments
wych I call the comen wit of man
That of wythouteforth gives Iugementes
And goth before the gostly sentementes
A manner sufferaunce corporal
For to excyte the gostly might with al
And styren so the worchyng of the mind
To forms wych arested so were wythyn
So that the courage may them feel and find
And though the wits al this work begin
The knowing of these bodies for to win
And brings him to a manner remembrance
The soul is subject to no sufferaunce
But he demeth of his propre might
These passions that in the body ben
How much more such a gostly wight
That fully is al absolute and clean
In whom may none affection be seyn
Of any thing to be feled bodily
His propre might shall vsen kendly
And foreyn myghtes shall he vsen naught
For to dyscerne obiectes of without
But by the worchyng of his own thought
He wynneth his conceytes al a boute
And by the same skyle hit is no doubt
Full many fold of knowing may thou find
In substances / diverse in there kende
The felyng may be called one of tho
wyche have bestes that been vnmeueable
That wit they have al only and no mo
As shelle fysshe and such that cleuen stable
In cleffes / as to them is couenable
And so such other shylle fysshe of the sea
wyche in diverse places norysshed be
But knowing of Imagynation
Meueable bestes have and does hit sue
The wych in manner haueth affection
Some manner thing to coueyt or exchwe
But reason to dyscernen false and true
Only to man hit has conuenyence
As only does to god Intellygence
Than is hit so as every man may se
That this knowing most worthy is and hye
wych of his own kendly properte
Not only that perteyneth kendely
Un to his own knowing properly
He knows well / but furdermore yet
The subject knows he of every wit
But what if comen wits stood a geyn
And in this wise perauenture answer
And would un to dyscours of reason sayn
Loo / that this universal / no thing were
That reason seems he behaldeth there
For all that ever Imagenable is
Or comen wits may perceive y wysse
Hit is not universal in no wise
Now / or the Judgment of reason than
Must be sothe / if he will thus deuyse
That no thing may be sensyble to man
Or for he wot well that these wits han
Subjects many / diverse / that they know
His own conceuyng fallace must he trow
When that he seyth and comprehends well
Thing that sensyble is and singular
Behaldyng hit right as universal
To this if reason would aunsweren here
That she her self behaldeth well and clear
By reason of vniuersalyte
All that these other may perceive and se
For wits ne Imagynation
May no way comprehenden sykerly
These universal things of reason
For they may not exceden proprely
As by there own knowing kendly
Shappes and fygures corporal
A bouen that may they no thing at al
In knowing then of things at the last
Hit is to give credence to the Judgment
That most perfet is and stedefaste
And we that have this reason excellent
And comen wit to demen thing present
And Imagination also
Should we not reason here assenten to
But man's reason is y leke in this
As toward dyuyne Intellygence
Right as Imagenyng or wits is
To reason of a man's conscience
That weneth that dyuyne prescience
May no manner thing behalde as he troweth
That is to come / but as him selfen knows
For loo / this argument thou make me
if things that hereafter shall be done
Not certain ne necessary be
For knowing may not fallen there upon
For prescience say thou is there none
And if so is that prescience be
There falls naught but of necessyte
But if we might parteners ben
Loo / of the domes of dyuyne thought
Right as we may by very reason seyn
That Imagenyng suffyseth naught
Ne comen wits to perceyuen ought
The Judgment of reason as we deem
Full Just hit should man's reason seem
To be subject and vndercast always
Un to dyuyne thought / I am certain
A rise we there fore fully if we may
To that Intellygence souereyn
And if we may in to that hight atteyn
Loo there shall reason feel and known well
That in hit self he may do never a dele
Loo / that is this as in what wise and how
The things that betydeth thus vncertenly
This prescience seyth hit well y now
Dyffyned in his thought eternally
Not by gessyng opynablely
But by souereyn science of symplenesse
whom terms may not closen ne compresse
Metru^ v. Capitulum x.
Quam varijs terras.
Phia loquitur. These bestes in there kendes dyfferent
Full dyuersly on earth does they glyden
Sum on there body strecchyng and extent
Crepi^g upon there breasts down they slyde^
And in the dust a forwe they dyuyden
And sum by very lyghtnesse of there kind
with there wings planeth in the wind
And long spaces of the air on hye
So in there flight / they swymmeth as hit were
And sum ben glad to keep them selfen nigh
This ground a low and set there stappes here
In grene feldes / there is al there chere
And some to walk in wodes and forestes
And though so be that al these wild bestes
Ben diverse in there shappes and figure
Al there faces ben enclyned yet
Un to the ground showing there nature
And the kendly dullness of there wit
Loo / only kende of man reuerseth hit
For man's head a ryseth up on hight
And even vpryght his body stands streght
And under him the earth behaldeth he
whether dotest thou / or art you in a sweuen
Thou erthly man thy figure techeth the
That lyfteth up thy vysage in to heaven
And thy frount in to the air full even
On erthly thing thou sholdest not set thy love
But set hit holly in the heaven a boue
There sholdest thou be there is thy kendly place
Thou have of the earth but thy bestly kende
And yet loo thou wylt bring thy selfen bace
And so with bestes set thy self behind
Let not the noble nature of thy mind
Be plounged down and to the ground y pyght
Sith that thy body stands even vpryght
Prosa vj. Capitulu^ xj.
Quonia^ igitur vti.
Phia loquitur. Sith every thing as I have showed now right
That wist or known is in any way
Hit is not known of the propre might
Of that self thing hit is no nay
But of the kendly might / the sothe to say
Of tho that does hit know or comprehend
Now let ous then behalden and entende
So as our simple kende may suffyse
what thing is that astate of excellence
Of dyuyne substance / and in that wise
Than somewhat may we know of his science
This is the used general sentence
Of al / that by reason does dyscerne
They say that god him self is eterne
But now what thing is this eternyte
Hit needs first to known sykerly
And after that we may behalde and se
The science and the nature plenerly
So as we may suffysen symplely
Of god that is our prince and souereyn
Eternyte is this as clerks sayn
Hit is a perfet hole possessyon
At ones of a lyffe intermynable
This is declared by comparyson
Of thing that is by times varyable
For all that leueth in time hit is unstable
Present yet is / the time a gone is passed
To time coming hyeth hit full fast
There may no thing be set in time and space
As clerks have devised here be forn
That al at ones may his lyffe embrace
For why as yet / he fails of to morn
And yesterday is passed and forlorn
And in the same day that present is
Of your lyffe ye have no more y wysse
But this moment transytory loo
That thing that has this dysposytion
His times for to over passen so
Though that hit were of such condytion
By Aristoteles tradition
That said this world never began
Ne never here after shall an end han
Though that hit might as Aristotel seemed
To infinyte hit selfen so extend
Eterne hit may not ryghtuously be demed
Though hit were infynyte wythouten end
At ones al hit may not comprehend
Ne clyppen al these spaces temporel
For of time to come yet has hit not a dele
But he that of the lyffe intermynable
The fullness comprehends verily
Possessyng hit at ones perdurable
Fro whom no thing does lacken verily
For time to come he has hit presently
Ne time passed fro him is there none
Is / and was / and shall be / al is one
Eterne he may be called well by right
To him self present and pereles
And al way present is be fore his sight
The moble space of times endless
But they rehersen Plato / nevertheless
His conceyt they reports al a mysse
And of his menyng fails foul y wysse
Loo Plato says this world has ever ybe
As clerks have deffyned / Time is mesure of meuyng of before and after. This
mesure is taken most come^ly after the meuyng of the E^noctial vvhos meuyng is
the svvyftest that is possible. The vvych line is divided in to CCC.lx. even
parts. Of vvyche parts / eueryche is called a degree. The mesure of a rysyng
of xv. degrees / is called an hour naturel. The mesure of a rysyng of xxiiii.
hours / is a day naturel. The mesure of CCC. lxv. days and vi. hours of
encresse and certain mynutes / is called a year. By vvych times: the
perdurabelte of this world of before and after / is mesured vsyngly. Sith
than that mesure of meuyng is called time / then sueth hit: that before the
world meued / there was no time: But god eternally is / er any thing meued:
or any time were / and shall be after that al meuynges cesseth: For his being
is mesured by no meuyng of before and after / for himself is vnmeueable / ne
his being has no regard to before and after For all times present / passed /
and to come: ben to him verily present Ne his being is not mesured by
succession of times. For he has his being vnmesured al at ones. vvyche is
called his eternyte. There fore is god called Inmensus. But the perdurabelte of
the world is mesured by meuyng of the heaven / vvyche is called time: And
longer than heaven meueth / shall there be no time. Than is hit so that the being
of god is called erernyte. The being of this world is named perpetuyte. Then
is this the conceyte of Plato sayng that the world has ever ben / That is to
mean / as long as any thing has meued. And as long as any thing meueth: or
any time is / so long hit shall endure in such being as hit now has. And
after that al meuyng and al times cesseth / the world renewed shall endure in
lyffe interminable. For so says our lord. Ecce noua facio omnia.

This interminable lyffe / is the eternal being of our creator* to vvho^ as to
there end / al thing shall be reduced: and at him as at there fynal end: rest
and abide. Therefore says plato as is in the text alleged / that the world
has ever ben: that is to say: sith any time was. and hit shall never while
any time is / cessen of his menynge. So meuyng and time shall cessen both at
ones. And the world then shall not end by destruction or torn in to naught /
for god and nature did never thing in vayn. Ne god noughteth never thing that
he made but the corruption of one thing / is the generation of a another thing.
So that at last every corruptyble thing retorneth in round in to the
Elements / that hit was first formed of. And there fore the author says / that
the intent of temporel things that so meuethe in round / casts and
entendeth by ledyng of nature / to counterfete the perdurable lyffe of god. For
kendly every creature coueyteth: to conform him to his make / at lest in
being. vvher fore of nature every thing vvythstandeth in that hit may / his
own corruption and division of his parts. And when hit is corrupt and
resolved in to his first matter / vvyche is the elements / vvych ben cleped the
seeds of erthly things then ben they apt as they were be fore to be matter
and to clothe other diverse forms. And so ben they perpetuate / by there
chaungeabelte in to an endless compate. For these things if they fail in there
indiuidues / yet in there vniuersalles they a bydeth ever: after time that they
ones be. And the matter of the singulers / torneth into other things / after
that nature vvorcheth. Than is this the conceyt of the clerk in the letter.
Every creature as is before said / coueyteth of nature / for to counterfete his
maker. But for canse these erthly things of feblenesse and contraryoustey of
there matter / may not endure / but needs be resolved / there fore they take that
they may of being / enduryng by succession of times. where that god endures
(not by temporal succession) but has his being separate fro creatures al at
ones so that toward him naught is to come / ne naught over passed / But all that is / was / and shall be: is be fore him present.

Than having regard to the eternyte of god / vvyche has his being al at ones
vnmesured by succession of times / there is no purueyaunce ne foresyght / but he
seyth al by present knowledge / and in him / is none other sight but connyng.
For all knovvyng of present and passed / notes imperfection of creatures that
be passing and corruptyble. And hit needs naught / ne is conuenyent / to
conform his eternal insyght to our temporal estimation / that al thing demeth
by before and after as we have over being. But hit accords better / and is
more kendly / that the creature submytte al his vvytte / and conform al his
knovvyng holly to his maker / with out whom he is naught / can naught / ne
has naught at al / that ought owes to be cleped.

Sith hit is so then that every Judgment / must sue the nature of the Judge /
that is of him that knovveth / hit needs not the^ to bynden things to fall
necessaryly / ne to vvete the knovvyng of god for to compelle tho things to
betyde / be cause that he seyth hit presently as he al behaldeth / no more than
for to vvyte me the meuyng of the son / by cause I se hit meue / or for to
vvyte me the death of a man / by cause I se him dye. For the meuyng of the son
is caused absolutely of the first ordinance of him that made hit for to meue.

But that I now se hit meue / hit proceeds of my own fre vvylle /
presupposed that I have my yees hole and lyberte to se al present obiectes that
falls to my lust.

And to an end hit shall never be brought
They say therefore hit has eternyte
As even y leke with god that has hit wrought
But yet al one in certain is hit naught
A lyffe interminable for to lead
As Plato thought him self hit is no dread
Hit is a another to enclosen al
At ones so this lyffe intermynable
For all that is / or was / or ever shall
At him hit is present and permenable
He fleteth naught but always stands stable
Loo / of dyuyne thought the state is this
No creature may ben y leke y wysse
And yet for that ye shall not demen here
That god is elder as in time of space
Than creatures made of his power
But this loo shall ye Iugen in this case
That god him selfen always is and was
Before / er any formed creature
In propre symplenesse of his nature
And the intent of things temporel
That always meueth so contynuelly
They cast to counterfeten every dele
The perdurable lyffe of god on hy
That changes not but stands presently
But when hit may not even hit self there to
There very stablenesse they falls fro
And meueth then out of symplycyte
Decressyng out of present then a none
To Infinyte and endless quantyte
Of time to come and time that is a gonne
But when he may not bring hit in to one
Al his lyffe at ones for to have
Hit wylleth thus hit selfen for to save
And there hit may not ben a boute y brought
So al his lyffe at ones for to get
yet in as much as hit ends naught
This lyffe hit does not utterly forlete
But hit seems that hit volde counterfete
The souereyn lyffe of god omnipotent
In so much as he somewhat has present
And so hit byndeth him to a little stounde
To have a manner perdurablenesse
In wyche no time of space may be found
But for hit has a manner lekelynesse
Of the eternal lyffe that present is
Hit seems how so ever hit flee or flete
That in present ever a bydeth hit
And for hit may not after his delight
A byden / but for such a little space
Hit takes always of times Infynyte
And for hit may not al his lyffe enbrace
At ones / as his princypal purpose was
Passing forth the lyffe he keeps so
For cause he may ne can none other do
And if we should by names him dyscerne
To suen Plato where he said well
He said that god him self is eterne
Loo / and the world should be perpetuel
Of this may thou conceyuen then full well
Sith every Judgment that shall be true
Hit must the nature of him selfen sue
To comprehenden things of without
And thastate of souereyn god on hye
Stondeth ever in one hit is no doubt
Algates in him selfen presently
His knowing then surmounteth sykerly
Al thing / that has meuyng in dyfference
A bydyng in his symplycyte of presence
And so encloseth spaces Infinyte
Of time that was and shall here after be
But to tho spaces has he no respect
But to his own hole eternyte
By knowing of his hye symplycyte
Al thing in presens of his sight
He seyth hit as hit were do now right
if thou consydre that prescience in thy thoug
By wych he knows al things so
This prescience shall thou referren naught
As to a thing that after shall be do
But very science shall thou deem hit loo
Of present time that never faylen may
Ne out of presens pass never a way
For why hit is not called preuydence
But rather is hit called purueyaunce
That al things knows in presence
In wych knowing there is no varyaunce
Fro our knowing / hit has full great dystaunce
For we behaldeth lo things here
But fro on hye behaldeth he al in fere
Sith every Judgment must suen than
The nature of the knower kendely
wherefore is hit that thou ask than
That al must fallen necessaryly
That seyn is in dyuyne sight on hye
Sith men the present things yt they seyn
Makes naught / of need for to ben
Loo / may thy sight of things here present
Make them to fallen of necessyte
Boeus) I said nay Phia) quod she right so hit stent
Of gods purueyaunce / as seems me
Al tho there may no comparyson be
For the prescience of a man's thought
To gods prescience may be lekened naught
For right as ye behaldeth with your sight
That in this time present is y don
Rygh so he seyth in his eternal light
So / that thing to coming is there none
As in his sight / ne no thing over gone
where fore his prescience (hit sueth well)
The nature of things changes never a dele
For sith he seyth tho things presently
Right as they shall here afterward befalle
The Judgment of things sykerly
His knowing confundeth no thing at al
For all thing that betyde here after shall
whether nedeful or contingent be the end
At ones al he seyth hit is in his mind
Right as thou seyst a man go on the ground
And the son also in heaven a rise
And both thou behaldest in one stounde
yet can thou well dyscernen and deuyse
Loo that yt this man wych walks in this wise
He does him self wyllyngly that deed
But yet in sothe the son a ryseth need
Ne the sight of god that is so clear
That al thing does him be nethen se
Of these wordly things that been here
Destorbeleth never a dele the qualyte
wyche in the sight of his eternyte
Ben present now / but to the sight of man
There time they shall here afterward han
And here of comes this conclusyon
That what he wot that shall here after sue
Hit is no fallace another opinion
But very science suffysant and true
By wych he knows yt hit is not due
As of necessyte to fallen so
Bnt than thou say a thing that shall be do
And is provided in dyuyne thought
Hit may not vnbetyde / hit is no dread
And thing that so may be exchwed naught
Than of necessyte / hit falls need
And so thou wolt me bynden to the deed
As by this word / that is necessyte
And loo as truth / I will hit grant the
But this uneath may felen any wight
Ne well conceyuen in this erthly lyffe
But if he had a conceyt and a sight
Of god / and fully were contemplatyue
But un to this I answer the belyue
when that thing that so to comen is
To dyuyne science / referred is
Loo / necessary is hit sykerly
But in the manner of that propre kende
when that thou hit behaldest verily
Necessyte does hit in no wise bind
For ij. necessyteys shall thou find
Of wyche that one is simple / wete hit well
And that other is condycyonel
That every man is mortal of nature
This is necessyte of symplenesse
But when thou know a man perauenture
That walks of his own wylfulnesse
That man's walkyng necessary is
with this condytion y put there to
The while hit is y known to be so
For thing that known is in man's thought
As for the time hit may none other be
But this condytion suffyseth naught
with him to drawn this symplycyte
For well thou wotest that this necessyte
Comes not of kendly dysposytion
But of that accydent condytion
And necessyte does him not compelle
To walken / he that walks wyllyngly
But while he goth / this will I grant well
Loo that he walks uecessaryly
And in the same wise sykerly
what purueyaunce as present does provide
So of necessyte hit does betyde
And yet that thing as of his propre kende
Truly does not of necessyte befalle
But all that god behaldeth in his mind
That so of lyberte betyden shall
He behaldeth hit as present al
And so referred to dyuyne sight
As necessary they ben a counted right
But this is only by condytion
Of the knowing of dyuyne wit
But when these things have relation
Un to there own propre kende yet
Al absolutely then betydeth hit
No thing compelled of necessyte
Ne hit forleteth naught his lyberte
So than hit shall befallen doutles
All that god to comen does provide
And much thing shall fallen nevertheless
That only shall of lyberte betyde
So that they stands fre fro either side
And though they be to come yet may we chese
So propre nature does they not forlese
There kende is this / be forehand er they were
Of lyberte they might have been undo
But what force is hit wylt thou say me hyre
where they come of necessyte or no
Sith of dyuyne science is hit so
In all wise hit does befallen this
Right even as thing that necessary is
Loo this / as I a little here beforn
Purposed by exsample plenerly
Of the son that ryseth by the morn
And of a man that walks wyllyngly
Till time they be in doing presently
They may well be undone hit is no dread
But that one was to betyden need
But sykerly that other neded naught
So all that he behaldeth as present
Right so wythouten doubt hit shall be wrought
But that the son ryseth verament
Loo of necessyte hit has dessent
But the man to walken or to gone
His own choys hit stands al upon
Now then in this we have said but right
That when these things so referred be
Un to the knowing of dyuyne sight
Loo then they falls of necessyte
But referred to there qualyte
Full absolute in lyberte they stand
As out of al necessary bond
As all that apereth to the comen wit
if that they be referred to reason
Universal than in sothe is hit
And if thou set in thyn entention
The properte of there condytion
So then thou felest hit as synguler
But if hit be (thou say) in my power
My purpose for to chaungen as me lust
Loo than shall I a voyden purueyaunce
By wyche the same is known and wist
But I shall answer to thyn allegeaunce
Thy purpose may thou change at thy plesaunce
But this might for to don or do hit naught
And all that diverse chaungyng of thy thought
The very present truth of prescience
Every dele behaldeth presently
And thou may not a voyden his presence
No more than thou may a void verily
The behaldyng of a present ye
Though yt thou would thy selfen torn or wend
As leketh to the fre will of thy mind
But here thou make this objection
if gods science may be changed so
At my propre dysposytion
As when I this now / and now that may I do
Than may I enterchaungen to and fro
Loo his science by stoundes at my will
Nay for sothe / that may thou not by skyle
For why the knowing of dyuyne sight
Goes before that thing that shall befalle
And before the propre presence right
Loo of his knowing he retorneth all That ever was / or ben here after shall
Ne as thou wenest he alters naught
His presence by stoundes of thy thought
As now this thing and now yt thing to know
But he abydyng every wit compaseth
The chaungyng of thy thoughts al a row
with one sight al at ones he enlaceth
He goth also before and al embraces
His might also / that al comprehends
And eke his sight that to so fer extends
Al things to behalden presently
He has them not received so as we
Of thing that is to comen suyngly
But of his propre hye symplycyte
whereby hit may full well assoyled be
That thou while er a geynst me have y put
Vnsembly say thou is hit to thy wit
That thing to come of our unstableness
Should the cause ben of his science
But of his connyng loo the might is this
He closes al with knowing of presence
Of diverse time he has no dyfference
And al thing in to certain has he brought
To things passed owes he right naught
Sith hit is so / I may concluden now
That in every mortal creature
The lyberte abides hole y now
And stands fully in there own cure
And laws wyche that medes does mesure
To tho men that been good and virtuous
And also peynes to the vycyous
Then for unright they may not ben arected
Sith every man his own will is at
As by necessyte no thing y let
But that he may deseruen love or hate
And god him selfen sytte a boue algate
And every thing he knows er hit be
As present in his hye eternyte
In ous behaldyng every thought and deed
That is / or shall be don / in full certain
And to the good men he desposeth mede
And to the wicked punysshement and peyn
To trust in god hit is no thing in veyn
And preyours / if they ryghtuously be led
Believe hit well / they may not ben vnspedde
Wythstande thou vice / and give the to virtue
To ryghtuous hope / thou lift up thy courage
And for thy needs / if thou wolt pursue
Humble preyer send in thy message
Up to thy god / hit fails not his wage
Ne doubt the naught / you shall be spedde full sone
For he refuses never a lowly boune
And look that thou my counsel not forgete
Dyssymule not / but do thy business
The need is thyn / also the charge is great
That thau be found in virtue and prowess
Sith al thy work is open and express
Un to the presence of the Judge on hye
That al thing does behalden plenerly
Explicit Liber Quintus Boecij De consolatione Phie.
Deo gracias.
Collectis in sequentibus cuiuslibet linee primis litteris / non solum
Translatoris sed and transferri procurantis / nomina cu^ cognominibus /
inuestigare poteris.
Nomen transferri procurantis.
EVer more exalted be thou lord on hy
Lawly wyche of thy benygnyte
In flesh and blodde aperyng wyllyngly
So pyteously were peyned on the tree
And suffer / that grievous was to the
Be bledde with al thy blodde for man's sake
Ever more exalted be thy majesty
Thyn heart blodde / our raunson would you make
Cognomen.
Blysful lord I pray the hertely
Er I depart of this mortalyte
Reskewe me fro my perylous enemy
Keeping me fro his cursed cruelte
Eternally to set my thought in the
Lust of sins fully to forsake
Endless god wyche art both one and iij.
in to thy cure for ever I me betake
Nomen Translatoris.
Tyelde you thanks lady Sapience
Of yt this work ye to an end y brought
Have ye the worship and the recompense
And I no dele / I have deserved naught
None other lust desire I in my thought
Ne naught coueyt I but your Influence
Eternally / so that I may be brought
Souereyn lady in to your presence
Cognomen Translatoris.
with al my heart to do you reverence
And seruyse / such as of me may be wrought
Lawly under your obedyence
To plesen you if I suffysed ought
With al my heart / as ever I have besoght
No thing coueyt I of your excellence
Eternally but that I may be brought
My souereyn lady in to your presence
Here ends the book of comfort called in latin Boecius de consolatione Phie.
Enprented in the exempt monastery of Tauestok in Denshyre. By me Dan Thomas
Rychard monk of the said Monastery / To the instant desire of the right
worshypful esquyer Master Robert Langdon. Anno d. MDxxv.

Deo Gracias.
Robertus Lanhdon.

blazon of Robert Langdon, Esquire.


