Bel-vedere OR THE GARDEN OF THE MUSES.

Quem re^erent Muse viuet dum robora tellus,
Dum ^^^^^ ^oll^^, ^^^^ ve^^t amnis aquas.


Imprinted at London by F. K. for Hugh Astley, dwelling at Saint Magni^ corner*
1600.

To the University of Oxenford.
Thou eye of Honor, Nurserie of Fame,
Still teeming-Mother of immortal seed:
Receive these blessed Orphans of thy breed
As from thy happy issue first they came.
Those flowing wits that bathed in thy foord,
And sucked the honey dew from thy pure pap:
Return their tribute back into thy lap,
In rich-wrought lines, that yield no idle word.
O let thy Sons from time to time supply
This Garden of the Muses, where does want
Such Flowers as are not, or come short, or scant
Of that perfection may be had thereby:
So shall thy name live still, their fame never dye,
Though under ground whole worlds of time they lie.
Stat sine morte decus.
To the University of Cambridge.
Mother of Muses, and great Nurse of Art,
Which lent'st the root from whence these sweets are grown,
Now with increase, receive a bounteous part,
Which thou may justly challenge as thine own:
That Grant may to the comfort of her streams
Behold her (Seeds of late) now Dulcet flowers,
And with the plenty of the famous Thames,
Attire her Nymphs, and deck her watery bowres
And cherishing these Choyces of delights,
With dainty Garlands, Crown the peaceful shore,
Prepared for Feasting, and Triumphant sights,
More Beautiful than ages heretofore:
Whilst all the Floods so famous but of late,
Shall give their glory to adorn her state.
Sua cuique gloria.
To his loving and approved good Friend, M. John Bodenham.
TO thee that art Arts lover, Learnings friend,
First causer and collectour of these flowers:
Thy pains just merit, I in right commend,
Costing whole years, months, weeks, and daily hours.
Like to the Be, thou every where did rome,
Spending thy spirits in laborious care:
And nightly brought thy gathered honey home,
As a true worke-man in so great affair.
First, of thine own deserving, take the fame;
Next, of thy friends, his due he gives to thee:
That love of learning may renown thy name,
And leave it richly to posterity,
Where others (who might better) yet forslow it,
May see their shame, and times hereafter know it.
A. M.

Of this Garden of the Muses.
THou which delight'st to view this goodly plot,
Here take such flowers as best shall serve thy use,
Where thou may find in every curious knot,
Of special virtue, and most pre^^^us juice,
Set by Apollo in their several places,
And nourished with his celestial Beams,
And watered by the Muses and the Graces,
With the fresh dew of those Castalian streams.
What sent or color can thou but devise
That is not here, that may delight the sense?
Or what can Art or Industry comprize,
That in abundance is not gathered hence?
No Garden yet was ever half so sweet,
As where Apollo and the Muses meet.
A. B.

A Sonnet to the Muses Garden.
Fair planted Eden of collected sweets,
Cropped from the bosom of the fertile ground,
Where Science with her honey-current greets
The sacred Sisters: where her liberal sound
Makes Angels echoes, and to heavens rebound
The repetition of sententious spirits;
(Oh dear beloved in virtues painful merits.)
Fruit-furnisht Tempe, all the worlds abstract,
For flowers of virtue, herbs of rare effect,
From whence, as well souls Physic is extract,
As bodies government; hold in respect
What Science gives (though Ignorance reject)
For every maime and sickness of the mind,
A wounded life a precious balm may find.
She sends you not to search the hidden mines
For gorgeous jewels, nor to foreign lands,
But in one casket all her wealth combines,
And gives it freely with heart-open hands.
She limits not her bounty within bands:
Look first, then like, survey, take one or all;
Choose with the mind, the eye is fancies ball.
W. Rankins, Gent.

Of the Book.
THe sundry beams proceeding from one Sun,
The hiue where many Bees their honey bring,
The Sea, to which a thousand rivers run,
The garden where suruiues conti^uall spring,
The Trophee hung with diverse painful hands,
Abstract of knowledge, Brief of Eloquence,
Aiding the weak, preserving him that stands:
Guide to the soul, and ruler of the sense.
Such is this Volume, and the freight hereof,
How-euer ignorance presume to scoff.
R. Hathway.

Of God.
God is beyond ^raile sense to comprehend,
He first began all, and of all is end.
Where God puts too his hand, all else is vain.
God thunders oftener than he strikes or beats.
God gives his wrath by weight, but mercy free.
Where God does bless, abundance quickly springs.
Gods wisdom too much s^archt, is dangerous.
Gods justice ouer-vrgde, strikes heavily.
Without the understanding of Gods will,
Our wi^ is folly, and our best sight ill.
God does not hate to love, nor love to hate.
God with his finger strikes, and not his arm.
No m(...)o ^o^re, but God can bless his days,
Who ^a^i^n Job did from the dunghill raise.
In vain it is for man with God to stand.
God will control when mortal men have done.
Gods eq^^^^^ does every action ^^ooue.
Gods ha^^h^^^^s thunder, who dare him off^nd?
Faith finds ^^^ passage to ^ods mercy seat.
Where virtue raises men to dignity,
There God his blessings still does multiply.
Little auailes Gods gifts where wants his grace.
Men order war, but God gives victory.
Gods mercy does his justice far exceed.
God deals not with us as our sins deserve.
Gods doctrine is the rule of providence.
God is eternal, therefore without end.
God made all mortal things, and orders them,
According to his wisdom, where and when.
Gods greatness is more seen in love, than wrath.
God never made any equal to himself.
If God he^^e not, yet deem him not v^iust.
Gods mercy is the work of our redemption.
If thou lif^ up thy self, God flies from thee:
If thou be humble, then he comes to thee.
If God dart lightning, soon he dewes down rain.
Gods wrath soon kindled, is as quickly quenched.
No misaduentures cross, where God does guide.
Where God does save, no other s^lue does need.
How can that enterprise ill issue have,
Where God himself does guide, does speed, does save.
Happy are they who favor from God find.
God and our shame are stays unto our sin.
Gods justice does man's justice far excel.
Those that God loves, in them he nothing hates.
How can a simple current him withstand,
Who all the mighty Ocean does command?
God loves the faithful, but does hate their sin.
Good life begun in earth, in heaven is ended.
When Satan tempts, he leads us unto hell,
But God does guide whereas no death does dwell.
When Satan tempts, he seeks our faith to foil,
But God does seal it, never to recoile.
God makes our burning zeal full bright to shine,
Amongst the candles of his Church divine.
God ever seeks by trial and temptation,
To sound man's heart and secret cogitation*
God well knows men, and still his eye does see,
All thoughts of men, ere they conceived be.
God out of season never yet does try,
His children new converted by and by.
Man made of earth, sounds not the seas profound
Of Gods deep judgments, where there is no ground.
The Lord lawmakers, just and righteous,
Does frame his laws, not for himself, but us.
Gods wisdom guides this worlds society,
With equal power, and equal piety.
Gods word which made the world, and guides it still,
To diverse en^s conducts both good and ill.
He that preferres not God fore all his race,
Amongst the sons of God deserves no place.
He that the furrows ploweth of Gods field,
May not turn back his fainting face, nor yield.
Satan suggesteth ill, God mooues to grace.
God can do all, save that he will not do.
Our mighty God, always for his elect,
Of wicked things can draw a good effect.
God keeps his watch above the starrie skies.
For his elect, who never idle lies.
Similies on the same subject.
AS one poor drop is nothing to the sea,
So all we can is nothing in Gods sight.
As the bright Sun defaceth candlelight,
So Gods great power controlleth all the world.
As Princes are to be both loved and feared,
So God the Prince of princes, must have more.
As with great care a Pilot guides the ship,
So with great grace does God direct the world.
As when the soul departs, the body dies:
So where God blesses not, all things decay.
As mothers hug their children in their arms,
So God enfolds his chosen with his grace.
Examples likewise on the same.
PHerecides, for his contemning God,
Was eat with lice, and dyed miserably.
Lucian an Atheist, and denying God,
Was afterward in pieces torn with dogs.
Justinian for his light regard of God,
Became a fool, and so in folly did.
The Athenians banished Protagoras,
Because his books questioned the deity.
Socrates did confess one only God,
And tearn^'d the heathen Gods but vaniti^.
Plato, when he wrote any serious thing,
Began still, In the name of one sole God.
Of Heaven.
Heaven is Gods seat, the throne of endless grace:
The Souls true home, and Hopes desired place.
ALl powers are subject to the power of Heaven.
Nothing but Heaven, is perfect happiness.
What heaven will have, that needs must come to pass.
The Soul is heavenly, and from heaven relieved.
Heaven is as near to sea, as to the land.
Heaven sings for joy, when sinners truly pray.
The waking heavens will plague all sleeping ill.
When as the heavens are to justice bent,
All things are turned to our just punishment.
None can attain what heaven and earth withstands.
Earth must come in, when awful heaven commands.
When heaven yields means, they must not be neglect.
Though men revenge not, yet the heavens will.
Heaven is the habitation of the elect.
Heaven is the just man's true inheritance.
It Is hard to live well, easy to dye ill:
Hard to win heaven, easy to keep from thence.
In vain do men contend against the stars.
Heaven works our fall, but yet the fault is ours.
All men ought know they have the Heavens above them.
No walls can hide us from the eye of heaven.
Repentance carries heavens eternal keys.
When heavens lamp shines, all other lights are lost.
We never know what it is in heaven to dwell,
Till we have had some feeling of grim hell.
Heaven is our home, we are but strangers here.
All earthly things are dark, to them divine.
What heaven decrees, sollie may notwithstand.
Earths admirations are the heavens delights.
Heavens deep dessignes are hid from mortal eyes.
We are at heavens dispose, and not our own.
Heaven sets our time, wherewith can naught dispense.
High heavens hand restraine^ our wilful powers,
Whose will must rule above this will of ours.
Heaven does repair what fortune has destroid.
Things that are heavenly, no corruption taste.
Whom heaven does spite, the earth disdaines to hate.
Heavens couers him that has no bu^iall.
Earth feeds on earth, heaven gives the spirit food.
Proui^ence heavenly, passes humane thought,
And does for wretched men's relief make way.
Earth gives us gold, but heaven the wealth of grace.
The Sun which shines in heaven, does light the earth.
Hell cannot hurt, whom heaven does preserve.
The care of heaven does seek the souls content.
It is the doom of heaven, which can and will,
Con^ound the branch, whose root was planted ill.
Sin, is earths Sun; the Sun of heaven, sins death.
Thoughts sixth on heaven, contemn all earthly things.
Mortals may feel heavens doom, but not remove.
All men are subject to the powers above.
Heavens secrets are conceald from mortal sight.
By mortal laws a bond may be diuorst,
But heavens decree by no means can be forced.
From heaven, our souls receive their sustenance.
Hell is the place of horror, heaven of rest.
Good death is true inheritance in heaven.
The way to heaven is not so wide as hell.
Men look up to the stars, thereby to know,
That as they progress heaven, they earth should so.
Heaven often winkes at mortal men's amiss.
Heavens Sun does shine both on the good and bad.
All humane wishes never have the power,
To have or hold the course of heaven one hour.
Similies on the same subject.
AS hell was made to punish sins proud guilt,
Even so was heaven for comfort of the just.
As base clothes ill become a princes court,
So none can enter heaven but purely clad.
As trauailers desire their native homes,
So should all souls long for their heavenly home.
As hells obscurity excells all dark,
So nothing with heavens brightness may compare.
As Jacob for his Rachell thought sower sweet,
So we for heaven ought deem all else but vile.
As all joys in this life are frail and vain,
So none but heavens joys are perfect gain.
Of Conscience.
Conscience is that accuses and condemns,
Needing no other witness than it self.
FAults long unfelt, the conscience will bewray.
The fear of conscience enters iron walls.
Where coin preuailes, conscience bears little sway.
Kings, but the conscience, all things can defend.
Death, but an acted passion does appear,
Where truth gives courage, and a conscience clear.
Conscience own doom does half condemn a man.
No armor proof against the conscience terror.
Weak consciences are with vain questions wounded.
Sound conscience, well is called a wall of brass:
Corrupted, fit compared to broken glass.
In conscience book, our faults are daily writ.
There conscience fails, where faith bears no account.
A guilty conscience never is secure.
The conscience stained with blood of innocents,
Is always subject to appeaching guilt.
Repentance brings the keys of conscience.
After minds guilt, does inward grief begin.
Run where thou will, into all lands betake thee,
Yet will a w^unded conscience nere forsake thee.
A stained conscience finds no joy at all.
They dread no shame, that v^e no conscience.
If thou but find thy conscience be upright,
No matter for the worlds rebuke or spite.
Conscience will never suffer wicked thoughts.
Conscience needs no tormenter but it self.
Conscience sees that which no eye else can do.
Conscience once drowned in wealth and worldly pomp,
Esteems all wisdom as mere foolishnes.
A guilty conscience is a gnawing worm.
Conscience t^kes vengeance on her own transgressions.
Nothing but true repent cleares conscience.
The riches we may carry to our grave,
Is a good conscience: blessed they that have.
Conscience once faulty, still abides in fear.
Innocence is the joy of conscience.
A conscience standing free from all detect,
Fears no accuse, or does excuse respect.
Looks confident and sober, show clean souls.
Conscience for heaven contemns all worldly things.
To frame excuse, before thou be accusde,
Shows that thou have not conscience truly used.
Conscience does covet nothing but her own.
Conscience craves nothing, but by lawful means.
Conscience will willingly offend no man.
Conscience once laden with the weight of sin,
Is Judge and Iuror to it self therein.
Conscience does bind us to respect our kin.
Conscience despises bribes in any case.
Conscience commands us to relieve the poor.
A conscience clear, is like a well fenc't tower,
Not to be shaken by rough Canon shot.
Conscience, to princes always gives their due.
Conscience submits, when Justice does command.
Similies on the same subject.
AS persecution is the bodies death:
So foul despair quite kills the conscience.
As the bright Sun does lighten all the world,
So a clear conscience shines in the soul.
As beauty is a thing glads mortal sight,
So unstained conscience does high heaven delight.
As wine cheeres up the heart when it is sad,
So peace of conscience makes it much more glad.
As brazen walls defend a city best,
So conscience taintlesse, is at peace and rest.
As gold is best, when through the fire it is tried,
So conscience is by troubles purifide.
Examples likewise on the same.
O Restes matricide was justly plagued,
With sting of conscience by his mothers ghost.
And Nero (whose foul fact did equal his)
Was whipped in conscience with her walking shape.
Caesar Caligula could never rest,
But conscience torment did him still molest.
Tullie affirms, a conscience well emploi'd,
Is chiefest comfort in adversity.
Plato says: Sweetly sle^peth innocence,
In the safe chamber of good conscience.
Lactantius writes, that no sin can prevail,
Where quiet conscience sits, and guides the sail.
Conscience must leave a little while to grieve,
To let in horror, coming to reprove.
Of Religion.
Religion is the ground of every grace,
And teaches man salvation to embrace.
WHere God is not, religion cannot be.
Sundry religions, make no religion.
Where saints are clarks, there always God is judge.
Religions touchstone best does try the truth.
Religion is the soul of innocence,
Working in each unspotted conscience.
After religion, painted zeal does run.
Blessings come seldom, but by earnest prayer.
Ignorance is religions enemy.
The Scriptures are sufficient to resolve
All doubts that in religion can arise.
The word's a medicine to a troubled mind.
Religion is the perfect bond of love.
No poison worse than Scripture falsely taught.
Religion is in truth, not fallacies.
No surer sign of kingdoms overthrow,
Than where religion lives in contempt.
Change of religion is most dangerous.
Faith, and not reason, teaches true religion.
Man was created for religions use.
There is no error half so dangerous,
As that committed in religion.
Ill happens when religion we neglect.
Doubt in religion, punishment deserves.
Where no religion is, no virtue bides.
Religions cloak can cover much abuse.
Those men may well be called religious,
That hate the world, and nothing mind but heaven.
Religion linketh men in unity.
Religion, to all virtues is the guide.
Humility expresses true religion.
Religion does relieve the fatherless,
And succors widows in adversity.
Religion is the council of the just.
Religion only can support the weak.
Religion teaches remedy against sin.
Religion comforts all afflictions.
Similies on the same subject.
LIke as a Torch directs us in the dark,
So does religion lighten all our hopes.
As these our bodies live by earthly food,
So true religion does our souls most good.
As iron makes soft the rudest earth,
So does religion temper hardest hearts.
As sore eyes cannot gaze against the Sun,
So wicked minds brook no religion.
As want of food the body hunger-sterues,
So pines the soul through pure religions lack.
As medicines make sick bodies whole and sound,
So does religion wash out errors wound.
Examples likewise on the same.
BRennus for wronging of religion,
Was smitten with a thunderbolt to death.
Conomachus, religious rites profaned,
But with an earthquake was he swallowed up.
Pherecydes nick-nam'd religion,
For which he was consumed by worms alive.
In Athens they would not create a king,
Except he had taken orders of a Priest.
The chiefest oath th'Athenians had, was this:
Pugnabo pro sacris, and cum alijs, and solus.
Old Rome, her sons sent to Hetruria,
To be instructed in religion.
Of Truth.
Truth is the fount of knowledge, earths best light:
The scale to heaven, and only rule of right.
THe weakest things are strongest props to truth,
Truth is most strong, and alwai^s finds friends.
Truth never fails, and true love wants no might.
Trial does certainliest the truth bewray.
Falsehood with truth may by no means abide.
Deeds not by manhood, or the do^rs might,
Are to be scand, but by their truth and right.
What shines nearest best, holds truest worth.
Where then is truth, if there be no self trust?
Truth is the only shield of best defense.
When truly in our selves our faults we see,
We deem them known to all, as well as we.
An honest tale speeds best being truly told.
Truth may be shent, but never shall be shamed.
Truth to all goodness is the perfect guide.
All doubts resolving, is by finding truth.
How shall he think to find a stranger just,
That in himself dare put no confidence?
False dreams do evermore the truth deny.
Time shows the truth, and wit that is bought is best.
Truth sounds sweetly in a silly tongue.
Who cherish wrongs, are bent against the truth.
Truth needs not the aid of Rhetoric.
Happy the people, blessed is the land,
Where truth and virtue get the upper hand.
Nothing so hard, but is by truth explained.
All hidden secrets, truth can best disclose.
Truth to all goodness, is the perfect guide.
Truth has two friends; Wisdom, and Constancy.
Truth stands not upon the tongues of men:
Nor Honor, on authorities big frowns.
Truth triumphs long, when falsehood soon decaies.
The truth of things, the end or time will try.
The smoothest tale, has oft-times smallest truth.
Truth most delights, when she goes meanest clad.
The seat of Truth is in our secret hearts,
Not in the tongue, which falsehood often imparts.
Truth needs no Orators to plead her cause.
Truth fears nothing more than to be hid.
Truth with her own light is best satisfide.
A certain truth does need no subtle gloss.
Truth is a health that never will be sick:
An endless life, a Sun that never sets.
Truth shows her self in secrecy of trust:
A clear case needs no shifting counselor.
Truth vnbefriended, will find friends at last.
Truth hates most to here a feigned tale.
Innocence smile before the Judge by truth,
And falsehood found before he was suspect.
Reprove not rashly, neither hide the truth.
Truth is a blab, and will no treasons hide.
Truth is a text that troubles many minds.
Truth still has certain bounds, but falsehood none.
Similies on the same subject.
AS the best steeled glass bewraies the face,
So truth best shines in an honest soul.
As purest Emeralds without foyles shine best,
So truth most pleases in her plainest clothes.
As wormwood fitteth not a lickerish taste,
So truth does never please a liars tongue.
As clouds often threaten rain, and yet shed none,
So storms often menace truth, yet hurt her not.
As darkness is an enemy to light,
So falsehood is continual foe to truth.
As mean attire impaires not beauties face,
So poorest rags to truth give no disgrace.
Examples likewise on the same.
IVlian Apostat ^the foe to T^u^h,
Cried out at length, that Truth had conquered him.
N^s^^riu^, who contended with the truth,
His tongue was eaten in his life, with worms.
The Per^^a^s in the honor of the truth,
Ordain^d death to such as did deny it*
Popiel king of Poland, for untruth,
Was as he late alive, deuou^^d with Rats.
C^to was so r^nowmed for the truth,
That he was only said, to speak the truth.
Untruth, says Se^eca, are meetest Arms,
For any coward or base minded man.
Of Virtue.
Virtue, is Queen of labor, Nource of love:
The minds true grace, and blessing from above.
ALl things decay, but virtue cannot die.
Virtue makes beauty more angelical.
Virtue is free from time, and fortunes power.
Men cannot leave their virtues to their heirs.
Fair virtues seat is deep within the mind,
And not by shows, but inward thoughts defined.
Vices are noted, virtues soon forgot.
Virtues best store, by giving does augment.
There is no virtue that is borne with us.
No virtue springs, where wants due regard.
Virtues obscurde, yield small and sorry gains:
But actiuely employed, true worth-retaines.
Win fame by virtue, let opinion go.
Virtue is in the mind, not the attire.
Virtue and fortune never could agree.
Virtue is loathed of fools, loved of the wise.
Virtue is much more amiable and sweet,
When therewithal true majesty does meet.
Vice cares not if virtue sink or swim.
Wit shines in virtue, virtue shines in wit.
Sweetest temptations most make virtue known.
Virtue it self turns vice, being misapplyed:
And vice sometimes by action dignified.
The field of honor, virtue never loses.
Virtue will bear what can on virtue fall.
True happiness, on virtue takes ground.
The more vice reigns, the less does virtue thrive.
To virtues goods we only ought to clean,
The rest are good in semblanc^, but deceive.
Virtue will live when villainy shall die.
Virtue may be disturbed, but never disgraced.
No beauty like the virtue of the mind.
Virtue through darkest shades does light her self.
Virtue in greatest dangers being best shown,
May be oppressed, but never overthrown.
Virtue often lies where life is in disgrace.
If sin were dead, virtue could not be known.
Sweet is the gain which virtuous travail brings*
All virtuous minds do virtuous deeds declare.
Our vices nor our virtues never die,
Though under ground a thousand years we lie.
Virtue does mortal things immortal make.
The bond of virtue always surest binds.
Than virtue, there can be no greater dower.
It Is virtues self, that her rewards does pay.
Enuies black cloud would dim bright virtues rays.
All sorrows in the world are far more less,
Than virtues might and valors confidence.
Sin counted solace, virtue is despisde.
Vain praise is shame, but honor virtues due.
Without defense of virtue, nothing lasts.
Only fair virtue scales eternity,
Above earths all-abating tyranny.
All Orators are dumb when virtue pleads.
Virtue but stamped in Lead, is rich enough.
That grows apace which virtue helps to raise.
Virtue curbes in the most unbridled will.
With goodness men do s^one grow discontent,
Where states are ripe to fall, and virtue spent.
True virtue is rich dower for chastity.
In virtuous deeds all stratagems are good.
Virtue is beauty of the inward man.
Exclude discretion, virtue turns to vice.
Like to the Sun, so virtue lights the world.
Such as leave off fair vertue^ to esteem,
Do greatly err, that take things as they seem.
Virtue will shine though never so much obscured.
Virtue depressed, is expressed more.
Virtue makes women seem to be divine.
With honors eyes let virtues plaints be scand.
Virtue does raise by very small degrees,
Where in a moment Fortune casts down.
While virtue suffers, still it vanquisheth.
Need clad with virtue, is abundant rich.
Virtue is better and more sure than Arts.
Virtue is not to get things, but to keep them.
Virtue on earth does soonest bring us fame,
Makes our graves glorious, writes our names in heaven.
Virtue most grieueth at her own disgrace.
A virtuous act seems strange in some men's sight.
A virtuous mind cannot be miserable.
Death is true life to every virtuous man.
Though virtue many times wants due reward,
Yet seldom vice escapes deserved blame.
Virtue does never envy good desert.
Love makes virtue live, and vice to die.
Reports can never harm the virtuous.
He is not virtuous that is too timorous.
Each cunning sin being clad in virtues shape,
Flies much reproof, and many storms does escape.
Virtues are many times by faults disgraced.
Honors defects, by virtues are supplied.
Virtue still doteth on perfection.
Virtue, in beauteous bodies shines best.
All the gay pleasures that the world can prove,
Are but sick sorrows to pure virtues love.
Virtue is most renowm'd in honors eyes.
Virtue still smiles, when vain conceit does cry.
Immortal virtue lives an endless dat^.
Wisdom on Virtue as her handmaid waits.
The world^ opinion so does virtue smoother,
A^ one bears that belongs unto another.
Virtue makes every where a strangers home.
Virtue does conquer dissolute desires.
Virtue in Princes is most glorious.
Virtue deserves more than wealth can do.
The blasts of Fortune never can prevail,
In the maine sea where virtue ^oiset^ sail.
All pomp is vile, where virtue has no place.
Virtue does vanquish Fortune, Time, and Death.
Similies on the same subject.
AS fear of torment holds the wicked in,
So virtues love m^ke good men loath their sin.
Look how one vice begets another sin,
Even so one virtue draws another in.
As Music pro^its nothing but by sound,
So virtue helps not if it sail in life.
Like as the Sun obscures all lesser lights,
So virtues luster damps all enuies sleights.
As spices in their b^uising savor most,
So virtue in affliction best is seen.
As wine refreshes sad dismayed minds,
So virtue comforts poor distressed souls.
Examples likewise on the same.
KIng Alexander got the name of Great,
By virtuous carriage of himself in war.
Spurina chose to mangl^ his fair face,
Rather than be seduc'de from virtuous thoughts*
Hercules, bad vain pleasure get her gone:
And made fair virtue his companion.
Xerxes for beastlines was not so blamed,
As Galba for his virtue was renowmd.
Thales affirms, that nothing in the world,
For man was meet, but virtuous actions.
Cicero says: That virtue of it self
Is the sol^ cause of happy life and death.
Virtue was never ^ireling of the mind,
But still will live though fame had never a tongue.
What suit of grace has virtue to put on,
If vice shall wear as good, and do as well.
Of Faith and Zeal.
Faith shows a good man's fruits, preserues the soul,
And zeal does best give evidence of faith.
FAithes best is trial, then it shines most.
The faithful stands, the faulty man will fly.
Zeal is but cold where louelesse law restraines.
It Is hasty rashness where true faith does fly.
In deep distress, true faith does best avail.
When once man's faith is spotted and defamd,
The body had been better never framd.
Zeal and good courage best become a Prince.
Faith bides no perfect trial, but by time.
Shipwreck of faith is made, where conscience dies.
Friends have no privilege to break their faith.
The gift deserves most is given in zeal.
False fainting zeal, shadowed with good pretense*
Can find a cloak to cover each offense.
F^lse faith is ouer-pois^le with we^l^^st weigh^.
The ballanc^ yields unto the lightest feather.
An easy yielding zeal is quickly quaild.
Faith violate, is most detestable.
Faith once resolved, treads fortune under foot.
The man that holds no faith, shall find no trust.
Where faith does fearelesse dwell in brazen tower,
There spotless pleasure builds her sacred bower.
A zealous heart is always bountiful.
The faith of Knighthood is by virtue tried.
Every occasion quails a hireling faith.
The gift deserves much is given in zeal.
A princes greatest fault, is breach of faith.
The faith of Pagans ought not be belieu'd.
Faith is a fortress against all fainting fear:
And Zeal, the walls does evermore vp-reare.
Take faith from justice, all things run to spoil.
Authority is strengthened best by zeal.
Who binds himself by faith, had need beware.
Faith to rash oaths no credit gives at all.
The greater faith, the greater sufferance.
Faith is the true foundation of the soul,
And soonest does redeem the same from sin.
Zeal makes opinion stand invincible.
A good man's wish, is substance, faith, and fame.
Self-will does frown, when earnest zeal reprooues.
Faith mounteth to the clouds on golden wings.
Faith brings forth works, and works declare our faith.
No faith too firm, no trust can be too strong.
Similies on the same subject.
AS rain makes every ground bring forth increase.
So faith of every soul does show the fruits.
As honors fire does kindle high desires,
So zealous faith lifts up the lowest soul.
As night does best the diamonds glory show,
So sharp affliction best makes faith to grow.
As wisdom is the only way to weal,
So true discretion best directs zeal.
As love and hate cannot agree in one,
So without zeal, faith thinks her self alone.
Examples likewise on the same.
PArmenio wild his king to break his faith,
I would (quoth he) were I Parmenio.
Lysander made no reckoning of his faith,
And therefore was by every one reproou'd.
Attilius sent to Rome upon his faith,
Boldly returned, although it cost his life.
Rastrix the Duke of Cleueland, breaking faith,
Was therefore dispossessed of both his eyes.
Let none speak ill of us, said Pittacus,
To whom we stand obliged by our faith.
Keep faith (says Cicero) with enemies
What ere mishap do follow thereupon.
Of Hope.
Hope is the sad hearts help, the sick thoughts friend,
And what distrust impaires, Hope does amend.
ALl hope is vain without the fear of God.
Hope, on each least occasion takes hold.
Hope does forbid us sorrow to believe.
When love grows sickely, hope then daily sterues.
Things out of hope, by ventring often are won.
Hope many times on blessed hap does light.
When hope is lost in care then comfort bleeds.
Unworthy he of grace, whom once denial
Excludes from fairest hope, without more trial.
All foolish hopes have evermore bad speed.
Council does come too late when hope is past.
Men well may hope to rise, but fear to fall.
Its good to hope the best, but fear the worst.
Changing the air, hopes time will alter chance.
Despair and hope do still attend on love.
Its good to fear, yet let our fear be so,
That to our hope it prove no overthrow.
Often present hap, makes future hope to yield.
No hap so hard but hope does much amend.
Hope to enjoy, is little less than joy.
Honor once lost, gives farewell to all hope.
Unhappy men are subject to no hope.
Fortune may take our goods, but not our hope.
The heart that is inly hurt, is greatly easd,
With hope of that may make grief best appeasd.
Hopes are unsure, when certain is the pain.
We often fall, when most we hope to clime.
As we wax hopeless, violence still grows.
Hope well in love what ever be thy hap.
Hope is the daily dream of waking men.
This life, is but the hope of endless life.
Unworthy is he of one happy day,
That will not take the offer of good hope.
There is no trust in youth, nor hope in age.
The hope of things unseen bears greatest price.
Good conscience alwaie has a perfect hope.
Hope is a pleasing passion of the mind.
To hope against all hope, is high resolve.
True hope is swift, and flies with swallows wings,
Kings it makes Gods, and meaner creatures Kings.
Inconstant hope is drowned often in fears.
In midst of grief, hope always has some part.
Hope being deluded makes the torment more.
Who cannot fear to loose, never hopes to have.
All greedy hope, vain vicious humor feeds.
Hope is companion evermore to love.
No one without great hopes, will follow such,
Whose power and honor does not promise much.
No hope of rest, where hap true hope delays.
Hope still persuading hope, expects good.
Hope is the God of miserable men.
In vain he hopes, who here his hope does ground.
From fruitless hopes but silly favors spring.
The euenings hope may comfort mornings care.
Hope built upon the world, does never thrive,
But grounded once on God, at no time fails.
Hope is the bread and food of wretched men.
Bad haps are help with hope and good belief.
No greater grief in love, than fruitless hope.
Hope waits on great men's tongues, and often beguil^^.
Hopes above Fortune, do fore-point deep falls.
Who thinks to thrive by hope, often haps to beg.
To hope too much, is boldly to presume:
To hope too little, ^asely to despair.
Small is his gain that hopes for golden grief.
Mean men's preferments eleuates their hopes.
Sad hopes seem over long and burdenous.
Grace to thy hope is always safest guide.
When hope and hap, when health and wealth is highest,
Then woe and wrack, disease and need is nighest.
Hope (of all passions) is the pleasantest.
Vain hopes, are like a Vane turned with the wind,
To have no hope, is held most miserable.
To live in hope of that men mean to give,
Is to deceive our selves, and not to live.
Hope not for that which justice does deny.
Where grace begins, hope makes a happy end.
Similies on the same subject.
AS greatest calmes often turn to thunderclaps,
So sweetest hopes do change to sowrest haps.
As in mean places may much wealth be hid,
So little hopes may mighty things expect.
As sadness is the hearts chief punishment,
So hope is highest help in deep distress.
As one part of the body toiles for all,
So hope strives to accomplish all desires.
As every metal is of Sulphur made,
So every pleasure does from hope proceed.
As honest pastimes can no way offend,
So good men's hopes must needs have happy end.
Examples likewise on the same.
WHen Alexander gave great gifts away,
Being asked, What for himself he kept? replied, Hope.
Caesar continually wasled with hope,
That he should govern many Monarchies.
Androclidas derided being lame,
Said; Then in fight I hope I shall not fly.
Pindarus calls hope, The nource of age:
And Thales said, Hope was a common help.
Learned men differ from the ignorant
(As Bias says) but only by their Hope.
Hope (as Simonides the Poet says)
Is the sole guide and governor of men.
Of Love.
Love is a virtue, measured by duteous choice,
But not if it be maimed with wilful chance.
TRue love is simple like his mother Truth.
Firm and untainted love, had never mean.
In long delay, love most impatient is.
Our treasure we may hide, but not our love.
The truest love is most suspicious.
Loves eyes in looking never have their fill.
MAY is not loves month, MAY is full of flowers,
But dropping APRIL: Love is full of showers.
Lewd love breeds loss, ill peace has deadly fight.
Life is most loathed, where love may not prevail.
Love is the mistress of a many minds.
Loves little sweet, often finds a longer sower.
Love's like the winters Rose, or Summers Ice.
Love where it likes, life where it loves would be.
Love does desire the thing beloved to see,
That like it self in lovely shape may be.
As love is loath to part, so sear shunnes death.
Luke warm desires best fit with crazed love.
Valor nor love dwells where division is.
Naught worth is love without true constancy.
Love cannot sound well, but in lovers tongues.
Loves strongest bands, unkindness does unbind.
Firm love that is in gentle breasts begun,
No idle charm may easily remove.
Short is the joy of him that longest loves.
Love never can endure a Paragon.
The greater love, the greater is the loss.
True love is often sown, but seldom grows.
Loose loves are vain, and vanish still to smoke.
Love, that two hearts makes one, so frames one will.
Too hard a lesson it is for living clay,
From love (in course of nature) to refrain.
Firm love, the dread of danger does despise.
Love may not be compeld by masterie.
Sweet love bars lewdness from his company.
Causeless to change love, is most foul reproach.
Love hates thought of all ungentleness.
A lovers heaven must pass by sorrows hell.
All loss is less, yea less is infamy,
Than loss of love to him that loves but one.
They cannot judge of love, that never did love.
Love wants his eyes, yet shoots he passing right.
The shrine of love does seldom offerings want.
What can be said, that lovers cannot say?
Blind loves, best Poets have imperfect sight.
Love deeply grounded, hardly is dissembled.
Love is a fiend, a fire, a heaven, a hell,
Where pleasure, pain, and sad repentance dwell.
Where both deliberate, the love is light.
True love is mute, and often amazed stands.
Who ever loved, that loved not at first sight?
The darkest night is Cupids brightest day.
Love always makes those eloquent that love.
There Is nothing more than counsel, lovers hate.
The light of hidden fire, it self discouers:
And love that is conceald betraies poor lovers.
A lover most restraind, the worser fares.
Love is too full of faith, too credulous.
Great force and virtue has a loving look.
No stony limits can hold out true love.
What love can do, that dare it still attempt.
Sweet are those bands that true love does combine.
Love goes toward love like schoole-boyes from their books:
But love from love, to school with heavy looks.
No love so sweet as where both souls consent.
True perfect love is quickest of belief.
It Is better love and live, than loath and die.
Free vent of words, loves fire does assuage.
Looks do kill love, and love by looks reuiues.
Foul words and frowns will not compel a lover.
Lovers well wot, what grief it is to part,
When twixt two bodies lives but one heart.
Love easily commenteth on every woe.
Loves gentle spring does always fresh remain.
Love makes young men thrall, and old men dote.
In folly love is wise and foolish witty.
A lovers hours are long, though seeming sho^^.
Lovers do say, The heart has treble wrong,
When it is bard the ayding of the tongue.
Love does with gall and honey both abound.
It is not love, that loves to anger love.
Love still is free and led with selfe-delight.
Sweet is the love that comes with willingness.
Who learnes to love, the lesson is so plain:
That once made perfect, never lost again.
There is no pain like loves sweet miscrie.
Great talk of love proceeds but from the tongue.
Love makes blunt wits, right pleasing Orators.
All love deceits are held excusable.
Love is most sweet and fair in every thing.
Love well is said, to be a life in death,
That laughes and weeps, and all but with a breath.
Such ve^^ue love has, to make one of two.
The fire of love is blown by dalliance.
Loves special lesson, is to please the eye.
Loves glory does in greatest darkness shine.
Love is a spirit all compact of fire,
Not gr^sse to s^^ke, but light and will aspire.
Love paints his longings in fair virgins eyes.
If merit look not well, Love bids, stand by.
Love lofty, does despise a lowly eye.
Love never will be drawn, but must be led.
Although sweet love to conquer glorious be.
Yet is the pain far greater than the fee.
He that shows all his love, does love but lightly.
Favors make happy lovers ever dumb.
The latest won, is always loved the longer.
Equal estate, does nourish equal love.
Love in brave spirits, kindles goodly fire,
Which to great height of honor does aspire.
Love makes at once, sick, sound, alive, and dead.
Love makes divided creatures live in one.
Love is a thing that feeds on care and fear.
Poor is the love that poverty impaires.
All loves conceits are excellently witty.
Two eyes him needs, both to watch and wake.
That lovers will deceive and find their escape.
That love is singular, is least in sight.
A pregnant love conceits a thousand things.
Wanton conceits are rife, where love is witty,
Disdain to true love yet was ever foe.
That love is it which always lasts long.
That tends to neither of the lovers wrong.
Vnwoed love knows not what pity means.
They love indeed, that dare not say they love.
Loves works are more than of a mortal temper.
Hearts are Loves food, his drink is lovers tears.
Love is a golden bubble full of dreams,
That waking breaks, and fills us with extremes.
The gain is grief to them that traffic love.
Love is in prime of youth, a Rose; in age, a Weed.
Love, for a minutes joy, pays endless pain.
Mean men in love have frowns as well as Kings.
Two constant lovers being joined in one,
Yielding to one another, yield to none.
Love truly bred, true trial will abide.
Men's love is written on the Angels breasts.
Love, with true friends will always live and die.
Love is refiner of invention.
The faults that are in love* by love committed,
By love for love do claim to be remitted.
Love teaches music to unskillful men.
Love won by virtue, still is permanent.
The love of beauty, reason often beguiles.
Love is the Lord of hope and confidence.
Love whe^s the d^llest wits, his plagues are such:
Yet makes the wise by pleasing dote as much.
Likeness in manners makes love most pure.
Virtue cannot be perfect, wanting love.
Love is most fortunate where courage lives.
Concealed love burns with the fiercest flame.
Lovers best like to see themselves alone,
Or with their loves, if needs they must have one.
A cold base love, cooles not a hot desire.
Hate in the name of love does often presume.
Sel^e*loue, of mischief is the only ground.
The ^owards warfare is a wanton love.
Where ^rowes a perfect sympathy of hearts,
E^h passion in the one, the other paineth.
Pure love did never see the face of fear.
Lascivious love is root of all remorse.
Love won in heat, will with a cold be lost.
Love, and high seat, no equals can endure.
Lovers have quick all corners searching eyes.
Similies on the same subject.
LIke as the wax does quench, and feed the flame,
^o love to men gives both despair and life.
As luie finds fit means whereby to climb,
So love sorts out his subject where him list*
As fire with violence consumes wood,
So scorn with cruelty does murder love.
As young vines yield most wine, but old brings best,
So young love speaks much, but old does most.
Like as affection is in lovers restless.
So being perfect, it is likewise endless.
As fancy must be cured by affection,
So love is only remedied by love.
Examples likewise on the same.
PAusanias loved his wife with such firm love,
As no description well could set it down.
Prediccas for his love to Alexander,
Refused mighty wealth in Macedon.
The Emperor Claudius would not love or hate,
But as he wa^ thereto by others led.
Scipio so loved the Poet Ennius,
That being dead, he kept his picture still.
Zeno, although a Stoicke, yet did yield,
That love in young men was most requisite.
Cicero not gainsaid wise men to love
So they might love without deep cares and sighs.
Of Hate.
Hate, is loves enemy, and Friendships foe:
Neighbourhoods bane, and Peaces overthrow.
HAte cannot work, where nature planteth love.
Hates eyes may slumber, but can hardly sleep.
Hatred is chiefest enemy to love.
That which is h^ld with hate, we fear to loose.
Who hates himself to love another man,
Senseless should be esteemed of all men.
The deadliest hate, with s^iles, securely stands.
Where rancour rules, there hate does most prevail.
Lewd love, is hate; and base desire is shame.
Youth old in will, age young in hate does make.
It Is incident to them who many fear,
Many to them more grie^o^es hate do bear.
In meckenesse maskes the most distemperd hate.
True faithful love will never turn to hate.
Men often show favor to conceal the^^ hate.
Hatred attends on prosperity.
The sweetest love, changing his property:
Turns to the sowrest and most deadly hate.
Love so, thou may have little fear to hate*
Few hate their faults; all hate of them to hear.
A rooted hate will hardly be displaced.
Fie on the love that hatcheth hate and death.
These are the greatest spoilers of a state:
Young ^^nsell, private gain, and partial hate.
Hate without might comes ever more too late.
A poor man's hate is very perilous.
Mercy may mend, whom hatred made transgress.
From deep desire^, often comes the deadliest hate.
Hatred must be beguiled by some new course,
Where states are strong, and Princes doubt their force.
Never put trust in them that hate their blood.
Hate seeks to salve his harms by swist revenge.
Enforced wedlock breeds but secret hate.
Hate euurmore is blind, and so is love.
In v^^lgar ears delight it always breeds,
To have the hated authors of misdeeds.
Where h^^e does rule, Lordship small safety has.
Hate nourishes contempt, debate, and rage.
Hate furrows up a grave to bury love.
But few will follow them whom princes hate.
Hate and disdain do never brook respect,
Consisting in true loving hearts neglect.
To color ^a^e with kindness, some commend.
Hid hate exce^deth open enmiti^^
Looks often ti^^^ hate, when as the heart does love*
No hate like that of friends, once changed to foes.
Who foster hate, can never find out love.
Most happy he, to whom love comes at last,
And does restore what hate before did wast.
Hate many times is hid in smoothest looks.
The wrong of friends exceeds the soe-mans hate.
Hate buried once, hurts deadly afterward.
A b^d man's hate can never harm the good.
With pleasing speech men promise and protest.
When hateful hearts l^e lurking in their breast.
Whom all men hate, none is so fond to love.
Hate commonly does most offend it self.
Hates winking is a prep'ratiue to death.
Similies on the same subject.
AS Lions are discerned by their paws,
So hateful men are by their qualities.
As envy braggeth and can draw no blood,
So hate in stead of hurt, often does men good.
As greenest wood lies long before it burn,
So hate stands watching till fit time to harm.
As blindness, led by blindness, needs must fall,
So hate, vrg'de on by hate, harms least of all.
As children for their faults have slye excuses,
So hates smooth looks hide very foul abuses.
As crauen Cocks make show, yet dare not fight,
So hate makes proffers, when he dares nor bite.
Examples likewise on the same.
Demetrius Phalerius did condemn
Any that justly could be said to hate.
Stesilia did procure Themistocles,
Even to the death to hate Aristides.
Cato and Caesar hated not each other,
Until Seruilia made them enemies.
Clodius did hate the men that loved him most,
And therefore was of all abandoned.
Cicero says, No honest citizen
Can be procur' de to hate his enemy.
Pindarus held no vice more odious,
Than envious hatred, in what man so ere.
Of Chastity.
Chaste life is graces seal, devotions staff,
Mark of the just, and crown of martyrdom.
Chastity is bright honors glorious crown,
Lost jewels may be found, Chastity never
That Is lost but once: and once lost, lost for ever.
She is most chaste, that is but enjoyed of one.
Pure chastity is beauty to our souls,
Grace to our bodies, peace to our desires.
We break chaste vows when we live loosely ever.
The purest incense on the altar smokes.
But chastest thoughts are Nectar in Jove's sight.
Chastity lost, can never be restored.
Eternal thraldom rather should be wished,
Than loss of chastiti^, or change of love.
Chaste love is founded on a just desire.
When chastity is rifled of her store,
Lust, the proud thief, is poorer than before.
Chaste things are charie to the Gods themselves.
Chaste eyes are blind at any gaudie gift,
And dease her ears to goodliest promises.
Chaste eyes will banish lustful sights away.
Riches and beauty praises not a wife,
But pleasing of her husband, and chaste life,
No princes wealth can prize true chastity.
The brown complexion famed for chastity,
Exceeds far the fairest suspected beauty.
No life to liberty, no love like chastity.
Chastity beautifies the meanest coat,
Better than blame in richest clothing clad.
Beauty unchaste is reckned nothing worth.
Chastity, weakly can withstand proud wealth
And dignity, both leagued to assault.
Chastity is the crown of happy life.
In wedlock, chastity is special good:
But more, in virgins life and widowhood.
Chastities wrongs, bondage awarrants not.
Chastity is the beauty of the soul,
The joy of heaven, best jewel here on earth.
Wanton desire, chaste looks does often hide.
Chastity, charity, and humility,
Are the united virtues of the soul.
Frugalitie is badge of chastity.
Beauty unchaste, is like the Mandrakes fruit,
Sightly in show, but poisonous in taste.
Idleness is the foe to chastity.
Nothing in women worthy praise remains,
If once their (glory) chastity be lost.
Where gold's too plenty, chastity grows cheap.
Fair is the face which promises pure love,
But that celestial, lives by chastity.
Fortitude, with chaste life, adorn the soul.
She is not chaste that is by fear compeld:
Neither she honest, that with need is won.
Modest and chaste, is dourie rich enough.
Chastity in extremity is known,
And in the end crowned with eternity.
A wandering eye bewrayes an unchaste mind.
With reasons reins, chastity bridles lust.
Where needy want is joined with chastity,
There unclean life gets some authority.
Chaste ears cannot endure dishonest talk.
The modest eye controlles loves wanton riot.
Chaste modest thoughts beseem a woman best.
Similies on the same subject.
AS beauty looks like flowers in the spring,
So chastity is like the stars of heaven.
As Violets smell sweet in any sent,
So chastity shines bright in every eye.
As water-drops will pearce the hardest flint,
So chaste resolve o'recomes the proudest lust.
As glasses broke, can never be repaird,
So chastity once lost, is never restored.
As lust and liberty does shorten life,
So chastity makes endless live the soul.
As champions by their manhood are best known,
So is good life by spotless chastity.
Examples likewise on the same.
THe Spartane virgins rather chose to die,
Than loose the honor of pure chastity.
Nic^nor moved a Thebane maid to lust,
Which to prevent, she gladly slew her self.
Lucrece once rifled of her chastity,
Imagined following life, but infamy.
Diripen^^na, by her fathers hands,
Was done to death to save her chastity.
Va^ro did hold the man religious,
That made a conscience of his chastity.
Qu^^t^l^an says, I hat heavens chiefest gift
Bestowed on man, is blessed chastity.
Of Beauty.
Beauty is Natures privilege, a close deceit,
A short times tyrant, and vast Monarchy.
Beauty but seldom seen, makes us admire it.
Beauty is such a bait, that (swallowed) choakes.
Beauties best treasure, is the owners harm.
Selfe-pleasing souls do play with beauties baits.
There is no name (if she be false or not)
But being fair, some envious tongue will blot.
Beauty does varnish age, as if newborn.
Where fair is not, no boor to paint the brow.
Beauty being borrowed, merits no regard.
Simples fit beauty, fie on drugs or Art.
Beauty does sweetly quicken when it is nigh:
But distant far, murders, where it is beloved.
Seldom want guests where beauty bids the feast.
Care and suspicion is fair beauties dower.
Beauty brings peril, wanting safe protection.
Beauty at death can be bequeathed to none.
Were beauty under twenty lo^kes kept fast,
Yet l^u^ will through, and pick them all at last.
Nice fools delight to be accounted fair.
Beauty is soonest lost, too choicely kept.
Beauty to beauty always is benign.
Beauty within it self should not be wasted.
Bright beauty is the bait, which with delight,
Does most allure man to increase his kind.
Beauty and wealth are fraught with coy disdain.
Beauty is often with it self at strife.
True beauty needs no other ornament.
Men praise the face, yet blame the flintie mind.
The fairest flower of beauty fades away,
Like the fresh Lilly in the Sunshine day.
Swift time makes wrinkles in the fairest brow.
Fair women grieve to think they must be old.
Pity and smiles do best become the fair.
Beauty has privilege to check all duty.
All things that fair, that pure, and glorious been,
Offer themselves on purpose to be seen.
Alluring shows most deep impression strike.
Sweetly it fits the fair to wantonnize.
Nothing but cruelty misseemes the fair.
Beauty is nothing if it be not seen.
No greater corsiue to our blooming years,
Than the cold badge of winter-blasted hairs.
Beauty will be where is the most resort.
Beauty is mighty, yet her strength but weak.
Beauty like Autumn fades and falls away.
Beauty has power to overcome the strong.
Fair flowers that are not gathered in their prime.
R^t and consume themselves in little time.
The Summers beauty yields to winters blasts.
By clouds of care best beauties are defaced.
Beauty being shameless, soemes a loath some sight.
Amongst fair Roses grow some stinking weeds.
The fairer and more beautiful the sky,
The ouglier seem the clouds that in it lie.
Nothing so soon allures as beauty does.
Religion is austere, but beauty mild.
The fairest in show must carry all away.
At fairest signs, best welcome is surmiz'd.
Beauty in heaven and earth this grace does win,
It supples rigor, and it lessens sin.
Dainties are made for taste, beauty for use.
Seeds spring from seeds, and beauty beauty breeds.
Beauty often crazeth like a broken glass.
Both old and young, and all would fairest be.
Hardly perfection is so absolute,
But some impuritie does it pollute.
A small fault soon impaires the sweetest beauty.
The very fairest has her imperfection.
Beauty to dwell with woe, deformes it self.
As fairest beauty fades, so love grows cold.
Beauty it self, does of it self persuade
The eyes of men, without an Orator.
If beauty were not, love were quite confounded.
The fairest flowers have not the sweetest smell.
The painted face sets forth no perfect blood.
The beauty of the mind excels the face.
Desire being Pilot, and bright beauty prize.
Who can fear sinking where such treasure lyes^
Beauty is able sorrow to beguile.
There Is none so fair, whose beauty all respect.
The fairest buds are soonest nipt with frosts.
Who builds on beauty, builds but for a while.
Beauty is cuer held so much more fair,
By how much less her hate makes love despair.
That Is quickly staind, which is the purest fine.
In fairest stone small rain soon makes a print.
Ill fare that fair which inwardly is foul.
Beauty is inward virtue of the soul.
We trample grass, and prize the flowers in MAY,
Yet grass is green, when fairest flowers decay.
The love of beauty, Reason quite forgets.
The cause of love is only beauties looks.
Beauty and youth once banished, never return.
Chaste thoughts makes beauty be immortallizd.
Fair beauty is the spark of hot desire,
And sparks in time will kindle to a fire.
Sickness and age are beauties chiefest foes.
Weeds often times grow, when fairest flowers fade.
Beauty is like a fair, but fading flower.
Where beauty most abounds, there wants most ruth.
The goodliest gemme being blemished with a crack,
Loses both beauty and the virtue too.
Beauty does whet the wit, makes bold the will.
Beauty makes Art to work beyond it self.
Dishonest beauty is a deadly poison.
Vertue-Iesse beauty does deserve no Jove.
The fairest flower nipt with the winters frost,
In show seems worser than the basest weed.
The perfect glass of virtue, beauty is.
No bait so sweet as beauty, to the eye.
White seems the fairer when as black is by.
The purest Lawne is apt for every stain.
Better it is with beauty to be blinded,
Than beauties graces should be blindly minded.
Beauty is termed the mistress of delight.
Beauty often iniures them endued there with.
Beauty enflates and puffs up the mind.
Humility with beauty seldom is.
Beauty brings fancy to a dainty feast,
And makes a man, that else were but a beast*
Man of all creatures is most beautiful.
Beauty not proud, nothing more excellent.
Similies on the same subject.
AS the right Coral need no other grace,
So Artl^sse beauty best sets sorth the face.
As finest cloth will soonest catch a stain,
So fairest looks may shadow minds most vain.
As greatest feasts seldom can want fit friends,
So beauties house will hardly lack resort.
As medlers with the fire are easily scorcht,
So they that gaze on beauty soon are caught.
As coldest Climates have their Summer days,
So coolest thoughts are fierd at beauties blaze.
As that same Spear which harm must heal the wound,
So look where beauty kills, it must revive.
Examples likewise on the same.
HErcules being a mighty conqueror,
Yet vaild his courage at fair beauties feet.
The ^ybian Lions loo^e their sternest might,
If of a beauteous face they once get sight.
The S^an^ian Lord, by nature dull and rude,
By sight of beauty lost this servitude.
Alcestaes beauty made M^ande^s Swannes,
To leave the stood and on her shoulders perch.
Chrysippus held, that beauty did preserve
Kindness, and all society with men.
Zeno, the Prince of Stoickes did agree,
That beauty, like could very hardly be.
Of Jealousy.
Jealousy is hells torment to the mind,
Quite quenching reason, and increasing rage.
Love ever laughes when Jealousy does weep.
If age be jealous, youth will be untrue.
No hell can be compard to Jealousy.
This still we find, where jealousy is bred,
Horns in the mind are worse than on the head.
Suspect bewraies our thoughts, betraies our words.
Suspicious eyes are messengers of woe.
Jealous suspect is linked with despair.
Well fares the man, how ere his cates do taste,
That tables not with foul suspicion.
Better to die, than be suspicious.
Trust not too soon, nor all too light mistrust.
Mistrust does treason in the trustiest raise.
Where Jealousy directesh forward wills,
Beauties sweet dalliance with despite a kills.
Jealousy kindles enuie^ quenchlesse fire.
Suspicion always haunts a guilty mind.
Suspicion often wounds as a ^^ope as death.
When sweet repose does calm the troubled mind,
Then base suspect soon'st leaves his ^^ing behind.
Dangerous suspect still waits on loves delight.
Suspicion often times breeds a further ill.
Once guilty* and suspected evermore.
O Jealousy, when truth once takes thy part,
No mercie-wanting Tyrant so severe.
No secrecy can be without suspect.
Jealousy is the father of revenge.
Jealousy pines it self to death alive.
Thy wise being fair be not thou jealous,
Because suspicion cur^^ not women's follies.
Jealousy grows extreme, by lengthning it.
A jealous man no counsel will admit.
Jealousy is the sruit of sudden choice.
The heart being once infect with jealousy,
Grief is the night, and day dark miscrie.
No thraldom like the yoke of jealousy.
Suspicion gives continual cause of care.
Jealousy is Disdaines black harbinger.
Jealousy is the torment of the mind,
For which* nor w^t, nor counsel help can find.
Suspicion wounds, but jealousy strikes dead.
Suspect sends men too swiftly to their end.
Who travails in suspect, are bound to haste.
Too much s^spition o^ another, is
A flat ^^nd^ ^^^ng of ou^ own amiss.
Passio^^ kept private, do most prejudice.
Suspicion needs no vrger but it self.
Wise men have always hated jealousy.
Where once suspicion breeds enmity,
It Is hard with shows to compass amity.
Jealousy murdereth hospitality.
Jealousy roots up all good neighborhood.
Jealousy reckons friends no more than foes.
Similies on the same subject.
AS no content is like the sweetes of love,
So no despair can match with jealousy.
Love, as it is divine with loyalty,
So is it hellish, wrapped in jealousy.
As from small brooks great rivers do arise,
So huge distemper springs from jealousy.
As Crows do deem their brood the fairest birds,
So jealous men their own choice most commend.
As ships in tempests by the winds are tossed,
So fond conceits do hurrie jealous heads.
As kindness does delight in company,
So is it poison to mad jealousy.
Examples likewise on the same.
THe Persians were so jealous of their wives*
As but in wagons they never went abroad.
Phanius locked up his wife through jealousy,
Whereby she compast what she could not else.
Procris was slain through her own jealousy,
Hid in a bush to watch her husbands walk.
Argus, albeit he had an hundred eyes,
Yet could not keep from Io, Jupiter.
Cicero calls Jealousy, a fear
Of loosing that belongs to ones own self*
Chrysippus holds, that jealousy ill brooks
A partner in the thing it most esteems.
Of Wit and Wisdom
Wisdom is Natures child, Experience heir,
Discretely ruled, while Wit gads every where.
Wisdom seems blind, when she beholds best.
Wisdom grown wealthy, lives then at quiet.
No wisdom with extremities to deal.
It Is wisdom to give much: a gift preuailes
When deep persuading Oratorie fails.
Man's wit does build for time but to devour,
Wisdom is always held the chiefest wealth.
Each soil o^ country is a wise man's home.
He is not wise, that having scap^^ a harm
Will afterward go meddle with it more.
Fair sober speed, is counted wisdoms have.
All after-wit, is ever dearly bought.
Wisdom bids stay, though foot be in the gate.
Not cowardice, but wisdom warnes to yield*
When fortune aids the proud iusulting foe.
Feed (...)les with toys, and wise men with regard.
When clouds appear, wise men put on their cloakes.
He wisely walks that does safely go.
All places that the eye of heaven sur^aies,
Are (to a wise man) happy ports and havens*
What wise men see, the vulgar little think.
Sad pawse and deep regard, becomes the wise.
Wary sore-sight does master headstrong will.
Wise men do seldom sit and wayle their wo^s,
But presently prevent the ways to wail.
No common things can please a wandering wit
Without discretion, virtue seems like vice.
Good wit ill used, may harm a commonwealth*
Wisdom commands to part the dead and sick,
Jest they infect the faulelesse and the quick.
Discretion practices the things are good.
In love, discretion is the chiefest help.
Over discretion, Fortune has no power*
All after-wit is like a shower of rain,
That falls (...)i^ely on the r^pened grain.
Sharpness of wit quickly enslames desire.
What strength denies, wit may aspire unto.
Wit bends not where will does show most force.
If thou have lost by fore-wits rash prevention,
Win it again by after-wits contention.
Who trusts most his wit, is ignorant.
Wisdom in midst of rage appears best.
By others faults wise men reform their own.
The Pilot, that by skill the ship does guide
And not by might: makes vessels brook the tide.
Wisdom is poor, her dowry is content,
To play the fool well, is good sign of wit.
Some little pawse does help the quickest wit*
Wise men for fortune do so well provide,
That though she shake them, yet they will not slide.
Wisdom will flourish when as folly fades.
True wisdom bids, rather do well than speak.
Wisemen have company, though left alone.
Wisdom must judge twixt men a^t to amend,
And minds incurable, borne to offend.
A wise man's country is the world throughout.
Wisdom is wealth, even to the poorest wretch.
Natures imperfect things, wisdom makes right.
Reformed wit can scant so instly deem,
But that it leaves true goods, for such as seem.
Wisdom does beautify mean poverty.
Unskillful heads run recklesse on their will.
Sound judgment slightly weighes opinion.
Too few there be that do discreetely learn,
What pr^sit rightly ought themselves concern.
Who trusts his wit, by wit is soonest tript.
By wit we speak, by wit the mind is ruled.
By wit we govern all our actions.
Wit in a woman, like to oil enflamed,
Kindles great virtue, or much vanity.
Wit is the load-starre of each humane thought.
Wise men will take their opportunities.
All wisdoms heirs are jealous of their fall.
Wisdom has charms and incantations,
Can tame huge spirits and outrageous passions.
Slow to believe, from wisdom does proceed.
High is the seat which wisdom does commend.
It Is wisdom when we win, to win to save.
When all against one, and none for him will speak,
Who thinks himself most wise, will prove too weak.
Will does desire, what wisdom still reprooues.
Wisdom breeds care, but folly want does bring.
Wit daunceth many times, when folly pipes.
T^attempt with others danger, not our own,
A chiefest part of wisdom may be brown.
It Is wisdom not to be too credulous.
Short l^ued wits do wither as they grow.
Home ^i^l is y^k^s^^e to a wand^^^ng wit.
^^Wis^men (...)a^^e,
Th'v^i^^^^ peace, before the insiest war.
Unwise weaues he that takes two webbes in hand.
Things well regarded, longest do endure.
Fore-fi^ht does f^ll on all advantage wait.
It is no wisdom to enlarge ^ thrall,
Whose free ^^ ^^ may return thee greater harm.
The office of wisdom, is to shadow griese.
Wisdom is that where by the soul does live.
Wisdom is plentiful in good examples.
Those wits that know how much fair graces move,
May there by draw sound arguments of love.
Wit gets wealth, but none by wealth get wit.
No noble b^^^ge like ornament of wit.
Nothing more fine than wit, nothing more sickle.
Men that neglect their own for want of wit,
Make something nothing, by augmenting it.
Wit won by industry is hardly lost.
When age approaches, wisdom waxe^h young.
Wisdom makes poor men rich; rich, honorable.
All pearls are not derived from one shell,
Nor all good wits within one country dwell.
Justice, not joined with wisdome's cruelty.
Wisdom in man, is no mean happiness.
Similies on the same subject.
AS from the earth the plough all brambles cleares,
So wisdom from the mind all vices root.
As wise men for them selves are meetest scribes,
So fools never care what stranger knows their hearts.
As brass or iron (by use) become most bright:
So wit employed, shines fair in all men's sight.
As empty vessels yield the loudest sound,
So those of meanest wit will prattle most.
As Bees by their own honey often are hurt,
So wit by wisdom many times is scourged.
As Sea-crabs use to swim against the stream,
So wit with wisdom always will contend.
Examples likewise on the same.
CAesar in his great fortunes gloried,
Yet by his wisdom all were brought to pass.
Antonius the Emperor was so wise,
He never repented what-^oe're he did.
Scipio, accused unjustly, by his wit
In making answer, won himself renown.
The Senate did acquire Emilius Scaurus,
Only because he answered wittily.
Plato in his Conuiuim does affirm,
That wisdom is the only gift in man.
Tullie terms wisdom, mistress of this life:
Likewise, an Art instructing to live well.
Of Learning, etc.
Learning and Knowledge are the lamps of life,
Chief guides to Arts and all perfections.
LEarning in spite of fate will mount alost.
Vain is the Art that will deceive it self.
Midas base brood do sit in honors chaires,
Where to the Muses sons are only heirs.
Art has a world of secrets in her power.
There is no age ought think too late to learn.
The world does smile on every so^tish clown,
And most ungently treads learning down.
Often highest worthes are paid with spightfull hire.
Art is but base, with them that know it not.
None have more hard or more obdurate minds,
Than vicious hare-braines, and illit'rate hinds.
The rarest gifts do need no trumpets sound.
Learning by virtue is more beautiful.
True Art can wound as deep as any steel.
Who may have help assuredly else where,
In vain seek wonders out of Magique Art.
Knowledge is hurtful, if discretion want.
Art must be won by Art, and not by might.
Needs must those men be blind, an^ blindly led,
Where ^^ good l^ss^ns ^^^ ^^ ^^a^n'd or read.
Nature is most of all adorned by A^tes.
The purest study seeks (...) things.
Learning has power to d^a^ men waxen rude,
To civil love of* Art and ^^rti^^^^.
Wit learneth us what secret^ Science yields.
Arts perish, wanting ho^^^^ and ap^l^u^e.
Learning can bridle the infornall kind:
To wit, the perturbations of the mi^^*
The priest unpaid can neither sing nor say.
Skill and the love of skill, do ^ue^ kiss.
^ooles will ^in^ fault without the cause disc^^ring.
And argue most of that they ^a^e n^ lea^^^^g.
No bond of love so s^rong a* knowledge is.
Learning, to grave experience, ought to bow.
True Science suited in well ^ou^^d ^imes,
Is nourished for sa^^ in aftertimes.
Learning to conquest adde^h p^rpetuitie.
Learning, first founder w^^ of publ^^^e w^a^es.
When dolts have lu^^^, o^ hen^^* step to s^ay:
Let Scholars burn their boo^e^, and g^e to pla^.
Learning is ages comfort, you^hes b^st guide.
Learning makes young men so ^^^, old men wi^e.
D^ll^^^ (...) learnin^ d^e desire,
Bu^ (...)e wise.
To vnl^ ^^^^ ^uill, hat'hest learning is.
Opinion without l^^rning is not good.
Some men so (...),
That o^^ there ^^rre the work before was well.
Knowledge continues when all wealth else wast^.
Knowledge in all things is ^ight prositable.
The mind withdrawn from study, for supplies,
Is learnings wrack, where want does tyrannize.
To know, and want performance, is mishap.
Best knowledge is ^or men to know themselves.
Coy readers deem, that dull conceits proceed
From ignorance, the cause being only need.
Poets are borne, but Orators are made.
Poetry quickens wit, sweetens discourse.
Poets scant sweetly write, except they meet
With sound rewards, for ser^oning so sweet.
Learning and knowledge, good minds most desire.
Knowledge, before all else should be preferred.
True learning has a body absolute,
That in apparent sense it self can su^e.
Brevity is great praise of eloquence.
Silence in wise men is sweet eloquence.
The man that scorneth all the Arts of school,
Lackes but a long coat, to be natures fool.
Eloquence is the ornament of speech.
Eloquence makes bad matters often seem good.
They which do like all Arts which can be thought,
Do comprehend not any as they ought.
Experience is the mistress of old age.
Men rich in knowledge hate all other wealth.
Arts, which right hard do seem at our first sight,
By trial are ^ade easy, quick and light.
Experience, times characters rac^th out.
Knowledge distinguishes twixt ^en and beasts,
Learning will live, and virtue still shall shine,
When folly dies, and ignorance does pine.
Learning, with courage, make a man complete.
Let Guns serve gowns, and bucklers yield to books.
Arts want may stop our tongues, but not our tears.
Similies on the same subject.
AS learning help* to purchase all men fame,
So (truly le^^n'd) does more renown their name.
As ground vntil'd can never bring ^o^th g^aine,
So vnlearn'd valor (...) takes pain.
As men by folly ^^^^ ^^^^ the Gods,
Even so by (...) they nearest them.
As Bees suck honey out of di^ers fl^we^s,
So out of Science^ men knowl^d^^ learn*
As seals i^p^in^ ^^^^ ^^ly ^o^^e in wa^e,
So Poets in dull mind^^ ^^^^ ^hou^hts ^^presse.
As Musque quic^^n^ (...) hea^t^,
So drowsy souls are c^^^^'d with eloquence.
Examples likewise on the same.
ALexander honored Aristotle,
And made his pillow Homers ^^ades.
In camp or elsewhere ^^sar always bare,
His Commentaries as hi^ bosom friend*
Robert king of Sci^ill used to say.
Kingdom and all go, ^^^^ I learning loose.
Ptolomie Philadelp^^^, l^^^i^gs friend,
Five hundred thousand books had in his studi^.
Man (as says* Aristotl^) was create
To understand, and afterward to do.
Oh Science said grave Plato) how would men
Love and esteem thee, if they knew thee right?
Of Kings and Princes.
Kings are the images of Gods on earth:
And therefore they are called, Gods of the earth.
KIngs like to Gods should govern every thing.
Monarchs misdeeds cannot be hid in clay*
Unhappy kings, that never may be ^aught
To know themselves, or to discer^e their saul^^.
Princes are glasses to their subjects eyes.
The lives of princes are their subjects books.
To whom should su^iects for true iusti^ ^^s^^e,
When Kings themselves do reig^e by (...)?
The greatest scandale wai^s on great^ s^s^a^e.
Poor grooms are sightlesse night; Kings, glorious day.
A king should ever privilege his pleas^^e,
And make his peers esteem it as t^^ir treasure.
The cares of kings wast li^^, and hasten age.
Within one la^d, one single sway i^ best.
Princes like Suns are eu^^ ^^re in sight,
All see the clouds that do eclipse their lig^t.
Divided kingdoms make divided hearts.
Good deeds from kings must not be drawn perforce.
A Princes wealth, in spending still does spread,
Like to a poole with many fountains fed.
Minions too great, argue a king too weak.
Kings sleeping, see with eyes of other men.
Whereas proud conquest keeps all in awe,
Kings often are forced in service ^okes to draw.
A kings great arm does reach from shore to shore.
Kings use their loves as garments they have worn.
Princes have but their titles for their glory,
And outward honor for an inward toil.
Kings pardon death, but can not pardon shame.
Kings want no means t'accomplish what they would.
Princes, for mere vnseli imaginations,
Do often feel a world of resilesse ca^e^.
It shames a Prince to say* IF THAT I COVLD,
Kings lives reputed are their subi^cts lights.
Between kings titles and their lowly name,
There Is nothing differ* but the outward f^^me.
No common fortunes can once blemish kings.
A begging prince, what beggar pitties not?
Where Angele in the cause of Kings do sight,
VVeake men must fall* for bea^^n regards the right.
A king, woes slave, must kingly woe obey.
Kings may win kingdoms, but not conquer hearts*
Not all the water in the rough rule sea,
Can wash the balm from an annoi^ted king.
The linkes of princes love, are blood and war.
Poor private men ^ound not their princes hearts.
This fault is ever incident to kings,
Too much to credit over pleasing things.
Princes respect their honor more than blood.
To be a Prince, is more than be a man.
The man that at a subjects use does anne,
To the princes body gives a privy maime.
Princes like Lions never will be tamed.
Kings will be only, competirors must down.
Gnats are unnoted where-soe're they fly,
But Eagles gazed upon with every eye.
A kings great name makes not his fault the less.
Desire of sovereignty respects no faith.
Foolish the beggar, that to touch a crown,
Would with the scepter strait be smitten down.
The threats of kings are like the thunders noise.
Kings have long arms, and rulers reach at large.
Princes are as the glass, the school, the book,
Where subjects eyes do learn, do read, do look.
Majesty shines like lightning from the East.
A princes will ought not exceed his law.
Mildness does better suit with majesty,
Than rash revenge, and rough severity.
Princes desires are many times corrupt.
Princes often favor flatterers more than friends.
Kings do approach the nearest unto God,
By giving life and safety to their people.
Unworthy men's preferment, shames the prince.
Kings Courts are held as universal schools.
Succeeding heaps of plagues do teach too late,
To learn the mischiefs of misgnided state.
Kings by example sin more than by act.
Kings seats for souls distressed, are sanctuaries.
The youth of Princes have no bounds for sin,
Unless themselves do make them bounds within.
Princes often purchase quiet with price of wrong.
Wish for good princes, but endure the ill.
Subjects may well complain, but not correct
A princes faults, they bear more high respect.
No ruler yet could ever all content.
The face of kings makes faulty subjects fear.
Kings, Lords of times and of occasions,
May take advantage when and how they list.
It Is hard to rule, and please both good and bad.
New kings do fear when old Courts further strain.
Poor majesty, that other men must guide:
Whose discontent can never look aright.
When princes work, who then will idle stand?
Peasants may bear, but kings must needs requite.
Who would all mastring majesty defeat
Of her best grace: that is to make men great.
A princes wrath is messenger of death.
What else is pomp, rule, reign; but earth and dust?
Kings must have some be hated worse than they,
On whom they may their weight of envy lay.
Pride is no ornament for diademes.
Self-love does very ill beseem a prince.
Blessed is that league, where cities further Kings,
And kings do further them in other things.
Kings that would have laws kept, must rule themselves.
Grave heads are meetest Counselors for kings.
Look what a King does most of all embrace,
To that his subjects will incline as fast.
The strength of princes is their subjects love.
Kings ought be free from partiality.
Sleeplesse suspicion, pale distrust, cold fear,
Always with princes company does bear.
Kings should be fathers to their common-^^ale^.
Kings should prefer them most that (...) least.
A Prince not feared, has often his death (...):
And dreaded Princes have their death^ de^^^^^.
Majesty scorns to look on cowardice.
Kings reasons should be more than their opi^^^^^.
What else are kings when regiment is g^n^,
But like to shadows in a Sun shine day?
In ^^^i^cts wrongs, princes sustain abuse.
It'^ ^^^ater care to keep, than get a crown.
Kings favors in their eyelids use to hang.
Ready with every wink to be wip'te out.
He is no king, that is affections slave.
No fall like his that falls from a crown.
Kings are not termed Gods for wearing crowns,
But for over fame and fortune they are Lords.
Misgouern'd kings are cause of common wrack.
Kings changing customs, ever fear a change.
Jest not with Princes if that thou be wise:
For in unequal jest great danger lies.
Kings are their subjects joy, their countries hope.
True subjects hearts are princes chiefest stay.
In Princes, these two qualities well sit:
For strength a Lion, and a Fox for wit.
Great perils are comprised within a crown.
Beggars make majesty a gazing mark.
True justice is the chief and only thing
That is re^uir'd and looked for in a king.
Mislikes are silly lets, where kings resolve.
Just sovereignty can never be displaced.
A king, hereft of all his trusty friends
Is dead alive; for fame and honor ends.
All lawful princes, first or last prevail.
A princes safety is his peoples love.
Who has been kneeled unto, can hardly kneel,
Or beg for that which once has been his own.
Kings greatness stands on the great king of heaven.
No majesty, where virtue is despised.
Similies on the same subject.
AS princes wills are commonly held laws.
So life or death depends on their looks.
As often burials is Physicians shame,
So many deaths argue a kings hard reign.
As beasts obey the Lordly lions look,
So mean estate must mighty prince^ brook.
As the Sunbeams do lighten all the world,
So princes lives are l^nternes to their lands.
As Princes wanting wealth, learn tyranny,
So too much treasure makes them vicious.
As biggest winds enkindle greatest flames,
So much submission makes a king most mild.
Examples likewise on the same.
THe Kings of Persia, always showed themselves
More subject to the law, than to their Lords.
Antiochus told his son Dem^trius,
That kingly rule was noble slavery.
B^lus the son of Nemrod, was first king
That in this world had title of that name.
The Roman kings did use to wear no crowns.
But always bare their scepters in their hands.
Tully says, then it is best to check a prince,
When he forgets himself to be a prince.
S^^^ates wil'd good kings prefer their friends,
And show some kindness to their enemies.
Of Kingdoms, etc.
The Kingdom, Country, and the Commonweal,
Are things that subjects love do most reveal.
Kingdoms are Fortunes slattering gifts, soon lost.
Kingdoms are burd'nous to the wi^est men.
Con^^rd does keep a Realm in stable stay.
When discord brings all kingdoms to decay.
Wretched the state where men desire to die.
Who strives to alter laws, disturbes the state.
Kingdoms are commonly much sooner lost
Than kept: desired, than had with mighty cost.
Kingdoms are Fortunes ^atall tenise balls.
A wicked king, makes a more wicked land.
A man that takes delight in doing all,
To trouble all the State deui^eth ^^i^l.
In a well-gouern'd state one head is best.
Some men unwilling benefit their land.
Fools set in office, do their sple^es ^e^e^le:
And meaning well, m^st h^^t the commonweal.
Some unawares their countries good pro^erre.
All earthly kingdoms, even as men m^st perish.
Kingdoms are ruled but badly, where the base
Will check the chief that sit in highest place.
No state stands sure, but on the grounds of right.
Realms never get by change, but pain and loss.
When laws are ma^e, they ought to be obeyed,
And rulers wills with reuer^nce to be weighed
Wisdom and care are kingdoms chiefest prop^.
Rude multitudes are kingdoms overthrow.
By nature, man unto the wo^st i^ bent,
If wholesome statutes stay not his inten^.
Innocent men are common-weale^ b^st treasure.
Innocence makes kingdoms flourish more than arms.
That kingdom ought of right to be destroyed,
Which once was virtues ^lower, now vices weed.
Wise princes are their kingdoms con^^o^ters.
Unjust ex^^^ons killes a commonweal.
No greater da ^nger to a commonwealth,
Than when vnskilf^ll (...)* ^ide her powers.
Kingdoms are nothing el^e but common care.
Where tools b^are r^le the common wealth decaies*
In ^ calme^ a many see how (...) ^^gin,
But few respect the en^ and em^^lie.
Where wi^^ m^n are neglected, kingdoms perish.
No n^ar^r kindred can be, than our country.
The^e ^^^ no commonweals more loose and bad,
T^a^ w^e^e the c^m^^n^ ^^ue most liberty.
Our country, parents* kin, claim part in us.
Our countries love ought be most dear to us.
And ^^ties of commonweals d^^ay,
^^^^^ b^il^ing^ ^^^^, and carel^sse heads bear sway.
Where any may li^e well, that is his country.
Remembrance of ou^ country is most sweet.
In commonweals such should be honored most,
As show their care both insterne war and peace.
^^^ country first by nature claims us.
^^^^^t is the death in cause of commonweal.
The government of commonweals and state,
Will (without wi^dome) soon he ruinate.
Reward and punishment are kingdoms keys.
Peace in a commonwealth is mellodie.
There Is nothing c^n impresse so dear constraint,
As countries cause and common foes disclaine.
Men of desert, their country least esteems.
Discretion best does rule a commonweal.
That kingdom may be counted fortunate,
Where no man lives by another sweat.
Seditious heads disturb the common good.
Unruly members soon should be lopt of.
Similies on the same subject.
AS spring and Autumn hazard health by change,
So ^nnouations harm a commonwealth.
Look how the body void of members is,
Even so are kingdoms dispossessed of laws.
As ships in tempests need all helping hands,
So in a kingdom none must idly stand.
As many Elements one temper frame,
So diverse men's endeauours help the state.
As from the heart all members have their life,
So from the commonwealth comes each man's good.
As Captains are the eyes to lead their men,
So kings are Load-starres to their commonweals.
Examples likewise on the same.
Ulysses loved so dear his native land.
As for it, he refused to be immortal.
Aglaurus to redeem his countries peace,
From Athens walls himself threw headlong down.
Fair Iphigenia for her kingdoms good,
Made willing sacrifice of her own blood.
King Codrus, rather than his realm should perish,
Gladly did run upon his foe-mens swords.
Xenophon did think them unworthy life,
That made no conscience of the commonwealth.
He that denies to die in countries cause,
Deserves (says Tullie) hate of all good men.
Of Nobility.
Nobility, is a surname or praise,
Which to our selves by virtue we do raise.
A Noble nature no mishap can daunt.
Virtue feeds scorn; and noblest honor, shame.
A noble mind does never dread mischaunce.
That which in me^ne men we call patience,
In noble breasts, is pale, cold cowardice.
Noblenes never stoupes to servile fear.
A noble heart does still contemn despair.
Often noble deeds by falsehood are desac'd.
Good gis^^are sometim^s given to men past good:
And noblesse stoop^s o^t times beneath his blood,
Our virtues make us noble, nothing else.
Nobility from kindred is but bor^owed.
It is thine own des^^ts ^nnobles thee.
He is not noble, but most basely ^^ed,
That ransacks tombs, and does d^^ace the dead,
A noble nature is to all men kind.
Nobility cont^^neth ^latterie.
A noble resolution makes men just.
Nobility is best continued,
^^ those conu^nient means that made it rise.
In boldest actions, noblesse shines most clear.
He is not noble, bears a nigga^ds mind.
True nobl^sse is a sign of happy life.
In change of streams ^ch fish makes shif^ to live,
And every place a noble mind content^.
Nobility (to bad men) is reproach.
To virtuous men, nobility brings glory.
Nothing are nobl^ ti^^es worth, if life be bad.
If nobleness ge^^ b^t a minutes sla^^e,
An hundred years s^ant makes it well again.
Truth is the title of true nobleness.
It Is virtue only gives nobility.
In virtues love no noble mind dismayes.
Fair speech, with usage affable and kind,
Wipes malice out of any noble mind.
Much babbling does offend a noble ^^re.
A noble nature is religious.
Pouerties best friend, is the noble mind.
Noble discents make virtue more divine.
Similies on the same subject.
AS none but Eagles gaze against the Sun,
So none but virtuous eyes discern nobility.
As credit from opinion often comes,
So from desert ensues nobility.
As bricks from clay have their original,
So noblesse first rose from mean parentage.
As gross thick clouds obscure the Suns fair light,
So muddie crimes disgrace nobility.
As bitter roots may yet yield pleasant fruit,
So mean descent may bring forth noble minds.
As in the barren grounds best gold does grow,
So poorest race s^aines not true noblesse.
Examples likewise on the same.
CAmillus did express a noble mind,
In safe returning the ^al^ri^n youths.
Py^^^us well found ^^b^iti^s noble nature,
When his Physicion would have poisoned him.
Lysander in his famous vi^to^ies,
Ever declared his minds tr^^ nobleness.
Catilines wicked life disgraced him,
And quite obscured his former noble race.
The name of Noblenes (says Cicero)
Must give them place that by their virtue claim it.
Plato affirms, that a noble heart
Will not by base attempts once wrong it self.
Of Honor and dishonor.
Honor, is that the mind does covet most:
And no dishonor like that honor lost.
Honor once lost, can never b^ repaired.
Honor, ambitious women's sex does please.
It is no honor to be Princes heirs:
When we can boa^t* but only birth is theirs.
Their fall is great, that from high honor slide.
Honor is least, where odds appears most.
Honor was first ordained for no cause,
But to see right maintained by the lawe^.
To honor, beauty is a due by right.
Die rather, then do ought dishonor yields.
True love does always bring forth bourteous deeds,
And in good minds desire of honor ^reeds,
It is more honor to preserve, than s^ill.
Who cheapneth honor, must not stand on price.
Fie on the fawe, for which good same is sold,
Or honor with indignity emba^'d.
Honor is grounded on the tickle Ice.
No kingly veil can cover villainy.
An honorable grave is more esteemed,
Than the polluted close^ of a king.
No scepter serves dishonor to excuse.
No subtle plea reuokes dishonours error.
Pr^fi^e with honor still must be commixt,
Or else our actions are but scandalous.
Honor and envy are companions.
Honor is purchased by the deeds we do.
To frustrate them that but expect their due,
Does ill beseem an honorable mind.
On general bruit, honor does most depend.
With painful ^oyle is honor soonest found.
Honor will hardly fellowship endure,
Nor never Crown corriuall could abide.
Some honor lives in honorable spoil.
It Is honor to forgive a yielding foe
The mightier man, the mightier is the thing:
That makes him honored, or begets him hate.
Danger has honor; great dessignes their fame.
Honor's a thing without us, not our own.
It Is honor to deprive dishonored li^e*
The one will live, the other being de^d.
Honor by oath, ought right poor Ladies wrongs.
Honors are smoakes, and dignities have c^^es.
Honor and beauty in the owners arms,
Are weakly fortrest from a world of ^armes.
Honor relieues a foe as well as friend.
It is no honor to be swol^e with pride.
Honor does scorn dishonorable thoughts.
The v^^tor can no honor justly claim,
To loose the means that should advance the same.
Where hate bears sovereignty, there honor di^s.
He that regards his honor, will not wrong it.
Disquiet honor hurts more than helps.
Honor and wealth often times too dearly cost
The death of all, so altogether lost.
Honor does ever judge with lenity.
No greater honor than a quiet mind.
Honor's no privilege against defame.
Always does great employment for the great,
Quicken the blood, and honor still beget.
Honor, to many is more sweet than life.
Honor is fruit of virtue and fair truth.
Honor once gone, bids farewell to all hope.
The inward touch that wounded honor bears,
Finds no help, till death cure the disease.
Honor and glory labors in mistrust.
Honor is first step to disquietnesse.
How hard is princely honor to attain?
High honor* not long life, the treasure is,
Which noble minds without respect defend.
Dishonest deeds no honor can attain.
The praise of honor is not always blood.
Never retire with shame, bright honor says,
The worst that can befall thee, is but death.
Honor does scorn the height of Fortunes pride,
Great honors youth may loose it self in age.
Report, that seld to honor is true friend,
May many lies against true meaning mint.
No honor comes by spilling aged blood.
Who seeks for honor, lingers not his time.
Vilde is that honor, and the title vain,
The which true worth and honor did not gain.
Honor does hate with base delights to dwell.
Honor helps nothing where contentment wants.
He that contends with the inferior sort,
May with dishonor reap but bad report.
Honor is worthless in a wretched state.
High honor cries revenge upon his foes.
No death or hell can damnifie thine honor,
So long as reasons arm vpholds thy banner.
Who reach at honor, spurn at beauties baits.
Honor is like a vain, yet pleasing dream.
Honor deckes learning that with honor reares it.
Similies on the same subject.
AS fairest blossoms soon are nipt with frost,
So honors pride by fortunes frowns are c^ost.
As goodly trees that yield no fruit are bad,
So beautcous bodies (honour-lesse) as bad*
As shadows are the flectest things that be,
So honors have the like inconstancy.
As rain in harvest does but little good,
So fools for honor be are no likelihood*
As he that climbes aloft may quickly fall,
So honors seat is not the fu^'st of all.
As every crown fits not a conque^our,
So honor not agrees with every one.
Examples likewise on the same.
NEstor rehearst his honorable deed^,
That Hectors combat might be vnd^^^ane.
Leonidas to honor E^tich^s,
Led him from forth the danger of the fight*
Pericles being requested to sw^are false,
Replied: That honor would not suffer him.
Agesilaus urged to give sentence wrong,
Said: But for honor he could easily do it.
Parmenides, his scholars did instruct:
No wound was comparable to dishonor.
Cleobulus condemned that city quite,
Where honor was not held in high esteem.
Of Council, etc.
Council and good advise is wisdoms square,
And most auailing to the life of man.
Council does mitigate the greatest smarts.
In public shame, often counsel seems disgraced.
That counsel evermore is held most fit,
Which of the time does due advantage take.
They that thrive well, take counsel of their friends.
Untroubled night gives counsel ever best.
With grauest counsel all must be directed*
Where plainest shows are openly suspected.
All wounded minds good counsel helps most.
With patient counsel thirst is not appeased.
A kingdoms greatness hardly can he sway,
That wholesome counsel will not first obey.
Direct not him, whose way himself will choose.
Often long debated counsels hinder deeds.
In vain be counsels, statutes, humane laws,
When chief of counsel pleads the unjust cause.
Never grieve his harm that would not be advised.
Friends by advise may help each other much.
Always too late comes counsel to be heard,
Where will does mutiny with wits regard.
The sick man may give counsel to the sound.
The wisest men (in need) will list advise.
When green deu^se by grave advise is stayed:
A world of harms are openly displaied.
Who uses counsel, ^s not soon deceived.
A worldly man's advise is dangerous.
Time, and fit place, gives always best advise:
For what comes out of season's out of price.
Advise is quickly given, not taken so soon.
No man so wise, but he may counsel want.
Ost times the counsel of a very friend,
Appearing good, may fail yet in the end.
Council con^oundeth doubts, dissolues denials.
Afflicted hearts, all counsels do defer.
Counsel unto a careless man applied,
Is like a charm unto an Adders ear.
The wise accept of counsel, fools will not.
The careless man is full of wretchedness.
Counsel unto it self most honor draws.
Wounds often grow desperate, and death does end,
Before good council can the fault amend.
Advise bids quench a spark before it slame.
Counsel best curbs doting affections.
Where sound advise and wholesome counsel want^,
Trees hardly prove, but perish in the plants.
Counsel, the jealous scorn, and will not learn.
What boots complaining, where is no remedy?
It cannot be, but such as counsel scorn,
Shall in their greatest need be l^^t forlorn.
In evils, counsel is a comfort chief.
Good counsel often times cheares dispai^ing minds.
The sick that loathes to listen to his cure.
To die the death for lack of help is sure.
Good counsel may be called a right good work.
Courteous advise, calmes storms of misery.
Similies on the same subject.
AS wise men scorn not to accept advise.
So fools hold counsel not of any price.
As young rash heads without discretion run,
So old men's counsels tell what should be done.
As gentle showers do cause the earths increase,
So mild advise assures the conscience peace.
As treachers treasons prove against themselves*
So evil counsel often turns on it self.
As flowers in their prime have sweetest sent,
So in distress counsel best shows it self.
As foes by sleering seek each others harm,
So friends by council gain each others good.
Examples likewise on the same.
TO Plutarch did the Emperor Traiane write,
Only to counsel him what he should do.
The Emperor Galba said; All his mishaps
Ensued, because he would not be aduis'de.
Demetrius of Maccdon would say:
Reprove me, when I council do refuse.
Verres had never fallen in miscrie,
But that good counsel always he despised.
Solon bad wealthy Croesus be advised,
For counsel was more worth than all his wealth.
Philo^enus the Poet did esteem
Nothing so precious as discreet advise.
Of Justice, etc.
Justice is that which gives equal right,
Punishes wrong, keeps law in public sight.
Justice and order keep up commonweals.
Justice allows no warrant to de^raud.
Justice gives every man that is his own.
Good Justices are commonweals Physicians.
Honor and ^ame hold up mild justice train,
And heavenly hopes in heart she does retain.
Wrong must have wrong, and blame the due of blame.
A world of wrongs can not weigh down one right.
Men are content to leave right, being distressed.
Weak does he build, that fenceth wrong with wrong*
To a strong man, and of most pu^ssant might,
He gives him more that takes away his right*
What wrong has not continuance out worn?
Years makes that right, which never was s^ borne.
That right is wrong, ill sought and got with ^poile.
Proud, rich, and poor* to justice are alike.
Princes never do themselves a greate^ wrong,
Than when they hinder justice, or prolong
With love and law is justice joined still.
Wrong richly clad, to blindness seems right.
To pay each with his own, is right and due.
In suffering harms great wrongs are offered.
Where justice swayes in time of peace and quies,
It fits not shifters fishing, nor their diet.
Right oftentimes by might is ouer-raught.
Men higly wronged, fear not to displease.
True noble minds do still respect the right
Justice, not pity, fits a princes mind.
Where our own wrongs do work our overthrow,
In vain we hope to wear it out with woe.
Men armed with justice, know not how to fear.
Companion to offense, is punishment.
The punishment of some, reformeth all.
Speed does love right, but long delay is wrong.
Innocence, concord, friendship, and godliness:
These do support justice and equity.
Right makes roo^e sometimes where weapons fail.
Accusers should themselves be innocent.
Justice forbids to slay them that submit.
The foe does justly kill where prince for sakes.
The judge himself does for condemned stand,
Where guilt goes free with pardon in his hand.
Possession is no plea where wrong insults.
They that have part in wrongs* have part in griefs.
Wrongs are remembered while the scarres remain.
A lawless peer, by law deserves to die.
Justice is virtues badge, and staff of peace:
Maintaining honor in her rich increase.
True justice pays the bloody home their hire.
Blood spilt by wrong, calls vengeance scourge by right.
Seldom advantage is in wrongs debarred.
Who sows wrong, is sure to reap the same.
All runs to wrack and ruin, where selfe-kind,
From selfsame kind withholds mutual right.
Delay in punishment no pardon is.
A public fault craves open punishment.
Who flies judgment, shows his guiltiness.
Equity judges mildly, law severely.
Wrongs done us, we are sparing to forgive:
Not minding, we by mercy only live.
Wrong is the trial of true patience.
Law with extremity is extreme wrong.
Similies on the same subject.
AS hardest metals in the fire is melt,
So greatest sins by justice soon are felt.
As sin at first is sweet* but after sower,
So Law looks stern, yet shows not all her power.
As from worst maladies best medicines come,
So are best laws from lewdest manners formed.
As cities with their walls are fenced round,
So are good minds with right and equity.
As he that wants reason is no man,
So who lives lawless may be termed a beast.
As thirsty souls do seek some long looked spring,
So wrongs received with right, do comfort bring.
Examples likewise on the same.
PHilip, when any made complaint to him,
Stopped one ear, till the other part were heard.
Aristides so loved Equity,
That he of all men was sir named JUST.
Iunius the Consul so respected right,
As his own sons he did condemn to death.
Cato Censorius was so just and firm,
As none durst move him in a naughty cause.
Justice (says Seneca) is the law of God,
And bond of all humane society.
Devotion and good will ( Lactantius says)
Ioynes us to God, as justice does to men.
Of Policy.
Policy is a wise and discreet care,
For King, for country, and for common good.
Policy often religions habit wears.
What wants in strength, is help by policy.
Small policy has prowess learned, to spill
Much blood abroad, to cut her own with skill.
Small harm, pretending good, is policy.
Often times has reaching policy deuisde,
A cunning clause which has himself surpised.
A wrastlers sl^ights often counter-checketh force.
Strength, wanting wit and policy to rule,
Is soon cast down, and proves himself a fool.
It Is policy to fear a powerful hate.
Counsel in any kingdom pollicied,
More worthy is than war, more dignified.
No policy where lambs do lions lead.
It is the sum of perfect policy.
To work securely with vulgaritie.
Who builds on strength, by policy is stripped.
More worthy it is, by wit and policy
To compass honor, than by progeny.
Policy is to prowess chiefest friend.
Where power and policy do often fail,
Respect of gold both conquers and commands.
The very poorest has his policy.
Men may in conquest benefit themselves,
As much by policy as power and might.
All policy is soon destroyed by pride.
Policy often subdues where valor fails.
Courage that has nor wit nor policy,
Flies like a slave before his enemy.
A well-establisht policy is best.
Society must be preserved by policy.
Similies on the same subject.
AS dull neglect is follies chiefest badge,
So quick conceit is sign of policy.
As careless heads do soonest harm a state,
So policy fore-sees before too late.
As cunning crafts-men are commended most,
So Realms of polliticke aduisers boast.
As subtlety is slye to help it self,
So policy is wise to shield it self.
As dangers felt are worse than others feared,
So policies not executed, most offend.
As counsel is some comfort in distress,
So policy employ* (...)lls wretchedness.
Examples likewise on the same.
L^curgus by his polliticke advise,
^eform'd the Lacedae ^on mangled state.
Numa Pompilius discreet policy,
Made Rome to flourish in her royalty.
Deucalions policy be^riended Greece,
And brought the people to religious awe,
Sc^p^oes Lieuten^n^ named Pol^^^us
Was highly praised for his policy.
Byas did much commend the government,
Where the chief heads were wi^e and polliticke.
Plutarch thought, cities could as ably st^nd
Without foundation^, as no policy.
Of Peace and Concord.
Peace is the ground of kingdoms happiness:
Nource of true concord, love, and all increase.
PEace is great riches in the poorest state.
Men know not peace, nor rightly how to deem it,
That first by war have not been taught ^'esteems it.
Peace has best biding in a settled mind.
Peace brings in pleasure, pleasure breeds excess:
Excess procures want, want works distress.
Peace does depend on reason, war on force.
You whose fair calm make neighbors storms seem sore,
Try you your tides, before you trust the shore.
Peace, all extremes concludes with remorse.
Sourges may rise on sudden ere we think,
And whiles we swim secure, compel us sink.
Mild calmed faced peace, exceeds blood-thirsting war.
War is ordained for nothing else but peace:
And perfect peace is end of bloody war.
Peace flourishes where reason bears sway.
Peace still is honest, humane, and upright:
When war is brutish, foste^ed by despite.
Concord of many, makes an unity.
Concord makes small things mightily increase:
Where discord makes great things as fast decrease.
True peace, is peace with virtue, war with vice*
In peace, for war let us so well provide,
As in each state, no harm do us betide.
Peace from a Tyrants mouth, is treachery.
Dear and unprofitable is the peace,
That Is purchased with expense of guiltless blood.
The weight of peace, is easy to be borne.
They justly do deserve the sword of war,
That wilfully withstand fair offered peace.
To fly from peace, is seeking selfe-decay.
Peace asks no less wisdom to preserve is,
Than valor was bestowed in getting it.
Peace still succeeds, what ever drifts withstand.
That Is more esteemed, obtained by peace-full words,
Than any thing atchieu'd by violence.
State-stabling peace, brings froward minds in fashion.
Similies on the same subject.
AS members knit in one, do maintain life:
So states combined in peace, do nourish love.
As desolation dwelles where discord is,
So where is concord, lives all happiness.
As Laurel ever crowns the Conqueror,
So peace becomes any Emperor.
As they that seek their harm, deserve to have it,
So they which fly from peace, should never feel it.
As war cuts deep, and makes mighty wounds,
So peace like sovereign balm does cure them all.
As grief is cognizance of falling states,
So peace is glory of fair shining sway.
Examples likewise on the same.
Forty years keeping Ianus temple shut,
Gave testimony of the Romans peace.
Numa (the second king of Rome) so loved peace,
That all his reign, was neither war nor strife.
Archidamus, wrote to the Elians
Nothing but this; Peace is a goodly thing.
The cause why Cato did oppose himself
Against great Caesar; was, For breach of peace.
Tullie says: Let us so begin our war,
That afterward we may be sure of peace.
Phocion being asked; What fitted kingdoms best?
Replied: A little war, to win long peace.
Of War.
War is most lawful for a countries good,
To purchase peace with least expense of blood.
War makes the conquered yield, and serve with hate.
Where war once enters, ruin does ensue.
Great is the h^rror of intestine broils,
When with our blood we fat our native soyles.
War makes the victour to desire debate.
A Captain talks best of bo^s^ious war.
Look where the sword for pity leaves to s^ill,
Pity that Justice s^c^^^^ begin to ^ill.
War leaves naught sure, though we presume to choose.
Bloodshed by bloodshed still is nou^ished.
War should not fill kings ^^ll^^es with mo^e:
Nor peril come when it is least thought upon.
In vain are arms, when heaven becomes our foe.
Wars ^ag^ has no respect of piety.
It is a meritorious fair dessig^e,
To chase mi^stice with reuengefull arms.
Virtue may sometimes be surpised by number.
Valor and Art, are both the sons of Jove.
Who would not be a Soldier in that band,
Which (ere it fight) holds victory in hand?
Art is Nobilities true register.
Nobility, Arts champion still is named.
Honor does say: That if she chance to fail,
The brave attempt the shame shall counteruaile.
Learning, is fortitudes right calendar.
Fair fortitude is learnings saint and friend.
Honor shields learning from all injury,
And learning, honor from black infamy.
A crown twixt breethren breeds contention.
Valor in greatest danger shines most bright.
If through rashness valor do get honor.
We blame the rashness, but reward the honor.
Well does he die, that dies against countries foes.
An honorable burial is the field.
He that has once sustained the bullets wound,
What need he fear the Canons harmless soun^?
Blood, naught but sin; war, naught but sorrows yield.
Sad are the sights, bitter the fruits of war.
Those that are brought up in the bro^les of realms,
Think it best fishing still in troubled streams.
A martial man ought not be fancies slave.
Men used to war, are greatest foes to peace.
The smallest iarres if they be suffered run,
Breed wrath and war, yea death ere they be done.
No war is right, but that which lawful is.
The sword must mend what insolence did mar.
Who knows to win by sword, can judge of wit:
For without wit, no war can prosper well.
On little broils ensues bloody war.
Who best does speed in war, small safety sinds.
The best observing providence in war,
Still thinks foes much stronger than they are.
Un natural wars where subjects brave their kings*
A bloody conquest stains the captains praise.
A brauer mind has he that fights for more,
Than he that wars for that he had before.
His flight is shameful that flies victory.
Wars conquerours, in love do seldom pine.
When war and troubles do ^s most molest,
Then wicked persons ever prosper best.
In wary and love, courage is most required
A coward Captain marres the soldiers fight.
Arms, but in great extremes, do never serua
To reconcile and punish such a swerue.
A valiant leader, makes faint cowards fight.
By arms, Realms, Empires, Monarchies are won.
Let war his boast of dignity surcease,
And yield to wisdom, which seeks all increase.
To arms, laws, justice, magistrates submit.
Arts, Sciences, before Arms triumphs sit.
The plough-mans hope, and husbands thriftie ^illage.
Often times become the wastfull soldiers pillage.
Uncivil war, all justice does divorce.
Basely he fights, that wars as others bid.
It Is much to conquer, but to keep it then,
Is full as much, if not a great deal more.
Booke-expert warriors never are truly bold.
War for our country is a holy fight.
Those wiser heads that know the scourge of war,
Seek safest means to mitigate the jar.
War rightly handled, is most excellent.
Who fights for crowns, set life and all too light.
To keep our country safe from any harm:
For war or work, we either hand should arm.
War was ordained to make men live in peace.
War does defend our right, repulse our foes.
In war they are esteemed as Captains good,
That win the field with least expense of blood.
Never use arms where money may prevail.
The Effects of war, are covetous desires.
Let desperate men and Russians thirst for blood:
Win foes with love, and think that conquest good.
In war, let female honor be preserved.
Ambition is the chiefest cause of war.
He that was wont to call his sword to aid:
It Is hard with him, when he must stand to plead.
Necessity makes war to seem most just.
Many may talk of war, but few conclude.
Similies on the same subject.
AS Earth and Fire were first in this worlds frame,
So War and Peace are chief in kingdoms rule.
As cunning Pilots best can guide the ship,
So expert Captains aptest manage war.
As peace may suffer wrong, and be abused,
So war is harmless, if but rightly used.
As pleasant talk makes short the longest way,
So valiant leaders whet on dullest minds.
As lingering sickness most offends life,
So quick dispatch in war is glorious.
As rusticke notes likes any loutish swad,
So drums and trumpets please a Soldier best.
Examples likewise on the same.
PApyrius Cursor punished Fabius,
Because unjustly he commenced war.
The Emperor A^relius gave strict charge,
That no man should abuse himself in war.
The worthy Soldier Bell^zarius,
Would never war but on some special cause.
Traiane was never vanquished in war,
Because he would not meddle, but in right.
War makes men cruel, so says Sen^^a:
But peace prouo^eth them to gentleness.
Plato affirmed, war was excellent
When it did ha^me to none but enemies.
Of Fame and Infamy.
Good Fame is that which all men ought desire:
But evil Fame is bad men's worthy hire.
FAme never finds a tomb t'enclose it in.
Fame never sloops to things are mean or poor.
No fame does follow any unjust act.
To fames rich treasure, Time vnlockes the door,
Which angry Fortune had shut up before.
Fame never looks so low as idle drones.
Base Envy still will bark at sleeping same.
Life is not lost that brings eternal fame.
All perils ought be less, and less all pain,
In open field, than the dear loss of fame.
Dearer is love than life, and fame than gold.
The path is sweet which danger leads to fame.
Fame being once foiled, incurable the blot.
Our deeds in life to worth cannot be rated:
In death our life with fame even then is dated.
Fame is not subject to authority.
Fame never prosi^eth a wicked man.
Infamy has no power to hurt the good.
Thy same defa^'d, or touched with any stain:
Being once supplanted, never grows again.
Fame is a speedy herald to bear news.
A good report, in deepest darkness shines.
Good life is readiest way to purchase same.
If sp^tl^sse reputation be away.
M^n ar^ but gilded loame, or ^ainted day.
Fame, by our ^ertuous actions is maintained.
Rumors soon raised, decay; but same stands fume.
A man can have no sweeter friend than fame.
Fame, not supposed to was^e, but grow by wa^^ing:
(Like snow in rivers fallen) consumes by lasting.
Covet not same, without great care to keep it.
No like mishap, as to be inmous.
Fame, that the living saues, reuiues the dead.
Fame has two wings; the one of false report:
The other has some plumes of verity.
No law can quit, where fame is once endighted.
Fame is the joy and life of valiant minds.
Prefer sharp death before infamous life.
The chiefest thing a princes fame to raise.
Is, to excel those that are excellent.
Glory does never blow cold pitties fire.
There Is nothing can be done, but fame reports.
To know too much, is to know naught but fame.
Let not proud will hold up thy head for fame,
When inward wants may not expect the same.
Fame dies with them that all their honor waste.
Fame, bad concealer of our close intenrs.
Fame got by folly, dies before it lives.
Fame with her golden wings aloft does fly,
Above the reach of ruinous decay.
He lives long enough, dies soon with fame.
Where fame bears sway, there Cupid will be bold.
Good fame is better than a crown of gold.
Similies on the same subject.
AS thunder nor fierce lightning harms the Bay,
So no extremity has power on fame.
As precious stones (though set in Lead) will shine,
So fame in poorest corners will appear.
As earth producing salt, brings nothing else,
So virtue, seeking fame, craves nothing else.
As many voices make the consort sweet,
So many virtues do confirm true fame.
As pride is enemy to good report,
Solowly thoughts do lead the way to fame.
As sight receives his splendor from the air,
So fame from virtue does derive her self.
Examples likewise on the same.
PVblicola won fame for leading arms:
And Solon by his civil actions.
The fame Milciades got at Marathon,
Would not permit Thems stocles to sleep.
Fabius did by his virtues get such fame,
As Maximus was added to his name.
Lysimachus was famous through the world,
Because he killed a Lion in his youth.
Seneca says; Fame should be followed,
Rather than coueted by fond desire.
No man (says Cicero) is learned and wise,
But fame must needs attend his actions.
Of Praise, etc.
Praise is the hyre of virtue, for those parts
That well deserve it, both in eyes and hearts.
PRaise is but smoke that sheddeth in the sky.
Men for their own deeds shall be praised or blamed.
True la^d proceeds by the report of other:
Of more esteem, when we our selves it smoother.
The peoples voice, is neither shame nor praise.
Safety may breed delight, not nourish praise.
Hard words do discommend some men to day,
Yet praise tomorrow with all might they may.
Many will praise in words, but spite in works.
Chief praise consists in contented life.
It Is better to be praised for a truth,
Than for a leasing to be honored.
To praise unworthy men, is flatteri^.
Save virtuous deeds, there is nothing merits praise.
When men do praise themselves immoderately,
Makes other sentence them with obloquie.
Praise stirs the mind to great and mighty things.
Praise nourishes true virtue where it sprang.
The benefits of peace deserve more praise,
Than all the cunningst stratagenis of war.
Praise makes labor light, enricheth hope.
When others praise thee, best to judge thy self.
Praise is a poison to ambitious men,
Because it makes them out ran honesty.
In doing that we ought, deserves no praise.
By counterfeited virtue seek no praise.
In vain we seek the idle smoke of praise,
Since all things by antiquity decays.
All good things have pre-eminence in praise.
Never praise that which is not commendable.
Often those whom princes patronage extold,
Forget themselves, and what they were of old.
Condemn not that deserves praise by due.
An ill man's praise, is praise for doing ill.
Who strives to gain inheritance of air,
Leaves yet perhaps but begg^^ie to his heir.
Helping the poor, deseru^th double praise.
Virtue begetreth praise; praise, honors height.
Nothing of more uncertainty than praise:
For one days gift, another robs us of.
An open praise deserves a secret doubt.
Too much commending, is a heavy load.
He that commends a man before his face,
Will scant speak well of him behind his back.
Bad nature by good nurture mended, merits praise.
Abasing worthy men, argues selfe-praise.
It is more worthy praise to keep good fame,
Than the bare style, or getting ^f the same.
Our elders praise, is light unto our lives.
Be not too rash in discommending any.
Be not too hasty in bestowing praise:
Nor yet too slow when due time calls for praise.
A man's own praise, is public infamy.
Honest attempts can never want due praise.
Similies on the same subject.
AS shadows on our bodies do attend,
So praise does wait on virtue to the end.
As praising make the Peacocke spread her tail,
So men commended do express themselves.
As fools in folly are not to be soothed,
So wicked actions are not to be praised.
As Cocks by crowing show their victory,
So men's own praises blab their obloquie.
As niggards are discerned by their gifts,
So men's commendings do express their love.
As greatest praises fatten not thy fields,
So much commending pleases not thy friend.
Examples likewise on the same.
THe noble Roman Titus Flaminius,
Could not endure when any praised him.
Caesar beholding Alexanders image,
Wept, in remembering his exceeding praise.
Pompey did count it praise enough for him,
To set Tigranes in his throne again.
Agathocles condemned all vain praise,
And still confessed himself a potters son.
By virtue (says Euripide^) get praise,
For that will live when time expires thy days.
Solon said, All vainglorious men were fools;
And none praise-worthie, but the humble-wise.
Of Friendship, etc.
The sum of friendship is, that of two souls
One should be made, in will and firm affect.
TRue friends partake in either weal or woe.
Faint-hearted friends, their succors long delay.
A dear friends grave is a more heavy sight,
Than all the fears wherewith death can affright.
Of foes, the spoil is ill; far more of friends.
Who fails one, is false, though true to other.
That friendship can no length of time endure,
Which does ^^^se ill, or evil end procure.
The truest friendship, is in equality.
Likeness in manners, makes best amity.
When equal might is up unto the chin,
Weak friends become strong foes to thrust him in,
Among kind friends, departing drinks up joy.
Better a new friend, than an ancient foe.
Call him not friend, that savors most of foe:
Tea^me him thy deaths-man, look he prove not so.
Give foes no odds, nor friends unequal power.
Trust not to foes, if friends their credit loose.
For friends if one should die, were rarely much:
But die for foes, the world affoords none such.
In base minds dwells friendship nor enmity.
No service will a gentle friend despise.
Look what abuse is offered to a friend,
The shame and faule finds no excuse or end.
To wrong a friend does prove too foul a deed,
Foes often wake, when loyal friends do sleep.
Fair lovely concord, and most sacred peace,
Do nourish virtue, and make friendship fast.
A stead fast friend is to be loved as life.
Faint friends, when they fall out, prove cruel foes.
Those friends that love the Sun shine of delights,
Will fly the winter when affliction bites.
True friendship at the first affront retires not.
Most friends befriend themselves with friendships show.
Suspicion is sedition among good friends,
When eithers drift to others mischief tends.
They kill, that feel not their friends living pain.
Be envied of thy foe, rather than pitied.
More conquest is the gaining of a friend,
Than the subduing of an enemy.
He is too foolish that mistrusts his friend.
In greatest need, a friend is best discerned.
We ought sometimes as well to reprehend,
As praise the party whom we count a friend.
True friendship makes light all heavy harms.
A friend in most distress, will most assist.
Who entertaineth many friends, does loose
The title of a true and steadfast friend.
Men in their friendship, always should be one.
A hard attempt to tempt a foe for aid.
Make all men our well-willers if we can,
But only choose good men to be our friends.
Small is that friendship table-talke will crack*
Requests twixt friends are counted as commands.
To strangers let great proffers still be made:
But to true friends use sound and perfect deeds.
Performance is in friendship held a duty.
No man should love himself more than his friend.
Four things we ought supply our friend withal:
Our person, counsel, comfort, and ^ur goods.
A friend is to a man another self.
With every one to shake hands, is not good.
Who w^^^teth f^i^nds to ^a^^^e what he begins
In lands fair off: gets not, although he winnes.
A wise man takes not each one as his friend.
Prove strangers to love them, and not love to prove them.
The man that makes a f^iend of every ^ir^unger,
Dis^ards him not a^aine without some danger.
True friendship ought be free, like charity.
Opinion of virtue is the sount of friendship.
In friendship this one difference is tryde:
True f^iends stand ^^^st, when as the ^^^gned slide.
Who never had a foe, ne^re knew a friend.
Friendship admits not an angry frown.
A ^^ue f^rme f^i^^^ will never sound retreat,
Nor so op^^^^ sail^^ ^or any storm of weather.
Vn^^e, is A^^t^es chiefest ^^^^nc^.
Hazard displeasure to relieve a friend.
True frien^^^ips Sun continual^y does last,
And shines the clearer in the bitterst blast.
They are no friends, that hazard them they love.
True friendship scorns confederacy with shame.
In earnest, ^east, in quiet, peace or war.
Never presume to try thy foe too far.
Aduersi^i^ does best disclose a friend.
Amity stre^^heth not beyond the Altar.
An open ^oe a man may soon prevent,
B^t a false friend, murders in blandishment.
A feigned friend will quickly change conceit.
Overmuch boldness makes men loose their friends.
Whilst things go well, friends always will be near thee,
But sailing once, the dearest friends will fear thee.
What death is life, when dearest friends are lost.
It Is good to have a wise and discreet friend.
No foe so fell, or cunning to escape,
As is a friend, clad in a foe-mans shape.
Often to try our friends is profitable.
Flattery is friendships form, but not the fruit.
Many to those they should most friendship show,
Doc lie in wait to work their over throw.
Suspicion is the poison of firm friendship.
Forgetful fools unfriendly use then friends.
Of any foe, be ^^re no gift thou take,
Least to thy ruin it some entrance make.
Folly respects ^latterers more than friends.
Good natures inly grieve to try their friends.
No mortal fee so full of venomous sp^ght,
As man to man, when mischief he pretends,
Begging at friends hands, is esteemed buying.
Friends hide no coin, or secrets from their friends.
Who sees their friends in want, and them despise:
When they do fall, never deserve to rise.
True friends do soon forget a friends offense.
Scornful and proud, are very perilous friends.
He that intends giule, and thou findst so:
No wrong thou do, to use him as thy foe.
Where friends are knit in love, there griefs are shared.
Quick promisers, slow doers, are slack friends.
Where many hearts do gently sympathize
In sacred friendship, there all bliss abounds.
No friend like him whom no distress can daunt.
Happy is he that finds and feels a friend.
Similies on the same subject.
AS no calamity can thwart true love,
So no mishap can separate firm friends.
As wan^ of friends is very perilous,
So talking friends do prove too tedious.
As fire from heat cannot be separate,
So true friends hearts will no way be disjoined.
As Physic cures the secret'st griefs we have,
So friendship heales the hearts extremest woes.
As instruments are tuned e're musicke's heard,
So friends are tried ere they be firmly found.
As exiles have no comforts but their cares,
So home-abiders have no joy like friends.
Examples likewise on the same.
C^rus upon his left side placed his friends,
Because they should be nearest to his heart.
^^^^ and Caesar rather wished death,
Than they should grow distrustful of their friends.
Cato this poesy carried in his Ring:
Be friend to one, and enemy to none.
Lu^i^^ius seeing Brutus round engirt,
Called himself B^utus, that his friend might escape.
Ph^^o^, in despcrate fury saved his friend,
Saying: For ^his cause was I made thy friend.
Three things (says Tullie) men should wish their friends:
Health, good account, and privilege from need.
Of Patience.
Patience, is voluntary sufferance
Of hardest matters, for fair virtues sake.
PAtience preuailes against a world of wrongs.
What Fortune hurts, patience can only heal.
No ba^^shment can be to him assigned,
That has a pa^ient and resolved mind.
The minds affliction, patience can appease.
To be borne well, and die worse, breaks patience.
That life is only miserable and vile,
Which from fair* patience does it self exile.
Patience does passions always mortify.
The minds distress, with patience is relieved.
They that loose half, with greater patience bear it,
Then they whose all, is swallowed in confusion.
For curelesse sores, pa^ience is chiefest salve.
Patience, all trouble sweetly does digest.
True patience can mili^ly suffer wrong,
Where rage and fury do our lives defame.
True patience is the prouender of fools.
Patience importuned, does convert to hate.
The strength to fight with death, is patience,
And to be conquered of him, patience.
The only salve for wrong, is patience.
Revenge on fortune, is mild patience.
Let such whom patience cannot moderate,
Endaunger them that would endammage him.
He is most valiant that is patient.
No conquest can compare with patience.
Patience is often from princely seat pulled down,
When bloody minds do s^^ssle for a crown.
Patience makes light, afflictions heauiest load.
The shield of patience bears off all mishaps.
Comfortless patience brings consumption.
No sting has patience, but a sighing grief:
That stings naught but it self without relief.
The end of patience, is expect of promise.
Patience bears that which care cannot redress.
A heavenly spirits hope, is patience.
Similies on the same subject.
AS rage does kindle still the fire of wrath,
Patience to quench i^, store of water has.
As fire impaires not gold, but makes it bright,
So greatest wrongs by patience are made light.
As physic does repair decayed health,
So patience brings true blessings to the soul.
As water quenches the extremest fire,
So patience qualifies the mightiest wrongs.
As Diamonds in the dark are best discerned,
So patience is in trouble best approou'd.
As angry splenes are hasty in revenge,
So discreet souls brook all with patience.
Examples likewise on the same.
WHat-e're mishap Darius did befall,
Yet in his mind he was not moved at all.
Marcus (...) said, that pati^nce
Had help him more than any thing be side.
Sylla endured reuilings patiently,
And mildly yielded his Dictator-ship.
Mauritius moved not at his childrens death,
Although he saw them slain before his face.
When Socrates was councel'd to revenge,
Said: If an Ass strike, shall I strike again?
In patience conflict, says Euripides:
The vanquished do exceed the vanquisher.
Of Man, and Men.
Man is a creature of such excellence,
As all else was created for his use.
MAn in himself a little world does bear.
All other creatures follow after kind,
But man alone is ruled by his mind.
All men, to some peculiar vice incline.
The greater man, the greater is the thing,
Be it good or bad, that he does undertake.
A man once stung, is hardly hurt again.
Fond is the man that will atte^p^ great deeds,
And loose the glory that attends on them.
Where ease abounds, men soon may do amiss.
Men do not know what they themselves will be,
When as more than themselves, themselves they see.
The worth of all men by their end, esteem.
When men have well fed, and the blood is warm,
Then are they most improuident of harm.
Birds have the air, Fish water, Men the land.
When from the heart of man ascends true sighs,
From Gods diuinest spirit descends grace.
The man that seeks his thraldom, merits it.
Man of himself is as a barren field,
But by the grace of heaven, a fruitful vine.
Men easily do credit what they love.
The man that lives by another breath:
Look when he dies, is certain of his death*
No man weighes him, that does himself neglect.
Men ought especially to save their winnings
In all attempts, else loose they their beginnings.
Often one man's sorrow does another touch.
The man unjust, is hopeless fortunate:
Quickly misse-led, but hardly reconciled.
It grieves a man to ask, when he deserves.
Men are but Fortunes subjects, therefore variable:
And times disciples, therefore momentarie.
Devise of man, in working has no end.
There lives no man so seiled in content,
That has not daily somewhat to repent.
Each man must think, his morning shall have night.
Men's imperfections oftentimes are known,
When they repine to think them as their own.
Man never takes delight to hear his fault.
Men often judge too well their own deserts:
When others smile to see their ignorance.
Men honored, wanting wit, are fruitless trees.
Man is but mere calamity it self.
Man when he thinks his state is most secure,
Shall find it then both fickle and unsure.
Man's nature is desirous still of change.
To greatest men, great faults are incident.
Mishaps have power over man, not he over them.
Similies on the same subject.
AS flowers by their sight and sent are known,
So men are noted by their words and works.
As snow in water does begin and end,
So man was made of earth, and so shall end.
As wax cannot endure before the fire,
So cannot unjust men in sight of heaven.
As all things on the earth are for man's use,
So men were made for one another help.
As Toades do suck their venime from the earth,
So bad men draw corruption from foul sin.
As fools erect their houses on the sands,
So wise men do rely their hopes on heaven.
Examples likewise on the same.
PHilip of Macedon was daily told:
Remember Philip, thou art but a man.
Cyrus held no man worthy government,
Except his virtues were to be admired.
Those men did. Alcibiad^s count safe,
That kept their countries laws unchangeable.
Timon was called, the enemy to men,
And would persuade them to destroy themselves.
What else is man (says Pindaru^) but a dream,
Or like a shadow we discern in sleep?
Homer cried out: Man was most miserable
Of all the creatures that the world contained.
Of Women.
Women are equal every way to men,
And both alike have their infirmities.
WOmen by men receive perfection.
Women and love like empty houses perish.
Like untuned golden strings fair women are,
Which lying lon^ untouched, will harshly jar.
Fair and unkind, in women ill beseemes*
Women are won, when they begin to jar.
Grief has two tongues, and never woman yet
Could rule them both, without ten women's wit.
All women are ambitious naturally.
In women's tongues is quickly found a rub.
A woman's will that is bent to walk astray,
Is seldom chaung'd by watch or sharp restraint.
Ripe still to ill, ill women's counsels are.
All things are subject, but a woman's will.
It Is fast good will, and gentle courtesies
Reclaim a woman, and no watching eyes.
Women are most won, when men merit least.
Women that long, think scorn to be said nay.
Never as yet was man so well aware,
But first or last was caught in women's snare.
Find constancy in women, all is found.
Women desire to see, and to be seen.
Great vaunts do seem hatched under Sampsons locks,
Yet women's words can give them killing knockes.
Women have tears for sorrow and dissembling.
Women allure with smiles, and kill with frowns.
It is a common rule, that women never
Love beauty in their sex, but envy ever.
Women with wanton eyes, have wanton tricks.
Virtue is richest dowry for a woman,
Though men can cover crimes with bold stern looks,
Poor women's faces are their own faults books.
Women least reckon of a doting lover.
What cannot women do, that know their power?
If women's hearts, that have light thoughts to spill them
Die of themselves: why then should sorrow kill them?
No beast is fiercer than a jealous woman.
Women often look, one to envy another.
A woman's tears are falling stars at night,
No sooner seen, but quickly out of sight.
A woman's favor lasts but a while.
Two things, to be a woman, and a Queen.
Women do hold, it is joys life, life's best treasure,
Both to begin, and leave to kiss at leisur^
Often women's mercy, more than men's is seen.
Some women's wits exceed all Art, in love.
A woman's passions does the air resemble:
Never alike, they sin if they dissemble.
Love, women, and inconstancy never part.
Blushes show women's thoughts, and teach men wit.
Those virtues that in women merit praise,
Are sober shows without, chaste thoughts within.
A woman's heart and tongue, are relatiues.
Women may fall, when there is no strength in men.
Those women of their wit may justly boast,
That buy their wisdom by another cost.
A woman's mind is fit for each impression.
High praises hammer best a woman's mind.
Thy wife being wise, make her thy secretary:
Else not, for women seldom can keep silence.
Women in mischief, are more wise then men.
A woman's tongue, wounds deeper than her eye.
Constant in love, who tryes a woman's mind:
Wealth, beauty, wit, and all in her does find.
Women are Natures wonder, loving Nature.
Women do covet most, what is most denied them.
Extreme are women's sorrows, past redress:
Or so dissembled, not to be believed.
A woman of good life, fears no ill tongue.
Silence in women, is a special grace.
Similies on the same subject.
AS none can tell a grief but he that feels it,
So none knows women's wrongs, but they that find them.
As women most despise what is offered them,
So to deny their minds, is worse than death.
As a sharp bridle fits a froward horse,
So a cursed woman must be roughly used.
As the best mettal'd blade has iron commixt,
So the best women are not free from faults.
As readiness of speech becomes a man,
^^ silence does a woman best beseem.
As goodliest gardens are not void of weeds,
So fairest women may have some defect.
Examples likewise on the same.
IS^rina, sometimes Queen of Scithia,
With her sweet voice, made calm the rough swollen seas.
Roman Cornelia was so eloquent,
That to her they did daily sacrifice.
Lachis of Athens, to her countrymen
Appointed laws for civil government.
Queen Parisatis caused the Persian kings,
To have their burial in rich tombs of gold.
Plato held women in a family,
As needful as a kingdoms governor.
If nature do desire her self to see,
(Says Plutarch) women then her glass may be.
Of Ambition.
Ambition is a humor that aspires,
And slayes it self in seeking high desires.
AMbition, with the Eagle loves to build.
Ambition being once inured to reign,
Can never brook a private state again.
Ambitious favorites always mischief bring.
Th'aspirer once attained unto the to^,
Cuts off those means where^y himself got up.
Ambition yet took never lasting root.
High aims, young spirits, birth of loyal line:
Make men play false, where kingdoms are the s^a^es.
The ambitious will find right, or else make ^ight.
It is ambitions sickness, having much,
To vex us with defect of that we have.
Might makes a title where he has no right.
Those men that commonly o're-looke too much,
Do ouer-see themselves, the^r sta^e is such.
Ambitious minds, a world of wealth would have.
Ambitious minds to get a prince^ train,
Would afterward of beggars life be feign.
Ambition, pain, and love, brooks no delay.
Lions do never cast a gentle look
On any beast, that would usurp their den.
Who climbes too soon, often time repents too late.
Blood and alliance nothing do prevail,
To cool the thirst of hot ambitious breasts.
Aspiring things are ready still to fall.
Bruises are sooner caught by reaching high,
Than when the mind is willing to sloope low.
Many usurp, but most in mischief end.
Fortune does never grudge at them that fall:
But envy stings and biteth them that climb.
Aspiring thoughts led Phae^on awry.
Reware ambition, it is a sugared ill,
That fortune lays, presuming minds to kill.
Ambitious Icarus did climb too high.
Ambitions bold and true begotten son,
Is quite spent in desire, ere hope be won.
Gaze^s on stars, often stumble at small stones.
Seldom can proud presumption be enthroan'd
To live esteemd; or die, to be bemoaned.
Ambition, no corriuall will admit.
The man that does presume above his state,
In stead of love, incurres but deadly hate.
Highest attempts to low disgraces fall.
Craft gives ambition leave to lay his plot,
And cross his friend, because he sounds him not.
Competitors the subjects dearly buy.
Presuming will counts it high prejudice
To be reproou'd, although by sound advise.
Beware ambition in felicity.
Such reaching heads as never think them well,
After their fall, their own mishaps may tell.
High mounting Eagles soon are smitten blind.
Ambitions dying, is great glory won.
Similies on the same subject.
AS breath on steel, as soon is off as on,
So climbers are as quickly down as up.
As nothing in substance is more light than air,
So nothing can out-goe ambitious thoughts.
As winds being up, do blow more violent,
So proud usurpers tyrannise in height.
As bad men grieve at good men's happiness,
So high aspirers grudge at lowlines.
As powder fier'd, is but a sudden flash,
Even so ambition is no more than smoke.
As B^ts do flutter, not directly fly,
So climbers aim at much, and miss of all.
Examples likewise on the same.
F^ederic^e the third, was by his bastard son
Ambitious Manf^o^ dispossessed of life
Geta murdered Antoni^s his brother,
Through his ambitious mind to rule alone.
Crassus procured himself a shameful death,
Through his ambitious spite at Caesar's fame.
Marius, not satisfied with former praise,
Through his ambition soon abridg'd his days.
Plato would have good men exalted still,
But none that sauour'd of ambition.
Says Aristotle, kingdoms soon decay,
Where pride, or else ambition bears sway.
Of Tyrants, etc.
Tirants are kingdoms plagues, and good men's woe:
Their own destroyers, and soon overthrow.
A Tyrants looks breed terror after death.
Often in the childrens slaughters, fathers die.
The man that once is strong in equity,
Will scorn th'austerest looks of tyranny.
Tyranny still strikes terror to it self.
Death is the utmost end of tyranny.
Those that in blood a violent pleasure have,
Seldom descend but ^leeding to the grave.
Birth is no shadow to stern tyranny.
Ladies and tyrants do respect no laws.
When tyranny is with strong aid supported,
All justice from ^ood minds is quite extorted.
No tyranny can force true fortitude.
Tyrants are leaders to a many ills.
A tyrant that has tasted once of blood*
Does hardly thrine by any other food.
Tyrants will brook no terms, or list dispute.
Tyrants are torturers of honest souls.
Words not prevail, neither can fighes advise,
To move the heart that is bent to tyrannise.
No fame consists in deeds of tyranny.
Tyrants are always traitors to themselves.
To punish many for th'amisse of one,
Most properly to tyrants appertain.
Where tyrants reign, God help the land that while.
It Is worse than death, to live a tyrants slave.
Tyrants being suffered, and not quail'd in time,
Will cut their throats that gave them leave to climb.
The smallest worm will turn, being trod upon.
The Doves will pecke in rescue of their brood.
The savage Bear will never li^ke his hand,
That spoils her of her young before her face.
By unjust deeds, a true prince grows a Tyrant.
Nothing more abject than a tyrant i^.
He that in bounty does exceed himself,
Becomes a tyrant ^fterward to others.
Tyrants subdue by strength, maintain in hate.
Tyrants are Nobles scourge, the commons plague
King as they ought, Tyrants rule as they list:
The one to profit all, the other few.
No peace, no hope, no rest has tyranny.
One injury, makes not a tyra^nie.
Princes ou^ht iu^tly to defend their own,
Rather than t^rant-like to conquer others.
Who kings refuse, deserve a tyrant Lord.
Usurping rule is held by tyranny.
Tyranny in a teacher is most vile:
For ^o^^^ with love, not rigor should be taught.
Tyrants tread laws and honor under foot.
Subjects in ^yrant^ eyes, are held as slaves.
Tyrants by arms, the i^st refer their cause
To due arbi^rement of right and laws.
A tyrants reign has seldom permanence.
Tyrants do never die an honest death.
Similies on the same subject.
AS kings do rule by counsel and advise,
So tyrants by their will, and not by law.
As want of riches makes a tyrant prince,
So great abundance heaps up wickedness.
As boistrous winds do shake the highest towers,
So blood and death cuts off proud tyranny.
As envy shoots at the fairest marks,
So tyrants level at tr^^^ princes lives.
As forest tempests are in largest seas,
So greatest evil ensues on tyranny.
As trees are always weakest toward the top.
So falls Tyrants in their chiefest height.
Examples likewise on the same.
TH^asillus teaching means of tyranny,
Was first enforst to taste thereof himself.
Scyron threw others headlong in the sea,
Till Theseus did the like by him at length.
Caligula wished Rome had but one head,
That at one stroke himself might smite it off.
Cyrus that never had enough of blood,
Had afterward his head all drowned in blood.
The souls of tyrants, Plutarch does affirm,
To be composed of cruelty and pride.
A tyrant seeks his private benefit
And no man's else, as Seneca maintains.
Of Treason, etc.
Treason is hated both of God and men,
As such a sin, as none can greater be.
TReason has no place where obedience is.
Rebellion does bewray corrupted nature.
There is no treason wounds half so deep*
As that which does in prince^ bosoms sleep.
Rebellion springs of too much head strong will.
The rebel shrinkes, where rule and order swayes.
Kings palaces stand open to let in
The ^oothing traitor, and the guide to sin.
In darkness dwells the blind rebellious mind.
Traitors are loathed, and yet their treason loved.
They that against s^ates and kingdoms do conjure,
Their headlong ruin none can well recure.
Treason first works ere traitors are e^pied.
Most bitter-sower does foul rebellion taste.
Bet me it is good to let the traitor die.
^o sparing justice fee ^s iniquity.
All filthy floods flow from rebellions brinks.
No virtue merits praise with treason touched.
No worthy mind by treason will assail,
When as he knows h^ valor can prevail.
A factious Lord s^ld benefits himself.
Who builds in blood and treason, builds unsure.
A troubled stream of puddle mixed with mi^e,
Does quench the thirst of rebels h^e desire.
Men in seditions nour^'d, in factions live.
Shame, is the rightful end of treache^^e.
It Is madness to give way to treachery,
Without due vengeance to such injury.
In careless trust is treason soonest found.
Revolted subjects, of themselves will quail.
No greater spite, than basely be betra^ed
By such a one whom thou before have made.
Reuolt's a mischief, euer-more pernicious.
Who nill be subjects, shall be slaves at length.
Converse with treachers, look for treacheri^:
Who deals with bad man, must have injury.
Conflict with traitors is most perilous.
A traitor once, never trusted afterward.
They that do covet deadly to betray,
By sweetest means first practice to entrap.
No place is ^ase enough for any traitor.
Time is the touch that treacherous minds does try.
Nothing auailes, strong bulwa^kes, sense or towers:
When treacherous foes all inward strength de^ou ^s.
Traitors are subject to continual fear.
Traitors, like vipers, gnaw their countries bones.
Similies on the same subject.
AS Iuie kills the tree embracing it,
^o traitors murder with their smoothest looks.
As evil savors do corrupt the air,
So treachers do pollute a commonweal.
As in fair weather greatest storms arise,
So in mild seasons, treason is most bold.
As branches too much laden quickly break,
So traitors too far trusted, do most harm.
As too much rankenesse bends the stalks of corn*
So too much mildness whets the traitor on.
As hawks are lost by soaring ouer-high,
So traitors perish in their chiefest hopes.
Examples likewise on the same.
THey that slew Caesar in the Senate House,
Perished like traitors, never prospered.
The traitors that great ^ompey did betray,
With death did Caesar justly guerdon them.
Sylla to her own father proou'd untrue,
And therefore felt desert accordingly.
Lyciscus rotted alive above the ground
For his vile treason to th'Orcmenians.
Th'Athenians would let none be buried,
That had been traitors to the country.
Tullie says: Wise men not at any time
Will trust a traitor or a faithless man.
Of Envy.
Envy is nothing else but grief of mind,
Conceived at sight of others happiness.
Envy is hand maid to prosperity.
Envy let in, does in more mischief let.
Envy does cease, wanting to feed upon.
Envious is he, that grieves his neighbors good.
Envy has often times eloquence in st^^e
To serve his turn, than which he craves no more.
Ill will too soon regards enuies cries.
He Is most envied, that most exceeds the rest.
Promotions chaung'd, glory is enuies mark.
No sooner excellent, but envied straight.
Envy does virtue in such sort disgrace,
It makes men foes to them they should embrace.
Envy to honor, is a secret foe.
The fruits of envy, is despite and hate.
It Is hate, which enui^s virtue in a friend.
Anger and envy, are life's enemies.
^^^ie lives with us while our selves survive,
And when we die, it is no more alive.
Let envy with misfortune be contented.
Honors is still a moare in ennies eye.
Envy cannot offend but such as live.
On dead men's virtues, envy has no power.
Envy in this point may be known from hate:
The one is evident, the other hid.
All poisoned thoughts, are enuies daily food.
Envy is friendships secret enemy.
Envy at other shoots, but wounds her self.
It Is bette: be envied, than pitied.
Envy does make the body ill disposed,
And kills the color of the countenance.
Men enui^us, by their manners are best known.
Envy does often brag, but draws no blood.
Envy like lightning in the dark is seen.
Envy is blind, and virtues mortal foe.
Envy does scorn to cast her eye below:
As proud ambition always gazeth up.
As rust the iron, so envy frets the heart.
At good men's fatness, envy waxes lean.
Envy spots beauties colors with disdain.
Envy will reach at them are farthest off.
The enui^us man is sed with dainty fare,
For his own heart is his continual food.
Envy is mighty men's companion.
Enuies disease proceeds from others good.
Envy at virtues elbow always waits.
The envious man, thinks others loss, his gain
It Is better be a beggars mate in love,
Than in base envy, fellow with a king.
Envy tears up the dead, buries the quick.
Envy speaks always what comes next in mind.
Glory erects, what envy casts down.
Envy is like a shaft shot from a bow,
Which flies a while aloft, but lights low.
The envious ^ an never spares to persecute.
Hid envy is more dangerous than known.
When envy winkes, then waits he most harm.
If any man be good, he is envied:
If evil, then himself is envious.
Patience endures what ever envy dare.
An envious neighbor is a double ill.
Similies on the same subject.
As Bauens by their bands are easily known,
So enuies looks do most disclose her self.
As greatest floods have always quickest ebbes,
So enuies heat is commonly soon cold.
As rigor blasteth fancies fairest bloomes,
So envy does the no lest man disgrace.
As no disease with inward grief compares,
So nothing more than envy wounds the mind.
As fire not maintained is quickly out,
So envy not supplied, dies of it self.
As in the Cedar, worms do never breed,
So in the wise, envy can have no power.
Examples likewise on the same.
PHilip was told, that men envied him:
Quoth he; I care not, I have given no cause.
Caligula had such an envious heart,
As he repined at all men's happiness.
Th'Athenians so envied Themistocles,
As they made verses in reproach of him,
Pompey and Caesar's envy to each other,
Can scant be matched in any histories.
Plutarch says, envy is damned sorcerie,
And therefore witht it generally abhorred.
Thucidides graunts, wise men may be envied,
Only to make their virtues shine the more.
Of Lust.
Lust, is the minds disturber, purses foe:
The conscience wronger, and first step to woe.
Lust often is filled, but never satisfied.
Lascivious lust the senses does deceive.
Where lust gets footing, shame does soon ensue.
Lust like a lantern shows through it self,
The poisoned venime hid within it self.
Lust puts the most unlawful things in ure.
The Leachers tongue, is never void of guile.
Lust lives by spoil, like thieves that rob true men.
Lust makes oblivion, beats reason back:
Forgette^h shames pure ^lush, and honors wrack.
The flames of lust do from loves fuel rise.
The fil^h of lust, uncleanness wallowes in.
Lust gads abroad, desire does seldom sleep.
Most sweet it is, swift same to ouer-goe:
But vile, to live in lusts black overthrow.
Where lust is law, it booteth not to plead.
Lust lacks no wings, when love is fled away.
Blind is base lust, false colors to descrie.
Iustes Owle-sight eyes are dazeled with the light,
Yet see too clearly in the darkest night.
Love surfets not, lust like a glutton dies.
Love is all truth, lust full of perjured lies.
Lusts winter comes ere summer half is done.
While lust is in his pride, no exclamation
Can cur^e his heat, or reine his rash desire.
Lust being Lord, there is no trust in kings.
Lewd lust is endless, pleasure has no bounds.
As corn o're-growes by weeds, so fear by lust.
All fair humanity abhorres the deed,
That stains with lust loves modest snow-white weed.
Tears harden lust, though marble wear with drops.
Fair love, foul lust, are deadly enemies.
Lust blows the fire when temperance is thawed.
Fair day discouers lusts obscurest ways,
And shows each thing as it is indeed.
The love of lust is loss unto our health.
Lust led with envy, dreads no deadly sin.
Sower is the case that from lusts root does spring.
Inchastitie is ever prostitute,
Whose tree we loath, when we have pluck^ the fruit.
It is great virtue to abstain from lust.
Who follows lust, can never come to love.
Lust always seeks the ruin of chaste love.
Better severity that is right and just,
Than impotent affections led with just.
Greatness does make it great incontinence.
No bondage like the slavish life to lust.
Lust is a pleasure bought with after pain.
The gate that opens to iniquity,
Is unrestrained lust and liberty.
Lust by continuance grows to impudence.
Shame and disgrace attend unbridled lust
Adultery is injury to nature.
Where wic^ed lust does dwell in foul excess,
That is no house but for damned beastlines.
Adult'rie is unlawful matrimony.
Adult'rie is despised among bruit beasts.
Concupiscence does violence the soul.
Love comfort like Sun-sh^ne after rain,
But lust^ effect is tempest after Sin.
No beastlines like base concupiscense.
Lust is the path way to perdition.
Concupiscense leads on the way to death.
Poor silly flies may teach great men be lust,
And not to yield them selves a prey to lust.
Lust is in age most loathsome, vile in youth.
Lust makes us covet things beyond our power.
Lust cuts off life before the dated time.
Lust never takes joy in what is due,
But still leaves known delights to seek out new.
A man long plunged in lust, is hard v purged.
Slothfulness is the nourisher of lust.
Similies on the same subject.
AS fire consumes wood into it self,
So lust draws men into her deepest sins.
A^ Sulphur being hot* is quickly fier'd,
So lust vnb^^dled easily is prouokt
As wanton thoughts are full of wanton speech,
So lewd conceits are filled with loose desires.
As greedy minds encroch on other* right,
So lust makes no respect of lewd delight.
As leprosy the members does corrupt,
So luxury enuenometh the soul.
As ravenous binds make no respect of prey,
So all are apt that come in lusts foul way.
Examples likewise on the same.
Cleopatra had her brothers company,
Wronging thereby her husband and her self.
Thalestris trauail'd five and twenty days,
To lie one night with mighty Alexander.
Claudius of his own sisters made no spare.
Sem^ramis in lust desired her son.
Nero slew Atticus the Roman Consul,
That he might have access unto his wife.
Aristotle says, that lust men's bodies change.
And likewise breeds madness in their souls.
Hippocrates called lust the foul disease,
Than which could be no worse infection.
Of Pride, etc.
Pride, is a puffed up mind, a swollen desire,
That by vainglory seeks to aspire.
PRide, is the chief disgrace beauty can have.
Pride draws on vengeance, vengeance has no mean.
Weak weapons do the greatest pride abate.
When pride but points once unto his fall.
He bears a sword to stay himself withal.
Vainglory never temperance does retain.
Vainglory fondly gazeth on the skies.
Pride gapes aloft, and scorneth humble looks.
Pride is contemned, scorned, disdained, derided:
While humbleness of all things is provided.
Proud will is dease, and hears no heedfull friends.
The flesh being proud, desire does sight with grace.
Suppress the proud, help to support the m^^ke.
Vaine-glories vice, l^^e to the n(...),
Does blemish often o^r (...).
Small Onats enforced ^^oud ^^^^^ ^^^^^ to stoop.
Very vnsurely stands the ^^^t o^ ^^^^^.
Vainglorious men des^^^ to ^^^^^ ^^^i^ ^^^^.
Such is the nature still of haughty pride,
Than others praise, can nothing worse abide.
In-sight illustrates, outward bravery blinds.
Shame follows pride, as does the bodies shade.
Wit oft-times wrackes, by self-conceit of pride.
Though pride leads on, yet shame does wait behind,
And shame for pride by justice is assigned.
Beauty breeds pride, pride brings forth disdain.
Virtue is placed, where pride may not presume.
The plague of pride presumption did begin.
Nothing there is that heaven can worse abide,
Amongst men's deeds, than arrogance and pride.
Trust not to choice of proud confederates.
High-builded castles ouer-looke low lands.
Envy is auncient'st sin, but pride is greatest.
Proud thoughts, that greatest matters take in hand,
Falls soonest, where they safest think to stand.
Sorrow never follows him that flies from pride.
Where least desert is, always pride is most.
Prides lowest step is blood, Envy the highest.
Pride bathes in tears of poor submission,
And makes his soul the purple he puts on.
A proud man's glory, soon begets defame.
A rich man hardly can be free from pride.
Similies on the same subject.
AS vapors in ascending soon are lost,
So prides presuming but confounds it self.
As great fires hazard simple cottages,
So pride in poor men is most perilous.
As winds blow sternely being near to cease,
So pride is loftiest, near destruction.
As Cadar trees unfruitful are and stiff,
So proud men help not any, nor themselves.
As pride is the beginner of all vice,
So the destruction is it of all virtue.
As still the dropsy couets after drink,
So pride is never pleased but with pride.
Examples likewise on the same.
FAbius the Senator, o're-come with pride,
Swallowed a hair in milk, and thereof dyed.
Poppeia that was Neroes concubine,
Had with the purest gold her horses shod.
Chare^ for hurting Cyrus in the knee,
Became so proud, that forthwith he ran mad.
The Emperor Di^^lesian in hi^ pride,
Would needs be called the brother to the Sun.
Says Aristotle, Men overcome with pride,
Their betters nor their equals can abide.
Quint^liam would have men of greatest gifts,
Rather be humble, than swollen up with pride.
Of Covetousness, etc.
Covetousness is only root of ill,
That kingdom, conscience, soul and all does spill.
THey that most covet, oftentimes loose more.
Gain comes, while as the mi^ler sleeps.
Co^etous wretches do such griefs sustain.
That they prove bankrupts in their greatest gain.
Vain is it, all to have and nothing use.
Intemperance t^ralles men to couetise.
Treasure is most abu^'d being hoorded up,
When being employed, in turns two for one.
It Is vain to cover more than we need use.
He that encrocheth much, is always needy.
Rich roabes, other both and themselves adorn.
But nor themselves nor others, if not ^o^ne.
Great is the sc^p^ that greedy will desires.
Gains got with i^san^e, is greatest loss.
Less sins the poor man* that does starve himself.
Than he that sl^^es his soul by hoor^ing pelf.
Desire to have, does makes us much endure.
Avarice is good to none, worse to himself.
Who would not wish his treasure safe from thieves,
And rid his heart of pangs, his eyes from tears?
The man that couets much, he wants much.
The gain of gold makes many loose their souls.
Learnings decay, is thankelesse avarice:
Not rendering virtue her deserving price.
All vices have their taste from avarice,
The covetous man's excuse, is childrens care.
Who hugs th'idolatrous desire of gold,
To scorn and ruin has his freedom sold.
The devils mouth is termed a misers purse.
Men's faults, by couctousnes the world discernes.
The greedy wretch that for himself still spares,
Does hoord up nothing but contiz^ail cares.
A covetous eye does seldom and content.
Desire of gain, at no time has enough.
A niggard seldom wants this s^^e shift,
To call his cursed avarice, good thrift.
The covetous minded man is always poor.
Covetousness runs round about the world.
Covetousness deserves special hate
In Judges, or in rulers of a state.
Avarice disease, nothing can cure but death.
To fly from avarice, is a kingdoms gain.
So greedy minds may but augment their wealth.
They not respect how much they harm their health.
How hard from covetousness can men refrain?
Gold, that makes all men false, is true it self.
Treasures fast bard up by a covetous mind,
As prodigal expenders after find.
The more we spare, the more we hope to gain.
To have gold, and to have it safe, is all.
In old men, covetousness is monstrous,
Because they are so near their iournies end.
Avarice (like the dropsy) still seckes more.
The gulf of greediness will never be filled.
The covetous churl, whose care great heaps attaines:
Has for his end affliction, grief his gains.
Avarice is the chiefest hook of death.
The misers mind is never satisfied.
Similies on the same subject.
AS fire, the more it has, the fiercer burns,
^o covetous minds do always crave for more.
As Bees do flock unto a honey dew,
So covetous men still haunt the sent of gain.
As greatest fish devour the smaller fry,
So covetous wretches feed upon the poor.
As glurtons from themselves can nothing spare,
So misers will let nothing pass their purse.
As without waves we never see the sea,
So covetous men are never free from cares.
As clouds do^ sometime hide the Suns clear light,
So covetousness depriues the light of grace.
Examples likewise on the same.
HErmocrates lying at the point of death,
Bequeathed his goods to no one but himself.
Euclio ^^^ his treasure in his house,
And durst not go abroad for fear of robbing.
Caligula became so covetous,
That he would spare no means to compass coin.
Demonica for gold sold Ephesus,
And after dyed under the weight thereof.
Socrates seeing one ignorant, yet rich,
Said: He was nothing but a golden slave.
Diogenes would say to covetous men,
That he had rather be their sheep, than son.
Of Sloth, etc.
Sloth is to Virtue, chiefest enemy:
And Idleness, the guide to every ill.
SLoth dulles the wit, and does corrupt our strength.
Sloth both corrupts, and chokes the vital powers.
Idleness is a death in life esteemed.
Long slumbers are for idle persons meet.
The idle luske, that no way is inclined,
Walks as one dead among the living kind.
Ease is the mothet of dissension.
Who grows too negligent, too soon repents.
Humors, by much excess of ease are bred.
All idle works, are but the works of lies.
All idle hours are Calenders of ruth,
And time ill spent is prejudice to youth.
Idleness causes error and ignorance.
Through idleness, kingdoms have been destroi'd.
Idleness is the root of desperation.
The idle mind is apt to all uncleanness.
In height of weal who has a slothful heart,
Repents too late his ouer-foolish part.
Sloth blunts conceit, but study sharpens it.
Prosperity always ingendreth sloth.
The slothful man in his own want does sleep.
Sloth hinders thrift, and much displea^eth God.
Love is a prodigy to loytring wits,
A hell of life, a trap for idle toies.
The idle heart is moved with no prayers.
In doing nothing, men learn to do ill.
Sloth is a fear of labor to ensue.
The Bees abide no idle Drones among them.
Usury is the nource of idleness:
And idleness the mother of all evil.
The wise man's idleness, is d^ily labor.
A noble nature, sloth does soon corrupt.
Idleness is the canker of the mind.
Similies on the same subject.
AS mothes eat garments that are seldom worn,
So idleness infecteth loytring wits.
As too much bending breaks the strongest bow,
So too much sloth corrupts the chastest mind.
As moss grows on those stones which are not stirred,
So sloth defiles the soul, not well employed.
As standing waters venomous worms engender,
So idle brains beget unholy thoughts.
As pooles freeze sooner than the running streams,
So idle men speed worse than those that work.
As sitters sooner sleep than they that walk,
So sin tempts sooner sloth, than diligence.
Examples likewise on the same.
SCipi^ did banish from his camp, all such
As could be touched with sloth or idleness.
The wise men thus did answer Alexander,
If he were idle, long he could not live.
Because the Sabies did abound in wealth,
They gave them selves to naught but idleness.
Metellus being arrived in Africa,
Dismissed all means might offer idleness.
Tully says, Men were borne to do good works,
As a pre^eruatiue against idleness.
Pythagoras gave all his ^^ho^l^^s charge,
At no time to admit an idle thought.
Of Anger, etc.
Anger is entrance to unseemly wrath,
Provoking Fury, Rage, and Violence.
ANgers rash fire concealed, enkindles more.
Anger must be no reason of divorce.
Anger does still his own mishaps increase.
Thunder affri^hteth infants in the schools:
And angry threats are conquests meet for fools.
What reason urges, rage does still deny.
Untamed rage does all advise reject.
Rage is like fire, and naturally ascends.
Hot hasty wrath, and heedlesse ^azardi^,
Breeds l^te repentance, and long i^^^mie.
Full many mischiefs follow hasty wrath.
Happy who can abstain when anger swelles.
Words have great power to appease enflamed rage.
Fury and frenzies are fit company*
To help to blaze a woeful tragedy.
Mighty men's anger is more feared than death.
Misshapen stuff is meet for ^ude demeanor.
Violent fires do soon burn ou^ them selves.
Often times we see, men troubled with ann^y
Do laugh for anger, and yet weep for joy.
Small showers last long, but angry storms are short.
Often outward rage does inward griefs increase.
The wrathful man is seldom free from woe.
The broken top^ of lofty trees declare,
The fury of a mercie-wanting storm.
Men will not spend their surie on a child.
Young slippes are never graft in windy days.
Love being resisted* grows impa^ient.
Rain added to a river that is rank.
Perforce will make it ouer-flow the ^anke.
Calmes seldom hold, without ensuing storms.
Choler unto digestion is a friend.
He that loves ease, offends no angry man.
If once the fire be to the powder go^,
It Is then too late to seek to fly the shot.
Heat added unto heat, augmenteth it.
There is no rest* where rage runs all on head.
The waters swell before a boistrous sto^me.
In windy days we hold our garments fast,
But glaring Sunshine makes us put them off.
Tides being restrained, o'r^^well their bounds with rage.
The depth is hid by troubling of the flood.
Great mists arise before the greatest rain.
If rage spare not the wal^es of pieti^,
How shall the profane piles of sin keep strong?
The rain does cease, before the floods do rise.
All storms are calmed by a gentle star.
P^le angry death a gr^edie longing stops.
When discontented sects and schisms arise,
They seed the simple, and offend the wise.
The edge of reprehension, is sharp words.
Reprove with love, not anger, others faults.
Cold breath does not cool fire, but makes more hot.
What is with f^ri^ ^^d ste^ne rage begun,
Does challenge shame before it be half done.
Fond disagreement is loves overthrow.
Love should prevail, just anger to assuage.
Similies on the same subject.
AS hate is often conceived upon no cause,
So anger on small matters does ensue.
As he that loves quiet, sleeps ^ecure,
So he that yields to wrath, much harms himself.
As wrathful anger is a grievous fault,
So sufferance is great commendation.
As winter commonly is full of storms,
So angry minds have still impatient thoughts.
As lukewarm water inward heats assuage,
So gentle language calmeth angers rage.
As tumors rise by blows upon the flesh,
So anger swelles by buffetting the mind.
Examples likewise on the same.
GReat Alexander, in his angry mood
Killed Clytus, his old counselor and friend.
Dionysiu^ being overcome with rage,
Stabd to the heart his innocent poor Page.
Periander, angry and misse-gouerned,
His dear wife most unkindly murdered.
Architas, though his bondman did amiss,
Yet in his anger he refused to smite him.
Euripides, held nothing in a man
Of more defect, than stern impatience.
The elder Cato counsail'd angry men,
To banish rage, if they desired long life.
Of Gluttony, etc.
Gluttony, drunkenness, and lewd excess,
Is the highway to woe and wretchedness.
Who daily taste neat wine, do water loath.
Disorder breeds by heating of the blood.
Advantage feeds him fat, while men delay.
In Italy, the fat, fair, slick^ and full,
Are better liked than lean, lanke, spare and dull.
Starved men best guess the sweetness of a feast.
Worldlings (like Antes) eat up the gains of men.
Things undigested, never turn to blood.
Steel is the glass of beauty for our sight,
But wine is termed, the mirror of the mind.
A beastly shape with brutish soul agrees.
Set-banquets made by Courtiers, want no cates.
It Is good in health to counsel with a Leach.
It Is good abstaining from superstuous feasts:
Where too much feeding makes men bruit beasts.
Wine burns up beauty, and prouokes on age.
No secrecy abides, where lives excess.
Excess is nothing else, but wilful madness.
He that delights in pampering up himself,
Is chiefest seeker of his bodies shame.
Chastities danger waits on drunkenness.
Wine is the earths blood, and th'abusers blame.
A double fire in man, is wine and youth.
Gluttony dryes the bones, more thereby die
Than in a kingdom perish by the sword.
Surfeit has sickness to attend on him.
Gluttony causes many maladies.
Excess is that which soon dispatcheth life.
Rich men may feed their bellies when they please,
But poor men's dinners stay till they have meat.
Much feeding causes much infirmity.
The belly always is a thanklesse beast.
Drunkenness is a many headed monster.
Moderate diet is a wise man's badge,
But surfeiting, the glory of a fool.
Women and wine have made the wise to dote.
Too much of any thing conuerts to vice.
A mean in all things is most commendable.
Similies on the same subject.
AS corporal fasting quickens up the soul,
So too much feeding does depresse it down.
As sable clouds obscure the silver Moon,
So gluttony dimmes glory of the mind.
As birds with weighty bodies hardly fly,
So men o're-come with drink, scant rightly go.
As too much wet does cause a moorish ground,
So too much drink does make a muddie mind.
As ships of lightest burden lightliest sail,
So minds of quickest motion are most apt.
As drowsy soldiers are unfit for fight,
So drunken humors are not meet for men.
Examples likewise on the same.
THe Tyrant Dionysius, by much drink,
Lost utterly the benefit of sight.
Aruntius in his beastly drunkenness,
With his own daughter incest did commit.
Ptolomie slew his father and his mother,
Through wine and women, dying like a beast.
Geta the Emperor three days feasting sat,
Served by the order of the Alphabet.
Men given to belly-seruice, Plato says,
Deserve no better name, than brutish beasts.
Excess (says Tullie) is a testimony
Of souls incontinence, and base desires.
Of Grief, etc..
Grief, Sorrow, Woe, and sighing care,
Endaunger health, and often urge despair.
Grief does await on life, though never sought.
Grief being disclosed, the sooner is recur'd.
Each grief best judges of his contrary.
Extreme and hard with sorrow does it go^,
Where woe becomes a comforter to woe.
Sorrow does dim the judgment of the wit.
Great griefs more easily can be thought than told.
There is no grief, but time does make it less.
Sighs of them* selves, are ouer-silent much,
And far too short to make our sorrows known.
Grief, to it self most dreadful does appear.
Never was sorrow quite deuoid of fear.
Sorrow best fitteth with a cloudie cell.
Still we behold some grief our bliss bese^^*
Yet oftentimes that grief, some good ^ege^s.
Sorrow discloseth what it most does grieve.
The deapth of grief with words is sounded least.
No plaster helps before the grief be known.
Words are but shadows of a further smart,
But inward grief does truly touch the heart.
Sower is the sweet that sorrow does maintain.
A heavy hear^, with sorrows pipe must dance.
Sorrow her self, is in her self confounded.
Where sorrow serves for food, where drink is tears,
There pleasure sighs amidst confused fears.
Sighs often sue, but seldom times find grace.
We may conclude our words, but not our woes.
Great griefs are mut^, when mitth can chearely speak.
What boots i^ plain that cannot be redrest,
Or sow vain sorrows in a fruitless ear?
Nothing avails grief, when fates deny.
Cares, close concealed, do aggrauate the pain^.
It Is ease to tell the cares that inly touch.
Men torn with tempests, safe arrived at last,
May sit and sing, and tell of sorrows past.
Well sits moan the mind, near killed with care.
A double grief afflicts concealing hearts.
One loving hour quits many years of grief.
When thou do feel thy conscience rent with grief,
Thy self pursuest thy self, both robbed, and thief.
All earthly sights can naught but sorrow breed.
Woe waxes old, by being still renewed.
Woe never wants, where every cause is caught.
When sorrow once is seated in our eyes,
What-e're we see, increases miseries.
Men change the air, but seldom change their cares.
Griefs are long lived, and sorrows seldom die.
Grief need no feigned action to be taught.
Know how to weep when mighty griefs constrain,
Else tears and sighs are merely spent in vain.
Sorrow grows sence-lesse, when too much she bears.
We need not cherish griefs, too fast they grow.
Woe be to him that dies of his own woe.
To mean estate, but common woes are known*
But crowns have cares that ever ^e unknown
Sorrow does make the shortest time seem long.
One grief concealed, more grievous is than ten
From strongest woe we hardly language w^est.
Often times it haps, that sorrows of the mind
Find help unsought, that seeking cannot find.
Huge horrors, in high tides of griefs are drowned*
Woe past may once laugh present woe to scorn.
Grief ^arueth deepest, coming from the heart.
Enough of grief it is to pensive minds,
To feel their faults, and not be further vexed.
Care makes men passionate, and sorrow dumb.
High floods of joy, often falls by ebbbes of grief.
No note is sweet, where grief bears all the ground.
It Is ever pleasing for ^ man to hear,
Those griefs discourst, that once were hard to bear.
Some often sing that have more cause to sigh.
Grief never parts from a care-filled breast.
Free vent of grief does ease the ouer-flow.
Unhappy man, the subject of misfortune,
Whose very birth does following woe importune
Men's days of woe are long, but short of joy.
Our time may pass, but cares will never die.
Often greatest cares, the greatest comforts kill.
Men die, and humane kind does pass away,
But grief (that mak^s them die) does ever stay.
Joy still ascends, but sorrow sings below.
Men may lament, but never disanull.
Sorrow still seazeth on a grieved heart.
Things of small moment we can scarsely hold,
But griefs that touch the heart, are hardly told.
They easily grieve, that cannot choose but moan.
Sorrow concludes not when it seems done.
Conceit deriues from some fore-father grief.
Conceived grief reboundeth where it falls:
Not with the empty hollownesse, but weight.
Things past redress should be as free from care.
It is no loss to be exempt from care.
Against a change, woe is o're-run with woe.
Woe with the heavier weight does always sit,
Where it perceiue^ it is but faintly borne.
The deepest cares cure not the smallest grief.
Sorrow is mortal enemy to health.
Grief wants words to utter what it would.
Fell g^a^ling sorrow has least power to bite
The man that mockes it, and does set it light.
No need to hasten care, it comes too soon.
Griefs best redress, is the best sufferance.
Grief finds some ease by him that bears like.
Sharp sorrows tooth does never ran^kle more,
Than when he bites, and launceth not the sore.
The hearts deep sorrow hates both light and life.
Mirth may not soiourne with black malcontent.
What helps care, when cure is past and g^ne?
Each substance of a grief has twenty shades,
Which shows like grief it self, yet is not so.
It is some case our sorrows to reveal.
Sorrow does ever long to hear the worst.
Long are their nights whose cares do never sleep.
The eyes of sorrow glazed with blinding tears,
Deuide^ one thing en^^re to many objects.
No far remove can make stern sorrow less,
Care-charming sleep, is son of sable night.
Idly we grieve, when fruitlessely we grieve.
Their legs can kee^e no measure in delight,
Whose heart do hold no measure in their grief.
They that report grief, feel it for the time.
Sad souls are slain in merry company.
Grief is best pleased with griefs society.
In wooing sorrow, it is best be brief,
When wedding it, there is such length in grief.
Great grief grieves most at that would do it good.
Grief dallied with, nor law nor limit knows.
A woeful hostess brooks no merry guests.
Each thinks himself to fetch the deepest groan,
Because he feels no sorrow but his own.
Distress likes dumps, when time is kept with tears.
Woe is most tedious when her words are brief.
Though woe be heavy, yet it seldom sleeps.
Kind fellowship in woe, does woe assuage,
As Palmers chat makes short their pilgrimage.
Love never so loyal, is not free from care.
Weep never so long, yet grief must have an end.
Of sorrow, comes but fancies and fond dreams.
True sorrow then is feelingly suffis'd,
When with like semblance it is sympathiz'd.
Sad hearts with weeping live upon their tears.
Sad sighs set down the hearts most feeling woes.
Assurance always puts grief to flight.
Deep woes roll forward like a gentle flood,
Which being stop^, the bounding banks o're-flowes.
Accustomed sorrow, is mere c^ueltie.
Sorrow is very doubtful in belief.
Silence, is sorrows chiefest Orator.
To see sad sights, mooues more than hear them told,
For then the eye interprets to the care.
Sacietie makes passions still less strong.
All sense must die where grief too much abounds.
All care is bootlesse in a careless case.
Sorrow is like a heaui^ hanging bell.
Which set on ringing, with his own weight goes.
Sorrow best speaks by signs of heavy eyes.
On greatest charge, the greatest care attends.
Dombe is the message of a hidden grief.
Sorrow breaks seasons, and reposing hours:
Makes the night morning, and the noon-tyde night.
Our inward cares are most pent in with grief.
Sad cares, men's eyes does always open keep.
Short walks seem long when sorrow metes the way.
Sorrow has only this poor bare relief,
To be bemoand of such as woeful are.
Wounds help not wounds, nor grief ease grievous deeds.
Excess of sorrow listneth no relief.
Passions increasing, multiply complaints.
To moan ones care, yet cannot help his thrall,
It kills his heart, but comforts not at all.
No grief like to the bondage of the mind.
No outward utterance can command conceit.
Similies on the same subject.
AS fire suppressed, is much more forcible,
So griefs concealed, urge greater passions.
As streams restrained, break through or ouer-flow,
So sorrow smoother'd, grows to greater woe.
As tendrest wood is most annoyed of worms,
So feeblest minds does sorrow most afflict.
As clouds do rob us of fair heavens beauty,
So care bereaues us of our speeches liberty.
As the sweet rose does grow among the briars,
So often in sorrows some content is found.
As discreet Pylots do for storms prepare,
So in our joy let us provide for care.
Examples likewise on the same.
COriolanus, finding his offense
For warring against his country, did with grief*
Torquatus, banished from his fathers house,
For grief thereof did rashly slay him self.
The Roman matrons for a whole years space,
Sighed and sorrowed for B^^t^^ death.
Lepidus grieuing long his wives abuse,
Shortened his own days with conceit of grief.
The Pythagorians always had th^s poesy:
The heart ought not be ^aten with sad grief.
Cicero thought, the minds chief enemies,
Were melancholy griefs, and pensiues.
Of Fear, etc.
Fear is defect of manly fortitude,
Continually by dread and doubt pursude.
A Hell-tormenting fear, no faith can move.
Safety (most safe) when she is fenced with fear.
Better first f^are, than after still to fear.
Danger deui^eth shifts, wit waits on fear.
Abhor sin past, prevent what i^ to come,
These two are things fear not the day of doom.
The bait in sight, the hook much less is feared.
Who ever fears, is better never fear.
To love for fear, is secretly to hate.
Fear is companion of a guil^ie ^ind.
Faint fear and doub^ still takes their delight
In ^erile, which exceed all peril might.
F^delitie does fly where fear is hatched.
Fears urge despaires, ruth breeds a hopeless rage.
By needless fear, none ever vantage got.
The benefit of fear, is to be wise.
Wh^ would not die, to kill all murdering griefs?
Or who would live in neuer-dying fears?
Fear gives wings, and need does courage teach.
Fond is the fear that finds no remedy
The d^ead of dying, pays death servile breath.
Who liue^^ c^ntent, need fear no f^owning fate.
To fear the foe, when fear oppresses strength,
Gives in our weakness, strengthening to the foe.
Fear finds out shi^ts, timiditie is s^b^ill.
No greater hell than be a slave to fear.
Birds fear no bushes that were never lim'd.
The guilt being great, the fear does more exceed.
Fear, and be slain, no worse can come to fight:
And fight and dye, is death destroying death.
Love thriues not in the heart that shadows fear.
Against loves fire, fears frost can have no power.
The Lions roaring, lesser beasts do fear.
Doubt takes sure footing often in slipperie ways.
Huge rocks, high winds, strong pirates, shelues and sands,
The ^erchant fears, ere rich at home he lands.
Delay breeds doubt, and doubt brings on dismay.
A fearful thing to tumble from a crown.
Give no beginning to a doubtful end.
It Is fearful sleeping in a serpents bed.
Extremest fear can neither fight nor fly,
But coward-like, with trembling terror die.
Our own examples makes us fear the more.
Fear that is wiser than the truth, does ill.
Greatness that stands high, stands still in fear,
Fear casts too deep, and ever is too wise.
Who fears a sentence, or an old man's saw,
May by a painted cloth be kept in awe.
The doubtful can no usual plots endure.
A moderate fear fore-casts the worst of ill.
It Is vain to fear the thing we cannot shun.
Better to fear thy choice, than rue thy chance.
He rightly may be termed a val^ant man,
Whom honest death does not affright with fear.
Distracted terror knows not what is best.
No fear of death should force us to do ill
Dread of unknown things breeds a greater dread.
Fear not the things must come, be think faults past.
In vain with terror is he sortifide,
That is not guarded with ^i^me love beside.
The love unseen, is never known to fear.
A seru^le fear, does make a drooping mind.
Least we presume, we must go back with fear.
Delay does much torment a doubtful mind.
It much offends to be old with fears,
When youth says, thereof thou want many years.
Hardly we credit what imports our ill.
Men fear not them whose feeble strength they know.
Fear commonly does breed and nourish hate.
Small ease has he that feared is of all.
Cold doubt cauills with honor, scorneth fame,
And in the end, fear weighes down faith with shame.
Dissension ever more breeds greater doubt.
We soon believe the case we would have so.
A fearful look bewrayes a guilty heart.
Death is far sweeter than the fear of death.
It Is better much, to suffer that we fear,
Than still by fear, to live in martyrdom.
Continual grief, is fear beyond all fear.
Baseness advanced, purchases but fear.
Who walk in fear, suspect the paths they tread.
Death being assured to come, deserves no fear.
Whiles timorous knowledge stands considering,
Audacious ignorance performs the deed.
He that knows most, the more he has to doubt.
Better mistrust too soon, than rue too late.
We deem things doubtful, breed not contentation.
Where men least fear, there harm they soonest find.
Wicked men commonly are void of fear,
And therefore danger always with them bear.
Love never was without both fear and tears.
Fear lends wings for aged folk to fly.
Similies on the same subject.
AS sudden bleeding, argues ill ensuing,
So sudden ceasing is fell fears renewing.
As leaking vessels cannot long endure,
So fearful minds have slender permanence.
As nettles have no pricks, and yet do sting,
So fears have little motion, yet often kill.
As salt taken moderately does ^ellish meat,
So discreet fears do often benefit.
As in calamity good friends avail,
So sound advise aduantageth in fear.
As wrong suspicions are but men's disgrace,
So needless fears declare but want of wit.
Examples likewise on the same.
Claudius being given to fear, his mother said,
Nature begun, but had not finished him.
Midas grew desperate by his fearful dreams,
That to be rid of them, he slew himself.
Aristodemus feared with howling dogs,
Took such conceit, that soon he ended life.
Nicias th'Athenian, through cowardly fear,
Lost many famous opportunities.
Tully says, Much more evil is in fear,
Than in the thing that does procure the fear.
Solon gave instance to his countrymen,
That shame did evermore attend on fear.
Of Fortune, etc.
Fortune is nource of fools, poison of hope,
Fuel of vain desires, deserts destruction.
WHat fortune works, seems not always pretended.
Fortune not always does pour forth her bags.
Fortune in tariance, to her self is strange.
Fortune her gifts in vain to such does give,
Who when they live, seem as they did not live.
The end is it that makes fortune good.
The sea of fortune does not always flow.
Hap comes well although it come but late.
When Fortune all her utmost spite has shown,
Some blisse-full hours may never thelesse appear.
Fortune's not always good, nor always ill.
Fortune does some times laugh as well as lower.
Misfortune follows him that tempts fortune.
How can mischaunce unto that ship ^etide,
Where fortune is the pylot and the guide?
Fortune often hurts, when most she seems to help.
Wisdom predominates both fate and fortune.
Often where best chance begins, ill chance does end.
Misfortune is attended by reproach:
Good fortune, fame and virtue si^llifies.
The Event often times makes soul faults fortunate.
What folly hurts not, fortune can repair.
Like clouds continually does fortune change.
Where Fortune does her bounty frank bestow,
There heaven and earth must pay what she does owe.
Mishaps are mastred by discreet advise.
The helpe-lesse hap, it booteth none to grieve.
Misfortune waits advantage to entrap.
Misfortunes power can never ^^yle thy right,
Do thou but bear a mind in her despite.
Misfortune follows many ouer-fast.
Where first mishap began, there will she end.
A chance may win, what by mischance was lost.
Where great mishaps our errors does assault,
There do they easiest make us see our fault.
Nimble mischaunce, is very swift of foot.
Silent mishap discloseth mourning grief.
Our friends misfortune does increase our own.
A mischief seen, may easily be p^euented,
But being hapt, not helped, though still lamented.
In some things all, in nothing all are crossed.
On mischiefs maine, mishap full sail does bear.
The greatest losses seldom are restored.
Nothing so much a man's mishap torments,
As who to him his good state represents.
Harms unexpected, still do hurt us most.
Vnlook^ for things do happen soon'st of all.
Power h^th no privilege against mishap.
Complain not t^y misfortune to thy foe,
For he w^llt i^nto^ when he sees thy tears.
The highest state awarrants not mishaps.
Unfortunate are some men that be wise.
Happy he lives that tastes no mischaunce.
Often times we see amidst the greatest cares,
Some ill success does slip in unawares.
No wit nor wealth preuailes against mischaunce.
If ill approach us, only that is ours.
Of greatest ill, a greater good may spring.
The man that still amidst misfortunes stands,
Is sorrows slave, and bound in lasting bands.
Never stays tickle fortune in one state.
The basest means, often highest fortune brings.
Well may he swim, held up by fortunes hand.
The world is rightly termed full of rub^,
When all our fortunes run against the byas.
Fortune hurts not where she is held despised.
The fleece of fortune strives to have the fell,
Who keeps his fortunes wisely, needs no more.
They fall, which trust to fortunes fickle wheel:
But stayed by virtue, men shall never reele.
Time goes by turns, and chances change by course.
A tragic note best fits a tragic chance.
By fortunes smiles ensues the greatest falls.
He cannot judge aright of fortunes power,
Nor taste the sweet that never tried the sower.
Fortune may raise again a downe-cast foe.
The cards once dealt, it boots not ask, why so?
Love throws them down, whom fortune raised up.
Riches are nothing else but fortunes gifts,
An^ bring with them their own confusion.
Mariners sound at first for fear of rocks.
Fortune assaults, but hurts no constant mind.
Physical drugs help not sinister chance.
It Is seldom seen in any high estate,
Father and son like good, like fortunate.
Fortunes fierce frowns, are often times princes haps.
Fortunes being equal, are loves favorites.
Where Fortune favors much, she flatters more.
Nothing is ours that we by hap may loose:
What nearest seems, is furthest off in woes.
Birth many times by fortune is abas'd.
Fortune in sleepers nets poures all her pride.
To painful persons fortune is ingrate.
When Fortune does most sweetly seem to smile,
Then soon she frowns, she laughes but little while.
Few reap the sweet, that taste not of the sower.
Whom fortune scorns, the common people hate.
Trust not to Fortune when she seems to smile,
For then she does intend the greatest guile.
Fortune is tear'md a bog or dancing mire.
Fortune, though fickle, sometime is a friend.
Fortune helps hardy men, but scorneth cowards.
Long-passed cares renew again their course,
When fatal chance does change from bad to worse.
Fortune can take our goods, but not our virtues.
Fortune is first and last, that ruins states.
Fortune often brings us to misfortunes gate.
Desert awaits, while fortune makes provision,
For fools and dolts, and men of base condition.
While worthiest fall, fortune does worth-lesse raise.
Fortune best shows her-selfe in women kind.
Fortune does glory in her changing mood.
While grass does grow, the laboring Steed may starve,
For fortune seld each wishers turn does serve.
On virtuous actions fortune has no power.
Fortune can never hurt a steadfast mind.
Who farthest seems, is to misfortune nighest.
Similies on the same subject.
EVen as the racket takes the balls rebound,
So does good fortune catch ill fortunes proof.
As winds blow some men good, and other harm,
So fortune friending some, on others frowns.
As Archers always cannot hit the white,
So no man may of fortune always boast.
As glasses show the figure of the face,
So do our fortunes best disclose our minds.
As Hedge-hogs do foresee ensuing storms,
So wise men are for fortune still prepared.
As hail hurts not the house, though makes a noise,
So haps may daunt, but not dismay the mind.
Examples likewise on the same.
SCylla for multitude of high good haps,
Would often say: That he was Fortunes child.
Caesar said to the Pilot in a storm:
Fear not, thou cariest Caesar and his fortune.
Augustus wished Scipioes valiancie,
And Pompeys love, but Fortune like himself.
Paulus Aemilius greatly feared Fortune,
Chiefly in those things which he held divine.
To him whose hope on fortune does depend,
Nothing can be assured, Tully says.
Pindarus said, the Romans did rely
Only on Fortune, as their patroness.
Of Fate, etc.
Destiny, or the firm decree of Fate,
Is sure to happen, be it soon or late.
NO privilege can from the fates protect.
The fates far off sore-seene, come gently near.
Men are but men in ignorance of fate,
To alter chance exceeds humane state.
Men's haps by heaven are framed preposterous.
That yields to fate, which will not stoop ^o force.
We often find the course of fatal things,
Is best discerned in states of ^ealmes and kings.
No one can turn the stream of destiny.
No man can shun what destiny ordaines.
I^ lye^ not in our power to love or hate,
For will in us is ouer-rul'd by ^ate.
There Is none by warning can avoid his fate.
Ou^ haps do change, as chances on the dyce.
In vain^ we ^ize that at so high a rate,
Whose best assurance but depends on fate.
What ^^te imposes, we perforce must bear.
All men's estates alike vnsteadfast are*
Things which presage both good and bad there be,
Which fate fore-shewes, but will not let us see.
Our frailties doom is written in the flowers.
Fate cannot be prevented, though fore-knowne.
Wales may a while hold out an enemy,
But never castle kept out destiny.
Errors are never errors but by fate.
No providence preuenteth destiny.
Those fates that one while plague poor men with crosses,
Another time provide to mend their losses.
The fairest things are subject still to fate.
No man is sure what final fruits to reap.
Men attribute their follies unto fate,
And lay on heaven the guilt of their own crimes.
What happens me this day, may you the next.
He thriueth best that has a blessed fate.
Fatal is that ascent unto a crown,
From whence men come not, but are hurled down.
What fate intends, folly cannot fore-stall.
Whom fate casts down, hardly again recouers.
The breach once made upon a battered state,
Down goes distress, no shelter shrouds their fate.
Force cannot win, what fate does contradict.
Men are but men, and may not know their lot.
When ^^en do wish for death, fates have no force,
But they (when men would live) have no remorse.
It fatal is to be seduced with shows.
To alter course, may bring men more astray.
Similies on the same subject.
LIke as the day cannot prevent the night,
So vain it is against the fates to fight.
As with the worst, fate spares not the best,
So faults are easier looked in, than redrest.
Even as the stars and sands have wondrous date,
So are our lives subject to naught but fate.
As cities are o're-come by battery,
So all on earth must yield to destiny.
As looks of love often shadow inward hate,
So times fair hope is shortened soon by fate.
As flowers in morning fresh, often fade ere night,
So fate cuts off what goodliest seems in sight.
Examples likewise on the same.
AS Bibulus in triumph rode through Rome,
His fate was with a tyle-stone to be slain.
Aurelius sister, Lucia, by her needle
But pricked her breast, and did immediately.
Cneius Rufferius, combing of his head,
One of the teeth bereft him of his life.
Methridates, supposed men's destinies
Consisted in the power of herbs and stones.
Chilo of Lacedaemon did maintain,
That men might comprehend what was to come.
Plato affirmed, That a good man's fate
Never to evil could be destinate.
Of the Mind.
The Mind is that bright eye, which guides the soul
And gouernes men in all their actions.
THe mind is free, what ever man afflicts.
Liberty is the minds best living fame.
Hope of long life, is balefull to the mind.
O're-many thoughts, maze-like the mind enclose
Confusedly, till order them dispose.
Patience does give a troubled heart delight.
Patience is the true touchstone of the mind.
The griefs of troubled minds, exceed belief.
When rooms of charge are given to minds of praise,
Then majesty does show her brightest rays.
The gentle mind, by gentle deeds is known.
The noblest mind, the best contentment has.
No deuilish thoughts dismay a constant mind.
Fame, cherisher of honour-breathing hearts.
Is valors friend, and nource of sacred Arts.
By outward looks, the mind is often discerned.
The mind discernes, where eyes could never see.
A yielding mind does argue cowardice.
The action and affection of the heart,
Two ways whereby a christian plays his part.
The virtuous mind bears patiently all wrongs.
Ill may a sad mind forge a merry face.
The highest looks have not the highest minds.
The careless man with unadvised mind,
Does blindly follow every puff of wind.
Free is the heart, the temple of the mind.
Men's bodies may be ours, their minds their own.
The mind of man does many times behold,
That which frail sight can never reach unto.
Great hearts will break before they yield to bend.
A private mind may yield, yet cares not how.
Man's mind a mirror is of heavenly sights:
A brief wherein all maruailes summed lie.
No man can slay the mind resolved to die.
Our seeming each man sees; God knows the heart.
The mind a creature it, yet can create,
And add to natures patterns higher skill.
None has enough for every greedy mind.
Men's minds often times are tainted by their ears.
Bad mind, so much to mind another ill,
At to become unmindful of his own.
Men have rude ma^ble, women soft wax minds.
Thieves, cares, and troubled minds, are long awake.
There Is none can tell the ease the mind does gain,
When eyes can weep, heart groan, or grief complain.
The mind corrupted, takes the worser part.
A gentle mind will always judge the best.
Oh what a balm is made to cheer the heart,
If pearl and gold and spices bear a part!
Where minds are knit, what helps, if not enjoyed?
What the tongue dares not, often the mind does say.
The gentle mind does plainly represent,
The glorious splendor of the firmament.
The mind stoopes to no dread, though flesh be frail.
Little persuasion mooues a wicked mind.
It Is pity gold should sunder virtuous minds.
He does but pine among his delicates,
Whose troubled mind is stuffed with discontent.
The heart often suffers for the eyes offense.
Much promises the mind, if fate as much.
Great is the will, but greater far the mind.
In case of jar, when as one man espyes
Another mind li^e his, then ill breed^ worse.
Hire of a hireling mind, is earned shame.
The guilty mind has never quiet li^e.
The bodies rest, is quiet of the mind.
Agrieued minds seldom weigh the intent,
But always judge according to the intent.
The mind well bent, is safe from any harm.
Cares cruel scourge does greatly whip the mind.
No plague is greater than the grief of mind.
The feeble mind through weakness coins new fears:
When stronger hearts their griefs more wisely bears.
Ignorance is the deadly night of mind.
Men's faces glister when their minds are black.
The face is held the Herald of the mind.
Whereas the mind is willing and addict,
Examples are more forcible and strict.
The greatest minds do aim at greatest things.
Pithie demands are whetstones to the mind.
The fairest face may have the foulest mind.
All impious minds, though their fore-casts be great,
They cannot hide them from the greatest great.
The minds old habit hardly will be chaung'd.
Pure is the mind that never meant amiss.
Where mind consents not, faults deserve excuse.
When many tunes do sweetly symphonize,
It conquers hearts, and kindly them compounds.
Dombe plaints in feeling minds, make greatest noise.
The mind by wrong is made a malcontent.
Similies on the same subject.
AS Scales by poise are mounted up and down,
So too and fro conceits do urge the mind.
As tender trees bend every way we please,
So gentle minds are easily ouer-rul'd.
As heaviness fore-tels some harm at hand,
So minds disturbed, presage ensuing ills.
As sickly bodies brook not heat nor cold,
So crazed minds dislike of every thing.
As working vessels are by vent kept sound,
So troubled minds by conference find ease.
As fennie grounds send forth unsavory sents,
So bad minds bl^nder out distempered thoughts.
Examples likewise on the same.
SCeuola in the greatness of his mind,
Entered Porsennaes Tent to murder him.
Queen Tomiris to show her dauntlesse mind,
With Cyrus blood, revenged her dear sons death.
Zenobia told Aurelian in the field,
He was not able to subdue her mind.
Lucius Dentatus, never matched for mind,
Came eighteen times a conqueror from field.
Cicero says, the goodness of the m^nd,
Is most discerned in pardoning injuries.
Socrates said, His quietness in mind
Was cause he never sickned till his death.
Of Affection, etc.
Affection, and sweet fancies secret fire,
Kindle the coals, that quicken up desire.
WHere we affect, we seldom find defect.
Of things unknown, we can have no desire.
Men ost affect them, that do love them least,
And least do love them whom they should like best.
That one desires, another does disdain.
Affection by the countenance is descried.
Full easily the fault may be redrest,
Where kind affection only has transgrest.
Kindly affection, youth to live with youth.
Truest affection does no bounds retain.
Affection is a ^ierce, yet holy fire:
Free of himself, and chained to strong desire.
Desire, with small encouraging grows bold.
It Is easy to desire, but hard to choose.
Affections speech, that easily can dissolve,
Does moisten Flint, yet Steel in stiff attire.
The sea has bounds, but deep desire has none.
In darkest nights, desire sees best of all.
Sweet are the kisses, the embracements sweet,
When like desires, with like affections meet.
Affections slave regards no oaths nor laws.
Lukewarm desires best fit with crazed love.
Affection is a coal that must be coold:
Else suffered, it will set the heart on fire.
Entire affection hates nice coy hands.
Affection will like fire, himself betray.
Affection faints not like a pale faced coward,
But then wooes best, when most his choice is froward.
The coals are quick, where fancy blows the fire.
Desire can make a Doctor in a day.
Where love does reign, disturbing jealousy
Does call him* self, affections Sentinel.
Favor and grace, are termed fancies fuel.
An equal age does equal like desires.
Bad men's affections, turn to fear and hate:
And hate, to danger and deserved death.
That Is hardly kept, which is desired of many.
The most maid-seeming, is not without affection.
That needs must issue to the full perfection,
Has grounded-being by the minds affection.
There Is nothing can affections force control.
Drunken desire does vomit his receipt.
Affections gawdie banner once displayed,
The coward fights, and will not be dismayed.
Things much restrained, make us the more desire them.
In meanest show, the most affection dwells.
Small drops do oft-times quench a mighty fire,
But hugest Seas not qualify desire.
All qualifide affections love does hate.
Beauty strikes fancy blind, vain shows deceive.
Sad per^ur^ations that affections guide,
Should not give judgment, till their cause be tried.
Desire is life of love, and death of fear.
Death is the final end of all desires.
Nothing can quench an infinite desire,
Once kindled through the first conceived fire.
Sad sighs do show the heat of hearts desire.
Desire controld, does aggrauate desire.
Desire being fierce, is spring of sighs and tears.
Men once degenerate and grown deprest,
Are pleased to share affections with a beast.
Desire does spring from that we wish and want.
Fancy is blind, deaf, and incredulous.
Fancy is watchful, and does seldom sleep.
Fancy compeld, to Lute strings is compared,
Which over stretched, do crack before they sound.
Lawful desires, are honesties best notes.
Affection's rest less, yet (being perfect) end-lesse.
Delay is prejudicial to desire.
The greater part lean to example so,
That what they fancy, they will s^ant forgo.
Fancies best cure, is mutual affection.
Fancy soon ^ires, but long before it quench.
When love leads looks, no compass keeps desire.
A hot desire, on present heat does dote:
When cold repentance will it not fore-note.
Low fortunes often times have high desires.
Like fortunes globe, even so is fancies seat.
Appetites flame, with wisdom best is quenched.
There never did all circumstances meet,
With those desires which were conceived before.
Affection brooketh no division.
Sleep has no privilege over desire.
Similies on the same subject.
AS poison sweetly mixed is sooner taken,
So fancy close concealed, is soonest fier'd.
As Chrysolites are proved in the fire,
So is affection in enforced restraint.
As cities wanting Magistrates, decay:
Even so desire vngouern'd, hurts it self.
As all the world were dark but for the Sun,
So life, but for affection, were unsure.
As steel brings fire from the hardest flint,
So fancy mollisies the stearnest mind.
As Almond trees in age do bear most fruit,
So years does best approve affections.
Examples likewise on the same.
ZAleucus to the Locrians made a law,
To loose their eyes that sinned in foul desires.
Appius was banished the city Rome,
For lewd affection to Virginia.
Mark Anthony disgraced his former fame,
By not restraining his affections.
King Alexander hated to the death
In men or women loose and lewd desires.
Fancy (says Aristotle) often makes
A frenzy in their souls are led thereby.
Desire (says Socrates) no limits holds,
And therefore hardly can be mastred.
Of Disdain, etc.
Contempt and Scorn, are Wits infirmity,
Wherewith Disdain and Scoffs keep company.
FLint, frost, disdain; wears, melts, and yields we see.
Things long in getting, quickly are disdained.
Present disdain often after-loue divines
Prayers prevail not, where is coy disdain?
Better to die a thousand deaths and more,
Than live contemned, that honored was before.
Disdain delivers a depraved mind.
Grief oftentimes gives place to nice disdain.
Too much preciseness savors of self-love.
Gibing demands deserve scornful replies.
Neither can wit or Art take any place,
Where adverse scorn, with fear, strikes boldness dead.
Presumption gives no guerdon, but disdain.
Despised men on earth, must live in heaven.
There must be some contempt, ere plagues ensue.
Disdain attends where greatest honor haunts.
In high disdain, love is a base desire:
And Cupids flames do seem but watrie fire.
Disdain repines at all good things it sees.
They others virtues scorn, that doubt their own.
Mock none in need, beware thine own mishap.
Scoffs without fear, from foll^e do proceed.
The choice ^^hard, where silence kills with grief*
O^ speech reapes no reward, but base contemp^.
To mock a friend, is held no manly part.
Scorn can have no reward, but like contempt.
Ieasting is tolerable, but scorn most vile.
Disdain declares a proud presuming heart.
Loves passions quenched by unkind disdain,
Does often times increase the more desire.
Scorning is artificial injury.
Who scorneth most, shall be but paid with scoffs.
Scorn not thy wife, least scorned, she do thee s^athe.
Better an open foe, than scornful friend.
Better be borne a fool, than wrong thy wit.
No mocker, but at length did meet his match.
Similies on the same subject.
AS hottest love has soonest cold disdain,
So greatest pleasures have the greatest pain.
As good and ill each other do pu^^ue,
So hate-full estimation scorn succeeds.
As Adders keep their venime in their tails,
So scoffers poison lurketh in their tongues.
As fairest beauty may deserve some blame,
So wittiest scoffs prove but ridiculous.
As some things sweet in taste, are sour going down,
So scoffs that like the ear, dislike the mind.
As fair demeanor most commends a man,
So scorns and scoffs as much dishonor him.
Examples likewise on the same.
CAligula did covet his own ease,
And yet disdained others should do the like.
Anthony causde the head of Cicero
In scorn, be set before him at his meat.
Plato, Xenophon, and Demosthenes,
Against each other were contemptuous.
Geta and Antoninus, being brethren,
Slew one the other through their private scorn.
Among all perturbations, Tullie says,
Disdain is most injurious to it self.
And Fabius Maximus holds like conceit,
Affirming, nothing worser than contempt.
Of Slander, etc.
Slander and base Detraction, is the fruit
Of deuilish hearts, and foul polluted souls.
WHo lives, that stands out of slanders reach?
Detractions tongue, delights in ill reports.
What likes not malice, straight disprais'd must be,
Slander is blind, and cannot virtue see,
In slaundring speech, enu^e takes pleasure most.
With spightfull tongue detract no honest mind.
Do what we will, we cannot s^ape the sting
Of slaundrous tongues, that s^^li afresh do spring.
Take not away that thou can not restore:
Increase not grief, but rather sai^e the sore.
Detracting speech, of heaven does not smell,
But rather stinking, like the p^t of hell.
Lewdness is still defamed, and ever was.
Bold slanders tongue, time never can suppress.
Good words of all men gains laud and praise,
Where slanders are but counted cast-awayes.
No secret's hid, where slander keeps the dor^
Detraction will not spare Dianaes name.
Detracting talk, Gods picture out does race,
And sets up the Devils in the place.
A free consent is priuiledg'd from blame.
Slander can never just deserts deface.
The Be has honey, so he has a sting:
The one does wound, more than the other heales.
Against bad tongues, goodness cannot defend he^.
A sprightly wit disdaines detraction.
Men hardly stop the infamy and noise,
Of slanders published by common voice.
An unjust slander has no recompense.
Foul mouthed detraction is his neighbors foe.
Blame is esteemed more blame-lesse general,
Than that which private errors does pursue.
Slanders call things in question, not approues them.
A tale vn^ptly told, may be dep^au'd.
An open slander, often times has brought
That to effect, which never else was thought.
Flattery, lies, and slander, are sworn friends.
Slander will wrong his friend behind his back.
Slander like enuies dog, detects the dead.
Slanders like arrows against a wall rebound,
And soon'st of all the slaunderer does wound.
Slander being odious, so would others make.
Slander may bark at truth, but cannot b^te.
All itching ears do swallow many wrongs.
Who by his slaundring tongue his neighbor harms,
Does wound his own soul by his wicked words.
Large slanders are apparent signs of envy.
Slander offends the living, gnawes the dead.
Patience is proved by detraction.
No bane to friendship, worse than slander is.
Similies on the same subject.
AS Rats and Myce do feed upon our meat,
So slaunderers feed on flesh of other men.
As diverse meats do hurt digestion,
So changeable reports begets slander.
As Princes arms reach very far in length,
So slander stretches unto following times.
As deep incisions are for festred sores,
So mighty means must cure up slanders wounds.
As vultures prey upon dead carrion,
So slaunderers feed upon men's living names.
As Somners live by peoples daily sins,
So slanders live by killing men's good fame.
Examples likewise on the same.
NArsetes that renowned General,
By slanders was dismissed from his charge.
When Scipio was by slander highly wronged,
His discreet answer soon acquitted him.
Calisthenes, Parmenio, and Philotae^.
By slaundrous accusations lost their lives.
Augustus pardoned one that would have slain him,
But banished him that falsely slaundred him.
Diogenes affirmed, the slaunderer
Was worse than any wild or furious beast.
Seneca says, O^ thieves men may beware,
But hardly shall they escape the slaunderer.
Of the Tongue, etc.
The tongue is tell-tale of the private thoughts,
And words often times do ouer-reach the wise.
WOrds are but wind, they bid, but do not buy.
The greatest words, often times have weakest deeds.
Deep sounds make lesser noise than shallow foords:
And sorrow ebbes, being blown with wind of words.
Imperious tongues do scorn to use entreats.
The vulgar tongue proves impartial still.
Few words do ever ^it a trespass ^est,
Where no excuse can give the fault amends.
A soft slow tongue, true mark of modesty.
The least discourse is commonly most stout.
Presumption's ever fullest of deceits,
And many times proud words have poor effects.
Words are but shadows of a further smart.
Things being twice told, the vulgar not allow.
The further men do speak of things well done,
They have more mouths, but not more merit won.
Not words, but deeds are still respected most.
No charming words by dead tongues uttered are.
Of others faults what need we babble so,
When we our selves have vices many more?
Few words will serve a righteous cause to plead.
Great power have pleasing words, and mickle might.
Fair pleasing words are like to Magiq^e Art,
That does the charmed snake in slumber lay.
With words and gifts, it is easy to attempt.
Speech does prevail, where weapons cannot win.
He that no more must speak, is listened more,
Than they whom youth and ease has taught to gloss.
By good persuasion, what cannot be done?
Curses, are but vain breathings in the air.
Curses resemble arrows shot upright,
Which falling down, light on the shooters head.
The tongues of dying men enforce attention,
The hearts abundance issues from the tongue.
Still easy yielding zeal is quickly caught,
With what the mouth of gravity has taught.
Foul payment for fair words is more than needs.
The tongues mis-vse often breeds the bodies smart.
Sorrow makes silence her best Orator,
Where words may make it less, not show it more.
In poor men's words, the rich have small delight.
Report can make a substance of a shade.
Folly does guide the tongue that vainly speaks,
And vain is that which modest measure breaks.
In many words must needs be much amiss.
Men's thoughts and words nothing so opposite.
Few words among the wise have greater grace,
Than long Orations with unskillfulness.
Words are the shadows of our daily works.
Superfluous speech does much disgrace a man.
Grief sometimes does distressed minds so wreake,
That heart near bursteth ere the tongue can speak.
The tongue gads many times before the wit.
Much babbling does bewray great impudence.
Words are but fruitless that infect the ear,
Without some sweet impression of the mind.
Wine oftentimes is cause of many words.
The fewer words, the more discretion.
That man may worthily be said to do^e,
That trusts fair words, and solles his goods for smoke.
When swords have pleaded, words do come too late.
The less men speak, the more they meditate.
Bargains made by constraint, may well be broken:
And words by force compeld, as well unspoken.
By the hearts thoughts, the tongue is carried.
Few words well coucht, do most content the wise.
Reports in Co^^^s are held both night and day,
As common guests, and seldom part away.
Seld speaks love, but sighs his secret pains.
Of whom the tongue talks much, the heart thinks more.
Better by speaking little, make a s^arre,
Than by much babbling cause a wide deep wound.
Report has often a blister on her tongue.
The sweetest words may come from sowrest hearts.
The words that sound the sweetest in the ear,
Are not the wholso^^'st always to the heart.
In many words is couched most mistrust.
Who fights with words, does soonest wound himself.
Many repent the words that they have spoke,
But never any, that they held their peace.
The coldest words, often cooles the hottest throat.
Works, and not words, do most commend a man.
Spend stripes on him, whom words may not retain:
Yet spend to mend by strokes, but not to maime.
From fewest words may great effects ensue.
Silence has seldom yet made any sad.
Whereas desire does urge the tongue to speak,
Somewhat must out, or else the heart will break.
The tongue is called, the gate of life and death.
Who speaks with heed, may boldly say his mind.
The man whose tongue before his wit does run,
Often speaks too soon, and rues when he has done.
A word once past, can be recalde no more.
Better be silent, than in vain to speak.
As good be dombe, as speak and not be heard.
Similies on the same subject.
AS one spark may procure a mighty fire,
So one ill tongue may cause great enmity.
As rivers are bound in with banks for ouer-flowing,
So reason should restrain too lavish talking.
As gold boiles best when it does bubble least,
So mild deliverance sweetens best our words.
As silence is a gift deuoid of fear,
So talking is a thing to urge suspect.
As he bears misery best that hides it most,
So he declares least wit that prateth most.
As we must give account for idle silence,
So much more must we for our fruitless talk.
Examples likewise on the same.
POmpey let burn his finger in the fire,
Rather than he would be too free of tongue.
V^ysse^ in his you^h refrained from speech,
Because in years he would direct his tongue.
Great Alexander, gave Cherillus coin
To hold his peace, and to forbear to write.
Antig^nus this lesson taught his son,
First to learn silence, then to practice speech.
Ze^o repr^oued one that prated much,
And said, his ears were founded on his tongue*
The tongue (says Aristotle) blabs the mind,
And fools or wise men soon thereby we find.
Of Flattery, etc.
Flattery, is friendships utter overthrow,
The wrack of States, and honest natures foe.
THe greenest herb, often hides the foulest toad.
The stillest water has the deepest channel.
It Is better to be blamed by a friend,
Than to be kissed of a flatterer.
Soothing g^ts friends, but truth does purchase hate.
A seeming friend, is a deceitful bogge.
Flattery suruiues not at the dead man's door,
Live men have ears, when tombs are deaf and poor.
Of false dissembling, foulie must be fall.
The best dissembler, has the brauest wit.
It is esteemed no certain way to thrive,
To praise the dead, but flattering men alive.
Dissembled holiness, is double crime.
Fair feigned tales convey foul things from sight.
Dissembling sometimes may attain to save
Men's lives, their ^ame, their goods, and all they have.
Choose few friends, try them, flatterers speak fair.
Men strew sweet flowers to hide the deepest snares.
Men's pleas in love, like painters pensils are,
Which figure shadows, and the substance leave.
Fair outward shows prove inwardly the worst.
Love looks fair, when hap is most accursed.
The badge of hypocrites is noted still,
By always speaking well, yet doing ill.
Flattery does very seldom want rewards.
To flatter wise men, shows discretions want.
When greatest braues are brought to trials proof,
The boasters are content to stand aloof.
Flatterers r^spect their own good, no man's else.
Better a wretch, than a dissembler.
False flatterers are worse than greedy crows:
The one de^oure^ alive, the other dead.
Plain, and not honest, is too ha^sh a style.
Men still do foullest, when they fairest speak.
Fond Physiognomies complexion,
Guides not the inward disposition.
Better offend with truth, than flattering praise.
Flatterers are naught else but trencher flies.
True love's a Saint, so shall ye true love know,
False love's a S^ithian, yet a Saint in show.
Flattery i^ the nource of wickedness.
Dissembling wears a cloak, truth naked goes.
The smoothest looks, do soon'st of all beguile,
And often are clokes to cogitations vile.
Women's dissembling hardly can be matched.
A foe is better than a dissembling friend.
Similies on the same subject.
AS vultures sleep not where they find no prey,
So flatterers haunt not but where profit grows.
As vermin bre^d in places of most warmth,
So flatterers cling where best they find relief.
As Pilgrims creep not but where is some cross,
So slye dissemblers crouch not but for gain.
As ^othes the finest garments do consume,
So flatterers feed upon the frankest hearts.
As Panthers have sweet sents, but ravenous minds,
So flatterers have smooth looks, but killing hea^^s.
As straightest trees have still the crookedst roots,
So all dissemblers have the craftiest tricks.
Examples likewise on the same.
THe Emperor Sigismond struck a flatterer,
And said: He bit worse than a Scorpion.
Augustus so detested flattery,
He could not bide his servants kneel to him.
Tyberius servants might not call him Lord,
Because he said, therein they flattered him.
Clisiphus was called Philips counterfeit,
Because like him he fashioned all he did.
Phocion said to king Antipater,
He could not be his friend and flatterer.
Wise men (says Bias) make not all their friends,
But have a special eye to flatterers.
Of good Deeds, etc.
Good Deeds confound all bad, suppress offense:
Correcting faults with love and patience.
THat is a good deed which preuents the bad.
Good vows are never broken by good deeds.
He that sets down what gifts in goodness lurk,
Shall breath him twice, before he end his work.
In persons full of note, good deeds are done.
Vows are but seeds, and good deeds are the fruits.
Good turns ought not be held a servile bond,
To bind their doers to receive their meed.
That which does good, disgraceth no degre^.
We have no good, that we can say is ours.
Of passed good to make a new discourse,
By double usury does twice renew it.
Good lamps will shine till all their oil be gone.
Each goodly thing is hardest to begin.
When as the doing good, is only thought
Worthy reward, who will be bad for naught?
Raise not the bad, to make the good complain.
No good at all, with doing ill, is won.
Let us not think, that that our good can frame,
Which ruined has the Authors of the same.
They are too blame, which deeds well done will wrest.
Good deeds, the cruelt'st heart to kindness brings.
Good done to any, does impression strike
Of joy and love, in all that are alike.
Good deeds, are famishment unto the devil.
The end is crown of every work well done.
Good still is best when it is soonest wrought,
For lingring-fauour ever comes to naught.
The way to good, is never learned too late.
Faults should be measured by intent, not deed.
Nothing so good, but may through guilty shame,
Be much corrupt, and wrested to great blame.
Ig^orant faults crave pardon still by course.
Fa^^ts done, may be repented, not reclaimed.
He that will purchase things of greatest price,
Must conquer by his deeds, and not by words.
Faults vncommitted, challenge no repent.
Many deserts, may lessen slender faults.
Unjust offenses danger escape a time,
But yet at length revenge does pay them home.
Faults often are measured by their secr^cie.
An error past, is likewise past recalling.
There Is naught so vile that on the earth does live,
But to the earth some special good does give.
Good is the end that cannot be amended.
Where good is found, we should not quit with ill.
There Is naught so good, but strained from that fair use:
Reuolts to vice, and stumbles on abuse.
Gold and base mould, no difference but by use.
Better to hear than do what is not well.
For ones offense, why should a number fall,
Or priuas sin be plagued in general?
Seldom but some good comes ere the end.
Gay without good, is good hearts greatest loathing.
Foreign defects giving home faults the way,
Make many times bad actions well succeed.
Still the directest courses best succeed.
Virtue conducteth to all things are good.
First weigh the quality of each offense,
And thereunto apply the punishment.
What one thinks good, another counts as vain.
The highest iudger quickly can ^spie,
If faults or fraud do under covert lie.
Wisdom directs to know the good from bad.
As often as we do good, we sacrifice.
The more ^ur grace and goodness does increase,
The more our souls prepare them selves to God.
Truth is the guide to all good actions.
Never repent thee of thy well-done deeds.
The goodness that proceeds from ignorance,
I^ like the herbs that on a dunghill grows.
Good men do still delight in doing good.
Good deeds do show the fruits of zealous faith.
Similies on the same subject.
AS hardest stones are pier^'d with softest drops,
So virtuous deads reform the loosest minds.
As ^ond behavior most displaies a fool,
So honest deeds declare an honest heart.
As falling stars are soon extinguished,
So slight offenses crave quick pardoning.
As sullein looks bewrayes reuenge-full thoughts,
So mild aspect declares a gentle heart.
As golden bridles better not a horse,
So words without good deeds, show not a man.
As bankets have no grace, where wants guests,
So words are little worth, where deeds come short.
Examples likewise on the same.
TRaiane reproou'd for listening poor men's wrongs,
Said: None should hindet him from doing good.
The Emperor Au^elian had great care,
Least malice should obscure his well done deeds.
Philip did thank the woman for her check,
And said: Still c^ide me when I do not well.
Augustus left his friend to judgments trial,
For hindering law (quoth he) becomes no king.
Cleon being called to deal in state affairs,
Fore-warned his friends be careful of their deeds.
Reward the good (says Solon) for their doing good,
And punish them delight in wicked deeds.
Of evil Deeds, etc.
Evil deeds and wicked, come from vicious minds:
And here, or some-where else, due vengeance finds.
Extremest ills, some time a joy possess.
Ill hardly set on, is as hard got out.
Those things which we deem good, often prove but ill.
Counsel that comes when ill has done his worst,
Blesses our ill, but makes our good accursed.
To put back ill, our good we must forbear.
Evil tidings still do faster fly than good.
Our greatest ills, we most of all mistiust.
A guilty conscience, urged with the thought
Of former ill done deeds, not easily erres.
Evils unto evils, still conducters are.
Ill comes too soon, repentance often too late.
Ill news has wings, and with the wind does ^^ye.
In the first rising, seek to stifle ill,
Least it get head, and grow against thy will.
That daye's never ill, that brings a pleasing night
Worse than the worst of evils, are wicked thoughts.
No blush can paint the shame is due to ill.
The apprehension of what e're is good,
Gives but the greater feeling to the worse.
All wicked deeds do wrathful doomes procure.
In evils, counsel is the comfort chief.
Many times good does grow by evils proof.
By evil courses may be understood,
That their events can never fall out good.
When ill is hapt, tears but increase the ill.
Ill by example often gains good.
It Is double grief to see a helpless ill.
Great men that will have less do for them still,
Must bear them out, although their deeds be ill.
Good heart in ill, does much the ill amend.
It Is better to reform, than cut off ill.
The wor^er deed, the doer likes for best.
Never was man so evil, did or thought,
But would pretend some good cause, though stark naught.
Good words do often cover ill pretense.
One day does wreake the ill that many wrought.
Mischief often falls upon the meaners head.
An evil deed ^one by authority,
Is mighty sin and subornation.
The good compared with bad is soonest seen.
Who will not stoop to good, must yield to ill.
Mischief does ever ouer-match the bad.
The wicked cannot sleep or take their rest,
Till they be pleased with some ill done deed.
Mischief is light, and mounteth over head.
Old mischiefs often do set new ills abroach.
Ill president, the tide that wa^tes to vice.
A minute spent in good, seems long loathed day,
But nights of ill like moments slip away.
The more ill threats us, we suspect the less.
To harm, there always needs but little help.
Evil ensues of each wrong intent.
With unjust men to stand debating laws,
Is to give power to hurt a rightful cause.
Constrained ill must needs be suffered.
We see the good, but yet we choose the ill.
Often that is vile, shows like a virtuous deed.
Nothing the world with greater harm does fill,
Than want of feeling one another ill.
Men's faults do seldom to themselves appear.
Men smoother partially their own misdeeds.
Faults still against themselves give evidence.
When better choices are not to be had,
We needs must take the seeming best of bad.
The evil does always argue the offense.
One bad done deed, may work to many ill.
Evil seeming good, is most pernicious.
Those evils where to a man by love is driven,
So much the rather ought to be forgiven.
Things badly got, can have but bad success.
Custom confirms, and makes ill in perfection.
Nothing is evil, that is necessary.
Too small a sacrifice for mischiefs done
Is one man's breath, that thousands did defeat.
Mischief is no meet way to seek redress.
Mischief is often thought good by speeding ill.
A bad beginning makes a wor^er end.
Ill sometimes is the cause of good success,
And wicked meanings turn to happiness.
One mischiefs Sun, thawes not another Ice.
The sight of evil sets out goodness best.
Evil dessignes have evil accidents.
All such as are the ministers of ill,
The gallows eats, or fatal sword does kill.
Similies on the same subject.
AS Fowlers by their craft beguile the birds,
So wicked deeds corrupt plain meaning minds.
As serpents food is only on the earth,
So wicked men's delights, is ill done deeds.
As sheep-cloath'd Wolves do always greatest spoil,
So painted deeds do most of all deceive.
As Circes witchcraft changed men to beasts,
So wicked deeds makes seeming men bruit beasts.
As branches prosper not cut from the tree,
So all is vain that swerues from honest course.
As little sparks of ^ire procure great harm,
So least ill deeds do hardly find amends.
Examples likewise on the same.
PEricles said, the Athenians loved him,
Because they never could detect his deeds.
Demetrius lost all his followers,
Because he had no care of doing ill.
Pyrrhus desired to be smit with death,
When he did ought that ill beseem'd a King.
Seuerus caused his man be smoakt to death,
Because his deeds should not dishonor him.
Men to do ill, or injury each other,
Is no mean eyesore, Tullie does affirm.
No man (says Socrates) should deal unjustly
In any matter, be it never so small.
Of Thoughts.
Thoughts are the flowring blossoms of the mind,
And words, the daily fruits of our desires.
CLose thoughts stands free from sword or violence.
No kings command could ever hinder thought.
What thought can think, another thought can mend
A secret shame in every thought will smother.
Where fears do Candie-thoughts with Icie-cold,
Heat stirs the tongue to dangers manifold.
Thoughts are but dreams, till their effects be tried.
Unstained thoughts do seldom dream of ill.
A fault unknown, is as a thought vnacted.
Prevention speaks all, but what he thinks.
That which the thought would by the tongue digest,
The ear conuayes it back into the breast.
The thoughts of men are fed with expectations.
All wishing thoughts sprout forth by quick desire.
Cities do bastardize the brauest thoughts.
It Is very hard, imprisoned thoughts to bale.
Pure thoughts do always sleep secure and still,
While lust and murder wakes to stain and kill.
Thoughts often times force a lingering life to pine.
Hope strengthened, adds much matter to each thought.
All women's tongues and thoughts seldom agreee.
How poor soever, thought is rich enough.
If springing thoughts be any jot diminisht,
They wither in their prime, and prove naught worth.
The heart has but one string, yet many thoughts.
All earthly thoughts are subject to annoy.
Irreverent thoughts against kings, are treachery.
Vnmeasur'd thoughts, by fortune are cut short.
Nothing does sooner dry up beauties blood,
Than sullein thoughts, though it be never so fresh.
Often princes thoughts are tied to beauties wings.
All wicked thoughts have still a wicked end.
Sweet is the thought, where hope persuades hap.
Sweet are the thoughts that never found amisle.
Nothing does sooner shorten life of man,
Than vain deluding hopes, and idle thoughts.
Dear is the thought whereby discretion lives.
Thoughts prosper not, where fear does perish them.
No witness needs for a guilty thought.
The meanest man, will yet in thought aspire.
Our narrow-eyes thoughts often times look more direct*
Than our loose wisdoms, borne with wild neglect.
All leaden thoughts, than earth no higher flies.
Full many signs bewrayes our secret thoughts.
Thoughts oftentimes do shroud us in the earth.
To muse and meditate, is learnings life.
By common carriage of the outward parts,
The secret thoughts are seen of many hearts.
Cartie thy thoughts in silence sealed up.
Sweet are the thoughts of pleasures we have tried.
Thoughts are not seen, yet looks bewray the mind.
Similies on the same subject.
AS white and black are contrary in sight,
So words and thoughts are very different.
As fire and water never can agree,
Even so men's words and thoughts do disagree.
As courtiers cloakes are shifted very often,
So are our thoughts never at certain stay.
As light is welcome to perplexed minds,
So merry thoughts do banish sadness best.
As every tree has his peculiar fruit,
So every man has his own private thought.
As merry hosts care not for frowning guests,
So pleasant minds can brook no pensive thoughts.
Examples likewise on the same.
CAesar did never fear a merry look.
But doubted sad men to have wicked thoughts.
The Spartanes carried commendation,
Because they scorned to bear injurious thoughts.
Puluillus being told, his son was dead,
Made answer: Therefore he would take no thought.
When Scipio read the books of Xenophon,
He said: They counsail'd him from taking thought.
Thoughts do afflict the mind, says Cicer^,
And makes it subject to no certainty.
Says Aristotle, They need Physic most,
That do devour their health by fretfull thoughts.
Of Tears, etc.
Tears are best friends to solitary minds:
And mourning is a foe to company.
WEeping auailes not, where laments are scorned.
Our tears often times draw tears from others eyes.
Great losses, greatly are to be bemoaned.
Tears tie the tongue of an accusers grudge,
And softs the rigor of the stearnest judge.
No grief like that, to mourn and be despised.
A troubled soul in tears her comfort seeks.
Well mourning garments fit a mourning mind.
Tears are dumb Orators, and wanting speech,
Persuade some-time more than the tongue can do.
Tears are the most effectual ^hetoricke*
Tears are the treasure of a griefe-gald heart.
Grief ties the tongue, and sorrow stops tears.
Tears must not be as torments, but at marks
To show the love we bear unto our friend.
Tears will appease, where trespass has incenst.
Repentant tears does quench Gods kindled ire.
Tears sh^d in time, does win a blisse-full hour.
Our tears must be as drops of vital blood,
Not feigned, but derived from the heart.
The heart may weep, although the eyes be dry.
Partners in love, are partners in laments.
Eyes are first causers of the hearts lamenting.
Music can hardly solace humane ears,
When strings are broke, and eyes are drowned in tears,
Soft tears make battery in the hardest heart.
Tears deemed but silent, are as loud as thunder.
Tears are swift posts to certify our griefs.
They seldom do respect poor beggars tears,
That may have music to delight their ears.
Tears are as nourishment to godly souls.
Weeping is joy to well-affected minds.
Our eyes must not be drowned, nor yet dry.
To weep for loss, or worldly dignity
And not for sin, is mere hypocrisy.
Tears kindle love, and qualify displeasure.
The deepest cares, break never into tears.
Tears ill becomes the Judge that first condemns.
To weep alone, is thought an yrkesome sore:
Yet company disturbeth some, much more.
Venus smiles seldom in a house of tears.
It Is better wake and weep, than sleep and joy.
Tears ease the mind, though else do small avail.
Drops pierce the flint, not by their force or strength,
But by often falling wears it out at length.
Tears shed for virtues sake, are blessed tears.
Tears work no ruth, but where the heart is tender.
Tears are the riches of a sighing soul.
Griefe-broken hearts do live with tears in eyes,
And dy^ with mirth, appearing in their looks.
Grief till all ends, has never perfect ending.
Sighs usually proceed from grief and smart.
Tears do but blind the eyes, as clouds the air.
The rich man does revenge himself by arms,
But poor men have no other help than tears.
Whose griefs are great, have need of quickest cure.
Tears cannot change what God has fore-decreed.
Tears do want eyes which should give tears to weep.
Tears are no remedies for sad distress:
Neither can present plaints ease passed harms.
Hearts true contrition, is souls bliss beginner.
Tears are the badges of true penitence.
Similies on the same subject.
AS some men weep that are not rightly sad.
So many smile that are not rightly glad.
As trees by nature brings forth their fruit,
So sorrow does by custom shed ^ad tears.
As thunder always is not quenched with rain,
So grief not ever is appea^d with tears.
As too much boldness is in women bad,
So fits it not in men to be too ^ad.
As showers of rain do cause the earths increase,
So streams of tears do give the soul true peac^.
As weeping Olive trees most fruitful are,
So mourning minds do soonest kill despair.
Examples likewise on the same.
Brave Coriolanus being banished Rome,
^oucht with his fault, went forth, and did in tears.
The Roman matrons for old Brutus death,
For one whole year did nothing else but mourn.
The wife of Lepidus, her misbehauiour,
In tears and anguish did abridge his days.
Crassus was never seen in all his life
But once to smile; but many times to mourn.
Sen^e^ says, That mighty men by power
Revenge themselves; the weaker, by their tears.
The broken heart (says Tullie) has moist eyes,
When oftentimes it faignes forth merry looks.
Of Humility, etc.
Humility, is lowliness of mind,
The only way, the seat of bliss to find.
HVmilitie looks lowly on the ground.
Humility, her friends with kindness feeds.
The lowly dales envy not highest hills.
Humility, to heaven, the step, the staire,
Is by devotion, hearty grief, and prayer.
The lowly mind does highest gifts adorn.
Meekness of heart is glory to mankind.
Humility admires his pain with joy.
The kindly dew drops from the higher tree,
And wets the little plants that lowly dwell.
The Cedar yields to the Axes edge.
Better sit still, than rise, and after fall.
The shrub is safe, when the tall Cedar shakes,
H^ that high growth on Cedars did bestow,
Gave likewise lowly Mushromes leave to grow.
Humble and meek, becomes both young and old.
Gray has less grief, than costly silken ^utes.
Humility walks lowly on the earth,
Assured of certain dignity in heaven.
The lowest shrubs do feel the fewest storms*
The minds submission pulls down lofty looks.
When as the Eagle means his highest flight,
He makes his mounting in the lowest dale.
Great floods do often rise from humble streams*
Content below, never climbes to seek aloft.
The cottage seated in the lowly dale,
Is more secure than highest sovereignty.
Humility, the ^oules chief beauty is.
Humility does anger soon assuage.
A lowly life that fears no sudden loss,
Is still content, how-euer things goes cross.
An humble mind savors of piety.
True humblenes does all men's virtues praise.
A mind that fears no fall, nor craves no crown,
Is in the rightest way to true renown.
Religions chief precept, is humblenes.
Happy that man, who is in honor humble.
Where humble thoughts do to the heavens aspire,
There is no place for any proud desire.
The minds best armor, is humility.
Lowliness is the perfect path to honor.
Humility has brought those things to pass,
Which reason, nor no virtue else could do.
Pride wageth war against humility.
By lowliness, is true discretion won.
Proud minds can hardly learn humility.
Humility augments benevolence,
Supporteth truth, and keeps a kingdom safe.
Humility reuiues dead charity.
The face does soon express an humble mind.
Truth soon appears to humble minded men.
The noble Lion never slayes the least,
But always preyes upon the proudest beast.
Humility rules all the minds affects.
No way to heaven, but by humility.
Humility winnes immortality.
Humility with perfect grace stands fast,
When all things else are vanished and past.
Break not a bending reed, spare the submisse.
Earth vessels, with the brazen may not strive.
Similies on the same subject.
AS lowliness of heart brings down heavens grace,
So humble words can proudest terms deface.
As salt does season every kind of meat,
So lowliness does show all virtues best.
As valleys sertilnesse the hills exceeds,
So humble lowliness shows fairest deeds.
As wine in lowest vaults is best preserved,
So grace in humble minds is best discerned.
As proud presumption seeks his own decay,
So lowliness to bliss directs the way.
As ignorance most scorneth to be taught,
So humbleness desires still to learn.
Examples likewise on the same.
PHilip for humblenes of mind was praisd,
Beyond all princes of the Macedons.
Antigon^^s with great humility,
Bare off the ^launders of his enemies.
Scipio, in all his fottunes never sweru'd,
From patient sufferance, and humility.
Pericles most of all defamed himself,
By making scorn of true humility.
Tullie affirms, all virtues what-soe're,
Are soonest learned by humility.
Plato calls lowliness, the souls defense,
And only shield against extremities.
Of Authority, etc.
Authority, proud pomp, and worldly power,
Makes monarchs but as marks, when fate does lower.
AVthoritie makes many m^n severe.
Death gives no thanks, but checks authority.
It is in vain, and fondly we resist,
Against proud might, that can do what it list*
A lawful title counter-checks proud might.
The greatest often may need a weaker help.
Little auailes a lawless usurpation,
Which gains ascepter, but not rules a nation.
Might wanting measure, proves surquedrie.
Nothing ^o ^^l^ as w^ong, being armed with right.
Might is reputed absolute alone,
When of two powers there is true conjunction.
Some lea^^e to rule, while others learn to live.
They th^^ stand high, have many blasts to shake them
Vain^ is the vaunt, and vi^^orie vmust,
That more to might, than ^ightfull cause does trust.
When great leaves ^all, then winter is at hand.
Needs must we do, what might will force us do.
The ^^er-spreading pomp of greatest might,
Will darken weakness, and debase his sight.
What mighty men misdoe, they cannot mend.
Deep are the blows made with a mighty Ax^.
More than enough he finds, that finds his might,
Has force to make all that he will have, right.
The more, the migh^ier, if they gree in one.
Arm not unskillfulness with mighty power.
He, who his ow^e cause makes, does still devise,
To make too ^^^ch* to have is more than sure.
Great is the danger of vnmastred might.
Too many great, one kingdom cannot hold.
Where power has decreed ^o find offense,
The cause is better still, than the defense.
Might makes a title, where he has no right.
M^n count that wrong, is compassed by might.
He only tr^^ds the sure and perfect path
To greatness, who love and opinion has.
Uncertain power, cannot it self retain.
Custom has power to kill with weakest might.
Who falls bu^ ^ow, may quickly rise again:
Who falls from h^ight, is mercilessely slain.
Love is not alwa^es dign^^ies companion.
The tallest trees are shaken most with winds.
When one selfe-power is common made to two,
Their duties they nor suffer* nor will do.
Preferment is the first step to disquiet.
In equal play-fellowes, no peril lies.
The man that gives a weapon to his stronger,
Is like himself to carry rule no longer.
Each little spot, appears most in the face.
Great might is like a fortified tower.
No man can manage great affairs of state,
And yet content a wayward multitude.
Where many lead, they lead to many blows.
Let Gods with Gods, and men with men contend.
What ere he be, with his superior plays,
Stands in the mouth of danger many ways.
He hardly will entreat, that may command.
All dignity on tickle stays does stand.
With mighty men it is better ceasing strife,
Than an unequal quarrel to maintain.
There is no hell, like to declining pomp.
He sits not safest, that is mounted high.
In high degree small faul^s are quickly spyde,
But low estate a many errors hyde.
No high estate can yield a quiet life.
The power of virtue euer-more preuailes.
What though our sins go brave and better clad?
They are in rags as base and all as bad.
Might breaks the law the sacred Senate makes.
The more our greatness, makes our faul^s the more.
Similies on the same subject.
AS in fine cloth the brightest stains we see,
So faults are most discerned in high degree.
As ^^stie cl^mbers often catch sudden falls,
So might mis-vsde, does kindle naught but braules.
A^ he that stands on high, stands still in fear,
So they that manage states, do want no care.
As Rasors are not fit for childrens hands,
So fools no way beseem authority.
As presidents are aptest means for youth,
So rulers goodness gives example best.
As the great Elm supports the spreading vine,
So might ought still support humility.
Examples hereof are generally through the book: as in Kings, Princes,
Kingdoms, Magistrates, etc. and therefore no need of other collections.

Of Courage, etc.
Courage, is foe to faint-heart cowardice:
And manhood, teaches valor to be wise.
COurage emboldneth wit, wit courage arms.
Without experience, valor wants his arms.
Danger and fear, like cowards turns aside,
When manhood is by resolution tryde.
Skill valor guides, and valor armeth skill.
Who hopes a conquest, leaves no means unsought.
The inward thoughts, that haughty courage bear^s,
Gri^ucs mo^^ at words, than deaths pale-faced f^ar^s.
Courage, with cowardice will not be matched.
The valiant man, does most in war delight.
Seldom shall any living creature se^,
That courtesy and manhood disagree.
The coward seeks to live at home in ease.
Valor is never known till it be tried.
They that attempt high da^ngers ^uident,
Upon no reason, are not valiant.
Actions do kill imaginations sway.
Unequal wars, t'vnequall shame is sold.
The man that dares, not caring how he dar^s*
Sells virtues name, to purchase foolish skarres.
Rebellious natures must be roughly used.
Repining courage yields no foe a foot.
Cowards do only wish and call for death,
While valiant hearts in silence banish breath.
Vain words cannot bewitch a valiant mind.
Measure not manhood by the outward show*
The noble courage never weeneth ought,
That may unworthy of it self be thought.
Chaffer no words, high courage to provoke.
Courage may lend a cloak to cowardice.
Nothing the praise of manhood more does mar
Than foul revenge, and base contentious jar.
Action, is fiery valors sovereign good.
True valor lodges in the lowliest hearts.
High courage with true wisdom always back*
Winnes perfect fame, and shunneth each mishap.
Weakness is false, and faith in cowards rare.
Glori^ does follow, courage goes before.
The man that couples courage with desire,
Runs freely through his danger, and preuailes.
True valor aims at honor evermore.
A cowards heart keeps words and deeds asunder.
A jewel in a ten-times bard-vp chest,
I^ a bold spirit in a loyal breast.
Courage and industri^ can never want.
In conquering will, true courage most is shown.
In vain^ he seeks others to suppress,
Who has not learned first to subdue himself.
All strength is frail, and full of fickleness.
No fortunes frown can daunt true valors heart.
Beggars (but ^eigning bravery) are the proudest:
And cowards (bragging boldness) wrangle loudest.
A valiant mind disdaines to hide his head.
It Is cowardice, unworthy wrongs to bear.
Where wronged valor reign^s, it is hard to find
Such pittis, as may honors pride control.
True valor, feels nor grief nor misery.
Resolute courage, makes love fortunate.
Cowards in p^ace do dread the weapons sight.
But urged by need, will venture then the pikes*
Courage to die, exceeds a captived life.
Courage despises dread, and conquers death.
Similies on the same subject.
AS courage adds wings to brave desire,
So bloody shows does quench incensedire.
As it is valor to be conqueror,
So wisdom makes use of victory.
As courage keeps the mind from base assaults,
So cowardice infects it with all faults.
As courage is esteemed a wise man's coat,
So cowardice is follies cognizance.
As Faulconers do in Faulcons most delight,
So mighty men rejoices in their might.
Examples likewise on the same.
THe Roman^ Sergius, loosing his right hand,
Slew with his left hand, four in single fight.
Scaeuola entered king Porsennaes Tent,
Either to kill him, or be slain by him.
Agis dissuaded from the fight, replied:
No man won shame, that with true courage did.
Stout Al^ibiades cheerd up his followers,
By his courageous lead^ng them to field.
Courage, says Seneca, is of such power,
As it can conquer any misery.
Plato says, Courage eleuates the mind,
To all things that are laudable and just.
Of Pleasure, etc.
Pleasure and sweet Delights, do much beguile:
Expecting joy, grief happens often meane-while.
PLeasures are poor, and our delights soon dye.
Where pleasure is displaced, care keeps his ^arte.
Where care killes pleasure, life not long endures.
Who tries, shall find, that pleasures long restrained.
Be far more pleasant when they once are gained.
Where strife is stirred, there pleasure has no part.
Worlds pleasure lasts not long, but grief abides.
Farewell delight, when graueld is all grace.
Never have unjust pleasures been complete
In joys entire, but fear still keeps the door.
The sweetest pleasure has the shortest date.
Long wished things, a sweet delight do bear.
Pleasure and penance still are mortal foes.
Enforced solace, like a vapor flies,
And has no power repining hearts to move.
Solace and sorrow have their certain times.
While pleasure withers, pain more ripe does grow.
When pleasures ^bbe, then griefs begin to flow.
To vain delights, a man may easily go:
But safely to return, may much be feared.
Best music breeds delight in loathing cares.
The strong, through pleasure falls; ^he weak, by smart.
Pleasures do never feed, but ^n exc^sse.
He that in pleasures vain does time bestow,
Treads but the path to his ow^e ouerthr^w.
In things without us, no delight is sure.
Pleasure is felt, opinion but conceived.
Pleasure is short, and glory lasts not long.
The sweets we wish for, tu^ne to ^^at^ed son e^s*
Even in the moment, that we call them ours.
That pleases most, is ^arthest from the eye.
Low is the stalk, whereon best pleasures grow*
Pleasure asleep, then so^^ow will awake.
Maids are not won by brutish force or might,
But speeches full of pleasure and delight.
Pleasure maintained by care, is quickly lost.
After long sickness, health brings most delight.
Uncertain pleasures, bring a certain pain.
Ma^des do take more delight, when they prepare
And think of wives state, than when wives they are.
Shortest delights, do bring a long repent.
Pleasures themselves, are but imaginations.
Things soon obtained, do least of all delight.
This wo^ld is but the pleasure of an hour,
And yet the sorrow of a thousand da^es.
Often pleasures past, do way to woe prepare.
In worldly mi^th, lurketh much misery.
All sweet delights, are drowned in dulled minds.
Pleasures (li^e posting guests) make but small stay,
Where griefs ^ide long, and leave a score to pay.
It Is true delight, to know the cause of grief.
Mi^th ^oundeth harsh to melancholy men.
Mirth makes the longest iournies to seem short.
What more apparent sign can be of madness,
Than have another pleasure cause thy sadness?
Who buys a minutes mirth, may wail a week.
Mirth searches out the bottom of annoy.
Unlawful pleasures, haste destruction.
Potions (if pleasant) though insectious,
Are sooner ta^ne, than wholesome pill^ for health.
Sorrow, foregoing pleasure, graceth it.
Gladness with grief, continually is mixed.
Banke-rupts in pleasure, can but pay with woe.
We are right docible to imitate
Depraved pleasures, though degenerate.
Short pleasures many times have large repents.
Pleasures are still inductions to our griefs.
Often has a tragic entrance, pleasant end.
Similies on the same subject.
AS no estate can stable stand for aye,
So every pleasure has his ending day.
As small brooks swell and are enraged with rain,
So sight of pleasure trebleth every pain.
As weeds expeld, the corn does better thrive,
So care being killed, pleasure bides long alive.
As greatest griefs do make the least not seen,
So huge delights cause mean ones vanish clean.
As greatest light, is in the largest sky,
So that delights, is furthest from the eye.
As sad minds brook no merry company,
So sorrow is to pleasure enemy.
Examples likewise on the same.
SArdanapalus was so given to pleasure,
That of a man, he made himself a beast.
Xerxes bestowed gifts on none but such,
As daily could invent new kinds of pleasures.
In King Latinus Court, the ^royans
In choice of all delights did spend their time.
Demetrius being to all vain pleasures given,
Was by the Macedonians quite expulst.
Cineas told Fabritius, that vain pleasure,
Did like a moath consume the life of man.
Demosthenes in his Orations,
Always forbad voluptuous vain delights.
Of Pain.
Pain, as companion does on Pleasure wait:
And Danger is the handmaid to Delight.
SHort pain may be endured, that brings long ease.
He never finds help, that hides his pain.
Far harder is it, to learn continence
In joyful pleasures, than in grievous pain.
They lesser pains can bear, that hide the great.
Pain profit reapes, if seeds be wisely sown.
Where words be scarce, they are seldom spent in vain,
For they speak truth, that breath their words with pain.
Soone-dying mirth, begets long-liuing pain.
Who bears the wound, perfor^e must feel the pain.
The man that needs will seek for unknown gain,
Often lives by loss, and leaves with mickle pain.
The greater pain, the greater misery.
Pain pays the in-come of each precious thing.
It eases some, though none it ever cured,
To think that others have their pains endured.
It Is pain to keep the things we would express.
All labors have their end, but pain has none.
No pain or sickness does so swiftly breed,
As evil humors grow, the grief to feed.
To get, and keep not; is not loss, but pain.
Pain breeds honor, virtue gets fame.
Better in prison ever to remain,
Than being ^orth, to suffer greater pain.
With ease a spark, with pain is quenched a flame.
Pleasure does follow pain, and bliss annoy.
It Is pain and grief, to bear and suffer wrong:
But shame and sin to him that causes it.
An inward sore strikes the Physician blind.
Salues seldom help ouer-long festred sores.
How mighty is the sovereign power of love,
Which pain, thirst, hunger, no nor death can moo^^?
Sad music to sad passions, adds more pain.
One pain is lessened by another anguish.
Let him for ever live in woe and grief,
That feels pain, and will not have relief.
Pain is the entrance to eternal joy.
How frail is that which men atchieue with pain*
They that must either serve, or pine in want,
Ought scorn no pains, that ^ay relieu^ their sca^^^.
The cause, and not the pain, the martyr makes.
Remembrance of joys past, breeds greater pain.
He that with ease may pain and harm eschew,
Is vain, if he his proper death pursue.
Patience does put all toyle-some pain to flight.
He best does bear his pain, that hides it most.
^ew link for love, but all for greedy gain,
Though in the end, it turns them most to pain.
An unknown pain, is greatest misery.
He cannot judge of pleasure, never felt pain.
Similies on the same subject.
AS danger waits at the heels of pride,
So every pleasure has a following pain.
As where mishaps do flow, there love does ebb,
So where friends fail, the heart feels no like pain.
As sick men with least anguish are disturbed,
So to vex troubled minds, augments their pain.
As Sunshine days of fortune gets friends,
So pain or peril loses them as soon.
As misery a medicine hardly finds,
So inward pains, are not with pratinge cured.
As he bears sorrow best that hides it most,
So who knows patience, stands prepared for pain.
Examples likewise on the same.
PHilostrates endured all his pains,
To th'admiration of his enemies.
Marius the Roman said, he felt no pain
In all his hurts, if but one friend were by.
Sextus Pompeius could abide no pain,
No, not so much as feel his head to ache.
The Spartanes for their pleasures, made strict laws,
Showing, what pain to each one did belong.
Cicero said, No pain could touch the mind,
That was but rampierd*in with ^usterance.
And Aristotle held the same opinion,
Firm resolution could subdue all pain.
Of Poverty, etc.
Poverty is a virtue of it self,
Content with want and needy misery.
Poverty is not wisdoms hinderance.
Contented poverty is greatest wealth.
Need, is esteemed a perfect Schoole-mistresse.
Need answers not to every man's request.
Poor misery i^ trodden on by many,
And being low, never relieved by any.
Wise men, must give place to necessity.
Ignorance is the greatest poverty.
Stout vows are often repealed in extreme need.
Sweet are poor crummes, where pained thoughts do starve.
Need hurts none so much as silly souls,
Who cannot patiently endure her yoke.
Plenty breeds peril, want procures di^daine.
Misery craves rather mercy, than reproof.
There is no virtue like necessity.
Thanks ought be deemed The Exchequer of the poor.
We should our selves not miserable deem,
Since none are so but in their own esteem.
To needy men, delay is even as death.
Most wretched he, that is, yet cannot tell.
Misery often makes sport to mock it self.
The wretched conquered, may naught refuse.
Who in distress from resolution flies,
Is rightly said, to yield to miseries.
That needs must be performed, which need constraines.
Poor wretches have remorse in poor abuses.
The graunts are small to them that stand in need.
Men fly from foes, but not from misery.
Sharp are the wounds, but sweet the medcines be,
That wretched souls from weary bondage free.
Want pines away, and comfortless does dye.
Delay leads impotent and s^aile-pac'd need.
He is not poor, has little, but that much desires.
Contented poverty, is happiness.
A little ^roke will serve to make him die,
That is hal^e slain before with misery.
Diligence most enableth poorest men.
The love of poor men, great men's harms debates*
Love never keeps where wretchedness abides.
Poor men should suffer for no great men's sins.
No truer friends have poor men than their tears,
Wherein men (^ach way wretched) may be rich.
It is too much for one good man to want.
Give them that want, not such as have no need.
To live and lack, does breed a daily grief.
Sharp is the food necessity imposes.
Want smiles secure when pri^cely thoughts do feel
That fear and danger treads upon their heel.
Speed in necessity is chiefest s^^^^e.
Distress cuts deeper than stern fortunes frowns.
Necessity endure* what else would not.
Misery finds no multitude of friends.
It is an ^^^^ur ^^ adversity,
With s^^igh*^ to (...)ine prosperity.
Where need comp^^^s, Orat^on^ are in vain.
Occasion makes them s^ir^^, that else would not.
The just man's misery is no mean me^it.
Though thou a^t poor* yet se^k^, and thou shall find.
Prosperity is ^o^^^ of very ^^^^^,
But men i^ want are hardly ^olpe by an^.
By others wants we know our own good haps.
Misery does the brauest mind abate.
Need makes men ^eeke for that they sometime scornd.
Want, is the enemy to good desires.
Poverty often with heavy ^l^gge of care
Pulls ^^^ny down, when th^^ as^ending are.
Poor men are little shrubs, rich men tall trees.
Need sometimes does instruct ^nlawfull things.
A poor and honest life has no compare.
Similies on the same subject.
AS Kings have honor to bear out their deeds,
The po^re ^aue honesty to guide their lives.
As riches se^meth ^umbersome to ^ooles,
So poverty is pleasing to the wise.
As riches is the mother of delight,
So poverty does no^rce calamity.
As want, to ma(...) in tolerable,
So in good men, it is most comfortable.
As the wild Ass is still the Lions prey,
So do the rich feed on the poor each day.
As every Artizane best knows his trade,
So every poor man best does feel his want.
Examples likewise on the same.
PVblicola cast down from high degree,
Shamed not, but ioyed in his poverty.
Aristides, from humble poverty,
Was raised to degree of dignity.
Fabritius in his meanest poverty,
Pyrrhus made choice of, as companion.
Vul^urnus banished by Anthony,
Never repined at his misery.
Poverty, is help to Philosophy,
Learned of it self; so said Diogenes.
Lactantius said: Take away insolence,
And there is no difference twixt the rich and poor.
Of Bounty, etc.
Bounty has open hands, a zealous heart:
And liberally bestows without respect.
LIke clouds that have no rain, are liberal words.
The whole effect of bounty, is in love.
The liberal heart, God cherishes and loves,
And from him still, all cause of want remooues.
The more the fruit, more precious is the tree.
The more the fish, more valued is the stream.
That bounty is the best, and most approou'd,
Which without peril of renow^ne is past.
The goodliest night is, when most stars are seen.
Bounties best honor is to help the poor,
And happiness to live in good men's minds.
We count that ground the best, which yields most grain.
Bounty, r^mitting frail and mortal things,
Does for reward receive immortal fame.
The whole effect of bounty, is in love.
They that in bounty d^e begin to want,
In weak estate shall find their friends and foes.
True bounty is not fastened to respect.
A spend-thrift sworn to prodigality,
Excuses it with liberality.
A liberal minded man, base envy hates.
He that still draws forth without supply,
The fountain of his store will soon be dry.
He never gives in vain, that gives in zeal.
Gifts to the poor, let them be done with speed*
For long delay, more wretched makes their need.
Bounty and thankfulness are concords bonds.
One gift in time bestowed, as good minds do,
Falls out in pooose to help much more than two.
A liberal heart procures benevolence.
Honors chief grace is liberality.
Similies on the same subject.
AS pride makes enemies of perfect friends,
So liberality makes friends of foes.
As hollow spouts retains naught but air,
So hollow hearts all bounty ever have.
As Bees do flock unto a honey dew,
So multitudes flies to a liberal mind.
As s^^dowes hinders ripening of the fruits,
So covetousness still holds bounty back.
As H^nbane causes death by sleepines,
So bounty is destroyed by niggardnes.
As manhood is discerned by cowardice,
So bounty is beheld by wretchedness.
Examples likewise on the same.
BY liberal bounty, Alexander won
^ore fame, than all his conquests else beside.
Caesar, by bounty to his followers,
Was called the liberall'st prince in all those times.
Archelaus gave not to unworthy men,
For that h^ held not liberality.
Titus, remembering one day nothing given,
Said: O my friends, how have we lost this day*
Plato said, Niggards never can be good,
For all attends on the bountiful.
Phocylides willed no man sleep at night,
Till that day he could count some well-done deed.
Of Folly.
Folly is both rewarded and respected,
When wit is often scorned and rejected.
WHat folly can pretend, wisdom preuents.
A greater sign of folly i^ not known,
Than trusting others force, distrust our own.
Repentance, youthful folly quite expells.
Who hazards his estate, to remedy
A curelesse mischief, may be termed a fool.
Wishes are vain, where will is follies guide.
Fools may not play with swords, nor maids with love,
Least folly cry, and wantonness repent.
Fools many times, to dignities arise.
A fool such pastime with his pleasure makes,
As in the end his ruin he awaketh.
Fools wanting knowledge, do cont^mne the wise.
He is a fool that does prepare a ginne,
To be him self the first man t^^^^ therein.
Unlettered fools, at learning do repine.
Who with a rasour thinks to c^t the Flint,
But vnder-takes a foolish fruit less ta^ke.
Follies often leave a memory of shame.
Learning does live in pen^orie and bare,
When fools grow rich, and feed on daint^st fare*
Wisdom does frown when folly is in place.
Fools are set up in offices full gay,
When wiser men come down, and sit below.
It Is better be a fool, than prove a Fox.
Folly is judged in silence to ^e wise,
For too much babbling, wisdom does despise.
Folly flings forth, if counsel touch him near.
For childrens hands, a rasour is unfit,
And fools unmeet in wisdoms seat to sit.
What greater scourge than folly, is to wit?
Foolish that science is, held never so dear,
Which fore-shewes perils ^^nre, not dangers near.
Silence is still best answer to a fool.
Promote a fool, his folly strait appears,
And proves a shame to them which caused him climb.
All Is prouender to Asses, but the air.
Mount up a fool, his wit is quickly heard:
Then keep such down, let wise men be preferred.
Instructions given to fools, increases folly.
A leaden sword clad in a golden sheath,
Is like a fool of natures finest mould.
Follies are sooner thought on, than redrest.
For man, it is great folly to delight
In fading smoke, and loose the heavenly light.
Folly, to save a part, and loose the whole.
A very fool I do him firmly hold,
That loves his fetters, though they be of gold.
A Lions skin hides not the Asses ears.
So much does folly thrust men into blame,
That even to leave off shame, they count a shame.
Folly, though ouer-guilt, at length appears.
Prosperity often makes fools stark mad.
Similies on the same subject.
AS foolish questions merit silence best,
So kind demands require as kind replies.
As no mishap can move a careless mind,
So no instructions can reform a fool.
As wise men not esteemed by outward shows,
So any semblaunce satisfies fools.
As snow in Summer no man does commend,
So none deemes honor requisite for fools.
As spots disfigure any beauteous face,
So folly is the blemish of the mind.
As smoke at highest, soonest vanishes,
So folly praised, quickliest perishes.
Examples likewise on the same.
BY folly Nicias was taken alive,
Dismayed only with the Moons eclipse.
Oemilius termed Perses but a fool,
To be dismayed because of vanquishing.
Cleander, who would needs betray his lord,
Lost all his hopes, and proou'd him self a fool.
Torquatu^ foolishly shunned dignity,
Because himself was pained with sore eyes.
Be neither simple, nor yet over subtle,
Such counsel gave the wise and learned Bias.
Folly, says Cicero, pollutes the sou^e,
But wisdom is a glorious o^^a^^^t.
Of Time.
Time calls account of what before is past,
For time will have a reckning made at last.
TIme wanting bounds, still lacks certainty.
Time has a ^alue for all e^^^emities.
There Is none but have in time persuaded been.
Flowers have time, before they fall to seed.
VV^e can help time, to ^^^^ow us with age,
Bus stop no w^inkl^ in ^is pilgrimage.
Times office is to end the hate of fo^s.
Times glory is to calm contending kings.
Time is a tutour ^oth to good and bad.
Short time seems long, in sorrows sharp s^staining.
Time is the herald, that does best of all
Emblazon all affections of the mind.
They that watch well, see time how slow it creepes.
Dalliance of time does long looked joys prevent.
Time offers still each hour to do amiss.
In time all things decay, and draw to end.
Time is the sweet Physician, that allows
Some remedy for all our past mishap.
Times minutes loss, no treasure can restore.
We may much shorten time by negligence.
Time h^ales, when Art and reason both do fail.
No time so long as that which breeds grief.
Nothing than time there is more precious,
And nothing less than time accounted of.
Nothing so firm, but time dissolueth it.
Fair baits of time does all the world devour.
By time and wisdom, passions are suppressed.
In time, small wedges cleave the hardest Oaks.
He that will not endure the stormy time*
Where will he live until the lusty prime?
In time the flint is pierced with softest showers
Time is the anchor both of truth and right.
In great extremes, advantage has no time.
Times loss, is greatest prodigality.
Time ripens all, and hastes the harvest on,
To sow new seeds ere all the old are gone.
Showers come out of time, when corn is ripe.
Time is discouerer of all mishaps.
Time has set down the compass of his course.
When time is lost, repentance is but vain.
While we have jewels, we do not esteem them:
But being lost, would with our lives redeem them.
Times change, and we in them, do alter still.
By times delay, new hope of help still lives.
Time is the father of uncertainty.
Time measures our daily actions.
Times motions equalleth the reeling Suns,
Or as the Sea reciprocally runs.
That longest kept, must yet at length be spent.
Both life and love, in time must have an end.
Our daily labors harbor deep distrust.
Time, on the weariest wretch, bestows rest.
The loss of time, all other loss exceeds;
And commonly, too late repentance breeds.
Time is best governor of all our counsels.
Time to the greatest sorrows limits end.
Neglected time is follies chiefest sign.
Time is our lives discreetest councellor.
Similies on the same subject.
AS when the ship is split, no anchor helps,
So time once spent, can never be repealed.
As joints cut off, the plaster comes too late,
So time being past, repentance booteth not.
As no retrait auailes, when fight is fought:
So no devise recouereth passed time.
As time well used, a man's best treasure is,
So badly wasted, is most misery.
As nothing is of greater price than time,
So nothing should with greater care be kept.
As winter nips the freshest flowers that be,
So time makes furrows in the fairest face.
Examples likewise on the same.
SEuerus made such dear account of time,
As nothing grieved him more than loss of time.
Pyrrhus had private observations,
Whereby to know how time did steal away.
Philip of Macedon would chide himself,
For the least vain employment of his time.
Great Alexander learned of Diogenes,
How in his war affairs to spend his time.
Byas maintained; Fools might in time be wise,
And ignorance attain to learnings reach.
Our happiness of time (in Solons mind)
Consists in the shorter while it lasts.
Of Youth.
Youth is that state our minds does most affect,
Our speediest spoil, without most wise respect.
YOung grafts of future goodness, soon appears.
When youth have wealth before they can well use it,
It is no wonder though they do abuse it.
Custom, small faults of youth permits to escape.
The mean is best, young fruits the stomach gripe*
And elder cloy, when they are ouer-ripe.
Suspect is still a page that waits on youth.
The Summers glory figures youths vanity,
The winters wrack, ages declining steps*
Youth hardly can obey an old decree.
Look what impression we in youth retain,
In age, our reason hardly will refrain.
Love is youths plague, wits scourge, and ages hell.
Look where vnbruised youth, with vnstuf^ brains
Does couch his limbs, there golden sleep remains.
The spring has flowers, but autumn withe^d leaves.
It Is often seen, that love in young men lies
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Youths love is quick, swifter than swiftest speed.
Nothing can temper well a young man's rage,
But thraldom, wedlock, or the staff of age.
Youth is too hot, and void of care or dread.
Youth learnes to cha^nge the course that he has run,
When he perceiues and knows what age has done.
Youth minds no danger in his hastines.
Young slips new set, are quickly plucked away,
But elder roots clean faster to the clay.
Youth, into needless quarrels soon is led.
How* ever youngsters seem to boast and brave,
Their worth and wit, they from their elders have.
Lewd objects, forward natures soon retain.
Youths common fault, is to admit and choose
Those errors which their lawless parents use.
Youth by increasing, does as fast decrease.
What things by vain examples youth conceiues,
The same ^or lawful daily he receives*
Youth well instructed, makes age well disposed.
The faults and follies men in youth commit,
Are causes of repentance in old age.
Examples are best presidents for youth.
The prime of youth is like the pine tree flowers.
Seemly in sight, unsavory in their sent.
Like to a shipwreck is the death of youth.
He that in youth, by reason guides his life,
In age shall find the footsteps from decay.
Youth uses pastimes but as natural rest.
The better that a child is borne by birth,
The more respect should wait upon his youth.
So tutour youth, that ages sins may die.
Good doctrines characters being stamped in youth,
No age or fortune once can wear them out.
Vanity is the mask for youths fond march.
Where vice in youth does bear the chiefest sway*
Their virtue is neglected most in age.
Less pain to learn in youth, than dote in age.
Tyranny is no schoolmasters for youth,
Rather use kindnessae than compulsion.
Wild youth, by gentleness will soonest yield.
When beauty and sweet youth are banished,
They never after can be called again.
Young willowes easily bend, green wit soon caught.
Youth graced with virtue, then most perfect is.
Similies on the same subject.
AS sin is soonest entertained in youth,
So is it hardly shaken off in age.
As gentle mould is apt for any print,
So youth receives what-e're impression.
As vntill'd fields bring nothing ^orth but weeds,
So untaught youth yields all but vanity.
As freshest flowers the canker soonest eats,
So youthful heads are quickly caught by vice.
As unripe apples fall not but by force,
So vnconstrain'd, ^outh hardly yields to die.
As youngest nettles are not free from stings,
So wisest youth has imperfections.
Examples likewise on the same.
COmodus not well tutored in his youth,
Did afterward prove a most wicked Prince.
Neroe^ unbridled youth, made him to fall
To greater lewdness than was ever heard.
Cato would to his sons be school master,
Because he would not have their youth infected.
Scemides and her son were cast in Tyber,
For bringing up the gulf of shame to Rome.
Youth well instructed, says Euripides,
Does after make his age more honorable.
Pythagoras bad, tutor so young youth,
The sins of age be not imposde on thee.
Of Age.
Age is the gift of Heaven, expense of years:
Exchange of haps, and grave experience school.
AGe is a Cinicke, not a flatterer.
Age, or infirmity, soon blasteth beauty.
Age i^ alike in Kings and other men.
Gray hairs in youth, kindles no green desires.
The power of Kings may well with-stand proud foe^*
But cannot keep back age, with time that grows.
In women's honor, age is worst disease.
Let s^ringing youth r^iourne old ages woes.
For age to die, is right; for youth, it is wrong.
Blame we not youth, if wantonly he wooes,
Since doting old, and booke-wise cannot choose.
Folly in you^h, is sin; in age, it is madness.
Age, though concealed, does warm with thoughts desire*
Cold age dotes most, when heat of youth is gone.
Age still is prone to credit what it likes.
Men's chiefest aim, is but to nource up life,
With honor, wealth, and ease in waining age.
Respect and Reason, wait on wrinkled age.
Youthful delights, lode crooked age with grief.
Age is as credulous as suspicious.
What can avail vnpleasurable age,
That feeds on lust, or base unable rage?
Age is a glorious crown, adorned with grace.
Death is the due to nature, ages alms.
Gray hairs are fruits for death, not flowers for life.
Trees may have roots, although they bear no leaves.
Love (as a virtue) is in age allowed,
Except unequal choice do disallow.
Age well may join with youth in law, not love.
When old Bees dye, the young possess the hiue.
Age is chill cold, and full of doubts and fears.
Pleasant conceits are blossoms for young years,
But melancholy thoughts, fruits of gray hairs.
Age with foresight, a many harms preuents.
Age takes advise, ere he presume too far.
Age is ordaind to counsel, youth to fight.
Age lends foresight, young courage must enact*
Age is allowed to gaze at beautie^ tree,
But youth must cl^mbe and gather up the fruit.
Old age, helps by good counsel and foresight.
Old age can never pay youths debt set down.
Discretion waxes young, when age draws near.
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
And where ^are lodges, sleep can never lie.
Age breeds no d^^^ct in innocence.
Innocence is an excellence in age.
Old age being come, life cannot long endure.
Each age of man has end, but old age none.
Age can report, and youth does ^aily prove,
There is no comfort like the sweets of love.
Sickness and age are ou^ conducts to death.
It helps not age to wi^h him young again.
It Is grievous to be old with fears, not years.
It Is time to fly from brawles of judgment seat
And public noise, when age once ge^^ the start.
Gray hairs are wisdoms badge, and ages pride.
The benefit of age, is liberty.
Respect old age, it comes not alone.
Old men, are young men's meetest presidents.
Advised age right warily does keep,
What headstrong youth would loose, and loosing weep.
Youth runs well, when age the b^idle holds.
Old age has all things, and yet all things wants.
Our parents age, worse t^an our gran^*s^^es be,
We worst b^g^t, our children worse than we.
White hairs, are grauities ambassadors.
Aged and wise, deserves great reverence.
Similies on the same subject.
AS Cedars in their age the straighter g^owes,
So men in age should have the grauer shows.
As bo^ds being sealed, are past recalling back,
So age once com^, by no means can be shund.
As flo^d-gates help not, when the town is drowned,
So c^^^^^g helps not, when gray hairs are seen.
As co^ne consumed, e^pence is ^ued too late,
So snow-white heads in vain wish youth again.
As physic ^oots not for a body dead,
So counsel helps not ages way ward head.
As fairest Sunnie days must have their nights,
So goodliest youth old age at length affrights.
Examples likewise on the same.
C^^^^^achu^ of Carthage, in good years
Went to be scholar to Carn^ades.
M^^cus Aur^^us told to ^^cius,
He went to lear^e what ^et he did not know.
Teren^i^^ Var^o. and M^rcus Po^tiu^ Cato,
Went to lear^e Greek when they were very old.
Alpho^sus, king of Arragon, at fifty years,
Translated ^^^ie into the Spanish tongue.
When men sa^^h ^^llie look on their white hairs,
They must do nothing ^^^ becomes those years.
Old men, whose soul^s ar^ s^d with heavenly light,
Grieve not their age, but joy it, so says Sophocles.
Of Life.
Life, is a frost of cold felicity,
And death, a thaw of all our misery.
LIfe is a wandering course to doubtful rest.
Life is but loss, where death is counted gain.
When virtues days do end, they are not done,
But live two lives, where others have but one.
The death of sin, is life unto the soul.
Man's life still ends, with the end of life.
In vanity of lif^, and wandering ways,
The wicked r^n and wear out all their days.
Better not be, than being, soon to die.
Life is most loathed, where love may not prevail.
Death is most lovely, sweet, and amiable,
But captived life, for foulness admirable.
The longer life, the greater is our guilt.
Life must with life, and blood with blood be paid.
Hate not thy life, but loath captivity,
Where rests no hope to purchase victory.
He that gives life, best knows the date thereof.
Man's life may less'ned, not enlarged be.
Who will not bide the burden of a^stresse,
Must not here live, for life i^ wret^he^nesse.
True love despises shame, when life is feared.
Life wars with love, and love contends with life.
Too long they l^ue, that live till they be naught,
Life saved by sin, base purchase, dearel^ bought.
Mo^e are men's ends marked, than their lives before.
As death is fee to life, so hate to love.
Even then when we of obscure life do boast,
It often proves, that then we are known most.
Men must have grief, so long as life remains.
Life is not that which should be much desired.
We often see, who on a ^ing relyes,
Fin^s death alive, while living yet he dies.
So some men live, they care not how they live.
Life suffers wrong, when death would end her woes*
Ill, compassing sit opportunity,
Or killes his life, or else life's quality.
That dead things can give life, we seldom find.
Contrition does reformed life begin.
To live or dye, which of the twain is better,
When life is shamed, and death reproaches debtor?
First do we bud, then blow; next seed, last ^all.
We ask deaths and, to end li^es wretchedness.
God guides man's life, and when he list to have it,
Wit, wealth, nor any thing beside can save it.
Our life is death, if we do live in sin.
A dying life, all kind of deaths exceeds.
Contented mean estate, true life does give,
Resting secure, not rising up to grieve.
This life affoords no sweet without some sour.
To live and love not, is no life at all.
Fond blinded g^eatnesse, with his busy toil,
Seeking for happy life, does life despoyle.
Life never is too short, where death is wished.
There is no force so great, as life enforced.
What kind of life (alas) live those men in,
That cannot live without, nor with their kin?
Life is ill spared, that is spared to spill more blood.
To live in death, is but a dying life.
Long use of life, is as a lingering foe,
And gentle death the only end of woe.
Sweet is the life that is maintained by love.
Redeem thy life, although with all thou have.
The good do live, as if they li^ed not:
And die, as if their death were but a dream.
That life is death, where men do live alone.
A good life does beget as good a death.
No wise man likes in such a ^ife to dwell,
Whose ways ^re strait to heaven, but wide to hell.
Man's life may not be destitute of office.
A good life, is next way to win good fame.
The life co^^upt with unexpected shame
And ^imelesse death, is buried with defame.
They live but ill, who always think to live.
To men in misery, life seems too long.
Long life has commonly long cares annexed.
The breath that maintains life does finish life.
Similies on the same subject.
AS falls the tree, so prostrate still it lies:
So speedeth life, in living, as it dies.
As men by life in bondage soon are brought,
Even so by death is freedom soonest wrought.
As si^e burns fiercely, being still supplied,
So life posts swiftly when it least is spyed.
As sharp frosts easily nip forward springs,
So life to end it, has too many things.
As Eastern winds does towardly blossoms blast,
So inward cares makes life to finish fast.
As life is only by the gift of grace.
So death by nature takes time and place.
THere is hardly any one Chapter in this Book, but it delivers plenty of
examples for this argument of life; the whole sum (indeed) but containing the
course of our actions, even from our entrance into life, unto the very hour
of our death: therefore there shall need no special collection upon this head.

Of Death.
Death is the keye, which unlocks misery,
And lets the soul to blessed liberty.
DEath is the end of woe and wretchednesie.
When deaths hour comes, let none ask reason why.
He ought to die, that not deserves to live.
Who dies the death with honor in the field,
Both his life's woe^ and sorrows ^rie^^ e^^s.
With sharp as^liction, death first grounds his cause
The fairest blossom, deaths stern winter ni^^.
Death has no dart to slay deserved same.
The (...) Seen where death ^er pl^y begins,
Are a^t^ of ^ight, and d^^^^^ of ^^giy dark
To wretched men, death is the welcom^st friend,
Death never comes when need does most require.
Life is but loss, and death felicity.
Who dies, the utmost anguish does abide:
But ^e that lives, is left to w^^^e his loss.
Sad life, is much more worse than gladsome death.
Our life is day, but death is ougly night.
Fair death it is, to shun more shame, to die.
Death to sharp sorrow, quickly ease does send,
For death, does grief and sorrow soonest end.
Death to the wretched, is both grace and gain.
In death, advise for danger comes too late.
It Is worse than death, to linger on relief.
Death is the gulf of all, and then I say,
Thou are as good as Caesar in the clay.
A sick man best sets down the pangs of death.
Deaths name is much more mighty than his deeds.
To die, is all as common, as to live.
It is not death, that which the world calls dying,
But that is death, which is all joys denying.
The shade pursues the body, so death us.
Death is the driery Dad* and dust the Dame.
Death is misfortunes monarchizing foe.
Thy fatal end, why do thou so begin,
Locking death out, ye^ keep'st destruction in.
None moan his death, whose life has all annoyed.
We have one life, and so our death is one.
Death lends us sight, while he does spare us breath.
It Is treble death, a freezing death to feel,
For him on whom the Sun has ever shone.
Long lives the man, that dies in lusty years.
Death is the lowest step a man can fall.
Death is not shunned of them that duty yield.
Death which e^ds care, yet careless of our death,
Does steal our joys, but steals not our breath.
Parting breeds mourning absence cruel death.
To good and bad, death is an equal doom.
Though death be poor, it ends a world of woe.
Death is to some a fierce unbidden guest,
But those that crave his aid, be beloeth least.
There Is nothing we can call our own, but death.
Death's the deuourer of all worlds delight.
It Is sweet to dye, when we are forced to live.
When heaps of treasure is the meed preposed,
Though death ^e adiunct, there is no death supposed.
Near death he stands, that stands too near a crown.
It Is double death to drown in ken of shore.
Death is too good for base dishonest life.
There Is nothing else remains for us beside,
But tea^es and co^^ins only to provide.
All things are subject to deaths tyranny.
What thing soever lives, is sure to die.
All killing death, by Christ is killed himself.
Oh Sickness, thou art many times belyde,
When death has many w^yes to come beside.
The sharpest sting of death, hurts not but helps.
Carrion corruption is the food of death.
The day of death, excels our day of birth.
Often times their gains whom greatness favors,
When chief preserr'd, stand as preferred to death.
Raise up no living blame against the dead.
A present death exceeds a lingering life.
Life leads to care, death to the scale of heaven.
The dying man, whose eyes are sunk and dim,
Thinks every passing bell rings out for him.
To die in life, is but a living death.
Good death, not lofty life, is most renown.
In countries cause to die, is noble death.
Death does no time, no age, no reason measure.
Similies on the same subject.
AS the herb Rue is bitter in our taste,
^o deaths remembrance fearful is to many.
As sleep depriues the memory of pains,
So sleep of death ends all our wretchedness.
As all small currents run into the sea,
So all men's toiles are swallowed up in death.
As borrowed money must be paid again,
So what life owes, must be by death discharged.
As we are merry at our childrens birth,
So should we not grieve vainly at their death.
As darkness does obscure the fairest day,
So death lays hold upon the forward'st life.
Examples likewise on the same.
HEctor said to his wife Andromache,
Grieve not my death, all men are borne to die.
Gorgias, asked in sickness how he fared?
Said, Sleep now yields me to his brother death.
Pindarus sleeping on a young lads breast,
Never awaked, but in that sort dyed.
Vespasian stood up at the point of death,
And said, An Emperor should standing dye.
Plato thankt Nature, that she let him live,
In such a time, as taught him well to die.
Thales willed every man amend his life,
Else he could have no honor in his death.
The Conclusion.
THis work, which cost no mean pains and labor, to reduce into this form
and method; is thus at the length happily concluded, and commended to the kind
acceptance of all gentle and well-disposed minds. If some carping Sycophant
(readier always to cavil and find fault, than correct and amend) shall mislike
of the course observed in this book, and imagine the heads not aptly or
properly placed, (according as in his nice opinion perhaps he would have
them:) let me thus plainly answer him, That they were never meant for the
pleasing of his vain appetite, and therefore he has more love to look off,
than be prying into matters above his capacity. Only to the judicial and
affable judgments of this age, both the pains and pleasure of this labor is
published: not doubting, but they will measure it by the just desert, and
censure thereof as their own kind natures have ever been accustomed.

In this first Impression, are omitted the Sentences of Chaucer, Gower,
Lidgate, and other ancient Poets, because it was not known how their form
would agree with these of ten syllables only, and that sometimes they exceed
the compass herein observed, having none but lineall and couplet sentences,
above and beyond which course, the Gentleman who was the cause of this
collection (taking therein no mean pains himself, besides his friends
labor) could not be persuaded, but determinately aimed at this observation.
Nevertheless, if this may enjoy but the favor he hopes it will, and the good
intent thereof be no way misconstrued: at the next impression it shall be
largely supplied, with things that at this present could not be obtained, both
in respect of some urgent occasion, being the hinderance thereof: as also
because there wanted apt means to furnish further purpose then intended. All
which, shall then be answered effectually, and any thing else may be thought
available to this work, and the good liking of the wise.

FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Table, of the several things handled in this Book.
A
Abundance. vide Riches. Absence. vide Love and Friendship. Abstinence. vide
Gluttony. Accusation. vide Justice. Actions. 1, 17, 19, 50, 67, etc.
Admiration. vide Love. 40 Admonition. vide Counsel, Advise, etc. Adversity.
vide Poverty. 12 Advise. 73 Adultery. vide Lust. Affection. 161 Affliction.
12, 20, 74 Age. 222 Ambition. 108 Amity. vide Friendship. Angels. vide Heaven.
58 Anger 132 Arms. vide War. Arrogancy. vide Pride. Art. vide Learning.
Aspiring. vide Ambition. Avarice. 127 Ancestors. vide Kings. Authority. 194
B
BAbbling. vide Words. Beauty. 40 Belief. 30 Benefits. 63 Blasphemy. vide
God, and Heaven. Blessedness. 2, 11, 16, 24 Blood. 58, 71, 77, 79, 82, 84, etc.
Boasting. vide Pride. Body. vide Mind. Bounty. 22, 211 Bragging. vide Pride.
Bravery vide Pride.
C
CAre vide Grief. Charity. vide Love. Chastity. 37, 38, 39, 40 Chance. vide
Fortune. Change. 11, 24, 29, 34, 37, etc. Children. 36, 97 Choice. 46 Choler.
vide Anger. Civility. vide Anger. Clemency. vide Pity. Comfort. 20, 24, 54,
64, 80, etc. Commonwealth. vide Kingdoms. Compassion. vide Pity. Concord.
81 Concupiscence. vide Lust. Confidence. 18, 32 Conquest. vide War.
Conscience. 8, 9, 10 Consideration. vide Counsel. Conspiracy. vide Treason.
Constancy. vide Women. Contemplation. vide Religion. Contempt. vide Disdain.
Content. vide Peace. 6, 49, 67, 71 Contention. vide Anger, Concord, etc.
Covetousness. 127 Counsel. 73 Country. vide Commonwealth. Courage. 197
Courtesy. vide Kindness. 75 Cowardice. 33, 48, 60, 66, 86 Craft. 97 Credit.
22, 68 Credulity. 30, 51, 58 Cruelty. vide Tyranny. 33, 41, 51 Curiosity.
vide Pride. Custom. 61, 70, 79
D
Darkness. vide Day and Night. Danger. vide Fear. Day. 29, 46, 57, 92 Death.
230 Deceit. vide Falsehood. Deeds, 177, etc. Delay. 28, 78 Delight. 201, etc.
Desert. 19, 65, 67, 68 Desire. 161 Despair. 24, 26, 33, 43, 45, 47, 66, 74
Desperation. vide Despair. Destiny. 154 Devil. vide Sin. 2 Devotion. vide
God. 37 Diligence. vide Labor. Discord. vide Concord. Discretion. 18, 48, 49,
50, 53, 65, etc. Disdain. 165 Dishonestie. 39, 43, 71 Dishonor. vide Honor.
Dissimulation. 29, 174, etc. Distress. 20, 21, 26, 59, 75, 76, 80 Distrust.
vide Trust. 24 ^^iuision. vide Discord. Doctrine. vide Learning. ^^^^bt. 144
Dr^^^d. vide Fear. Drunkenness. vide Gluttony. Duty. vide Subjects. 41
E
EArth. 2, 5, 6, 12, 19, 42, 57, 60, 63, 87 Education. vide Children. Election.
vide Choice. Eloquence. 30, 55, 56 Envy. 117, etc. Equality. vide Equity.
Equity. 1, 3, 13, 33, 76, etc. 94 Error. 12, 18 Eternity. 18, 37, 39, 54 Evil
Deeeds. 181, etc. Example. 51, 59 Excess. vide Drunkenness. Exile. 82
Experience. 48, 54, 55 Extremity. 32, 39, 46, 48, 78, 82, 90, 98
F
FAith. 21, etc. Falsehood. vide Friends and Friendship. Fame. 88, etc.
Familiarity. vide Friendship. Fancy. vide Affection. Father. 60 Faults. 14,
19, 21, 22, 32, 35, 36, 42, etc. Favor. 2, 26, 31, 35, 59, 61 Fear. 144, etc.
Felicity. vide Happiness. Flattery. 174, etc. Foes. vide Friends, and
Friendship. Folly. 1, 5, 17, 24, 30, 41, 49, 50, 52, 213 Fortitude. 39, 54, 85
Fortune. 149, etc. Force. vide Strength. Fraud. vide Deceit. Friends. 94, etc.
Friendship. vide Friends. Frugality. 38 Fury. vide Tyrants.
G
Gain. 18, 26, 32, 35 General. vide War. Gentleness. vide Kindness. Gladness.
vide Joy. Glory. 31, 38, 67, 71, 89 Gluttony. 135, etc. God. 1, 2, 3, 4, 11,
24, 26, 37, 41, 59, 79 Gold. vide Riches. 80 Goodness, 14, 17, 18, 36, 50 Good
Deeds. 177, etc. Good name. vide Fame. Good will. vide Love. Gifts. 2, 21, 26,
27, 38, 40, 48, etc. Grace. 21, 24, 26, 37, 42, 44 Grief. 138, etc. Guile.
vide Fraud. Guiltines. 46, 77, 78
H
HAp. vide Fortune, and Fate. Happiness. 5, 17, 25, 27, 36, 51, 67, 81, 98 Hate.
34, etc. Health. 26 Hearing. vide Justice and Judgment. Heaven. 5, 6, 7 Hell.
vide Sin. 2, 6, 7, 29, 45, 72 Honesty. 14, 15, 27, 39, 82, 92, 93 Honor.
69, etc. Hope. 24, etc. Hospitality. vide Bounty. Humanity. vide Manhood.
Humility. 191, etc.
I
Idleness. vide Sloth. Jealousy. 45, etc. Ieasting. vide Pleasure. Idolatry.
vide God, and Religion. Ignorance. 9, 11, 27, 49, 55 Immortality. 18, 19, 43
Impiety. vide Religion. Impudence. vide Shame. Incontinence. vide Lust.
Industry. vide Learning. 51 Infamy. vide Fame. Ingratitude. vide Love.
Injury. vide Wrong. 44, 85 Injustice. vide Justice. Innocence. 10, 11, 15, 64,
77, 224 Instruction. vide Art. Intemperance. vide Gluttony. Invention. vide
Learning. 32 Joy 5, 8, 9, 25, 29, 32, 61, 89 Ire. vide Anger. Judge. vide
Justice. Judgment. 3, 77, 78, 92 Justice. 76, etc.
K
Kindness. vide Pity. 3, 7 Kingdoms. 63, etc. Kings. 57, etc. Kindred. 3,
64, 67 Knighthood. 22 Knowledge. 13, 53, etc.
L
Labor. 16, 71, 92 Lamentation. vide Sorrow and Tears. Laws. 3, 60, 61, etc.
Learning. 53, etc. Lechery. vide Lust. Lenity. vide Kindness. Liberality. vide
Bounty. Liberty. 17, 38, 39, 64 Life. 226 Light. vide Day. 30 Love. 28
Lowliness. vide Humility. Loyalty. 47, 95 Lust. 120 Lying. 15, 71, 92
M
Madness. vide Fury. 47 Magistrates. 64, 86 Magnanimity. vide Courage and
War. Majesty. 17, 59, 60, 61 Malice. vide Hate. 67 Man. 101 Manhood. vide
Valor. Marriage. vide Love, and Lust. Mean. vide Equity. Melancholy. vide
Grief. 64 Memory. vide Learning. Mercy. 1, 2, 35, 78 Might. vide Power. Mind.
157 Misery. 19, 26, 30, 46, 75 Mishap. 2, 55, 66, 89, 98 Mistrust. vide Trust.
Moderation. vide Law. Modesty. vide Temperance. 39 Monarch. 27, 40, 57, 86
Money. vide Wealth. 87 Mourning. 188, etc. Muses. vide Poetry. 53 Music. 20,
32, 56, 98
N
NAture. 29, 34, 40, 48, 50, 54, 55, 64, etc. Necessity. vide Need. Need. 19,
26, 39, 55, 74, 87, 95 Negligence. vide Sloth. Neighbor. 34, 47, 68, 82
Niggardise. 67, 93, 212, 213 Night. 29, 46, 57, 73 Nobility. 66, etc. Nurture.
vide Children.
O
OAth. 37, 70 Obedience. vide Subjects. Oblivion. vide Memory. Occasion. 22,
24, 69 Offense. 9, 21, 36, 77, 97 Offers. vide Gifts. Office. vide Authority.
Old age. vide Age. Opinion. 17, 19, 22, 50, 54, 60, 68, 96 Opportunity. vide
Occasion. 50 Oratory. vide Orators. Orators. 15, 18, 31, 42, 55 Order. vide
Justice.
P
Pain. 25, 29, 31, 32, 33, 64, 70, 204, etc. Painting. 40, etc. Parasites.
vide Flattery. Pardon. vide Obedience, and Age. Parents. 64, 66, 68
Partiality. vide Justice. Passions. 26, 33, 46, 50 Patience. 99, etc. Peace.
81, etc Peril. vide Danger. Perjury. vide Oath. Perseverance. vide Patience.
Pity. 32, 35, 41, 43, 45, 47, 77, 84 Plainness. vide Honesty. 15 Play. vide
Pleasure. Pleasure. 201, etc. Plenty. vide Abundance and Wealth. Poetry. vide
Learning. Policy. 79, etc. Poor. vide Need. 207 Poverty. 1, 15, 31, 35, 50,
51, 57, 58, etc. Power. 5, 14, 18, 25, 26, 35, 42, 49, 54 Praise. 18, 38, 41,
50, 66, 91, etc. Prayer. 11, 79, 80, 81 Preciseness. vide Pride. Preferment.
vide Promotion. Presumption. vide Ambition and Pride. Pride. 124, etc. Princes.
57, 58, etc. Prodigality. vide Bounty, and time. Profit. 50, 54, 70 Promise.
36, 34, 70 Promotion. 26, 59 Prosperity. vide Wealth. 35 Providence. 2, 6, 85
Prudence. vide Wisdom. Punishment. 65, 77, 78
Q
Quality. 36, 61 Quietness. 10, 48, 59, 71, 77
R
RAge. vide Anger. 35, 45, 49 Rashness. 21, 22, 49, 59, 75, 85, 93 Reason. 12,
15, 32, 39, 43, 45, 60, 72, 82 Religion. 11, etc. Repentance. 6, 8, 29, 213,
217 Report. 19, 71, 89, 91 Reproach. vide Shame, and Slander Resolution, 22,
25, 39, 61, 67 Revenge. 5, 35, 46, 59, 72 Rhetoric. 11 Riches. 9, 18, 38, 51,
76, 81 Right. 13, 14, 64, 69, 77 Rigor. vide Cruelty. 42 Riot. vide
Prodigality. 39 Ruin. 84, 90, 97 Rule. vide Authority, and Kings. Ruth. vide
Pity.
S
Sadness. 26 Sapience. vide Wit, and Wisdom. Science. 56, 86 Scoffing. 165,
etc. Scorn. vide Disdain. Self-love. 33, 40, 60 Self-will. vide Vainglory.
22 Secrecy. 46 Security. vide Idleness. Senses. vide Learning. Service. vide
Duty. Shame. 2, 18, 29, 42, 58, 59, 66, 67, 71, 73. Sickness. vide Death. 43,
74, 75, 87, 224 Silence. vide Talk. Sin. 2, 6, 9, 12, 17, etc. Sight. vide
Love. Slavery. vide Tyrants. Slander. 167, etc. Sleep. vide Death. Sloth.
130, etc. Sobriety. 9, 48 Solitude. vide Grief. Sorrow. vide Woe. Soldiers.
86, 87 Soul. 5, 7 Sparing. vide Niggardise. Speech. vide Words. Spending. vide
Bounty. Spoil. vide War. Sport. vide Delight. Stabilitie. vide Resolution.
State. vide Kings and Commonwealths. Strength. vide Power. Study. vide
Learning. Subjects. 57, etc. Subtilty. vide Fraud. Sufferance. vide Patience.
Surfeit. vide Gluttony. Suspicion. vide Jealousy. Swearing. vide Oath. Sword.
vide War.
T
Talk. vide Words. Taunts. vide Disdain. Tasting. 38, 42 Tears. 188, etc.
Temperance. vide Sobriety. Temptation. 3, 17 Terror. vide Tyrants and Fear.
Thankfulness. vide Kindness. Thoughts. 185, etc. Time. Tongue. 170, etc.
Treason. 114, etc. Treasure. 28, 40, 43, 57, 62, 64, 71 Trial. 3, 14, 21, 24,
55, 78, 82, 97, 98 Trouble. vide Affliction. 10, 63 Truth. 13, etc. Trust. 14,
22, 25, 45 Tyranny. vide Tyrants. Tyrants. 111, etc.
V
VAliancie. 86, etc. Valor. 18, 29, 56, 80, 82, 84, 85 Vainglory. vide
Pride. 94 Vanity. 18, 26, 44, 50, 53 Variety. vide Pleasure. Venery. vide Lust.
Virtue. 16, etc. Vice. 17, etc. 62, 82 Victory. 2, 85, 86 Violence. vide
Cruelty. Virginity. 37 Understanding. vide Wisdom. 56 Unity. 12, 38, 82, 96
Unkindness. vide Affection. 29 Vows. vide Oath. Usury. vide Riches.
W
WAnt. 39, 55, 82, 89 Wantonness. 31, 33, 38, 39, 41 War. 84, etc. Wealth.
9, 20, 26, 33, 38, 42, 48, etc. Weeping. vide Mourning. Wife. 38, 46 Will. 18,
29, 30, 43, 44, 46, 49, etc. Wine. vide Drunkenness. 10, 20 Wisdom. 48, etc.
Wit. vide Wisdom. Wickedness. 3, 63, 86, 89, 93 Woe. vide Grief. Women. 104,
etc. Words. 170, etc. Works. 22, 32, 60, 75, 86 World. 12, 17, 19, 26, 53, 74,
87 VVretchednesse. vide Misery. Wrath. vide Anger. 1, 2, 60, 85
Y
Youth. 219
Z
Zeal. 21, 22, 23

