The several Engines that Nichol^s Bloy Enginer professes, be Nine in number;
These as follows.
THE first, is the perpetual motion, commonly called the continual Wheel,
which Wheel goes without Wind, Water, Man, or Horse, or anything that breaths.

The several uses be these. It will grind all kind of Corn, or oraine, as
sufficiently as ever was or can be either by Windmill, or Water-mill.

It will serve for the drayning of Fends or Marish grounds.

It serves for drayning of Cole pits, Lead-mines, Cynne-mines, and all other
Mines of Metals.

It serves for Oyle-milles, Iron milles, Smeltin of Lead, Sawing of Timber,
beating of Hemp, and many other good purposes.

The Second, is the wheel Pro and Contra, which Wheel goes by the labor of
one man, by which wheel more stuff may be drawn out of the ground as Cole,
Lead, Stone, Earth, Water, or any other metal, then ever was yet done by the
labor of Ten men.

The Third, is the Attractiue Pegasus, it serves for the drayning of Cole
pits, Lead-mines, Tynne-mynes, and all other Mines of Metals.

The Fourth, is the High periticall Assistant, a very necessary Engine at the
foot of Pegasus, to send home the water to him, that he may raise it out at the
day.

The Fifth, is the Lacune Rampant, it serves to draine Fends and Marish grounds
it will raise 300. Tons of water in an hour with the labor of one man, it
will raise water out of a standing poole to drive any Water-mill, and that with
the labor of one man, besides a very necessary Engine for ships at Sea.

The Sixth, is the Ignipotent Carpim, for if there be a Seare-fire in a Town,
one man with that Engine shall do more good for the staking of the said Fire,
then can be done by Forty men any other way; it serves also to water Gardens
as rain from Heaven, it will beat Catterpillers from fruit trees and Arbours,
and that in an excellent manner.

The Seaueth, is the Saxipotent Engine, it serves to pierce the stony Rocks
for speedy getting to the Cole, Lead, Tynne, or any other metals.

The Eight, is the Dampe Engine, for it drives the dampe out of the ground for
the preservation of all that shall work therein, and that with the labor of one
man.

The Nynth, is the Engine Triangula, it brings the water out of the very top
of a pit, and it runs in Pipes down the Hill side naturally after it be once
set a work, much after the manner of a perpetual motion, for it never can
stand (except it be stopped or stayed) so long as there is any water in the pit.

All these Nine Engines have been studied and practiced by me Nicholas Bloy
Enginer.

