THE DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTRY OF APHRIQVE.

the first part of the world, with the cituation of all the countries together,
with the particular manners laws, and ceremonies, of diverse people inhabityng
in the same part. Translated out of French into English by Wyllyam Prat of
London, the first day of the new year, M.CCCCC.L.IIII.

Read it dylygently, Mark it perfectly, Reuolue it thoroughly, Bear it equally,
Behold the auctours simplicity, And praise God almighty.

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable lord Edward Courtney Earl of Deuonshyre, his humble
servant Wyllyam Pratte wysheth him peace, grace, and mercy from our Lord Jesus
Christ. Amen.
FOr want of a costly and precious Jewel, have here offered to you this base
gift: The discriptyon of Aphrique (my good lord) though not so good as is
wylled, nor so excellent as is wyshed. Yet most humbly besechynge you to take
it in good part. It is said the mind of gifts is best: For in the gifts of
friends, the value of the things which be presented, be not to be considred,
but the good will of the presenter. That worthy King Xerxes received thanfully
of a certain stranger a handful of water, And Christ also accepted the wydowes
two farthynges, and preferred them before other great and rich offeringes:
So I trust you will this my rude and homely present, and wey in an equal peyre
of balans my good will toward your Lordeshyp, for to my power I have done, and
as far as my capacytie would reach, as well in the translation as other
ways, I have written, In magnis et voluisse sat est. In greater things which
might pass my simple capacity it is sufficient for me to have willed, will
otherwhiles especially in those things which might pass a man's power, does
merit comendacions although his enterprise take no effect. To my purpose. Now
seeing that the end or extinct of my long wyshe is fynyshed, I can not but
hyghly laud God therefore, so joyful is your Lordeshyps prosperus success
unto me, as the fortunate hour is of the traueling woman in the delyuerance of
her child, your long adversity was not so lamentable, but your prosperity is
as joyful. Truly as often as I perpende and wey with my self the depnes of
your adversities causes me to wonder, considering how that you have been
tossed in the waves of the sea, in storms, te^pests, and in extreme peryls,
yea, amongst (if I might so say) devouring Lions, and yet to se how god has
preserved your good Lordeshippe: what may I say. shall I ascrybe it to dame
Fortune, as the poites did in old time, and render up thanks to her? No
certainly, I shall thank the mighty Lord above, the preserver of his elect. I
do fully persuade with my self that god has chosen you, and preserved you, to
the end that you should be hereafter, (when it shall please our virtuous
Queen to call you) a worthy cou^celler, a preserver of the public weal, and a
fortherer of her good and godli laws: for god has endowed you with a most
precious gift, and has given you a great talent and well worthy. For that you
daily augment and increase it. How can a man but wonder (though that the
gifts of God be not to be marueiled at) as often as he shall conceive with him
self the course of your life togethers, with your education. I mean your
long imprisonment, in such a desert place, where in a manner neither
siuilitie, nor wisdom was to be learned, yet to behold your state and study
how that you have applied your mind to good letters, as well to the Romans
as to the french, Italion, and Spanysh besides al these I can not so easily
express as conceive the number of other virtues and qualyties* which rain in
you, what condinge praise does that child deserve, which with out a nourse
does feed him self with the sweet pappe of learning? Even so how much is
your Lordship worthy of lawde, who without tutors but of and by your own
industry and labor, have atteyned to this perfection of learning, what
pregnant wit is this, it is easily deserved, how well you have followed the
peynters line, here may we se nulla preterit sine linea dies so have you let no
day escape without drawing of a profitable line, as you have begone so proceed,
and every day draw a line to the profit of your good lady and queen
advancement of her honor, and the commonweals, so in studyeng, with god you
shall be retained, and of the people beloved. For if the late offenders had
bestowed their wits and employed their knowledge to the service of their Queen
and mystres, God would have prospered them, but seeing they did contrary, he
shortened not only their most nequitious and wicked purpose, but also
punysshed some of them according to their deserts. Truly it was a Goodely
myrroure and glass, for all nobles to look in, exhortyng your Lordeship to
behold both their beginnynge and their ends. what was the destruction of the
country of Caria, which once was such a plentyfull country as ours has been
and will be again, now we have so virtuous a queen, and noble council, who
studyeth daily and trauaileth hourly to bring in plenty, but only the liberty
of a multitude? This unlawful liberty is called Anarchie, a myschyefe truly
as evil as any tyranny, I would al men would have in remembrance this godly
saying, Nosce te ipsum, Plato discrybeth this divine sentens to god Appollo,
but truly I will discribe it to all men, and would council the^ to lay the
fear of God before their eyes, to remember their beginning, their birth
present state, and end, So would I wish that your lordshyppe would bear in
memory, your former adversities with the goodness of God exte^ded upon you, in
delyuerynge you out of the hands of all your enemies, have a respect to the
poor, give attentyue ear to their peticions, feade them which honger, and
give them to drink which thyrst, and cheryshe your poor servants, for to
what praise with god, love with the people, honor to the renome does the noble
man ateyne to? which in time of his authority and life prefers and
aduaunceth his pore servants, percontra in how much displeasure with God,
hate with people, destruction of his honor, and into other infinite dangers
does he incur in whose service his poor servants do not floryshe but decay. I
cannot but lament so often as I call to memory the lamentacions of diverse of
the late dukes servants the which (as they said) be vtterli brought to ruin
and extreme poverty by serving of him, whereas they trusted to have floryshed,
yea some of them cursyng him, and wyshed that they had never seen his head.
Alas alas what ouersyght was it, when that in his chyfe and fresh dignity he
might have advanced them which took peynes and spent their substans to do him
honor. Truly either covetousness surmounted him, or else understanding failed
him. We have one worthy Bishop in this realm, which has purchased him self
perpetual honor and praise, as well for his convenient hospitality, as for
preferrynge of his servants, whose doyenge be notable, a clear myrrour for
all the rest of nobles to behold, trustyng your lordship will follow his
steps, and lay his acts before your eyes as a glass to look in, so in
doenge, I know god will (as he has al ready) cause the people to love you, give
you long life: with prosperous success and your fatal end honorable. I shall
not neade (my good Lord) to be tedious in rehersing of many of these examples,
for that I know your singular wisdom has atteined to a farther knowledge of
them then I am able to declare or show, but to the entente that other may
thereby be admonished, so by council may follow the steps which lead them to
virtue and goodness. I have enterprised (honorable lord to translate into
English Aphrique, Asie. and Europia, the.iii. parts of the world, and for
as much as the hole volume is great, and having small time, and leisure granted
to me, would be loath notwithstanding this first part should be hindered in the
impression, thought it good not only to dedicate this to your Lordshyp, but
also for the fruit I perceive in the hole work to the end that the reader
should savor ye residue, have therefore both set forth the hole table and a
prologe, trusting that he will covet the other two parts. And because I owe
to my lord of Darbie for his many and manyfold plesures done for me, a great
some, I pretend in one part of payment to present to him the description of
Asie, or Lacie the second part, being also greatly in danger to my good
mistres Clarentius for her sondrye trauayles for me, have appointed the last
part of Europia to her mystreship. These two last with expedicio^ I will
endeavor my self to end In the mean season, I shall most humbly beseech your
Lordeshyp to accept this in good worth and the faults therein, do impute to
ignorans, partly for want of time, besides all this to consider my pore estate,
long time absent absent from my studies, and the beginning of my enterpryses,
being the first that ever I translated out of the french tongue, and to my
simple judgment (the obscurity of the sentences considred) neither is the
translation out of latin, Italion, or Spanyshe, so difficile and hard, as the
translation of french into English. To conclude in token of a Newyeres gift I
do here exhibit unto your Lordship this discriptio^ of Aphrique. A gift I
grant not so great as is owed, nor so good as is wyshed, (as before I said)
yet where office and love owes much and will would pay all, though power
drawethe back not able to discharge either loves debt, or acquit all that
will would, yet by the vewe of any reasonable judge the yield of the one, and the
bente of the other, ought with the creditour to supply the thyrdes defect.

The cause occurrynge like in me, be it lawful to use such a shyft, not only
to excuse my small ability exhibytynge so small tribute of so much as is owed
and wylled, but also to grate at your Lordeshyps hands, notwithstanding
acceptacion thereof as of a sufficient monumente of loves debt, and token of
wylles wyshe, how so ever malyngne power shall temper the same in the
vtteraune^. Thus I commend your Lordeshyppe to God.

The prologue to the Readar.
Having had opportunity and time granted me, have bestowed the hours of
leisure in accumulating the fassyons most worthy of memory together with the
pertyculer obseruacyons and laws of diverse people, in sort that the fathers
of hystories, has most amply written of. As Herodote, Diodore. Sicilien,
Berose, Strabo, Solin, Troge, Po^peie, Ptolomie, Pline, Cornele Tacit, De^nis,
Aphriqueni, Pompenemele, Caesar, Iosephe, and of the auctours in our age and
time, as Vincent Aeneas Silutus, which sins had the name of pope Pie the
second, Antonie Sabellique, John Nanclere, Ambros Capelin, and Nicolas Perot,
in their cornucopies, and many other excellent Auctours. I have made a little
abridgement or abstract, not in hope of any lucour or particular profit, but
provoked to do this, only do require favor of the people: having had the
true and free leisure, to imploye togethers with the fruitful joy and
delectacion which I have noted in the whole work by me encerprised. And if
thou wylt understand (O gentyl reder) the histories, and be desirus of the
knowledge of them which I have gathered together, as well the new and fresh,
as also the ancient examples both good and evil serving to this purpose, to
the end that they may present unto the things virtuous and of honor as
evil and vicious, thou may follow those things which lead to virtue, and
require discretion to shonne that which does entende to reproach and fylthynes,
therein thou shall se the magnificens and felicity of the mortal men now
living, and also the poor and simple life of them which came first upon
yearch, syns the creacion of man until the flud of Noe. Again mani other
worlds after ye said flud In so much the human creatures were disparced
through the hole earth, and lived without doing any traficke or marchaundyse
one with an other, or using of money current from man to man, in sort that
they could not exell one an other in good deeds. All things were equally
divided amongst them, that they had neither more nor less then the heuens,
the earth, together with the waters commen so that they were not covetous of
any honor or riches, having that, contented them selves, to pase their life
in plain field, uncovered, or under the shadow of some tree, or coueryng of
an house, with one or many women and the whole lynage, without al fear and
solicitude, only contentyng them selves with the things, which the earth
brought forth, with the milk of the beasts, and for their drink water
sufficed. First for their apparel took the large leaves of trees but a lyttel
after, the world began to invent the ways to cloth them with the skins of
bestes, one like unto the other. Man created was so little careful to be in
suertye, that he did not pass or desire to be looked up in walled Cities, or in
for treses, made with strong rampers but wandered and strayed abroad like other
beasts, and had no certain place to take his rest, but being in the field
rested him. To whom when that the night approached, was in great tranquylytie
without fear of thieves or robbers yet at the last being compelled to do the
contrary by such like chances, by succession of time that the world might
increase and multiplye, which the enuey and dyuersitie of their wiles was the
cause of the variety, and change of the humayne inclinations, again without
the industry and labor of man the fruits which came from the earth, was not
sufficient to norishe them, that lived then, provoked them to exercise one with
an other and by the above said Calamyties they were so greatly weryed with
trauayles that they followed the coures of wild beasts, wherefore the humayne
creatures by little and little accompanyenge togethers, consultede, by a commen
seecours and aid to expulse such evil courses and hurtes, began to prepare
and appoint to eueryone of them certain portions of ground, upon the which
they builded little houses, and made perticions of their lands by certain
limittes, in so much that by little and little, they made dyches and walls,
and at the last there was appointed a populaeir estate or common weal. In
likewise they established certain laws and magestrates, by whom every man
should be ruled. In so much at the last there was observed a great concord
and peace amongst so great a multitude of people. Sins that time men invented
to live not only by the fruits and noriture which the earth her self brought
forth, and that the beasts or cattle gave, but also by their many and sundry
industries and labors by them excogitated, and found out the manner to make
the ships to ride upon the seas, some to serve for marchaundyse, other some
to abide the countries. Also some invented the carts with horses to draw
them, and after that they began to have course gold and silver, then was the
aparel of men more sumptuous, their language adorned with eloquens, their
frequentacion more siuile, their diete more delicate, their building more
larger and gorgious, in fine the morrall creatures in continuance of time,
were altered and changed as well from their conditions, as from their
barbarousnes and cruelnes, they became humayne, gentyl, and gracious, that at
the last they ruled them selves so discretely that they them selves banyshed
all their inhumanitie, and vnciuilitie as to kill one an other, to eat the
flesh of men, and to occupye the company of the first they mete without
discrecion or regard of blud or kindred, with such like vices and
imperfections. After they had tasted of this evil order, and atteyne to more
reason by their travail, made the earth fruteful, the which before was hydden
over as a wild forest, uninhabited and most unprofitable for man. They removed
away the great stones and stubbes of trees, made the fair waters and sprynges
to be sought for, in the marshe places. This they did and all to make it
plain, and to cause it lose his old and ancient form, whereas before it was
hilly and rude. In so vsyng the earth, at the last brought forth wynes and
other increase abundantly, the which before did yield them but a little
quantity of wyldynges and crabs. Moreover by the infinite gardens and arbors,
which they did set round about the fountains and springes, made the valeys
fresh, and lest the high mountains, because of the wodes and forestes, and
after knew how to order the ground to bring forth fruit. Again their
places where they inhabited at the first were little, but having dwelt there a
time from small vyllages became great Cities. upon the high mountains they
builded towns and strong castles, and in the valeyes great temples and
churches, to the end that the fountains might be more holsommer and
delectable. they were richli made of fair cut marbelstone and they set trees
al about to give them a pleasant shadow. And more from the said wells they
caused waters by the pipes to descend and come into their Cities They made
havens and crekes in the sea to harbor the ships. They also made many right
places, into the which the ships might retire back without danger of
winds and tempests At the end they had so appoyncted al things as well in
the sea, as in the land, which if we do consider the state present and after
what it was before time, a man would take it to be a country above all other,
then that which was first created, and would judge it more like the gardeyne or
paradyse out of the which our forefathers Adam and Eve was drowen for the
transgression of the heavenly commandment then other wise. Moreover the
people invented many arts and sciences most wyttye (as letters and tables to
write which after was had in use, they be oftentimes exempted from the
condition of the mortalles in leuyng memory of them to their posterity which
made participacions of their inventions, and by this, me thinks that the
mortal men might be sooner called some earthly gods then men, had it not ben
for that malygne Satan, which has by a most pestilente seade sown in the
world, brought confusion: for he seeing that the humayne creatures did
increase, and that the condition of their life passed from good to better,
being styrred up by an envy has brought thee^ into bondage, by reason of
their sundry and many sins and inormities committed. And sins the true light
appeared, there came in Idolaters which would have darkened the same. There
engendered many sects amongst the people. To prove this true, we do se that at
these prese^tes, those of Asie, Arm^^e, Arabie, Perse, Cyrie, asyre, Medie and
in Aphrique Those of Egipte, of Numidie, Libie, Maritanie, and in Europia.
those of Greece, Mis^e. Romayne, and all other which be under the obedience of
the Turk, do observe duly for the most part the laws of wicked mahoment, and
his false doctrine, and mad, forsakynge our savior Christ. The people of
Scythie, of whom there is a great number, and be now called Tartariens or
Tartares. do worshhyp most commonly the Idolles of the Emperor Cham, some
do worship the stars, not withstanding there be which attribute honor to
the only God, and use the epistles and doctrine of saynct Paul. The Indes
which (...) under Pressed John, do follow the true Christen religion,
(Nevertheless) there is dyuersitie between their doings and ours. At these
presents, there be no nations which do observe the Catholyke faith but the
English men, the Germaynes, Italyons, Spanyardes, Frenchemen, Scotts,
Iryshmen, the Danes, Liuones Prusste^s, me^ of Polland, of Hongery, and those
in the Ilondes, those of the Rodes, of Cecilie, of Corse, of Sardayne, and some
other regions. That cruel enemy of mankind, has so stirred him self that by
the dyuersitie of religion and ceremonies, the other abouesayde natyons had
perticulerly chosen and meinteined to be the true ways to bring to eternal
bless and felicity, in reputing al other false and Eronious, every one after
their own fashcions with all their endeuoyr did set for them most ample manner
their own religion, whereupon has followed such hate, amongst men that they
which have taken great iourneyes into far contreys have not gone in save guard.
In so much the men the^ selves have stopped, the passage to come to the
perfect knowledge of diverse nations, which does make me judge that many
there be that believe all that is written of our purpose to be but fables, for
that they have not skant the knowledge of the people and nations which be nygh
to them. I mean they know not their own neighbors, as those regio^s
situated next to theirs and all is for not having trauayled. We do se that the
knowledge of these things has been so agreeable and pleasant to many, that it
has redowned to their great honor glory and profit. As it is most
certain, that many has not refused to their end to atteyne to this knowledge
leaft their natyue contreys, their fathers, mothers, wife, children, and
friends, not regardinge (the which is more) their health and salut, to put them
selves in infinite dangers, and contempnynge all things which move them from
their enterpryses. yea, and to their pain have taken upon them the long and
dangerous vyage by sea whereby (as I know) not only but this time present, but
also in time paste, in a manner sins the world began, most commonly they have been in great credit, authority and reputacion, and made governors of publyke
weals, and grown to be councellers, Judges, and great capyteynes or chyefe
of armor, and all by the experiens of many people, with manner of their vsages
and lyuinges, and long viages in contreis. Other has atteined to so great
knowledge, that of the great nombre of their disciples were instructed diverse
be^ds of the Philosophers, like as of Socrates were called Socrateques, the other
which were the disciple of Plato^, were nominated achademiques Those of
Aristotel, Peripathetiques Those of Antisthenes, Ciniques, those of Aristippus
were called Cirenaiques, of Zenon, Stoiques, of Pythagoras, Pithagoriques. And
if we look a little nyer, we shall find that they which have given so much
authority to the ancient lawers, as to Minos, and Rhadamantus, to wards them
of Crete. Orpheus, to them of Thrace, Draco, and Solon, to the Athiens.
Licurgus, to the Lacedemoniens, Moses to the Iues and diverse toward other
nations, that every one of them might be instructed, and to instytute certain
religion and laws. If these men had kept their own contreys this had not ben,
but because they consumed their age in other countries they were able to
instruct, having afterward the same knowledge of the Caldes, Mages, Br^^^manes
Gimnosophistes, and the prests of Egypt which were all men of great
knowledge, and of a most excellent natural wit, with whom they had
frequented a certain space and time. we do also find that this knowledge has
greatly served the excellent personages and princes in the old time, as
^upiter of Crete, who^ the poet writes did meet the Circuit of the world five
times. To his two children, as to Dionisos, otherwise called Bacchus, and to
Hercules the strong, with his immitatour Thes^ns Iaso^ with all his bend. To
Ulysses which invaded so much the dangers of the sea, and to Aeneas, of Troy,
to Titus Darius, Xerxes, Alexander the great, Hanibal Metridatis, king of Pont,
which could speak fyftye languages, of the fyfty Realms which was under him.
The innumerable nobles of Rome, as to the two Scipions, to Marius Le^tulus
Pompeie the great, Julius Caesar, Octauian august. To the Constantines Charles,
Otheons, Courades. Henryz Federiz, and that in their acts of wars, by the
which they have purchased to them selves eternal glory and praise. Seeing
then the knowledge of diverse nations, is greatly to be delited in and
profitable, I shall desire the (gentyl reader) to put to thy good will, and
read over the things contained in this book, for to this purpose the same be
gathered together, to reduce the as well to a perfection of knowledge both of
the countries and the nature of each people, as if I should lead the by the
hand from one place to an other from one region to an other, or to point the
with my finger. I have manifested to me the manner of the lyuinge as well of the
ancient, as of fresh memory, together with the cituacion of al countries, and
how they were inhabited in old time, and be now present. And be not offended
with me (gentle reader) for want of austeritie. In that I have not holly
satisfied thy appetite as peradventure thou desyrest, I have done it rather to
challenge unto my self rebuke and shame, then praise, yet I have written
neither of the things passed, nor present, but they have been more then a
thousand times spoken of, in the same terms, in hundredth of auctours, I would
not thou should think that I do attrybute all this work or invention to my
own doing, and to have it set forth for any newaltie, to satisfy some
particular man. I shall hartly desire the (gentyl reader) understand of me,
that I do entreat of many things worthy of knowledge, part came of my self,
and part also of the treasure of my books, and as the good father of a
famylie (to whom our savior Christ has compared al me^ that profess the
faith) to his household, so judge of me that these which I hear present, be
ancient things, and come from strange auctours. I require the bear me good
will, and take all things in good part, prayeng God to meinteyne the in
prosperity, which I beseech him hertely to grant. Amen.

Finis.
THE TRUE OPINIon of the divine writers touching the Original of Man. The
first Chapter.
AFter that the divine majesty of God had finished the creation of the
heavens, and universal frame the which for his ornament and most comely
composicion, was called Mundus, together with all things contained in the
Cyrcuite of the same at the fyfthe day of his creacion. upon the syxt day the
most noble creature called Man was made, for to be lord over ye things above
mentioned, Leauyng to him the use and pleasures of the^. Of al other creatures,
he was only endued with celestial wisdom, and had the name of Ada^ given
unto him, because he was made of a vein of red earth. A while after was given
to him a company keeper, to the entente that solitarines should not anoy him.
The woman which was made of his rybbe. They were set in the most delectable
place of the world, being compassed with fair ryuers, that place was
replenished with young sprynges, trees, herbs, and flowers, wonderful
pleasant and delectable to behold, and for that cause it was called Paradyse
by a greek term. These two persons for a space led a most happy life, and
without feelynge of ill, for the earth of her self brought forth al fruits
at desire. Notwithstanding, for breaking the commandments of God, they were
driven to forsake that place, after that the earth was acursed, whereby she
brought nothing forth according to her former fertillitie. They were
constrained to seek their living with swet and labor, then raygned all kinds
of syckenesse, feeling of cold and heat upon the humayne bodies, Cain was
the first begotten child of them, and Abel was the second, and after them
many more, and so increased the world and the earth was well inhabyted. The
more the number of men multiplied the more did they increase in vice, and their
living did daily wax from il to worse. In stead of good doing to their
neighbors, they began to annoy and hurt one an other, and in stead of
acknowlegynge of the creator, they had in contempt the goodness of God, from
that time continued and increased the wyckednes of men, in such sort that God
therefore after he had found one just man which was called Noe, for whose
cause he saved all his famyly for the restorynge of mankind, sent the fludde,
which drowned the hole earth with all living things thereupon, except those
which were saved in the holy arc made by the said Noe, (...) called (...)
be^^^se it ^oken (...) Christ church
five months then after the beginning of the flud, the arc touched ground
upon the mountains, of Armenie, and Noe went out with his, and increased
mankind in short space after by the help of God, he enterprised to have all
the parts of the earth inhabyted, and for that occaon sent his children into
diverse contreys in the world, he sent his so^ Cain into Egypt with his dukes
(as Berose recites) Esennius into Libie, and in Cerene Tritames: and all the
rest of Aphrique, he sent Iapetus the elder, and Atalas. Into the Orie^tal Asie
he sent Ganges, with some of the children of Gomer the Gallica, into the
luckye Arabie, he sent Sabus the Encense bearer, Ara^us was by him appointed
chyefe of the deserte Arabie, and Petretus capyteyne of Araby the stony, he
caused the country from Damas unto the borders of Palestyne to be inhabyted by
Canaan. Into Europia he sent Tuisco the gyaunt to be king of Sarmatie, from
the river of Panais unto the river of Rh^^, nyhg unto the same Tuisco, there
did inhabit the children of Ister, and Mesa with his brethren, who had the
country from the mount Adule unto Mesemberie, and the country of Ponticque
(...) at that time Tyras, Achardius, and Emathius, held Italy, Gomer the
French man, Samotes the Celtes, the which be the countries of the said
Gaul, now called France, and Iubal enjoyed the Celriberiens which is Spain.
The sudden and short departure from his kindred (who had not yet learned
neither the living ne manners of their parents) was the cause of all the
dyuersitie that syns followed. In so much that Cham (who did flee for the shame
done to his father,) remained he, his wife, and children, in those parts of
Arabie, and since called by his name Cain, who never gave to his posterity any
precepts of religion, in so much that he travailed not to learn any. where
upon it came to pass by succession of time, the one sent after the other out
of one land to inhabyte an other. After having occupied many countries in the
world for this skattered lygnage multyplyed meruelously, finally they fell into
most execrable errors, out of the which they cold not unwrap themselves,
their language chanched, and it was not to be understand or intelligeble, the
true worshyppynge and knowledgynge of God was out of remembrance. So men have
lived after such a strange sort that one can not well deserne the living
between the bests and them. They which do pass Egypt for the admiracion they
had of the celestial creatures, began to worship as gods the son, and the moon, calling the son Osyris, and the moon Isis. They attributed godlynes to
respiracion, by the which all men do live, under the name of Jupiter, to the
element of fire, under the name of Vulcaine, to the air, under the name of
Pallas, to the earth, under the name of Seres, and to diverse other creatures,
under* many other names. And they of Egypt do not only thus walk in darkness,
but also in the countries possessed by them, which be descended from Cham,
have been subiett to execrable bondage, and ignorance of the true religion.
Moreover there was never country that the people were so fertyll to bring
forth children, nor better merytynge the name of a mother for this respect,
then this part of Arabie, which the said Cha^ with his occupied. Such and so
great a ruin was brought to man kind, the banyesh mente of that only
personage, to the contrary, S^m, and Iaphet, with all their stock, who were
instituted and appointed by their fathers in certain law, were contented with
small possessions, and therefore they were not so largely disparsed through out
the hole world as the other. Then it came to pass, that the love of the truth
(that is to say the true hollynes and adoration of the right God) did remain
hyd in one only nation, until the coming of Messiah.

he false opinion of the Etheniques and Infydels, touching the Original of
man. Chapi, ii.
THe Philosophers in time past without any knowledge of the true Godde, of
long time did speak of natural things. Some of them beleaued that the
world was a thing not created, and incorruptyble, and that mankind was
without taking beginning. The other again judged, that the world was created
and subject to corruption, and that men were created by succession of time. To
confyrme this opinion they said, before any thing had his beginning, heaven
and earth had one only form, and that the propriete of these two things was
confuse that since these two elements separated one from the other whereupon
such disposition and form of the world, that we perceive the air in
contynuall agitacion, and that of him, the part of the fire had gotten the
highest place, because of his agilitie and lyghtnes, and that by this reason,
the son and the other stars, had kept their places and certain courses,
in the high region, as for that which rests being as of a moist quality
moved but a little from the first place, because of his heaviness and weight,
having a kind of moystenes in him of the moystest part one would say that the
sea had followed it, and that the heauynes disapoynted of so great humydite
shall return to slammy earth and soft, the which by little and little shall
harden, by reason of the heat of the son. In such sort the abouesayde by the
vyolence of the heat shall be swollen and risen, whereupon many humors under the
holones of the ground, risen up, were gethered, and by little and little
converted and turned to matters rotten, as we se has happened in the
maryshes of Egypt. Again the earth being cold and moist of her nature, is
made hot in a little space by the vehemente heat of the air, that a man would
judge in a small time, that the heat had been mingled with moist things,
which again shall be formed in a proper matter, and engendered to an efficacy,
to the which was given moystues, shed by night and by the vygneur of the son
had kept and noryshed this matter generatyue until that by contynuaaunce of
time, the abouesayd matters shall be compelled to ascend up also, as if the time
had been come, that the said hardenesse would have rendered that which it
has engendered, that may be open and broken by the vehemence of the so^, and
in a little space after, brought forth all kind of beasts, of the which,
those which were perticipent of the great heat, were volatyfe or made to
fly, and did win the highest region of the air. The other which had more of
the weigh tines or ponderousnes of the earth were made to remain creapynge,
and some going upon the ground. The other which held them selves of the
quality of water, were tra^sformed into the element of the quality, and took
the name Fyshe, and by this the earth partly because of the heat of the son,
partly because of the wyndes, became more dryer and warmer, so that the mighty
beasts ceased engendrynge, but they which engendered by a mutual conjunction
did bring forth other. They say after this sort, me^ were first created, who
has ever since sought their meat and living in the fields, and feade after
a strange and wild sort, eating nothing but herbs, and the fruit of the
trees, and did no labor, for what by occasyon of the hurt that the wild
beasts did them before, and for fear they should daily, they gathered them
selves together for their commen vtillitie and profit that they might succoure
one an other, and prepare places to dwell in. Again for that the sound of
their mouths were co^fuse, they estudied to frame their tongues to a certain
speech, so that by little and little they gave every thing a name. And because
they were divided into diverse parts, and regions of the world, they formed
diverse and diversity of language and consequentely a ferme in their letters.
And by this the humayne creatures living in great poverty, and without
understanding how to make reseruacion for their necessities, with that which
God sent them, as the fruit which the earth brought forth, fortuned
oftentimes that one (amongst the great number) dyed for hunger, and some for
cold, whereupon me^ instructed by experience was driven and learned to prepare
a buckler to defend them from these and such like inconuenientes, serched (as
says the Philosophers) caves to avoid the vyolence of the cold and reserved
the frut for their provision afterward they had knowledge of the propriety of
fire, whae it was, together with all other necessaries. In a space after, they
invented al things apt and mete for humayne life. To conclude necessity was
the co^peller to seake these inventions, at the last man had the art to use
one an other in his place, that the hands, the words the excellency of the
spirits, was helpers togethers, and served the^. These be they which be
persuaded that the original of man is, as above rehearsed, and have not
referred it to the dyuyne providence of God, does hold opinion that the
Ethiopie^s were the first that were procreated amongst the mortalles and had
this opinion, for that the land of Ethiopie is the neighbor to the son, as
before al other to feale the heat, how much as before they did, neither more
nor less then all the rest of the earth, the said earth was slymye, then it
should have been, that of this first temparature and moistnes with the heat man
shall be engendered, who should rest in the place of his birth, rather then in any
other, which he knows not. Now we will begin by this region, and after we
have spoken a little of Aphtique, one of the three parts of the world
(according to the same also is our book divided in three.) We will rehearse in
the first place of the cytuacion of the country of Ethiope, and manners of the
nations which inhabyte there, and after by order, we will set forth the
description of all other regions and nations, as well as we can possible. And
for that I would not seem altogether slowfull. I will some what more to enryche
my book, entreat of more then the French auctoure writes of as well in this
part following the division of the world in four: as also to enlarge the
description of Ethiope, with a brief and general description of Aphrique, and
many other anotacions, according to the judgment of Pomponius Mela.

A division of the world into four parts. Ca. iii.
AS touching the same matter, that thing which is called all, what soever
thing it is, whereunto we have given the name of the world and of heaven. It
is one thing and comprehendethe in one compase him self and al things. In
his part is dyfference. From whence the son does spring, it is named the
Orient or East. And there as it falls it is named the Occidente or the west.
That way where his course does lie, it is called the South And on the
contrary part the North. And in the mids of the same is the earth on
high, and is gyrded round about with the sea. And the same divided from the
east to the west into two parts the which are called Hemispherise has fine
distyncte porcyons or Zoones. Heat does vex the meddle most and cold the
extremes. The resydwe may be inhabited. They have like times of the year, but
yet not at one time our Antichthones does dwell in the one, and we in the
other. The situation of that being unknown for the vehement heat of the
plage, that is between: we must entreat upon this. And so this is extended
from the east unto the west. And for because it lies even so it is something
longer than where it is brodest. It is all compassed about with the C^ccear,
and receaueth of him four seas, one from the North and two from the Southe,
and the fourth from the west. They shall be declared in their places. This first
bring very strayte and passing not ten miles in breadth opens the earth, and
entrethe. And then is poured out long and wide and dryueth a fore him myghtely
the sea banks, gyuing him place. And then again they coming together very
nygh, it is driven into such a strayt yt it is less then a mile over. And then
spreads it self again, but thae is very moderatly and then it goes forth
into a more narowe place the^ it was before, where, when it is once received it
is again very huge and great, and is joined unto the poole, but yt is by a
small monthe. And all this same both where as it commethe and where as it
spreads is called with one name our see. The strayte enter of it coming in,
the Latynes, does call Fretum. where as it spreads a broad, it receives
diverse names in diverse places, whereas it first stratneth it self together it
is called Helles Pontus. And then Propontus where as it spreads out, where it
rynneth together again Eospherus of Thrace. And where again it powrethe out
it self a broad it is called Pontus Euxinus. And there as it is committed to
the poole it is called Cymi^us Bospherus. The poole it self is called Meot^s.
By this see and two noble ryuees called Tanais and Nilus the hole world is
divided into three parts. The river Tanais coming from the North toward the
Southe rynnethe all most in to the myddest of the poole Meotis. and from the
contrary part Nilus rynneth into the sea. And all that land that is from the
strayte unto those fluddes on the one side we call Africa. And on the other side
Europe, unto Nilus, Africa, unto Tanais Europe. And all that ever is beyond is
called Asia.

The description of the Conntreye of Ethiope, and the aunciente manners of the
Ethiopiens. p Ca. iiii
EThiope is a region divided into two parts. The One part is called Asie.
the other is Aphricke. The same which at this day is called the Indes toward the
son rysynge, is enuironned with the read see, and with the sea of Barbaria
toward the North it is bordynge on the country of Libie and Egepte toward
Occidente, and does join to the forthest Lible of the part resting, the
which is set on the side of Midy and joined to the other Ethiope, and was so
called by a name Athiopes son of Vulcaiue, which first raygned (as says
Pliny) of a Greek digestion Atho which signifies burn and Oph which
signifies take heed, and that because of the approchynge nyghe to the soon.
The countreye is continually hot, the same being under the region of the Midy.
This country draws toward the west, and the desert toward the East. Many
sorts of people dwell there of diverse figures, and kinds. Some do think that
they were the first created of almortall creatures, and the true Inhabitoures
of the earth. They know not what bondage means. They have always ben at
liberty. It is said that religion and the ceremoneyes for their Gods were
first by them invented. They have doble vsaunce of letters. The letters which
be called holy, are for the pristes of laws usage and to the^ only known,
the other be for the common people. The fygures of their letters were not such
that of them might be lykened two selables, but moore lyker to the outeward
parts of men and creatures, and to be compared to some instruments that
artificers occupy. Every one of the fygures had three proper significations. As
for example. The figure of Milan, by the which was sygnyfyed celeritie or
quiknes. By the figure of one Crocodile, was signified evil. By the figure of
Locil was signified take heed and preservation, and so consequently of all
other figures every one to his propriety signified sondrye things They which
presented the sign of Incence amongeste the pristes were holden most holy, and
therefore they were axcepted with the king and worshypped of all the people as
men endued with deuinitie, which was reputed to be sent by the deuyne
prouydence. The king was bound to lyu^ acordynge to the ordinance of their
laws, and in all his affairs to be ruled as the fashion of the country, he
could punish no malefactors nor rewarded good doers, but would send one of
his officers to him which is ordained to be punyshed, geuynge him charge to
signifye to him death. As soon as he should cease speaking to the malefactor,
incontinently after, he shall go into his house and kyl him, with out remedy or
other question to be axed. There is much honor attribtted by them to the
king, for as often as they shall perceive him to be sick in any part of his
body, or what cause so ever it may be, they of the court, will in good gray
take the like decease in the saw part where the king is sick of, for they
judge if to be health full for them, that if so be it, the king should lose
either his leg or arm, that they might also be pertycypent, of the like
calamytie. Also they say that they which be servants with the king after they
know that he is dead, do seek also their own deaths, and that is in
witness or temonial of the true amyte between their king and them. The same
death says they does turn them to greeate honor.

The most part of the people of that country do commonly go naked, because it
is so hot, only they do cover their members with shepes skynnes, and other
some of them have couerynges hanging from their hear (with the which they
be interlaced) unto the myddle of their bodies. They have no fruit nor grain,
but of little Palms, and yet there is but a small quantity, some of the
people live with herbs and little roots of trees together with flesh and
milk.

Meroe was the capital town, in that realm, and is an Ilonde in form of a
tryangle within the river of Nylo, and does extend almost three thousand
Stades It was inhabited at the beginning by shepherdes given holly to the chase
and by labors, who had in their possessions the minds of gold. Herodote
does resyte that the Macrobiens (which be people in Ethiope) do moore esteem
tynne and lether, then gold, in so much that the Imbassadours which king
Cambises sent into that country, came home cheyned together like prisoners in
great cheynes of gold, they have in that country great plenty of gold and
Evene wodde. They kyl the Olyphantes and eat them They have Lions, Leopardes,
Vnycornes, Dragons, the which by the number of knottes, they make of their
tails do kyl the Olyphantes. There is found in that country certain kind of
stones, as the H^acinthe, and the Christop^rast. they do gather Peper there
Their bows belong and burnt at the end. The women of that country use to go
a warfare them selves, all like to the men. And they have for the most part
their lyppe persed, or thruste through with a knyfe, and through the same
passes a ring of copper. Some of the^ do worship the son rysynge, other some
the son going down, some use to cast the dead bodies into the ryuers, other
some do enclose them in vessels of earth and keep them a hole year in their
houses and so do worship the dead bodies, and with great seremonie makes
offering of the first fruit gathered. Some wrytethe that they use of custom
to chose him king which does pass all other in the science of bryngyng up
beasts, and strong of body. Their king had this prerogatyue of an old and
ancient custom over the priests of the city of Memphis, that he might by
his officer command which of them he would to kill them selves, and to apoynte
in their stead and place whom he please. They do believe that there is an
everlasting God, and he which made all things and governs the whole world.
Again they do believe there should be an other mortal, the which god (as they
say they know not. They have their king in such reverence that they lyken
him to their God, for they say he has merited more praise for a publyke cause,
and worthyer of honor then their God. This like has been from the beginnynge
also the estate of Ethiope. Such has been their ceremonies and manner; of
living. Never the less Marc Anthony Sabellique (out of whom we have taken the
most part which we have and will rehearse) does say that he did understand of
the true and right men of the country that the king of Ethiope which we call
pretian or pressed John who^ they call Gian, that is to say strong is of so great
a personage and blud, that under him he has threscoore and two other kings,
and that is the chyefe of the Church in his kingdom be all governed by him.
There be under him in his kyngedome a great number of Archebyshops, and each
of them Again have at the least under their jurisdiction twenty bishops. They
say more, that princes and noble bluds do eary the cross before them, when
they go abroad. In like case, they carry a vessel made of gold filled with
earth, and by that representacio^ they be warned of the mortal condition by
one of the said objections, and by the other of the passion of Jesus Christ.
The pryestes do mary wives, to the end they may increase, always provided
when their first wives be dead it is forbidden them to take an other. Their
Temples be of great highness and large, and far rycher then ours, They have
diverse couentes and orders of religion. As of saynct Anthony saynct ^o^enick,
saint Augustine and other Their aparel is not of one certain color, but as
the supprior would permit them to wear. They have a great deuosion to our
blessed and holy virgin Marye, and to saynct Thomas, which is called Didimus,
They do surely think that their king which is called Gram is come of the seade
of David: Of the which they esteem their generation to have of long time
continued until these presents. The king is not black as other of the
people of Ethiope be he is both of face and body white. The old king of the
country is called Garama, he is not enclosed in a wall. They did build a
great nombre of tents, and pauylions disposed by order, garnyshed with
tapestry, and wrought with sylke. The king of ancient custom does never keep
him self together in houses, and cloisters waled two hours, and why? They
judge it to be a thing of imfamy and dishonestie. They observe this kind of
doing for a law, at al times in wars they can find a mylion of men, fine
hundredth Olyphantes, and with them a great number of horses and Camelles, and
again by occasion of a little troubles which chanced, there is al about the
countries many bands of his soldiers, and they which do descend be marked
with a cross the which is prynted with an hot from, in what place so ever
they come it shall appear upon them. They use in their wars Iauelynges. The
highest degree of dingnitie is presthod. The second degree is to be given to
the sage men, which they call Balsamos and Panquez, they esteem greatly
innocency, and for knolege they put these two virtues in the first place of
wisdom. The third degree of reputacion is attributed to the state of the
nobles, atter the which follows those which be in the estate of a Prince.
The Judges says their minds, when there is any question of the death of a
man, and does send their minds in writing to the governor of the town,
which they call Lycomegia, which does present the kings person. They have
laws registered in writing, and do judge al things as to the^ shall be thought
good to be done with Justice and equity. The man found in anultry and
condemned for the same, shall pay for amends the fourth part of their goods.
when that the woman is likewise found the correction is co^mited to the^ of
the house, where she offended, and as they of the ma^cio^ shall think them
selves dishonored, so to punish her. The men and women do wear white apparel
set with pearls, and trayneth their clothes even to their fete and their
sleues be neither open before nor behind. They use al colors in their aparel
except black, and that they wear not because it is a doleful token, the
which they are accustomed to wear.xl. days after any of their friends dye.
At noble men's tables, they are served for their first mese with hard flesh,
which they cut up properly, and do powder it with spices, and with good
appetyde eat the same. They do never apparel themselves in woollen cloth, their
apparel is of lynnen and sylke. They have diverse languages amongst them and
do apply them selves to till the ground. All the nations of Libie which be on
this side of Ethiopie to the Indes unto the Occident do follow the error of
Mahomet, and do live in a manner like to Barbaries, which be now in Egypt,
and be called Maures, because of the frequentacion of Maures, which grieved not
this country of Libie so much as the Sarazines in the evil time that so great
alteracion and mutacion chanced in this world and that the aunciente laws
and creances, was as well through all the country and nations changed as also
their names There is a lake wherein the bodies which be washed withal does
shine like as they were anointed with oil. The same is feeble also and weak
that the things which do fall or be cast into it, as the leaves which be nigh
the said lake falling therein does not swymme upon the water, but is received
inwardly, and so synke down. There be also marvelous birds with horns, and
Tragopomones and Pagasi which have ears like Asses. But into the parts to
wards the borders Southward, there is nothing notable. All that way is wast,
for it is interupt with wave hy^les, and rather like freshwater banks then sea
banks.

And from thens there is a great cooste and without inhabytance. And for a
certain time it was douted whether the sea was beyond or whether the earth
was compassed about or whether Aphrique, being void of all fruit, did
extend it self without end. But if it be so that Hamo of Carthago when he
was sent by his country folks to search out the countreies, ofter he had
passed the mouths of the Ocean, and went a compass about a great part of
Aphrique, he made report, that he did not lack sea. But that he wanted
victual. A certain man called Eudoxus in the time of our graundefathers,
when as he fled away from Lathyrus King of Alexandria went forth by the
Arabians baie (as Nepos affirms) and was carried through by those seas even
unto Gades where there is certain things of that border known. For beyond
those places which as we have said before be deserte. There be dume people
which uses signs for spech, other has tongues without sou^de. some lack
there tongues other some also have their lyppes c^auynge together, saving that
they have an hole under their nosttrelles, where they covet to drink, but when
they have list to eat, they take the corn sprynging here and there, and be
reported to receive one corn at once. These be admirable. yet not so admirable
as notable. Truly they be worthy of parpetuall memory and praise as well for
their living as also for the obedyence to their prince. For how much is it to
be accounted to us for dishonor being Christians, reasonable creatures, endued
with celestial knowledge, and instructed in godly laws to show more
disobedience to our magistrates the^ the Infydels to their governors. what
rebuke do they meret and deserve, which know the word of God, and yet
neither obey the Queen nor her godly procedinges? Where as ye Ethenekes not
knowing the true God ne his laws, do notwithstanding live a purer life then
they. Well I wyshe all men would have shame laid before their eyes as a glass
to look in, that they might thereby be more ashamed to do evil, the^ the
Infydels.

The description of Egypt, and the manners of the Egyptiens Cha. v.
EGypt is a countreye in Aphricque (which to the judgment of some) is nighe
to Aphrique, and this country is so called by ye name of a brother of Danaus
which had the name Egyptus, and was before called Aeria This country as Pline
says in his fyfte book, is of the side of the Orient by the read see, and the
region Palestine, toward the Occedente of the countreye of C^ent, to the
residue of the country of Aphricque, The same does extend from the Midy to
Ethiope toward the side of Septentrion to the sea of Egypt, There was
sometime great Cities as Thebes, Abidos, Alexadria, Babylon, Memphis, and at
this time ^aniete and Caire or Alcir, the which is the residens of Sultan. In
Egypt (as says Platon) there is no rain, and yet is the earth very
fruitful, and al by reason of the river of Nile, which is divided in such
sort and made in form of a tryangle, for the which sign there is a word in
Greek called Deltae, so that country is called Deltae by reason of ye many and
soundrye fluddes which come every year from the river of Nile after ye drougthe
of the somer Some men judged that it was an Island, because of the circuit
that the said Nile had made all about the country. The Egyptiens, were the
first inuentures of.xii. Gods, and began to build Temples, Aulters,
Images, and ingraued in stones figures of diverse bestes. The things which be
issued out from the Ethiopiens shall suffycyently declare the same to us, who
has been the inuentures of these things (as Diodore Cilicien says) Their
wives of an old and ancient custom do use to occupy marchau^: vyse, to keep
Hostyllerye and vyttyllynge houses and do also trafyke, whereupon the men do
give them selves to make lynnen clothe and to carry fardles upon their heads,
where the women do not carye but upon their shoulders, as our men do here in
Ingla^de Moreover they use to make water against a wall like unto our men, and
the men cowrynge down to the ground like as our women do here, all
nessesaryes in the house the women do, and (...) after that is done they go a
broad a bankettynge. Their custone is to assemble together with their Prelate.
The men children be not compelled to keep their parents, but the daughters,
many of them in time paste (when any of their friends dyed) were accustomed to
pole their hear and let their beardes grow long. The Egyptiens to the
contrary shave their beardes, and let the hear of their hedde grow. They
kned the dowe there which they make bread with their fete, and works the
earth with their hands. This has been a particular fassion to all those which
were dissended from the^ (as the Greeks writes) to cyrcu^sisse their members
and preuites. The men be clothed with double apparel. The women do wear but
one wydde at a time. They have two kinds of vsages of letters. The one is for
ye Pristes The other is for the common people. Notwithstanding they have both
the same of the Ethiopiens. The Pristes for the space of three days be
accustomed to have the vermyn and other fylthenes of their bodies taken away
because they fear to do service with the fylthenes about them. They are
accustomablye apparelled in linen They sow no Beans. It is defended by their
laws, and why? because they esteem them unclean. They wash three times in
the day with cold water, and.ii, times in the night They will not eat the
heads of their Bestes until such time as they be sacreficed. Judging them
to be cursed by execrations during the time of their sacrefyces. They do sell
the said heads to the Merchant strangers, and if they can find no man that
will by the^. They be cast into the river of Nile. All the sacrifices of Egypt.
Be of Oxen which never before served. The Calves and Kyne be not saccrefyced,
for that the same Beasts are dew to be offered to Isis their God. They live by
a kind of meat made of Wheat and Rye, and of drink made of branne, for in
that country there is no wynes. They eat also of a certain fysshe part
hardened and dried in the son, and part reserved in sellers, which is
moist. Some time they eat birds which be salted and made hard as a crust of
bread. Morouer the noble men in their bankeres do present wild Duckes, both
mayles and femayles. When they find a company gather at a supper, one amongst
them takes out of his ^uget an Image of death made of wodde or painted cloth
of half a yard long, they shows it to every man at the table and says.
Eat and make good chere, after that thou art dead thou shall be like to this
pycture. If the younger do recontre or mete the elder, he gives place to him,
and tourneth to him with reverence, and in thus doing they resemble the
Lacedemoniens. When the younger does over take the elder by the way shows
worship and lays his hand on the kne. They have) as Haeste writes) gowns of
lynnen borders down to their knes, called Casiliers, and above the same they
wear other whyt garments, but no woollen cloth. Al they which in old time
excelle in knowledge, or had establysshed laws for the common weal. as
cou^cellers went first to the Egyptiens to learn their knowledge and doctrine,
in ye which knowledge they passed all other as these report. Orpheus the Poet,
Homere, museus Melampodes Dedalus, Licurgus Lacedemonien and also Solon of
Athenes Platon. Philosopher, Phithagoras the Samien and his scoller Samolxis,
Eudoxus Mathematicien, Democritus, Inopides borne in the Island of Chios Moses
the hebrew, and many other so that the Pristes of Egypt glorified that they
found them in their books, Wherefore me think it is very necessary to speak
more of their fachio^s, manners, and lyuings to the end we might know that
which they above named had taken of them and other nations. For so (as says
Ber^alde.) In the book that Apulie did write upon the golden Ass, that many
of our fachions and doings was gathered out of the seremonies of the
Egiptiens, as to wear germentes, the men of ye church to wear a crown, to
make alters, to go a processyon, to sing musycke, to do adoration, to pray and
many other things. The Kings of Eypte (as writes Diodore Silicien in ye
second book) did not as our Princes in their time which held their wylles
for laws, and lived in evil order, but their conueruacio^ was to be noted in
that they lived according to their ordynaunces. They have no bond men nor
slaves borne, as they have in other countries. Noble men's children serve them
in their houses, as well of Pristes, as also of others, they must be twentye
years old and such was chosen as had knowledge, to thend that the Prince
moved, by the presens of his servants (who^ were always next to his person)
should not be fantesied and minded to make other acts, but of virtue, for the
Kings do nothing of them selves worthy of reprehe^sio^, they have at all times
to council them other that be wise also, there is certain hours appointed
as well in the night as in the day, at the which time the King shall
understand the affairs committed to him by their laws. At his vprysynge he
shall receive all complayntes exhibyted unto him to the end he may know all that shall need to be done. Every thing is dispatched in time and in his place
opposited by good conduxcion. After that is done, they wasshe their bodies in
the presens of many noble and mighty parso^s, puts on a sumptuous robe, and
makes sacrifyce to their Gods. The custom of the greatest Prelate amongst all the pristes is to lead nyghe to the altar the beasts, and to praise their
Gods with a loud voice the King next to him, and the people assystynge. They
also pray for the health and prosperity of their King, which has done true
justice to his subjects, and afterward resitynge the virtue and excellency of
their said Prince, as his deuosion toward the Gods, humility to man, the
keeping of his promise, Justice, magninemitie, veretie, lyberalitie, modistie
and mercy to them in solitarines. And afterward do curse all malifactoures,
and thereby dyschargethe their King of blame. Imputynge his offenses to his
officers. Wha^ that these solempnites be fynysshed, the Prelate does exorte the
King to depart according to the will of their Gods, and not to follow the
peoples aduyce of small practyse, but to have respect to virtue and honor.
After that the sacrifyce made of a Bull is done, the Prelate does rehearse out
of holy books some acts of virtue made by their predicessors, to admonyshe
their King to rule after the example of them, that is truly and iustlye. The
aunciente laws were not only made to meinteyne Justice, but also for the
government of every thing in all points, as to eat, drink, sleep, to
banyshe and to accompanye with women. Their meats were denty: most commonly
they use to eat Veale. They have a certain measure when they drink wine,
that they can not pass the stynte, The which is to avoyde Ebrietie drou^kennes
and glotenye. Insomuche their laws were so well instituted yt it appeared they
were not made and ordained by a lawier, but by a most perfect Physician. And
it was a marvelous thing to se the Egyptiens so perticularly and duly observe
their laws, and not their wylles, but this is moore worthy of marvel to say
that they were not inclyned to gather and accumelate goods, by a unjust manner
or by any vnreysonable covetousness. They do punysh no man in indygnation, so
that their felicity was obtempered to the laws and esteem them which praise
and glorify them selfs to be subjects to many passions in following their
own pleasures: in somuche that we may se they know their own fautes, that
neither love, heae, nor covetousness could compel them to do things which
they knew to be unlawful or preuidiciall to those which govern them by
prudence and council, besides they have respect least they should dysplease
the^. The justice of the king to the people on the other side is such, that
he has the love of all them. that not only the pristes, but also the hoole
people of Egypt have a great solicitude or more carefulnes, and tenderness over
the health of their king, then they have either of wife children or other
particular Lord. And when such a just king does depart. All in general does
deploore and lament, rent their clothes in pieces, shut the churches, and are
discoraged to commence any publyke acts. By the space of.lxxii. days. two
hundredth of them goes about the streates in a strange apparel as well men as
women.ii. times a day, and sings after the manner and form of hymmes, the
virtues of their king departed. And they will not eat the flesh of any best
baked, they absteyn them selves from all delicate meats as well in drynking as
also in eating. They use no bathes, nor ointmentes, nor sleapes in beds, nor
have not the company of their wives. So sorowfully be they al as though their
dear children were departed. And more over touching this, they be wont to
make ready that which should serve for the sepulcher, and at the last day, they
shut the body within a little Cyrcle, before it is put in the sepulcher In the
same place there shall be red according to the old custom the Regester of all
that which the king had done in his life time, and it was permytted for every
one to accuse him. At these funerals there are a great nombre of people some
come with loud voice to praise his deservings and merits, other do blame his
faults, and make a great noise and brute. And by this brute it has many times
hapened that diverse kings, have been plucked away from the honor of the
sepulcher, and having this fear does styre and provoke the kings of Egypt
to live well and justly, fearing least after their death they should incur
into the displeasure of any of their subjects. And this is the state of the
king of this country. Al Egypt is divided into diverse gouernementes, every one
of them by a name, constituted a governor who has the charge of all things.
The reuenews of the kings lands was divided in three parts. The first part to
the prestes of their law, to whom they give great honor, as well for the
administracion of their sacraments, as also for their knoweledge, by the which
other be tought, part of the revenues be employed upon such necessaries as
serves for the sacrifices, and their own lyuynges. they ca^ not suffer that
the ministers of their gods shall be poor, or that they should lack any thing
to do sacrifyce withal. These priests coming to the king professes to him
the things which be to come as well by the science of Astrology, as also by the
sort of their sacrifices. Moreover they do rehearse to their king books which
be called holly. The acts and deades of other kings, his predecessors by the
same he know the better what is expedient for him. They be not in a small
nombre as ye would say two in a company, they be frank and have the second
place of authority next to the king. The second part of the revenues is to
the king who does bestow it for his necessaries as well upon marterial weapons
for wars, as also the necessaries for his house, and show lyberalitie
toward the good and virtuous people. And by this his lyberalitie the common
people be not burdened to pay taxes and fynes, as they do in other countries.
The third part of the revenues belongeeh to the men of war, to the end
they may have the greater desire to put them selves forth in all parts
dangerous, for the defense of their country. Their policy consists in three
manner of people, that is to say, laborers, herdemen and practisers of science.
The laborers do bye either of the prests King, or of men of war, certain
ground in the fyelde, and do continue in labourynge all their life long upon
the same. And thereof it comes that they can better skyll to labor and till
the earth, then other nations. This industry and labor of theyrs is given by
nature from the father to the child, likewise the shepherde from the father to
the child, do keep and noryshe beasts and have no other vocation This art and
science has been greatly augmented by the artyficers of Egypt, for that they
meddle with no publyke matter, nor do exercise no other occupacio^, but that
which they are called to, and appointed by their laws, or learned of their
fathers. They do judge nothing rashly. In so much they say that these things
which be conducted posytyuely and by maturitie be of great commodytie, and for
the preseruacion of societe and humayne life,

They can find no better means to expulse or banyshe all noughtynes, then to
punish mulefactours and evil doers, so shall al offenders be whypped. And they
have such a respect that due Justice be done, that neither for love friendship,
nor money, the trespasses of the offendour shall be forgeuen, for they said,
these remissions to be destruction of man. Wherefore in the gretest Cities as in
Heliopole in Memphis, and Thebes there was elected and chosen good men, to whom
the correction of all causes was committed who do little dyffer from those of
Areopagites of Athenes or to the senate of the Lacedemoniens where there was of
long time two judges constituted. They do apere always to the number of xxx.
and they chose some of the most lykest among them to be president. And again
there is given to them an other superior by the Cytizens. The king does find
all the necessaries as lyuynges, but the superiors was commanded by the king
to be more honorablye served then the inferiors. He that is principal of the^
has a cheine of gold hang at his neck, whereunto is tied an Image well
garnyshed with precious stones. This cheyne is called verytie. In so much that
president should signify to all men that he which was appointed to hear
their causes, by the cheyne should present verity, and with truth to way all
things. Again their laws containing in.viii. books, brought amongst them.
This was the custom, that the accuser should bring in written the causes of the
accusacion and to certify the judge in form and manner as it was done (Is the
hurt done to an other was a question.) To the defendant there was given time
to answer the plaintifes objection, and to pourge him self or avoid the
fault, or else to deny al and be clear. Moreover they give audyence to the
accuser. Finally after that they have benne hard two times before the iuges
They take deliberacion, that done the judge tourneth the Image toward the
true and feythfull party, and does pronounce judgment Seeing now by chance
we have fallen into this passage, and taken upon us this journey in the formal
declaracions, it would be most best to rehearse some old and ancient laws of
the Egyptians, to the intent that we may know the one from the other, as those
that be evil to shone, and the other that be good and profitable to follow. Al
Periurers were corporally punyshed, and taken as men dispraysynge the religion
of the gods, in so doing they had vyolated the faith to man, the which is no
other thing then a true line of humayne society and fellowship, he that in the
high way shall mete any man which has been pursued by thieves or robbers, and
being able, would not run to take them, was holden coulpable of the
inconueniens and misfortune happened unto the man. And if so be it, he could
not follow him. Yet was he bond to come before the Justice and there to
declare the cause, and to present him self as an accuser against the thyefe.
The pain that was appointed to him that transgressed the law was: that he
should endure a nombre of strypes with a rod, and not to eat nor drink for the
space of three hoole days. The false accuser is punished as a great
transgresser. All the Egypcie^s were bound to bring their names in writing,
and the state of the governor of their country he which in that place was
found a liar, or gat his living by an unlawful way, as vserye* or such like,
was put to death. The man which kylleth an other, whether he be free or
bound, was judged to dye. for murderers or those which commit homicede, they
be not curious to have the laws pass upon them The person dead, present
death to the manslers, so by that the nobles of the country be in surety and
out of fear. The father which kill the child is not put to death, but for
the space of three days and three nights, he is continually nyghe death, being
accompanied with a certain nombre of seriantes. And their reason is, that
though they commyt this crime, yet ought not to be pupunished for they judge
that the father takes away again but the life which before he gave to his
child, and it is sufficient for him to be afflicted by continual repentance
and dollour he takes for his evil dead, and by this means it seameth to
them that other fathers were admonished not to commit the like. They have a
sharp punishment for the paradices and mans^eers. First they are with a
sharp poynted tool thrust through, and afterward set upon a great heap of
thorns, and there be bruised, for they esteem manslauter to be the greatest
crime that a man can commyt to put him to death which would live.

If a women with child had done an offense and condemned to dye, execution
should not have been done until she had been delivered of child, for fear
that the infaunte in her womb not trespassynge should be punisshed with the
trespasser. And for one fault two parsons to be punysshed. He that in ye
battle obeyethe not his Capyteyne is not put to death, but incurreth in a
notable infamy to the dysstruction of his honor. They have such a regard to
their honors, that they esteem the dystruction of their name worse the^ death
it self. The tongues of them be cut out which do reueyle to their enemies
the secrets of publyke matters. All clyppers of money, Forgers of false Coin,
Changers of weight and mark, Grauers of any face scripture or writing, and
cou^ter featters of letters have their two Thombes cut of, to the end those
parts of the body which had done the offense should bear the pain and
punishment, and were suffered notwithstanding to live for others examples. They
have also a grievous punishment. for the man which occupyeth parforce the free
women, that is. shall have his members cut of. By that one evil act (say
they) he commyteth three crimes. First he has defiled the woman. Secondly he
has committed force and vyolence. Thyrdly he let increase of chylder, or at
the lest staynned the parentage and blood. He which is taken in adulterye
shall suffer great tourmentes, and in the sight of the woman his nose shall be
cut of. by that means they will depreue him of part of his visage, the which
lost, in contynent loses his beutye. We find in aucters that Bocchoris was the
inue^ture of the laws observed among the Egyptiens concerning worldly matters.
This amongst alother was ordained ye money lent without a byll or recognisence,
the borower without fraud to repaye again to the Apprester for they hold
this oppinion. That the promise and faith is of great efficacy and virtue.
They did defend that any unreasonable vserars should be had in their country.
Also they would that no man should have their bodies bound for any debt.
Thynkyng it is suffyciente to have their goods bound and not their bodies to
be subject to no other things but to the prefermente of all publyke like
matters. They the^ selves did find this to be repungna^t against reason that
the me^ of war which put them selves forth in infinitte dangers for the
cause of the come^ weal, to be carried to prison (as they were oftymes) by
reason of such dettes as they took up at vsarye. The like to this law there
was traunsported by Solon to the Athenes, and was called Sisatee, By the which
they would not suffer that the body of a Citiziner should be kept in prison for
money taken up at vserye. Moreover the said laws the Ethiopiens observe, one
particular law as concerning thieves by the which it was establyshed that all
they which had stolen any thing should bring the stolen before the high
Priest, and to give him their names in writynge. In likewise he which had the
robery done to, must come before the high Priest. and declare what he has
lost, the day and time when, and how the robbery was committed. so by that
means the things lost be recovered. Always it was provided that the fourth
part of the stolen goods the robber should have. To make this law there was
certain lawyers that considered with them selves that it should be impossible
to drive out of the country all thieves, thought it therefore most expedient to
find the ways that such gentle men as had lost their goods might be
restored to them again: made this law that the fourth part should be to
the thief, and the rest to the howner. The estate of marriage is not in the same
uniform amongst the Egyptiens as it was with the^. For the pristes could take
but one wife in marriage, the other as many as they would or could meynteyne.
They think the child is never Illigitemetly begotten. I suppose they be
engendered of a woman slauesse. for that the man does judge the child to be God,
and ye woman which bare him in her belly to serve for no other purpose but to
nourse hi^ yt he may live. The hole charge the father is at with the child
from his Infancye until he come to age, is not above.xx. Drachimes which is
ten pens English. The Priests do instruct the children with holy letters
and good books. They also teach them their scyences as Geometry
Arithimetique. They do not study to learn ye feites of wars, neither
exercise they morning, nor the art of musycke, they have this opinion. That
mourning is pernetious for young Infantes, and musycke unprofitable, as to
purchase unto them great infamation. The manners to heal malydies and disseases
is to observe a diet, or to provoke to vomet: for seeing (as they do say) that
all sycknesses comes by ye superfluitie^ of meats, they can find no better
medycyne to help the sick patient, then to follow the above named rurle. The
men of war do spend nothing to have Barbers or Phisicions, for that at the
sole and only charge of the common weal there be Phisicions sound which do
heal them when they be hurt. They have cer: tayne kind of medycens left them
in writing by their predycessors, which be regestred in books called holy. If
a man observing the manner of the medycens conteynyng in their books, had not
helped the sick patient he was exempted by their law, and put in fault, but
if he had appointed or other wise ministered other medicene, then in the said
books were specified, and that the patiente was not helped but dyed. The
Physician was also condemned to dye. This law was instituted by the lawyers,
for they judged it a strange thing and unprofitable for the sick man to
inuente a new manner of Phisycke, when he had been a long time visited with a
desease, under the color of a new experiens to hassard the life of the
parson. The Egygtiens above all other nations, were subjects to Idolytrye,
amongste other things they did not only worship (...) the living beasts,
but also the dead, as cattes, dogs, and wolfes, for they where not a shamed
to be such great Idolyters, but glorified therein, and thought thereby to
purchase to them selves and to their Gods great honor, They would go about
the towns and cities with the Images of the said beasts, showynge (as they
went) what beasts they were and how they honored them. When that ye said
beasts be departed, they wrappe them in a lynnen shete: That done, they bow
them selves down and knock their breasts. They keep their beasts dentily,
for they give them to eat whete flower myxte with milk, this they have given
to them ordinerlye, To the other beasts which eat nothing but hard flesh,
was given birds and large money spent upon them. After they be dead, the
people show them selves so sorrowful as though it were for the death of their
own children. Many times they bestow upon the sumptuous buryynge of the
said beasts more the^ their own substance draws to.

In so much when king Ptolomee Lagus reigned it chanced that there was an Ox
in the city of Me^phis, which dyed for age. A talent^ is.v.C.li ^arlynge
Hebraitu^ talentun vulgariu^ is.ii. hundeth and pounds syxti mines is a
hundrel drachmes a dram is.iii. shillyngs.iii pens.
The burienge of the said ox cost his keeper over and above the ordinary
expenses which he had spent upon him al his life time the some of fyfty
talentes of silver which he borrowed of the said king Ptolome, These things
should seem marvelous yet not so meruelus as credible to some men to behold the
sumptuous buryenge of the dead beasts, which the Egyptians use. So often as
these things chance, all the parents and friends of the dead goes about the
streates, their hear of their heads all blouddy lamenting until such time
as the body is under the ground. These misfortunes give them occasion neither
to wash them selves, to eat delicate meats, or to drink pleasant drynkes,
nor to wear sumptuous apparel, They have three sorts of tombs. The first be
gorgious and costly. The second be not so coostely. The last be of a little
value. The first does cost a tallant of silver. The second.xx. mines, the
third a little or no certain sum, but at sometime more, and less. They which
make the funerals have it by patremoni. That is after their fathers death, the
sone make the sepulchers, and he wrytethe all the expenses and charges that it
might cost. After that the price is made with him. The corpse is given him to
burye for the price agreed of before. They which have the charge to open and
enbalme the body be called Saleurs, and be had in honor and reputacion, for
that the priests accompany them to the temple. The officers be round about
the coffin and corpse, and one amongst them does take all the intrelles out of
the belly, except that which belong to the raynes of the back, the which once
plucked forth be given to an other to wasshe in wine of Phenice together with
other sweet odours. This done they do anoint the body first with ointment of
Cedre, and after with other precious oyntmentes continually for the space of
xxx. days, and to (...) do cover it over with myrre and sinamonde and orher
spices, to the intent the body might be kept long and to smell notwithstanding
swet After that they have thus ordered the body, it is delivered to the
parents. A man lokynge upon it shall not well deserve whther it is a dead body
or one a sleep for that all the parts, as the face, shoulders, hands, be
hoole. Before the burienge of the dead the parents shall declare to the
judges, and to the friends of the dead the day of buryenge, saying that the
body shall pass the sea. The judges to the no^bre of.xl. being ready to
accompany the corpse he which is appointed to keep the ship shall bring her to
the shore to New Rigge and apparel her. Moreover before the body is put into
the tomb, it is permitted every one to accuse the dead if he had been found to
have committed any evil. The judges give sentence that he shall be denied the
sepulcher. If he had been falsely accused, the accuser should be grievously
punished, but if no man could come and accuse him, the parents end mourning,
and begin to recite the praise of the dead without making mention of his
genelogie (as the Greeks did) the Egiptie^s take them selves one like to an
other in bludde and nobility. First they will rehearse how he has passed his
youth, led his life, and the good doctrine yt he learned, and degresseth from
that, repetynge the notable acts done in his life time, and amongst all other
do magnifye his goodness toward the gods wisdom, other virtues and qualities
Some children burye their parents in tombs. They which have no sepulcher be
buried in the most strongest and thyckest wall in their houses within the which
they reise a monument. To them which occupied vsery in their life time, was
denied the sepulcher, and wear brought back again, from the temple to their
own houses with out sepulcher appointed until that their predecessors with
their riches chanced to them acquyted the debities of the dead, the same
paid, he shall honorably be buried. Also they have this custom to deleuer in
gage to the creditoure the dead body of the debitoure. The man which had his
kynsman denied the sepulcher, and will not redeem him shall run into great
infamy and sklaunder. In so much that if the son bye not out the fafather, he
shall after his death also be denied of the honor of the sepulcher. Not
withoue just cause many people will meruayl what they meant to ordeyne and
make those laws for affairs of the living And also to be so curious to do
that which might rebound to the honor of the dead. It is manifest to us the
fervent zeal and love they bear to the life of man, which would have
brought gladlye the same (by such examples) clear and without spot. Truly the
Greeks who by the fables of poets have passed in verite and truth, has
written of the fauorynge and cherishing of the good and tormentyng of the
evil. To cause men lead a verteus and sincere life, they thought they could
not sufficient, nor travail to much. In likewise the Egiptiens as well by
fables as also by ernest and lawful attribucio^ of praise exalted the good, and
tormented the evil. And thereby they bring or rather compel men daily to do
things profitable for the health and salvation of this life, that in so much
we may se how each one according to their deserts, and to the quality of
their crimes received that which they merited, and deserved, so that at the
last they were ruled and became virtuous. Wherefore we can not but judge these
laws to be good, which provoke men to a desire to atteyn wisdom and virtue,
and to fly covetousness and that most abominable vseries. What do we
christians mean to allow that for good, which the Infidels esteem for evil,
and abhor it. What reproach is it for us to occupy so many kind of vseryes
to pyll and to polle the poor, the vserer to sell a commodity for one
hundrethe pounds that scante is valued at twenty pou^des. Alas alas I can not
but lament to hear diverse young gentylmen cry out upon these vserers, and
also young merchant men which have morgaged their lands and laid their
marchandyse in paune. For if they miss but one day of payment, or that their
money is not ready at the prescripted time, but come a day or.ii. after, they
will not receive it but sue the rygur of ye law, straight way extend they the
statute of esstaple (as they call it) with a process served, then enter they
upon the house, lands, goods and al, thrust out him, his wife, children and
famyly, Yea so cruel be these vserers that albeit for three hundredth pounds of
money lent, they have.vii. hunereth pounds with the intrest for a year well
paid them, either of the gentylmennes lands, or poor young merchants goods
yet they will not give one penny back agein, so wretched be they, though they
gain the half, and that there should remain a small sum or rest, and find
not so much in the house, then shall the debitours body be committed to prison,
there to abide until full satisfaction be made This have I seen practiced within
this xiiii. months, and who be they which have occupied these vseryes. and
showed this extremity, but such as htah professed most of all godlynes, and
yafned them selves holly. I speak this by no particular man, but as general
grief moves me. To al such corrupted conscience I say, not only say but also
exhort them to fly this art, and practice a godlyer, and let them herein
follow the council and walk the steps of the Ethenikes, for I can not but
nominate them Infydels, yea more wicked then they which be not ashamed to do
that which they vtterli detest. And here I make an end of the description of
Egypt, and the nature of the Egiptianr, and will proceade to treat of other
people inhabytynge in Aphrique.

The description Of Penes or Puniciens and other people of Aphrique Capitalo.vi.
THere be diverse nations amongst the Penes or Puniciens. The Adrimachides do
draw toward Egypt, and hold the fashyons of the Egyptiens, saving only
they wear their apparel after the manner of the Punitiens, their wyfes do
wear a cheyne of copper, and never do cut their hear. They do byte the fles
between their teth when they find them about their bodies, and after they do
cast them away. They present only amongst other people of that contreye
their daughters, and promysethe the^ to be faithful to their king, and he
only to deflower them, and to have his choice to take of them whom he shall
please or fantasye. The Nasamoniens be other people very evil, the most part
of them be robbers upon the sea, and when they se a ship a shore they tone
upon her and robs her, In somer they leave their cattle all about the
cooste, and do go to a certain place where there is great plentye of fair
and good fruytes, and gathers them. The fruit which they gather before
they be ripe they do leave in the son to dry. Afterward put milk together
and stampeth it, and then they do swalow it hole. They have each of them many
wyfes, and have company with them when their lust is come upon them at the
first place they tome at openly, without having any shame to do it in the
presence of other, Like unto them be the M^ssagetes which have an other manner
more of doing, and is, in that they put their staves before them. The same
also is the custom of the Nasamoniens, when that any of the^ take a wife. The
espoused is bound to present him self to all them of the feast, and to be
bound to them to grant for to do there pleasure, and he which has company
with her may give her a presence without danger, and do what he list with her.
They use certain oaths. They amongst them which be just and of a holly life
were had in this reputacion, that after their death the men of the country
did revoke or call again their names, by certain obedes, in swerynge and
touching the sepulcher did transport also, for to do their sort and guess upon
the Sepulchers of their auncitours, and after they had made their oracion, they
sleep upon the same, and do coniectoure upon that which might come of it,
which in sleapynge they dreamed first of The manner of promisynge which they
have one to an other, is to present drink in token of their promise, and if it
so fortun they have no drink, they take the powder of the earth, and lay it
upon their tongue. There is an other kind of people in that countreye called
Garamantes that country was traficked and and traded of other nations. They do
use no weapons, they dare not defend them selves against other which strive
against them, they do dwell beyonge the Nasomoniens toward the occide^t in
part of the sea. To those people do end other which be called Macez which do
cause their hear to be shorn upon the top of the head and let it grow in the
mids. Their neighbors be Guydans, who in their wars they make continually
against the Autrices, do insteade of other armours, put on only the skins of
certain bestes. The women in their apparel hade diverse borders of furs or
skynnes. And for this reason as it is written for that of every man who^ they
have had company they took by a manner of a present, a vestment in such sort
that she which is so apparelled, was counted most horourable, as to beloved of
many. The Machlie^s which be other people inhabyting in the country in Maraiz,
be called Maraiz Tritonides. They do were their hear behind, and nothing
before. The Auses contrawyse be other people inhabiting in the same region, and
do wear their hear before. The maidens of that country do accustomablye
part them selves into bands or companyes, and do fight one against an other
with staves, and cast stones, and does say that this fashion has been by them
observed in the honor of their goddess Minerue. Those which were wounded and
constrained to leave the fyeld were esteemed with them which remained and
resysted unworthy of the honor of the maidens. Contrarywyse, she which shall be
counted most hardiest, at the end is apparelled after the best sort they can
al devise And moreover she is armed in armor according to the Greeks, and do
wear a helmette, like unto the come of a cock, after the manner of the
Corinthians. And after they have so dressed her, they set her in a cart and do
accompanye her all about the Mazais. The people last named have their wives
commen amongst them, and do use the nature like to beasts. So soon as their
wives have had a child, and noursed it a time until the said child have a
little strength, the same amongst them is called the father. The mother must
forsake to live with the said child. And ye shall understand that from.iii.
months to three months, the man has company with the woman, and then the
mother shall deliver the child to one whom she shall please. The other people
of the same region which be called Atlantes, because they inhabyte toward the
mount Atlas by Arom^es, that is without particular name They do detest the
curse of the passing son, with infinite execracions, in that it is so hot
that it burns them and their region. They eat no kind of flesh, and have
no resting place to sleep. The other people of Aphrique, which be called
Pastoriciens live by flesh and milk, notwithstanding they eat no beafe, no
more then the Egiptiens do eat porke: for there the women of the country of
Cerene have a fear or horroure to beat their kynne. because they said
beasts be offered to their god or Idol Isis, the which in Egypt is honored,
and for his honor observe certain fasting days and holy days The women of
Barcees which be other people of that country have a contrary obseruacion,
for they never eat bieffe nor porke. And so sone as their children be.iiii.
or.v. years old, they do beat the veins of their heads, some of them do
burn the veygnes of the temples, and that which is set burning upon their
heads is of blood and woll, set on fire upon their hear to the intent that
the moistnes and petuitie descendyng from the brain and other parts of the
head may not hurt the^, by this means they say their children are more
healthful and their persons in better disposicion. The manner of their
sacrifyce be these, that after they have cut the ear of a sheep, they present
it in sign of thanks given for the first fruits they have every year. They do
cast the said ear upon the covering of their house, that done, they do wry
their shepes necks. They do no other sacrifices but unto the son and moan.
They bury the dead, as the Greeks, except the Nasamoniens, when they perceive
that one amongst them is at the point of death, being in his bed, does lift
him up, and makes him to sit vpryght, for fear that he should yield up the
ghost lieng in his bed upon his back. their tabernacles be builded, and
gorgigiously made, set upon great trees after such a sort, that they will
turn with every wind. The Maxiens do wear their hear on the right side, and
shave away all on the left, they do peynt their bodies with red, and they say
it comes from the Troyens. The women of Zabiques be other people, ending to
the Maxiens And they do conducte their husband carts when they go a warfare.
The zigante^ be other people of that nacio^. They have a great quantity of
honey bees that the men by their industri knows well how to keep and norish
them, so that they multiply greatly in so much there is so great abundance that
the people be fed only there with. The people be also peinted red. All the
nations of the country of Libie do live a very strange and wild life, The
most part of the day time in the somer, they goo under some shadow, so that
there is no diversity between them and beasts, they make no provision for
that they lack. And for their aparel they use gotes skynnes. The most
myghtiest amongst them, have no cities subject under them but little towares
al about the waters side. In the which they put al their necessaries, and that
which they have gathered be laid in the said towers. Every year they do a
kind of obediens to their subjects, and by that they show them selves to be
friends to the good and parcecutoures of the rebellions, as thieves, and robbers
of countries. Their weapons in war be proper, agreeable both for their manner
and nature, for that they are light of body, and the country plain for the
most part thereof, they use no swords nor daggers, nor no like weapons, yet
they carry with them iii. darts, and a quantity of stones which they gather,
and put into a lether buget. They be furnished with such wepons both for the
assautynge and retyryng back that they do hurt greatly their enemies, by that
so long exercise they make the^ selves parfet. They hold no feyth to
strangers. The Troglodites (whom the Greeks call herdme^ or shepherds because
they keep cattle) be people in Ethiope of this same region, which through out
all countries appointed them selves a king. They have their women and
children common, except the king which has his wife and children a part. As soon as the queen his wife is come to see him The king with all magnificence
does present to her a number of cattle. As long as the wyndes of Ethesiens
do last to the dog days. There does fall in that country great plenty of
rain. They are fed most commonly with the blud of beasts and milk myngled
sodden together. And when that their pastures be baren because of the heat of
the son, they do seek for the maryshes. They have no wars one with an other,
by reason whereof they live like lords. They do kill their old mottons and
those which can not keep them selves from maledies and disseases. They do
asscribe no certain name to none of their children. For they do think that
the sheape and the bulls be their fathers and mothers, and why? because from
those bestes they have their daily noryture. The common people do use to drink
the iuce of a tree called Aubespine The rich me^ do cause to be pressed a
certain kind of flower. The licour whereof makes drink for them, having in a
manner the taste of worse new wine They lead their sheape from one place to an
other, for fear that the said sheape should be weary to abide still in one
country. The peoples bodies be all naked saving their members. Which they
cover with skynnes. They said Troglodites. Who^ they call Megauares, do wear
always for their armor a coote of buffe with hear and al vndessed and amase
set with points of Iron, other do carry a bow, another half a pycke. They do
not pass to buyld Tombs and Sepulchers, but insteade of a tomb, they do
burye the body of the dead with such like woodde as we call splynt, or
barks of trees, and the body is wrapped therein even from the top of the head,
to the soole of the foot. Afterward they set it in some high place, and
covers it with the stones they cast upon, and that done they do laughe at
the dead. And after that they have covered with stones they put upon it a
horn of a got, and so leauethe him without taking any more co^passyon. They
make battle one against an other not in anger or for ambytion (as ye Greeks
were wont to do) but too gain the commodytie of their pastures and fields.
First in their wars they cast at one an other a great number of stones. And
they use of a custom to shut one at an other, so that their follows great
blodshed. These battelles be never ended but by the most ancient women, the
which be in great suertie (for that no man of the one part nor of the other will
hurt them) they do go between two, and so do part them which be conflicted.
They which (...) from the desert, and run into that country for shadow, and
do deuower the little wyld beasts, making such courses, sometime dystroye
many Ethiopiens at their coming out of the marysshes, long time past that
nation had been undone by the Lions, had not dame nature for seane it, and given
them succors by her providence. At the first entering of the dog days, a
great multitude of pampyllions, as cater pillars do fley into this councrey,
being brought without any wind. The same swarm of little beasts do never
hurt them which dwell in the marysshes. whereupon as well for mourmuring as for
bythynge, do constreyne the Lions to depart. To this nation of Rirophagis is
joined the Ilophagris and Spermatophages. The last named people live of the
graynes (as we call them) the accornes which fall from the trees in Somer. The
rest of the time, they gather certain kind of herbs groynge in their
orchardes whereof they live in time of hungre. But the Ilophagers with their
wyfes and children do go into the fyldes and do clyme up into the trees, and
breketh ye weakest branches they dwell so well that they may leap from one
tree to an other like as the birds do, and upon the said trees they dwell
without all dangers. And if it so fortune, that the branches should spread
over the weight of their bodies, they hold them up with their hands: but if
it had so chanced in holding up of thee said branches they fall upon the
ground, yet they falling, had no harm, because of the agilitie and nimbilnes
of their bodies, besides all this they live of the said trees, choosing out the
tendrest bows and do nyble and gnawe the same as the little mouse eats the
chief, and they are certyfied with the bark^s of trees, These people be always
naked, and have their wyfes and children common. They fight one against an
other, and all to get others b^e^e garnyshed trees and in their fyghtes they
do use no other weapons but of wode, they which be overcome, be as bond slaves
to the vaunquyshers or over comers. They do oftentimes dye for hungre, or that
after they have ones lost their sight (the which fortune to them in leaping
from one tree to an other) and cannot se to gather that which they used to
live by, then they dye in continent after. The cyrcuit of this nation is
inhabyted by other Ethiopiens which be called Cinectens. There is no
dyfference between them and the other, for as much as they inhabit in the for
rest countreye, they have few or no fountaynes. They are compelled to live
upon the tres because there is so many wild beasts, and very earlye in the
morning they goo and seek the waters and the fountains, and do water the
branches of the trees in the heat of the day, the wild Oxen, the Leopardes,
and other wild beasts, do run to the waters for to drink. And the said
beasts do drink so much, that they become so heuye and puffed up that they
can not well resist. Then the Ethiopiens defending from their trees very
fearsly and swiftly do assault the^, as well with bournynge staves as also with
darts and stones. In so much now and then they kill one amongeste the great
number. It chaunsethe sometime also that the said wild beasts have the upper
hand and devour some of the men notwithstanding most commenlye there does
come at the last, certain might and strength so that they take the said
beasts and the rather by there art and industry And if it should hapen that
they kyl not these beasts, but be driven to a excigency, then they do in such
an extremity take again the skynnes of the said beasts, which they had eaten
the flesh before, do pluck away the head, shoulders with the hear, castyng
it in water, and with little fire does sith, afterward it is destrybyted
amongst the^ to eat, and are therewith sertyfied. They use their children to
shote at a but, and gives them no meat till they hit it, and thereby they become
good archers, and expert in casting of stones. Thereis an other kind of
people in that countreye dwelling nyghe the deserte, which be called
Archridophages, and they be very low men and marvelous black. At the pryme
time the wind of zephyrus, and the wind of Libique do bring out of the
desert a number of marvelous great Locustes, which have wings of a loathsome
coullour and figure. The Ethiopiens being accustomed and brought to this,
made great a boundaunce of woods, leaves and such like in a long valley. The
season of the year being come, that the said beasts above named were driven
out of the desert by the same wynd and that so great aboundau^ce, that a man
would take them to be clouds which passed above the valley, again wha^ that
the people, according to their manner and custom, did put on fire the said
abondau^ce of woodde covered with herbs in the valley the which they had
before heaven and cut. The smoke that assended up from the said fire into
the air, was so hot, the locustes flyenge in the myddest of the heat, fell
down ded a little beyond the said valleye. The quantity of them is so great
that they largelye feade and vyttell all the people: And having great store of
salt in that countreye they do salt the said locustes and by that means they
last long. And this kind of meat is plenty and for their apetit, that in all
their life time they eat nothing else for they bring up no beasts or cattle
in those countries, nor they have no fyshe, because they are far from the sea
and fair ryuers. They are very light, and run swyftly, yet they line no
long time. They live but to the age of forty and no longer. Their ends be not
so pitiful as incredible, for when they are come to their full age, that is xl
years expired. There ingendreth in their bodies certain vermines like unto
flees having little wings of diverse colors, and so made that they would fear a
man. These verminnes first eats the belly, then the breast, and afterward by
little and little consumes oll the body. They whithe be infected with this
maladye, shall at the first feel the^ selves moved with an iche, and by reason
of to much scratchynge, there does follow to the parson aflictio^ a grudging
of a new dissease with allegement of the first in a manner. a little after yt by
such Emotio^ does follow affluence of blood which comes out of the body of
the sick patient, that there does issue in spite of him an infinite multitude
of the said vermentes. And thereby feleth so great pain, that it disfygureth
and dismembreth all his body. And after that it had stinted, a fresh does
issue such abondance, of the said blood and vermentes, that it is impossible
to help him, in somuche either by the corrupt ear of the countreye, or
beastlye bryngyng up, they end their lyuea most miserable and peryously. The
extremyties of Aphrique toward the part of Midy, be in habited with a kind of
people which the Greeks call Cynamines otherwise called be the barbarous wild.
They do wear great beardes, and do keep for their defense a number of dogs,
for from the midst of summer to the myddest of winter, there commethe into
that countreye a multitude of Oxen from the country of Indes. And they know
not from whence this plentye should come, except it be that the said beasts
be co^streaned to fley out of the said region, into this country, for fear of
the hurt of other wyld beasts, or by the iustynce of nature. Who has
engendered many other things unknown to man, most worthy of admiration, and
for that the people be not able to resyst so great a number of beasts coming
upon the^, be constrained always to have with them so great a number of dogs,
by the help and course of the which dogs, there is taken many of the said
beasts, after they have killed them, they ear continent one part, and for
their provision salt the rest. They do eat also many other beasts which the
dogs do werye and kill. Beyond the above said people toward the Midy,
inhabyteth other people which they call Icthiophages, who although they have
the faces of men, yet they dyffer nothing from beasts in their lyuynges,
these people dwell under the Troglodites in the great sea Arabie they be very
barbarous. At altymes they be naked, their wifes and children be common, and
like brute beasts, they do not feale any volupe lupt or passion in the^ selves
except it be after their bodies feale good or evil. These people be void of
discretion, good manners, and honestye. They dwell in ryuers and crekes of the
sea along by the waters, and in the high countries, in the which places be
found many deep caves and long valleys. Therbe diverse narowe holes
dangerous at ye enteryng and evil at ye coming out. In so much that which
follows, a man may judge the country by nature to be made after the fashion of
the Icthiophages for they gathered great heaps of stones, and and laid them
before the entryng of all crooked places, and made more such inventions for the
nets to take fyshe of the sea, because in the sea when the flude comes it
chau^seth about nonetyde all the place nighe be compassed and closed about
with waters, and they grow to such an infinite number that they cover all the
country and brings a great quantity of fish, which do swyme hither and
thither to find their pasture, so in the end, at the retournynge again of
the sea, the water do cast them up amongst the heaps of stones, and then
the fyshe lie dry, and they be gathered by the people inhabytynge in that
country, which do run with their wife and children, and gather the said
fishes for their provision. And when they dress the said fyshe to eat, they
lay it upon the stones to wards the Midy, or nontyde, and burnethe it in the
heat of the son and does let it lie upon the one side a while, and turns
the other side when they think it is roasted enough they pluck out all the
flesh, and put it in a hollow stone, which is like unto a mortar, then mixeth
it with the grain of a gosebery tree, or much like to it, these mingled
together so well, that it makes goodly meat to eat, they set it in the son
after they have put it together they make it like in propriety to a tyle. This
they use for all their meat with great abundance and joy, and seruethe them
insteade of corn, when it chance that the find of the sea abide still and
nothing deminyshe, by reason whereof they were forced to leave their comodytie
of fyshynge, and that they abide hunger. Then they heap together the shells of
the sea which be very great and do break the^ with stones, and so fead of the
flesh they find with in the said shelles the which is in taste like to an
oyster of the sea.

Again if this kind of living were taken from them by continual tempests and
wyndes. They take the bones of the fyshes by them gathered before and gnaweth
it like a dog the tender and fresh. And the hardest bone they break with
stones. In so doing they dyffer nothing from beasts. This kind of vitell
they receive for their repast with great joy (as I rehearsed before) singing
and making good chere one with an other. And after that every one of them by
the care they have to get children, do accompany with the first woman they
mete, without having any solicitude all their life long, which comes by
reason of the afflu(...) which to them be (...) for the space of v. days to
that manner of living, the syxte day they go together to find the wells to
drink, by the way as they go, they cry both in one voice in such sort that a
man would judge them rather to be the crieng of a multytud of wyld bestes then
men's voices. As soon as they come to the fountaynes, they receive in such
abundaunce of water, that they can not well return again, but rest them
selves there and can eat no more, being afterward as men troubled or rather
dronken. The next day following they return a fisshynge, and in this sort
passing their lives (being a very few of them sick) and that is for because
they eat but one kind of meat, yet for all that they live not so long (...)
of other nations, their (...) this cost to their lodging and by the pleasant
shadows they are tempr^^^. (...) must understand that the caves of that
country, the which have their throtes toward the Midy be as hot as a
furnasse, because of the heat of the son, and consequently does follow that
they be never inhabited: wherefore alme^ of that country does cover to dwell
toward the Septentrion. Such was the manner and living of the two
I^thiophages. There restethe yet to speak of the Amazones which (as they say)
in time past was of one part of Aphrique in the country of ^^bie They were
women of war and of good courage greatly differryng from the women in our age
and time. A certain time of their age they were accustomed to exercise the
seat of war, and by that kept their virginity. After that they had passed
their age, as abouesayd, they married husbands to increase children. They had
the prehemines to govern all public matters, for the common weal was ruled
by them, in such sort ruled the women, that their husbands had the charge of
all the domestical affairs which we accustomably commit to our wives. And the
wives to the contrary ruled as our men do hear, yea, so circumspecte they
were, that their husbands should not take in hand any publyke matter, that
they would not suffer them once to speak in causes touching the common weal.
So sone as they be in their bed, their children be given men to keep, and they
to nourse them, which infants be brought up with wylke, and other meats
agreeable for their age If a woman had been delivered of a man child he should
have had either his right arm broken or ben killed. But if she had brought
forth a female or woman child, they would burn her breasts with an hot iron
for to take away all that which might let her in the wars, and for that cause
they were called with the Greeks Amazones: That is to say, women without
breasts. They did inhabit (as it is written) in an Island called Hespera,
which was so named for that it aprocheth nygh the Occident, and is within the
lake Tritonide, nygh to the Ocean sea. That lake is so called by reason of the
river Triton which passes through the same, being cituated to Ethiope and to
the me unt Atlas, which is one of the hygheste and wydest in all that country.

This Island is great, replenished with trees, and a bundance of fruit In that
country is plenty of sheep, wherewith most of the people be refreshed and
fed. Wheat is unknown to the inhabiters of that country, because there
never grew none there.

A general description of Aphrique. Capi. vii.
AFrique is ended on the est part with Nilus and on the other parts with the
sea. And truly it is shorter the^ Europa, for it is stretched contrary to no
part of Asia, and not to the sea banks of all Europia and it is more long
then brood and there as it butteth upon the fludde it is most broad, and as it
proceeds from thense even so rysyng up with hills specially in the midst it
goes on crooked into the west, and sharpeneth it self easily, and therefore by
the way is made by little and little narower, and there as his end is it is
most narowe. For so much as is inhabited it is very frutful, but for as much as
the most parts of it be unoccupied, and either covered with baren lands, or
else desert with the drought of heaven and of the countries, or else be vexed
with many and mischeuous kinds of wild beasts, it is more waste then
replenished with people The sea where with it is gyrded on the north side we do
call Libicum. And on ye south Ethiopicum and on the west Atlant^^um. And on the
part that lyethe upon libicum next drouince unto Nilus is that which we do call
Cirenas, and after that is it to whom is given a name by the vocable of the
hole region that is to say Aphrique, The other parts the Numides and the
Murrians does hold, but the Murrians are set out unto the sea Atlantium
beyond them be Nigrite, and Pharusii. unto the Ethiopes for they do possess
the residue of it and the hole side that is toward the south even unto the
borders of A^^a. And above those regions which are weshed with the Libicum see
by Libies Aegiptii and Lencothiopes and a nation very frequente and manyfolde
called Setuli. after whom the region is vacant and uninhabitable continually for
a great space. And then the first on the Est as we do hear say are Garamantes
and after them Augila, and beyond them Proglodita, and last of all upon the
west Atlantes. And within if ye like to give credance are such as be scant
worthy to be called men, but rather half bestes. Aegipanes and Blemie: and
Sa^pha^antes and Sat^ri, wandrynge without houses and mancions euerywhere and
has lands rather then inhabiteth them we have manifest to you al things at
large, as well the nature and manners of the people of Aphrique, as also the
cituacion of their nations and countries. And hear we will end the description
of this first part of the world, geuyng the reader my travail, aspectyng and
lokyng for the fortunate sparks of acceptacion. And for mine enterprise
notwithstanding my labor I crave his good word.

Finis
A particular table containing all the Chapiters in the first book of the
description of the country of Aphrique,
FIrst The opinion of the devines, touching the original of man. The false
opinion of the Infidels. The division of the world into iiii, parts. The
d^scription of the country of Aphrique. The description of the country of
Egypt. Of penes and other people inhabytynge in Aphrique. A general
description of Aphrique.
A particular table of all the notable passages in this present book, of the
description of Aphrique, Capi. i.
IMprimus the creation of heaven and earth. The creation of man. The couplynge
of man and wife. The touching of the arc upon the mountains of Armenie.
Cayne the first begotten. Abell the second. Noyes arc holy. The disparsynge
of mankind abroad in the world. How Noye sent his children to inhabit the
parts of the earth.
Capitulo.ii.
The worshihpynge of the son and moon as gods. The false persuasion of the
philosophers for the creation of man. How some philosophers believed that man
is incorruptible, some corruptible, and without taking beginning.
Capitulo.iii.
The deuicion from the west is called hemispheris, and has.v. distinct zones.
The straight entering is called fretum. The spredynge abroad is called helles
po^tus.
Capitulo.iiii.
There be in Ethiope many collored people. How the Ethiopiens take them selves
first procrreated of the mortalles. What the figures signifies of Milan,
Crocodile and locil Their kings live after their laws made. How the king
signifies death to the malefactors. The due honor that the Ethiopiens do
attribute to their king, and how they wyshe thyr kings disease to them
selves as often as he shall be sick. The people be all naked. The people live
with herbs and roots. Meroe is the capital town in that tountrey.
Macrobiens be people in Ethiope which do esteem rather lether and tynne then
gold. How king Cambises ambassadors, came cheyned like prisoners in cheynes
of gold from that country There grows precious stones. Aubespine is a
gosebery tree. How the people worship as gods the son and moan. He is chosen
king that can skyll best to keep beasts. These people believe that there is an
everlasting God. And ageine say they there should be another mortal. The
Pretian or Priest John is king and of a great blud, and has three score and
two kings under him. They have the epistles of sayncte Paul and certain
religious houses. Presthod is the chief and highest degree of dignity. The
sharp punishment for aduultrers. There is diverse kind of language amongst
them. The people of Libie follow the error of mahomet. A lake which they are
washed in shine like to oil. Marvelous birds as Tragopomones, and Pagasi.
Capitulo.v.
There be dumme people beyond the Arabians hay. Thebes and Abido, Babylon,
and other great Cities in Egypt. A river called Nile. How the women void
their vryne against a wall. The vsages of the Egiptians in their letters. The
Egyptians be great Idolaters. The reuerenes of the younger to the elder. The
kings of Egypt hold not their wylles for laws. The solitudenes and
carefulnes of the kings of Egypt, to have prudent councellers about them. The
due justice of the kings of Egypt The atte^tiuenes of the kings to the
peticions of the poor, and how they will hear the poores causes them selves.
How the people of Egypt pray for the preseruacion of their king. Laws made to
avoid Ebrietie and pronkenes. The obediens of the Egiptians toward the
magestrates. The lamentacion of the people for the death of a just king. The
distribucion of the revenues of the kings lands. How every man lives
according to their vocacion. The punyshement appointed for malefactors They
which be chosen rulers be prudent and Wy^e. A cheyne of gold signifienge
verity. The sentence of the judge pronounced. The punyshement appointed for
periurers The grievous punishment appointed for the paradise and mansleer. The
pain for clyppers of money. The laws made for rauishers of the free woman.
Abstine^s is the best diet and medicine for man. The estate of marriage. The
expense the parents is at with the child is xx d^achemes, that is.x. s The
punishment appointed for the physician if the sick patient should dye. The
feadynge of their sacrificial beasts is wonderful. The sepulcher is denied
the vserer. How the Egiptians abhor vsery.
Capitulo. vi.
Adrimachides be people in aphrique amongst the puniciens. Nasemoniens robbers
on the sea. These people be unnatural and like beasts. Mesagetes put their
staves before them. How he which was just has been in reputacion. The form
of promisynge one an other. Garamatea other people in Aphrique. Macez clyppeth
away the hear in the top of the head, Autruces their wives have diverse
bordera of furs, and why they wear such borders. Machliens be people in
Aphrique. Auses be other people and wear al their hear before How the maids
fight in the honor of their Goddess minerue. Atlantes be people amongeste the
Punitiens, these people have no particular names. Pastoriciens be people that
live by flesh and milk. How the women of Cerene fear to hurt the cattle
which should be offered to their Idol Isis. How the women of Barcees eat no
beafe nor porke, and also how they burn the veins of the temples of their
children. A strange manner of sacrifice they do. How these people will not
suffer a person to lie dyenge upon his back. Their churches be made to turn
like to a vane to and fro with every wind, The zigantes be people of that
nation and have great store of honey bees. In their wars each one carry.iii.
darts and ssones. Troclodites be people in Aphrique, their wives and children
be common, They have never wars. Megauares be people which have wars, and
their wars be never ended but by the ancient women, These people desire
rather to dye the^ to live Rizophages be people that have great store of
Pampilions in their country. Ilophagris and Spermatophages be people in
Aphrique. How these people make them houses, upon trees. After what sort
these people dye for hunger. Cineciens be people in Ethiope. How the
Ethiopiens kill the Lions, Leparda and other wild beasts. Their provision in
time of hunger. How their children eat no meat until they shute and hit a
but. Acridophages be low men and black There be great store of locustes
brought in by certain wyndes. The wytty practice they exercise to distroye
these locustes. A wonderful thing to behold how they end their lives. How
they live but until the age of xl. years what vermines engender in their
bellies Cinamines barbarous people, they have always a company of dogs with
them to defend the wild beasts from the^, Icthiohhages be people little
differyng from beasts. How the fyshe be cast up upon the rocks and Their
provision in time of hunger. How the men and women cry like beasts, They can
endure and abide hunger by nature They never drink. How these people will
suffer stripes very delectable to read. All the caves toward the Midy be
hot. Amazones were women of war, and take upon them to meddell in publyke
affairs
Finis.
A table of the description of Asye, and Europie, the other two parts of the
world, with the particular nations.
Of Asie the second part of the world. Of Panchaye. Of Asyrie Of Iudee. Of
Medie. Of Parthye. Of Perse. Of Indes. Of Scithie. Of Vartarie. Of Turquie Of
Christendone
Eropia.
Of ^rice Of L^cye. Of Laconie or Lacedemonie. Of Crete. Of Tharrace. Ru^^ or
Ruthenie Of Lithuanie. Of Liuonie. Of Polo^ne. Of Hungry. Of Boesme. Of
Allmanye. Of saxone Of westualie Of franconie. Of ^uenie. Of Bauier. Of Italy.
Of Ligurie. Of the Coscane. Of Galatie. Of France Of Spain. Of Portyngale. Of
Engl^^de, scotland, and Irelande, Of the vle of Taprobane.
Finis,
Imprinted at London in Fletestrete at the sign of the George next to saint
Dunstones Church by Wyllyam Powel


