The history of king Boccus / and Sydracke how he confoundyd his learned men /
and in ye sight of them drunk strong venym in the name of the Trinite and did
him no hurt. Also his diuynyte yt he learned of the book of Noe. Also his
profycyes that he had by reuelacyo^ of the angel. Also his answeris to the
questions of wisdom / both moral and natural with much worldly wisdom
contained in noumber. CCC. lxv. translatyd by Hugo of Caumpeden / out of
french into English.

Sidrack

King boccus.



John^ Twyne to the redar
THe profyt and co^modite of this book (o gentyl and curteys redar) is so
euydent and open / that it nedythe no setting out nor praysyng / for dowtful
things comenly be praysyd or despraysed / be cause true iugment may be taken
of them. but things of open goodness need no praysyng / for with their goodness
they praise them self / as thou shall find this book / the which to speak
truly can not be suffycyently praised. I had lever therefore (as Salust says of
Carthago) hold my pese and to speak little of yt / but shortly to know somewhat
of his matters in effect / he shows of goddys works right as the old and new
testament in many volumes declares. Also natural philosophy expressyng the
causes with euydent ensamples of much moralyte in geuyng good counsel and a
delect betwyx good and bade and truly more euyde^t than ever did Plato /
Arystotyles / or Cicero i^ their manyfold works he shortly techeth much
knowledge of physyke the dyspocycyon of co^plexcyons the alteracyo^ of ages with
much secresy of the year / greatly of astronomy / course of heuyn / and planets
with their respects / breuely and plainly that that ypocras / Galyen or
Ptholomy comprehendyd in great or just volumes. Also much worldly experyence.
Abundau^t in prophesyes / how the manners of me^ shall alter and the world shall be
ended / with his iugment meruelus exhortyng the people to eschew the
fylthynesse of sin / what pains are ordained for yt / and the joys of
heuyn. Than is this book necessary to al men. For it exhortyth to wisdom /
good manners / ensamples hystoryis. wherefore it may well be called a book of
philosofye / that is to say a stody of wisdom. Than I counsel every man to
read this book / or that cannot read to give dylygent eere to the reder for
they shall find theri^ great fruit both to the soul and body.

Here begins the table of this book.
First the hystory of Boccus and Sidracke / how by the power of god he
dystroyed his ydols / and by the counsel of the aungel showed him the vmbre
of the trinite / whereby he converted him and all his host. Than gave he him
enstructions / and answered to diverse questions that he demaundyd of him.

The questyons.
If god be ever and ever shall be? The first questyon. Where may it be that god
of heaven may be seen ii. If god be over al and every where iii. Which was the
first thing that god made iiii. The king asked when aungel was wrought v.
Wherefore serve the angels that are in heaven vi. Do deuyls know al rhynge and
may do al thing vii. What shape are angels and what can they do viii. Did god
make Adam with his own hand ix. In what place was Adam made x. Whether went
Adam when he came out of paradise xi. Did Adam any other syn than that he the
appul ete and gods commaundment brake xii. What did Adam fro god take / and
how shall he amendys make. xiii. Why was not Adam straight lost when he had
that sin wrought xiiii. Why would not god send an aungel or a man to amend
Ada^ xv. Why shall god be borne of a maiden and she still a maiden xvi. Why is
death called death and how many dethes there be xvii. Sends god man knowledge
what death he shall dye xviii. When the soul from the body departs how goth
it to other place xix, Whether were the soul or body made first xx. Which
speaks in man the soul or the body xxi. The soul that is a ghost and has
another flesh nor bone how may it feel well or woe xxii. Which is more lord
the soul or the body xxiii. In what place of the body has the soul his
dwelling xxiiii. Why is the soul no lengar in the body than blood is left xxv.
How may it be that the people so dye xxvi. How may man know that god made man
to his lykenes xxvii. Seeing man is made of gods lykenes why may he not do as
god did xxviii. Where becomes all the blood of man when he dies xxix. Where
becomes the fire when it is quenchyd xxx. Why dyethe not the body when he
has lost half his blood or more xxxi Of what complexcion and nature is the
body xxxii. Ware sowles made at the first or be they made every day xxxiii May
they have any excusing that of god know nothing. xxxiiii. Shall a man do more
than god co^maundyth him xxxv. How many worlds be there and how do me^ them
call xxxvi. Does god greatly reward them that ryghtly his seruys here do.
xxxvii. The people that shallbe at the coming of him and that shall be after
shall they believe in him steadfastly xxxviii. What co^maundment shall gods
sone give the people xxxix. The blesfulest / fairest / and worthyest thing what
is it. xl. The fowlest and most perelous thing to se which is it. xli. Shall the
good sowles sorrow for the wicked xlii. Which is bettar of health or sycknesse
to have xliii. What pour has god given to soul here xliiii. When goddys sone
is returned to heuyn shall he leave any gouerner here to rule the people xlv.
Goddys hows who shall keep it and have it in hold. xlvi. He that does no good
but holdyth him still does he ill. xlvii. Lordshype / shall it be more of rygour
or pity xlviii. Shall aman do good to his kyn or friends xlix. Whereof comyth
gentylhed.l. How may it be cold when the wether is fair and clear li. May aman
by any tokyn know the good from the ill lii. The believe of ydols shall it be
aresed after my deeth liiii. Why was it not goddys will that man lived not a
weke with one mele of mete liiii. Dye the rych men as the pouer do lv. Shall men
judge the rych as they do the pouer lvi. May wecked men ever get goddys love as
the good have. lvii. How may the child that full of love is come out of the
mothers womb lviii. May any woman bear mo children at onys than one lix. Which
is the best thing that may be or man may have lx. What is the worst thing that
man may have lxi How may aman be leel and true lxii. Whereof comyth hardynesse
and dred in man lxiii. Whereof comyth meselry or scalle lxiiii. Ware al things
of goddys making made at the begyni^g. lxv. Who noryssheth the trute in earth
lxvi. The beasts that have no wit how wax they ragyus and mad lxvii. What
beast leuyth longest in his kind lxviii. Fedyth god al thing that is in earth
of his making lxix. Fysshes / fowls / and beasts have they souls or no lxx.
They that shall be after the incarnacyon shall they live as long as we do now
lxxi. How long shall the world endure: lxxii. Live any men mo out of the earth
that we on go lxxiii. Why are some men whyt some broune and some blake.
lxxiiii. Whereof comyth felony lxxv. Why are not al beasts of one color lxxvi.
They that ete or dri^ke more tha^ need do they well or no. lxxvii. Which is the
best thing / and the worst of the man. lxxviii. Whether is a man more apter to
conyng in etyng of hot metis or of cold. lxxix How may aman fle felony /
wrath / and malencoly. lxxx. Is it better to have hate of woman or love.
lxxxi. A man that is young / how angeryth he for a little thing. lxxxii. How may
aman blamles be to love a woman and him not she lxxxiii. Whereof comyth
fattnesse in a mannys body lxxxiiii. Shall aman chasten a woman with betyng when
she does amys lxxxv. What thing is gelousy and whereof comyth it lxxxvi, Shall
aman love his friend and open to him all the secrets of his mind lxxxvii. May
aman do his profyt and labor not for it lxxxviii. Shall men do alms deeds to
pouer that have need lxxxix. How shall he order him self that is alday among
the people lxxxx. Is a rych man less worthy that has lost his good or the
pouer that has encresed lxxxxi. Whereof comyth the wicked custom of men or
manner. lxxxxii. Seeing iron is so strong and hard where with was first made the
hamer / tongues / and hyth lxxxxiii. Do they amys that swear by their god what
so he be. lxxxxiiii. Shall aman in althynges be chair of his body lxxxxv. With
whom shall aman love to go and whose company shall he tie from lxxxxvi. Which is
better to have of ryehes or to be pouer lxxxxvii. Shall a man honor a pouer man
as he do a rych man lxxxxviii. Delyght the pouer men in their pouerte as the
rich men do in their riches. lxxxxix Shall aman bost him of that thing that he
does c. Why are hounds raster in doing of their kind than other beasts are.
c.i. He that coueyteth another man's wife does he well or ill. c.ii. May not
aman escape death by riches / might / or by some other means. c.iii. Is it good
to answer them that speak folly. c.iiii. Which conyng of all is most greuoust
to man. c.v. They that labor for to win and cannot why do they not leave c.vi
Whereof may it come that men wax foles and unwise c.vii. Is the soul and the
body woe when they shall depart c.viii. Which shall aman take for the more a
young man or an old. c.ix. Why rayneth it more in one year than in another c.x.
Why made not god man so that he might not have sinned. c.xi Is it good to have
entermetynges with all manner of men indyfferently. c.xii. Why would god this
world make c.xiii. How was this world made as it is now and how holds it as
it is. c.xiiii. Is there any other than we that has the claryte or the light
of the son. c.xv. How long is the world / how broad / and how thycke
c.xvi. Why shall god this world clean undo c.xvii. How are the fowls borne a
hye that do fly. c.xviii. Whence comes the rain that falls c.xix. Hayle
stones whereof come they c.xx. Whereof come the tempests c.xxi. Whereof comes
the thonder c.xxii. The wind whereof comethe it c.xxiii. How issues the water
out of the hills which hills seem to be dry. c.xxiiii. The water that is in
the sea why is it salt c.xxv. Whereof comes the lyghtenyng c.xxvi. The water
that does ebb and flow whereof come they and whyther do they go. c.xxvii.
Ware not hills and roches made at the first making of the world c.xxviii.
Shall ever so great a flode come any more as was in the time of Noe. c.xxix.
Why did Noe take with him into the arch venomous beastys as scorpion / edder /
and snake. c.xxx. Whereof comes gold. c.xxxi. How spryngeth some waters out of
the earth hot c.xxxi. Whereof comes the Brymstone c.xxxii. Whereof comes
carbouncles and other precious stones. c.xxxiii. How many landys be in the
world c.xxxiiii. May aman by dry land go the world round about c.xxxv. Might
a man sail so long that his ship came vnrent to the turnyng of the fyrmament
c.xxxvi. Why made not god man to be ever young / iolyfe / and of power rich /
and of long life / and at his death to have blys c.xxxvii. Which are the
angels that receyuethe man's soul into heaven. c.xxxviii. Which is better of
these two / good works without chaslyte / or wicked works / and chaste to be.
c.xxxix. What makes the earth quake c.xl. Whereof comes the eclypse of the
son and moan c.xli. How fall the sterres that men se fall / and from whens
come they all. c.xlii. How many heuyns are there c.xliii. How hye is the heuyn
above the earth c.xliiii. Of what might is the fyrmament c.xlv. Of what might
are the planettis and what be they called c.xlvi. How many manners of waters be
there c.xlvii. How many sees be there c.xlviii. Why has god made the world
round c.lxix. Why is the moon cold and the son hot c.l. Which is the most
thing that is c.li. Is there more grauel in earth or dropes of water in the sea. c.lii. May the gravel in earth told be / or dropes of water in the sea.
c.liii. How many sterres are on the sky c.liiii. How many angels did god make
/ how many be left / and how many tell. c.lv. Which are most / of men /
beasts / or fysshes c.lvi. Which is the delectablest place in all the world
c.lvii. Which is the most prowes in town or forest c.lviii. If a man have an
evil wife / or a wemme in any of his lymmes shall aman cast it in his tethe
c.lix. Shall men both worship men and do their will c.lx. Shall aman forget
the service of a good servant that well has served him. c.lxi. May a man
with hold himself from a woman that he has in keeping / that he commyt no
lechery. c.lxii. Which is the greatest delyght that is. c.lxiii. Shall a man
ought delyght him with a woman c.lxiiii. When two hoostes mete shall they
straight fight c.lxv. Which of his members might a man worst forgo c.lxvi. Who
made the first instrument that ever was / and how came it in his thought
c.lxvii. He that is dumb / defe / and can not se / what speech in his heart
thynkethe he. c.lxviii. Why are some clouds of the sky white and some black.
c.lxix. May no creature know gods will or thought c.lxx. Shall aman worship
god all day c.lxxi. Whereof comethe bleryd eyes and why c.lxxii. What people
shall men worship in this world c.lxxiii. Which is the largest man in the
world c.lxxiiii. Shall a pouer man put himself at any time before a reche man.
c.lxxv. Is a man in any sin to ete all that he may get c.lxxvi. Shall a man
give gretynge to a man every time of the day when he him does mete c.lxxvii.
How shall a man order his children that he do not afterward repent him.
c.lxxviii. Whether shall a man love better his wife or children c.lxxix. If I
had another father nor mother how should I have been borne c.lxxx. The child
that has the full shape in the mother how may it not sometime be brought
forth a live. c.lxxxi Are all women in this world of one manner c.lxxxii. If
thy neighbors wife or servants mys use themself shall thou show thy
neighbor thereof c.lxxxiii. Shall aman have him to do that that he has to do.
c.lxxxiiii. Shall a man love every man c.lxxxv. Are all the people of the world
common after one c.lxxxvi. Do men honor the rich men in the other world and
not the pouer at all. c.lxxxvii. Shall the father bear any burden for the sone
/ or the sone for the father c.lxxxviii. They that sle men / take they from
them their sin also. c.lxxxix. Which is most sorrow of that a man hereth or
seythe. c.lxx^x May ama find any that ete one another again kind c.lxxxxi
Which is worst of these three / mourder / theft / or sla^der c.lxxxxii. Forgive
god gladly all the sins that man does here c.lxxxxiii. Why labor men in this
world as they do c.lxxxxiiii. Which is the wickedest thing that is c.lxxxxv
The good works or wicked that men do / whether come they of god or of
himself. c.lxxxxvi. Where hydeth the day him from the night / and the night
fro the day light. c.lxxxxvii. Who hold the planettes on the sky that they fall
not c.lxxxxviii How may me^ know the hours and poi^tes of day and night
c.lxxxxix Turn all the sterres about on the sky cc. Which is the holsomest
place in all the world cc.i. Tell me which is the worthyest day in the year
cc.i. Why was sleep made and wherefore cc.ii. Shall there be ever war and
strife in this world cc.iii. Wrath not god for man's death or his mysfortune
what so ever it be. cc.iiii. Which are they that now most the world
sustayneth cc.v. Which is heygher the king / or the law of the land cc.vii
May aman any good have here / that he may with him bear / and grieve him nothing
cc.viii. If two men love together and after be separate / when they come
together shall they love as they did before.cc.ix. How may aman love a woman or
she him for the sight.cc.x. A man that has light conscience / and swerethe
falsely by his god for.x. false things is he any more forsworn tha^ ones
cc.xi. They that have knowledge to teache the folk shall they have more grace
than other men cc.xii. The thought that aman thinks whereof comes it cc.xiii.
Why fall people of the falling evil cc.xiiii. Which is the pereloust lymme
that aman has cc.xv. Which is the sureest art of all / and most parayle
may come of it. cc.xvi. How is a man iolyfe / and light of body cc.xvii. May
aman not get a child as often as he knowethe his wife flesshely. cc.xviii.
Whereof is the kind of man / and how gatheryth it so when it gothe him fro.
cc.xix. Is aman bound to love his children and do them good. cc.xx.
Enchau^tme^t or socery / veil they ought or are they folly. cc.xxi Which is
the wyghtest beast and most of savor cc.xxii. Which is higher of land or see.
cc.xxiii. Whereof come snayles / and how does they hold themself so to the
gras. cc.xxiiii. Why sleep these old men as these young men do cc.xxv. If god had
made so great a man as all the world / might he have resystyd god. cc.xxvi.
What should this world have been if god had not dyght it as is now cc.xxvii.
Whether came au^gel of gods onde as did the soul of Adam or not. cc.xxviii.
What thing is heavenly paradyse cc.xxix. Which is the fairest thing to look on
that god made in this world. cc.xxx. Whether art thou bound to love them more
that loves the / or them that thou love. cc.xxxi. Which are worthyest
words / erbes / or stones cc.xxxii. Shall thou tell all thy counsel to thy
frynd. cc.xxxiii. Which women be tho that is most profit for men to do their
delyght withal. cc.xxxiiii. Whereof comethe the trymbelyng or quakyng that a man
has some time in his body. cc.xxxv. When a man sees / does the eye give it
outward / or does it receives it inward. cc.xxxvi. How may a man by
himself say we. cc.xxxvii. May the sea be demynysshed any thing with taking
away any of the water. cc.xxxviii. Whether shall aman love better the child
that comethe of the sister / or of the brother. cc.xxxix. Which are the most
perelous thyngis in man. cc.xl. Which is the holsomest flesh that aman may
ete cc.xli. How doparteth the mete in a man's body cc.xlii. How shall a man do
to get out above that stekethe fast in his throat cc.xliii. The mucke that
comes of man how stynketh it so. cc.xliiii. Why is man's vryne so salt
cc.xlv. Whereof bread worms in man and how do they feed. cc.xlvi. Which
crafts are tho that aman may worst forbere cc.xlvii. Which shall in heaven
have more joy children that never did a mys / or them that for gods love
refrayned ill. cc.xlviii. How may aman overcome the will of this world cc.xlix.
Tho that go to hell or paradyse may they co^ again cc.xlix. Why go not the
good into erthly paradyse cc.l. Why go not the good in to erthly paradyse cc.l.
Whether is soul heavy or light great or small dark or bright cc.lii. The good
sowles that go from the body whyther go they cc.liii. May no man go to heuyn
but he se purgatory cc.liiii Seeing god sendyth some to heuyn and some to hell
whereof shall than the dome be cc.lv Young children that have no reason shall they
be dampened tell me or no cc.lvi Is there any hows / town or cite in the other
world cc.lvii Shall the children of hethen men be dampened cc.lviii. If Adam had
no sin don should the people that of him came have feed with flesh as they
do now cc.lix. Did the flode droune paradyse cc.lx. Of what age made god Adam
cc.lxi. Such as shall dey at the iugment and have no time of purgacyon what shall
become of them cc.lxii. Wha^ the soul comyth to the body which part goith it
i^. cc.lxiii. Who named first althyng and taught them conyng cc.lxiiii. Whereof
is it that some are less and some more cc.xv. Which is more perylous of hete
or cold. cc.lxvi. Shall the child follow the ill condycions of the father.
cclxvii. Which is best / to speak or hold him stylle cc.lxviii. Which ought to
be wysar of a young man or old cc.lxix. What thing is delight cc.lxx. What manner
of appuls did Adam ete cc.lxxi. How learn young children more than old men
cc.lxxii. Which is the delectabelest thing under the son cc.lxxiii. Why was
here made on mannys body cc.lxxiiii. How is it that some be borne doume and
defe cc.lxxv. Profyteth men the alms deeds that they do cc.lxxvi. Synneth the
judge that iugeth or he that does execute. cc.lxxvii. Tho that are fools and
doume borne and do ill shall they be dampened cc.lxxviii Keep angels men's
souls here cc.lxxix. How may aungel show himself openly to men seeing he
has no body. cc.lxxx. Do deuyls espy that that people does cc.lxxxi. On
what manner is the fire of purgatary cc.lxxxii. What thing is hell and how come
souls thither cc.lxxxiii. Know souls any thing that be in hell. cc.lxxxiiii.
The good that be hens gone be they in parfite joy cc.lxxxv. May souls show
themself to their good friends every time when they will. cc.lxxxvi. Whereof
come dremys. cc.lxxxvii. Was the fruit in the trees wha^ they were first made
cc.lxxxviii. What time and what day was Adam made cc.lxxxix. When the flode was
done made god new fruit to man.cc.lxxxx. Where set Noe ship on land. cc.lxxxxi.
Wha^ Noe ca^ out of the ship ca^ he strange to this world. cc.lxxxxii Whereof
comes petye in a man's heart cc.lxxxxiii. Why have not fowls nature in them
to engendure as other beasts do. cc.lxxxxiiii. Shall men have pytye of those
that be in woe and deliver them if they have might thereto. cc.lxxxxv. Which is
better to drink wine or water cc.lxxxxvi. When man is in great will to fight
how may he refrain him of that passion cc.lxxxxvii. Why have wymen all the woe
and the joy also cc.lxxxxviii. Why are children at their birth as vnconyng as
beasts that have no reason cc.lxxxxix. Whereof comyth natural wit in man ccc.
Whereof comyth the nesyng ccci. Why dies the wynd for a shower of rain ccc.ii.
Which is stronger wynd or water ccc.iii. On what manner shall a man leave in
this world ccc.iiii. Shall a man when he is in a good place change to seek
abetter. ccc.v. Which is worthyer of rich or pouer ccc.vi. Which is more
semely to man fair face or fair body. ccc.vii. How shall a man led his life
that fyndethe aman with his wife. ccc.viii. Shall men for their loss blame god
ccc.ix. Which is the sauorest thing that is ccc.x. Of what manner of bounte
ought kings to be ccc.xi. How comes sweet of a body / whereof / and why
ccc.xii. Which are the best colors for man's weryng ccc.xiii. Which is the
grenest thing that is ccc.xiiii. Which is the fattest thing that is ccc.xv.
Which is better to have when a man shall dye repentance or hope of joy.
ccc.xvi. Shall men be sorry for them that dye ccc.xvii. Came ever any from the
other world that told tidings of heuyn or hell. ccc.xviii. Shall a man say
any thing when he go to bed ccc.xix. Which is the strongest battle that is
ccc.xx. How lies the children in the mothers womb ccc.xxi. Why is some wine
white and some red ccc.xxii. Have fowls or beasts any understanding
ccc.xxiii. Which helpethe the soul more / that a man does before he dye or
after his death. ccc.xxiiii. Sleep the fysshes ever or no. ccc.xxv. Which is
the fairest foul in the world ccc.xxvi. Which is the fairest beast and that
might worst be mist. ccc.xxvii. Which are the fairest horses that be
ccc.xxviii. Which be the beasts that have most understanding. ccc.xxix: By
what toke^ may me^ know that goddis sone is borne. ccc.xxx What sygnyfyeth tho
tokens ccc.xxx. Shall he be a child more conyng then other ccc.xxxi. Where shall
he most dwell ccc.xxxii. Shall gods sone a fair man be ccc.xxxiiii. Why would
god dye. ccc.xxxv Who shall him kyl / and how long shall he be ded ccc.xxxvi.
Shall he ascend without company. ccc.xxxvii. Shall gods sone have any house in
earth. ccc.xxxviii. Shall his body be ever dwelling in earth ccc.xxxix. Shall
every man have power to make his body ccc.xl. They that have might to make his
body shall they be more honoryd before god than other. ccc.xli. Why shall they
every day make it. ccc.lxii. What thing is sin / that men shall be lost by
ccc.xliii. By what sign shall me^ know that gods son is ded. ccc xliiii. Of
what virtue shall gods sone be ccc.xlv. Shall his dyscypyls do miracles
ccc.xlvi Shall they never have woe nor end that go to heaven. ccc.xlvii. Shall
they never have rest that be in hell ccc.xlviii. Shall they that be in heuyn be
nakyd or clothed ccc.xlix. When god shall come to judgment and deem both
quycke and deed / who shall be than alive ccc.l. Where shall be borne the
antichryst ccc.li. What day shall the iugment be on ccc.lii. What time shall
the dome be ccc.liii. On what manner shall he come to the iugment. ccc.liiii.
Shall his cross be there present ccc.liiii. How shall he show him self at the
judgment ccc.lv. Shall his mynysters be with him at the judgment. ccc.lvi. How
shall he do the judgment and what shall he say. ccc.lvii. Shall any man know
what he has done ccc.lviii. What shall be done after the dome. ccc.lix. What
shall be come of this world after the dome ccc.lx. Shall the good have leave to
do what they will ccc.lxi. Shall they remember them of their wyckednes
ccc.lxii.
FINIS
MEn may find in old bokys
Who so the in lokys
Acts worthy of memory
Full of knowledge and mystery
Whereof I shall show a little ielle
That be fell ons in the Eest
There was a king that Boccus hight
And was a man of much might
His land lay by the great ynde
Bectorye hight it as we find
After the time of Noe even
Eight hundred year forty and seven
The king Boccus him be thought
That he would have a city wrought
His enmyes there with to fere
And again them to maintain his were
Chefly for a king that was his foo
That much of ynde longed unto
His name was Garaab the king
Boccus tho purueyed all thing
And shortly a tower began he
There he would make a optye
And was right in the incomynge
Of Garabys land the king
The masons with great labor
Began to work on the tower
And all that they wrought on the day
On night was it done a way
On morrow when Boccus it, herd
He was wrouthe that it so fared
And it all new quykly begone
At night when they should leave sone
Of work / and they went to rest
On the morrow all was down kest
Well vij. months thus they wrought
And all might a veil naught
Boccus was wroth wonderly
He called his gentylls that was him by
Cownsell me lordynges / quod he
How I may best make this city
Sir they said send you anon
For your philosophers euerychone
And ye astronomers that in your country is
For of them can you no cownsell mys
King Boccus for them sent
His messyngers to gather them went
And when they apperyd to gyther there
Four score and.ix. masters there were
The king receyuyd them with the best
And three days he did let them rest
The fourth day he did them caull
And they before him were come all
Lordynges he said I shall tell you now
For what cause I have sent for you
I am the most king I wysse
That under the son rysynge is
All the kings of this country
At my co^maundment truly be
Except Garaab the king
That in ynde is raynynge
He contraryes my commaundment
And not comys to my parlyament
And him would I feign compel
But how in his land to enter I cannot tell
But men have cowselyd me
For to make there a city
Masons and stone I thither brought
And seven mou^thes there as they wrought
Right in the enter of his land
For to meke him to his hand
And all that they on day wrought
At night turned all to naught
And if Garaab has perauenture herd
Of our work how it farede
He will say I have no might
A tower in his land for to dyght
Therefore your wits here on lay
Prayeng you that ye me say
How I may after my will
This tower and the city fulfill
For I had lever a venged to be
Of Garaab that despysyth me
Than ye name of all the world to bear
And by my god I you swear
That I shall soon for your deed
Quyte rychely your mede
Sir quod they we you promise
That tower suerly for to furnyshe
So that ye shall a vengyd be
And have your mind of the city
And you us respyte give
Forty days by your leave
Till we our art have over seen
How your tower shall be made a gain
And we shall do our might
To make it stand day and night
A place he caused made ready to be
With vernaunt flowers and many a tree
And with freyshe water of the river
He commaundyd on all goodly manner
That they were served rychely
That day as his own body
Astronomers there voare many one in fee
That were the eldest men of that countryt
And they wrought dylygently in their art
Every one by him self on his part
And when the forty days ware gone
They came before the king anon
He asked them how they had wrought
Sir quod they take you no thought
Be you glade and merry also
For you shall all your mind come to
Within a xiiij. nyghtes ye shall se
Therefore let your masons ready be
Such atyme as we shall you say
Stones upon the tower to lay
And look that they be than ready
And we all will be there by
Full greatly thanked them the king
And much joy had he of their saying
Than came the day that they had set
The masons were all ready fet
And the masters went with all
To se them that work shall
With great joy they be gunne
And wrought as long as they had son
When that the night came at the last
They went home to make repaste
And they left upon the work all night
Great plenty truly of candell light
They went all home at night time
And came again the next day be pryme
The king was the next day wod
When he saw his work not stood
All the tresure that he had up laid
In ydylnesse it is consumyd he said
And he anon cauled before him the clerks
And said are these your good works
That you have caused me for to do
By the god that I believe on and love also
Quyte I shall all your deed
And for your works ye shall have mede
Bind them foot and hand
These wordis were spread a broad in his land
And so they were in prison cast
Therein kept without favor fast
Ferof this tower the voice rane
And unto Garaab at lenght it came
When he it herd great joy he had
And in his heart he was full glade
A letter he made to king Boccus
And sent it by him that spoke thus
I Garaab of ynde king
To the Boccus sendes gretynge
We have understanding well
Of thy work and thy will euerydele
Of the City thou would dyght
But thou have theyrto no might
Neither by art nor by engyn
For to bring it to a fine.
But wylt thou send me to my fere
Thy daughter that to the is so dear
And I shall give the leave thereto
To make that thou desyrest so
This came to Boccus the king
All in skorne and in mocking
Boccus thought his heart should blede
When he herd the letters read
And was so wode with that answer
That by and by he slew the messyngere
Than did he in his land cry
If there ware any low or hye
That cowde him cownsell of that thing
How he myhht bring it to ending
That city with the tower
He should with great honor
Give him his daughter unto wye
With half his tresure in his life
Well two days after this cry
The king sat full drerely
For he wyste not what to do
Than came an old man him to
And said sir I shall not crave
Your daughter nor your tresure to have
But if you will do me good
I shall wytsafe to amend your mode
And show who shall on him take
Your tower and city for to make
The king anon swore by his god
That he loved and trusted in ever more
He should so quyt his seruyse
That it should like him and all his
Sir he said this is best to do
Send the king Tractabar unto
And pray him for your seruyse
That he you lend in any wise
The book of Astronomye
That Noe had with him in balye
By an Angel was made that book
And Noe to one of his sons it took
And so has it gone I tell you
That Tractabar has it now
Pray him also you to lend
And with that book hastily to send
His astronomer Sydrac
Which shall undo all the hole pac
All your will shall sone be do
If Sydrac come you ones to
Anon the king did letters make
And to a messynger he deed them take
And unto Tractabar them sent
With a full rich and good present
Desyryng him very curtesly
His book and Sydrac to send shorty
When Tractabar that messengere
Had received with loving there
Saying you are right welcome to me
Great joy I have that I nou se
My lord and my friend Boccus
To send me loving letters thus
A book to send him he prays me
That in old time had Noe
That book can fulfill his will
Of a thing that lies beryed in a hill
That who so might come them to
He might an his will do
My father went up to that hill
But he might never come there till
But Boccus is of much might
And he will with them fight
That upon that hill won
He shall have his will sone
He sent him his book and Sydrac
And a letter that thus spoke
Unto our lord and friend
The king Boccus unto we send
Whom king Garaab gets well
And certyfyeth that we have every dele
According your mind we send you to
Our book and our clarke also
And thank ye much of your sendynge
A glade man was Boccus tho
When Sydrac before him came truly
He took him by the hand right gladly
And told him every dele of his case
And how to him it befallen was
Sir quod Sydrac that land I wysse
Every dele be weched is
There shall nere man speed
Upon that land to do no deed
That thereof shall come any prosperyte
Except their wychecrafte vndoune be
And I shall it redely unbind
I tha^k the quod the king for thy words
Sir king quod Sydrac we find
In this ^osse that was Noes ^ynde
That an aungel came him to
From his god that sent him tho
And told him that he might find
An hill fare in the land of ynde
That called is the grene ravens hill
And has that name for this skyll
When Noe the raven sent
Out of the arc verament
To prove if there apered any ground
But he fell on careyn that he found
And would not truly come away
The dowe upon another day
Fownd land and came again blyue
With a branche of grene olyue
That hill is of length as we read
Four ioyrneys and three of bread
People there dwells of strange chere
Made of body as we are here
But their vysages for to se on
Are as hounds euerychon
By the law of femynne as it tellys
Lies it there / no man in dwellys
On that hill such frutfulnese is
That.xij. M. herbs there growys
Four thousand may good do
Four thousand are yuel to
The third thousand who the^ understood
May do nether yuell ne good
Seven manner waters there are on
And all they gather in till one
The dewes the herbs cause to spring
And if you will have your entendynge
Find menys the herbs to win
And than may you never blynne
To do all that your will is
And overcome your enemies
The king made joy when he herd this
And swore so ever have I blys
His tresure and gods to lose all
But those herbs have I shall
Redely on the third day
He with great company went his way
Unto the hill ward they made speed
And Sydrac with them did led
The thyrtene day come they till
A vale at the foot of the hill
There tarried they three days
The fourth day to ye hill took their ways
But the people that dwelled there
Hard that they come were
Anon again them went boldly
And did bet them back manfully
Unto the vale again they turned
And fyften days so they iourned
And than went they to the hill again
Truly with all their main
And fought with them full hardely
But they ware dyscomfortyd foully
Unto the dale again they went
And after great succoure they sent
When they come they did them speed
Again that they ware at that deed
And than they that on the hill wore
They did dyscomforte for ever more
And viij. days they dwelled still
Having all the hyl at will
Boccus was hethen and knew naught
God that heuyn wrought
He believed all in ydolatre
And in false ymagere
Sydrac believed in the Trynyte
Keeping his co^maundment with dylyge^se
The king where he yede
His mammetes with him did led
And upon the eyghtene day
Upon the hill where they lay
Their war clean don
The king made ready a pauylyon
And his gods forth fet
Each one in his place was set
There ware they set in molde
Both of silver and gold
And among them there was one
Rychest of them euerychone
Of gold and silver comely to se
Highest among them stood he
Most had in honor
Among all that there wore
Bestes the king forth began call
To make sacryfyce with all
He took Sydrac by the hand
With other lords of his land
To the pauylyon they went
The bestes ware there present
A sheep very fat he took truly
Killing him with his knyfe devoutly
Before him that so hye stood
And offeryd to him the blood
And every one slew at the last
And about the pauylyon them cast
Sydrac wondered in his thought
And markyd sadly what they wrought
King Boccus said Sydrac up rise
And unto our god make sacryfyse
Sydrac answered with great ire
And said that shall I never sire
Sacryfyse shall I make him to
Heuyn and earth that made also
Both air / element / son and the se
And all that therein be
Also that made both Adam and Eve
He is the god that I on believe
The king was wroth there he stood
And asked him in his mode
What canyst thou by my gods say
Are they not good and all things may
Nay quod Sydrac trust me to
They are wicked and false also
And the devil in them dwelling is
Craftily that begyleth the I wys
And all that honor to them make
But I cownsel you them forsake
For a bad god I him suppose
That cannot amannys heart dysclose
I had lever to death be tourmentyd
Or of me they should be honoryd
The king was wroth of his saying
And caused his gods forth to bring
And when they were before him brought
He said Sydrac dysdayne naught
Sacryfyse to do anon
Before so rych a god as this is one
Sir he said my sacryfyce
Shall be to god that hye justice
That made man and man not him
But this is the deuelys lym
The devil of them thank takyth
That unto him honor makyth
Therefore they be refusyd of me
All these mahowndes that ye here se
Now was the king moved sore
That his gods despised wore
And said to Sydrac tell thou me
Thy god how called is he
Sir he said I shall tell ywys
On god a goostly substance is
And the angels of heuyn light
That are so noble and so bright
Passing the son in manyfolde
Having great joy on him to behold
The king than called two of his
That ware in his law counted wise
For to dyspute with Sydrac
But he cast them sone abacke
And overcome all their reason
Right in opyn dysputacyon
Pray thou than quod they thy god unto
And we will to ours also
Trusting to have tokenynge
Who shall sonyst have his asking
And look how that we shall fare
In this wild country where we are
Anon they all forth went
And held a great parleamente
Than was there one that spoke
I shall tell you this Sydrac
That causyth ye king this work to begyne
And brought us here it for to wine
Without him may it naught
Our purpose to end be brought
And through his enchauntmente
Our god with fire has burnt
Nevertheless I read that we
Counsel that he delivered be
And when we have that we have sought
And in to our country again brought
Having our purpose on our enemies
Than shall the king by my advise
Cause him hanged and drawn to be
By cause to our god he has do felone
All assentyd to that conclusyon
And made to the king of it relacyon
Anon the king chose him ten
Of his most sagyest wise men
And bid them to Sydrac goo
Saying that the king was woo
That he should be prysonede
And say if he will my ioyrney speed
I shall forgive the trespass
That done to my god was
Sydrac answered truly thus
Great well the king Boccus
And say also to him so god me save
That I will no forgyfnes have
Of nothing that I have don amys
But if god that in heuyn is
On his god has shoyd power as he did se
What? will he forgive that me
But say to him if it be his will
That I shall his seruyse fulfill
In god of heuyn trust he shall
And his commaundment do all
Than his grace and mercy
I shall him show apertly
Anon the messyngers went
Unto the king that them had sent
And told him what answer they had
The king was wroth / and bad
That he should other days nine
In prison lie and there pyne
When the.ix. day was come and go
The king sent him again unto
The same bodies less nor more
That he sent to him before
And he his answer on them laid
As he had before said
When the king saw at the last
That his ioyrne was over cast
And that he was a comfortlese man
That without him nothing can
He set him forth anon right
And made him all the joy he might
Sydrac anon before the king
Said sir by god of all thing
The work that thou have to do
Shall never endyng come unto
But thou wylt trust in god of light
That all thing made of his might
And if that thou wylt him se
Apertly I shall show him the
The king said than with words grym
Let it so be than / show me him
And he be so good / as thou prechest
I shall believe as thou me techest
When he that herd anon Sydrac
And went from him a little while bake
And set on his knees at the last
His sith up to heaven did cast
And this prayer made he
Lord god full of pity
That heryst all that call the to
And made heaven and earth also
And aungells full of claryte
Of wisdom also for to be
Lucyfer by his pride had a fall
For lord would he abyn of all
And thou lord him castest down
Into hell that foul prison
Than made of earth slym
Adam our father and put him in
Of thy grace ghost of life
And made Eve to be his wife
Lord that werkyst so perfytly
I beseech the inwardly
That thou thy grace down me send
This wicked people for to amend
So that I have no blame
And that they worshype thy holy name
When he had made his oryson
An angel came from heuyn down
And Sydrac truly this certyfyed
That god had herd all that he desired
And has grawnted the thy bone
This king shall thou convert sone
Thou shall overcome by gods grace
The devil and his wicked trace
God has granted the might
And his grace shall be thy light
Thou shall to morrow upon a trow
Party of gods might him show
How he the world first began
And why that he made man
Of the coming a gods son
That in earth shall with you wone
And of the antecryst with all
That the world end shall
An erthen pot thou cause to be fet
And upon three stakys it set
In the name of the Trynyte
One god and persons three
Fill that pot with water clear
And than call the king the nere
Gods grace than shall thou se
And show it him and so shall he
The angel anon went his way
Sydrac markyd well what he did say
And at that had great reioysynge
Geuynge lawde to god for so cumfortynge
He called the king and said sir
Will ye se that you desire
He was full wrouth I wys
And said show we what a is
Which is better that will I se
Our god yt thou have brent / or he
Sydrac three stakys took anon
And set an erthen pot thereon
Than with water it did fill
He lokyd therein with good will
Than called the king him to
And said behold here in / loo
The king beheld and than saw he
The vmbre of the Trynyte
That of might is truly most
Father and son and holygost
In heuyn all they syttyng wore
And the aungelles them before
Syngyng all that there wone
Lo quod the father to the son
The son to the holygost also
And the holygost unto them two
When the king had seen that sight
He was full joyful and full light
He thought that he was in heuyn
His blessydnes coud he not tell yt he had syn
He told Sydrac how he fared
And said unto him that all they herd
I believe in thy god I wys
And in all thing that of him is
Or ever was or ever shall be
But I pray the tell now me
That I the better believe thereon
How than ar they three in one
Sir he said I shall you sho
On what manner ye shall him know
Sir if ye understand verily
The son in the sky shynyng bryghtly
Three things ar there innate
And noman can them separat
One is the son properly
That ye se upon the say
A another is the claryte
That it gyuys to you and me
And the hete is the third
That wide in the world is spread
Be the son I understand
The father that all thing has in hand
And the son by the claryte
For of the father come is he
The holygost by the hete
These ar the three that I great
And all three ar god but one
As you may se the son upon
Boccus than is now in such gladnese
That no man coud it exprese
And on hye cried and spoke
I believe in thy god Sydrac
Three persons and one very god mighty
To late I have on him be eued suerly
The gods that my fathers wore
And my auncytors here before
For sake I here for ever in say
For his love that all thing may
When the people that understood
They were for it ny wode
And swore that Sydrac should dey
For often that any man cowd sey
Sum went morning alone
And for the king made great morn
And said alas that he was borne
Our king has his wit forlorn
There withal they came him to
And said sir thou have mysdo
Full wroght than ar thy meyne
All that to the trusty should be
That thou have a which believed
And thy good god renayed
That thy father and forgoars all
Had full dear and did on call
Now have thou him by thy assent
Confoundyd and in fire brent
The king said unto all them
You wot never what ye mean
Therefore I have him forsakyn
And unto a another god me taken
Long I have been in the dark night
I take me now to the son light
Ye are of this thing full lewd
For Sydrac that had me showed
The vmbre of the trynyte
And that our fathers and we
Have believed in gods falls and bad
And a feeble life have we had
But now have I him in mind
That may both lose and tynde
In his law soth to say
Than will I both live and dey
The people drew themself bake
All that were anger with Sydrac
They chose fouer men of the host
That wysest were and could most
For to hold dysputacyon
Again Sydrac and his reason
These fouer before the king went
And said to him with one assent
This which with his wichcraft lewdly
Has you mouyd greatly
Sir let him come forth now
And we shall dyspute with him before you
So it come to pase at the last
And to dyspute they began fast
They showed him their falls law
And he vndyd it on a raw
He destroyed with good reason
All their falls and pervert opinion
Wroth a way than began they turn
For again him cowd they not spourne
When they overcome wore
And they might do no more
They went anon forth and fet
Of stark venom a gobet
And came to Sydrac there he stood
And said thou seyst thy god is good
Daryst thou in the name of him
Drink this gobet of venym
For if he be true and strong also
To the it can no velony do
By god Sydrac that / that you wene
May not a vayl you a been
Uenom of adder nor of snake
That each in goddys name take
May grieve me right naught
Give it hither that ye have brought
The venom in his hand took he
That all the people about might se
Ye that to my god trust not to
Anon shall se what he can do
He drank that venom anon right
And was hole sownde and light
All the people that there gadered was
Had great wonder at that caas
The king was full glad therefore
And said to all that there wore
Had Sydracis god not mighty been
He had brust that we had it syne
And these four that did him spyte
Thought he would a be deed quyte
When the devil was out lepyd
Of his great god that he was in crepyd
He and his fellows also
In to other gods did go
And they all at the last
Upon the king a cry did cast
And said Boccus thou had lost thy wit
To play now this folysh tyt
To change thy old law
And to trust in this withes saw
Us thou have now forsakyn
And to a wychcrafte the takyn
And we shall forsake the
None of us thy friend will be
Thy sacryfyce we shall forsake
On thy gods we shall do wrake
All thy bestes we will slo
And help again the thy fo
We shall also have blyue
Out of thy kingdom the to drive
All thy chyldern sle we shall
And other of thy kyne with all
And thy self with soth to sey
On evil death shall cause to dey
But thou will slake all this
And believe still in thy blys
Revoke all that thou have said
And all that thy heart is on laid
And break yender pot in two
His wichcraft for to undo
And the water at the last
Unto thy howndes thou cast
Seeing that Sydrac does not blynne
This woe to bring the in
THe king and all that were thore
Of this thing wonderyd sore
And a masyd were sumdele
Sydrac that beheld full well
And said sir dysmay ye noght
On god of heuyn be thy thought
Let the devil have no intrese
The with his engyn to refreshe
For thou shall se anon right
That I shall destroy him and his might
A betyll in his his hand he took
And to the false gods he it shoke
He stood and said all on hye
In his name that is almighty
I shall you break this uery day
And the devil drive away
With his betyll he laid upon
And brake the ydols euerychone
When the devil saw no more
That his dwelling might be thore
He and all his company
Began then from thens to hye
And an hydyous cry they cast
When the ydols were all to brast
An erthquake did they make anon
So that ye folk thought euerychone
That the yerth sanke and down went
Thunder and lyghtenyng also they sent
Hayle and rain also there wore
That made the folk abashed sore
And the king of all the host
Was abashed all the most
Sydrac saw the king in dread
Anon he unto him did yede
And said sir dyscomfort ye naught
Goddys might that all has wroght
Is stronger than the devil of hell
And that thou shall perseue well
Therefore dred not but comfort the
Over us shall sone his grace be
Down came than an angel bright
All about him much light
And said Sydrac take with thyn handys
The water that in the pot standys
On the fouer corners of the hows it cast
As long as any of it does last
In the name of the Trynyte
Betokenyd of the stakys three
Beat together fast the two
And the devil shall fle there fro
Sydrac did as he him bad
And fayer wether anon they had
An other aungel they saw coming
Beryng aswerd all brennyng
And smot the devil and him did shent
And those ydols all to brent
All the folk that there wore
And would not be conuertyd before
When they had seen that sight
They turned unto god anon right
Boccus the king when he that sauh
Alytel he began to lawgh
In his heart he was full iocound
And asked Sydrac in that stound
Leave Sydrac / and tell now me
What syngnyfy the stakes three
And the pot of earth also
That thou the water dydyst put into
And why thou so the water did cast
And bet to gyther the stakes fast
Sir he said the stakes three
Do sygnyfye the Trynytye
Father and son and holygoost
That are one god / as thou well know
By the erthen pot I take
This world that god of earth did make
The three Rakys the pot up bar
God it syngnyfyeth be thou well ware
The water that in the pot was don
Syngnyfyeth plainly goddys son
That in this world shall borne be
Of a fair vyrgyn puer and fre
And that son shall all with right
Destroy the devil and his might
Upon a cross he shall be done
And dye about the time of none
In earth shall he buried without fayl be
And rise up within days three
Through that deed shall he call
Adam and verily his friends all
Out of woe and of their mornfull care
That now in the deuyllys hands are
The water that I at the last
About on the fouer corners did cast
Betokenys fouer men that shall tho
In fouer sides of the world shall go
That many a man shall suerly wit
Every one his book shall write
By the which they confownde shall
The devil and his power all
The stakes that I together smot
Made great benne as ye it wot
That was in tokyn of them tho
That with goddys son shall go
And shall his dyscypyls also be
They shall preche the Trynyte
And the noise of them shall wend
Over all to the worlds end
For they shall to the people preche
And the right believe them teache
That man had better not be borne
That it despysyth / for he is forlorn
And those that are in right believe
Goddys son shall them forgive
All that they have don amys
And bring them in to heuyn blys
Boccus lyked those words well
And is instructyd now sumdele
By Sydracs true informacyon
In the faith has take a fundacyon
And goddys name in honor had
And of the faith right glad
Than desired he for to here
Many things that he would requere
Prayng that he tell would
Things that he ask should
Sydrac said full mekely
Ask what ye will sir hardely
The king asked him anon
These questyons by one and one
That are written in this book
And unto them great head he took.
Here after begin the questyons
Hic incipiunt questiones
The first thing than asked he
If god was ever and ever shall be
GOd had never beginning
Nor never shall have endyng
Before he heavy nor earth wrought
Or any thing to effect brought
He knew well how them to dyght
And all through his own might
Or he made angel to be
The noumbre of them well wist he
Of man of best of every dell
Of foul of fyshe all knew be well
And what deed echone should have
Also which should their sowles save
Which they were should be forlore
All together knew he before
And their words and also thought
God had orels a be vnperfyt and naught
For of all that were of his making
There nedyd to be non amendyng
Ne empeyred should he a be naught
Al though they had not be wrought
He was / is / and ever shall be
Of one power I ensuer the
Over all truly is his might
And three heuyns he has dyght
The one is bodily that we se
An other goostly where angels be
The third there god him self is
Where is a joyful blys
Where shall the right (...) end (...) dyd^ on
When this world is past and gone
The second questyon.
The king asked where it aryght ben
That god of heuyn might be sen
UIsybyl is god that warn I the
And inuysybyl also is he
For all things may he se
And he may nor seen be
For that / that is of bodily making
May se no goostly thing
But goostly thing that is in blys
May se goostly thing that is
But when goddys son so dear
In to earth is come among us here
And the people shall walk both to
Both he and his work (...) true
That shall be most of goddys might
And shall in a maiden light
Body to take of that vyrgyne
And shall be borne without syn
And do truly as a man shall do
Save syne that may he not do
And god almighty shall he be
Him shall men / here feel and se
And except he body took
There might no man on him look
The third questyon
Than asked the king him more
If god be over all and every whore.
Never yet god made thing
That is / or has of him felyng
For we / such as we are now
Feel him and I shall show the how
We live here / war and go
That comys always him fro
And by the fruit one kind him felyth
That every year newly spryngyth
The heueunes than feel him also
They turn in orbis as he had them do
Son and moan and sterre bright
All they feel him and his might
For all they fast about go
Untyll they come where they came fro
The earth also him truly felys
For every year his fruit he geuys
Wind and the fe^ feel him I wis
For when the most tempest is
At his byddyng and at his will
Withdraw they them and hold them still
The deed him felys on like manner wise
For at his will they shall up rise
The bestes that in earth both crepe and go
They feel him / for they do also
As he gave their kind to be
And over them all verily is he.
The.iiii. questyon.
Which was the first thing
That god made asked the king
Sir quod Sydrac unto me list
A fair paleys made he first
Full of blys and full of light
That the kingdom of heuyn hight
After made he the world thus
And hell deep underneath us
In to heuyn his fryndes he did let
His foes in hell were subject
Man made he than as was his will
The vmbre of angels to fulfill
Instead of them that fall wore
And should in heuyn come no more
Aungel and man shall fellows be
For one god honorys both he and we
That is god of might most
Father / son and holygoost
The.v. questyon
The king tha^ Sydrac be sought
To tell wan aungel was wroght
When god said word but one
Than aungel was made anon
Lucyfer him self did se
That fairest of all was he
In pride sone he did fall
And despised the other of his company all
He was so good as him thought
As god him self / that him wroght
Sum of the angels turned him to
And thought that it might be so
Maysteres to make than he them hight
Above other angels bright
Out of that palace was he cast
An hour might he not therein last
For it was no right that he
That again his lord would be
Should any part have in that bliss
And for him they fared all amysse
Truly all that were of his assent
Sum of them to hell went
And sum in to the thyckest air
That of joy is none espeyre
They may no mercy have
Ne for pride they may none crave
The vj. questyon
The king asked where of serve they
The angels that in heuyn ar ay
THe angels ye now heuyn ar in
Shall never have will to syn
By cause they refusyd Lucyfer
In bliss they shall be ever
To who god has gyuyn ywysse
Order and office in his bliss
Of angels is there one manner
That unto folk tellyth here
Both in water and in land truly
The great things of god all mighty
Another manner there is also
That tell^^ coming folks unto
Be it loud / be it still
The small bodies of goddys will
The third potestas called is
That are put in great offys
Lordshype over deuyls they have
And co^maundes the^ as a man his knave
That they ne may ought can
Over much evil to do to man
A another hight pryncypates
Masters over good spyryts be these
And commaundes them to fulfill
Goddys service unto his will
Than is there one that virtutes hight
Which tech men to go aryght
Another is there great of might
Dominaciones their name hight
Which be obedyent to the other before
And in their subiectyon ar thore
Another / and throni called is he
There upon is goddys se
By them vsys god on hy
His iugementes full gryssely
An order is there chief of all
Which cherubyns we do call
Many creatures of skyll
Ar that order subject till
For dylygently they behold and se
In the myrrour of goddys claryte
And they know by their natures
The preuytes of creatures
And yet is there Seraphyn above
They are brennynge in goddy ^^out
More than all the other be
And they are of such dygnyte
That no other spyryt certainly is
Betwyx them and god in eternal blys
The vij. questyon
The king asked if deuyls also
All thing know and all thing may do
UEryly sir quod Sydrac we do find
That deuyls ar of angels kind
And by cause they of their nature ware
Of full great conynge they are
And they are more goostly
Than man that has body
Therefore know they more than man
By nature much secrecy tell can
Save things that are commy^ge
Of that they know little or nothing
Things that I have don or thou
That know they well I now
Of evil will and evil thought
Thereof wot the deuyls naught
Ne none but god alone I ensuer the
Of a manys heart the preuyte
The deuyls may well yuel do
But good they ne have will unto
And yet may they not fulfill
To do i^ yuel all their will
No more have they might until
Than good angels them suffer will
The viij. questyon
What shape ar angels and what thyn^
They can do a said the king
ON owyse have they even
The lyknese of god of heuyn
For bodylese they are and h^yght
Full of fair bed and of light
And there is nothing in kind
That they ne wot and have in my^de
No wonder that they of knowledge be
For all things in god they se
And all that they have will unto
Without greuaunce may they do
The ix. questyon
The king than Sydrac asked
If god Adam with his hand formyd
MAn and all that god him lent
Was made of his comaundment
And who so understand can
A feeble nature is in man
And of a foul thing god him dyght
To confound the devil and his might
For man so feeble to (...) yt he came fro
That is to him great so^^w^ and woe
Of the fouer elements as (...) the
Our parent Adam made be
For his kind (...) was goddis will
Should ^oue (...) of the world fulfill
For god knew ^e for (...) the should syn
And l^se the virtue that he was ^reat in
And that he should as aman vnwysse
Not long live in paradyse
All other things did he make
To mannys behoue and for his sake
And many worms he made also
As mees / freys and other mo
Man to sorrow and byte s^ime tide
Be cause he should not fall in pride
And that he should remember by this
How feeble a thing that he is
When so feeble a thing and so vile
Shall him greatly wex and trobyll
Of mire and rain se men may
How they are trauelyd all day
So besy should we of right
God to serve with all our might
For unto our delight made he
A^l things that we se
And we and they were made also
Unto god worshype to do
The.x questyon.
The king asked him than
In what stead made god Adam
IN Ebro^ ar god ^olde it have
Where (...) was put in grave
But first he was ^et in paradyse
A fayer stead tha^ in the est lyese
There is joy and gr^t de^yre
And trees a many (...) of fruit
And every fruit (...) of might
As god hastyth (...) with virtue dyght
One fruit there is that if aman
Had ones ete of it / neue^ after than
He should hounger any more
And another also grows thore
That is called the fruit of life
Both good for man and wife
For who so etys of that tree
Shall never syke nor old he
When Adam was thither brought
There was Eve than of him wroght
So were they made as we find
Of one flesh and of o kind
Be cause they should be where they went
As of one flesh / so of one assent
God made them that they should not syn
The more mercy after to win
And when that god had Adam makyd
He and Eve were both nakyd
But thereof shamyd they noght
Untyll they had sin wroght
When they of the appull had byten abyte
Either shamyd of other was tyte
For they saw them than vnclad
Of clothyng a grace that they had
And in paradyse they wore
Seven hours and no more
The third hour after his m^kyng
Gave Adam name to all thing
The syxth hour ete his wife
The appull that made all the strife
The seventh hour Adam did of yt ete
And was chasyd and streyth out hete
The aungel came thither anon right
With a sword of fire very bright
And with the fire be set he there
The walls of paradyse that there were
So that no man there in should wone
Untyl the coming of goddys son
After his death he shall undo
The fire that it does compase so
And Adam and his friends all
Into heuyn conducte shall
The xj. questyon
Tha^ as^yd he whyther went Adam
Out of paradyse when he came
AFter that / he went anon
There he was made in Ebron
A hundredth year there led his life
And had children by his wife
But at lenght Cayn that was fell
Did kill his brother Abel
Adam therefore came his wife not nere
By the space of a hundredth year
Making great sorrow that Abel was slain
Than bade him the aungel go again
And know his wife as he should do
Saying that the will of god was so
For cursed of god was Cayn
And a^l the sede that came of him
And of that cursed sede forlorn
Goddys son would not be borne
That fu^fyl^ed Adam and ^eth begot he
Of whose sede goddys some borne shall be
And wete thou sir that from Adam
Unto the time that Noe came
Never fell on earth no rain
Ne none raynebowe was ne feign
Flesh that time no man did ete
No wind than was / god none be let
The wether was all times there
Fayer as summers day and clear
And plenty was of all thing
Till mannys syn it made lettynge
The.xij. questyon
Did Adam any other syn than it
He broke goddys bode and ye appul byt
NAy / he did none other sin
But a greater might he not begin
For he couetyd god to be
And for that the appul ete he
And should no creature of wit
His creatorys bode ouersyt
If you before god now were
And some aungel said to the there
That thou behind should se
Or the world should destroyed be
And god the bade look on him fast
And no where else thy eyes cast
Goddys bode thou shuldyst fulfill
And let all the world spyll
For that Adam couthe no good
Before god sometime he stood
And behind he lokyd as unwise
Wherefore he lost paradyse
And in that one sin that he did
Seuyn sins were there hyd
First pride / for that he
Desired goddys like to be
Inobedyence another also
For he brake that god bade him do
Couetyse the third did him grieve
For he couetyd more than god would give
Sacrylege was the fouerth sin
That Adam was wrappyd in
For he took upon him thore
That god had forbyden him before
The fyfte may be called by reason
Goostly fornicacyon
For his very spouse he forsook
And to the deuelys counsel him took
Whereby his right sponsale he brake
And in aduoutre he stake
The syxth to manslawter he drew
For he by that him self slew
Glotony the seventh was
When he put him in that caas
To ete the appul that his wife bad
And that god him forbodden had
Wherefore in that etynge vnwysly
Was syn inoughe as me thynkyth truly
The.xiij. questyon
What was ye Adam from god did take
And how shall he amendys make
FRom god Adam much took
That time that he him forsook
All that he should there have wrought
That Adam should forth have brought
That is that they should have ouercomen
The devil / and his might have nomen
As the devil did Adam
Both him / and all that of him came
Because his syn was much more
Than was all the world / therefore
It behouyd him more again to yield
And this had he naught to welde
Or find a man that should more be
Than all the world / which was not he
And therefore did he ete his bread
In labor and sweet till he was deed
The.xiiij. questyon.
Forlorn for aye why was he naught
When he so great a syn had wrought
FOr it behooves nedely to stand
That god has ordeynyd before hand
God ordained at ye begi^yng
That of Adam and his osprynge
Should ye orders of goddis chosen
Be fulfyllyd / and out losyn
And after when Adam forthought
Was angryd that he had so wrought
Mercy anon might he none take
For he might not amendis make
And if god had forgeuen him this
And have put him again into bliss
That angel was cast fro before
For a thought and for no more
Than had god been vnryghtwyse
Therefore in sin and wreke he lyse
If a man found anon
In a sloughe a rich stone
That were foul and nothing clean
He should wasshe it as I wene
And in treasure it not lay
Untyll the fylthe were away
But gods sone that more shall be
Than all the world / shall dye on tree
Amendys for Adam to make
And him fro his penance take
So shall he come out of hell
And among gods chosen dwell
The.xv. questyon.
Why would not god an anngel send
Or a man Adam to amend
ANd au^gel had bought man and made hi^ fre
His vnderlyne tha^ should he be
Man in earth was maked here
For to bear angel fere
And if angel the kind nam
Of man / and a man becam
Then were angel of less posterite
Than god him made first to be
And man again might man not win
For all were they lockyd in one sin
For this shall gods sone of might
In a clean maiden light
Our kind shall he in her take
And of two kyndys a man make
God and man both shall he be
And of his manhed shall he
Begyle the devil / for evermore
As that he did man before
And of mankind shall he not twynne
Save that he shall never do sin
The.xvj. questyon.
Why shall god be borne y^ me tell
Of a mayde^ / and she amayden dwell
Sir on three manners we find
That god in earth made man's kind
First made he man and gave him life
That another came of man nor wife
Man of man only than he name
As Eve that he made of Adam
The third manner than shall be
When god of his power I ensure the
Shall light in earth in a woman
Without knowlegynge of any man
And sethe the world first began
Evermore god lokyd unto man
That he should best do his will
And his commaundementis fulfill
And of his kind shall chosen be
A clean maiden and a free
That shall be withouten sin
And all virtues her within
Her father shall her son be
And of his dought his mother make shall he
She inuyolate / shall be in her light
And dwell in her.ix. months right
For the.ix orders shall he fulfill
Of angels than in heaven are still
With man's kind that shall be borne
And forth have comen here beforne
He shall also through his might
Be borne of that maiden bright
And she after child berynge
Shall Be wemmyd of nothing
For as the son his light casts
Through the glass that hole lasts
And comes out as he first was
Without wemme of the glass
So shall god in that maiden lend
And out of her body wend
And she still left a maiden right
As the glass fro the son light
The.xvij. questyon.
Why is death called death tell me
And how many dethes that therbe
For bytternes is called death in deed
And for Adam through evil read
A bitter byte of the appul he bote
That drove him into labor and swote
And three manner of dethes theris /
One that not ripe is
As of chylderne that are young
They feel no pains strong
Another death there is also
That bitter is to come unto
As a young man when him lyketh best
And the death be on him fest
Bytternes he feleth and woe
Or the ghost depart him fro
Goostly death the third it is
There the foul is ever deed fro blys
And all three to man they came
For the sin that did Adam
And if that sin ne had been wrought
Man ne should have dyed naught
The.xviij. question.
Sends god ought to man to say
Of what death that he shall dye
Nay: he sends to no man
But he that so much can
That he haueth no menyng of the deed
And works after the best read
Sudden death shall he not dye
For he shall go the ready way
And the good that byleueth aryght
In god of heaven and his might
And work as they ought to do
To what death that they go to
Whether they be slain with sword or knyf^
Or with wild bestes lose their life
Or in water drowned be
Or hangyd hye upon a tree
Or of some foul adventure
May then the life no longer endure
Wicked death are none of these
In the sight of god and hese
For their good dedys more and less
And gods own ryghtwysenesse
May not he forgottyn in thought
For they cursyd fyltynes of syn naught
And if they had often don amys
Through febylnes that in them is
Truly yt shall be forgyuen all
By the sharp pains that they suffer shall
But he that in god trowes naught
Ne his co^maundmentis has not wroght
What may it him a veil
That he haueth great travail
And prouys long or he dye
And though men him fortunat say
What death so ever he dies I wys
Wicked death and short it is
The.xix. questyon.
Wha^ soul fro the body shall shede
How wendys the soul to other stead
THe soul wendes fro the body
When he dies full preuely
But when it is out gone
Again to the body there comes none
A sort of deuyls it take
And much joy and dene therewith make
And unto hell they it bear
With many pains it to dear
But after the time of gods sone
That he is comen in earth to wone
Of ledynge / shall be manners three
Souls to lead there they shall be
One is if a man had here leuyd
Trusting as god has him instructed
And his co^maundmentes all has wroght
And from the right faith erred naught
When his life in this world endys
And his soul from the body wendys
Of angels a great company
Gaderys them with melody
Untyl him that his keeper was
Reioysyng greatly at that caas
Taking that soul with play and song
And thankyng god ever among
Untyl heuyn therewith they wend
There to dwell without end
Another manner of ledyng is
If aman have done amys
And will not his law fulfill
But has all his life done ill
And again that he dye shall
He repentys him of all
And unto god for mercy cries
When that soul from the body flies
A good angel it takes in have
And deliver it to a wicked ghost at last
And he shall it forth led
Pain to suffer for his mysdede
But when he has beat it all
And suffered that he suffer shall
Then the good angel him takes away
And ledethe him to joy for aye
The third manner if man or wife
In sin have ever lad their life
And gods byddyng would not fulfill
But did all their hearts will
Deuyls keep that soul anon
When it is out of the body gone
And bear it to the pain of hell
Without end therein to dwell
The.xx. questyon
Now would I wit whether wore
Soul or body made before
First the body is made fulfayre
Of fire / water / earth and air
And the four complexyons that are
In man / of these four they are
When the body is made also
Goddys grace comyth thereto
And blowyth in him the ghost of life
And after of him made a wife
Lord and Sir he made him be
Of all that he in earth might se
But when he the appul chose
Clothyng of grace than did he lose
Which him greuyd very sore
As ye have herd here before
The.xxj. questyon
Which spekyth know would I
The soul of man or body
NO might has the body
Of him self syk erly
To speak / to goo / ne ought else to do
But that the soul him geuyth to
Men se ofre it chaunsys
That aman on ahorse ryd yse
And him gydeth to and fro
The way that he will go
And the horse so compellede
Goyth as the man will him led
On like manner has the body no might
Of spekyng / of going / ne of sight
Nor of naught that he do shall
But of the soul it comyth all
The body is of earth wrought
And shall rote away to naught
Therefore is he of feeble ar nature
Than the soul that ever shall endure
And the body ne is nothing
Unto the soul but an hythynge
Thou seyste well when the soul is gone
A soul caryn is the body on
That speak ne store ought may
When the soul is gone away
And by cause all thing of the soul is
Therefore goyth she first to joy or blys
And than felyth the soul euerydele
That the body doyth ill or well
The.xxiij. questyon
The soul that a ghost is on
And has another flesh ne bone
Ne noght takys ne gyuys him fro
How may it feel other well or woe
A Ghost is the soul the soth to sey
And never more may it dey
Ete ne drink will it naught
And it is as swyfte as thought
Felt ne seen may it not be
Nor no stead may it occupe
But when the life comes to end
And the soul shall fro the body wend
If he held gods commandment
A clothe of grace to him shall be sent
Have he be wicked over all
A clothe of sorrow come to him shall
Through which clothing feel shall he
Joy or pain whether it be
The.xxiij. questyon.
Who is more lord of the twey
Soul or body thou me say.
THe body the more lord is
That ledeth the soul often amys
But the more parell should abide
The soul / if that evil betyde
As if there were now young men tway
Going in a parellous way
And that one be bold and hardy
That other a coward that goes him by
The coward thinks as he goes
If again us come any fooes
This hardy man shall me out bear
So that me they shall not dear
Thus goyth the cowarde hardely
The hardy thynkyth what do shall I
This is a coward that goyth by me
If other than good come he will fle
And I shall mys him when I have need
Thus goyth the hardy man in dread
All thus farys it wyturly
Betwyx the soul and the body
The body says I will have quyte
All my will and my delight
When I am ded earth shall I be
What than shall I recke what is of me
The soul says a fellow I led
That me beryth feeble felowrede
For if there come any aduersyte
I shall it feel and not be
Thus is the sowl in peril ay
For that the body holdyth play
The.xxiiij. questyon
Where has ye soul I the read
In mannys body his wonnyng stead
IN the body euerywhere
Wonyth ye soul if blood be there
Blood is wessel for the soul truly
And of the blood is the body
And where as blood raynyth nothing
There has the soul no dwelling
As in teth and here also
In nails and in hyde thereto
If you say life is in tho
For they may feel who does them woe
Thereto lies answer good
For their rotys touchyth blood
Pare them and clyp them who thou wylt
And come their rotys not until
Shall they feel it never a dele
Whether thou doyst them woe or well
The.xxv. questyon
Why does the soul no lengar rest
In the body / than ye blood does lest
Like it faryth I the ensuer
As fysshe in apond of water puer
If aman a goter make
The water of that ponde to slake
The water re^nith small and small
Untyl it be run out all
Than lie the fysshe of that ponde
Betynge them self again the dry land
And when the water is all awey
Than most they nedys dey
Of the soul it fares so
When the blood it rennyth fro
As the blood out yssueth treuly
So does the soul there wex feeble quyely
And when the blood is out every dele
The soul no longer lyketh well
In that body for to dwell
But departs al so suell
For his nature has he lost tho
As fysshe when the water is therfro
The.xxvj. questyon.
I pray the now that thou me say
How it is that ^he folk^ so deye
AMan dies on many ways
Sum when that his days
That god him set fulfilled are
Than it behooves him nedely to fare
Sum of outrage that they do
As of mete and drink also
And destroys their nature
So that they may not endure
Understande that no man may
Over gods term leave one day
But with outrage may he let
The term that god him have set
Some dies in battle and in fight
With staff or sword as falls light
And on many otherwise also
Mo than I can tell the unto
The.xxvij. questyon.
How may man wete that it so is
That god made man to his lykenes
WE find of antiquite
In books yt sometime had Noye
That when god of heaven king
Had made be and all thing
Tha^ said one of ye parsons three
That are in the Trinite
Now althynge are made more and les
Make we man to our lykenes
And because he said make we
Is to understand that there are three
And that he said is no lesynge
Than are we like him in making
The.xxviij. questyon
Sethen we of gods lykenes be
Why may we not do as did he?
TO goddis lykenes are we dyght
And therefore has be given us might
Above al other creature
That he made here for to dure
And for that likeness so know we
All things that in earth be
We can labor / work and win
And we know alms fro sin
All creatures may we take
And our seruauntis of them make
And al other things that are naught
Unto goddis lykenes wrought
Have no conynge ne might thereto
To do thyngis that we do
Ne command us they ne may
As we do them every day
But though we be of his lykenes
We may not nevertheless
Be al so strong and wise as he
For his handworke all ar we
He is maker of all thing
And we are of his making
He is lord and we subject as a slave
And for the lykenes that we have
If that we do not ill
Angels nombre we shall fulfill
For other lykenes than his
Were not worthy to that blys
The.xxix. question.
Where becomes the blood all
Of man / when he dye shall.
GOd made blood of water right
And the body of earth he dyght
And as water in earth synketh
And the earth the water drynketh
For to maintain all thing
That waxes and in earth spring
Also mayntayneth trewly
The blood / that is in the body
And when the soul depart shall
The blood he bears with him all
And when the heart is fro him sent
The blood is into the water went
And the body that is dry
And ripe / may not long lie
That it ne drynketh the blood also
As the earth will the water do
The.xxx. questyon.
When the fire quenchyd is
Whether becomes it tell me this?
OF the son the fire is right
Thereof haueth he hete and light
And he be quenchyd he shall go
To the son there he came fro
Thou see the son that light makes
And hete also there it on takes
On night when he fro us is went
All the hete that he to us lent
And the^ light of him also
All does he take it him unto
And ledeth with him that he brought
Fro him depart ne may it naught
Also when fire is slaked here
He withdraws him on the same manner
Unto the nature for to go
Of the son there he came fro
The.xxxj. question.
Why dies not the body thore
When he leseth half his blood and more
Though the blood be half aweye
The body may not yet deye
For the hete of the soul I wys
That the blood by mayntayned is
Departs not so lightly
And I shall tell the for why
The little blood that there is left
Makes that the soul fro him is not refte
For it maynteyneth the soul styffely
And the soul the blood and the body
The weke that in a candel is
When it begins for to mys
The fire slaketh and is a way
Euynso it is here to say
Of the blood the weke I make
And by the fire the soul I take
When the blood away is all
The soul no longer dwell shall
But the blood comfort him so
Except some other evil it forth do
Dies he not so lightly
But holds him on live contynually
The.xxxij. questyon.
Of what complexyon may it be
The body / and of what nature is he
OF the nature of earth it is told
And his complexyon is cold
And than is he makyd yare
Of the four elamentis that are
Of the earth is the flesh
And the blood of water nesshe
Of air the soul maked was
And of fire the hete he has
Se thyn flesh is of erthes kind
And blood of water as we find
Both are they cold of kind to fond
But soul that is of goddis onde
That ought to be clean and fair
And is hot of kind of air
That soul abides in the blood
And heteth it and does it good
And the blood heteth trewly
All the lymmes of the body
The.xxxiij. questyon.
Were sowles made at the first for aye
Or are they made yet every day
ALl thing that god thought
to make al were at ons wroght
That is to say at ye beginning
That he before saw all thing
And one co^maundme^t made he
All that was and that shall be
But I say not that they were
In the lykenes that they now are
All things in him ware enclosyd verily
Untyll they come to their being apertly
Than he shapyd their figure
Euerychon after their nature
But he commanded all to be
At ones / as we do se
So at ones made he all thing
At his word and his bidding
The xxxiiij. questyon
May they have any excusing
That of god know nothing?
SUch as god know not here
Nor him to learn will not endeuere
At the day of dome shall he
Know them for none of his meyne
And tho that believe and will not do
The works that belongs them unto
That sympely them understand
As simple men that are in land
If they dampened be therefore
Turmentyd should they not be sore
And they that have good understanding
Of god / and do not his byddyng
Fro pain they may them not defend
But if that they do here amend
The.xxxv. questyon.
Shall aman ought else do
But that god commands him to?
GOd has kyndly made man
To serve him in all that he can
And his commaundme^t to do
And the devil to hate also
And as we lordshyp will crave
Of all things / and their service have
Even so will god on all wise
Ask and have of us seruyse
And that we believe on him steadfastly
And worship him with our body
And love him above all thing
For we are all of his making
The.xxxvj. questyon.
How many worlds are of all
And how do men them call?
THere are gostly worlds two
And two bodily worlds also
That one goostly heaven is
There angels are and all the blys
And there the good generacyon
Of Adam / shall hereafter wone
That other goostly than is hell
There the deuyls in pains dwell
The two bodily is in our sight
As sun / and moan / day / and night
And other things that we se
That us gives claryte
The the other trewly we can not want
The chief thing that we do enhaunte
As the earth that all thing takes
And our womb that naught forsakes
And fro the bodily that are
Unto the goostly for to fare
Whether it be low or hye
Ne is it but a twynkelyng of an eye
The.xxxvij. questyon.
Is god of great yeldyng to tho
That right in his service here go
IN all the world ne is no man
That may think ne tell can
The good / the honor in many wise
That god gives man for his seruyse
That in him ttusteth and in his might
And his co^maundment does aryght
And short co^maundment ordenyd has he
Do good and let evil be
His son shall he send here down
To dye for mannys salvation
And tho that his seruyse have in mind
In his blys they shall it find
For he shall them worshype more
Than any aungel that is thore
The.xxxviij. questyon
The people that in yt time shall be
Of goddys son when come is he
And after shall they comenly
Believe in him steadfastly
ALl shall they in him their truth ley
His own folk that is to sey
But all shall they gatherede be
Of diverse spech and sondre country
But they shall not euerychon
Have co^maundment after one
The co^maundment as men shall se
Of goddys son shall truly one be
After him his mynisters twelve
Shall command that selue
But they that come after tho
That instead of mynisters shall go
They shall well behold and find
The feebleness of man's kind
And lyghter commaundment for that skyl
Shall they make the folk until
And each nacyon shall wene that he
Be better than any other be
But of them shall be at the fine
As it does by a great gardyne
Where in many trees stands
And each of them frewte bears
The tree that best frewte berys
Be they appulles or be they peers
The plentuousest of berynge
And of best savor in etynge
That tree shall the gardynere
Most love and serve in time of year
Also they that shall best believe
In gods sone and their heart him give
And best shall here in earth do
When time comes there unto
They shall most worshypped be
In heaven before the Trinite
A myrrour that they shall behold and se
Full of joy / that of no tongue may expressed be
The.xxxix. question.
What co^maundment by thy leave
Shall gods sone his folk give?
IT shall be love and abstynence
And charity and pacyence
And that no man other do
Than he would were done him to
God himself for man's love
Shall send his sone from above
And shall feel here abstynence
And sufferaunce and pacyence
And bitter death at the last
His folk out of pain to cast
And who so behold these four things
All goodness out of them sprynges
For he that good love has in god
Love in himself is not all odd
And he that has abstynence
And charity and pacyence
And haueth the love of god with all
No doubt he shall have the life eternal
The.xl. questyon.
The blesfulest thing after thy wit
And dygniest / and fairest which is it?
A Soul that is good of man
Of all things that I tell can
Is the fairest thing that may be
For bryghter than the son is he
And a worthyer thing is there naught
Of all that god in earth has wrought
For of gods own onde it came
When god blewe on Adam
Therefore are angels set thereto
To keep it in all that they may do
Also the blysfullest it is
For it is ordained to that blys
There never end shall be
Of joy and bliss and game and gle
And god gave commandment to al thing
For to serve man his blyssynge
Than is man's soul blysfulest tho
And worthyest and fairest also
The.xlj, questyon.
The fowlest and ye perelousest thing to se
And most wyckedest which may that be
Wicked soul of man I wysse
Is the fowlest thing that is
So hard hearted man is none
And he a wicked soul saw one
In the right lykenes of it
That he ne should lose his wit
Also it is perelouse
For it gothe to a velayne house
There parell is and much woe
Where it never shall come fro
The most cursyd is it aye
For gods sone on domes day
Before all his angels thore
Shall curse it for evermore
And of the pain that it shall to
Angels and Archangels also
Shall have both joy and bliss
For that it had done amys
The.xlij. questyon
The good sowles shall they ought
For ye wicked sorrow or take thought
GOod men when the wicked spyl
Shall Be al of goddys will
And wha^ they ye dome have seen
Of them yt again god has been
They shall be demt from goddis face
Which shulbe al their solace
For the dome shall be ryghtwyse
That god shall give his enemies
And when they are in all their pains
A monge the other hell hownes
The good sowles shall glade be
Them in their pains on to se
As we have game to behold
Fysshe swyme in the water cold
The.xliij. questyon
Whether is better so god ye save
Health or syknes for to have
Health of soul is good to win
To keep it out of dedly sin
For when it is hole and fair
Of heuyn blys it shall be heir
And his dwelling with god shall be
For his labor and dylygence
If thou haddyst now a knight
That ware strong and stowt in fight
And ware hold bold and hardy
Him thou woldyst hold the by
And thou shuldyst in to fight
And ware he syke and of no might
No where woldyst thou with him yede
Where thou shuldyst stand in dread
Like manner it is of sowles hele
God will not with that soul dele
That feeble is by the syknes of sin
But he will thereof blynne
Again the health of the body
To agood man say I sykerly
Is better hole than syke to be
For in goodness his health vsyth he
And they that live in sin and woe
Sycknes is best for them tho
Which for the pain of their sycknesse
Shall they sin yet the less
And withdraw them therfro
That in health should not so do
The.xliiij. questyon
What pour is it yt would I lere
That god has given to soul here
GOd has given soul unto
Akyngdome for to rule also
That if he keep it aryght
His kings sete shall be dyght
Before god in heaven blys
And god shall say to him this
Come my dear sone to me
The kingdom that I behyght the
Thou have it so kept in all thing
That thou art worthy to be a king
Therefore shalt thou crowned be
Before my fathers majesty
The soul for the king take I
And for the kingdom the body
And the commaundment of each good king
In his land should be done above all thing
Therefore what so the soul will
The body should it do with skyll
And but the body do also
As the soul counsaylethe him to
Both together they should be cast
In fire of hell at the last
The.xlv questyon.
When gods sone to ye earth is sent
And again to heaven is went
Shall he any governor leave here
In this world the folk to lere?
AFter that gods sone up shall stye
Into his fathers company
His.xii. mynysters leave he shall
That in earth him companyd with all
A holy house among them all
Shall they make / that they shall call
Gods house and so shall it be
For therein may men god se
After them shall other come also
That their commaundment shall do
A while / till it last may
And they shall fro day to day
Wax rich and of great might
And for their riches anon right
The law that gods sone them left
And his.xii. mynysters efte
Febely than shall they it hold
But for riches shall all be sold
And god shall then dystroye them tho
For their sin and for their woe
And than shall come great maystery
Of the art of astronomy
And wise men hold shall they be
But coueytys shall shende all their gle
The xlvj. questyon
Goddys hows that thou have told
Who shall it keep and have in hold
Forsooth goddys son him selue
Shall among his dysciples twelve
Command one to keep it right
And stone of stonys shall he hight
He shall it keep that it shall not spyll
After man shall succeed man according his will
But after the time that goddys son
Is come in earth for to wone
A thousand year after than shall begin
In the world to spring sin
Against god and his lore
And shall be wors than before
After that men shall se
Two great douues shall borne be
That goddys law forther shall
And myschefe destroy all
That one douue shall be called mendar
And that other amonester
In the world they shall be bold
And pore men they shall be told
The good shall love them inwardly
The wicked shall dread them wonderly
And worship them with dread and saw
For they shall have of them great awe
Champyons they shall be strong
The faith to hold and to fordo wrong
Good kepars shall they be
Of gods house and his meyne
The.xlvij. questyon
He yt no good does but holds hi^ still
Whether does he good or ill
HE that no good does nor ill dedys
The life of beast right he ledys
And that does ill for he do (...)
And he that of good wy^ a^ynne
And does not there he may it do
He does ill and sin also
As if a man were honger sted
And gladly would of mete be fed
And he by an orchyarde were going
There he much freute saw hanging
And dies for fault of mete
And of the freute will not ete
He does evil and amys
For his own defawte it is
The.xlviij. questyon.
Lordshyp whether shall it be
Stout and stern or of petye?
LOrdshyp is gods will
Law and justice to fulfill
And if might Justice find
Men should be of fysshes kind
The strong should the feeble ete
And great the small that they might get
And lordshyp ought stowte to be
And stalworthe and of potence
With right and skyll the wicked to deem
And peace among the folk to set clean
Alytel gods sone beforne
A king shall in earth be borne
He shall be profit or he dye
And in his prophesye he shall say
Blesyd be they god unto
That deem / and ryghtwysenes shall do
If a wicked man be raynt
And of his wyckednes be ataynt
The lord may deem him of his right
And forgive it of his might
But if he afterward do amys
Of the dome worthy he is
The.xlix. questyon.
Shall any man good do
His kind and his friends unto?
IF thy kind good men be
And they have defawte of the
And have lost by myschaunce
The good that should them auaunce
Thou shall them help and good them do
And give them good counsel also
If they be of wicked life
Be it man or be it wife
And they be in wretchydnesse
Through their own wickedness
As some that are of evil mode
He does ill that does them good
That men puts in all is lorne
In a purs that is al to torn
What helps it wax for to take
And a serge thereof make
And before aman it light
That is blind and has no sight
To such aman helps it naught
That light before him be brought
Also it is lost for to show
Any goodness to a shrewe
The.l. questyon.
Now I pray the tell me
Gentylhed what may that be
GEntylry that is power
And riches that aman has here
Of land and rent and of fee
And comes of antiquite
And that in cost has to maintain
For most ientyll is he counted certain
But some are rich men of good
And are churles kind of blood
A rich man men call him one
But gentylman is he flone
And he that rich is wonderly
A noble man of his body
Curteys / wise and holden fre
A great gentylman is he
And though he be a pour man
And among men bear him can
As of norture in boure and halle
A gentylman men shall him call
But of pour men we al came
As of Eve and adam
The.lj. questyon
How may it be cold every year
When the wether is fair and clear
THe wether when that it is fair
The hete comyth down from ye air
And in to the earth he dryueth thore
The hete that hetyd the earth before
And so is hete al away
On wynters days that is to say
And when the wether is trobelus and thike
The hete may not down light
From the son by his might
So may it here be warm told
And sumtyme in fair wether cold
The.lij. questyon
May aman by any trow
The goodmen from the wicked know
GOod men them self declare right
For of vysage they are bright
And their eyes also are bright
And lovely they are of sight
For the good life they are in
And they are trewly out of syn
And because they live so chastely
Sweet words have they comenly
The wicked of evil will they be
And lowrynge are they on to se
Of stablenes have they nothing
Out of mesure is their speaking
Smarte going they have also
And they are seldom in to
And the wyckednes of their heart
In word and warke they show all smarte
The.liij. questyon.
The believe that was here before
Of false ydols that here wore
Shall it ever raised be
So sterke as was in time of me?
Children that shall come of the
In god of heaven their believe shall be
And their children yet also
But they that shall come of them tho
Shall turn unto the wicked law
That was before by old saw
And they shall make a cite
Therein shall a tower be
And that tower shall have thore
Four and forty stages before
And therein shall raygne a king
Of all the world most masterlynge
And an image he shall do dyght
After his father and like him right
And all folk shall he make go to
That image worship to do.
The.liiij. questyon.
Why was it not gods will
That man leuyd not a weke with one fyl
HOnger one of the pains is
For syn that Adam did amys
And man was made so (if he would)
That he ever leave should
Without travail and without woe
But when he was fallen god fro
Might he not again come him to
Without travail and woe also
And travail should him not lift
But if he had hunger and thyrst
And honger / thyrst / keelth / and hete
With other pains that men with mete
Should man nothing of have wist
Had the man not sinned first
And with honger and thyrst may
Glotony be done away
And for to mean in man's thought
The glotony that Adam wrought
And that sin to wasshe a way
Kyndly him hongereth every day
The.lv. questyon.
The rich men dye they also
Lightly as the pour men do?
Rich and pour that men find
All god made them of one kind
One while waxes the pour rich
And sometime made pour is the rich
Up and down catel is brought
But kind of man ne changes naught
Honger and thyrst hete and cold
Joy and sorrow many fold
Sleep and wake etynge and drinking
And many mo kinds of living
This has the pour men as well
As the rych of kind every dele
But the pour by reason
Are of strongar complexcyon
Than the rich that deyntely does feed
But they in travail their life do led
But when death knocks truly
There is no another remedy
But both alyke shall fare
Rych or pour whether they are
The.lvj questyon
Shall men judge the rich also
As they the pour do
Judge they shall them of right
Stryghter than ye pour wight
And ever the rycher that he be
And he mysdo again the
The more pain should he bear
Should no riches him out were
And if men deem the rich sore
The pour shall him dread the more
But for the pour mannys deed
Has the rych no dread
But god rewardys them than
The rych more than the pour man
And demyth both ryghtwysly
After as they are worthy
So should men deem the quycke
Rych and pour al alyke
The.lvij. questyon
May the wicked as well for ay
Have goddys love as the good may
A Wicked man that has do sin
And of wyckydnes will blynne
Crye^g god mercy wyllyng to do it no more
He shall be in goddys favor
The good are goddys where they go
The wicked are fall him fro
If aman athynge have lore
That he loved well before
And he may it after find
That shall he more have in mind
And more shall thereof be glad
Than of all the othere that he had
By man faryth god even so
If aman again him mys do
And it dedly sin be
Far fro god fallen is he
But if he will mercy crave
Sykerly he shall it have
For thereof is god fulfayne
And than fyndeth he him again
And of his finding is he glad
For the great love that he to him had
Thus may wicked as well all day
Have gods love as goodmen may.
The.lviij. questyon.
How may the child that full of love is
Come out of ye mothers womb tell me this
GOd that all has made of naught
More wonders has he wrought
And as he has power thereto
The one body in that other to do
So has he might it out to bring
For at his will are all thing
When time comes that woman shall
Be delyueryd of that she gothe withal
All the joints of her body
Open and enlarges them kyndly
All one save the chyn before
And in that time the child is bore
As a lykenes of death that ware
But as soon as the body bare
The air has sauoryd that is here
The bones that febely mow stere
Begin for to dry anon
And waxes hard growyng to bon
And all the lyghthes that ware open
In the woman again are cropen
Harken I shall tell the how
If aman his fyngar drow
The joint will open and undo
And after shet again to
So it faryth with woman after chyldynge
Through the grace of the heuynly king
The.lix. questyon
May any woman bear mo
Children in her at onys than two
A Woman may bear kyndly
Seven at onys in her body
For the matryce of woman
If you understand can
Has seven chambres and no mo
And each one is separat other fro
And she may have in each of tho
A child / and so with seven go
If goddys will be first thereto
And the kind of woman also
If hot of kind be the woman
And has great lykyng to the man
One chamber or two or three
Of them that in her matryce be
Of great will open there again
That aman has by her layne
The sede falls in them anon
And they close again each one
And if that sede acordaunt find
It waxes further in his kind
And if that other chaumbers be
Open / and it be that she
Know man again that same night
Or on the morrow by day light
Or the second day / later naught
And the sede be therein brought
They spear to and hold it fast
And norysshe children at the last
And so long they should be borne
Latter than other are beforne
As they ware get sonderly
But understand not thereby
That every time that aman
Knows flessly awoman
That the seed in her rote take
Many things may lettynge make
But it behouyth that he and she
Be both to gether atempre
For if aman alecheroure be
And haunteth many as men do se
The seed of him is of no might
For feebleness of fowlynge right
And if aman hold him fro
That he no woman come to
And than does as ye wotte
The seed of him is so hot
When it is to his chamber brought
It brennyth and wastyth all to naught
And if the man be of tempre
And if the woman not so be
But brennyng hot and of good will
It shall the seed in her spylle
And if they both be of tempure
Their seed shall in his chamber dure
Fest there in and so ground fast
That yt shall come to man at the last
And if their together coming
Be glade and merry in all thing
Of glade semblant their child shall be
As they ware both at the assembly
And if they assemble them wrothly
The Other shall be the child truly
If the one be glade the other naught
And the child be bytwyx them wrought
The child shall be sometime blythe
And sometime great felnes kythe
And if that it befall so
That the one of them two
Has any man greatly in thought
When the seed is to his chamber brought
That seed may lycknes take percaas
Of him that in their thought so was
The.lx. questyon
Which is the best thing yt may be
Or man may have tell it me
HUmylyte is the best thing
That is under heuyn king
For he that has with him humylyte
He is endued with virtues three
Unto god and himself also
And his neyghbore unto
Al things are loved thereby
And god loves it greatly
The angels that in heuyn are
For humilyte might not fall in care
With the other that fell out
For they ware vnleel and stout
The great flode scapyd Noe
By the goodness of humilyte
That him made of naught also
And at his will them shall for do
Trustyng steadfastly that he
Was ever and without end shall be
And keep well the commaundment
That his son when he down is sent
Shall in earth give man unto
Toward god and man also
To do good and wyckydnes let be
And couetys and envy fle
And take unto him pacyence
With charity and abstynence
For who so has these three
I wys aleel man is he
And after for his humilyte
In heuyn may he crowned be
With angels before god of might
Where ever is day with out night
The.lxiij questyon
Hardynes of man and dread
Whereof come they I the read
Boldness and dread of man
Whereof they come tell I can
They come of the complexcyon
And I shall tell the areson
Thou knouest yt me^ made ware
Of ye four elements that are
Save that god gave him ghost
And after aman has in him most
Of wete of dries hete or cold
Shall his complexcyon betolde
And these four even be
Raynynge in man / than shall he
Be neither coward ne hardy
Lysten I shall tell the why
If kelth not overcome the hete
Nor the dry overcome the wete
Equalyte than of hete / kylth / wete and dry
The heart of man shall than lie
For the euynhode of them tho
And styre neither to ne fro
And if the hete the kelthe over go
And the hete the kylth also
The body begins for to shake
And the heart to styre and quake
And for the hete is hardy anon
And dredyth not that he lokyth on
If the cold be master over the hete
And over the dry be the wete
The body waxes cold at need
And the heart weke and full of dread
The.lxiiij. questyon
Whereof may it be fall
Man to have meselry or scall
SCall and meselry also
Of the woman come they tho
A woman that is hot of kind
And aman her in her flowers find
The flowers are both hot and dry
And the man than by her lie
And get a child perauenture
That child shall be of nature
Other be scalled or mesel
The nature it is so fell
That it in the woman takes
Of a blood that it all makys
Menstruum that blood we call
That bredyth meselry or scall
Which raygnyng in woman
It is but folly to come to man
But aman shall know his wife
In intent to get a life
To worshype god that him wrought
And when she is with child brought
He should come ny her no more
Untyl the child ware bore
Nor forty days should naught
Such precept to Noe ye aungel brought
The.lxv. questyon
Ware althynges of goddys making
Made at the first beginning
GOd made of his might althynge
At his word and bidding
But all the creatures that he forth brought
At one time made he them naught
For it ware again kind by my thought
A thing that of matter is wrought
But if the matter ware before
Or that thing of it made wore
For long is stone or tree
Or the hows made be
Also find I many things yet
As worms coming of mannys swet
As lees and other worms mo
And some of mannys flesh also
And of mannys flesh them feed
As worms that in hands bread
Scarbode is of fylt a neet
A worm that is so great
Of howndes come howndflees to
And worms of wicked air also
And if these things latter be
Than that that they come of / thynkes me
That god at the beginning
Made not at ones al thing
And al things he made I wys
Unto the lest worm that is
The.lxvj. questyon
Tell me now after thy wit
The fruit in earth who norysshys yt
ALL the fruit that in earth grows
And all that man therein sowes
Al noryshys god of his might
And for that has he them dyght
The four elamentes to find
Each one noryssheth in his kind
The earth sustayneth wha^ he to him takes
The air noryssheth and it makes
The water it fedeth and grene it makes
Of fire / here and waxyng it takes
These four make ripe every fruit
Whereof men suffyse their apetyte
Right as who should sethe mete
Four things behooves him to get
Fire and water air and vessele
Or else is it not sodden well
The.lxvij. questyon
The bestes that have no wit
How wax they ragyous tell me it
GOd made each best as we find
And gave each wit after his kind
And each kind has knoulegynge
After his wit of some thing
And that wit may sone away
In manner as I shall the say
Aman may rekyn and find sone
The.xxvii. day of the moon
In time of June right esterly
A sterre him shows on the sky
And be it night or be it day
If a beast it behold may
Or the vmbre in water on night
It shall wax ragyous anon right
And if it man or beast than byte
It shall become rageous streyte
The.lxviii. questyon
What beast is it that ye find
That lengest leueth in his kind?
AN Erne leueth longest as I trow
Of all the beasts that I know
The erne every day will fly
In to the air up so hye
Higher than any man may se
And fresshe and new becomes he
And in long life he contynueth
That so often him self renueth
The adder also has long life
And under earth he dwellyth ryfe
And under stonys and in brynkes
The kelyth of the earth drynkys
His hyde he newyth every year
And becomyth young and fair
Be he not slayned with beast or man
A thousand year well live he can
And when a thousand year is gone
Horn his head growyth on
And shortly after begins he
A fair dragon for to be
But al they fare not so
Some dye or they come thereto
And some are slayned here and there
Or else al to fell they were
The.lxix. questyon
Fedyth god al thing
That is in earth of his making
GOd made althyng good
And to al he sendyth lives fode
Fruit on earth and flesh on land
And fysshe in water and on sand
To mannys fode is ordenyd all
And thereby he live shall
Beasts so are fed also
Of that the earth comyth fro
Fowls some in earth are fed
And some in water their life is led
The fyssh lives by his mete
And each of them will other ete
The worm in earth is feed also
And this sendyth god them unto
Unto all that he has life lent
He has mete to them sent
The.lxx. questyon
Fysshe and foul and beasts echone
Have they sowles or have they none
Ryghtly sowles for to sey
Is such that it may never dey
For if the body do well here
The soul shall be assocyat to aungel clear
And that is called soul of skyl
That god gave only man until
Wherefore every other creature
Is under man by right nature
And for that should he
Over al beasts master be
Have soul that most wysdom can
Or else ware beast like to man
Beasts and fowls and fysshes al
Have no sowl ryghtly to call
If thou say as some men do
All that lives has soul there to
Trough which sowl the body sterys
Etyth / drynketh / seyth and herys
It is no soul it is but an onde
That god has lent the^ here we have fond
For no good ne can they do
But that man them noryssheth to
Than have they wit of mannys techynge
But of them self have they nothing
If wit of them self wore
Their soul ware of might the more
But their soul that I a yeanyng call
When the body ded shall fall
It faryth as an onde of thy mouth
When it is gone no man it couth
But vanysshys in the air away
And no lengar ne dure may
The.lxxj. questyon
They yt in time of goddis son be
Shall they live as long as we
OF body such as now are we
But so great shall they not be
And we are now of lengar life
Than shall be than man or wife
For the world is now stalworthyare
Than shall be than and myghtyare
And the earth gives us to
More fruit than it shall them do
And the plenty that the earth yeldys
Both in woddes and in feldys
Is now of much more might
Than it shall be than with right
And the wine is strongar now
Than shall be than and to more prow
Wherefore ought we by right nature
Have lengar life and lengar to endure
Than they that in those days are
And febleare so forth shall they fare
For he that may than the people among
Live a.C. year he lives long
And ever shall men dounwarde go
Of life and of strength also
But in wit wax they shall
And in malice with all
And of their bodies lessen shall
Twyxen this and domys day
The.lxxij. questyon
Tell me now some ensure
How long this world shall endure
NO man in earth may verily
The preuyte know of goddys secresy
It is so great that wit it ne can
Another beast / aungel ne man
Ne no thing but it be he
That with god be full preue
And that he loves alther most
As his sone or the holy ghost
For they with him are all one
In godhed / or else wot it none
For every erthely man will naught
Tell to every man his thought
Ne his will in preuyte
But if he preuy with him be
Also reserueth god him to
Many things that he will do
That he will of no kowlegynge
Give to man / ne to nothing
But to his own sone only
For he is next and most him by
And that time that gods sone
Shall in earth a man here wone
Men shall him ask if the world here
Shall endure seven thousand year
And anon answer he shall
And say ye / and more withal
For of the fathers preuyte
Of the more / shall none the wyser be
We find well that god of heaven
Has made planettes seven
The world to keep by day and night
And to eueryone gives that is his might
And every one is assyngned to
A thousand year to keep also
And when every one haueth on this wise
A thousand year done his seruyse
Than shall ever god fulfill
The world longer at his will
For as al planettes governors be
Euenso governs them he
And for he is above all
Wot none but he what shall befall
The.lxxiij. questyon.
Leave any men in the world mo
Out of the earth that we on go
Sir yles are many in the sea
A thousand and foureho^dred and two there be
Some are inhabyted men withal
And some not / nor never shall
There are some that men in dwell
Of our lykenes every dell
And of hyth but hanfulls three
And berdes hangyng to their kne
Their here down to their helys is
Of flesh they feed both of goose and gryce
Their beasts are small euerychone
A speech they have by them alone
A another isle is by the sea
And therein are small meyne
A spanne long are they and no more
And all of fysshe live they thore
In the water are they be light
And up on land they are on night
Yet there other yles be
With men al so great as we
With one eye in the front no more
And us with two they dread full sore
They ete flesh / and with the fellys
Clothe they them / and with nothing else
Yet there is a another also
The folk that longs thereto
Are tayled right as sheep each one
And then live by fysshe alone
Yet is there one of our shapnesse
But they are much less
And they are ever in fight and were
Again a great manner of foul is there
In cold winter tho fowls great
Take they / and hold them for their mete
A another is there yet nere hand
There is a manner foul dweland
Though they were in fire brought
Brenne ne should their feathers naught
A another folk is there feyre and sound
That have vysage like a hounde
Yet is there folk in a country
And feeble and lene they be
On son and on the moon they believe
And sacryfyce to them they give
But when they will sacrifyce make
Sum will his best frendis take
And pray him company him bear
At the sacrifyce he shall do there
Than shall he cause to be made a fire
And when it brenneth full shyere
Than shall he cry that al may here
For love of the son so dear
Or the moon whether it be
Or an image made of tree
Lepe I in this fire al hot
For my merit well I wot
Thus him self there he brenneth
And the devil his soul wynneth
And tho that bear him company
Anon shall do the same folly
The the other folk about bydene
Sit till they be brenned full clean
And than shall they their ashes take
And relykes shall they thereof make
Another land there is also
That sacryfyce the devil unto
Of their bodies / and are full blythe
They cause to be made a sharp sithe
In lykenes of a horse sho
And that shall have haftes two
By the here than shall he hanged be
Hye on lofte that men may se
The sithe in his neck shall men lay
The haftes in his hands twey
And he shall cry as a man in a rage
For the love of his image
That is my god this shall I do
And kerue his own neck in two
The head hangs still on hye
The body falls hastily
That body shall be with honor takyn
And done out all that is therein
And salted as they will it have
And by that image do it grave
Upon the grave shall written be
His own name / and how that he
Made to that image sacryfyce
And on what day and in what wise
Another manner is there yet
Of folk that are of little wit
When they sacrafyce should make
A hye tree they do take
And do styke it in a place
With many about making solas
And about that same tree
Four swerdis naked shall set be
The points upward euerychone
Than shall he betaken anon
He that sacryfyce shall do
Be bounden foot and hand also
And up drawn shall he be
Into the ouermost end of the tree
There shall he cry the folk unto
In the worshype of god this I do
They slake the rope they him with drow
And he fallyth sharp I now
Upon the swerdes he does light
And goyth to the devil right
Than shall men that body take
And a fair stead for it make
Two days / and that whyl shall be
A cry made in all the cowntre
That such a man made sacryfyce
And if any are so wise
To come and ask any bone
Have them and come thither sone
Or he to his grave be brought
For of their bone want shall they naught
Than come some unto that stead
And unto him make their bid
And at their goddys foot shall he
Afterward grauyn be
Yet is there a country ferthermore
When a man is deed thore
If he have a wife then shall she
All quycke by him graven be
And also the man by the wife
If she or he forlese their life
Another folk there is and that
Will ete for deyntes hound and cat
Another is when he wife shall wed
He dare not with her go to bed
The first night / but he causes blythly
Another gest to lie her by
For it is peril a says to life
To touch first a weddyd wife
Another manner there is well fed
But they will never wife wedde
They say that one wife ne can
Hold her ever to one man
Yet is there one that men do call
Land femynne that men call
All of wymen and no men
For therein live no man can
That passyth five year of age
Over five days there to have heritage
But in four sesons of the year
Men and they gathere full nere
Having with them felowrede
Lokyng after no syburrede
Viij. days fare they thus no mo
Or the men depart them fro
And if any a child have
Be it so that it be a knawe
They shall it keep and norysshe well
Five year / but more no dele
And than shall they drive it sone
To the land there men in wone
They labor and till their met to wine
And over them they have a queen
That co^maundyth them as queen should do
Holdyng them in peace and to
Countres are there many mo
But long it ware to tell of tho
But of these some shall mere
At the coming of the false prophyte
But many shall there first be lorne
For a king that shall be borne
That shall the world seek valyently
And shall do wryt them as men find truly
And many of those shall he spyll
And with other their lands fill
The.lxxiiij. questyon
Why are some men blake in town
Some whyt and some brown
IN three manners it comyth to
That a man is colouryd so
One is through kind
As we in our bokys find
For if the man broune be
And the woman as well as he
And if they to gether have engendrure
It ought to be broune of nature
If the one be broune the other whyt
And they assemble with great delyt
Whose seed with most delyt festys
When it in the chamber restys
That seed shall the child be
Lyckenyd most and shape of ble
Another manner there yet is
If a man be fed amys
And pourly lie and pourly go
It makyth him not colouryd so
As he should be with right
If he ware kept day and night
The third cause it is also
The land and the air thereto
For ever the hoter the land is
The browner is the folk Iwys
The colder land the whyter aye
For their skyn is not brent al day
The.lxxv. questyon.
Tell me now per company
Whereof comes felony?
Wicked humors make male^colye
And that engendereth felonye
The wicked humors ki^del smert
And gloweth so^ while about the heart
And chafeth it as a fire
And makes it derke and black for Ire
And that darkness answers than
Up into the brain pan
And when the brains are derked so
Great deal of wit they for go
And smite anon in felony
And that makes the heart so dry
But when that the humors sease
And of their glowyng do release
The heart rests and still lies
And the derkenes fro him wendeth
The lymmes lyghten euerychone
And in good point becomes anon
The.lxxvi. questyon.
The beasts yt god i^ earth has wrought
Of one hew why are they naught?
FOr they of gods lykenes not be
Diverse colors have they perde
And by cause they on the ground frete
Diverse herbs to their mete
Some are cold and some are hot
And some are dry and some are wete
And if a beast / when it great is
Gothe etynge on the gras
That most is hot and dry also
The young shall black hew come unto
And if the most part be hot
Read shall that young be god it wot
And be they moist it shall be graye
And be they cold white for aye
And if that a beast find
In one place erbes of sundry kind
And she feed her of them all
Of diverse hew the young shall fall
And after that she most of eteth
Most of that hew the young geteth
And of all beasts fares it so
Wild and tame where so it go
And al has god dyght this thing
At his will and his ordaynyng
The.lxxvij. questyon
They yt ete or drink more tha^ need is
Whether do they well or amys?
HE that eteth more than he should
And more than his kind would
He does harm his body unto
And some unto his soul also
And dystruccyon of mete does he
That other withal might fed be
A gain god such aman is
Wors than a beast I wys
God ordained man to feed
After that his kind has need
And the remnaunt to save
Untyl after he need have
And a man that is wise
Shall ete onys a day or twyse
A man that etyth at meel
Untyl him thynkyth that he is well
And layth efte above more
Or that be dygestyd before
His stomach encombres he
And the hete that therein should be
And so his kind he bryngyth down
And him self to corrupcyon
And his wit in that is less
Than a beast that etyth gresse
For there is nether horse ne kowe
From that he has etyn I now
That will ete any more
Till after he hongar sore
And seeing a brute beast does yt
More should a man that has wit
Wherefore I say a mys they do
That ete more than need is to
The.lxxviij. questyon
Which is the best thing of ye man
And ye worst that thou reckyn can
THe best thing of the man I wys
And the worst the tongue it is
For by his tongue a man may get
Silver and gold drink and mete
Love / worshype and favor
And enhauntynge of honor
Also for the tongue he may
Have shame and bylony alday
For such words may he say
That perauenture may cause him to dey
The tongue has another gold ne fee
But much honor makyth she
And the tongue has no bone
But it does break many one
And also well / ware it the will
Might it speak the good as ill
The.lxxix. questyon
Whether has aman more conyng
Of hot mets or of cold etyng
A Man that vsyth hot metys
He chasys his body when he etys
The senewes norysshys he thereby
And all the veins of his body
He warmyth the brain and the heart
And makyth them of wit smerte
Cold metes does not thereto
But keleth senowes and veins also
And styreth the humors wicked and ill
That the het held still
And they kele a mannys wit
Wherefore necessaryly behouyth it
When the wits are so cold
That they the less conynge hold
The.lxxx questyon.
How may aman fle felony
And wrath and malencoly?
First shall ama^ have i^ his thought
Him yt hi^ has made of naught
And thank it him in all sake
Yt he at his likeness would hi^ make
And he should him bethynke also
Of the death that he shall to
That no man may fro shrynke
Also shall he him bethynke
How god has given to many
Mayme and sekenes of body
And to some rotyng of lym
And what health he gave to him
Ete and drink after skyll
And sleep as that reason will
That evil well overcome he shall
That him stereth to grieve withal
And so may he felony
Overcome and malancoly
The.lxxxj questyon.
Whether to have is more bate
Love of woman or her hate?
A Good woman is good to love
And hold unto man's behoue
For of good women comethe naught
Neither in warke nor in thought
But good and worship where she goes
And every man therefore her commends
For but good and truth and law
Does she mean to her felawe
And such a woman love men shall
And do worship and honor with all
A wicked woman shall men hate
And fle from her in the gate
If men may not fle her still
Find menys to eschew her wicked will
For men shall never have but folly
Of wicked womannys company
Much peril and great blame
And among men eschap much shame
Her manners are full of vice
Much like to a cocatryce
Which is a beast as men of tellyth
And in the water most he dwellyth
He has a great head and a long
And many reth crokyd and wrong
Twyes in the year he is grieved
With worms that in his teth do bred
And when he felyth them so
The land does he draw to
And lies again the son aldaye
Gapynge as wide as he may
Than comyth a foul that god would make
The worms out of his teth to take
Aprycke on his head is dyght
Shapen as an edyl right
The foul crepeth in all nyce
In to the mouth of the Cocatryce
And the worms etyth echone
The Cocatryce felyth anon
That the worms destroyed be
Anon her mouth closyth she
And would that foul ete for his mede
That has don to him that good deed
The byrd felys her not well
And wotyth that she will him spyl
With his mouth that is sharp before
The Cocatryce smytyth thore
In the mouth again the palate
That she openyth her mouth with that
The byrd fleyth out in haste
And spedyth her away fast
Such seruys yeldyth wicked women
For all his good deed / unto man
Wherefore shall good men still
Fle from their wicked will
The.lxxxij. questyon
A man that is in health and young
How angerys he for a little wrong
I Shall tell the how and why
The heart is lord of the body
The body is his wardeyn
And his servant with all his meyn
For all that lyketh the heart unto
Lykes to the body also
The eyne are gythers of the heart
The erys messyngers smerte
The tongue his aduocat is she
And the fete his summers be
The hands are his knights ensured
The hertys castle is the head
The brains so are castle as I have sayn
That of the heart reseuyth fayn
If the heart a word here verily
Be it scath or be it merry
He may it not wit ne know
But his messyngers to him it show
And if that the tidings him like
He reioysys of it wonderlyke
And al his men have joy and blys
That the heart so merry is
But when ye messyngers tell him any thing
Whereto he has no lykyng
He styrreth and quakyth wrothfully
And al his men are than sorry
Al are they wroth and quake also
As the wot them self do
His enemies are glad therefore
On his men waxyng glowyng sore
If the heart be strong and wyes
And love the castle there he lies
And his men will se until
And their scath not norysshe will
Blame / charge / and the wroth all
Upon him self take he shall
Holdyng him fast it again
Than shall his men rest and be feign
And his foos overcome be
That have reryd his meyne
But if the heart be feeble and vain
His enmyes brennes him again
And if he have no might in resestyng
Their assaut him assaylyng
And his men are as feeble as he
And remembres naught her aduersyte
But to mysdo they styre them smerte
And all the sorrow bydeth the heart
Wherefore the body may take no scath
But the heart fell it rath
The.lxxxiij. questyon
How may a man blameles be
To love a woman and him not she
Love may they together well
As in god I the tell
For god them together festyd lovely
Of both making one body
By cause fruit should be bytwyx them two
To goddys name worshype to do
Wherefore should either love other in blys
As the will of god is
Of love there is another manner
After as the world vsyth here
As a man to love his wife
For her fayrnes and her good life
For riches and her lewte
And wit that in her may be
Aman that a good wife hauys
That him both wynnys and sauys
And is of good manner withal
The world will that he her love shall
And for these skylles shall woman
After the world again love man
But who so loves other well
And of these virtues have no dele
Much to blame are they trewly
For they love vnskylfully.
The.lxxxiiij. questyon.
Whereof comethe the fatnes and why
That aman has in his body?
OF flewmys that in the body renneth
Comes fathed who so them kenneth
And if the flewmys be sweet
Through the body they shete
And the hete of other things
Sle they / and themself sprynges
And lordshyp they have anon
Over the humors euerychone
And when that they masters are
The swetnes of them turns yare
In to greece / than gather that
And makes so the body fat
If the flewmes be salt within
The flesh and the body they brenne
And company anon they take
Unto colors yelowe and blake
And when they in lymmes and veins sprede
And tho colors with them led
So long as they therein dure
They let the body of norture
And holdis it so lene always
That it no greece gather may
Therefore it is good to many one
To let the flewmes out of him gone
For aman may be slaynyd thereby
Or make great scabbe on his body.
The.lxxxv. questyon
Shall a man awoman chastyse
With betyng when she does amyse
GOod wymen to dele with all
Their mysdedys shall be but small
And if she have ought mysgon
She repentys her anon
Shonysshyng her mysdede
Men shall than her chastyse and led
With fair words and soft
And shall noman morn her often
When a wicked woman has myswrought
And shonysys it right naught
But does use it al tyte
And has therein great delight
If man her blame that she did so
Another time shall she wors do
If men them vpbrede or beat
The less she shall her folly let
Men shall her warn twyes or thryes
With fayrewordes if he be wyes
And with gift and fair hetyng
Will not leave that thing
Man shall her let and fro her go
For it helpyth man no another to do
Unto woman that wicked will be
For of the deuyls will is she
And the devil her dwellyth in
That causyth that she cannot blyn
Wherefore there is no better wone
But let the devil and her alone
The.lxxxvj. questyon
What thing is gelousy to know
And why is man in gelousy so
OF gelousy are manners mo
For to tell of than one or two
One gelousy of god it is
When aman heryth spekyng amys
Again god or again his lay
As herytykes do al day
There should aman be right gelous
And to his law ware defyrus
Yet shall aman gelous be
Over his friend if any have he
And that gelouse is co^maundment
Of clean heart and loving intent
Yet is there a gelousye
That comyth of foul heart and folly
And of wicked humors also
That the heart gatherys unto
That gelousy comyth of woman suerly
Enhauntyng them wyckydly
The heart brennys of wicked thought
Rest in the body may it naught
Mete and drink he forgettyth al quyte
With all his joy and his delight
If aman be in such a strife
For her that is his own wife
Out of his thought he shall it late
And think that it may him not bate
His borden from his back he through
And cast it unto grownd low
And think if she good would be
Should non her keep so well as she
And think till he faryth so
He sekyth after sorrow and woe
And if he love one wodly
That not is his own properdly
He trauaylys in gelousye
Of brennyng heart and great folly
In angwysshe great live he sha
And his time losyth al
He is like that man I wys
That night and day fyghtyng is
Again the wynd it for to take
His own at his will to make
And ever the lengar he does so
The forther is the wind him fro
The.lxxxvij. questyon
Shall aman love his friend
And opyn to him al his mende
HIs good friend aman love shall
With good heart and clean with all
After his might and with him dele
And of his charge bear somdele
For if he right good friend be
No goodness forgetyth he
But of diverse manners are they al
Many that men friends call
Some there are that well can shake
And aman fair semblant make
Saying that he is his friend
Untyl he know ought of his mende
He proferys him his will to do
But there is no trust there to
What he does he rekenyth not nor hew
But that it be his own prow
For did he ought again him
He should find him fell and grym
And he loves me lightly inbate
That for a little will me hate
He that loves me for mine
And not for me / that is venyme
But he is friend to mannys behoue
To trust in and to love
That naught assentyth to the will
Of his friend that may turn to ill
And seruyth not glosyngly
But chastyse him of his folly
And though he apertly him mysdo
He ne says him no word unto
In that friend shall man have fyaunce
And love him and him auaunce
The.lxxxviij. questyon
May aman his profyt do
And no trauayl have thereto
SIthen ada^ ete through wicked read
The appul that god forbede
Fro that time unto now
Might never adam do his prowe
Ware he never so mighty
Without trauayl of his body
The world that men on affye
Is but vanyte and folly
Therefore it behooves pouer to travel smere
And rich men in their heart
As to think how they shall save
And multyplye that they have
And also think on heuyn king
To make him self a good ending
Better it is before to travel hard
So that the prove come afterward
Than of trauayl here to slake
And foul endyng after to make
For without some trauayl
May no man in the world auayl
The.lxxxix. questyon
Shall men do good and alms deed
Unto pouer that have need
DO good / men shall to a pouer man
That him self help ne can
And what befall ne rekyn shall
But for goddys love do all
Unto the rych is lent richesse
To help the pouer that has dystresse
He shall think that pouer borne be
Of adam and Eve as well as he
And to his lycknes are wrought
And that he has his riches naught
Of him self but of goddys love
His body to keep only
But his soul with all to tyle
And think that after a while
He shall dye and go hens somwhere
And nothing shall he with him bear
But as he came so shall he fare
Both pouer / nakyd and bare
Therefore shall he pouer give unto
Gladly departing therewith also
For that he geuyth that shall he find
And that he leuyth him behind
Is the worldys and not his
Whreof he shall have little blys
The.lxxxx. questyon
How shall aman him order me say
That is among the folk alday
A Man shall him contain wisely
Among men and curteslye
And with fair semblant every whore
Spekyng at mesure and no more
And here other speak when they begin
Though he have no delyt therein
For it is great curtesye
To cast unto him his eye
That he spekyth hold with all
And to his words lysten he shall
Yet shall he keep him every a tide
With out bost and also pride
Though he more rycher were
Than any other that are there
For ever the myghtyare he be
The better behauyour of should be he
For to be curtys and meke
If he will honor seek
And if he shall speak any whore
He shall him bethynke before
And cast than in his heart right well
Or that he speak any dele
And when that he shall tell his will
Give bold and fair semblaunt there till
And be abashed of nothing
Whyl he is in telling
Aman that shall a reason show
A baysshyng as he does it out throw
His knowledge is then lost among
For they will say that he says wrong
Be he among foles brought
There his wisdom helpyth naught
Wherefore he him contain
Untyl he be among wysmen again
As folly among wysmen is wyke
Wisdom among folys is like
The.lxxxxj. questyon
Is a rich man less worthy
That he losyth his good holy
Or a pour worthy the more
That riches on him encresyd wore
AS long as the rych has his good
He is regardyd as of noble blood
He is called and herd over all
And every man him trust shall
If his good fall him fro
He losyth might and honor also
With courage and doutynesse
And becomyth coward never the less
At cownsel shall he be not regardyd
His words shall nothing be trustyd
No man shall his tales believe
No faith shall men to him give
And the talkyng shall be I wys
That he was / and now not is
The pour when he waxyth rich
His neybors shall their trust in him pych
He is holden wise curteys and good
Though he be a churl of blood
His word is hard and byleued well
Though it be lesyng a great deal
Frendys he find anon right
That sometime set of him full light
If he come any where to the mete
He shall be set among the great
To counsel shall they call him gladly
That before regarded him lightly
By the rich it fares even so
As men sees by a merchant it do
That boroweth great good al day
Of rich men that lend may
And have naught thereof greatly
But trauayleth and lives thereby
And when the rich his good will have
Than is the merchant but a knave
And while he the reches occupied
He was of them rich counted
Of this world it fares so
Of all that men may gather them to
Has he naught but whyl he is here
His lyuelode / and he be on bear
Has he no more than he first with began
He comes and goes a pour man
But the pouer that rych was
Is holden gentylare per caas
Than he that naught hade
Nor naught has for he is bade
The.lxxxxij. questyon
The wicked manner of men we se
And wicked custom whereof may yt be
OF wicked will and wicked heart
And of malice yt gathers smerte
For man has the wit
To know his manner and reason it
And to let it if he will
And to change it from evil
He that wicked custom has also
Good may he not think ne do
Nor his heart in rest be
For in unclean thought trauayles he
Through the which suerly
His time he wastyth and body
As he that goyth beastye
That he might sykerlye go by
That goyth about without towns
Both by dale and by downs
And nedles trauaylys him amys
For all his own folly it is
The.lxxxxiij. questyon
Seeing iron is so hard and strong
And for to work it somewhat long
How was first made and wherewith
Tongues hamour and the styth
GOd commanded al thing
And al are of his making
And wist whereof man had need
For to do with any deed
To him his messyngers he sent
The aungel that to adam went
He bade him iron take in his hand
And than was it as nesshe as sand
And thereof first made a styth
And hamour / tongues to work with
He went and shapyd them euerychone
And they became hard anon
And when it to the dyluuy came
Noe of such lomes made than
That ware forged after tho
And kept them and after made mo
And so to this time wrought are they
And shall be to domysday
The.lxxxxiiii. questyon
Do they amys that alday swear
By their god what so he were
HE that swerys by his god falsely
For he should trust in him perfytly
Whether he good or wicked is
He does evil and amys
For I trow there is no man quyke
That his god holdyth wyke
And falsely for couetys
Swerys on him by many wys
He is devil and deuyls like
And wors than an herytyke
For his god falseth he
For thing that little while shall be
And though his god be false and wicke
And he forswere him by him thycke
His neighbor for to begyle
He synneth greatly I tell the treulye
Law nor treuthe has he none
Nor among men should gone
That by his god falsely will swear
For he would aman with falsed dear
The.lxxxxv questyon.
Shall aman of his body
In althyng be chaste treuly?
CHastyte a man shall hold
Of his body many fold
Of false oaths and of lechery
And of al other velany
Of evil sight of evil speak
Of evil going and of handelyng eke
Not to sleep in evil ne in evil read
Nor ete nor drink in evil stead
Ne none other thing do
But as right him gydeth to
All that is evil is to fle
And of all that shall a man chaste be
Sethe god at his lykenes has sent
Shape to man / and wit him lent
Evil to know and it to forsake
Than does he amys yt thereto will him take
And he that him therfro holds al
To gods company he shall
And to his angels also
When time comes there unto
The.lxxxxvj. questyon
Whom shall ama^ love with al to go
And whose company fle fro
IN fair dewes that may them mete
shall aman go and in herbs sweet
There may he go sykerly
Without hurt of his body
For who so in the fire goos
He brennyth both foot and toos
By this shall thou understand
With whom aman shall go company / and
Go with the good to and fro
So shall thou not mysdo
Nor noman shall to the say
Where thou goyst by the way
But worshype / honor of the will talk
And than in the dew thou doyst walk
But if aman in him self be good
And he turn there to his mood
To haunt folys company
To him thereof shall come folly
And evil report and wicked name
And vylony of folk and blame
And they shall say he would not go there
But he of their manners were
Ware he not of their assent
Therefore in their company he went
Every good man will him fle
And this upon the fire goyth he
Wherefore should men with good go
And that are folys fle them fro
The.lxxxxvij. questyon
Whether is better so god the save
Riches or pouerte for to have
RIches are there bodyly
And there are also goostly
And who comyth the one until
May have the other if he will
For he may have that is need
The soul and body both to feed
He shall find how him he serve shall
And his co^maundment do al
Iche man shall find to do it well
And for his riches the more every dele
If men worshype the pouer ought
That is but wind and turnyth to noght
For of that honor that he had
May he not be feed ne clad
Wherefore to bodyly profyt
Than is it more delyt
Men say a rych chorle is he
That pouer and worshyppyd men se
The.lxxxxviij. questyon
Shall aman honor yt are ny don
Like a rych man and agrom
THat man that deem will lelly
He shall also debonarly
Apouer ney do honor to
As he should to a rych do
Though the rych be hye set
And the pouer stand on his feet
But if they both in like caas be
Of iugment to here the sentence perde
No More shall he be dysdaynyng
To here the pouer mannys saying
Than he shall be of the rych mannys matter
So as ye pouer ma^nys be as good or better
Iugment came of god wherefore it should
Be delyd even if men would
The.lxxxxix. questyon
Delyt the pouer in pouerte also
As the rych in their riches do
APouer man that has no mete
And to fyl the womb he may get
He delyteth him more therein
Than ye rych with al yt he does wyn
For if the pouer have his fylle
Of mete and drink he has his will
And the rych is hongre ay
To gather more than he may
And have he never so great fee
He may never fyllyd be
For better at ese than is Iwys
The full man / than the hongre is
The pouer so of his hongar sesyth
The rych in his hongar contynuyth
He that long has seek leyne
When he is helyd he is feyne
And in his heart reioysyth more
Than they that ever in health wore
When the syckenes of the pouer
That hongre is may ought cover
With mete and drink that he has gat
More delight he has in that
Than he that is in riches sad
That never no defaut had
The.C. questyon
Shall aman ought make his roos
Of any thing that he doos
These wise me^ should bost them naught
Of nothing that they have wrought
For o^fence wa^e it god unto
And his own dishonor also
Be he never so doughty
Ne so valiant of his body
And he bost him of his deed
Men shall scorn him to his mede
And though they say it not / they him hold
For a liar of that he told
But a coward of no bounte
For men shall wene he doughty be
Of much more his bost will make
Than ever durst he under take
Than say some that by him sat
That he is a lyare in that
He was never worth a torde
But a bostar in word
And he that doughty man is told
And a hardy and a bold
Kepyth his tongue where he does resort
Sufferyng other of him to report
That is much more his honor
For it is an old auctoure
He that him self bostyth in town
With an horse tord men shall him crown
The.Cj. questyon
Why are howndes faster i^ their kind
Than other beasts that men do find
OF all the beasts that I wot
Is none of nature so hot
As is a hounde in his nature
And when he shall make engendure
Of their hete the great glowyng
Makes them together fastenyng
As two pieces of Iron fare
In the fire when they wellyd are
Ley that one that other upon
And give them a stroke anon
Through hete they together bind
And so fare hounds in their kind
The.C.ii. questyon
He yt of a another man's wife couetis is
Or of his good does he amys?
HE that is covetous and wode
After other man's good
Other his wife whether it be
Great sin and amys does he
And such aman as we of tell
Is called the deuyls grype of hell
For the devil coueth aye
To draw unto him that he may
And for such a covetous is known
That more would have than his own
For a man should with another do
As he would men did him to
What man would him take fro
His wife or his goodys mo
I trow it would make him loath
And sone make him wroth
Wherefore should man hold him even
As the angels do in heaven
There none couetyth others blys
But holdyth him content as he is
The.C.iij. questyon
May no man eschape / but dye
By riches / might ne any read me sey
Every man is made as thou have herd
Of four things in this mydelerd
Of fire / water / earth / air
Both the foul and also the fair
And these four each one be
Contrary to other in qualyte
And the body may not blyn
Where these four are gathered in
But to gether have they battle
Ey unto one of them does fail
And be the one down clean brought
The body lives lengar naught
Therefore where so aman be
Be it on land or on see
The death cleuyth ever by him
As it ware his own lyme
His lyme might he away cast
But death cleueth over fast
So that power ne richesse
Ne conyng ne doughtynesse
No excusacyon may aman make
When god will the death him to take
For good and bade shrewe and which
Young and old pouer and rich
Strong and feeble folys and wise
Great and small may none escape this
The death that he most to go
Unto the earth there he came fro
The.C.iiij. questyon
Syttyth god to answer ay
Them that folly speak alday
Him to ferforth aman strykys
That answerys him yt folysly spekys
But if his folly should him dear
Than is it good that he answer
Sometime spekyth a fool folly
And noman wottyth of whom ne why
And men answer him nothing
Is none the wors of his saying
But if men answer him thore
They bold him to speak the more
And than is a fool al hot
To speak more than he wot
And his words will not let
To confyrme with words great
And so engendryth great folly
And great hathred and envy
And if men him answered naught
His iangelyng were to end brought
Therefore he goth on the egg of a sword
That answers unto a foles word
The.C.v. questyon
What conyng of all that you tell can
Is most grievous unto man?
OF all conyngis the greuosest
That is clargy and eke the best
The sotylest and the most of wit
And the most worshyped is it
And therefore is it called art
For it arteth on each part
His herer unto conyng
And of al thing knowlegyng
And sonest may it avail
But art of the most travail
Than is writing of all that be
For he that writes may not se
A bought / while he is in writing
Nor here no speech nor other thing
Nor think / nor lysten / ne naught do
B^t al only there unto
Therefore of all trauayles thou wotest
Than is writing alther most
The.C.vj. questyon
They that travail for to win
And can not live / why will they not blyn
MEn that travail and ese them naught
In great couetyse are they brought
And great traldam live they in
And yet they cannot blyn
But they shall trauayl and go there fro
And all that travail in such woe
Shall another of it make him blyth
That little did for it / but labor light
I say not yt is gottyn in have
Shall a man dyspend in wast
Ne shall of that feel no dysese
But he shall with that sit at ese
And never the less at mesure spend
Of such as god will send
Ese them that not have
And life and soul so may he save
But he that of trauayl can not late
For couetys of wordly bare
And has I now without that
He shall never man be fate
But ever the more he may win The more care is he in
Wherefore it is good in trauayl strong
Though a man wyn / to rest among
The.C.vij. questyon
On what manner may it rise
That men wax soles and unwise
ON many manners comes it to
That men foles wax also
Some are simple as foles borne
Some by evil their wits have lorne
And some by lesyng of their blood
Some for their brains wax al wode
Some of wicked humors begin
And some for the hete that they have be in
Some by cause their heart is of feeble might
And some for evil sight on night
And some that wake over fast
That dries the brains at the last
And many manners are there mo
That works unto man great woe
The.C.viij. questyon
Is the soul or the body woe
When one shall depart another fro
FOr soth it greuyth them fulsore
And full morning are therefore
Felyng great ang^ysshe and woe
When that one partyth the other fro
And if it at their will wore
They depart would never more
If a young man took awyfe
That he louyd as his life
And she him more than althynge
Who so betwyx them made departing
Departing them again their will
That should plese them both full ill
So is it betwyx the soul and the body
They are spoused to gether inwardly
And so great love together hold
That they never depart would
And if they febely have wrought
Sythen they together ware brought
Than chely is the sorrow al
When that they depart shall
For the body rottyh away
The soul goyth to pain for aye
Than it is no wonder that they be wroth
And dredyng of thyr departing both
The.C.ix. questyon
Whether shall men hold the more
A old man or a young man that wore
UNto neither shall men hold
There both are for fools told
For if the young a fool is
And he be instructed amys
The hot nature will in him glowe
And humors as a low
Which hetyth his heart and his blood
And makyth him iolyfe and wode
And while that hete lasts so
A short read should he assent to
But an old fool if there be one
That has little hete or none
And he be tangeled with iolyte
A right kind fool is he
For his time he had before
And now would have one more
And that iolynesse men in him find
Is of force and of no kind
And so is he ioylyfe amys
For he shows more than in him is
As he that flesh would sethe kyndly
With the claryte of the son verily
But to such fools old
Shall no wyseman him hold
The.C.x. questyon
Why raynys it in one year more
Than in a another and wherefore
Sometime that it raynyth so
In one year more than in a another do
First of goddys will I it fet
And than of gouernal that he has set
As of mouyng a the planetys
And of the signs that them metys
After as they meue low or hye
Make they the years were or dry
And al comyth of goddys will
Rain it / snewe it / or be it still
The.C.xi. questyon
Why has not god man so wrought
That he ne had sinned naught
IF god had man first so dyght
That he after ne sinned might
Of meryt ware no man worthy
For no goodness of his body
All the meryt again. should go
Unto god there it came fro
And of goddys blys no man worthy wore
But he deseruyd it had before
And ware man made on such manner
That he might no sin do here
His goodness of him lefe ware naught
But his that him so has wrought
For of that that the behouyth need
Art thou worthy to have no mede
But the man that of his will
May do both good and ill
And does the good / worthy he is
For to come unto that blys
That god has ordained him unto
And that the devil should also
Shame him / that god had man ordained
To have the blys that he of myscaryed
By the works of his own will
The good to take and fle the ill
The.C.xii. questyon
Is it good to have entormetyng
Again every man of althyng
AMan shall clyme on a tree
That he thinks esyest be
The fruit for to come unto
If he will his profyt do
And he that on the son beme will clyme
He may break his neck some time
For he that clymeth over hye
May hap sometime to wrye
Even so it faryth with mannys demenar
That entermetyth a boue his powar
Late them that are rych and fers
Entyrmet them with their pers
And the pouer whare they fare
With such other as they are
But sometime the pouer is pert perde
To strive with the rych in his pouerte
But with the rych to entyrmet
He may lose and nothing get
And if that it so befall
That arych him to cownsel call
Entyrmete him of no more
Than that he is called fore
Late rych with the rych man
Do the best that they can
And work they good work they ill
Ever the pouer hold him still
With his like about he go
And entyrmete him as with the
Whare he shall have dread none
To hurt his head again astone
The.C.xiii. questyon
Tell me now for what sake
That god would yt world make
GOd made ye world as was his will
The palace of heuyn to fulfill
Of the which angels fell out before
For the pride they in wore
And for that the trynyte
Was not worshypped as it should be
Than made he man that bliss to win
That aungel had lost by sin
But al tho that here are wrought
Shall not to that blys be brought
None but tho that are worthy
For the good deeds of their body
The.C.xiiii. questyon
How was the world made as it is
And how holdys it tell me this
When aungel had don amys
And was fall out of blys
God commanded there unto
Be made the world and it was so
Fire and air the^ highest drew truly
For they ware lyghtest sykerly
Earth and water down them dressed
And the water upon the earth does rest
And al four by and by
Ware hangyng in the mydel of the sky
And fastenyng have they none
But of goddys might a lone
God made the world of the likeness
Of an egg more ny less
Be the shelle take I shall
The fyrmament that closyth al
Be the white the water take I
That is between the earth and the sky
Be the yolke that is innermest
Take I the earth that is lowest
And when the yolke is sodde hard
Awhyt is in the mydwarde
Whereby I take hell
For it is fortherest from the shel
And so is hell heuyn fro
Ferrest put in sorrow and woe
And echone is as thou may se
There god them ordained first to be
The.C.xv. questyon
Is any other folk than we
That of the son has the claryte
Diverse other the world are in
And fer from us they been
Under us they are loo
That their fete again owrs go
And who so all the world might se
In one son both be we
But sometime when here is night
Than have they the day light
And here sometime shynyth the son
When that they none se cone
For when the son to rest goyth thore
Half pryme is it to us and more
And the roundnesse I wys
Of the world makyth this
Our somer and our winter also
Is both on us and them unto
But after the son drawyth to endyng
When here is erly than there is morning
And in other placys mo
Of the word it faryth so
That some have somer very hot
There other have winter cold and wot
And god has of the son I wys
Made the way that makyth all this
The.C.xvj. questyon
How long may the world be
And how broad and thyke is he
HE that the world beholdyth all
It is rownd as a ball
And for his roundnes it behoue thanede
That al one like be long and bread
Bud the thycknes also
Is even with them two
And in caas it ware al plain land
As the palm of my hand
Aman should every day
Go certain miles by the way
And should have no lettyng
Of water ne no another thing
The world for to through fare
He should not come there
His purpose through to go
By a thousand days without mo
And that same shall he find that does yede
The thycknes as well as the bread
The.C.xvij. questyon
Why shall god clean also
The folk of this world undo
GOd shall this world destroy I wys
For a better than it is
For ware it now that here stood
A rych palace and a good
And the man that it longyd to
Another hows had also
Well sympler and less worthy
And it fortuned than chaunceably
That of the palace fell awalle
And lose thereof the stones and al
And that wall might he not make
But he would the stones take
Of the little hows beside
I trow there should no another betyde
But he would his paleys dyght
As shortly as he might
And of his hows have little care
But that his palace fulfilled ware
He ware a fool that would chese
The better for the wors to lose
So faryth god I warn the well
For of his palace fell agreat dele
And of this world no another cares he
But that his palace fulfilled be
The.C.xviij. questyon
The fowls that in the air fly
How are they borne on loft a hye
THe thycknesse of the air ahye
Is the chief cause truly
That the fowls a lofte are borne
Else ware their flight forlorn
The air is thycke and moist also
And will dysclose and close again to
And when the foul is a lofte
His wings styreth he often
With the warpyng of his wynge
He does the air a sondre mynge
Which waxes thycke and he is light
And that him holdyth in his flight
And that the air is thycke above
Aman may well prove
Who so in his hand will take
A yard and it smertly shake
It shall bow in the shaking
And that does no another thing
But thycknes of the air withstandys
The yard in shaking of thy handys
And so it withstandyth the fowls al
In their fleyng that they ne fall
The C.xix. questyon
Among al other tell me yet
The rain yt fallyth whens comith it
BAyne is water of the sea
And with blast of wind mountys he
And when the wind is on hye
The son that is hot kyndly
Draws the water fast him to
The wind puttyth fast after also
As that men may se sometime
A dew lyeng till half the pryme
But when the son his hete yeldys
That dew in town and in feldys
He takyth up and draws fast
And comes to the air at the last
And is there thyckened in cloud
Than comyth wind and blowyth loud
And beryth it in the air euerywhore
Till it be waxen thycke and more
Than begins it to be heavy sone
Aod may not long a boue wone
But fallyth in rain hastily
And when the rain is down clenly
The cloud becomyth white and fair
Which is a the keelth of the air
And that wastyth the son there nere
And so becomyth the sky clear
The.C.xx. questyon
Hayle stones that fall also
From whence and whereof come the
OF water gathered under ye sky
And of kylth of the air on hy
As when a cloud is but thyn
Little pour having him in
And above in the air fly
Wyndes that are cold and dry
And when that cloud should in drops fall
With coldness are they frosen all
And that yt should have fall rain to ground
They fall than in stones round
The.C.xxj. questyon
Whereof are the tempests all That sometime among us fall
IN that year that somer is cold
And the moisture manyfold
That is in the air holdyth still
And may not clensyd be at will
But gatheryth fast and holdyth thore
And in winter encresyth to more
Than be fallyth in some party
That the earth cleueth for dry
The spered wyndes than come out
And spread them al about
In to the air their way they take
And thereof great tempest make
The.C.xxii. questyon
Tell me now for it is wonder
Whereof comes the thounder
'RIse out of the earth arecke truly
As a smoke men may se perfitely
And exalacyons they hight
Which ascend in to the air right
Hot and dry are some of tho
And some hot and moist also
When they all the highest are
Of the air the wynd that is their
He that / that is hot and dry
May the hastlyar up a hye
And when the wete comes thore
For moisture gatheryth wynd sore
And waxyth cold thereby
And thyckeneth also wonderly
And than is it in sondre cast
And clouds made with wyndes blast
And the exalacyon that is dry
Is cast a mong the clouds hye
From one to another as a balle
But at the last out it shall
And when he brekyth it asonder
Anoyse it makyth that we call the thonder
For dry among the wete will naught
Dwell when the wete pressys him ought
And by ensample thou may se
On what manner it may be
Let a man his handful hold
Of whet or silver which he would
The more he the hand togethtr pressed
The more will it out threst
And so it is to understand
Of the the other before hand
The.C.xiij. questyon
The wind yt blowyth by la^d and see
Whereof ever may it be
I Have told here before
Evalacyons what they wore
And he that is hot and dry
As I said will up a hye
Now when it comyth clouds among
If the clouds be thycke and strong
They cast that exalacyon
To and fro up and down
And be cause it is dry at the last
It turns in to wyndes blast
And ware that exalacyon hot
It turns in to rain wot
The.C.xxiiij. questyon
How yssueth water of hills hye
That seemed rather to be dry
ALso as the veins lie
In mannys body low or hye
So the earth that we on go
Is under full of veins also
And open the hyde the vein upon
The blood spryngeth out anon
Even as well upon the crown
As on the foot beneth down
So the veins that in the earth lie
Have water runnyng low and hye
Up and down to and fro
As the veins in earth go
And there they the earth feeble se
Hye or low whether it be
It brestyth out and rennyth there
Hylle or dale whether it be
The.C.xxv. questyon
The water that is in the sea
Why is it salt tell you me
IN the mydel of the world a see is
Where the son ever brennyng is
And by that brennyng hete
Are the waters that should be sweet
Become bitter and salt also
Which see renneth the other unto
Whereof al salt it is
And ye hete of ye son makyth much of this
Ware it that the sea still stood
And ware the water fresshe and good
The stynke thereof so great should be
That all the fysshes in the sea
Should dye anon both great and small
And that ware unto man great bale
And on the land should be such stynke
More than I can express or think
Which should on land so be here
That it should all the people dear
The.C.xxvi questyon
Whereof ever may it be
The lyghtenyng that we here se
Clouds sometime on the sky
Run to gether up a hy
With so great fire and so kenne
That fire lyghtenyth them between
And that is that we lyghtnyng call
And sometime down will it fall
Sometime slekenys it a lofte
In the cloud and that is often
The.C.xxvij. questyon
The waters that ebb and flow also
Whereof come they and whyter do they go
ALl the waters that ever be
Al they come out of the sea
And thither again they go
Unto the sea where they came fro
The waters that fall in earth synkyth
And as a spryng the earth them drynkyth
And when they are come thither
In veins gather they to gether
And they that go in by one side
By another out they glyde
The earth takyth and geuyth all
The waters that are and on earth fall
The.C.xxviii. questyon
Hills and roches ware they naught
Made when ye world was first wrought
FRom the first time of adam
Unto the time that Noe came
Was never hyl ne rock with all
But as plain about as a ball
Rain fell than to earth none
No tempest was nor storm
But in the time of Noe
For the great iniquyte
And for the sin that adam wrought
God sent astode that sesyd naught
Xl. days and xl. nyghtes
All the world destroyed he thore
Save them that in the arch wore
And the course of the stood them among
In his coming was so strong
That where it neysshe ground fond
It did fret away both earth and sonde
Stone and rock field and town
Al was turned up se down
But when the flode began to slake
And little stremes for to make
Stones on hepes so with stood
And turned no more for the flode
And when some with stood so
Mo them gathered unto
The neysshe ground the water does fret
For no hardness it does let
And afterward the sonnys hete
With frost and snow to gether do mete
Dryuyng the stones to gether hard
And became rocks afterward
Wherefore by the foresaid skyl
That flode made both dale and hill
The.C.xxix. questyon
Shall the dyluuy come any more
In the world that was before
GOd has hight unto man kind
As we in our books find
That never shall come to destroy man
Such a dyluuy as than ran
But if of sin man not amend
A sharp scourge he shall them send
That scourge is a swerd of wrake
That one shall again a another take
And o^e shall a another for do
And destroy the world also
The.C.xxx. questyon
When Noe should to the arch go
And of each beasts took with him two
Why would he evil beasts take
As scorpyons / adder / and snake
NOe did them in the arch ley
For two things that I shall the sey
That one for the co^maundment
That god him be the aungel sent
And that durst he not break
For he saw much wreke
Of each one two god bid him take
For he would not them al new make
Wherefore his precept did he
And of them came / that now be
That other was for mannys hele
For but if venomous beasts feel
Ware dwelling in each country
So full of venom the earth should be
That it should enuenym al thing
As fruit and corn that in earth did spring
And so should no man thereof ete
But he dyed by that mete
And the beasts ne live I wys
But of the venym that in earth is
And they cleanse the earth by kind
Of the venym they therein find
And al their venym is truly
Of the earth that they live by
For take an adder for asay
The venemost that men find may
And in a vessel him do
That no earth come him to
With flesh and bred keep it thore
Fyftene days and no more
Al his venom shall be gone
And hurt may he do none
For venom in him none does abide
Except he on the earth do slide
The.C.xxxj questyon
Whereof ever comyth the gold
That man so precious does hold
THe mine of gold without mys
In veins of ye earth waxyng is
And silver also with metals mo
Which the earth come fro
But gold and silver men find between
The earth there it is pure and clean
Men gather it and dyght it so
With art that they have thereto
But there men it most find
Is a land by the west Inde
In gyse of brass men find there
By the bank of the sea euerywhere
But every man can not it dyght
For to bring it to the right
The.C.xxxi. questyon
Tell me now if thou wot
How out of ye earth spryng waters hot
WAters that al hot so spring
Have it somwher in their re^ni^g
By brymstone has his course
And not fare from his sours
By ye hete of y^ kind of brimstone
The water becomyth warm anon
And warm spryngeth out also
And who so leyd his nose thereto
He should anon feel full well
Sauoure of brymstone somdele
The.C.xxxii. questyon
Among al other tell me one
Whereof comyth the brymstone
QUycke brymstone that men call
Comes of lyghtenyng that does fall
Upon roches by the sea
Either on hills whether it be
And so hard down are they cast
With air above and wyndes blast
That they fall the earth within
And that earth they lie and ^ry^
Which earth ex^st hight thereby
For it is burnt so wondersly
And that turns to brymstone
Which wellyth up sometime anon
The.C.xxxiij. questyon
Carboncles and other stones mo
Whereof may come al tho
OUt of Nygre that is a see
Where cokyls are in great plente
And hang to gether two and two
Openyng in the water hangyng so
The rain falls from above
And entres in them there they houe
Wha^ they have received the rain astound
They close them and go to ground
And at the ground / lie they thore
Well a.C. year and more
And they that are of that country
When they seek them in the sea
Their vysages to couar they begin
With netes blathers blown thyn
And in black sow them also
For the fysshe will fle them fro
Than go they down them to win
And perlys find they them with in
White and round but neysshe they be
But when they come out of the sea
And the air have them smyt upon
They become right hard anon
But tho that are not in season
Nor their time have after they went down
To be fulfilled by the ground
They stynke as a pyllyd hownd
The Carboncles come also
Of cokyls as perles do
But Carboncles of small hayle fall
And in fresshe water be they all
They by the ground wylbe
Two hundred winter well or three
And they stynke and fare amys
When their time not fulfilled is
But all the rain that does fall
Turn not to stones all The rain that the first day fallyth
Of the moon in January / that men callyth
And the moon be in that sign
That unto that thing be dygne
If that rain in the cokyl go
Perles shall come of tho
And hayle that to fall is wone
The eight day of the moon
In feueryere and the moon be right
In a sign that Cancer hight
And the cokyls that hayle in take
Carboncles thereof they make
But that rain and hayle each dele
Fall full seldom wit you well
The.C.xxxiiij. questyon
Of this world now tell me
How many lands therein be
Land but one is there none
Who so al hole might se there on
But for departing of the sea
That departyth them in three
Three lands are that we call
With out small yles all
But al are one land to gethere fest
And al upon one ground they rest
And who so might the land be hold
That no water let him should
Al hole and one he should it se
And so made god it to be
The water above in sonder it castys
But under hole and fast it lastys
The.C.xxxv. questyon
Might any man on dry land well
Go ye world about every dele
IN earth no man might go
The world about to ne fro
For he should find many lettynges
And that of many things
He should find wastenes full great
There nethere were drink ne mere
But wild beasts many one
Ready to tere him as a bone
Ware a hundredth men on one wrought
And if that ne let him naught
The open earth should lettynge be
That swellyth and geuyth again the sea
And many lettynges other mo
If he est and west will go
And if north and south go he
Many other lettynges be
For three zones shall he find
Where no man may live in one kind
One is hot and cold are two
May no living thing be in tho
And goddys will it is also
Sha^ no man be mighty thereto
The.C.xxxvj. questyon
Might any man sail night and day
That had the wind with him ay
So long y^ his ship came vnre^t
To the turnyng of the fyrmament
A Man that in a ship wore
Though he sailed ever more
Yet should he not come nere the sky
And I shall tell the why
The earth is round as a ball
In the mydel / and the sky over al
Is alyke fer there fro
And the water also
Al about on the earth does stand
And though a man took vnderhande
To sail an hundred year
He should the sky be al so nere
When that he from home went
As when his hundred year ar spent
The.C.xxxvij. questyon
Why made not god man to be
Ay young / ioylyfe / and of pouste
Rych and long life him lent
And at his death to blys have went
HAd god made man on that manner
As that thou tellyst here
God as I think in my thought
Had the devil great wrong wrought
Which for a thought fell to hell
And mo with him than I can tell
Should aman than be of long life
Rych / young / and ioylyfe
And have here al his delight
And than fare to heuyn quyte
Noman is worthy to come thore
But if he have don wherefore
God has granted us unto
Be cause we shall here well do
Health with out sycknesse
Joy and delight and great richesse
And life also without end
For the death that men here to wend
Than is it for to reken right
No other but as a by^des flight
That flies here in / yonder out
And be a man never so stout
Nor so young / nor fair to day
To morrow shall it al a way
I would not live a thousand year
And al my delight have here
And than unto heuyn gone
I had lever be there a non
For one delight that is thore
Is worth a thousand here and more
And therefore ware it much scate
Thither for to come so late
The.C.xxxviij. questyon
Which are the angels tell me this
That receives mannys soul to blys
Each man an aungel has him to
To keep him that he not mys do
And when the soul at the end
Shall out fro the body wend
And it unto god be dear
The aungel that was his kepare here
Shall come with great melody
And of angels great company
Receyuyng him unto mede
And to joy him led
After the time that is to sey
That goddys son shall dey
But or he dey on the rode
Al go to hell wicked and good
But al alyke shall they naught
Be payned / but as they have wrought
And some shall be in fre prison
Till time of his passion
But when the great dome shall be
Men shall agree at wonder se
Soul and body to gether go
And to gether feel joy or woe
And the soul that to hell shall went
The devil that him help to shent
Shall receive him and sey him to
Thou have don as I bad the do
Thou withstodyst not my will
Nor my techyng unto ill
Wherefore shall thou go with me
Ever more in pain to be
Thus shall they be receyuyd thycke
Good with good / and wicked with wicke
The.C.xxxix questyon
I pray the master sey me now
Which is better of the two
Good works without chastyte
Or works wicked / and chaste to be
GOod works would I chese
Though I chastyte forlese
For be thou chaste of thy body
And thou work wickydly
What virtue than have thou in the
Percaas is than thy chastyte
For sycknesse that thou may not dure
Or for kelth of thy nature
Or for age that thou may no more
What meryt art thou worthy therefore
And than for to go sle aman
Or to rob in wode or fen
Or thy neyghbore to begyle sotelly
Or his good to forlese falsely
What is worth such chastyte
When thou of othere have no pity
But that unchaste life ledys
And he be good of al dedys
His sin does no man dear
But al one he shall him bear
And god alone he synneth to
And that may he sone fordo
With alms deed or other thing
But he that is of wicked beryng
And of wicked deeds blynne ne can
He synneth both to god and man
And lyghter is it for to win
Forgyfnes of god of sin
Than of god and man both
For the mo that are to him wrought
The more labor pees to make
For the better caas than would I it take
For to leave chastyte
Than wicked work / and chaste to be
The.C.xl. questyon
What thing may it ever make
Earth din yt does the earth quake
EXalacyons hot and dry
That are drawn up right hye
And there with clouds driven fast
And hard down to earth cast
Which in to the cleft of the earth go
As the clouds shones them fro
Comyth than hot wether and rain
Which spereth ye cleftes of the earth again
The exalacyons dwell therein
Spered and may not out win
To and fro they move them thore
But out may they no whore
And if the exalacyon be
Gathered there great quantyte
So hard meue them they shall
That the earth quakyth with all
And sometime more sometime less
After as it is of mykelnesse
The.C.xli. questyon
Tell me now if thou cone
Whereof is ye eclyps of son and moan
OF y^ moan is eclyps no dowte
In full moan or there about
and wha^ ye full moan sta^dithe south
The son is than north
A shadow of the earth ryseth sone
Ascendyng up a boue the moon
And houeth long while of the night
Betwyx her and the sonnys light
For light has the moon none
But that the son her smyteth on
And so the moon her light leaves
For the shadow it reues
But as she goys and her pace makys
Fro the shadow / light she takys
Eclyps of the son comenly
Is in the new moan or there by
When the moon is new right
She is dark with out light
And that time the son and she
Be one side of the sky shall be
And the son beme as it is wone
Should light down on the moon
But if the moon under alyne fall
Line of eclyps that we call
Light she takes naught anon
Unto she before be gone
But unto that she there shall houe
Be twyx us and the son above
Her derknes ronnyth from our sight
Much of the sonnys light
This is the kyndest eclyps to se
That may of the son be
Other eclyps three we find
Of the son against kind
One came in time of Noe
Again that the dyluny should be
Another shall be in soth to sey
I^ time that goddys son dey
And in the birth shall be the thryde
Of the antechryst as shall be kydde
The.C.xlij. questyon
Sterres that men se fall
How fall they and from whe^s come they all
UNderstand sir vyturly
That no sterres fall fro the sky
But I shall tell the what it may be
That the folk so falling se
It is a fire that is abydyng
In the highest of the air brennyng
Next to the spear of fire
And when the night sometime is shyre
Sparcles of that fire clear
That much hane of their matere
Fall and perce the air on night
And come so unto our sight
And semyth as it were a sterre
That by the sky did slide there
For a sparkel coming from so hye
Unto a sterre is full lykely
The.xliij. questyon
Tell me now or we further fare
How many heuens that there are
WE lay yt there are heuens three
Whereof the one is that we se
Turnyng about and is the sky
And that heaven is bodyly
And to our sight it is blew
As it ware of asur hew
The the other heuyn of to tell
Is there good angels dwell
That is goostly / and is al
Of hew as it ware crystal
The third is goddys se
Where he sytteth in majesty
Therein is much blys
And of the gold of hew it is
Of seven heuyns also we tell
For seven planetes that therein dwell
But ryghtly of heuens to lere
So are no mo but these three here
The.C.xliiii. questyon
Tell me now how hye the heuyn
Above the earth is for to neuen
SO hye is heuyn the earth fro
That if it were now also
That a stone in heuyn wore
And weyed a hundredth stone and more
And it should from heuyn fall
Unto ground among us all
It should be seven year
Or it to ground came here
And never thelesse so fare they are
That a good soul should fare
Fro earth in to heaven stye
In the twynkelyng of an eye
The.C.xlv. questyon
The fyrmament that we over us se
Of what might may it be?
WHo so know it al aryght
The firmament is of great might
Ever abought it turns aye
And rests never night nor day
For this world had no festenyng
Ne ware his about turnyng
Ware it that it still stood
There nys man ne fysshe in flode
Foul ne beast ne nothing here
That life has that ought might stere
All that ever we stere or go
Or flyt other to or fro
Al together is us lent
Of the turnyng of the fyrmament
Therefore may thou se Iwys
That of much might it is
The.C.xlvi. questyon
Tell me now of what might
The planetes are and what they hight
PLanettes governs al thing
That lives or has in earth waxyng
And each planet of his kind
To norysshe and give his mind
Of the child each alyke
While the mother go therewith quyke
Each one than shapyth his
Of every lyme that in him is
And of planetes are but seven
Whose names I shall to the reken
Saturnus the first we call
He is highest of them al
Most and strongest is he
And he passyth in his country
The.xii. signs be one and one
And he dwellyth in each one
Or he pass half three year
And his planet of power
The man that is borne therein
And he dounward go to begin
Dounward shall he go of might with all
And if he regne regne he shall
And this planet regnyth of power
Onys in a thyrty year
And his regne and his might
Is in a sign that Lybra hight
And dounward he rest takes
To a sign hight aries
The secounde planet is Iupyter
He is not from us so fer
Of great riches planet is it
Of marchaundyse and of great wit
And among men of good loos
And be the.xii. signs he goos
Dwelling in each one
A year or he about have gone
The man borne in him that is
Of.xii. year best of state he is I wys
In canser he regnes hard
In Caprycorne he goyth dounwarde
The third planet Mars is hight
Planet of war and fight
And of blood spyllyng there men dey
By the.xii. signs lies his wey
And in each one truly dwellyth
Forty days or he passyth
He that is borne in that planet
Within a year may he byete
And four and thyrty days thereto
His deeds and his will also
His regne is in Caprycorne
And in Canser his might is lorne
The fourth planet is the son
And if you understand conne
It is the planet of great worshype
Of kings and of ^ordshype
Kepar of earth we him call
And by the signs he passyth al
And in each when he comyth thore
He dwells a month and no more
That is borne in that he may every year
Change his work and his manner
His regne so is in A^yes
And in Lybra he him restes
The fyfte planet venus is
Planet of love / delight and blys
He that therein borne shall be
Feeble heart shall have of vanyte
But in four hundredth and forthy days
May he change al his ways
His work and thought holly
The.xii. signs goyth he by
And in each one of tho shall he
Seven and twenty days be
In piscibus rayneth he stabely
And down he goyth in Gemyny
The syxte planet Mercurius
That art and conyng geuyth us
By the.xii. signs lies his ways
Dwelling in each one seuentene days
He that is borne in him may
Be two hundred and the fourth day
Change his courage and his thought
And the works that he wrought
The moon the seventh planet we say
Planet of water and of way
By the.xii. signs she goyth also
Dwelling in each one days two
He that is borne in this planet
In a month may he byete
And change his work and will
Be it good be it ill
In Taurus comyth her regne unto
And abesses her in Scorpyo
And all the world is not I wys
So great as one planet is
Save the three that lowest wone
Uenus / Mercurius / and the moon
The.C.xlvij. questyon
Tell me now this ones yet
How many manner of waters is it
OF waters many manner there be
First the water of the sea
That al other waters come fro
Water of wells there is also
That their hew and manner
Four times change in a year
Wells are spryngyng else whore
Four days in the weke no more
I stood theris that rennyth ay
All the weke save saturdaye
A stood is in the est see right
Which rennyth ever on night
And a day it frosen is fast
But on night may it not last
Yet men may a well find
In the yles of the sea of ynde
That who so put a stafe therein
As of a fire it should bryn
And it nothing slekyn can
But only the breyne of man
Other wells are yet mo
And who the water drunk of tho
Of some good memory should he take
And some forgetfulness should make
Some amerous will make the men
And some will bareyne make wymen
Some will make yren and stele
In the fire to tempre well
A great well yet is there one
Standing stylle as any stone
But who so makyth solace there by
Anon it rennyth hastily
Some waters are hot of kind
And some cold as men do find
And the kind of the ground causyth all this
Where any water rennyng is
And al is at goddys will
Both rennyng and stondyng still
The.C.xlviij. questyon
Now would I wit of the sea
How many sees that there be
SEes we find there are three
Whereof one hight the sea beter
Al about the earth goyth she
And is salt as men may se
That other see the black see hight
And enuyrons that other right
The third is called the stynkyng see
Therein may no man living be
For the stynke that it comes fro
Enuyrous truly that other two
And god has made them so to be
Of his will and his potence
The.C.xlix. questyon
Why has god the world made al
Rownde about as a balle
THere are many skylles why
But three I find pryncypally
For his own lycknes is one
There non end ne is upon
For he ne had begynynge
Nor never shall have ending
And seek ye world never so with travail and mi^d
No endyng shall men therein find
Another sail is comodyte
Why it behooves so to be
For all the forms that thou know
Rownde contaynes aldermost
Now is it so at the begynyng
That the world contaynes althyng
Wherefore it behooved thereto
That it should rownde be also
The third cause is for the sky
And I shall tell the how and why
Late with war here fill a can
And when it is full break it than
The wax shall be of that shapnes
As was the can more ne les
Now is the say round and fair
And conteyneth fire and air
Water and earth ferrest therfro
And al behooves round to be tho
The round say the fire round makes
And air of fire roundhed takes
Water within air also
And earth within all tho
And because the sky as thou have hard
Is round and al are in him sperd
All behooves them round tobe
As thou ere on the wax might se
The.C.l. questyon
Why is the moon cold of kind
And the son hot as we find?
The son is well of hete
And the moon of waters wete
Now is that one dry and hot
And that other moist and wot
The hete of the son does spryng
That in earth is al thing
But with that hete may they not dure
But if they have withal moisture
And that the son heteth on day light
The moon keleth upon night
And gives it moisture there unto
Therefore al things spryngeth so
Should the son give us for aye
His here both night and day
Man nor beast should live no throw
Ne nothing should in earth grow
And if the keelth of the moon
Should ever among us wone
And of the hete have ryg^t naught
Should no leuyng thing forth be brought
Therefore has god ordained so
As the world has myster to
The.C.lj. questyon
Now I pray the tell me this
Which is the most thing that is?
OF al thing that thou most
Gods marcy is the most
For no mouth may speak I wys
No heart think how great it is
Unto tho that will it crave
And desires it to have
It is greater than al earth may be
Or all the water in the sea
It passyth al leaves that spring
Or herbs / or any other thing
Ye / an hundredth thousand fold
It passys all that I have told
The.C.lij. questyon
Whether may grauel of earth mo be
Or drops of water of the sea
GRauel of the earth is well more
Tha^ al water dropes yt ever wore
For all that were or yet shall be
Al they come of the sea
And for an handfuf of grauel
Behouyth of drops a gooddele
For well smaller is one hope
Of grauel / than a water drope
And water may be no where
But if earth be under there
And many miles may men gone
Dry / where no water is on
And the sea was never so deep a flete
That deper ne is under earth great
And if water upon roche stand
Under roche is earth molde or sand
Now is the earth apperyng small
And wide strekes him with all
In many stedes whare water is scante
Is fownde of earth good plente
Wherefore grauel of earth say we
Are mo than water drops be
The.C.liij. questyon
May the grauel ought told be
Or water drops of the sea
ANd the word such a thousand wore
As it is and well more
And that it should last with all
Such a thousand as now shall
Four and twenty hours right
Are in the day and in the night
And each a noure for to rekyn
Syxty points are therein
And though it might so befalle
That in each a point of all
Were borne a thousand men or mo
And full hoar were each of tho
Yet should the dropes of the sea
Be mo than tho here is be
And yet is gretnes of earth more
Than all the dropes wore
And goddys mercy most of al
He that with heart to him will call
The.C.liiij. questyon
Now would I wit vyturly
How many sterres are on the sky
IF all the men a live wore
That have be ded here before
Sythen that adam was forlorn
And all that ever shall be borne
Betwyx us and the world be gone
Ware every one borne anon
So mykel folk there should not ware
As sterres on the heaven are
But for the heyght of the sky
Ne may no man se them perfytly
All the sterres that there be
But some apertly may men se
How above with the sky they go
As it them beryth to and fro
When some go down / some up are went
With meuyng of the fyrmament
The.C.lv. questyon
Can thou of angels tell me ought
How many god in heuyn wroght
And how many be left therein
And how many fell for sin
GOd of his mercy and might
Of angels.ix. ordres has dyght
And in each order made he
Many a legyon for to be
And a legyon I wys
Six thousand and six hundredth is
With fyfty and six thereto
And al him worshype to do
But there fell out of each one
Al so many as came to one
And also many were they tho
As halfedele the folk and mo
That have be borne and borne shall be
And when fulfilled is each a se
Of angels that fell away
Than shall it be domesday
That god shall deem both good and ill
And that shall be at goddys will
The.C.lvj. questyon
Which are the most of beast or man
Or foul / or fysshe that swyme can
Beasts are mo than men
And fowls mo than beasts such ten
And for each afowle also
A thousand fysshes are and mo
For thereof is the most plente
Of al creatures that be
God made man of earth and slyme
And best of hete he made him
Fysshes of water / foul of air
And all that he made is fair
And if god them al had wrought
Of earth like / as he did naught
They should have risen al also
At domesday as man shall do
But for earth is in them none
Wherefore to naught they turn each one
The.C.lvij. questyon
Of all the world tell me yet
The delectabelest stead which is it
WHere amannys heart is fest
And for to dwele were leuest
There is the delectabelest stead
To him that he may on trede
For were aman in acountre
In the fairest stead might be
And had all that he had need
Him to clothe and to feed
And his heart loved else whore
No delight had he thore
But there aman louyth well
Though it be foul every dele
There is his joy and his solace
More than in any other place
The.C.lviij. questyon
Which is more prowes and best
That in town or in forest
PRowes in town as I wene
Ne was ever worth abent
It is no prowe / it is folly
And keytefnes and mysardry
Some man to aman full ryfe
Will draw unto a man his knyfe
That would never do so
And it ware betwyx them two
But there are things three
That make him hasty to be
One thereof is folly
That makyth his heart skyp a hye
Anothere that he hopyth well
That the folk elke adel
Shall stert on him and him hold
And let to do that he would
The third for his brains small
Are turned by wine or ale
And he that assailed is
Holdyth him still in all this
He dredyth that he should him slo
And lord^hype feryth he also
The third hedredyth his enemy
For he wortyth not if he be dowghty
His own lostes he feryth eke
Which makes his heart meke
But ware they both in the forest
There might men know the best
There should no men on them wonder
No man put them in sonder
Ne no baylyfe ware thereto dread
But the boldar him forth bid
Wherefore prowes in town as men tellys
Nys but bost and nothing else
The.C.lix. questyon
If aman have an evil wife
Or be pour or of feeble life
Or have a wemme in a lym
Shall a man vpbreyde it him
NO man ought othere vpbreyde
For no lack that on him is leyde
If he have an evil fere
So god may send to him here
If he in pouerte fallen be
So may perauenture to morrow he
For the whele of adventure
No while will endure
And if he have any lack
Either on body or on back
Or any of his lymmes al
Upbreyd him naught what so befall
For he that sent him that every dele
May send it to the right well
Wherefore each man fayrely speak
That of his spech god take no wreke
The.C.lx. questyon
Shall men every man worshype do
And al their will do also
AMan should all this do with skyl
If that he might come there till
But no man may / no man can
Do the will of every man
Nevertheless do not amys
Worshype every man as he is
And fulfill every mannys will
That turn thy self unto no if
Do with good chere that thou shall do
To them that prays the unto
And for a little say not nay
To do their will if thou may
That thou desyrest shall thou find
And each man to serve the shall be mind
Thy honor shall wide wend
Every man shall hold the good and kind
Whereby may no ill of the tide
Thy good word goyth so wide
The.C.lxj. questyon
Shall he ought forgotten be
That to lykyng has served me
IF aman do me seruyse
Unto my will in all wise
I ought to forget it never more
Though the seruyse little wore
For he that does me liking
He gives me inoughe of his thing
And I ought his help to be
If he have need of me
For every man that does a good deed
Is worthy to have well his mede
And the good will of such one
Ought I ever to think upon
The.C.lxij. questyon
May aman him ought with hold
From her that he has in hold
That he no lechery do
When he has great will thereto
Full well aman may hold him still
And withstand his own will
Fro lechery if that he will
Though he great will have thertyl
Late him cast in his thought
How fair that him god has wrought
At his own lykenes to be
And that so fair a thing to se
Should be kept clenly also
That no fylth ne came there to
Were it now sir that a king
Gave me a robe of his clothing
Full clean I would it keep and bright
And worshype it at al my might
For much worshype to me it were
A kyngys clothyng for to bear
Even so should it with us befall
Of goddys clothyng are we all
And if we think to hold it clean
Our foul will that was so kene
Shall twyne away and pass for naught
And kendele no more in our thought
The more that men a fire leys in
The more and hotter will it bryne
And it will not leave brynnynge
But men it sleken with some thing
Even so brenneth lechery
In man that gives him to folly
And if he will that it be laid
Think on god as I have said
Also shall in his thought be
What mede comes of chastyte
And if he be taken in sin
What pain shall his soul be in
And thus may he kele shortly
His brennyng will yt was so outragyously
The.C.lxiij. questyon
The grettyst delight that is
Which is it tell me this
I Find there are delytes two
Bodily and goostly also
The bodily will not last
That men does there on is a way cast
It fares as the candel light
That now brenneth ferly bright
Now than is it out quyte
So fares bodily delight
Goostly delight is on other wise
As delight in god and his seruyse
And tho that delight them therein
For to keep them out of sin
Wit you well that they tho
In the pain of the woe
That they suffer their soul to save
Full great delight therein they have
And who so is therein brought
That delight ne keelyth naught
It waxes ay from less to more
Ever until aman come thore
There no end may be
Which is before the Trynyte
And there shall his delight betolde
More than here a thousand fold
Wherefore the most delight that is
Is to delight in god I wys
The.C.lxiiij. questyon
Tell me now if that aman
Shall ought delyt him with a woman
Delight with wymen are there twye
And which they are I shall the seye
That one is goostly with chaste life
As aman with his own wife
Flesshely know her well he may
Children to wine to goddys pay
And fro that time that he
Wotyth that she with child be
He shall him hold from her holly
Till it be borne of her body
This is delight of chastyte
That dygne and honest ought to be
Bodily delight there is also
That no time has reward unto
But every time that will him takys
His fles^hly lust he not forsakys
And that is purly life of beast
That another is good ne honest
And such a delight with woman
Should no man have that good can
The.C.lxv. questyon
If one host a another mete
Shall he anon on him shete
CUm an host with al their main
And another come them again
Smite ano^e ne shall they naught
Their cheueteyne shall have forthought
And be well aduysed and wise
And over se his enymes
And if he have hope in his mode
That his party may be good
He shall ordeyne his folk wisely
And be vygorus and hardy
And his enemes assail
As it fallyth to battle
And if he aperceuyng is
That the feblear side be his
He shall comfort his folk ycke dele
And make good vysage and bear him well
And fare a^ he had no awe
And in all that him with draw
Holdyng them fast to gether so
That none outraye other fro
If his fleing may not avail
But that other him assail
Uygorously he than withstand
And heart his folk to be doand
The feeble side parchaunce so may
With little scathe escape away
The.C.lxvj. questyon
Which members of the man are tho
That he worste might forgo?
AMan might no lym forbere
But if it him greatly dear
And some one might he worse for go
Than he might other two
For though he forgo foot and hand
Eere and eyes though him want
Yet may he be full hot of heart
And leave many day in quarte
But ware teethe and tongue forgon
Good life after had he none
For tho are the most hardely
That help to sustain the body
The tongue the mete turns al
Under the tethe that chewe it shall
And the tongue is made also
Unto god worship to do
The teethe gryndeth the mete small
That the body leueth withal
And for that aman may naught
Without these be forth brought
Therefore tothe and tongue are tho
That aman may worst forgo
The.C.lxvij. questyon
The first instrument who made it
And how came it in his wit
OF the children of Noe
Iaphet the youngest of the three
He contryued it and wrought
As god it sent in his thought
And of the sound he it took
Of trees that the wind shoke
And also of waters soune
That ran hard from hills down
Some soune was low and some hye
And thereof found he melody
An instrument he made anon
That melody to work upon
The.C.lxviii. questyon
He that is dome / defte and may not se
What spech in his heart thynkeh he
A Man that is borne to day
Doum and defe that se ne may
No langage ne may lere
For that he may naught here
Than behouyth him of kind
Nedly in his he^te have mind
Of the spech that Adam spoke
Or he goddys precept brake
That is ebru that god gave man
First when he to speak began
For if a tree a fruit here
Be it appul / be it pere
The fruit must take kind and hew
Of the rote that it on grew
But the kind of the tree
Sal change if it imped be
And but aman have impyng
Of langage through some lernyng
The first speech have he shall
That man was first lernyd with all
The.C.lxix. questyon
Why are some clouds of the sky
White and some blake there by
Clouds sometime are right thyn
For little water that there is in
Than comys the light of the day
And the son that shynes ay
Which geuyth on the cloud light
And the cloud that is of little might
Is through shyned there with all
Whereby white he show him shall
For through water may men se
If that it not deep be
The cloud that blake is to our sight
Is thycke of water and of might
And for the thycknes that he haas
May no light there through paas
Wherefore holdys it odrye
Not full mykel up on hye
And be cause it is thycke and low
Behouyth it blake to us to show
The.C.lxx. questyon
May no creature that god wrought
Wit goddys will nor his thought
GOd made never creature
Aungel ne man nor other figure
That might wit goddys thought
Nor his will till it was wrought
When he any thing will do
He says be made and it is so
But or he it in work fulfill
There may no man wit his will
God wottyth the thoughts of each one
But his knows right none
Save the holy Trynyte
For all one are they three
Sometime wottyth man what god do will
That is he that he sendyth until
By angels to tell him his thought
Else none wot it naught
The.C.lxxj. questyon
Yet would I wit if I may
If aman shall worshype god alday
Every man should with right do so
But their might is not thereto
For the body is feeble of might
And behouyth sometime rest with right
And but he rest may have
Long may he not the life save
Wherefore god honor he may
At serteyne hours of the day
And in serteyne time he shall
Travail to hold the life with all
And sometime rest shall he take
The body strong with to make
For after mete and drink is rest
To nature of the body best
And when he shall god worshype do
Look al his heart be thereto
For he that says to god his bid
And his thought be in other stead
The tongue were as good be still
For it askys with no will
Wherefore that god worshype shall
Speak tongue / heart / thought and all The.C.lxxij. questyon
Whereof may it be and why
That eyne sometime look bleryly
Sometime herys aman a thing
That is not to his lykyng
Or a thing of great pity
And he of tender heart be
The heart mekys anon right
And castyth wather to the sight
So weep the eyne also smert
And al makyth the tenderness of the heart
And of that heart shall seldom
Evil will of felnesse come
And the eyne that weep often
Oldeth the heart and does it soft
For the hete that the heart felys
With the teres greatly kelys
But he that not well (...) weep
Great felnesse in his heart can keep
And of hard heart than is he
And of no mercy nor pity
But he that to weep is ready
In him is pity and mercy
The.C.lxxiij. questyon
What manner of folk are me^ hold to
In this world worshype to do
Every man shall pryncypaly
Worshype god that is on hy
That him made and shall unmake
When that talent will him take
His wife shall man worshype also
For one body are they two
His lord also worshype he shall
That he seruys and dwellyth with all
Father and mother also shall he
Worshype before all that be
Yet shall he worshype for their mede
That him good does with word or deed
Suster and brother and his kind
Unto worshype should he have in mind
And every man if that he might
Ought he to worshype with right
The.C.lxxiiii. questyon
The largest man which is he
That now in the world may be
A Large man that have shall
Though he the world seek al
Shall he none find ne se
That of his own may large be
For of no largenes told it is
Aman to give that not is his
For all the largess that men tells
Of god they are and no man else
And all that man is sent
Of goddys love it is him lent
For nakyd hither is he brought
And of him self he has naught
And nakyd away shall he wend
With him he berys it not at the end
And if it his own were
Than might he it with him bear
And god him lendyth good truly
That he it spend worthily
Him self at mesure for to feed
And help the pouer that has need
And seeing he is bound thereto
The pouer for to help also
So may no man make his roos
That it is largess that he doos
Wherefore wot I no large man
That to him self appropryat it can
The.C.lxxv. questyon
Shall a pouer man every whore
Put him arych man before
IF it be so that they tweye
Go to gether by the weye
The pouer man shall ever more
Put the rych man before
And at one table be they
The pouer set him not to hye
For if arycher come than he
Him behouyth to flyte his se
And than better yt wore
That he had set him else whore
But be they both in a battle
And shall their enymes assail
There the pouer with out dread
Before the rych him forth bid
For a pouer may be also doughty
As arych man of his body
And with yt forth puttyng percaas he may
Worshype more get than ye rych that day
The.C.lxxvj. questyon
Is a man in any sin to ete
Al thing that he may get
UNto man god had such love
That he made to his behoue
Foul and fysshe in the sea
Beast and fruit in earth to be
And when that he man had wrought
And in to paradyse him brought
He made him lord of al this
Them to put in his seruys
And for to use them to his fode
For god made al things good
And seeing he gave him leave there till
He does no sin me think with skyl
That of al thing etes
At mesure when he it gethes
For what he etes with good will
Ne may ever do him ill
Though it adder were or snake
But if he again heart it take
Though it be the best men find
It does no good to his kind
The.C.lxxvij. questyon
Shall aman another great
Alday when he may him mete
AMan so often naught great thou shall
As thou him metyst aday with all
But if thou in thy hows be
Among thy folk and thy meyne
Gretyng shall thou sey them thore
Twyes upon the day no more
On morn when thou comyst them among
And on even at thy bid going
And mete thou thy friend be the street
Ones in the day thou shall him great
And thou shall say him that gretyng
After the time of your metyng
At morn or even wether it be
And if that he first great the
Great him again curtesly
Men shall the say worship thereby
But thou him shall but onys great
On the day that thou him often mete
The.C.lxxviij. questyon
How shall aman his children order
So that after repentyth not he
IF you have children keep them well
Till they be of age somedele
And than if thou have them dear
Cause them some craft to lere
That in need myster can
His conyng is esy to bear
It will help and nothing dear
There is no tresure thereto
For tresure will a way go
And when the tresure is gone al
Conyng a gain it bring shall
Daunt them not while they are young
But sharp words of thy tongue
Sey unto them ever among
So shall they dread to do wrong
With thy children do thou shall
As men does a grene wand with all
It may be wrethen while it is grene
How so men will without tene
Were it dry sone would it crake
A with thereof should no man make
So should men children chastyse in youth
Till that they some good couth
For that yougth takyth comenly
In age he shall find it redely
The.C.lxxix. questyon
Whether shall ama^ more love have till
His wife or child with skyl
AMan shall love over al thing
God his maker heuyn king
And next his own body
And than his wife pryncypaly
His children ought aman by kind
For to love and have in mind
But when god first made adam
And Eve of his body came
He gave him her unto fere
And bade him for to have her dear
Than in that geuyng made he
Man and his wife one to be
And if thou and thy wife be one
And that partyng is none
Ne none other may forsake
Unto death the one take
Thou ought thy wife to love more
Than all the children that thine more
If thou forlese thy good wife
Than lesyst thou the solace of thy life
And if thou thy children forgo
Of thy wife may thou wyn mo
Wherefore shall thou thy wife love more
Than thy children and hold in store
The.C.lxxx. questyon
If I had no father borne
Ne no mother me beforne
How should I have borne be
In this world or here or se
Long or god the world wrought
Or man or beast therein brought
He knew all that should be borne
Which saved and which forlorn
And al their names and thought
God had been else naught
Wherefore he wist well of the
That thou should borne be
And seeing thou nedys should be borne
Though thy father the beforne
Ne thy mother that was also
Had another come this world unto
Another father thou should have had
And mother that had the both feed and clad
The.C.lxxxj. questyon
The child that has full the shap
In the mother / by what hap
Is it sometime brought to naught
And may alive forth be brought
BE three causes may it come to
Why it comyth to pas so
One than may be goddys will
That he wylleth that it shall spyl
Another skyl also there is
Why it so fares sometime amys
The feeble norysshyng in the wife
That it may not come to life
For the feblenesse of the which norture
Makyth the seed not to dure
Feebleness of raynes the third
As in woman is be tide
Some woman with child may be
And so feeble of rayns is she
That she is not of the might
Of the child to suffer the weight
The mother sterys and turns about
So that the child fallyth out
When it is out than is it lorne
And so than is it ded borne
And by the grace of goddys might
The mother sperys a non right
The.C.lxxxij. questyon
Wymen yt in this world are here
Are they al of one manner
WImen are made al after one
In flesh / blood / hyde and bone
And all the lymes you seyst one bear
Every one such lymes were
And that men felys one upon
May men feel on every one
But of complexcyon are they sere
Of word / will and of manner
But al on one delight men find
When it comyth to deed of kind
Often of wathers may thou se
That of diverse hewes they be
But in thy mouth if thou them take
Al as one water shall they smake
So do women whare they fare
Al of one savior they are
But thinks some man
That swetar is some woman
Than some other fyftene
And of that may be three things mean
One is if she be fair and white
For aman has more delight
In her that is bright on ble
Than in a lothlyer on to se
Another cause is noble wede
For aman geuyth gladder mede
To her that nobely is dyght
Than to a pouer raggyd wight
The third skyl is when a man
So great love has to woman
That him thynkyth none so sweet to hold
For love has no lack it is said of old
The.C.lxxxiij. questyon
If thy friend have wife and meyne
And them mysdo thou se
Salt thou unto thy friend it sey
And his wife and meyne be wrey
IF thy neyghbor have a wife
That be of evil life
And thou may it undertake
That she wrong does again her make
Or dystroyer of his good be
And thou may it wete or se
Warn him so preuely and still
That he smite in none evil will
But bid him that he look thereto
So that they no more do so
And make he him wroth at the first
When that he the soth has wist
And through thy words he shall take heed
And than shall he the better speed
And save his good that should away
And if thou him no word did say
For men said in old sawes
By good neighbors god day men dawes
The.C.lxxxiiij. questyon
If a man any thing shall do
Shall he him ought have thereto
IF thou think to do a good deed
Hastly thereto thou the speed
For good deed shall have no respyte
He does it twyes that does it tyte
But think thou evil deed to do
Haste the nothing there unto
Be think the first in thy heart
That it the not after smerte
For if that thou take good head
Evil haste is al vnspede
In little time may befalle the
That thy heart may changed be
So that thou shall the with hold
Fro that thou first don would
And than shall thou like well
That thou hasted to it no dele
The.C.lxxxv. questyon
Shall he that any good can
In this world love every man
GOostly for god love shall thou
Every man and I shall tell the how
Till his soul no evil will
More than thou wylt thine own till
But bodily thy love shall be
To every man as he loves the
Love he the love him a geyne
And of his company be feyne
Hate he the / hate him also
And do with him as he would to the do
Come thou to thy friends hows
There thy foes thou feryst not thus
He will receive the with blys
And for the the gladder he is
If thou any thing him crave
With good will thou may it have
Such aman shall thou love again
And his will to do be feyne
If thou come unto thy foo
That saw the lever hang than go
Despyte of him may thou get
Or either drink or mete
From such aman shall thou fle
And hate him as he does the
For in old sawes says men that
He that loves there he is hate
Again the streme he rows sore
And to lose has he no more
The.C.lxxxvj. questyon
The folk of this world each one
Are they comune after one
BEtwyx them is comunaute
In some things as thou may se
For all are they borne in care
And al shall they hens fare
And al shall they rotte away
And al arise at domysday
But betwyx them in some thing
Is dyuersyte / for some is king
Some pouer and vile is their mete
Some live by that they may get
Some go clade and some bare
And of diverse manner men are
Of diverse will of diverse thought
Here in comune are they naught
And as here is dyuersyte
So shall there in other world be
Some shall in to pain be brought
To dole the works that he has wrought
And some shall in to pain of hell
There with out end to dwell
And some shall in to heuyn blys
That nothing here have don amys
The.C.lxxxvij. questyon
Do men the rych honor each one
And unto the pouer eyhgt none
In the other world also
As men here in this do
ARych man more honor shall have
In other world than he can crave
And the pouer more shame suffer
Than any man here and greatter
The rych there shall honor find
And the pouer set behind
But they have no man there dear
After as he was rych here
Understand now if thou can
All the riches of the man
Is the soul that him is in
And if it be clean out of sin
It is noble and rych
Him shall angels of make much
And worship do to him truly
For the goodness that he is rych by
The pouer soul that synful is
Shall another have honor ne blys
The angels turn their face therfro
For it for pouert goyth to woe
Worship gettyth it right none
Ware it rych it had good wone
But his riches was al spent
And from him clenely it went
When he goddys precept forsook
And to deedly sin him took
Therefore after as his riches wore
Is he worthy to be honored thore
The.C.lxxxviij. questyon
Shall the father bear any bourthyn
For his son / or his son for him
THe father of the son shall bear
No burden that him may dear
Ne the son not charged is
With that the father does amys
Each man of his own sin
Is charged that he deyes in
But for the son the father may
Be charged often and every day
As if that the son mysdo
And the father wot that it be so
And chastyse him not of his sin
But sufferyth him to be therein
He sins al so well as he
And for him charged shall be
The son for his deed doing
And the father for his sufferyng
But the father is charged naught
Of that that the son wrought
But that he might a him corrected
If he had to him ought seyed
But by sufferaunce there is he in need
Charged for his sonnys mysdede
The.C.lxxxix. questyon
They that slay men and undo
Take they their sin them unto
NAy / sin yt one man has wrought
May charge a another naught
No man with right may other slo
For no mysdede ne for no woe
But if it by lordshyp be
That of god has the pouste
Justice for to do the right
Thereto is him given might
And if aman for wrath or hate
Sle another in the gate
The sin of the ded chargys him naught
Him that him to ded brought
But what he did evil or well
Shall cleue by himself every dele
Naught than may be of godys mercy
That he that is slain wrongfully
May of some sin releasyd be
For the sharp deed that he
Against right was brought unto
And he that him slew also
Encresyth his sin where he goyth
By also many as he sleyth
For greatter sin naught tell I can
Than wylfully to slay a man
The.C.lxxxx. questyon
Which is most sorrow thynkyth the
That thou heryst or do se
SIght of eye will more dear
Than that a man here is with ere
For that a man sees with eye
That may be no flatery
For he sees all the deed doing
And all the sorrow of that thing
That most go right nere the heart
And does it aldermost smert
For old men say / and it is news
That eyne ne se / heart ne rewes
But that a man is told unto
He wottyth never if it be so
And though he trow he say aryght
Yet deryth it nothing the sight
For the heart thinks as it would
It is not perchance as it is told
And thus conforteth he vyturly
All the wits of the body
Sight of eye is bodily
And heryng of ere is goostly
Right as the wind so is heryng
That is herd and seen nothing
Wherefore more sorrow is to se
Than to here what so it be
The.C.lxxxxj. questyon
Might men any folk synde
That etyth other again kind
HE that trauayles day and night
To hurt his neyghbor with unright
To lose his good that he wan
With travail or craft that he can
And that he should his life with led
For to clothe him with and to feed
Me think he byteth him very sore
And eteth him as that it wore
Yet is there another manner
Aman to ete another here
If he a lesyng on him lie
Wherefore he has great vylonye
Or says of him evil behynd his back
Or before men makes of him alack
He eteth him without methe
Though he not byte him with his tethe
And he that sleeth aman also
And has no cause there unto
Or for gift that him is hight
Forsothe he than him eteth right
And more manners the^e is of mete
That aman may another ete
The.C.lxxxxij. questyon
Which is the worst thing of these three
Morder / theft / or a slanderer to be?
TO be a slanderer is a wicked life
For he makes often great strife
He is about day and night
To make debate unto his might
And so may he by wicked read
Be encheson a man to be deed
Wherefore it is great folly
To have such one in company
Theft also is great sin
For he that will never blynne
To stele his neyghbor fro
That he has bide for much woe
And so does he again him drive
In woe and trauayl to live
Or to beg for ever more
Look what sin he doys thore
But the most sin of al tho
Is man to murdre and slo
For he destroys that stature
That god made after his figure
And reues life there it should be
And goddys seruyse so lettyth he
Mannys lycknes slo shall he naught
Ne none but god that him has wrought
The.C.lxxxxiij. questyon
Forgeuyth god with good chere
All the sins that a man does here
IF all the drops in the sea
And grasses that in earth may he
And all the leaves men can neuen
And all the sterres of heaven
And all the fysshes that swyme can
And all the here is of beast and man
Ware al on one sin brought
The tenthdele ne were they naught
Of the mercy of god of heaven
For that may no man sum ne reken
Had aman done all the sin
That all this world durst begin
And he had sorrow in heart therefore
And would leave and do no more
God would on him have mercy
And forgive it him redely
Admyttyng him among his meyne
And of his turnyng glade be
But he that leuyth not his sin
Ne naught thereof will blynne
Another mercy will crave
He is worthy none to have
For who so askys unworthily
It may be denied justly
The.C.lxxxxiiij. questyon
Why trauaylys aman so
In this world as men do
FOr two things pryncypaly
The one to sustain the body
The other that it strong be
To serve god in Trynyte
As in prayer and almesdede
For tho will the soul feed
And to gather have in mind
To leave his children and his friend
Al his travail should be here
To save the soul that god has dear
And to do as that we find
As the mire does in his kind
By summers days he gaderys all That he in winter by live shall
He will not so long abide
That it come to the winter tide
Even so should a man lere
To till his soul while he is here
Abide he till he hens fare
Cold winter he fyndys and care
Wherefore should he so travail
That it might after him a veil
The.C.lxxxxv. questyon
Tell me now with out mys
Which is the wickest thing that is
WIckydare thing may none be
Than wicked man in pouste
For the soul that is in him
Is both myrke and dym
And a wicked man might se been
How dark his soul is for sin
So foul a thing shall he se it
That he should forlese his wit
Wherefore is there no myrcknesse
Again a man in wickydnesse
The.C.lxxxxvj. questyon
The good works and the ill
That a man does of his will
Whether come they of god him to
Or of him self that does them so
UNderstand you well I wys
That of god no evil is
Of him is al holiness
And al fayrhed and goodness
And for goodness man he wrought
To paradyse when he him brought
He gave him wit as was his will
For to know both good and ill
And when aman had knowlegyng
Of both / than was at his chosyng
Whether he would take unto
And than began he evil to do
When that he the good let
Bytyng the appul that he did ete
And sythen he might do whether he would
And he would unto the wicked him hold
Of him self every dele it is
That he did so amys
To help he had an enymy
And so has both thou and I
Three we have every day
Us to tempt all that they may
Our own flesh / the world / the send
Each one would us truly shend
But we know among all this
Which is better and which wors is
Than is that wickydnes every dele
Of him that does it and might do well
If a man were well be thought
To thank him that made him of naught
He should have grace well to do
And wickydnes hold him fro
Wherefore of god comyth us goodness in
And of our self evil and sin
The.C.lxxxxvij. questyon
Where hydeth him ye day fro night
And the night fro the day light
THat time that god the world dyght
Of his word and of his might
The elements were myxt each one
And light on earth was none
Than departed them god asonder
And each one did set other under
Than made he son and moan to light
That one on day that other on night
The son about goes ever more
To light here and else whore
When he us lyghteth it is day
And night when it is a way
And when he departyth us fro
About the earth behooves him to go
And the earth that is so round
Reues us in that stounde
The light that we had of him
And than is the night to us dym
But when the son is about went
And again is to us sent
Sone so as he shows any thing
We se it is in the dawyng
And as he ryses ay and ay
So waxes us the clear day
Thus departyth day and night
By reason of the son light
And ever when comyth that one
The other departyth anon
The.C.lxxxxviij. questyon
How hold the planetes them al
On the sky that they ne fall
When god had dyght y^ fyrmame^t
And stabled every element
On the sky under the heaven
Made he planets seven
And he made up on hye
All the sterres of the sky
And each planet there he is
In his own spear goyth I wys
The moon so is lowest of all The highest Saturnus we call
And al have they their steryng
A gain the sky in his going
And ever the hyer that they be
The more to go has he
Some as a year and some two
In his spear about to go
And some about to go also
Have but a month thereto
And al they are of kind
Of the fyrmament as we find
Having to gether a fastenyng
So that there may be no partyng
And so god has ordained them all That none may from other fall
So may none fall from other well
Till god undo the world al each dele
The.C.lxxxxix. questyon
How may me^ yt hours know aryght
And the points of day and night
IN what land thou be
Thou may esely know and se
Sone so the son thou se may
That is apoynt of the day
And when the son to rest is gone
Thou know that it is night anon
And the night with the day
Have but four and twenty howrs ay
And every hour has no more
But a thousand points and four score
And this thing may thou well
Be a candel prowe each dele
Be the day short or long with sail
The therbe shall not mysse if thou will
Reckyn the day after as it is
And the night as rekenyd is
And each an hour know thou may
When it comyth and passyth away
The.CC. questyon
All the sterres up on hy
Turn they about on the sky
TUrnyng are the sterres ay
And as the sky goyth so go they
And for the turnyng of the sky
Is that they go so hastily
But one there is that semith naught
Unto our sight that it goyth ought
And yet is he ever steryng
In a cyrcle about turnyng
For full in the end stondyth he
The one end of the axeltre
That the world al turns on
For that semyth his steryng none
And be cause he the axeltre is by
Turns he so narowly
And so semyth he therefore
Ever in one stead as it wore
Whereby shypmen on the sea
In what stead so they be
Be night have great knolegeyng
By him and by his showing
And for that the shypmen al
Lodys sterre they him call
The.CC.j. questyon
The holsomest stead which is it
Of all the world after thy wit
HOlsomest stead unto man
Is there he best gyde him can
That no sycknes by him mete
Ne none outrage of keelth ne hete
Ne much sleep ne over much wakyng
Of mete and drink no outrage taking
In hot country no hot mete
Ne cold in cold shall he none ete
And therefore who so hole will be
Do as I shall teache the
Ones ete on day and night
And ones sporge the raynes in seuenyght
And ones in a month let the blood
And ones to purge him in the year is good
Thus may he him keep in hele
But of these men find not feel
The.CC.j. questyon
Tell me for I am in dwere
The dygnyest day of the year
OF all the year the dygnyest day
So is holden the Saturday
When god had heaven and earth wroght
And al thing therein brought
And al them wrought he tho
In six days and no mo
On the sunday he began
And the syxte day made he man
When that of man was made each lym
The seventh day god restyd him
For veryhed took he no rest
But for that he chose it day best
And bade man that day he in pees
And of al works to fees
Wherefore the Saturday of all The dygnyest day we call
But a time shall men se
When goddys son shall man be
That he shall dye and after arise
The third day on alwyse
Which rysyng day men worship shall ay
And that shall be the Sunday
And after shall men ever call
Sunday the best of all The.CC.ij. questyon
Yet would I wit more
Why sleep was made and wherefore
Sleep is made for mannys rest
Of al thing one of the best
For it esyth the heart namely
And might geuyth to all the body
As if a lord waken be
Wakyd is al his meyne
There ne may sleep non of al
For to be ready if he call
Till he sleep / sleep al his
Than are they the lyghter in seruys
The heart of man the lord call I
For it maysteryth all the body
And when it is a sleep anon
The lymes rest them euerychon
And than all the kyndly hete
Of the body geuyth to mete
About the stomach for to brynne
And to dygest that there is with in
And than the kind to him takys
That to him shall or he wakys
And purges him of that other dele
As kind geuyth him full well
Thus gatheryth the body might
And is after strong and light
For to do that it shall do
That ne ware / if sleep ware not so
Therefore has god the night wrought
To mannys rest and else naught
For pain is none / ne no morning
Unto man again wakyng
The.CC.iij. questyon
Shall ever in this word be
War and contecte as men now se
AT the beginning when there wore
Four men in the world no more
Was there war and envy
And mannys slawghter and felony
And it shall never seas
That the world be al in peace
For were the world in peace holly
Men might call it skylfully
Paradyse and else naught
For there was never no war wrought
But love / peace / and charity
And tho may holly here not be
But in this world are wars two
Goostly and bodily also
The goostly war may no man se
Which is of the devil and his meyne
Night and day on man he wars
And in all that he may men deres
Bodily war al first began
Which is betwyx man and man
And that shall never to end torn
Untyl it be the day of dome
The.CC.iiii. questyon
Wrathes god hi^ ough for ma^nis deed
What ded so he dye good or quede
THough god saw all the world brynne
And all the folk dye that are therein
And dried euerydele the sea
In god should no wreth be
In him may be no evil mode
For nothing of this worlds good
Man's deed deryth god no more
What deed so he dies no whore
Than it does the fire to brynne
A hylle that many auntes were in
The pain that they feel in brennyng
Ne derys them for no kings thing
No more does god soth to sey
What time aman shall here dey
No surar thing than is the deed
But of the time can no man read
And for that what time he dey shall
God greuyth him nothing with all
But sythen man wot no prow
When he shall dey ne how
Look he be ready ay I read
Than shall him not the deed dread
The.CC.v. questyon
Which folk are it as thou wetes
That the world now most susteynes
Four manner of folk there are
That were it so that they ne ware
The world might not up holden be
Ne fare so well as we now se
One than are these men of craft
That learn other that are dafte
Conyng their lyuelod for to win
And god to serve without sin
Another are tho that till the land
And win us mete and drink to hand
The thryde are lords that peace keep
For in peace may men suerly sleep
If peace were not there were great doubt
To live or any where walk about
The fourth manner of folk than are
Chapmen that about fare
Fro feyre to feyre fro land to land
And bring that men do wande
And should defaute have of it also
Did not chapmen give them thereto
Wherefore the world with out this
Might be kept on none wise
The.CC.vij. questyon
Whether is hyer as you doyst vndarsta^d
The king or the law of the land
Law is of more antyquyte
Than king or prince may be
And if thou wylt wit why
I shall the tell apertly
The name of king or emperor
Is geuyn for worldly honor
And it fallyth to his might
The law for to keep aryght
Than is king for law set
To keep that law be not let
Than is law more than he
For to do law has he potence
For a thing yt ordained is
For another / than semys this
That he that it is dyght for
Of them two is the more
And if the king for law be
Than is law more than he
Yet shall I say the a another saw
If the king do again the law
Law shall him deem with skyl and right
Than is law above his might
And break he law in any thing
He is not worthy to be king
Truly here after shall come one
A king that shall hight Solomon
In his sawes say shall he
Blessed mote they al be
That shall in this world round
Do justice and right in every stounde
The.CC.viij. questyon
May man in any manner
Any worldly good have here
That he over al may with him bear
And the weight him not dear
AMan in this world may have
Good him eneywhere for to save
And help him at his need
And ever he may it with him led
That is conyng of some art
Which will not fro man part
Who so has him nedyth not to dread
For it will him both cloth and feed
Bettar tresour never no man wan
Than is conyng un to man
And whyther so aman will go
He may it bear with out woe
And here unto none of his
Wherefore shall Solomon the wise
Say as aman well be taught
That wit and wisdom is worldys aught
The.CC.ix. questyon
If two have love to gether strong
And after are a sonder long
And come to gether ought one whore
May they love so as they did before
Love betwyx friends twey
That onys is ne should not dey
And if that they in sonder be
That either other long not se
And they to gether come efte
The love yt was before left
Before that they in sondre wore
May come again and right well more
As thou in a garden may se
Standing a well lykyng tree
And the gardynar behave him so
That he take no head thereto
To mucke and till and else it dyght
It myscaryeth anon right
Losyng his well lykyng
For it zemyd is nothing
But when the gardynar it sees
That it fails among other trees
Head again thereto he takys
And the earth about it bettar makys
And than begins it to spring
And take again to his liking
So it faryth of friends two
If that one fro the other go
And after to gether come again
Either wylbe of other feyne
And the love they had before
Or that they a sondre wore
For new may they them between
As the tree that eft waxed grene
The.CC.x. questyon
How may ama^ love woman right
Or she him for the sight
Sometime fallyth aman to mete
Afayre woman in the street
His eyes will he on her cast
Beholding her right fast
And the eyes a non present right
Unto the brains that same sight
Brains send the heart unto
And in delight he fallyth also
And as soon as he is in delight
He begins to love tyte
The brain sendyth to the eye again
That they of that sight are feign
Delytyng them to behold more
So that the heart therefore
Fallyth in a foul lykyng
And so begins the love to spryng
But and the heart were of might
Strong to hold him in that sight
And say lord I thank it the
The sight that I yonder se
That thou would after thy figure
Make so fair a creature
Temptacyon should he none be in
Ne fall in no delight of sin
Ne his heart should have no menyng
Another time to such a thing
No more should woman on her side
If she did thank god every tide
The.CC.xj. questyon
Aman that light conscience berys
And by his god falsely swerys
Of.x. false things for the nonys
Is he ought for swore but onys
HE that swerys an oath amys
By his god what so he is
For.x. false things al in one
Soth as he swerys for each one
And if each of the.x. false be
Tene times forsworn is he
An hundredth things though it wore
So often forsworn is he thore
And who so assentys thereto
That he made that oath also
Also often is he forsworn
As he that made that oath beforne
The.CC.xij. questyon
Tho that any knowledge have here
The folk for to lere
Shall any grace come them unto
More than it shall other men to
Right it is that every man
That trauayls in labor as he can
That it be him yeldyd so
As his travail amountys to
And he that trauayls here
Any good other to lere
Or preches to them how they shall
Heuynly blys wyn with all
God shall them in heuyn save
And double mede shall they have
For that they have techyd right
The way unto heuyn light
But two manner of techers be
In this world as thou may se
Unto the son is lykened one
That geuyth his light ever anon
And every like his light lastes
For ought that he down castes
That are the good that teches here
Doing them self as they do lere
But some are that tech well
And wickydly live them self every dele
Unto the candel light are tho
That to other geuyth his light him fro
And wastes him self hastily
He that is no grace worthy
For if aman were set to dele
Tresour among feel
And he might pay them each one well
And hold him self a great deal
If he dele so his delyng
That him self left nothing
Or if ought him left wicked ware
It is but right he evil fare
Skyl it is that he fare ill
That will chose it of his will
The.CC.xiij. questyon
Thought yt a man thynkes alday
Whereof ever come it may
COmenly thought in heart will spryng
Of clear heart and conyng
For ever the more that aman
Of art in this world can
The more thought he has thefore
And ymagynes more and more
The wysdom that these wise have so
Of pure courage it comyth them to
And that is of pure blood naught else
That about the heart dwelles
And the puryte of that blood
Cleres the brains and makys them good
And that claryte that in the brains dure
Geuyth to the courage moisture
And unto the eyes claryte
And to all the lymes light to be
The heart it geuyth unto
Blythnes and lykyng also
Which makyth aman conyng
And to have thought of much thing
But for his conyng shall he naught
Smite in to an evil thought
And his thought shall be holly
To worship god pryncypaly
And after to work at his might
Things that be honest and right
The.CC xiiij. questyon
Why than fall the folk also
Of the evil as men se they do
FOr three things pryncypaly
Falls vmwhyle amannys body
One is for colors and humors wyk
That stere in the body thycke
And the humors day and night
With the good in the body fight
And if the wicked masters be
The heart sometime they turn perde
And ableese to the brains cast
That aman falls at the last
And for that same vanyte
With foot and hand trauayleth he
And foam out of the mouth does fall
His wits so and does lose al
Another than is deedly sin
That aman is combred in
And goddys co^maundment does naught
But in sin is al his thought
Such power has the devil of him
That he him shows to him full grym
The aungel that has him in keeping
Rekenys than of him nothing
Wherefore the devil than foully
Turmentys him this pytyously
The third cause than is fantasy
That comyth to the heart vnwysly
Wherefore it fayles and cowarde is
And waxes dredful and losys blys
Wherefore sometime he fallys smert
And comyth a fantesy of the heart
The.CC.xv. questyon
Which is the perolousest lym
That mannys body has in him
OF all the lymes of the body
The perylousest than hold I
The eyes that should the body wys
That it not go amys
For in peril both put they
Soul and body every dey
The eyes show the brains anon
The thing that they se upon
And the brains also smert
Nuncyes it forth unto the heart
The heart has lykyng in the sight
And fallyth in sin anon right
And had the eyes se no thing
The heart had fall in no liking
Also perylouse they ere
For they are tender and light to dear
And pride and ire and couetys
With other sins mo than this
Which things had be unsought
And mannys eyes saw right naught
And for that of euerychone
Perylouser lyme is none
The.CC.xvj. questyon
Which is the sykerest art of al
And there most peril may in fall
Clerks that to the world preches
And goddys will to do them teches
And how they shall their sowles gyde
And the devil from them cause to slide
The surest art have they tho
And the perylousest also
For of the world they are the light
As to the body is eyes sight
The eyes light the body
And ledyth it by way and sty
Without hurt there it wylbe
Which hurt should take might it not se
Also tho that learn this art
And thech forth thereof some part
The right way the folk they led
And their sowles goostly they feed
And if they do as they say
Their self goyth in the right way
And if they naught ne do
As they other tech unto
Foully they them self spyl
And the candel like they are until
That lyghtes me and the ryghtwel
But him self wastes every dele
The.CC.xvij. questyon
How is a man sometime iolyfe
And light of body al his life
Sometime begins iolyfte
In mannys body to styre and be
And that comyth right kyndly
Of a young blood in the body
That of his mother took it than
Or he to the world came
But than after his beryng
Gatheryth he of mete in fedyng
Anew blood and that steryth him
Sometime in every a lyme
And the young blood therewith
Steryth in to each a light
The heart reuerdysse with all
As that it of kind shall
So come in iolynyte
Ey to that blood so steryng be
But when it begynnes to sesse
The heart quyckly has relesse
Of iolynyte and fallyth thore
In a sadness as it was before
The.CC.xviij. questyon
May man achyld not get ryfe
Each time that he touches his wife
IN this world man is none
That might get his wife upon
Achyld each time ay
That he with her lay
Ne so often may no woman
Conceive of the seed of man
Achyld forth for to bring
As he might get it in pleyeng
For she is coldar of nature.
And keelth to seed is no norture
A lecherous man sometime also
That goyth tha^ work much unto
And trauayles him ever right
Of his reins he lesyth might
Than is the seed feeble and vein
And to engendure has no meyne
As a woman seven chaumbres has
And in each of tho parcas
May she conceive a child no mo
And yet has she enough of tho
And were aman of such powere
To get one when he came her nere
At each time where should that wife
Spear so many in her life
Also if there be gotten one
The mother sperys up an one
And no more conceyueth she
Untyl that same borne be
The.CC.xix. questyon.
What is it and how gathers it so
Mannys kind when it goth him fro
AMannes kind that goth him fro
Gathers out of every lym
For when aman about his mind
With woman to done his kind
The hete of him and the great will
That he has his deed to fulfill
Causes his body to sweet witin
Blood inward fro every lym
And that blood becomes al white
And to the stones goth al tyte
And from thens it issues so
When it comyth there unto
Another cause than is frotyng
Of man to wife with great lykyng
Long rest also a cause is why
And full fellyng of the body
From aman sometime / one of tho
Does it slepyng go him fro
But body trauaylyng and fasting
Will come to him no such thing
The.CC.xx. questyon
Is aman bound thereto
To love his children and good them do
AMan shall love over al thing
God that is of heuyn king
And him self after that
And his children that he gat
For they are fruit of his body
And for that ought he to love them truly
But he shall not love them so
Folyshly as many do
For some are their children loving
More than them self in some thing
For if thou leave now for no sin
Worldly goods for to win
And caryst not where thou it take
Their children with rych to make
In also much thou love them more
Than thy self harken wherefore
Thy wrong taking makyth the
That thou shall dampened be
And me think he louys ill
That his soul therefore will spyl
Wherefore of thy labor dylygently
Shall thou find them mete truly
And somewhat thou learn them shall
That they may after live with all
And when they can it let them go
And purchase them with other mo
The.CC.xxi. questyon
Enchaunmentyng and socery
Uayle they ought or are they folly
THe body may they somdele veil
But to ye soul they do great travail
And he that them work shall
Three things most have with all
First behouyth him to know a right
The hours and points of day and night
For go he ought there again
Al his labor is in vain
The the other is he most of need
Give great faith unto the deed
And have steadfast in his thought
That the devil shall fail him naught
Yet most he know astronomy
Which shall help him a great party
But want he any of these three
His work is naught but vanyte
The.CC.xxij. questyon
Which is the wightest beast y^ is
And most of savior tell me this
HOunde is the wyghtest beast of al
And the trewest on to call
Lyghter no beast run ne can
Nor none louyngare to man
And the sauourest is he
Save if it the mire be
For of al beasts the mire I wys
Savors most after that it is
The.CC.xxiij. questyon
Whether of the two may be
Hyer the land or the sea
Land is hyer of the two
Else should the sea it over go
Let a wessel with water fylle
Even by the brynke standing still
Yet shall the brynkes ye water hold
But were it more up / it would
Run over the vessel quyckly
And there spyl truly
Eueyn so it fares by the sea
But if the earth might hyare be
The sea should it over run
That all the world should well kenne
The.CC.xxiiij. questyon
Whereof snayles come wit I would
And why they to the gras them hold
OF the hete and the swote
Come they of gras that is hot
And for moisture hold they them so
Unto the gras as that they do
And al be it lothly to sight
It is a worm of much might
For who so knoueth well the kind
Of great virtue he may it find
Be encombred the breast of man
That he his breath naught draw can
Who so took the snayles than
And fried them well in a pan
With oil of olyue where men it get
And with honey gave it him to ete
Tene days at even and morrow
It should deliver him of that sorrow
And if a white spote were
In his eye the sight to dear
And took snayles and them did brynne
Of that that is them with in
And when it is brent to cole also
The tender part so much do thereto
Of a roste leke / and so much yet
Ofybenus a tree as men call it
And bray it al to gether well
And after sarce it every dele
And use it twyes or thryes a day
The white spote shall go a way
The.CC.xxv. questyon
How sleep these old men also
As these young children do
Children young sleep for the grennesse
Of their branes and the swetnesse
For tender and light it ought to be
As is the flower upon a tree
If a wind thereon blow truly
It fallyth of lightly
Also is it of a child I wys
When it of mete fellyd is
An air smyteth there upon
Whereby it enclynes upon one
And slepes than and restes so
Which is norysshyng there unto
An old man also sleep will
As a child but by other skyl
For feebleness of brains slepys he
As a ripe appul upon a tree
When a wind it touches ought
It fallyth unto ground for naught
The old man is in that caas
A little ese when that he has
He fallyth a sleep quyte
And that is greatly his delight
For feeble reins and heavy bonys
That causyth him to sleep for the nonys
The.CC.xxvj. questyon
If god had so great a man wrought
As all the world / might he ought
Have stond again god right
Thrughe virtue of his might
HAd he made so great aman
As any man reckon can
As all the world dale or down
Wood / water / feld / or town
Again god had he no main
More than an aunte has him again
And yet a thousand times less
Than has the aunte in his greatness
For god with word euynly wrought
Heuyn / earth and al of naught
And would he bid them synke
It should be don as thou coudest think
Seeing he earth and henyn may undo
Even with his word also
And is but apoynt of his might
Much more than with right
Is the remnaunt of his pouste
Wherefore to him may nothing be
The.CC.xxvij. questyon
What should this word have be and how
Had god not dyght it as it is now
IT should have be more ne less
Than a foul dale of darkness
Or as a dark prison pyt
And nothing should have aluted it
The elements that we now call
Should have be troblyd to gether al
And god should never thelesse in blys
Have been and rought nothing of this
But for the creaturs sake
That god would afterward make
The elements claryfyed he
Setting each one there they should be
And dyghtyd al things to mannys prow
Also as that they are now
The.CC.xxviij. questyon
Wether the angels of goddys onde ca^
As did the soul first of Adam
ADamys soul so was wrought
Of goddys flate but aungel naught
They were of goddys word alone
He bad them be and they were echone
But god blewe upon Adam
Ghost of life and he forth came
Wherefore adam and his ospryng
That steadfastly over al thing
Trust in god and believe shall
And his byddyng do with all
Dygnyer before god shall be
Than angels be resons three
First he has life that may not wonde
Of the spririte of gods onde
And that was higher to my thynkyng
Than aungel that came ofspekyng
Also aman has enemies
To tempte him were he goth or lies
And aungel in no temptyng is
Wherefore he may not do amys
And he that the temptyng withstandis
And comes not in the deuyls handis
He is more dignyer than he
That in no temptyng may be
The third cause then is also
That god has set aungel thereto
To keep man both fer and hende
And fro al evil him to defend
And from al encombrement
But if him self thereto assent
And if aungel mannys servant be
Than is agood man dygnyer than he
The.CC.xxix. questyon
Now would I know I wys
What thing is heuynly paradyse
HEuynly paradyse than is
Nothing but that same blys
That a man has of the sight
Of goddys face that is so bright
For he that sees him face to face
He has al manner of grace
Joy and delight endless to be
Health / fayrhed / strenght / and lewte
Wit and conyng with riches also
God for his might send us thereto
The.CC.xxx. questyon
The fairest thing in this world to se
That god made which may it be
AMan than is the fairest thing
That is in earth af goddys making
And the louelyest of vysage
For he him made after his image
And for man made son and moan
With all things that under wone
And also as he would make
Al things for mannys sake
Seruyse unto man to do
So will he man to him shall do
The.CC.xxxj. questyon
Whether ought thou to love alday
That love the / or that ye love me say
THou shalt love that loves the
And that thou love some lat be
For thou love some parauenture
That of the take full little cure
And but thou love with all shy meyne
Him that loves the again
Than will I say thou louyst naught
God that at his lykenes the wrought
And who so loves sin here
He loves the devil to have to fere
And he ne loves here no man
But to shende all that he can
And to put him in pain and woe
Lo / what wise he loves tho
The good he hates day and night
But them to dear he has no might
For god defendes them with his might
And loves all that loves him a right
Therefore they that great love has the till
Love him again for that is skyl
The.CC.xxvii. questyon
Which are the worthyest words yt be
And gras and stones as thinks the?
GOd gave unto things three
Much virtue and potence
And to man's help each one
To word / to gras / and to stone
The worthyest word and most of might
For to say day or night
Is to worship heaven king
And pray him after good endyng
For if this word be worthily spoken
It shall be hard fro earth to heaven
Also grasses are there feel
Made unto mannys heel
But of so many is there one
That may werst be forgone
That is where to fode of man
Worthyar grass not I tell can
Also are there many stones
Of great virtue for the nones
But mylle stones are they tho
That man may not well forgo
For the gryndyng of the corn
They may werst be forborne
And seeing al haues of them need
That with bread shall them feed
Worthyest stone I them call
Among other stones all The.CC.xxxiij. questyon
Shall thou thy counsel tell every dele
To thy friend that thou love well
COunsel ought to be told
To him that thou al have would
Which is god and man else
For he will hele that thou tells
If thou thy friend tell it unto
It may after befalle so
That that frendshyp may over go
And thy friend becomyth thy fo
Than may thou say if the list
Now wottyth my foo that my frynd wist
Or if thou thy friend it sey
And wenyst he shall the not wrey
And he tellys it preuely
Unto another friend him by
And he the fourth as may welbe
This may it not long be preuete
For that many mouths wot
On some tongue it lies full hot
Thus might thou come in blame therefore
Wherefore bettar untold it wore
If thou a preuete have wrought
And thy heart may hele it naught
Thynkyng it sadness in the right
Untyl thou have told it to some wight
Go from the folk be the alone
That no man here the make no moan
And call it than thy self to
As thou would to a another do
When thou have told thy heart shall keel
And no more anguyshe shall thou feel
If thou no ways may it hold
Till thou have it a another told
Look thou tell it to such one
That thou may well trust upon
That he will tell it on no side
For no wrath that may be tide
The.CC.xxxiiij. questyon
Which are wymen of most profit
For man to have to his delight
UNtyl soul profytes none
But amanys wife alone
But of the body if thou sey
In the year are sesons twey
After which aman look shall
What woman he shall dele with all
In winter when the air is cold
And his keelth yeldes manyfolde
A young woman and broune also
Profytes than man unto
For broune woman is of hot onde
And of hot guts fond
And her hete hetys man also
And great profyt doys him to
In somer when the air is hot
And heteth both dry and wot
Than is a young white woman
Best unto profyt of man
For she is cold of kind to feel
And man of great hete may she kele
But an old woman does no profit
Unto man another broune ne white
For ill onde about she beres
And moist guts that greatly deres
She makys aman pure heavy
And greuyth every dele his body
And does change his fair color
Wherefore in her is no socour
The.CC.xxxv. questyon
The quakyng that aman is in
Sometime whereof may it begin
QUakyng that sometime lightly
Falls aman in his body
Comes of flemes that are cold
That the moisture in his body hold
For they over come of their ^ouste
All the colers that in him be
When the colers have al in welde
A great keelth in man they yield
That cold reykes forth there with
Unto sins veins and each light
Which causyth him to quake begin
And the body shake within
As the blast of a cold air will make
A thynne clothyd man for to shake
The.CC.xxxvi. questyon
When aman seyth a thing
Whether geuyth the eye out in seeing
Or it receyuyth inward thereto
The shape that it sees also
Nothing may come out owhore
But there that it went in before
Nor eye may nothing give outward
But that it first receyuyd inward
Wherefore understand a right
Three things go to the sight
First that thing that thou shalt se
That other that it colored be
For of al things is seen nothing
But only the coloring
The third are bemes of the sight
Which upon that thing shall light
That shall be seen and after this
Moisture that in the eyne is
Draws unto him the shapyng
And the facyon of that thing
And that shape yeldes it the branes unto
And the brains to the heart also
The heart sendys it to him at the last
And in memory holds fast
And for that sendyng will the heart
Think a another time full smerte
Of the thing eyes had somwhore
Seen truly therbefore
The.CC.xxxvij. questyon
How may aman spekyng be
Be him alone and say we
AMan is made more ne less
But after goddys own lycknesse
And also as in the godhed be
Rekened ryghtly persons three
So there are in every man
Three things that I reken can
Body / soul / and the wit
These three are together knyt
The tongue an instrument is right
To speak the soul geuyth might
The wits govern above al
What so the tongue speak shall
And seeing every man has these three
In spech may he well say we
The.CC.xxxviij. questyon
May with taking from the sea
It in any thing amenysshed be
Thing that men alday of take
Behouyth to menysshe and slake
Now is no water of all that be
Fresshe nor salt but of the sea
And every day men takys thereto
Both man and beast and foul also
And all that is taken every day
Again to the sea ne may
There goyth of it to wast somdele
As every man may wit well
But the earth yeldes waters her fro
That unto the sea go
And the sea restores eft
Of all that men has it reft
And it is so long and wide
And so greatly deep and side
That men may aperceue nothing
That thereof goys to wastyng
The.CC.xxxix. questyon
Whether shall man love one or other
Child of the suster or of the brother
BOth ought thou for to love them euin
After goddys right of heuyn
But after the worldys law
Some man were lever to him draw
The brothers child and love him more
Than the susters / harken wherefore
The child takys matter of the wife
And of the father shape and life
And shape of al thing I wys
Is worthyare than the matter is
Wherefore that some men will sey
The brothers child is nere of twey
But gyle is on that other side
As men has wist it often betyde
My brothers wife may be a wyle
And may do her husbond gyle
And wit on him achyld lightly
That he no more gat than I
But achyld that my suster bare
Thereof am I suer and ware
That that behouyth to be kynne of need
But of my brothers child is dread
The.CC.xl. questyon
Tell me now if that thou can
The peryloust things that are in man
Four colors has man him in
That of four complexcyons begin
The first is blood that may not mysse
That other black color I wysse
The third is fleme white on to se
And yelow color the fourth is he
And want aman of these three
His body were deed anon
And each one behouys to be
At his seson in his pouste
And if any lack them al
Out of time that they should in him fall
In sycknes the body falls
Perylous wherefore men them calls
And each one has his power
In diverse quarters of the year
Three things the first quarter ches
Capricorn / Aquarius / and pisses
And of flemes have they might
And wete and cold is their right
In December they begin
And in mydel of March they blynne
Which is the coldest time of al
For that is that we winter call
The second quarter next thereby
Have Aries / Taurus / Gemini
Blood in man have they might to
And are hot and moist also
In March is their begynyng
And in June is their endyng
Uer hight that seson that I mean
Al things therein wax grene
The third quarter has him unto
Cancer / Leo / and Uirgo
And they are both hot and dry
Of yelow colors is their maystrye
In June is their begynyng ay
And in September they wend away
Which is the somer tide
The meryest time that men abide
The fourth has signs thus
Libra / Scorpio / Sagittarius
They are both cold and dry
And of black color have sygnorye
Whose begynyng is in September
And their partyng in December
And who so these four times observes
And his kind well in them gydes
Fro perelles might he keep him long
And in hele hold his lymmes strong
The.xlj. questyon
Of all the flesshes ye men may get
Which is the holsomest to ete
THe flesh that is of most substance
And geuyth man most sustynaunce
That flesh is the holsomest
And unto mannys norysshyng best
But who so a good stomach might get
That might well dygest his mete
To him is best though it be great
Flesh of bugle and of nete
For great might to man they give
But sick men will they grieve
For a sick man is feeble right
And his stomach is of no might
Wherefore moton is best him to
And young chykens are good also
For tenderness that men in them find
And greatly charge not the kind
For a sick man may suffer no dele
Of that a hole man may right well
The.CC.xlij. questyon
The mete that aman shall live by
How departys it in his body
SUstenaunce that aman take shall
Gaderys unto the stomach al
And with drink synkes therein
And than to seth will it begin
And when it is soden well
And dygested every dele
In five parts divided it is
And every party goys unto his
The first part wylbe fall
To be clenest and purest of al
And that part also smerte
Draws him lightly unto the heart
That other part draws him also
The brains / eyes / and head unto
The third unto the lymes shall
And unto the blood with all
The fourth goyth there it is not spylt
To the longes / to the liver and to the milte
The fyfte than is as brene of al
Which will unto the guts fall
And men cast it out thereby
That it helpyth not the body
And dryuke departys also in man
As I of mete to tell began
The.CC.xliij. questyon
How shall aman of his throat wyn
Abone or a thorn styckyng therein
By bred or lycour takyn fully
And swelowed inward hastily
And if it synke not
And will not through the throt
Take of raw flesh a mossel
And with a small threde bynd it well
That mossel swalow with speed
But in thy hand hold the threde
Till it is down hold fast
And it shall that bone out cast
If the thread break do it efte
Unto that it be out refte
The.CC.xliiij. questyon
The mucke that every man goyth fro
Tell me why it styncketh so
STynkyng is it for causes twey
And which they are I shall sey
That one for speryng of the body
So yt none air may come thereby
I shall the set ensample how
If a man took right now
A piece of flesh never so fair
And spered it there it had no air
And it lie hot sone shall thou se
That it should stynckyng be
For the humors is another skyl
That the stomach draw him until
Which full byttar are and sour
Salt and of evil sauoure
With the mete they mynge them al
When so aman ete shall
Great stench the mete of them takys
Whereby as aman lies it smakys
The.CC.xlv. questyon
Tell me now I pray the this
Why mannys vryne so salt is
BE three things comys it to
Why that it is salt also
One is be cause aman that it drynkes
In him through the mete it synkes
And stepes therein out to get
All the salt that was in the mete
A another cause also truly
Is for the swote of the body
The body swetys inward for hete
And kyndly salt is the sweet
And that swet mengeles with the pyss^
Wherefore as salt it is
The third cause for the hete with in
To sees and boil that will not blyn
In the body both sweet and drink
Or they may to the blader synke
And for these causes three
Behooves vryne salt to be
The.CC.xlvj. questyon
Whereof ever worms bread
In man and how that they feed
Worms are truly there bread
And in mannys body feed
Of the mucke of grossy metes
That a man or woman etes
And of the self live they well
Of the venomousest dele
For as the adder and the pode
And other worms that in earth wode
Fedyth the earth them verily
Of the venom that therein does ly
Also these worms that in us lie
Clenses us of great party
Of euyls that should in us make
Uenemous metes that we take
Nevertheless hurt they do
There men has them long also
The.CC.xlvij. questyon
How many crafts and which are tho
That man might werst for go
Crafts four in earth ere
That men might not well for bear
One is smyth another wryght
That to men many things dyght
The third art so is sowyng
And the fourth so is weuyng
After the time that made was adam
Was smythyng the first art that came
Wherefore is it lord of al
For nothing that to man shall fall
Of werkyng lomes to work with all
That it through smythes hands ne shall
Wryghtyng is also a conyng
That might not be foreborne be my iugyng
For as for the iron steres the tree
So most the tree help to the iron be
For with out tree may no man well
Light nothing with iron and stele
Of sowyng as the world has need
With sowyng is dyght mannys wede
Though man in lether should be clade
Yet were it with out sowyng bade
Also clouth is made right none
But if weuyng be there on
Other many crafts there are
But these four be the first that ware
And of al they are the best
And to mannys life of the surest
The.CC.lxviij. questyon
Whether shall i^ heuyn have more blys
Children that never did amys
Or they that for god of their will
Took the good and left the ill
Children young that did no sin
Great joy shall in heuyn win
Ye / their joy shall be much more
Tha^ they here have do^e therefore
But he that is of age perfyte
And knows this worlds delight
And might take al to his behoue
And leuyth al for goddys love
Taking penance on his body
There he might live esely
An hundredth fold shall be his blys
More than any chyldes I wys
For as achyld no ill can do
So can it no good thereto
Mede is not ordained alto tho
That wicked deeds are kept fro
But that do of their will good deed
To them so is ordained mede
The.CC.xlix. questyon
How may aman on what manner
Over come ye will of this world here
HE may will over come every dele
And that lightly and well
If athyng fall in his thought
That he wotyth good is naught
And he have thereto great will
It in deed to fulfylle
Turn thy thought in that temptyng
And begin to think on other thing
Thy first thought shall fall the fro
And that wicked will thou shall forgo
But hold thou thereon thy thought sore
Thou delytes more and more
And kyndeles ever as a glede
Unto that thou come to deed
And than falls thou in sin
For thy thought could not blynne
But pyne the all that thou may
For to turn thy thought away
Anon shall it in the kele
And no more thereof shall thou feel
The.CC.xlix. questyon
Tho that to paradise or hell go
Shall they ever come out therfro?
ALL that are in paradise
Would gladly out that be thou wise
But the souls that are in hell
Would never out but still there dwell
And I shall tell the for why
If a lord dwelled here by
And had dwelling in a cete
Two servants of his meyne
That one served him so aryght
That the lord wardayne him hight
Sone would he have his lord come again
The the other were a wicked swayne
And for falshed taken wore
And in prison holden sore
And abode an evil endyng
At the lords home coming
The good servant would he came tyte
In trust of the more profit
The wicked would he tarried lange
For at his coming should he hang
And ever in prison lever were he
Than come out and hanged be
Also they that in paradyse wone
Them longs after gods sone
The very profit that come shall
That the world shall deem over al
For than shall their bliss be more
An hundredth fold than was before
For than shall soul and body wend
Into heaven withouten end
But souls that to hell go
Would gods sone never came so
For at his dome the body shall
Come and dwell the soul withal
And both into hell fare
And an hondreth fold have care
More than that he had first
Therefore to dwell still him list
For better with one care with inn
Than to come out and have twain
The.CC.l. questyon
Why go not the good that are wise
Unto erthly paradyse?
IT is not conuenyent dare I say
That they thither took the way
Erthly paradyse was wrought
To body and to soul naught
It is a place erthly
Therefore when soul is fro the body
It may no where have dwelling
But it be in goostly thing
For ghost reioyseth him right naught
In place that bodyly is wrought
Ghost to ghost that is his right
And body in bodyly thing has might
Soul may no man feel ne se
Wherefore in his kind must he be
The.CC.lij. questyon
Whether is soul heavy or light
Great or small dark or bright
WEre a thousand sowles here
Lyeng on alefe of papere
Heuyar were ye papere naught
For they are light and as thought
Under thy nail might you spear
A thousand and be never the werre
Thy eyes and thy sight before
Should never the less thy sight be
To se the thing that thou would se
No more than thou have lettyng
Of the wynd to se a thing
And in the world is naught so white
As is of hew a good spyryte
But a synful soul synful and wycke
Is also black as any pycke
Great lothly and heavy
And fallyth dounward redely
There nys man ne woman none
That a synful soul saw one
But if the more wonder ware
Out of his wit he should fare
The.CC.liij. questyon
Good sowles that fro the body go^
Whyther wend they anon
ALl that ever to life came
Fro the first time of adam
Young and old good and wicked
Till goddys son on rode be deed
Holly unto hell flyed
Some to the low and some to the hye
But after his deeth on the rood
So shall the sowles of the good
When they fro the body shede
Wend unto the clensyng stead
And when they cleansed are a right
Unto the blys of heuyn light
The wicked shall with out dwelling
Anon in to hell be synkyng
And some shall here have don so
That great clensyng nedyth them not to
But also sone as they dey
Wend to heuyn the hye wey
But never the less at their end
Be purgatory shall they wend
The.CC.liiij. questyon
May no man in heuyn be
But he first purgatory se
NO man or woman shall ever be
Ne was in time that is gone perde
That shall to heuyn when he shall dey
But by purgatory be his wey
Never thelesse there shall be two
That there by need not to go
The prophyt that shall man save
For of clensyng no need shall he have
That other shall be that maiden bright
That goddys son shall in light
For full clean shall be of sin
The body that he shall light in
Wherefore shall she with out care
With soul and body to him fare
The.CC.lv. questyon
Sythen god sendys some to hell
And some to heuyn for to dwell
Whereto shall the dome be
And what thing than judge shall he
GOod sowles should in heuyn dwell
And wicked before the dome in hell
And al at the angels call
Unto the dome come shall
In soul and body as they wore
In this world here before
And both to gether shall they wend
There they shall be with out end
Gloryfyed shall be the wise
Of him that is the hye iustyse
And trobeled than shall be their blys
That men never ne shall mys
And bryghter shall than the body be
Than is the son in his claryte
The wicked shall to hell go
Soul and body to dwele in woe
The pain that he had first in would
Shall than be encresed three fold
For right is the body that was here
In ill and good the sowlys fere
That it with the soul feel also
Joy or pain where it goys to
Wherefore shall the dome be set
Eythere joy or pain to get
The.CC.lvj. questyon
Young children that can not reason
Shall they ought feel dampnacyon
Shall no man dampened be but he
That grauntes well he worthy be
For again say may he naught
All the deeds that he has wrought
But cheldren that no good can
Ne no wit had of man
Dampnacyon shall none come in
For they did no deedly sin
But if any be perchance
That should have come to creaunce
And be deed or it be borne
Joy for ever it has forlorn
But pain it shall none dole
Dwele it shall in a dark hole
Where they shall feel every adele
Nyther of woe ne of well
The.CC.lvij. questyon
Whether in that other world may be
Any hows town or cete
AFul fair cete god first dyght
Of his conyng and his might
Both to aungel and to man
Or that man to sin began
But after the sin of adam
Each man unto hell came
And that is a full wicked cete
Made to the devil and his meyne
But when goddys son is come truly
And death has suffered pityously
Than shall men find weyes three
Each one to a diverse cete
The good to heuyn the way shall take
The wicked to hell to deuyls blake
That repent them here shall be dene
To purgatory to make them clean
Wonyng stedes be there no mo
Where man or woman shall to go
The.CC.lviij. questyon
Shall they be dampened can you me say
Children of hethen men that dey
Children of hethen in yougth dyed
And after their fathers law a lived
Al shall they dampened be
No blys shall they ever se
But young children shall have no awe
That should have be of goddys law
In a darcknes shall they dwell
But of pain dare them none tell
The.CC.lix. questyon
If no sin had done Adam
Should all the folk that of him came
With flesh and fell as they are seen
Ever in paradise have been?
HAd Adam so him bethought
That he had no sin wrought
Of his ospryng should never none
Out of paradyse have gone
But lived there without torment
And fro thens to heaven have went
Right as one of heuens meyne
Without death or any pain
Should no sin ne no lykyng
Have be than in child getyng
Should no man have thought velany
Among other of his company
No More than now is velanye
For to look a man in the eye
The.CC.lx. questyon
Wha^ water hylled ye world every dele
Hyllyd it paradyse as well?
THat flode in earth god sent also
The most dele of the folk to fordo
And for to wasshe the mekyl sin
That the world that time was inn
But in paradyse came it naught
For there was no sin in wrought
But one that adam the appul ate
And the sin lay not in that
It lay in the brekyng
Of the precept of heuyn king
And for the sin that he did thore
Might he therein dwele no more
With all his sin was he out cast
Unto this world here at the last
And when no sin was there about
In paradyse when he was out
What would the flode than do therein
Whare was left no sin
The.CC.lxxj. questyon
Of what age made god adam
When he in to this world came
ADam god made and his fere
At his licknes for they are to hi^ dear
And young right as angels wise
For the love that he and his
Should the ordres of angels fulfill
That Lucyfer began to spyl
But when they mysded at the last
And of paradyse ware out cast
Their here began to wax and sprede
And to their heles down it yede
And after their here on to se
Them seemed of thyrty year to be
The.CC.lxij questyon
Tho that at the dome shall dey
And have not served to hell the wey
Nore time of purgacyon so sone may be
What shall come of them tell me
THey that so long here live shall
Untyl god the world deem al
And them behouys on al wysse
Unto the dome for to arysse
And has not served here to dwele
With wicked in the pain of hell
Ne naught worthy so redely are
In to heuyn for to fare
Untyl their soul cleansed is
Of that it here did amys
God shall send them south to sey
So sharp a pain or they dey
That shall cleanse them over all
And for all the days stand them shall
That they had be worthy to take
In purgatory them clean to make
Also in their up taking
Shall come to them a sharp clensyng
And so shall they up wend
In to the blys with out end
The.CC.lxiii. questyon
When soul come to the body also
Which part gothe it in thereto?
GOddys will may not mys
What so he will anon it is
But when god asoule shall make
To a body that it shall take
Of his might he makys it al
Within the body it have shall
As thou seyst upon a tree
Pere or appul whether it be
When it to wax shall begin
The carnel bredyth there with in
And waxes in the fruit holly
So does the soul in the body
The.CC.lxiiij. questyon
Who named first al thing
And teched them their conyng
GOd when he had made adam
Gave him strength beute and wisdom
And he gave unto things al
Names as men them call
And he gave man conyng also
As behooved his life unto
Of goddys grace and of his will
And than be left they so al still
Fro the time that they begone to be
Unto our second father Noe
He newed and teched al thing
As adam did at the begynyng
Our second father we him call
For the dyluuy drouned al
But Noe and his sons three
And their wives / of them came we
Nevertheless Noe came
Of the gendure of adam
But that time no men had lives
But they four and their wives
And or he dyed came of them two
xxiiij. thousand and mo
The.CC.lxv. questyon
Whereof it be and wherefore
That some men are less and some more
COmenly a mannys waxyng
Is after the time of his beryng
And somwhyle man more or less is
After the vessel he lay in I wys
He that is planet of that year
When a child is borne so here
If he in time of the birth be
Of his sign in the enter
That child so shall be kyndly
But little man of his body
And if he be the sign amyde
For the more man he shall be kydde
And if it in the endyng fall
Than is he more than the other al
And by cause y^ planets of more might wore
In the time here before
Wherefore men than ware
Of greattare might than now are
And ever more while the world shall stand
The more shall al things be less and
The.CC.lxvj. questyon
Whether is perylousare to have
Hete or cold thy self to save
HEte and cold over mesure
Are full hot to endure
If thou have cold and clothles be
Yet may thou somwyse help the
For to styre and go fastly
Or some ways travail thy body
Travail in keelth than is good
It will sone enchafe thy blood
And when the blood in hete is brought
All the lymes eschafe for naught
But if thou have an outrage hete
It is evil for to beat
There may thou help thy self not so
As thou in the cold may do
The hete will gather more and more
And grieve aman al to sore
But if he any drink may feel
Or with some other thing him kele
Full dry it will his body make
And great evil cause him to take
Wherefore than is more pain to have
Hete than keelth and surear to save
The.CC.lxvij. questyon
Does the child follow naturally
The wicked co^dycyo^s of his pare^t truly
Though father and mother wicked be
And the child may live and the
And do as he ought to do
Toward god and man also
It shall him nothing dear
That his forgoars wicked were
No more than it dereth where to grow
Though a thief or wicked man it sow
And be his father never so good
Ne his mother never so myld of mode
And him self be wicked truly
Defiled with deeds wickedly
It fares as where that first men brynne
And after the earth sowes it in
That shall never in earth spryng
Ne fruit shall it none forth bring
The.CC.lxvi. questyon
Whether is bettar and less to spyl
Aman to speak or hold him still
Speak and leave is both to do
As aman sees time thereto
Thou may sometime a word sey
That may cause the for to dey
And sometime may thou hold the still
That may turn the unto ill
Wherefore if thou shall speak any whore
Auyse the on it before
Also well as thou can
That it be scath to no man
And that thy words may a veil
Or else losys thou thy travail
If thou any word say shall
For to pay thy friend with all
And it be a gain two or three
Unsayd were it bettar be
A man should have in many points
A cranes hals with many joints
That he not speak to rath
Whereof should turn scath
But that he may his word with call
Or it pass the joints all The.CC.lxvij. questyon
Whether ought wysar to be
Young man or old as thynkes the
I Think it ware again kind
That men young men should find
That of al thing wysar were
Than old men and could more
^or of the brains of the man
Is much of the wit that he can
And the brains of the old
Are sadder and more may hold
Than of a young man that are light
And to hold are of no might
Also the eldar that aman is
The more time of proof has be his
And the more aman may here and se
The more most his conyng be
In.xl. year more can men
Than in.viii. nine or ten
Wherefore ought old to be wysare
Than any young man in fere
The old may men over run well
But over the other never a dele
The.CC.lxviii. questyon
Tell me now I pray the
What thing delight may be
Bodily delight is hele
And for to have riches feel
And the body at ese to make
And many gifts for to take
For if that thou in hele be
In some thing thou delytes the
Be thou rych and fast may win
Thy delight is than therein
And he that will curteys be told
And geuyth gifts many fold
For to get him loos and pryese
His delight therein lyese
A couytous man delytes him sore
For to gather more and more
And that he to gather has delight
Comes some time other to profit
Another delight is there yet
And goostly delight hight it
When aman delytes him nothing
But in the seruyse of heuyn king
Neither in catel child ne wife
But in holiness of life
Of al delytes the best that is
For it geuyth the endless blys
The.CC.lxi. questyon
What kind appul was that
That our father Adam ate
ADam ete an appul right
Such as we now se in sight
And that appul for his sin
Tokyn of deeth bare there with in
For that yt was first swetest of al
Be came byttar as any galle
In tokyn that he that first had space
Was put there fro and from grace
And in to woe and sorrow than
Whereof the appul sour be came
And the sin was not for that
That he so the appul ate
But by cause he brake the co^maundment
Of his maker / that made him shent
And all that ever came of them to
For their sin went in to woe
The CC.lxxii. questyon
Why learn these young children so
More than these old men do
Children are hottar of kind
Tha^ any old man that me^ find
And curyous they are also
To the thing yt me^ the^ settis to
Lightly taking and holdyng
For their wit is ever waxing
Cold man has saddar wit
Wherefore hard taking is it
And of long time has he seen
Many things that has been
Whereof he has before
Therefore he takes not much more
And mannys wit is more thynkyng
In other things yt he has in occapyeng
And children but of their lesson
Have no occupacyon
Therefore their wit is thereon set
And are of naught else let
The.CC.lxii. questyon
Which is the dylectablest sight
That is under sun light?
THe delectabelest thing that may be
Than is to heuyn for to se
And think on him that al has wroght
Heuyn / earth / and al of naught
Son / moan / and sterre bright
That is delectable goostly sight
Delectable sight there is also
That bodily thing longes unto
As to se delytes him many one
That he loves and longes to se on
For man delyteth him to be hold
Thing that he loves and have would
Though it lothly be and black
For love men say has no lack
And be it so fair as it ought
And aman love it naught
In the sight has he no lykyng
Ne delytes him therein nothing
The.CC.lxiij. questyon
Why made god as thou may se
Here on mannys body for to be
Matter that man has of each lym
Took first god of earth slyme
And comparyd to earth he is
For as on earth waxes gris
So waxes here upon the man
Other fruit naught give he can
And on the first man here began spryng
In the stead of his clothyng
When he clothyng of grace had lorne
For he him to god had mysborne
He saw him nakyd and shamed sore
On all the lymes that on him wore
Than sent god here on him waxyng
That to his heles was hangyng
There with was his body clad
And Eve no another clothyng had
The.CC.lxxv. questyon
Why come some this world unto
Doumbe borne and defe also
LOng before that god began
This world for to make or man
Wist he well that man should sin
And goddys hest to break begin
And stablest he forth by
The turnyng about of the sky
And the planets in their going
For to govern al thing
And the signs there they in go
For to work both well and woe
And in some point of tho
Are some borne defe and doume also
Some crooked and some blind
As men may many find
And al for adamys sin is that
When that he the appul ate
And be cause he sinned in his assent
In all the wits that god him lent
Where by in each wit that man haas
Fallyth this aueature percaas
In tokyn that adam forsook
God in them al and the appul took
The.CC.lxxvj. questyon
Profyteth the folk ought unto
The almesdedes that they here do
AMan that does here almesdede
He is worthy of much mede
If he for god it do only
And he trust in him steadfastly
^o much pain it will him save
In purgatory that he should have
And he that beleuyth not in god truly
But in ydols beleuyth sykerly
No alms do he ne may
Though he the pouere give alday
For alms deed may none it prove
With out it be given for goddys love
And give for him and believe in him naught
This may not be to gether brought
For if a man now wore
With a spear wounded sore
Lechcrafte might do no good to him
While the yren styked therein
Never thelesse aman is sin
May sooner have grace for to blynne
And through knowlegyng may he loos
For almesdedes that he does
The.CC.lxxvij. questyon
A judge sins he ought
That denies them y^ ill has wrought
Or sins he ought also with all
That the iugment fulfill shall
BUt if iuges were set
The wicked sometime for to let
An evil world should sone begin
And peril were to live therein
Wherefore is it good to be here
Wicked deeds to correct and dear
For he that works here amys
In so much as in him is
He wrathes god of heuyn sore
Than is judge ordained therefore
Wreckar of goddys cause to be
Wrong to deny in every country
Now if he deem him that does ill
Me thinks he does goddys will
And he that the iugment shall do
Unto him sha^ dempt is so
He has no p^ryl therein
But waysshes his hand in blood of sin
Now than who so in iugment shall fyte
Look that he fro right not ^yte
For gift / fauour^ / ne for made
For he wrathes god so tha^ deed
But in (...) iuges right
Sins (...) the plyght
The.CC.lxxviij. questyon
Tho tha^ are dom^ and ^ooles borne
And doys (...)
HOles that no good can
Ne no wit have of man
And are borne of their mother so
Men tell of them what so they do
As a child that has no wit
But does all that lyketh it
And bettar do can it naught
But as it falls in the thought
And by cause their wit is no more
Dampened be they not therefore
But they that in wit were borne
And after it have forlorn
And did evil there before
While that they in wit wore
And no mercy of god asked
Of that deed while their wit lasted
And after knew another good nor ill
Tho shall be at goddys will
The.CC.lxxix. questyon
Angels that with god are dear
Keep they mennys sowles here
Every man what so he be
That beleuyth in the Trynyte
Has an aungel him to zeme
And to tech him to good to lene
And al his good thoughts and deeds
Puttys him his aungel that ledys
A wicked aungel he has also
Wicked deeds to put him to
And his wit is lent him fre
And good and evil knows he
Whether aungel he follow will
And the good aungel is f^lwo
When he sees his man mysgo
And his joy is well the more
When men doys after his lore
For of him self has man right naught
But wickydnes in deed and thought
The.CC.lxxx. questyon
How may aungel yt has no body
Show him self here to man openly
AUngel that is in goddys sight
To se al thing has he might
But him may no body se
For a goostly thing is he
And through mannys prison
Is aungel sometime sent here down
And he may come also smerte
As any thought in mannys heart
Of the air he takyth a body
And than is he seen openly
And than aman here him can
And he him as another man
But were not that body truly
Him might se no bodily eye
The.CC.lxxxj. questyon
Are deuyls spyers ever more
Of that the folk do euerywhore
DEuyls are ever more ready
Where so aman does wickedly
And many mynysters have they
That are walkyng night and day
And that never more blynne
Men to tempt and bring in sin
And when man hat^ do^ also
Anon his master hete^^ys it to
But if that it so b^falle
That any of the deuyls all
With some good man be down cast
His pour will no lengar last
Among his fellows he shall be she^^
And be cast in great tourment
So sore them ^^nes hesp^de naught
Of the thing that he after wrought
The.lxxxij. questyon
How is that fire on what manner
Purgatory that men call here
Fire of purgatory is
There much woe is and no blys
Thethere shall face al tho
That shall be saved and no mo
They that are here of repentance
And do not fully here pr^^aunce
There shall he it fulfill be dene
For to make him fully clean
But there shows to them in that woe
Angels and other hallowes mo
For whose love they did (...) h^re
And they amend them at their sh^re
Sight of them and trust al so
Of blys that they shall after to
That shall be the comfort all
For they wot to blys they shall
But that shall after that goddys son be
Deed truly upon the rode tr^
The.CC.lxxxiij. questyon
What thing is it men call hell
And how come sowles therein to dwell
Hell is a stead of pain and woe
And yet are there helles two
The nether and the vppar hell
And the nether the worse we ^el
For there is the great pyne
And prync^paly are there in
The first pain is I wot
That above other fire is hot
As that our fire is of nature
Above fire wrought of the paynture
That other pain than is great cold
Such that no man young ne old
May suffer it so straynyng it is
And there is another joy de blys
The third pain that is in that hell
Are dragons and adders fell
That in the fire live also
As fysshes in the water do
The fourth is such stynke in that hole
That nothing may it th^^
The fyfte scourgears fowls to ^ete
As smyth does (...) ^^mours great
The syxte pain that there is dyght
Is great darkness without light
The seuente is the confusyone
Of all the sins aman b^e done
For every man shall know and se
His deed though him loath be
The right pain shall be the cry
That the dragons so gryssely
And the adders that there wone
Shall cry upon him ever anon
The nynth is that he shall for go
The sight of god and ever to be in woe
A wicked shall have all this pyne
For he forsook the ordres nine
Of angels that in heuyn wore
Ne wrought not after goddys lore
But tho that now wend to hell
Shall not al in the nether dwell
In the hyer shall be their dwelling
As adam and his ospryng
Unto the time of the prophet
That their sin with his deeth shall beat
The.CC.lxxxiiij. questyon
They y^ in holle have their dwelling
Wot they or know they any thing
Ryghtwyse sowles know well
Al men and th^yr deeds every dele
And they wore all that ever is
Both in sorrow and in blys
Wicked sowl^ that is in hell
Knows all that with them dwell
But of heuyn wot they naught
Ne of no good deed that is wrought
The good pray ever more
For them that did them good before
And they present to god also
The good deeds that we do
And the sight in the Trynyte
Makyth them al thing to know and se
The.CC.lxxxv. questyon
The good that hens begone al tyte
Come they now to joy perfyte
UNto joy though they be brought
Parfyt joy have they naught
As they shall afterward come till
And why I shall the say the skyl
If thou come unto a feste
There rych metes are and honest
And thou be set alone to mete
The sadlyare shall thou ete
But if a good fellow come to the shall
That thou daryst to ete with all
Thou etyst meryare than thou dedyst before
And thy mete does the good the more
Even so the soul that is in blys
Has much joy there that he is
But perfyt joy has it naught
Till his fellow be thereto brought
Which is the body that it in lay
And that shall be at domysday
When they to gether shall come again
Either of other shall be feign
And have of other great delyt
Than shall be their joy perfyt
And tho that shall to hell fare
Shall than have perfyt care
The.CC.lxxxvj. questyon
May sowles ought show the^ until
Their fre^des each time wha^ they will
GOod sowles that are in blys
May each time that their will is
Show them to friends that would them se
Slepyng or wakyng whether it be
But the soul that is in hell
Behouyth ever more still to dwell
Tho yt are in purgatory / are believe
That the good aungel may them give
So may they show them their friends unto
To pray them that they them good do
Or that they prayer for them make
That their pains may sone slake
But if any show him to the
And seys that he dampened be
Trust it naught never the less
It is a deuel in his lycknesse
The.CC.lxxxvij. questyon
Dremes that men dreme on night
Whereof come they to mannys sight
SOme time of heuyn king
For to tell man some thing
And of the devil they come somwhyle
To be gyle that faith give them till
Sometime of humors steryng
About the heart of man slepyng
Sometime the womb filled will it make
Over much mete and drink to take
Sometime of that men sees on day
And can not cast it a way
Or thing that he has of great thought
In sleep is it before him brought
The.CC.lxxxviij. questyon
When god made first trees for man
Was any fruit in them than
AS god made adam fully man
And Eve of him fully woman
Of their seed forth mo to bring
So did he of al other thing
Among al other trees he wrought
That fruit in their seson forth brought
And every tree that men find
Has his fruit in him by kind
And the seed of them also
Brought forth fruit as they now do
The.CC.lxxxix. questyon
What time and what day was it
That adam was made tell me yet
ADam was made as old men told
When the moon was.iij. days old
And had little than of light
Gnabrygab than it hight
The first moan was it of the year
And on a friday that was clear
Adam saw that same time
And anon he called it pryme
But after changed al Noe
And the mones stablysshed he
On a friday adam was wrought
Noe that day of live was brought
And on such a day shall borne be
The very prophyt / and dye on tree
And he shall as he well may
Work many wonders on that day
The CC.lxxxx questyon
When the flod over the world ran
Made god than new fruit to man
GOd made fruit and al thing
To mannys mete at the begynyng
Trees he made and fruit thereon
And tho fell in the flod each one
The rotes stood in the earth still
And after the flod waxed to will
And were so fair as they first wore
Beryng fruit as they did before
So was no fruit made new
But the trees that first grew
The.CC.lxxxxj. questyon
Where set Noe ship on land
When the flod was with drawand
SOne so the flod was with droughe
The arch was set safe I noughe
Upon a great hylle and a hye
That hight the mount of Hermonye
Also quyckly as Noe
Was out gone with his mean
And the beasts euerychone
The trees took rotes up a non
That upon the ship wore
And shall there stand ever more
God set the lycknesse on the sky
So that men should wit there by
That never more should be none
Such a flod as that was one
The.CC.lxxxxij. questyon
When Noe from the ship went so
Came he this world strange unto?
GOd made never creature
Ne never shall here for to dure
That he ne shall that warn I the
To this world right strange be
For porely we came and bare
And pouere shall we hens fare
To day borne to morrow on bear
Our heritage is not here
And have we heritage none
Than are we strange euerychone
And strange was Noe also
When of the arche he came the world unto
The.CC.lxxxxiij. questyon
Whereof ever may it be
That a man has in his heart petye?
PEtye comes of a fre blood
And a nesshe heart that is good
Pity to god may lyckened be
For of him is mercy and pity
And he that will no pity have
Him avails not pity to crave
Pity tendres mannys heart
And causyth it to swet al smerte
The heart there with in sweet is brought
And for no another trauayleth naught
When the heart has pity of a thing
Anon it fallyth in meltyng
And to sweet it will begin
For tenderness that than is in
The.CC.lxxxxiiij. questyon
Why have fowls in the^ no nature
As beasts to make engendure
HAd fowls kind in them also
As the other beasts do
Young to bear in their body
They might not than fly a hy
The heaviness of their beryng
So should let them of fleyng
And than might take them every man
When they great to wax began
And they are made by the air to fly
And not ever by the ground to lie
Wherefore they ordained ware
Of goddys will as they now are
The.CC.lxxxxv. questyon
Sal men have pity of al tho
That lie in pain and in woe
And deliver them also
If that men may come thereto
IF that thou in pain se
Man or beast whether it be
Than shall thou have pity of the sight
And deliver them if thou might
Nevertheless men may well slo
Diverse beasts and fowls also
Mannys mete of for to make
When time comes them to take
But should they do the no seruyse
Nothere for mete ne other wise
Though thou have to it delight
Or serve not for thy appetyte
But as it came so let it go
Do it another pain ne woe
Be it a worm that venym berys
And it the / nor non other derys
Thou shall no hurt it do
For thou have no cause thereto
God it made not for naught
For thy let him that it wrought
For to do with it at his own will
And do not thou with wrong it spyl
The.CC.lxxxxvj. questyon
Which is bettar as ye doyst think
Wine or water for to drink
WIne is a thing full precious
That many are after covetous
And sometime it health makys
Unto some man that it takys
For it is naught to every man
To drink I like that it drink can
Wise men drink wine often
At mesure and bear them soft
They noman mys say ne mys do
Them is wine profit unto
But folys that wine drink shall
That drink drunk therwithal
And when the wit dronken is
Then will they gladly do amys
Men to beat or to slo
Or unto horedom for to go
Unto men that use it so common
Were better the water than the wine
But he that mesurably
Drynkys wine and not for thy
Leses his wit / him does it good
And makes him good body and blood
Therefore shall wine to good be pressed
And unto foles is water best
The.CC.lxxxxvij. questyon.
When man is ardaunt for to fight
With some that standis in his sight
How than may he hold him still
And overcome that wicked will
AMan may tempre him if he will
And he will led his wit with skyl
If that he in wreth be brought
For some thing that him lykes naught
If he be in will to fight
Withstand his will at his might
And undertake to think else whore
And may his blood not kele therefore
Out fro folk he draw him fast
And alone in his heart he cast
That man may do when he is wroth
That al his live may be him loath
And be him alone so flyte and fight
As it ware in that others sight
And with his breath that he lettes go
Shall his great hete wend him fro
So guyeted shall he be
And become al in a tempre
The.CC.lxxxxviij. questyon
Why have wymen all the woe
Of this world and the joy also
LIghtly woe and lightly well
Have these wymen every dele
Full lightly take they joy them to
And full lightly woe also
Lyghtnes of ye brain mas this
There no sadness in is
Less they are than men of wit
Wherefore their thought lightly will flyt
They fare as a lefe on the tree
That turns whare the wynd wylbe
Ware their wit sad as of man
Men should of them / for that they can
Domesmen and justice take
But no law will it them now make
Lightly they trust that men them say
And also quycly it is a way
And for that they now trust / andnow let go
Have they so sone well and woe
The.CC.lxxxxix. questyon
Why are children when they borne are
So vnconyng as beasts ware
A child yt tender is and a yonglyng
May of this wo^^d know nothing
For he is both tendar and grene
And of this world has nothing seen
Unto he come to greatter age
That he may him self page
Than may he se and understand
Of al things that be coming / and
Unconnyng is a child also
Unto the devil shame to do
That he that so little borne shall be
And that a beast can more than he
That he shall have the heritage
That the devil for his outrage
First lost / and for his pride
This is his sorrow in every tide
For feblenesse of nature is it
Why children young have no wit
When adam was made and his wife
And god had given him ghost of life
Redely knew they al thing
For they ware of goddys making
But that father and mother has here
For feblenesse of the matere
When it is borne it can no good
Less than a beast lepyng in the wode
The.CCC. questyon
Tell me now if that thou can
Whereof comys natural wit in man
OF pure brains it comyth unto
Pure blod and pure heart also
And be ye two pure of these three
And the third naught be
Right clear wit may ne be there
As that al three to gether were
For with one eye sees no man so
As that he with two might do
Be heart and brains never so good
And dark be in him the blood
Heart and brains it drynkes till
And the wit truly does spyl
Be the heart good and the blod bright
And the brains myrke and light
Greatly will light brains grieve
All that that other to would give
And the planets in their going
Works in man all this thing
The.CCC.j. questyon
Whereof may it come to
The nesyng that men nese so
NEsyng falls soth to sey
Unto man of things twey
First of humors that are ascended
In to the brains of the head
The brains refuse them gladly
And castys them out hastily
And in the down falling of tho
Unto the nostrels they go
For tho are ready open ey
Whereby go they so a wey
Another is to look up on hy
Unto the son on the sky
And the hete of the son anon
Fylles the veins of the head echone
Dryuyng out the keelth thore
That in the brains was before
And if thou wylt with hold nesyng
Spear thy mouth at the begynyng
And draw thy breath fast to and fro
And nesyng shall the over go
For the nose stoppys there with all
And at the mouth it out go shall
The CCC.ij questyon
Wynd blowyng with main
Why deyes it for a shoure of rain
WAter and wynd to gether are
As it mother and daughter ware
Daughter of mother has feding
And wynd of water begynyng
and wha^. ye cloud yt it has wrought
Is him self down brought
The wynd is stylle anon right
For his mattar has lorne sight
For knyfe shall no man make well
If he have another yren ne stele
The.CCCiii. questyon
Whic is the strongar of these twey
Wynd or water this me sey
GRound of al thing with right
Is strongar and of more might
Than the croppe above it cast
Else might it no while last
And strongar is that thing I wys
That sterys than that steryd is
Now is wynd at the begynyng
Stered air and no another thing
And course of water makes it all That the air so sterre shall
And if wynd with water stered be
Than is water strongar than he
The.CCC.iiii. questyon
Tell me now on what manner
Aman shall live in this world here
AMan shall live in that manner
So that when he deyes here
Afterward may rise
Boldly to go be fore iustyse
That is to say yt al his thought
Be on him that him has wrought
And worship him all that he can
And after in god love every man
And of that truly he may win
Of his travail with out sin
Than shall he live with out pride
Envy and couetys also let glyde
This may he both live well and deye
And rise and go to the blys the weye
The.CCC.v. questyon.
Shall aman that in good stead be
To seek a bettar raunge the country
IF thou in a good place be
Where with thou may well agree
There thou good life may led
The to cloth and to feed
Hold the still run naught
Ne for the bettar have no thought
To seek a bettar thou may be in mind
But thou wottyst not where it to find
And there thou comyst percaas
Shall Be wors than that other was
Such wenys to find him before
Baken bread when he comes thore
He shall perauenture find the corn
Standing yet in the feld unshorn
Wherefore if thou in good stead be
Hold the therein by read of me
The.CCC.vi. questyon
Which are more worthy of ye twey
Rych or pouer thou me sey
THere are worthynesse two
Goostly and bodily also
The bodily worthynesse
That is another more ne less
But after as a man has here
So is he hold among men dear
Therefore by so much as thou have now
So much worthy art thou
Have thou but a penny in all
No more worthy men hold the shall
Goostly worthynesse is not so
But who toward god best may do
And serve him here all the best
He with god is worthyest
Much worthy here to be
Is truly but a vanyte
But that worthy is to god to wend
That worthynesse has no end
The.CCC.vij. questyon
Whether is to man more semely
Fair vysage or fair body
A Fair body to man I wys
A full semely thing it is
But what the nakyd body be
No man may it well se
Be it shapenyl or well
The clothes couers it every dele
But that that is in sight
And may not be hyd with right
The vysage that man is known by
If it be fair and semely
A fair man men will him call
And leave his other lymmes all
And in a fair vysage and white
Has aman much delight
Wherefore in all the man not lies truly
So co^ly a lym as is a fair vysage verily
The.CCC.viij. questyon
How shall aman led his life
That fyndes ama hauntyng his wife
Find thou aman with thy wife
Look thou make with him no strife
Preuely thou go thy way
And nothing unto them say
But afterward thou say her to
That she no more do so
Say she does here self shame
For in her lies all the blame
There would no man her come till
But it were by her will
Wherefore chastyse her courtesly
And look how she will do there by
And she will not do after thy lore
Of that vpbreyd her no more
If thou smite on the man a non
When thou come him first upon
And begin to fight also
The devil procurys there unto
One of you may lightly the other slo
And so encresyth sone thy woe
Therefore though it greues the sore
Better the less scathe than the more
The.CCC.ix. questyon
Shall men for tene or for lesyng
Blame god of heaven in any thing?
GOd of heaven is so wise
That in him no blame lyse
But tha^kyng / worship / and honor
As to him that is our creator
And if thou for thy folly
Fall in any malencoly
Blame thou god therefore nothing
Blame the and thine vnconyng
Have thou not as thy will wore
Why shall thou blame god therefore
Though thou pray god send me
It may not at thy will be
But if thou travail for to live
God shall help the for to thryue
Were aman a water in
That deep ware and coud swym
And he cried on god fast
And ware perysshed at the last
For defaute of steryng
That he would help him self nothing
Wherefore blame god no man should
He would have help if him self would
The.CCC.x. questyon
Which is the sauourest thing
Of all that are at thy wenynge
OF al things that ever be
Is there none so sauoure
Unto man / beast / and foul also
As sleep is when time is thereto
There nis another mete ne drink
That sauoryth aman I think
As sleep. when aman would feign
No delight is there again
With out sleep may nothing thryue
Of all that ever are a live
For that ordained god the night
Therein to rest and sleep every wight
Sleep norysshes mannys kind
And beasts as that men find
Man / beast / ne foul is none
So iolyfe nor so well be gone
Hold him fro sleep again his will
Thou may him sone spyl
And cause him to lose both flesh and blood
Be he never so totter and wode
Wherefore is sleep sykerly
The sauorest thing that I wot truly
The.CCC.xj. questyon
Of what manner and of what bounte
Ought kings and lords to be
Lords and kings ought right well
To be true as any stele
In word i^ work to their might
And with justice deem a right
Uyse them well also to be
Curteys / meke and of pity
And to mysdoars nevertheless
Stout to deem their wickydnesse
For he may never god well plese
Nor his lordshyp in honor with ese
That sparyth wickedness to shent
And god is not there with content
They ought also to be doughty
Wygrous and fers of their body
Large and geuyng courtesly
Their state may they maynteyne there by
To pouer they ought be mercyable
And unto the rych stable
And above al thing
To work the will of heuyn king
For he has them lords set
Good to do and yi^ to let
The.CCC.xij. questyon
Sweet that comes of the body
How comes it whereof and why
Sweet kyndly comes comenly
Of wicked blod in the body
That steryth sometime and has no roo
And other humors him mynges to
And when they to gether take
Great hete in the body they make
And that hete that is within
Makes the body as it should brynne
And that body that is so hot
Anon castes out the swote
The kind clensys there with all
But over much hurt shall
The.CCC.xiij. questyon
Which are the best hewes that ere
Of clothyng men for to were
BEst hewes that may be
To mannys clothyng are three
That are read / white / and grene
And for these causes I it mean
The red supposys regalyte
And is color of dygnyte
It geuyth the werer much blys
And to the son lyckened it is
White wede is a worthy thing
And of angels it is clothyng
Hit makyth him mylde that it weryth
And hew of the moon it beryth
Grene is a precyons color
And should be hold in honor
Of al other most is it borne
For gras / tree / and also corn
And all that waxyth in earth by dene
Al is it clad in grene
And that most things are clad with all
Dygnyest hew men hold shall
The.CCC.xiiij. questyon
Seeing men grene a good hew call
Which is the grenest thing of all The grenest thing is water I wene
For waters make al thing grene
And ware not of water the moystyng
Should no grene thing spryng
Grasses that on hills are standing
There no water is rennyng
With rain and dewes of the air
Wax they both grene and fair
And seeing grennesse is by watrys might
Than is it grenest with right
The.CCC.xv. questyon
Tell me now so have thou blys
Which is the fattest thing that is
FAttest thing that is of kind
Than is earth that men find
For trees and al othere thing
Of the fatness of earth spring
And ware fattnesse of the earth no whore
Should they never spryng more
Of the fatness of earth comyth all That they spryng and wax with all
Of earth take they their nature
And else might they not endure
The.CCC.xvj. questyon
Whether is bettar at the death day
Repentance or hope of blys for ay
BOth are good soth to say
Unto man when he shall deye
Repentance is good to have
But good hope shall aman more save
For every man that deye shall
May not repent him of al
For thy behouyth him nedly
Trust him al in goddys mercy
But he that in no hope is
For to come to heuyn blys
Shall he never come therein
Be he never so clean of sin
But he that has al his trust
That god is of mercy most
That trust shall save him at the last
When other shall be out cast
The.CCC.xvij. questyon
Shall men grieve and make evil chere
For aman that deyes here
By kind men weep and make care
When their friends fro them fare
Nevertheless the man that ay
Has kept goddys law / I say
Of his deeth no sorrow is
For he goyth unto blys
There to be for ever more
Him should no man sorrow sore
But he that in god trustes naught
Nor his co^maundment has not wrought
And dies so in that intent
And is so to hell went
For him is sorrow to make
That he such life would not for sake
The.CCC.xviij. questyon
Came fro yt other world ever eni thi^ng
That of hell or heuyn told tydyng
MAny have come again here
Good men that with god were
The folk to counsel and tell
Both of heuyn and of hell
Yt ware good men here before
Of whom that we yet have lore
They wrote in books what was wrought
By cause men should for get it naught
The great joy that is in heaven
That no tongue in earth may reken
And the great pain of hell
That they have that therein dwell
This told adamys son Abel
Seth and Enocke also well
Noe and Melchysedech also
And other prophytes set thereto
Through goddys co^maundment
They are hither again sent
That is to say their techyng
Through which we have knolegeyng
Of heuyn and hell both
Well is he that they roth
The.CCC.xix. questyon
Shall aman any thing sey
When he shall to sleep him ley
AMan that beleuyth in god aryght
And kepyth his will at his might
Wha^ he to sleep does lay hi^ down
He shall say this oryson
Lord god of might most
To the be take I my ghost
Thou keep it lord and it defend
From encombrance of the fend
From him lord thou me clear
That he me never dear
Have mercy on me heuyn king
And grant me lord my askyng
And than sleep he hardely
With out dread of thy enemy
The CCC.xx. questyon
Of al battle that is in land
Which is the strongest to withstand
Battle strongar worcester I naught
When that I have al be thought
Than is temptacyon of the devil
None that does aman more evil
Other batayls sees some day
But the deuyls fondyng lastyth ay
Sleep man or wake he where so he be
That battle may he evil fle
And be he never so steadfast
Yet will the devil him cast a cast
And man may not fle of the stead
But with fasting or some holyhede
And be cause that war is ever on one
Therefore strengar wot I none
The.CCC.xxj. questyon
How lies a child tell me this
In the mothers womb when it is
A child through goddys grace
Has in the mothers womb aspace
In a chambyr one of the seven
Of the matryce that of men be callen
And the fystes soth to say
Lie be fore the eyes twaye
And great joy they have and reioysyng
There they lie and lykyng
And they would never more
Come in other stead than thore
But when they are here comen
And the air of this world have taken
Than would they not be there again
The.CCC.xxij. questyon
Tell me now of wynes tyte
Why some is read and some white
NOe was the first man
That ever vine to plant began
Fourthy plants he gathered and fette
That ware in fourthy days set
Every day two in earth he dyght
One on day a another on night
Tho that the day ware set upon
Unto the son on it shon
For hete of son that shon than
Of goddys grace tho read becam
And that in earth on night did lay
When the son was a way
For nyghtes keelth that fell thereon
Be came white euerychone
Wherefore are the red hottar well
Than the white agreat dele
The.CCC.xxiij. questyon
Have fowls and beasts any spekyng
Or understanding of any thing
OF beast or foul shall thou none find
That has language in his kind
Of al beasts men reckon can
Has none language but man
Fowls and beasts cry by dene
But they wot never what they mean
When that one makyth a cry
That other herys redely
And cries again by and by
But what they mean wot not they
All that ever they cry and do
Of kind is and usage also
Which kind has god them dyght
For man shall over them have might
The.CCCxxiiij. questyon
Whether helps the soul more
That aman does here before
Or that men after do for him
When that he is deed and dym
BOth helps man in need
But both are not of one mede
For if a man going be
In a da^knesse there he may not se
And a ^anthorne go him before
Thereof has he light well more
Than though be hynd followed two
For / for them might he mysgo
Also a man that does good here
As long as he may him self stere
Thereof has the soul more mede
Than for such two after deed
Many men have that read
To do for them when they are deed
When him self may have it no more
The less thank he is worthy therefore
Would he for goddys love it dele
While that he ware in hele
Than went before him the light
To lead him the wey a right
The.CCC.xxv questyon
Fysshes that swym here and thore
In water sleep they never more
FIsshes that are in the sea
Or in river whether it be
Have their eyes bright within
And to and fro they ever swym
It is not of their kind the right
That they sleep other day or night
If they be weary they will rest
A while where them thinks best
And if they felt the air also
As we or fowls or beasts do
That above earth wone
Of kind should they sleep full sone
The.CCC.xxvj. questyon
Of all that in the world be
The fairest foul which thinks the
IF all the fowls yt god has wrought
Wore in to one place brought
And stood al upon a flock
The fairest of al were the cock
And he has things three
That in none other may men se
On his head he beryth a crown
And spore upon his shanke down
And god has given him the might
To know the howrs of day and night
The cock is gelous over his wife
And often for her makyth strife
And he should have defaut of mete
Or his wife if he might ought get
And if he dwelled in field also
Or in wod as other do
All the fowls that before him wore
Reverence should here them thore
And for his fayrnesse have of him awe
Than is he fairest with law
The.CCC.xxvii. questyon
Which is the fairest beast that is
And that aman might not mys
Horse is the fairest beast in land
Stalworthyest and made to hand
With horses often lords get
Land and life / drink and mete
Horses in harow and in ploughe
In cart and euerywhore good I noughe
Horses bear men to and fro
There they on foot might not go
Wherefore is he best and fairest
And unto mannys behoue the best
The.CCC.xxviij. questyon
Tell me now yet things mo
The fairest horses which are tho
HOrses in the world are many one
But not al shapen after one
He that well shapen shall be
Behouyth to have this properte
Four things long / behouyth him to
And four things short also
And four things large somedele
Than is he horse shapen full well
Long shankes / and long hals
Long tail and long rybbes als
Four short things is no lake
Head / eres / pastors / and back
Four large things come there nest
Mouth / nostrels / croupe / and breast
And great eyes falls well
Than is he shapen well every a dele
The.CCC.xxjx. questyon
Which are ye beasts so god ye save
That most understanding have
Beasts yt of understanding be
Most of al other are three
Ape / bear / and hounde also
These wylbe buxum man unto
Mannys techyng will they lere
And understand that they stere
When Noe in the arch was in the flode
These three beasts next him stood
And of all the last went him fro
For none understood so much as tho
The.CCC.xxx. questyon
When goddys son shall borne be
By what tokyn shall men it se
TOkyns many shall be fall
When goddys son lord of all
Shall Be borne of her that hethes
Over all the world shall than be pees
Agreat ster^e shall show that day
That all the world well se may
Asercle of gold purpred with all
About the son show him shall
A well of oil in great tokenyng
Out of the earth than shall spryng
And a descrypcyon shall taken be
Over all the world in every country
A dombe beast as that we find
That day shall speak again kind
Beast / foul / and fysshe also
That day shall be in rest and to
And the deuyls in hell dwelling
Shall Be full sorry and morning
The eyghtene day after he is borne
He shall be circumcised and shorn
And that in tokenyng be shall
That he is god and man with all
The.CCC.xxx. questoon
Tell me now as shall be fall
What sygnyfye tho tokyns al
Peace shall be over al
For he is peace that man come shall
The sterre that shall show frelye
His godhed shall sygnyfye
About the son the golden thing
Shall betoken that he is king
The purpre shall be token also
Of the passion that he shall to
The well of oil showyth byturly
That he shall be well of mercy
The descrypcyon that shall taken be
Tokenes that over al lord is he
The doume be ast spekyng tokenes als
That they that in the law were falls
And were but as beasts told
Shall turn to him and of him hold
Beast and foul shall be in blys
And they wot goddys son he is
And the deuyls shall be sorry
For they dread him wonderly
That he is that shall break hell
And take away that with him dwell
The.CCC.xxxj. questyon
When he is borne achyid shall he
Be conyng more tha^ another shall be
SOne as he borne is / he can
More than any other man
For though he be tha^ a yonglyng
The godhed in him wot althyng
The son of the trynyte
The fathers wisdom truly
So is sperd in him only
Wherefore shall he know well more
Than any after or before
Nevertheless for all that he can
He will fulfill the kind of man
In all things that falls him to
Save sin that shall he never do
The.CCC.xxxij. questyon
When he is borne as that we tell
Where shall he in host dwell
WIth his mother while he is young
So shall be his dwelling
In to Egype she led him shall
And there a while dwele him with all
After again shall he go
Unto the land that he came fro
And begin the folk to tech
And openly for to prech
And al his life shall be so
As he teches there unto
To many sin he shall forgive
Such as upon him will believe
And cold water them christian in
In forgiveness of their sin
For water as that men well wot
S^eckenes the fire that is hot
It clenses fylth and makyth clean
And that is dry it makyth grene
And it sleckeneth also thyrste
Unto man that drink list
Wherefore in water baptyse shall he
For virtue of these myghtes three
First it sleckenes hete of sin
And clenses fylthe that man is in
And dry sowles grene shall he make
Through the baptyme that they shall take
And in this life shall he dwell
Ey to he dey and break hell
The.CCC.xxxiiij. questyon
Yet would I wit more of the
Shall goddys son afayre man be
A Shall with right of nature
Be the fairest creature
That ever was and ever shall be
Shall none be so fair as he
And it is right that he be fair
That of heuyn is son and heir
And he shall upon an hylle
His dyscyples show him till
And he shall seem to their sight
As it were the son light
And his clothes white of hew
As it were new fallen snewe
Therefore is no man alive
That his fayrhed may descryue
The.CCC.xxxv. questyon
Tell yet if that thou can me sey
Why it was that he would dey
FOr obedyence and for love
Heuyn to dyght to our behoue
For obedyent shall he be
Unto the deeth upon the tree
So that that was forlorn
Through the tree there beforne
Should be won again also
Through the tree that he shall to
And for love of man kind
That his seruyse will have in mind
He had lever deeth take
Than he would man kind forsake
His deeth shall aman again bye
To reave the devil of his maystery
The father shall to the son give
Pour for his servant yt he will here leave
The.CCC.xxxvj. questyon
Who shall him slo and by what read
And how long shall he be deed
A Manner of folk shall him slo
That hight Jews and none but tho
Afalse counsele take they shall
And afalse wyttnesse with all
To bring him to the deeth also
And knights shall to deeth him do
In grave shall he be nyghtes two
The whyls shall the godhed go
To hell to fete al hyse
And the third day shall he arise
To paradyse than wend shall he
Forty days there to be
In which time he shall bodily
Ten times show him openly
First he shall him show I sey
To him that him in grave shall ley
After to his mother dear
For to glade her morning chere
After he shall him show also
The Mary Magdalene unto
And her sins forgive shall he
The fourth time to maryes three
The fyfte to peter south to seye
The syxte time to pylgryms twey
That to a castle shall with him wend
And thore shall he with them send
And the seventh time in a halle
Among his dyscypyls al
There shall he bid them grope and se
Wyturly that he it be
The eyghtene day to one that shall
Grope his wounds and hands with all
And to aful worthy hylle
The nynth day shall he show them till
The tenth among the people openly
When he ascendyth to heuyn on hye
The.CCC.xxxvij. questyon
Shall he ascend to heuyn so hye
Alone with out company
AL tho that with him rise shall
To heuyn shall ascend him with all
And in that lyknesse shall he fare
That he was in before his care
But when he is up on hye
Above the clouds by the sky
In that lyknesse he shall be thore
That he did in him show before
Unto his dyscypyls two
Oo an hylle whare they shall go
The.CCC.xxxviij. questyon
Shall goddys son that him is dear
Any house in earth have here
IN earth a hows shall he have
That man afterward shall save
And that shall his spouse be
For all shall be on it and he
By the sacrament of his body
That he shall make solempnelye
Unto his apostyls at the mete
And each one shall thereof ete
And that sacrament that I the tell
Shall in his hows devoutly dwell
And al of good conuersacyon
Shall come unto salvation
Through the virtue and the might
Of that sacrament so dyght
And al tho that are outfous
And are spered out of that house
In pain of hell shall be shent
But they come to amendment
The.CCC.xxxix questyon
Shall his body ever dwelling be
In earth that men may it se
HIs body shall ever be dwelling
In earth to the worldys endyng
Upon a day as he shall
His apostyls soupe with all
He shall take the bred and bliss
And say / ete / my body this ysse
Than shall he take the cup in handys
That with wine before him standys
And bless it and say them unto
Have drink this my blood also
The self blood is it that I here make
That shall be shed for mannys sake
And through the virtue and the might
Of his word is there anon right
His very body god and man
As that he to say began
And if that sacrament ne wore
His flesh only and no more
With out blod thereto wrought
His very body ware it naught
Flesh in leuyng man to be
Without blood can no man se
And there shall his dyscypyls take
Might that sacrament to make
With word he shall them learn thore
That him self said before
And that body shall dwelling be
So that men each day may it se
The.CCC.xl. questyon
Shall every man have might thereto
His body for to make also?
NAy / shall none have thereto might
But that thereto are ordained right
That of his holy house shall be
Kepers / and have the dyngnyte
And though that keeper bear him ill
And will not fulfill gods will
Neuerthewors is that flesh and blood
Ne never the better though he be good
And who so takes it worthily
His soul hele he takes thereby
And he that unworthily it takes
His own dampnacyon he makes
For he takes not gods body
But bread he takes al only
The godhed that there was in
God takes it to him for his syn
For so worthy a thing as he
In a foul vessel will not be
And no more enpeyre ne can
That same body a wicked man
Than is enpeyred the sonnys light
Of a warderobe that here is dyght
The.CCC.xlj. questyon
Tho that have might thereto
That body for to make also
Shall they before the trynyte
More than other worshypped be
NO man shall there worshypped be
For honor nor for dygnyte
But with god he shall be dear
After as he has don here
Though goddys hows would him chose
Her kepar to bynd and lose
His worship shall be never the more
But if he have don wherefore
And do he not aryght also
As him be comyth for to do
He shall have blame and pain withal
Well more than a another shall
For he that is made a hyrdar
Of goddys hows to be kepar
His sheep must he keep well and know
And by his own life them show
How that they their life shall led
And them keep from mysdede
Wherefore if he mysdo
So much more pain shall he go to
The.CCC.xlij. questyon
Why shall they every day be wone
To make the body of goddys son
FOr three things pryncypaly
Shall a priest make goddys body
For god and for him self also
And for the folk that se thereto
He that it sees has mede therefore
And that it takes much more
But he that receyuyth it unworthily
Him self he dampneth suerly
And the body ne does it naught
But him that lewdly has wrought
In paradyse appyls many one
Made god and wicked none
And for an appyl that Adam did ete
Was he out of that place beat
And that was not for that
That the appul was naught that he ate
But for that that goddys bode brake he
That him defended had that three
So shall fare that Sacrament
It shall cause no man be shent
Again the devil strength shall it make
Look he be clean that it shall take
The.CCC.xliij. questyon
Tell me now what thing is sin
That many shall be lorne in
Sin forsooth is right naught
For that god never wrought
God of heuyn made al thing
And al was good of his making
And for his works good wore
Sin is none of them therefore
And for he made it not sothely
In substance it is naught truly
The.CCC.xliiij questyon
By what syngne shall men se
When gods sone shall deed be?
AT his death shall befall
Syngnes many one withal
For the son shall lose his light
And become dark as the night
The earth euerydele shall quake
That to folk great dread shall make
Deed bodies shall rise him with all
The third day when he rise shall
An astronomer then shall be
In the boest and say shall he
By the derkenes that he shall find
That than dies god of kind
The.CCC.xlv. questyon
When gods sone in earth shall dwell
Of what virtue shall men him tell
OF much virtue shall he be
By his works that men shall se
Of his virtue he shall with right
Overcome the devil and his might
His Glotony / couetyse / and pride
That the devil had spread wide
And al his might dystroy he shall
That he Adam begyled withal
Fro feuere and other euyls feel
Many men than shall he hele
With five loves and fysshes two
Five thousand shall h^ feed and mo
And.xij. lepys men shall fylle
Of the relefe there that shall be stylle
The prince of his apostyls shall he
Save going upon the sea
He shall command the wynd to lyth
And it shall be still also swyth
To blind shall he give sight
The crooked often to go right
Awoman that shall with here great
And with her teres waysshe his fete
And with her here them wype and dry
He shall forgive her / her folly
A deed man that in grave has leyn
Four days / he shall areyse again
One of his dyscypyls shall bear
A swerd and reave amannys ere
The ere in his hand shall he take
And again it hole make^
All the princes in hell that are
Shall he cause to quake and eke care
When he their gates shall come unto
And command them that they undo
That his are shall he take thore
And send them to blys for ever more
The.CCC.xlvj. questyon
Shall his dyscypyls ought also
Do miracles as he shall do
HIs dyscypyls through his grace
Shall to many sick do solace
For he shall ever by them be
They shall speak and work shall he
Many one with their techyng
To goddys law shall they bring
A wicked man that time shall be
And say that goddys son is he
And begin to ascend a hye
As he would to heuyn fly
One of the apostyls there by standing
And se where he is so flyeng
He shall command him through the might
Of goddys son that he down light
And he shall fall down anon
And break his neck bone
Of many a bale they shall do bote
And many a syke bring on foot
And al shall of his might be
That shall give them that pouste
The.CCC.xlvij. questyon
Shall they never have no end
Nor no woe that to heuyn wend
Souls that are i^ heuyn blys
Shall never of joy mys
Woe ne should they never se
Nor old shall they never be
They shall ever be rejoicing
As a child in his best lyking
And hool as fysshe in delight
Swyfte as wynd and snow white
Bright as the shynyng son
And know all that angels conne
Leel as ded in althyng
And worshypped shall they be as king
A thousand year in game and play
Thinks them not an hour of the day
And that delyt they are with all
With out end them last shall
The.CCC.xlviij. questyon
Tho that are in hell fest
Shall they no mercy have ne rest
THo that shall to hell wend
They are dampened with out end
Rest shall they none have ne mercy
For of that they are not worthy
He that lettys of his fre will
The good / and takys him to ill
It is right that he have also
As that he him chose unto
And t^ pray for him loud or still
Is al again goddys will
He that in purgatory is
To cleanse and after shall to blys
For him is prayer to make
Of his pains for to slake
But he that dampened is to hell
He shall ever in sorrow dwell
With out rest with out to
And with out mercy also
The.CCC.xlix. questyon
They that in heaven shall have their se
Shall they clad or naked be?
THey shall be nakyd of envy
Of pride and of lechery
And clad also nevertheless
With grace and blys and bryghtnes
Shame of themself shall they think non
Though they have no clothis on
No More than Adam of him thought
Or that he the sin wrought
When he had of the appul taken
Than shamed him a saw his making
No more than shamyth the
That man upon thy vysage se
The.CCC.l. questyon
When god to deem come shall
Quyck / deed / and the world al
And al shall be deed / which is than he
That shall alive here be
LIfe and deeth of for to sey
May be said on manners twey
Deeth that body goys here to
And deeth of soul in pain also
He that god has served here
And his co^maundments held dear
He shall not be deed that day
For he shall live in blys ever and ay
And he that goddys will ne wrought
And he that trowed on him naught
He shall be deed with out end
And to the pain of hell wend
And that the Antechyrst shall turn
Fro the faith / they may well morn
Them ware bettar they ware unborn
For many shall by him be lorne
The.CCC.lj. questyon
Where shall be borne yt false prophyte
That all that woe in earth shall sete
ANtechryst shall borne be
In Babylon agreat cete
A wicked woman him bear shall
And the devil shall enter him with all
And wicches shall norysshe him
In a^oune hight corozaym
Uery prophyt they shall him call
And many wondres shall of him fall
All the folk shall he draw
To his assent and to his law
The rych shall on him believe
For the gifts that he shall give
The pouer shall to him turn also
For great awe that he shall put them to
And for that he wise shall be
For all the clergy know shall he
The clerks shall he to him alye
Through wisdom of his clergy
The good men and steadfast
That in goddys law would last
Many shall he draw him to
For miracles that he shall do
He shall cause the fire to fall
Fro heuyn and his foos borne all
Deed men he shall cause arise
To bear wyttnesse of works his
No dedman but the devil only
Shall rise in dampened body
And bear witness of his werkys
Among lewd men and clerkys
Much people shall to him draw
Namely folk of the first law
Three year and a half shall he
Reygne with much dygnyte
Twelve apostyls chose he shall
With him to walk over al
He shall feyne him for to deye
And two days shall he be a weye
The third day shall he come with blys
And say that he up risen is
Than shall come Enocke and Elye
And shall prech again his folly
Great folk shall they turn him fro
But he shall them both slo
No longer there than dwell he will
But he shall draw him to a hyl
For to follow and to do shame
Tho that wicked have his name
Sodeyne death shall he dye thore
For god will that he regne ^omore
And full sore may agryse as ^yse
When they shall to the (...) rise
The.CCC.lij. questyon
What day shall it befall
That goddys sone shall deem us al
ON such aday shall he deem hyse
As he fro death to life shall rise
That shall be on a sunday
That now is sabbat in our lay
Of heaven than the orders nine
That neuermore shall heaven tene
Shall Be fulfyllyd as they were al
Or lucifer began to fall
Living men shall then eueryone
Dye for dread and rise anon
There shall be none of so great mede
That at that day he shall have dread
The.CCC.liij. questyon
What time shall he come thereto
For to deem the world also?
AT the mydnyght forsothe I tell
Such time as he shall harowe hell
That each time shall he led out thore
Al tho that his frendys wore
And that time out shall he led
His of this world to give them mede
The.CCC.liiii. questyon
How shall he come and on what manner
When he shall come to deem us here?
AS a king to a city
That will have his inentere
And inen before him shall bear
His crown his sheld and his spear
Whereby men may have knowlegyng
That thither coming is the king
So shall be come to the dome
But another with knight ne with grome
But with ordres of angels all
That bodies out of their grave shall call
And they shall dele and set in twynne
The good from those that deyed in sin
The.CCC.liiij. questyon
Shall his cross be there present
When he shall give his iugment
NAy his cross shall not be there
But the semblaunt as it were
And that shall be of more claryte
Than men in the son se
And when the dome is don al
With his to heuyn wend he shall
The.CCC.lv. questyon
When he the folk shall deem also
How shall he show him them unto
SO as he did his dyscypyls till
Dysfygured upon an hylle
He shall show him unto them
Bryghter than any son beme
So shall he show him to the good
And to the wicked hangyng on rode
The.CCC.lvj. questyon
Shall his mynystres with him be
In the dome to here and se
HIs mynysters shall be thore
Tho that with him walked before
And all that lived after his ^ore
And ke pars of his house wore
And all that live in chastyte
Or that ded for his love shall be
Al shall they be of his will
Synful wreches for to spylle
For that shall they be there present
To here and se the judgment
The.CCC.lvij. questyon
How shall he the dome do
And what shall he say them to
GOod departed shall he se
Fro the wicked that there shall be
Than shall he to the good say
Ye in earth stood by me ay
I houngred sore and ye me fed
I thursted and ye me drink bid
I was nakyd and ye me clad
In sycknesse I help of you had
I lay in prison and might not se
Thither ye came to vyset me
And by cause ye did this gladly
Come to my fathers joy heuynly
And ye that of me not rought
But all that ye lyked wrought
With the devil and his ye go
Unto pain for ever and od
For ye nothing did me fore
When ye in your lykyng wore
This shall every man here and se
Why he shall saved or dampnyd be
The.CCC.lviij. questyon
Sal every man than know well
That he has don here every adele
ALL that ever aman has wrought
Good and ill in deed or thought
Al shall on him written be
That all the world may it se
But if any ware of repentance
That took his shryft here and penance
Of his mysded with heart contryte
That sin for given is al tyte
The good than thank god shall thore
That they of such life wore
Wherefore that they should than wend
To the blys with out end
And the wicked shall se eft
What goodness they have left
And what wickedness they took
When that they the good forsook
Full* sorry be they than in thought
But al shall avayle them naught
For they shall anon be shent
With the devil in tourment
The.CCC.lix. questyon.
When al is don that dome so hard
What shall be don afterward
Afterward the devil shall
Take tho that shall with him al
And wend to hell for ever more
The wicked men to pain thore
Goddys son shall his take
That here did well for his sake
And led them to his fathers blys
Where ever I like joy is
And al shall their blys be
That they ever god shall se
And never more shall deye
For if they should chose one of tweye
They should lever in hell be
God every day in blys to se
Than be in heuyn and se him naught
For that ware naught worth them thought
The.CCC.lx. questyon
What shall than betyde and who
Of this world where we are now
AS water it first fordyd also
Shall it fire than fordo
Al to gether shall it brynne
Shall nothing beleft therein
The elements shall than slake
Of their figure and a new take
Son and moan shall bryghter be
Seven times than men now them se
Earth / water / fire / and air
They shall be than three times so fair
Than they ever ware before
And so shall be left ever more
Al trauayls in earth shall blynne
Shall no pain after be therein
The.CCC.lxj. questyon
Shall the good have leave there till
For to do all that they will
THe good shall than be of that will
To do but good and nothing ill
For than shall they each thing do
That their will standyth unto
And in what stead they would they wore
Anon as thought they shall be thore
And other work shall they have none
But goddys vysage to se upon
And thank him that of al lord is
That they are come to that hlys
The.CCC.lxij. questyon
Shall they than remember ought
Of wickedness yt they here wrought
REmember them they shall every dele
Of that they wrought here ill and well
And great joy have they shall
That they the wickedness over came al
As a knight is blyth and glad
That a strong battle has had
And has bore the praise away
From al his enymyes that day
Great joy it is his friends unto
That he that day bare him so
And al so sorry are they tho
That for their sin go than to woe
Here end the questyons.
The end of the hystory.
Sydracke god yield it the
The techyng yt thou have teched me
From darkness thou have me brought
Unto light that fails naught
Now than wot I much thing
That after Jesus have great longyng
And now wot I what god may do
To life and unto soul also
Wherefore it is good now
Upon what manner and how
That we shall our toure fulfill
Whereto we first had great will
For that was the cause why we
Came first unto this country
FOr thy the king Boccus anon
Took horse and worthed there upon
And his master Sydracke before
And al his folk began to raye thore
They came in to the in coming
Of Garabys land the king
There they began the toure to dyght
That sanke from them every night
The king caused to be brought lyme and stone
And caused masons to come anon
And Sydracke the king present
Devised them the foundament
In the name of the Trynyte
One god and persons three
Boldly there upon they wrought
And yt should hurt them found they naught
And in days six and twenty
Was the toure made up fully
And al thing that thereto should
After the king it ordain would
When that Garaab it herd
Of the town how it farede
How it was to end brought
He was full sorry in his thought
And foul abashed he was also
For he perseuyd it should him undo
In heart might have no rest
He counselyd him what was best
A messynger anon he sent
That unto king Boccus went
And prayed him purcharyte
Of him to have mercy and pity
King Boccus answered and spoke
By the counsel of Sydracke
That if Garaab will a good man be
And believe in the Trynyte
That may both dampne and save
That he shall of him mercy have
And Garaab sent to him again
That what he will I shall do feign
King Garaab caused to be broken anon
His false ydols euerychone
And trusted in god of heuyn light
Seruyng him with all his might
And many lands there mo
Caused Boccus to serve god tho
But when king Boccus was deed
And Sydracke / than was there no read
But anon they god forsook
And to their false ydols they took
Through entysement of the wicked ghost
Now he that is of might most
Save us fro his wicked wyles
For many one that shrew begyles
And bring us into that blys
Whereof that none end is.
AMEN
PRay we now with all our might
Unto god of heaven light
That he give us grace so to do
That we heaven may come unto
That we shall al to I w^^^
And that Hughe of caumpeden^
That this book has through sought
And unto English time brought
Live in joy without sin
And that he god is love here win
So that he at his lives end
Unto the bless of heaven wend.
FINIS
Thus ends the hystory and questyo^s of king Boccus and Sydracke. Prynted at
London by Thomas Godfray. At the cost and charge of dan Robert Saltwode monk
of faint Austens at Cantorbury.

Cum priuilegio regali.


