THE ART OF LOGIC.

Plainly taught in the English tongue, according to the best approved AVTHORS.

Very necessary for all STVDENTS in any Profession, how to defend any Argument
against all subtle Sophisters, and cauelling Schismatikes, and how to confute
their false Syllogismes, and captious Arguments.

By M. BLVNDEVILE.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby, and are to be sold by Matthew Lownes.

1617.

To the Reader.
MInding here to treat of the Art of Logike in our vulgar tongue, for the
profit of those my Countrymen, that are not learned in foreign tongues: I
think it no shame nor robbery to borrow terms of the said Art from the
Latins, as well as they did from the Greeks: and specially such terms as
cannot be aptly expressed in our native speech: and yet therewith I do not
forget plainly to show the signification of cuery such term, so as every man
may easily understand what each term signifies: thinking it much better so to
do, then to feign new words improper for the purpose, as some of late have
done. And as my mind is hereby to please the unlearned, that are desirous of
learning, having both good wits, and also good disposition with aptness to
learn. So my hope is not to offend the learned, who, I am sure do well allow
of Aristotle, in saying, that every good thing, the more common it be, the
better it is: neither are they ignorant, that in old time past, as well the
Greeks as the Latins, of what Art soever they wrote, each one wrote the same,
for the most part, in his own vulgar speech. Every man is not able in these
costly days, to find either himself or his Child at the University, whom if
God not withstanding has endued with a lively wit, and made him so apt to
learning, as having some help at home, he may by his own industry, attain
unto right good knowledge, and be made thereby the more able to glorify God,
and to profit his Country. Truly, I see no cause why the learned should
disdain, or be miscontent that such Man or Child should be freely taught this
or any other good Art, without any cost or charge. Wherefore arming my self
with assured hope, that with this my labor, I shall greatly profit and
pleasure the unlearned, and not hinder or displease the learned, I will boldly
follow mine enterprise, and here briefly show the order of my said Work, which
is divided into six Parts or Books: for since Logic is chiefly occupied in
discussing of Questions, and that such questions, both simple and compound do
spring of words, the first Part of my Book shall treat of Words, showing
which be Simple, which be Compound, and also which comprehend more, and which
comprehend less: and which be of affinity, and which be not: leaving out no
necessary Rules belonging thereunto, that are taught either by Aristotle, or by
any other Modern writer: Secondly, because all simple questions consisting of
single words, are to be discussed by Definition and Division: the second Part
treats of them both, and therewith shows also with what method and order
such simple questions are to be handled. Thirdly, because all compound
questions are to be discussed by reasoning or argumentation, and that every
kind of argument does consist of Propositions: the third Part treats of a
Proposition, and of all things belonging thereunto. Fourthly, because no sound
argument can be made to prove or disprove any thing that is in question,
unless the Disputer know from whence to fetch his proofs: the fourth Part of
my Book treats of all the places from whence any argument is to be fetched.
And the fifth Part treats of Argumentation, and of all the kinds thereof,
teaching how every kind is to be performed. The sixth and last Part treats of
Confutation, showing how all Sophistical arguments are to be confuted.

A Postscript.
THough I wrote this Book many years past, whilst I sojourned with my most
dear Brother in Law, M. William Hurnell, a man of most singular humanity, and
of great hospitality, at his house in Winkborne in Nottinghamshire, not far
from Southwell: yet notwithstanding upon diverse necessary considerations (as I
thought) since that time moving me thereunto, I still stayed it from the
Press, until now of late that I was fully persuaded by diverse of my learned
friends, to put it in print, who having diligently perused the same, and liking
my plain order of teaching used therein, thought it a most necessary Book for
such Ministers as had not been brought up in any University: to many of which
Ministers though God had given the gift of utterance, and great good zeal to
set forth in good speech the true Christian doctrine: yet, if they should have
to deal with subtle Sophisters and caueling Schismatikes (whereof in these
days, the more is the pity, there are too many) they were not able without
the help of Logike, to defend the truth of Gods Word, and orderly to confute
such false Conclusions as perverse Schismatikes and Heretics are wont to
gather out of the very words of holy Scripture: wherefore, through my said
friends persuasions, I have now at length committed my said Book to the
Press, praying all those that shall vouchsafe to read it, as thankefully to
accept the same, as of my part it is friendly offered: Vale.

The Contents of the Chapters contained in these six Books of LOGIC.
THE FIRST BOOK. Treating of a Question, and of Words, both Singular and
Universal.
WHat Logic is, of what parts it consists, and whereto such parts do
serve. Which be the two chief offices of Logic, and wherein Logic is
chiefly occupied, that is in discussing of Questions, which is done by
Definition, Division, and Argumentation. Chap. 1. What a question is, and that
every question is either simple or compound, also of what parts a compound
question consists (that is to say) of two parts, called the Subject and the
Predicate, and what those terms do signify. Because all questions do
consist of words either simple or compound, in this Chapter are set down
three principal divisions of words. First, which be simple, and which be
compound. Secondly, which be of the first intention, and which be of the second
intention: and thirdly, which be singular, called in Latin Indiuidua, and
which be universal. Chap. 2. What Indiuiduum is, and all the four kinds
thereof (that is) Indiuiduum determinatum, Indiuiduum demonstratiuum,
Indiuiduum vagum, and Indiuiduum ex hypothesi (that is to say) by supposition.
Chap. 3. Of universal words, whereof some are called Predicables, and some
Predicaments, and first of the five predicables (that is) Genus, Species,
Differentia, Proprium, and Accidens, and how every one is divided, and to what
uses they serve, but first of Species, and then of the rest. Chap. 4. Of
Predication, and of the diverse kinds thereof. Chap. 5. Of the ten Predicaments
in general, which be these, Substantia, Quantitas, Qualitas, Relatio, Actio,
Passio, Vbi, Quando, Situm est, and Habere. Chap. 6. Of the fore-predicaments,
and showing which they be, and to what end they serve. Chap. 7 Of the ten
Predicaments in special, showing what Substances, and how many kinds there
be, and what properties it has, whreto is added the Table of Substance. Chap.
8. Of Quantity, both whole and broken, called in Latin quantitas continua, and
discreta, and of the diverse kinds of bot^quantities, and what properties
quantity has, whereto is added a Table of quantity. Chap. 9. Of Quality,
and of the four kinds thereof, and in this Chapter are defined the five
intellectual habites, that is, Intelligence, Science, Prudence, Art, and
Sapience: it shows also what properties quality has, and to every of the
four kinds of quality is added his proper Table. Chap. 10. Of Relation, and
of the kinds thereof, together with a Table showing every kind, and finally
what properties Relation has. Chap. 11. What Action is, and how it is divided,
and what properties do belong thereunto. Chap. 12. What Passion is, and what
properties do belong thereunto. Chap. 13. What the Predicament Vbi is, and how
it is divided, and what properties do belong to that Predicament. Chap. 14.
What the Predicament Quando is, how it is divided, and what properties belong
thereunto. Chap. 15. What the Predicament Situm esse is, what it comprehends,
also what Descriptions are to be fetched from this Predicament, and what things
are said to alter their situation, and finally what property it has, to which
Predicament is added a brief Table. Chap. 16. The diverse significations of the
predicament Habere, also what words it comprehends, with a Table showing the
same, and finally what properties it has. Chap. 17. The manifold uses of the
aforesaid ten predicaments. Chap. 18. Of the Postpredicaments, which are in
number five, that is, Oppositio, ante and post, simul, motus, and habere, and
first of Opposition, and how many things are said to agree together, to be
diverse, or to be contrary one to another. Chap. 19. How many ways things are
said to be one before or after another, and to what end that Postpredicament
serves. Chap. 20. Of the Postpredicament Simul, showing how many ways things
are said to be together. Chap. 21. Of the Postpredicament Motus, showing how
many kinds of mouings there be. Chap. 22. How many ways the word Habere is to
be understood. Chapter 23.
THE SECOND BOOK. Treating of Definition, and of Division, and of Method.
OF Definition, and showing how many kinds of Definitions there be. Chap. 1.
How many Precepts are to be observed to make a true definition. Chap. 2. Of
Division, and of the diverse kinds thereof. Chap. 3. How many Precepts are to
be observed to make a true Division. Chap. 4. Of Method, and of the three
kinds thereof, that is, Compositiue, Resolutiue, and Diuisiue, and what
Method is to be observed in handling either of a simple, or of a compound
question. Chap. 5.
THE THIRD BOOK. Treating of a Proposition.
OF a Proposition, showing of what parts it consists, and how many ways it
is divided, and what questions are to be asked of a Categoricall or simple
proposition, being divided according to substance, quality, and quantity.
Chap. 1. Of the three properties belonging to a simple Proposition, that is,
Opposite on, Equiualency, and Conversion. Chap. 2. Of the Laws and conditions
belonging to the four Opposites, and also of the threefold matter of a
proposition, that is, Natural, Casual, and Remote, and then of Opposition,
showing how many ways simple propositions are said to be opposite one to
another. Chapter 3. Of the Equiualency of simple propositions. Chap. 4. Of the
Conversion of simple propositions, showing how manifold it is. Chap. 5. Of a
modall proposition, and of the two kinds thereof, that is to say, Coniunct and
Disiunct. Chap. 6. Of the Opposition, Equiualency, and Conversion, belonging to
Modall propositions. Chap. 7. Of Opposition belonging to Modall propositions.
Chap. 8. Of Equiualency and Conversion of Modall propositions. Chap. 9. Of an
Hypotheticall or compound Proposition, showing how it is divided, that is, into
a Conditional, Copulative, and Disjunctive, and of what parts it consists,
and also what things are to be considered in a compound Proposition. Chap. 10.
Of the truth and falsehood of all the three kinds of compound Propositions,
first, of the Conditional; secondly, of Copulative; and thirdly, of the
Disjunctive. Chap. 11.
THE FOVRTH BOOK. Treating of Logical places.
WHat a place is, and that it is twofold, that is, either of Persons or of
Things. Again, the places of things be either artificial or inartificiall,
and the artificial places of things are either inward, outward, or mean: and
the inart^ficiall places of things are six in number, comprehended under the
place of authority, as the Table of places set down in the beginning of this
Chapter does plainly show. Also this Chapter shows to what end such manifold
divisions of the places serves, and how places are divided according to the
School. men, that is, into Maxims, and difference of Maxims. Chap. 1.
Examples of all the places belonging to persons. Chap. 2. Of the places of
things, and first of artificial places, whereof some be inward, some outward,
and some mean: and first of inward places, whereof some belong to the
substance of things, and some do accompany the substance, giving examples of
every place, together with their proper Maxims or general Rules, belonging to
the same, and how Arguments are to be fetched from every such place, either
affirmatively or negatiuely, or both ways. Chap. 3. Of outward places, showing
how Arguments are to be fetched from every such place, together with the
general Rules or Maxims belonging to the same. Chap. 4. Of mean places,
giving examples, and showing how Arguments are to be fetched from such places,
together with the Rules belonging thereunto. Chap. 5. Of the six inartificiall
places comprehended under the place of authority, whereunto is added a Table
of authority. And in this Chapter is not only declared to what end the
knowledge of all the foresaid places do serve, but also it shows by one
example how to use them when need is, either to prove or to dilate any Theme,
which example is taken out of Hunneus. The Theme whereof is thus: Man ought to
embrace Virtue. Chap. 6.
THE FIFTH BOOK. Treating of Argumentation, and of Demonstration.
OF Argumentation, and of the four kinds thereof in general, and also of the
first principles of a Syllogism, as well material as regular. Chap. 1. What a
Syllogism is, how it is divided, and of what parts it consists (that is) of
matter and form. Chap. 2. What that matter and form is, and that the matter
consists of three terms and three propositions, and the Form to consist of
Figure and Mood. Also by what means the mean t^rme or proof is to be found
out. And finally, it defines the three Propositions, whereof a simple
Syllogism consists, showing how they are named, and how to frame the same to
make a true Syllogism. Chap. 3. What Figure or Mood is, whereof the form of
a Syllogism consists, and how many such Figures there be, and when a
Syllogism is said to conclude directly or indirectly: it shows also how many
Moodes do belong to every Figure, and how they are named. And finally, what
the four vowels A, e, i, o, do signify in any such Mood or Vocable of Art.
Chap. 4. Certain rules as well general as special belonging to the three
figures. Chap. 5. Examples of the four perfect Moodes, belonging to the first
Figure. Chap. 6. Examples of the five imperfect Moodes, belonging to the first
Figure. Chap. 7. Examples of four Moodes, belonging to the second Figure.
Chap. 8. Examples of the six Moodes, belonging to the third Figure. Chap. 9.
Of a Syllogism expositorie, s^ewing why it is so called. Cha. 10. Answer to
an objection concerning the three Figures and Moodes, belonging to the same.
Chap. 11. Of Reduction, and of the kinds thereof, and also of the
signification of certain Consonants in the words of Art, serving to
Reduction. Chap. 12. Of Reduction by impossibility, showing unto which of the
perfect Moodes, every imperfect Mood is to be reduced by impossibility. Chap.
13. Of a Syllogism made in oblique cases, and of the six abilities, and three
defects of a Syllogism. Chap. 14. Of a compound Syllogism, showing that it is
threefold, that is, Conditional, Copulative, and Disi^nctiue, and that the
truth of a compound Syllogism is to be found out by reducing the same into a
simple Syllogism. Chap. 15. Of a Consequent, showing what it is, and of how
many parts it consists, and how it is divided, also by what means, and by
what Rules the goodness of a Consequent is to be known. Chap. 16. Of a
Syllogism demonstratiue, showing what it is, and of what manner of
Propositions it consists, which Propositions are here defined, it shows
also the three properties belonging to the Predicate and Subject of a
demonstratiue Proposition, and also shows wha^ definitions Aristotle makes
of demonstration, and it defines what science is, and thereby gives example
of a Syllogism demonstratiue. Chap. 17. Of the three things, whereon depends
the certainty of Man's knowledge, that is, universal experience, principles,
and man's natural knowledge in judging of Consequents, showing how principles
are defined by Aristotle, and how they are divided by the Schoolmen. Chap. 18.
That the Schoolmen do divide Demonstration into two kinds, that is, either
perfect or imperfect, wherein is declared what is to be observed in either
kind of demonstration. Chap. 19. Of Science, Opinion, Ignorance, Wi^, and the
four scientiall questions. Chap. 20. Of a Syllogism dialecticall, showing
what it is, and of what kinds of propositions it is made, and what things are
said to be probable: Again, it shows how the Schoolmen do make the
matter, whereof a Syllogism consists to be twofold, that is, Materia remota,
and Materia propinqua, and what each matter contains. And finally, it shows
the difference betwixt a dialecticall proposition, a 'Probleme, and a Position.
Chap. 21. Of a sophistical Syllogism, showing what it is, and that it may be
false three manner of ways. Also in this Chapter is declared another kind of
false Syllogism, called Syllogismus falsigraphus. Chap. 22. Of Induction,
showing what it is, and what is to be observed therein, and that it is twofold,
that is, perfect and imperfect. Chap. 23. Of an Enthimeme, showing what it is,
of what parts it consists, and from whence that kind of Argument is to be
fetched. Chap. 24. Of an example, showing what it is, and wherein it differs
from all the other forms of Arguments, and to what end it serves, and what is
to be observed in reasoning thereby. And finally, from what places such
Argument is to be fetched. Chap. 25. Of an Argument called Sorites, showing how
it proceeds, and wherein it differs from the Argument of the Rhetoricians
called Gradatio. Chap. 26. Of diverse other kinds of captious Arguments, and
first of Dilemma, showing of what parts it consists, and how many kinds of
captious Arguments it comprehends, which are these four, that is, Certains
or horned Arguments, Crocodelites, Assistatons, and Pseudomenons, every one of
which is here defined, and example given thereof. Chap. 27. Of an argument
called Enumeratio, showing what it is, and how it is to be confuted. Chap. 28.
Of an argument called Simplex conclusio, showing what it is. Chap. 29. Of an
argument called Subiectio, showing what it is, and that it differs not much
from Enumeratio before described, Chap. 30. Of an argument called Oppositio,
made of parts repugnant. Chap. 31. Of an argument called Violatio, which is
more meet to confute then to prove. Chap. 32.
THE SIXTH BOOK. Treating of Confutation.
COnfutation is twofold, whereof the one belongs to the Person, the other to
the Matter: and that of Matter is divided into two kinds, that is, General
and Special, and the general confutation is done three manner of ways, that
is, either by denying the Consequent, by making distinction, or else by
instance, any of which three ways, when it is to be used, is here set down.
Chap. 1. Of special confutation, showing how it is done, and what order
Aristotle observes in treating of special confutation, whose order is briefly
here set down, and first of an Elench. Chap. 2. Of Disputation, and shows
how manisold it is. Chap. 3. Five marks of Soph^strie, that is, Rep^ehensio,
Absurdum, Paradoxis, Solecismus, and Nugatio, with their examples. Chap. 4.
There be thirteen Fallaxes, whereof six do consist in Words, and seven in
Things, and first it treats of the six Fallaxes consisting in Words, and
shows how to confute the same. Chap. 5. Of the seven Fallaxes consisting in
Things, and sh^weth by examples how to confute the same. Chap. 6.
THE ART OF LOGIC.
THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Of the Art of Logic, and of the parts and offices thereof.
WHat is Logic?
Logic is an Art, which teaches us to dispute probably on both sides of any
matter that is propounded.

Of what and how many parts does it consist?
Of two: that is, Invention and Judgment.

Whereto serve these parts?
Invention finds out meet matter to prove the thing that ye intend: and
Judgment examineth the matter, whether it be good, or not; and then frames,
disposes, and reduces the same into due form of argument.

What is the chief end or office of Logic?
The chief end or office of Logic is twofold: The one to discuss truth from
falsehood in any manner of speech; the other is to teach a compendious way to
attain to any Art or Science. And therefore it is defined of some, to be the
Art of Arts, and Science of Sciences; not for that it teaches the principles
of every Art or Science, (for those are to be learned of the Professors of
such Arts or Sciences) but because it shows the method, that is to say, the
true order and right way that is to be observed in seeking to come to the
perfect knowledge of any Art or Science. Of which methodicall part, mine old
friend, M. Iacomo Acontio Tridentino has written in the Latin tongue a very
proper and profitable Treatise. And therefore I mind here to deal only with
the first office, which is to discuss and to discern truth from falsehood in
any speech or question that is propounded.

How is that to be done?
By three special instruments: that is, by Definition, Division, and
Argumentation: whereof we shall speak hereafter in their proper places. In
the mean time, because questions are the matter wherein Logic is chiefly
occupied, we will speak first of a question.

CHAP. II.
Of a question, and of certain divisions of words.
WHat is a question?
A question is a speech where of some doubt is made and uttered with some
interrogatorie: as, How, What, or Whether: and such question is either simple,
or compound.

Which call you simple, and which compound?
It is called simple, when the question consists only of one word; as when I
ask what Justice is, or what Fortitude is, and such like; and is to be
discussed by defining and dividing the same. It is called compound, when it
consists of many words joined together by rules of Grammar, to make some
perfect sentence; as when I ask whether it be lawful for the Christians to
make war upon the Turks, or not: and such like questions, which are to be
discussed by arguing and reasoning on both sides: for Definition, Division, and
Argumentation, as I said before, are the three especial instruments whereby
Logic finds out the truth in any doubtful matter.

Of what parts does a compound question consist?
Of two, that is, the subject and the predicate.

What mean you by these words, subject and predicate?
The subject is the word or sentence, whereof another word or sentence, called
the predicate, is spoken: as when I say, Man is a sensible body; here this word
Man is the subject, and sensible body is the predicate: or each of them may
contain many words, as this, To be learned in the Law require^h a long study;
here To be learned in the Law is the subject, and all the rest is the predicate.

How shall I know in long speeches, and specially being preposterously set,
which is the Subject, and which is the predicate?
By asking this question, Who, or What: for that which answers to this
question, is always the Subject, as in this example: It were meet to learn my
Grammar perfectly, before I entered into my Logic: here if you ask, What is
meet, you shall find that to learn my Grammar perfectly is the Subject, and
all the rest to be the predicate. And note that these two words, Subject and
Predicate, are said to be the terms, limits, or extreme bounds of a
Proposition, whereof we shall speak hereafter.

Since every question does consist of words, me thinks it were necessary to show
how words are divided.
Of words the Schoolmen make diverse and manifold divisions, of which I mind
here to recite but three only, whereof the first is this: Of words some be
simple, which they call Incomplexa; and some be compound, which they call
Complexa. Simple or single words, are such as are sole or severed one from
another, not making any sentence, as man, horse, wolf. The compound are words
joined orderly together by rules of Grammar, to make some perfect sentence, as,
Man is a sensible body. And hereof the questions are said to be either simple
or compound, as has been said before.

What is the second division of words?
Of words some, be of the first Intention, and some of the second.

Which are they?
Words of the first Intention are those, whereby any thing is signified or
named by the purpose and meaning of the first author or inuentor thereof, in
any speech or language whatsoever it be: as the beast whereon we commonly ride,
is called in English a Horse, in Latin Equus, in Italian Cauallo, in French
Cheual. Words of the second Intention are terms of Art* as a Noune, Pronoune,
Ve^be, or Participle, are terms of Grammar: likewise Genus, Species, Proprium,
and such like, are terms of Logic.

What is the third division of words?
Of words, some be called Indiuidua, that is to say, particular, or rather
singular; and some be called Vniuersalia, that is to say, universal, common or
general.

CHAP. III.
Of singular and most particular words, called Indiuidua.
WHat is Indiuiduum?
Indiuiduum is that which signifies but one thing only, and can be applied but
to one thing only; as this name, John, or Robert, signifies but one certain
man, and not many.

How many kinds of Indiuiduums be there?
Four, that is, Indiuiduum determinatum, Indiuiduum demonstratiuum, Indiuiduum
vagum, and Indiuiduum ex hypothesi.

What is Indiuiduum determinatum?
Indiuiduum determinatum, that is to say, certain or determined, is the proper
name of some one certain thing, whatsoever it be, as John or Thomas is the
proper name of some or one man: again, Bucephalus is the proper name of great
Alexander his horse: and London is the proper name of the chiefest City in
England.

What is Indiuiduum demonstratiuum?
Indiuiduum demonstratiuum, which is as much to say, as showing or pointing, is
a common word or name joined with a Pronoune demonstratiue, to signify some
one certain thing only, as when we say, this man, or that horse: and
Indiuiduums demonstratiue be more ready to signify particular things, as well
in accidents* as in substances, then are Indiuidua determinata: for This, or
That, and such like Pronounes, do point out a thing, as it were with the
finger, when proper names oftentimes do fail: yea the Pronoune demonstratiue
is of such force, as being joined to the most general word that is, makes it
Indiuiduum, as well as when it is joined to the most especial: for, this
substance or this body is Indiuiduum, as well as this man or that horse.

What is Indiuiduum vagum?
Indiuiduum vagum, that is to say, wandering or uncertain, is a word
betokening some one certain thing, but not certainly: as when I say, There was
a certain man here to seek you; by this speech is meant but one man, and yet
uncertain who it was: and therefore, to make the thing more certain, we use
to add some token or mark; as we read in the Acts of the Apostles, There
was a certain man which was halt and lame from his mothers womb, whom they
laid daily before the gate of the Temple, etc. And note, that like as we do
use indiuidua, demonstratiua, and determinata, in declaring things either
present, or certainly known: so in speaking of things absent, or uncertainly
known, we express our minds oftentimes by indiuidua vaga.

What is Indiuiduum ex hypothesi?
Indiuiduum ex hypothesi, that is to say, by supposition, is a word which of
his own natural signification being common and universal is made
notwithstanding by supposition a singular word, and to signify but one thing
only: as for example, this word, The Son of Marie, is a common term, and
yet by supposition is made to signify none but Christ only: likewise when we
say, The Greek Poet, we mean none but Homer.

CHAP. IV.
Of words universal or general.
WHat words are said to be universal or general?
Those words are said to be universal, which are spoken of many things, that
is to say, which may be applied to many things, or comprehend many things, as
this word* Animal (which is as much to say as a sensible body) comprehends
both man, bruit beast, fish, foul, bird, and every thing else that has
feeling and moving.

How are such words divided?
Into Predicables and Predicaments.

Of the five Predicables.
WHat call you Predicables?
Predicables are certain degrees, or rather petigrees of words that be of one
affinity, showing which comprehend more, and which comprehend less.

How many such be there?
There be five, that is to say, Genus, Species, Differentia, Proprium, and
Accidens: which may be Englished thus, General kind, Special kind,
Difference, Property, and Accident. But we think it best to begin first with
Species, because it is next to Indiuiduum.

Of the special kind, called in Latin Species.
WHat is Species?
Species is a special kind, which is spoken of many things, that is to say,
it comprehends many things differing only in number, in asking the question,
what the thing is: as when I ask, What is John? it is rightly answered, to
say, A man: for this word man is an universal word, comprehending both John,
Thomas, Robert, and all other singular men.

How manifold is Species?
Twofold, that is, Infima and Subalterna. Infima, that is to say, the lowest or
most especial kind, is that which comprehends many things differing only in
number, and therefore cannot be a general kind, as man, horse, and such like
special kinds. Species subalterna, is that which comprehends many things
differing in kind, and in diverse respects may be both genus and species, as
these words, animal or sensible body, bird, fish: for this word bird, in that
it comprehends diverse kinds of birds, as a Blackbird, a Mauys, a Goldfinch,
and many other kinds of birds, it is a general kind: but in respect of these
words, substance, body, or animal, it is but species.

How is species called of the Greeks?
It is called Idea, which is as much to say, as a common shape conceived in the
mind, through some knowledge had before of one or two Indiuiduums having that
shape: so as after we have seen one wolf, or two, we bear the shape thereof
continually in our minds, and thereby are able to know a wolf whenever we
find him, or (if need be) to paint him. But genus extends too far, and
comprehends too many special kinds to be so easily painted. And note that
such shapes or Ideae are said also to be perpetual.

Why are they said to be perpetual?
Because they continue in the mind, though the things themselves cease to have
any being: as the shape of a Rose continues in our minds in the cold heart of
Winter, when there is no Rose indeed. And this is the true meaning of Plato
touching Ideae, that is, to be perpetual in the mind, not separate from man's
intelligence, as some men feign: for universalities are always to be
comprehended in man's mind, but not Indiuidua: which, because they are infinite,
there can be had of them no certain science or knowledge.

Of the general kind, called Genus.
WHat is Genus?
Genus is a general kind which may be spoken of many things differing in
special kind, in asking the question, what the thing is: as if I ask, What
is man, or horse? It is rightly answered, to say, Animal: for this word Animal
comprehends both man, horse, lion, and many other special kinds of beasts.

How is it divided?
Into two, that is, Genus most general, and Genus subalternate.

What is genus most general?
It is that which in no respect can be species, as these, Substance, Quantity,
Quality, and all the rest of the ten Predicaments, which be the highest
kinds, comprehending all other kinds, and are comprehended of none.

What is that which you call subalternate?
It is that which in diverse respects may be both genus and species, as these,
animal or sensible body, stone, tree, fish, bird: which being compared to their
superiors, as to substance or body, be special kinds: but if to their
inferiors, as this word sensible body being compared to man or horse, or this
word stone to a flint or Diamond, or this word tree to an Apple Tree or
Peare-tree, or this word fish to a Salmon or Pickerell, or this word bird to a
Mauys or Goldfinch, and such like, then they be general kinds. The order of
all which kinds, as well general as subalternate, as also most especial, you
may see here in the Table following, taken out of the predicament of substance:
in which Table, Substance is the highest or most general kind, under which
are placed the less general or special kinds, according as they be in
degrees high or low, nigh or far from substance. Moreover, on each side of
the general kinds are set down in this Table the differences whereby the
said general kinds are divided every one into those inferior kinds which it
comprehends. And the like Table may be made of all the rest of the
Predicaments.

A Table showing the order and degrees of general kinds and especial kinds,
taken out of the predicament of Substance.
Differences, General and special kinds Differences, Examples. With body,
Substance is either Or without body, as An Angel, A Spirit, The soul of a man
separated from the body.
Compound of the four elements, as all natural bodies and unnatural If with
body, it is either Or simple, as The 11. heavens, The 4. elements.


Living, Body compound is either Or vnliuing, as Stones, Metals, Liquors.
Sensible, Again, the living body is either Or insensible, as Tree, Herb,
Shrubbe.
Reasonable, as man: The sensible body, called in Latin Animal, is either Or
unreasonable, as Fourefooted beasts Creeping beasts, Fish, Foul, or Bird.
The reasonable body is man, called in Latin Homo, which is a most especial
kind: As Socrates, Plato, and every other singular man.

Of Difference, called of the Latins, Differentia.
WHat is difference?
Difference is that whereby things do differ one from another, or any thing
from it self.

How many kinds of differences be there?
According to Porphyrius, there be three kinds, that is to say, common,
proper, and most proper or especial, called of the Latins, Differentia
specifica.

What call you a common difference?
A common difference is some separable accident, whereby one thing differs
from another, or from it self: as a hot man from a cold, or a man standing
from himself sitting.

What is proper difference?
A proper difference is some inseparable accident, whereby one thing differs
from another, or from it self: as the Swanne by whiteness differs from the
Crow, the gray-eied man from another man that has black eyes, or from
himself, as having now an immovable scarre in his face, whereas before he
had none.

What is the most proper difference?
The most proper difference, only received and allowed of the Logicians, is
that which is spoken of many things differing in kind or number, in asking the
question what manner of thing any thing is, as this word reasonable or
unreasonable: for if I ask the question, what manner of thing this man or that
man is, as John, Thomas, or Richard, etc. it is rightly answered, to say, A
reasonable body. Likewise if I ask what manner of thing a horse is, it is
truly answered, to say, An unreasonable body: for these be the most proper and
especial differences, whereby men and bruit beasts do differ one from another.

How manifold is the office of a Logical difference?
Twofold: the one to divide the general kind into his especial kinds, and
the other to constitute or make the selfsame special kinds. Wherefore such
differences are said in diverse respects to be sometimes diuisiue, and sometimes
constitutiue, yea and sometimes both; as these differences, corporate and
vncorporate, living and vnliuing, sensible and insensible, reasonable and
unreasonable; which in that they do divide some general kind into other
kinds, either more special, or not so general, they may be called
differences diuisiue: but in that they constitute or make any special kind,
as this difference reasonable being added to a sensible body, makes the
special kind, man; such difference may be well called a difference
constitutiue, or rather specificatiue, as the former Table of general kinds
and differences does plainly show.

What other division do the Schoolmen make of this Logical difference?
They say, that of these differences some do extend further then some, for some
may be applied to many special kinds, as living, and vnliuing, sensible and
insensible, and also the difference unreasonable, but the difference reasonable
can be applied but to one special kind only, which is man.

Of Property, called in Latin, Proprium.
WHat is property?
It is a natural inclination or property incident to one especial kind,
which is to be understood four manner of ways.

Show how.
First, it is called Proprium, which is proper to one only kind, but not to
the whole kind, as to be a Poet or Musician, is proper to man, but not to every
man: Secondly, it is called proper that belongs to all the kind, but not to
that kind alone: as to be twofooted, belongs to al mankind, but not to that
kind alone: for ^l flying fowls are also two footed: Thirdly, it is said to be
proper, when it belongs to one only kind and to all that kind, but yet not
always: as to be hore-headed or bald, is proper to man in old age, but yet not
always: Fourthly, it is said to be proper, or rather most proper, which is
incident to one kind alone, to all that kind and always, as to have a
natural aptnes to laugh or to speak is proper to man only, to every man, and
always, and therefore this kind of property is said to be conuertible, with
the kind whereunto it belongs, as whatsoever has naturally power to speak
or laugh, the same is man, and whatsoever is man, the same has power to speak
or laugh.

Of an accident, called in Latin, Accidens.
WHat is an accident?
An accident is a voice or word signifying things casual, cleaving to
substances or subjects, without which subjects they have no being at all, and
it is thus defined. An accident is that which may be absent or present without
corruption of the subject whereto it cleaves, because it is no substantial
part of the subject, and of such accidents some be called separable, and some
inseperable.

What is a separable accident?
A separable accident is that which may be easily separated from the subject,
as outward heat or cold from a man's body, whiteness or blackness from a wall.

What is an inseperable accident?
An inseperable accident is that which cannot be separated from his subject in
deed, but only in thought or imagination, as heat from the fire, heaviness
from lead. And such accidents be either incident to certain subjects, or
substances in particular, as some men to be gray-eied, or red-headed; or else
to some whole kind in general, as to all Ravens to be black, and all Swannes
to be white.

Of the manifold uses of the aforesaid five Predicables.
TO how many uses do the Predicables serve?
To these four necessary uses: First, they show which words do comprehend
more, or extend furthest, and which comprehend less or least, and what
affinity is betwixt word and word, so as in making any definition, a man may
easily perceive how every word ought to be expounded one by another, that is to
say, the less common by that which is more common; as if you would define a
Spaniell, you must say that he is a dog: for this word dog is a more common
word then Spaniell, because it comprehends both Spaniell, Gr^yhound, Hound,
Curre, Mastiffe, and every other kind of dog. Secondly, they show the nature
of propositions, which be necessary, and which be casual or accidental.

Which call you necessary, and which casual?
That proposition is said to be necessary, whereof the predicate is either a
general kind, a special kind, a special difference, or property, and is
necessarily coupled to his subject; as when I say, John is a sensible body,
John is a man, John is reasonable, John is apt to speak.

When is a proposition said to be accidental?
When the predicate is an accident, as when I say, John is learned or
unlearned, white or black. Thirdly, they yield matter meet to make definitions
and divisions: for Logical definitions be made of the nighest general kinds
joined together, with their true differences or properties: as in defining a
man, we say that man is a sensible body endued with reason; and in making
divisions, we either divide the general kinds into their especial kinds, as
a sensible body into man and bruit beasts, o^ the special kinds into their
Indiuiduums, as man into John, Thomas, etc. or else we divide subjects into
their accidents, as of men, some be free, and some be bound, and such like.
Fourthly, they help much toward the invention of arguments: for arguments be
fetched from the common places, as from the general kind, the special kind,
the difference, the property, and from other like places of invention, as
shall be taught hereafter in his proper place. And note, that of these
predicables do spring certain predications, whereof we come now to speak.

CHAP. V.
Of Predication, and of the diverse kinds thereof.
WHat is predication?
Predication is a certain kind or phrase of speech, whereby one word is
spoken of another, and aptly applied to another, as when we say, John is a man;
for this word man is a general word, and is spoken of John, Thomas, Richard,
and every other singular man.

How many kinds of predications be there?
Two, that is, essential and accidental.

What is essential predication?
It is a natural and usual kind of speech, whereby one thing is naturally,
and properly spoken of another, or as the Logicians say, when words superior
are spoken of their inseriours being of one self affinity, as when the
general kind is spoken of any his special kinds, or the special kind of
any his Indiuiduums, or when the difference or property is spoken of their
special kinds, or of any of the Indiuiduums comprehended under the said
special kinds; as when we say, Man is a sensible body, or that John is a man,
or, John is reasonable, or, John is apt to speak, or such like: for such
speeches are both natural, and of necessity, because the predicate is aptly
applied to his subject. To this kind of predication some men do also refer
two other kinds of speeches.

Which be they?
Predication, Identicall and unusual.

What is Identicall predication?
It is a kind of speech, whereby one self thing is spoken of it self, as
when we say, John is John, which though it be essential, yet because nothing
is expounded thereby, it is not allowed of the Logicians.

What is unusual predication?
It is a kind of speech seldom used, as when we read in the holy
Scriptures, God is man, The word was made flesh; for these be most essential
and necessary speeches, though not usual in any other science then in
Divinity.

What is predication accidental?
Predication accidental is when an accident is spoken of his subject, as, Wine
is sweet, or, Wine is sour, Socrates walks; for this is a casual kind of
speech, employing no necessity, as do the other essential or natural
speeches before recited. To this also may be referred predications by way of
similitude, as when we say, One man is a God or Devil to another, A Tyrant is
a Wolf or Fox, that is to say, like a Wolf or Fox, which are otherwise called
figurative or metaphorical speeches. But whilst we talk here of accidental
predications, it shall not be amiss to show you that the Schoolmen, the more
distinctly to express the nature of accidents, do use two terms, Abstractum
and Concretum. Abstractum is the bare shape of any subject separated by
imagination from the same, as the whiteness or blackness of a wall, or any
other thing that is either white or black, which abstract cannot be properly
spoken of his subject; for it were no proper speech, to say, that this wall is
whiteness: wherefore we must use the adjective called Concretum, signifying
the shape, together with the subject, as when we say, This wall is white.

CHAP. VI.
Of Predicaments.
WHat are Predicaments?
Predicaments are certain Titles or Tables containing all things that be in
the world: for every thing, whatsoever it be, is either a substance, or
accident: and if it be a substance, it is found in the Table of substance
hereafter following: if it be an accident, it belongs either to quantity,
quality, relation, action, passion, time, place, to be scited, or to have: for
these be the Tables of accidents, in one of the which every accident is easy
to be found. So that in all there be ten Predicaments or Tables, one of
substance, and nine of accidents, and these be called the highest and most
general kinds, albeit there be others indeed higher then they, called of the
Schoolmen, Transcendentia, that is to say, surpassing, as these, Res, ens,
vnum, aliquid, verum, bonum: which may be Englished thus; a thing, a being,
one, somewhat, true, good. But for so much as these be not spoken of the other
higher kinds according to one self signification, but may be diversely
applied, they are excluded from the order of predicaments.

What other words are excluded from the order of Predicaments?
All compound words, called of the Schoolmen Complexa, as Goodman, Plato
disputes: and all doubtful words having diverse significations, otherwise
called Equiuokes, and also terms of Art, as a Noune, a Pronoune, a Verb,
which be terms of Grammar, and as genus, species, differentia, which be
terms of Logic, and such like: which terms of Art are called of the
Schoolmen, names of the second intention, as has been said before.
Notwithstanding, differences constituting especial kinds, do belong to the
predicament of the same special kinds, and the parts of any whole thing do
belong to the predicament wherein the whole is contained: and first, principles
do belong to the predicament or table of those things whereof they be
principles, as a point or prick belongs to the predicament of quantity, all
which shall be plainly declared unto you, immediately. after that we have
somewhat talked of those things which the Schoolmen call Antepredicamenta,
that is to say, forepredicaments.

CHAP. VII.
Of Forepredicaments.
WHat mean you by forepredicaments?
Forepredicaments be certain definitions, divisions, and rules taught by
Aristotle before the predicaments, for the better understanding of the same,
and therefore are called Antepredicamenta, that is to say, For predicaments.

What, and how many things defines he?
Three, that is, Equiuokes, Vniuokes, and Denominatiues.

What call you Equiuokes?
Equiuokes be such things as have one self name, and yet be diverse in
substance or definition; as a natural dog, and a certain star in the
firmament, are both called by one name in Latin, Canis, yet they be nothing
like in substance, kind, or nature. And note that the Schoolmen do call the
word or name it self Equiuocum Equiuocans, and the thing signified by the word
Equiuocum Equiuocatum. They make also two kinds of Equiuokes, that is,
Equiuokes by chance, and Equiuokes of purpose. The first is, when one self
name is given to many things by chance, and not for any likeness that is
betwixt them, as in English this word Heart signifies as well the Heart of a man
or beast, as a certain beast called a Heart in the Forest. The second is, when
one self name is given to diverse things of purpose, for some likeness that is
betwixt them, as a painted man is called man as well as the living man; for we
will commonly say, Here is King Henry the Eighth, when indeed it is but his
picture. But ye must note, that all Equiuokes being generally pronounced
without addition, ought to be understood according to their chief and most
principal signification, as this word man being generally spoken, ought to be
taken for a living man, and not for a painted man: but no Equiuokes ought to
be placed in any predicament, neither can it be defined, unless it be first
brought to one certain signification; and therefore all Equiuokes are utterly
barred from all manner of Discipline.

What call you Vniuokes?
Vniuokes be those things that have one common name, which is spoken of them
essentially, or really, as a man, a horse, a lion, whose common name is animal,
or sensible body; for in asking what either of them is, it is rightly answered,
to say, animal. And I say here really, because it is not enough for Vniuokes to
have a common name, unless the same be also real or essential, whereby are
excluded all common names or understandings that be accidental: for though
white or black, swift or slow, or such like, is a common name, and is commonly
applied both to man and beast, yet that is accidentally, and not really or
substantially. Moreover, the Schoolmen do call the common word it self
Vniuocum Vniuocans, and the thing signified by the word Vniuocum Vniuocatum.

What call you Denominatiues?
Denominatiues are those accidents that be of like name, and differ only in
case, or final termination; as humble, humility; proud, proudnesse: for of
humility, a man is said to be humble; and of pride, to be proud: and according
to the Schoolmen, that word whereof the name does spring, is called
Denominator, and the name it self Denominatiue, and the thing or person so
called, the Denominated; as if I should say of valiantness, Peter is said to
be valiant; here valiantness is the Denominator, valiant the Denominatiue, and
Peter the Denominated: for Peter is the subject whereunto the Denominator does
cleave. The Grammarians do call the Denominator Abstractum, that is, a
substantive, and the Denominatiue Concretum, that is, an Adjective.

To what end does Aristotle chiefly use th^se definitions?
To show the differences of predications or kinds of speeches, which are to be
allowed, and which not: again, to know which be predications essential, and
which be accidental: for according to the three definitions before rehear^ed,
there be three Predications, that is to say, Predication Equivocal,
Univocal, and Denominatiue.

What is Predication Equivocal?
Predication Equivocal, is when the equiuoke is spoken of any of the things
that it signifies, as to say* His Letter was a Letter of the matter, meaning
perhaps a hinderer of the matter: but such kind of speeches ought to be
rejected from all good discipline, as has been said before.

What is Predication Univocal?
It is when the general kind is spoken of his especial kinds, or the
especial kind of her inferiors, or the special difference of that special
kind which it makes, or of the Indiuiduums contained under the same special
kind, as when we say, Man is a sensible body, Man has reason, or, John is a
man.

What is Predication Denominatiue?
It is when some accident is spoken of his subject, as when we say, Peter is
proud, humble, or valiant.

What, and how many divisions be there?
Two: The first division is touching words simple and compound, whereof though
we have said somewhat before, yet it shall not grieve us, here again to set
it down in such order as the Logicians use.

Show how.
Of words, some be simple, called in Latin, Incomplexa, and some be compound,
called Complexa. Simple words be distinct and several words, not set together
by any rule of Grammar, to make any perfect sentence, as, good, just, a man a
horse, to stand, to go. Compound words be words significatiue, which are
joined together by rules of Grammar to make some perfect sentence, as, John is
learned.

What is the second division?
The second division is fourefold, as follows: First, of things that be, some
be spoken of a subject, and yet be in no subject, as, man, horse, and such like
universal natures or substances: for they be no accidents. Secondly, some be
in a subject, and yet be not spoken of any subject, as all particular
accidents, as this or that color, for these be Indiuiduums, and therefore not
predicable. Thirdly, some be in a subject, and also be spoken of a subject, as
all universal accidents, as Science, Grammar, Logi ke, and such like: for of
these some be general, and some be special kinds, and therefore are said to
be predicable accidents. Fourthly, some be neither in a subject, nor spoken of
a subject, as John, Thomas, this man, or that man, this horse, or that horse;
for these be first natures or substances, and therefore are subjects themselves
not predicable.

Whereto serves this division?
By this division ye may learn the diversity of these two speeches, to be
spoken of a subject, and to be in a subject: for to be spoken of a subject, is
to be spoken really or essentially of some thing that is part thereof, as this
word animal, or sensible body, is really spoken of man, horse, and of every
other thing that has life and seeling; for they be substantial parts of that
general kind: for if it be demanded what a man or horse is, it is rightly
answered, that he is a sensible body. But to be in a subject, is to be spoken
of another thing accidentally, and not essentially, as this word white or
black is spoken accidentally of man, or of any other subject, and not
essentially; for neither is man any essential part of white, nor white any
essential part of man, and therefore cannot be in man, or in any other
subject, but accidentally: and for that cause it is spoken of his subject
accidentally, and not really.

Now tell how many, and what those rules be, whereof you spoke before*
There be two rules. The first is thus: When one thing is spoken of another
essentially, as of his subject* then whatso^uer may be spoken of that
predicate, must needs be also really spoken of the same subject: for as this
wo^d sensible body is spoken of man or horse essentially, as when we say that
man is a sensible body; so this word living body, being spoken essentially of a
sensible body, as when we say that every sensible body is a living body, is
also as really spoken of the foresaid subject, man, in saying that man is a
living body; for this word, living body, is a more general kind then sensible
body is.

What is the second rule?
The second rule is thus: Diverse general kinds not contained one of another,
nor both of a third, have diverse special differences, which do make diverse
special kinds, as a sensible body and science: for the special differences
of a sensible body are these, reasonable and unreasonable, making both man and
bruit beast: but the differences of science be these, contemplative and
disputatiue, and such like, whereby are made special kinds of knowledge: for
the difference contemplative makes natural Philosophy, and the difference
disputatiue makes Logic.

To what end serve these rules?
To the end it might be easily known what words are of affinity, and which be
of one self predicament, and which not. Thus far as touching
forepredicaments. Now to the predicaments themselves. And first we will speak
of substance.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Substance.
WHat is substance? and how many kinds of substances be there?
Substance is a thing consisting of it self, and needs no help to sustain
the being thereof: and yet it is clad with accidents; for otherwise we could
not discern with our outward senses, whether it were a substance, or not: for
we cannot see the substance of any thing with our bodily eyes, but only with
the eyes of our mind and understanding; but we may see the shape, the
quantity, the color, and such like accidents cleaving to the substance,
without the which those accidents have no being at all: and therefore in seeing
such accidents, we may assure our selves that there is a substance sustaining
those accidents, which does always remain, though the accidents do fail or
change never so often. As for example: We see in water, that though it be
sometime hot, and sometime cold, now of one color, and now of another, yet the
substance of water does still remain, so as we may perceive those accidents to
be one thing, and the substance of water to be another. Now as touching the
kinds of substance, according to Aristotle, there be two, that is, first and
second.

What call you first substances?
First substances be those substances which the Logicians call Indiuidua, as
John, Thomas, this man, or that man, this horse, or that horse, and by reason
of their accidents are to be discerned with outward senses.

Which call you second substances?
Second substances are those which they call special kinds, and general
kinds, as man, a sensible body, a living body, and such like, which are to be
comprehended only by man's reason, and be not subject to our outward senses, as
first substances be. And these second substances are otherwise called of the
Schoolmen, universal natures.

How many properties do belong to substance?
These three: First, substance is contained in no subject, as an accident is:
for though the parts of a man's body be contained in the whole, yet every such
part is a peculiar body or substance, and has his proper being of it self so
well as the whole, whereas accidents without substance have no being at all.
Secondly, substances are said to be diverse, but not contrary one to another:
for neither is fire, as touching his substance, contrary to water, nor the
Wolf contrary to the Lamb, but only in respect of their quality, whereunto
contrariety does properly belong. Thirdly, of substances, one cannot be more
or less then another; for the greatest Giant, as touching substance, is no
more a man then the least Dwarf that is; neither is a man full grown, more a
man, then a child newly borne: for more or less appertains properly to
quantity, and not to substance. But if you will understand how far the
predicament of substance does extend, and what it comprehends, consider well
this Table following, whereby you may learn how to define any kind of
substance, whatsoever it be: for there you shall find all the kinds, both
general and special, together with their differences, most plainly set forth.

The Table of Substance.
Substance is either without body, as An Angel, as Gabriel, Michael, etc. A
spirit or soul separate from the body, as the spirit or soul of this or that
dead man.
Or with body: if it be with body, it is either Simple, if it be simple, it is
either Celestial, as the eleven heavens, and all the stars and planets. Or
elementall, as fire, air, water, earth.
Or compound, if it be compound, it is either living, if it be living, it is
either Sensible, if it be a sensible body, called in Latin, animal, it is
either Reasonable, as man, as Socrates, Plato, Virgil,
Or unreasonable, as A bird or foul, as a Lark, etc. A 4. footed beast as a
horse. A fish, as a salmo a creeping beast as a worm, a snake, a viper.

Or insensible, as a pla^t, which is either A tree, as an Oak, an Apple Tree,
etc. A shrubbe, as briers, broom, etc. Or herb, as Thyme, Isope, Margerum.


or vnliuing, if it be vnliuing, it is either Perfect, if it be perfect, it is
either Metal, as gold and silver, etc. Or stone, which is either Natural, as
a precious stone, a flint. Or artificial, as a tile or brick.
Or liquor, as wine, honey, etc.
or imperfect, as Fiery impressions, as thunder, lightning. Or watrie
impressions, as rain, ha^le, snow, etc.




CHAP. IX.
Of Quantity.
WHat is quantity, and how is it divided?
Quantity is that which comprehends the greatness and number or multitude
of things, and is divided into two kinds, that is, whole and broken.

What is whole quantity?
Whole quantity, called in Latin, quantitas continua, is that whose parts are
joined together with some common bound or limit, which is the ending of one
part, and the beginning of another, as the parts of the line here set down in
the margent, marked with the letters a. c. are coupled together with the middle
b a -- c
point b. which point is the ending of a. b. and the beginning of b. c.

How many kinds of whole quantity be there?
Of whole quantity there be three kinds, that is, linea, superficies, and
corpus.

Show how they are defined and divided.
Linea (in English, a line) is a length without either breadth or thickness,
which is either right, or crooked; ^ight, as a yard, an ell, or pole; crooked,
as a hoope, or circle.

Superficies (which we may properly interpret to be the upper face of any
thing) is a length and breadth without depth or thickness; and that is either
plain, or bowing; plain, as a plain or smooth floor; bowing or compassing,
as a vault or oven, whereof the outward side is called conu^x, and the inward
side concaue or hollow.

Corpus (which is as much to say as a body) is that which has both length,
breadth, and depth, and that is either round, or with angles; round, as a bowl
or ball; with a^gles or co^ners, as a square die, or such like thing. All which
three kinds of quantity are to be considered only with the mind
mathematically. as things abstract, and separated from all k^nde of matter,
that is to say as things that have no being ^t al, but imaginatiuely* and yet
so nec^ssarily invented by man, as nothing can be measured without them. To
these three kinds of whole quantity may be also added two other kinds, that
is to say, moving, and time, being taken for the measure, space, or distance of
place or time wherein any thing is moved.

How many kinds of this moving be there, and which be they?
Of this moving there be three kinds, that is, right, circular, and mixed. The
right belongs to the four elements, and to bodies without life: for their
natuall moving is either right upward, or else right downward, as the fire,
whose proper moving is always to ascend right up, and the moving of a stone,
or such like heavy thing, is to fall right downward: for (according to the
rules of philosophy) all light things do move upward, and all heavy things
downward. Circular, or round moving, belongs to the heavens, and celestial
bodies, which do turn round like a Cart wheel. The mixed moving (that is to
say, partly right, and partly round) belongs to all living beasts, that go
sometime forward, sometime backward, or sidelong, sometime upward, and sometime
downward.

How is time divided?
Time is divided into three kinds, that is, into time past, time present, and
time to come: and under time are comprehended years, months, weeks, days,
hours, and all other words signifying distance or difference of time.

What is broken quantity?
Broken quantity, called of the Latins, quantitas discreta, is that, whose
parts are not joined with any common bound or limit, but be loose and several
one from another; which quantity is divided into two kinds, that is, number
and speech.

What is number, and how is it divided?
Number is a multitude or sum of unities or ones gathered together: and such
number is either simple, respective, or figurative: Simple, as, two, three,
four, five, etc. Respective, as half, double, treble, quadruble, and such
like: Figurative, as a threesquare or foure-square number, like to these here
figured:: and such like.

What things are comprehended under broken quantity?
All names of measures, whereby we measure any thing, either dry or liquid, as
gallon, quart; pint, bushel, pecke, pound, dram, scruple, grain, etc.

How is speech here taken?
Speech is taken here for the measure or quantity of syllables, whereof some
be long, and some be short: and such quantity is to be considered either in
harmony, in rythme, or verse; of which things, the general and special
kinds, together with the rest that have been said touching quantity, are
orderly set forth in the Table of quantity here following.

What, and how many properties do belong to quantity?
To quantity belong three properties: First, to have no contrariety; for
great and small be not of themselves contrary, but only by way of comparison.
Secondly, to be greater or lesser, but not more or less, spoken aduerbially;
for a little quantity is a quantity as well as the greatest quantity of all.
The third and chiefest property of quantity, is, to be equal or unequal.

The Table of Quantity.
Quantity is either Whole, if it be whole, it is either permanent, if it be
permanent, it is either A line, which is either Right, as a yard, an ell. Or
crooked, as a hoope, or bow, etc.
A superficies, which is either Plain, as a smooth floor, etc. Or bowing, as
a vault, or oven, etc.
Or a body, which is either Round, as a bowl or ball. Or with corners, as a
square die, etc.

Or moveable, if it be moveable, it is either Motion, which is either Right,
Circular, Or Mixed.
Or time, and that is either Time past, Time present, Or time to come.


Or broken: if it be broken quantity, it is either Number, which is either
Simple, as even or odd, etc. Respectiu^, as double, treble, etc. Or
figurative, as three-cornered, foure-cornered, etc.
Or measure of speech, which consists either In composition of syllables, as
Dactilus, Sponde^s, etc. In harmony, as a third, a fist, etc. In rythme, as
charm, harm. Or in verse, as hexamiter, pentami^er, Iambicke.



CHAP. X.
Of Quality.
WHat is quality?
Quality is an affection, shape, or form of the mind or body, whereof the
thing so affected or formed takes his name: as of wisdom a man is said to be
wise, and of justice he is called just.

How many kinds of quality be there?
Of quality there be four kinds, that is, habit and disposition, natural
power and impotencie, passion and passible quality, figure and form.

What is habit, and how is it divided?
Habit is a constant and absolute perfection in any thing, not given by nature,
but gotten by long use and exercise; and it is twosold, that is, of the mind,
and of the body: again, habit of the mind is twofold, whereof the one is
called intellectual, belonging to the reason and understanding of man, and the
other moral, belonging to the will of man. Of intellectual habits, according
to Aristotle, there be five, that is, Intelligence, Science, Prudence, Art, and
Sapience.

1 Intelligence is the knowledge of speculatiue principles, as 2. and 2. make
4. the whole is more then his part; take equal from equal, and equal
remain, and such like. 2 Science is the knowledge of true conclusions,
consisting of most certain and infallible propositions; as, Man is a sensible
body, Man is apt to learn: and under Science are comprehended the sciences
rational, as Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic; also the sciences
Mathematical, as Arithmeticke, Geometry, Music, and Astronomy, which are
otherwise called Quadriuials, that is to say, the four ways or kinds of
mathematical discipline; and finally, the science physical, that is to say,
natural, as the natural philosophy of Aristotle, or of any other Writer
treating of the secrets of nature. 3 Prudence is an habit working with true
judgment, and according to right reason in all things appertaining to man, be
they good or evil. Prudence may be divided into prudence monastical,
domestical, and political. Monastical teaches to govern one sole person:
domestical, to govern a household or family; and political, to govern a
commonwealth. 4 Art is an habit of knowledge consisting of assured and
certain rules, tried and approved by experience, and learned by exercise,
teaching to do or to make something that is profitable to man's behoof: and
Art comprel end^th all Arts, both liberal and mechanical, that is to say,
handie crafts. 5. Sapience, consisting both of intelligence, and of science, is
the head and chief of those knowledges that be most honorable in nature,
comprehending two notable Sciences, that is, the Christian Divinity, and the
Philosophers Divinity, otherwise called Metaphysicall, that is, supernatural.
And all these intellectual habits are contained under a certain and most sure
knowledge, which is always true: for uncertain knowledge is sometimes true,
and sometimes false: whereto belongs opinion, suspicion, conjecture, and such
like. Thus much of habit intellectual.
What is moral habit, and how is it dinided?
It is a quality of the mind, gotten by custom and doctrine, teaching and
inuiting man's will to work, either well or evil; and is twofold, that is,
either good, or evil: to the good belong all kind of virtues, as justice,
liberality, fortitude, temperance, etc. to the evil al kind of vices, as
pride, covetousness, cowardlinesse, and such like. And note, that of virtues,
some be called moral, and some theological, that is to say, divine.

Which call you theological or divine?
Those that be not gotten by custom, or man's industry, but are the mere
gifts of God, as faith, hope, and perfect charity, and all other gifts of the
holy Ghost, as the gifts of the tongues, of prophesying, of healing, and such
like: which some do attribute to habit infused, making a difference betwixt
habit infused, and habit acquired or gotten, as you may see in the Table
following,

What is habit of the body?
Habit of the body is a certain aptness and agilitie of doing any thing with
the body, not given by nature, but gotten by custom and exercise, as to ride
well, to run, to leap, to dance, to wrestle, to shoot, to fence, to dart, to
swim, to write, to paint, and such like.

The Table of Habit.
Habit is either Of the body, as To fence, To dart, To shoot, To wrestle.
Or of the mind, if it be of the mind, it is either Infused, as Faith, Hope,
Charity.
Or acquired, if it be acquired, it is either Intellectual, intellectual
coprehen death both Knowledge certain, if it be certain, it contains the 5.
intellectual habits before defined, that is, Intelligence, Science, which is
Rational, as Grammar, Logic, Rhetoric.
Mathema ticall, as Arithmeticke, Geometry, Music, Astronomy.
Physical, as Knowledge of the secrets of Nature and of the Soul.

Prudence is either Monastical, Domestical, Political, which are before
defined*
Art is either Liberal, as Husbandry, Architecture,
or mechanical, as Tailors craft, Shoomakers craft, Carpenters craft.

And Sapience, which contains both Christian Divinity, and also Philosophers
Divinity, otherwise called Metaphysicall and supernatural wisdom.

And knowledge uncertain, as Opinion, Suspicion, Conjecture.

Or Moral, which comprehends both Virtue, as Justice, Fortitude, Temperance,
etc.
And vice, which is either By excess, as Rash boldness, Prodigality,
By defect, as Cowardl^nesse, (...)*






What is disposition, and how is it divided?
Disposition is an habit begun, but not perfected; and it is either of the
body, or of the mind: for to disposition may be referred whatsoever was before
attributed to habit (perfection in the thing only excepted) in which they
differ for lack of continuance, by reason whereof, disposition is said to be
easily removed, but habit not so, because it is thoroughly grounded: as for
example, of the disposition that a man has to learning, he is said to be
studious: but of perfect habit, gotten by continual study in learning, he is
said to be learned, which imports a perfection, which is more then a
disposition.

Of natural power and impotencie, the second kind of Quality.
WHat is natural power?
It is a natural ability to do, to suffer, or to resist, not gotten by
exercise, but given by nature to the mind or body: to the mind, as to have a
good wit or memory, to be apt to learning, and such like: to the body, as to
be healthful, nimble, strong, and such like.

What is natural impotencie?
It is a natural weakness either of the mind or body: of the mind, as to be
dull of wit, to be forgetful, or unapt to be taught, and such like: of the
body, as to be sickly, to be weak and feeble, and unapt to suffer any thing
that an able body can do or suffer.

What is comprehended under this second kind of quality?
To this kind may be referred all the natural powers and impotencies of the
soul vegetative, sensitive, and intellectiue: also all natural powers or
virtues of herbs and stones, and the natural influences of the heavens,
stars, elements, and of all the superior or upper bodies. All which things
you may see plainly set forth in this Table following.

Natural power is either
Of the body, as Health, Hardiness, Nimblenesse, Strength.
or of the mind, if it be of the mind, it is either Power vegetative is
either Principal, as Nutritive, Augmentatiue, Generatiue.
Or adiuuant, as Attractiue, Immutatiue, Retentiue, Expulsive.

Power sensitive is either Comprehensiue, which is either Interior, as Common
sense, Fantasy, Memory.
Exterior, as Sight, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, Feeling.

Or motive, which is either Appetitiue, which is either Concupiscible or
irascible, whereof spring all the perturbations and passions of the mind, as
love, hate, wrath
Progressiue, as To go, To fly, To swim*


Or power intellectiue, which is either Speculatiue, as To contemplate, To
understand.
Or practiue, as To will, To nill, To command, To choose.



Natural impotencie is either
Of the body, as To be sick, To be weak, To be feeble.
Or of the mind, To be forgetful, To be unapt to be taught.

Of passion and passible quality, the third kind of quality.
WHat does the third kind of quality comprehend?
Passion and passible quality.

What is passion?
It is a sudden motion of the mind or body, that endures not long, and
therefore easy to be removed. Passion of the mind is a sudden fear or joy
conceived of some evil or good that is offered: and of the body, as palenesse
of color, blushing, or trembling of the flesh.

What is passible quality?
It is an inueterate affection or motion of the mind or body, not easy to be
removed: of the mind, as madness grown of some continual sorrow or
melancholy: of the body, as blackness of the face by continual boiling heat
of the blood, or palenesse by continual sickness of the body: and therefore
passible quality is compared and likened to habit, and sudden passion to
disposition.

What is comprehended under passible quality?
All the objects of the five outward senses, as colors, light, brightness,
which be the objects of the sight; sounds, voices, and noises, the objects of
hearing; savors, the objects of tasting; odours and smells, the objects of
smelling; tangible qualities, which be the objects of feeling: of which
tangible qualities some are said to be first, and some second: the first be
these heat, coldness, moistness, dryness: the second be hardness,
softness, heaviness, lightness, roughness, smoothness, and such like.

Which be the chief passions or affections of the mind?
The chief affections be these four, joy, lust, sorrow, fear.

How is joy defined, and what good or evil branches do spring thereof?
Joy is a sweet and delectable motion of the heart, wherewith it is stirted and
delighted, whilst it enioieth some good that is present, or (at the least)
seems good: and hereof springs delight, boasting maleuolence, reioicing at
other men's evil.

What is lust, and what affections do spring thereof?
Lust is a motion of the mind, stirred up by thinking of some good indeed, or
seeming good, that is absent, whereof do spring these affections, hope,
desire, love, anger, wrath and hatred.

What is sorrow, and what affections do arise thereof?
It is a grievous motion of the heart, causing it to shrink together, whilst
it flies some present evil, that is evil indeed, or seems evil: and
hereof spring these affections, envy, slandering, mercy, agony, lamenting,
calamity, carfulness, grief and desperation.

What is fear, and what affections do rise thereof?
Fear is a grievous motion, causing the heart to shrink together, whilst it
flies some evil that is to come: and hereof spring these affections,
hea^nesse, shame, terror, sownding, and such like: all which things you may
see briefly set forth in the Table next following.

The Table of passion and passible quality.
Passion is either Of the mind, as Joy, Lust, Sorrow, Fear.
or of the body, as Sudden palenesse, Sudden blushing, Or Trembling of the
flesh.

Passible quality contains All the inueterate passions both of mind and
body before set down. And also all the objects of the five Senses, as Colors,
Sounds, Odours, Savors, Tangible qualities,
The objects
Of the sight, Of hearing, Of smelling, Of tasting, Of touching, Or feeling.


Why are these objects of the senses called passible qualities?
Because they make the senses to suffer, as the color of any thing, by
striking into the eye, makes the sight to suffer, and causes either pleasure
or grief to the sight: so likewise the sweetness of honey in striking the
taste, delights it: and contrariwise, the bitterness of gall, or such like
thing, endued with a bitter savor, offends the taste.

Of figure and form, the fourth kind of quality.
WHat difference is betwixt figure and form?
Figure, according to some, is that which is enclosed with one bound or limit,
or with many, as a circle environed with one round line, called the
circumference, or as a triangle or foure-square figure, whereof the one is
enclosed with three lines, and the other with four, and such like: but form
is the drawing or describing of the said figure. Again, according to the
opinion of some, figure is compared to an image representing some lively thing:
and form is said to be the due proportion and feature of the same. Some again
do attribute figure to things without life, and form to things, that have
life, briefly set down in this verse following:

Formam viuentis, picti dic esse Figuram:

Englished thus:

The shapes of painted things they Figures call:
But living things (they say) are formed all.
What does this fourth kind of quality comprehend?
It comprehends the accidental figures and forms, as well of natural, as
artificial things: of natural, as the shape of man, beast, or foul: or
artificial, as the shape or figure of a house, temple, ship, or such like:
also it comprehends all Geometrical figures, as well perfect as imperfect.

Which call you perfect?
Those that are enclosed within such bounds as nothing can be added or taken
away from them, without marring or altering the same, as a circle, a triangle,
a square, and such like: whereof some are plain, enclosed only with lines, as
circles, triangles, squares, and such like: and some are solid or whole bodies,
enclosed with upper faces, either one or many, as round spheres, sharp
pinacles, cubes, as a die, and round pillars.

Which call you imperfect?
Those which are not so enclosed with their bounds, but that some one thing may
be added or taken away from the same, without changing or altering of the
figure, as the rightnesse, roundnesse, concauitie, or conuexitie of imperfect
figures, may be lengthned or shortened, and yet the former shape thereof shall
still remain, and not be altered, but only in quantity.

A Table of figure and form.
Figure and form is either Perfect is either Plain, as A perfect circle. A
triangle, whereof there be six kinds: Isopleurus, Isosceles, Scalenon,
Ambligouius, Oxigonius, Orthogonius.
A quadrangle, as A perfect square, A long square, A square like to a
Thorne-backe, called Rhombus.
Or having many angles, as A figure of 5. 6. or 7. angles, or more.

Or solid, which is either Sphericall, Pyramidicall, Cubicke, or Piller-like.

Or imperfect, which is either Right, Circular, Conuex, or Concaue.


But the true descriptions of all the figures contained in this Table, are to
be learned of the Geometricians, and not of the Logicians.

Of the properties of quality.
HOw many properties do belong to Quality?
Three: First, to be contrary, as virtue is contrary to vice, heat to cold,
white to black: yet such contrariety belongs not to every kind of
Quality; for Triangles be not contrary to Squares, nor round pillars to
sharp pinacles.

What is the second property?
To be more or less: for one man may be more virtuous, or less virtuous;
more learned, or less learned; more healthful, or less healthful; more or
less, hot or cold. Yet this property belongs not to every kind of
quality; for one triangle is no more a triangle then another. The like may be
said of the rest of the perfect Figures, as well plain as solid.

What is the third property?
To be like or unlike: and this is the chiefest property belonging to every
kind of quality: as, two Grammarians be like one to another in their
profession, two healthful or unhealthful, two white or two black, two
triangles or two squares are said to be like or unlike one to another.

How define you likeness or unlikeness?
Likeness, according to Boethius, is when diverse things have one self
quality. Unlikeness is, when they have diverse qualities.

CHAP. XI.
Of Relation.
WHat is Relation?
It is the referring, comparing, or applying of one thing unto another, for
some respect of ^ffinitie or likeness, wherewith they are kn^t so together, as
the one cannot be well understood without the other: and therefore the things
so compared are called Relatiues, or rather Correlatiues; for of things, some
are said to be absolute, and some respective or relative.

Which call you absolute?
Absolute are those which may be understood by themselves, without being
applied to any other thing, as substance, quantity, quality.

Which are said to be relative or respective?
Those that cannot be well understood of themselves, without having relation to
some other thing, as the Father and the Son, the Lord and the Bondsman, the
Master and the Scholar, etc. Here note, that of the Schoolmen the thing from
which the application is made, is called in Latin, Fundamentum, in English,
The foundation; and the thing whereunto the relation or application is made, is
called in Latin, Terminus, in English, the bound, end, or term, as in th^se
Correlatiues, the Father and the Son, the Lord and the Bondsman, the
Schoolmaster and the Scholar. Here, the Father, the Lord, and Schoolmaster,
are called, every of them, Fundamentum; but the Son, the Bondsman, and
Scholar, every of them is called, terminus, that is, the end or term; and the
application of the one to the other is called relation.

How many kinds of Relatiues be there?
Two: Relatiues secundum esse, that is, indeed, and Relatiues secundum dici,
which we may call, Relatiues in name.

Which call you Relatiues indeed?
Those which according to their principal signification have relation to some
other thing, without which they cannot be understood: as a Father is not to be
understood, without there be a Son, nor a Son, unless there be a Father.
The like may be said of a Tutor and Pupil, the Master and his Scholar, and
such like.

What call you Relatiues in name?
Those that according to their principal signification may be understood,
without having relation to any other thing; and yet, because in some respect
they have relation to some other thing, they are called Relatiues, but not
properly, for they differ not from the abso^e things before defined, as virtue,
vice, habit, disposition etc.

What other division is there of Relatiues?
Of Relatiues, some are said to be of one self name, and some of diverse: of
one self name, as like, unlike, equal, unequal, schoole-follow, neighbor,
and such like: of diverse names, as the Father, the Son, the Lord and Bondsman,
etc. And of such, some be more worthy, and some be less worthy, as the Father
is more worthy, the Son less worthy; the Master more worthy, the Scholar
less worthy: which divisions this Table does show.

The Table of Relation.
Relation is either In deed, if in deed, it is either Of one self name, as A
Schoole-fellow, Like, Unlike, Equal, Unequal, Kinsman, Neighbor.
Or of diverse names, whereof some be More worthy, as The Master, The Father,
The double, The cause, The whole, The Captain.
And some be less worthy, as The Scholar, The Son, The one half, The
effect, The part, The Soldier.


Or in name, as Substance, Quantity, Quality, and such like absolutes.



Of the properties of Relation.
HOw many properties do belong to Relation?
Five: First, to have contrariety, as virtue and vice, science and ignorance.
But this property belongs not to all: for double and the one half has no
contrariety, nor the Father and the Son.

What is the second property?
The second is to be more or less, as to be more like, or less like; or more
equal, or less equal. Yet this belongs not to all: for double has neither
more or less, nor one Father is said to be more or less then another.

What is the third property?
The third is, that all Relatiues (which are Relatiues indeed) are conuertible:
for he is a Father, that has a Son, and he is a Son, that has a Father,
etc.

What is the fourth property?
The fourth is, that one Correlatiue is not before another, but are both
together: as the father is called no father, until he has begotten a child,
and a child is called no son, before he be begotten of the father. For this
is a general rule of Correlatiues: If the one be, the other must needs be: If
the one be taken away, the other must also be taken away.

What is the fifth property?
The fifth is, that whosoever assuredly knows the one Correlatiue, must needs
know the other: for whosoever certainly knows that I am a father, must needs
also certainly know that I have a child. The like may be said of all that be
Correlatiues indeed, to whom this property only belongs, as Aristotle says.

CHAP. XII.
Of Action.
WHat is action?
Action is some accidental form or shape, whereby any thing is said to do or
to work upon his subject.

What mean you here by this word subject?
The thing that suffers, as the water is the subject whereon the fire
induces the shape of heating: for here the water is said to be passive, and
the fire active.

How is action divided?
Into actions of the soul, and of the body. The actions of the soul, are
those which the soul does: for, according to his power vegetative, his actions
are to nourish, to increase, and to engender; and according to his power
sensitive, to see, to hear, to smell, to taste, to feel^; and according to his
power intellectiue, to understand, to will, ^o nill, and such like.

The actions of the body are those that do immediately belong to some body or
corporal accident, as to cut, to strike, to heat, to cool, to moisten, to
dry, to make white, to make black, and such like.

Is there no other division of action?
Yes diverse, but such as do rather belong to natural Philosophers, and to
Divines, then to Logicians: and therefore we leave to speak any further of
them.

What does this predicament comprehend?
All Nounes and Verbes of the active signification: as these Nounes,
generation, corruption, augmentation, diminution, alteration, moving from place
to place, and such like: also all Verbes active, as, to engender, to corrupt,
to increase, to diminish, to alter or change* and to move from place to place,
and such like Verbes of the active signification.

How many properties do belong to action?
Two: First, to admit contrariety, not simply, but per accidens, as to kindle,
and to extinguish: secondly, to be more or less, and yet accidentally, as one
fire to burn more, and another less, one water to cool more, and another
less.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Passion.
WHat is passion?
It is the relation or application of the patient to the agent: as for example,
whilst the water suffers to be heated by the fire, this sufferance is called
passion.

What does this predicament comprehend?
All Verbes of the passive signification, as to be engendered, corrupted,
increased, diminished, or altered, and such like.

What properties do belong to passion?
The same that have been said before to belong unto action.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the Predicament Where, called in Latin, Vbi.
HOw define you the Predicament Vbi?
Ubi is to be in some place, as when a body is enclosed within a place, and
therefore is defined of some, to be the description of the place wherein any
thing is said to be, or to be done or made, as in the heavens, in the earth, in
the temple, in the house, and such like.

How is this predicament divided?
Into Vbi simplex, and Vbi compositum, that is to say, simple and compound.

When is it said to be simple?
When a thing indivisible is in some indivisible place, as an Angel in Puncto;
or when a thing indivisible is in a place diuisible, as an Angel in the
Temple; for the Temple may be divided into many parts, though the Angel cannot.

When is it said to be compound?
When some diuisible body is contained in a place diuisible, as the being of
things corporal in the water, or in the air; for corporal things be so
diuisibly placed in their places, as every part of the thing placed, is
answerable to every part of the place wherein they are contained; and so
contrarily, as to the parts of a man's body environed with the air, one part of
that air is answerable to the head, another to the feet, and so consequently
of all the rest: and therefore the Schoolmen say, that Ubi compositum, is to
be in a place circumscriptiuely, but Ubi simplex, is to be in a place
definitiuely, that is to say, in some certain place, though not according to
the position or order of placing the parts. But when a thing is said to be in a
place circumscriptiuely, then such place and thing may be both divided
according to the parts of position or placing, as this part here, and the other
part there, whereof spring these differences, above, beneath, before, beh^nde,
on the right side, on the left side, and such like. And finally, this
predicament comprehends whatsoever answers to this question, where any
thing is said to be or to be done.

What properties do belong to the predicament, Where?
Three: First, to admit no contrariety; for though to be above and beneath
seem to be contrary, yet that is to be understood physically, and not
dialectically: secondly, it admits neither more nor less; for to be in the
Temple, is no more to be in place, then to be in the market, or in any house:
but the third and chiefest property of Vbi is to contain.

CHAP. XV.
Of the predicament When, called in Latin, Quando.
HOw define you this predicament?
This is said to be a relation or application of a thing measured by time, unto
time it self, and contains the differences of times, whereby any thing is
said to be, to have been, or shall be, to do, or to suffer: and to speak
briefly, it comprehends all words that answer to this question When, as
yesterday, to morrow, the next day, and such like.

How is Quando divided?
Two manner of ways; for sometime it is said to be definite, that is,
certain, as in this or that hour, day, or year, which is certain; and
sometime ind^finite, that is, uncertain, as to have been, without any
limitation of time, which is uncertain. Secondly. Quando may be divided into
his parts of succession, as into time past, present, and to come.

What properties do belong to this predicament?
First, to have no contrariety: Secondly, to admit neither more or loss:
Thirdly, to be always flitting or fluxible, and never permanent, which
property it has by reason of time which continually passes away.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the predicament, to be situated, called in Latin, Situm esse.
WHat is Situm esse?
Quintilian says, that Situm esse is as much to say, as to be situated,
ordered, or placed some manner of way; and it is a general word, comprehending
all names that do express the site or ordering of the body and parts thereof,
as to stand, to sit, to lie either groueling, or right up, or on the one side:
and finally, it comprehends all those words which answer to this question,
how any thing is situated, as when it is required how Norwich stands from
London, either Northward, Southward, Westward, or Eastward.

How is site divided of the Schoolmen?
Into site natural and casual.

Which call you natural site?
That whereby every part of the body has his natural place; as in man's body,
the head to stand above, the belly in the midst, and the feet beneath; and so
in a tree, the root to belowest, the body in the midst, and the boughs or
branches to be highest.

What call you site casual?
That whereby the position or ordering of the parts is altered any way by
accident, as, now to stand upright, now to stoop, now to sit, or to lie down,
this way, or that way.

What descriptions are to be fetched from this predicament?
The descriptions of places.

What properties do belong to this predicament?
Two: First, to admit no contrariety; for though upward seems to be
contrary to downward, yet that is understood physically, and not
dialectically. Secondly, it has neither more, nor less; for to stand is no
more a site, then to sit, nor sitting more then standing.

Which things do alter their situation, and which not?
All things without life and feeling, do keep their site, if by violence they
be not changed: but all things having life and feeling, do alter their site,
when and as often as it pleases them, as a beast to stand up, or to lie down,
and so forth.

The Table of Site.
(...) is either Natural, as The head to stand above, The belly to be in the
midst, And the feet beneath.
Or casual, as Going, Standing, Lying groueling, or With the fa^e upward.


CHAP. XVII.
Of the predicament, To have, called in Latin, Habere.
WHat does this word to have signify?
It has three special significations: First, to be clad with garments,
armor, or ornament: secondly, to possess any thing, as to possess wife,
lands, or goods: thirdly, to contain any thing, as a vessel to contain
either liquid or dry matter that is powered therein: and therefore this
predicament comprehends all such words as are derived of the names of
garments, as to be gowned, cloaked, or coated: also of armor, as well
defensive as offensive; defensive, as to be armed with a Corselet, Jack, or
shirt of male, and such like: offensive, as to be armed with a sword, dagger,
caliuer, halbert, or pike. Also beasts and fishes are said to be armed with
nails, horns, tallons, beakes, scales, finnes, and such like. Also it
comprehends words of ornament, as to be decked with Chains, Jewels, and
Tablets: also words of possession, as to have lands or goods: also words of
containing, as to be full of wine, oil, or honey, as you may see in the Table
following.

The Table of the predicament To have.
To have is threefold, that is, To be (...) With garments, as to be gowned or
cloaked. With armor, (...) a (...) or (...). Or with ornaments, as with ta^let
(...).
To possess, as to possess lands or goods. To contain, as a vessel to be
full of liquor, etc.


What properties do belong to this predicament?
Two: First, to admit more and less: for a man at arms is said to be more
armed then a light horseman, and a P^keman more then a Caliuer or Harquebuzier.
Again, he that is clad with two coats, is more clad then he that wears but
one. Secondly, this predicament admits in some sort contrariety: for to be
armed and unarmed, clad and naked, are contraries by privation, but not
otherwise.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the use of the Predicaments.
TO what use or end do these predicaments ser^e?
To many good uses. First, if you will define any thing, you shall be sure in
some of these predicaments to find out the general kind thereof, together
with all the differences (for the most part) belonging to the same: which if
they be not set down, then they are to be gathered out of the proper
accidents incident to the thing which you would define. Secondly, if you would
divide any thing, here you shall find both the general kinds, special
kinds, yea and diverse examples of the Indiuiduums comprehended under the same
kinds. Thirdly, out of these predicaments you may gather matter apt to prove
any question, either general or particular.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Post-predicaments.
WHat mean you by Post-predicaments?
They be interpretations of certain words more plainly expounded after the
predicaments, for the better understanding of certain of the said predicaments.

Which are they?
These five, Oppositio, prius and posterius, simul, motus, and habere, that is
to say in English, Opposition, before and after, together, moving, and to have:
every one whereof may be taken and interpreted diverse ways.

What is opposition?
Opposition is the repugnancie or contrariety of two extremes which are
contrary one to another, in such sort as none of them is in like manner
repugnant to any other thing: as for example, white and black being two
extremes, are more contrary one to another, then either of them is to any other
color, as to red, yellow, russet, or blew.

Since some things are said to be agreeable one to another, and some contrary
one to another, and some diverse one from another; it were not amiss, first
here to tell how, and when things are said to be agreeable, diverse, or
repugnant one to another.

Things are said to be agreeable one to another three manner of ways: First,
when they agree in general kind, as those which are subject to one next
general kind, as man and horse do agree in general kind, because this word
animal, or sensible body, is the next general kind to them both. Secondly,
things are said to agree in special kind, as Edward and John are both
comprehended under this word man. Thirdly, things are said to agree in number,
as words having one self signification, called in Greek Synonyma, as a blade,
a rapier, a curtilas or stuck, signifying a sword: also things of like
substance or definition, as man, and a sensible body endued with reason. And by
these three ways things are said also to differ one from another; for they may
differ one from another in general kind, in special kind, and in number: in
general kind, as a sensible body, and a tree; in special kind, as a horse,
and an as^e: again, they may differ in number, as the Indiuiduums that be
comprehended under one special kind, as John and Edward, do differ only in
number.

Is it all one, to be diverse, and contrary?
No: for those things are said to be diverse, which differ any of the ways
above said, or by any other difference, be it common, proper; or most proper.
Yet few or none of these things are contrary one to another: for no substance
admits contrariety, nor yet many accidents, unless it be by reason of
quality, whereunto contrariety does properly belong.

How many ways are things said to be contrary one to another?
Four manner of ways, that is, relative, contrary, privative, and
contradictorie, that is to say, by relation, by contrariety, by privation, and
by contradiction.

Which things are said to be opposite or contrary by relation?
Those things are opposite by relation, which according to their own
significations, have mutual relation one to another, neither can they be both
verified of one self thing in one self respect, as the father and the son,
the Lord and the bondsman: for one man cannot be both a father and a son in
one respect, but in diverse respects he may: for every man that has a son, is
notwithstanding a son to his own father, and a father to his own son.

Which things are said to be opposite by contrariety?
Those things are said to be contrary, which being comprehended under one
self kind, do most differ one from another, and yet both may be one after
another in one self subject meet to receive the same, because the one gives
place to the other, unless it be such a thing as is naturally incident to the
said subject: as heat and cold, being contained under quality, are most
contrary one to another, and yet may be one after another in man's body, or any
other subject apt to receive the same: for many times heat drives out cold,
and cold heat. Yet in fire it is not so: for heat is always naturally incident
to fi^e; and will never give place to cold, so long as it is fire, and not
extinct.

How are contraries divided?
Of contraries, some have a mean, called of the Schoolmen, Contraria mediata,
and some have no mean, called, Contraria immediata.

When are they said to have a mean?
When the two contraries are such, as neither of them is of mere necessity,
in any subject meet to receive the same, as white and black: for that subject
which is apt to receive them both, may be yellow or russet, and so the subject
is neither white nor black.

When are they said to have no mean?
When the one of the two contraries may be always truly affirmed of any
subject apt to receive the same, as sickness and health* for man or beast is
truly said to be either sick, or whole. Also vice and virtue have no mean:
for a man is said to be either good, or evil: yet some make good and evil to
have a mean* called a thing indifferent. Likewise, hot and cold to have a
mean, that is to say* lukewarm. And betwixt health and sickness Galen
makes a mean estate, that is to say, neither whole nor sick, but betwixt
both.

Which are opposites by privation?
Opposites by privation are two contraries belonging to one self subject apt
to receive the same, in the which subject, when the one is wanting at such time
as nature does appoint, the other must needs be, as sight and blindness in the
eye, hearing and deafness in the ear, light and darkness in the sky, or in
any other thing meet to receive both.

Wherefore do you add this clause, at such time as nature does appoint?
Because it is not needful that one of these opposites be in the subject in
all times: as for example, the whelpe which is not nine days old, though as
yet he sees not, yet is he not said to be blind, because Nature has
appointed him no sooner to see.

Which be opposite by contradiction?
They be two contraries, having no mean, and do consist in contradiction,
that is to say, in denying the one the other: and such contradiction consists
either in propositions, or else in simple or single terms.

Give examples of both.
In propositions thus: John is honest, John is not honest: Plato disputes,
Plato disputes not: in which kind of propositions, there is no mean of truth
or falsehood; for of necessity the one of them must always be either true or
false, in such sort, as both cannot be true together, nor both false together.
In simple terms thus: a man, no man: to know, not to know: to be, and not to
be: and therefore opposites by contradiction be most contrary, and do differ
from all the rest; for in all the other opposites, it is easy to find out
some mean subject, whereof neither of them can be truly spoken or affirmed.

CHAP. XX.
Of before and after, called in Latin, Prius and Posterius.
HOw many ways is a thing said to be before and after?
Five manner of ways, that is, by time, nature, order, honor, and cause,
contained in these two Latin verses:

Tempore natura, prius ordine dic and honor: Et causa effectis dicitur esse
prior.

Give examples of every one.
First, by time, Cicero is said to be before Quintilian, and Socrates before
Aristotle, and such like. Secondly, by nature, that thing is said to be first,
or before, from which the consequent cannot return backward: by which way all
general kinds are said to be before their special kinds, and special
kinds before their Indiuiduums: for if man be, then sensible body (which is
the general kind) must needs be, but not contrarily: so likewise, if John be,
man must needs be, but not contrarily; for it follows not of necessity,
Because it is a sensible body, Ergo it is a man, or because it is a man, Ergo
it is John. Thirdly, by order one thing is said to be before another, as one
before two, and two before three, letters before syllables, and syllables
before words, and words before speech. To this also appertains that which is
said to be before by situation, as in going from Norwich to London, Thetford is
before Newmarket, and Newmarket before Ware, and so forth. Fourthly, by honor
or dignity, an Emperor is said to be before a King, a King before a Duke, a
Duke before an Earl, an Earl before a Baron, etc. Fifthly, the cause is said
to be before his effect, as the rising of the Sun is said to be before day;
so the difference is said to be before his special kind, and the special
kind before his property. And these be conuertible: for if it be day, the
Sun must needs be up: and if the special difference be, the special kind
must needs be, and so contrarily.

To what end serves this manifold way of before and after?
To the intent that we may the better understand what has been said before
touching opposites by relation, that is to say, that Relatiues are always
together by order of nature, and not one before another, but only by their
fourth way, that is to say, by honor or worthiness, which way, as Aristotle
says, of all the other ways, is most improper, and least to the purpose.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the word Together, called in Latin, Simul.
HOw many ways are things said to be together?
Two ways, that is, by order of time, and by order of nature. First, by order
of time, the heat and shining of the Sun are said to be in the Sun
together, that is, at one time: also the Angels were created all together, and
at one time. Secondly, those things are said to be together by order of nature,
which have natural relation one to another, and be conuertible, neither is the
one cause of the other, as the father and the son, single and double, and
such like: and many do add hereunto diverse special kinds and differences
subject to one self general kind, as man and bruit beast, reasonable and
unreasonable, are subject to the general kind, sensible body, or animal.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Moving or Motion, called in Latin, Motus, and of the kinds thereof.
WHerefore is mention made here of moving?
For the better understanding of the Predicament Action, whereunto Moving
belongs.

How many kinds of motion or moving be there?
Six, briefly touched before in the predicament of Action, that is to say,
generation, corruption, augmentation, diminution, alteration, and moving from
place to place.

Define these kinds.
1 Generation is a proceeding from the not being of a substance, to the being
of the same, as from an Acorne to an Oak. 2 Corruption (contrariwise) is a
proceeding from a being to a not being, as from an Oak to chips or ashes. 3
Augmentation is the increasing of a greater quantity in the whole: as from a
child to a man. 4 Diminution is contrariwise a decreasing or diminishing of
quantity in the whole, as a body that consumes or pineth by disease or
otherwise. 5 Alteration is a proceeding or changing from one quality into
another, as from hot to cold. 6 Moving from place to place, is, as the moving
of the sun out of the East into the West.
CHAP. XXIII.
Of the word Habere, that is, to have, and how many ways it is to be
understood.
HOw many significations has this word, to have? Eight.
1 First, to have a quality, as science, vice, or virtue. 2 To have a
quantity, as to be six, seven, or eight footlong. 3 To be clad, as to have a
cloak or coat. 4 To have some part of the body clad or decked with some thing,
as the finger with a ring, the neck with a chain. 5 To have a part, or
member, as a hand, a head, or foot. 6 To contain, as a hogshead that has
therein beer or wine. 7 To possess, as to have lands, tenements, or goods. 8
To have a wife, which (according to Aristotle) is improperly said, because
nothing can be properly said to have, which is had it self of the same: for
the wife has the man, as well as the man the wife; and therefore this way of
having serves to little purpose.
Here ends the first Book.
THE ART OF LOGIC. THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Of Definition.
Having hitherto sufficiently spoken of the Predicables and Predicaments, and
of all things belonging unto them, without the knowledge whereof, no true
definition, nor good division, can be well made; me thinks it were meet now
to treat of definition and division.

What is Definition, and how manifold is it?
Definition is a speech, whereby either some name or thing is declated: and it
is twofold, that is, of a name, and of a thing.

What is definition of a name, and how manifold is it?
Definition of a name, is a speech whereby the signification of some word is
declared: and it is ten-fold.

1 Definition verbal, as when a word less known is declared by a word more
known, as thus, To imitate, is as much to say, as to follow, or to counterfeit:
again, to accomplish, is to fulfill. 2 Definition by difference; as, He is a
King, which rules by Law; but he that rules by force, is a Tyrant. 3
Definition metaphorical, or by figure; as, Adolescencie is the flower of man's
age: Good Preachers are the salt of the earth* 4 Definition by contrary; as,
Virtue is, to flee vice. 5 Definition by circumlocution; as, The writer of the
Trojan war, that is to say, Homer. 6 Definition by example, as to say, that
this word reasonable or unreasonable is a special difference. 7 Definition by
want, or desect; as, That is three quarters, which lacks a quarrer of a yard,
or any such like thing. 8 Definition by praise, or dispraise: by praise, as,
Logic is an Art of Arts, and Science of Sciences: Justice is the Queen of
all virtues. By dispraise, as, Idleness is the corruption or destruction of
youth. 9 Definition by similitude; as, The Sun is the eye of the world; A
City without a Magistrate, is as a ship without a Governor. 10 Definition by
Etymology; as, He is rightly called goodman, because he is a good man indeed,
and full of good works.
When is definition of the name needful to be used?
When some doubtful word is cause of the controversy.

Of the definition of a thing.
WHat is the definition of a thing?
It is a speech, which declares briefly, plainly, and aptly, the very nature
and substance of the thing which is defined.

How is the definition of a thing divided?
Into these six kinds, that is to say, into definition essential, causall, by
the Relative, by the effects and offices, by numbering up of the parts, and by
heaping up of accidents.

What is definition essential?
It is that which consists of the next general kind, joined with some
special difference or property belonging to the same kind; as when I define
a man to be a sensible body, endued with reason, or apt to speak: and this is
the Logical definition most sure of all others, but not easy to be made of
every thing, for lack of special differences and natural properties.

When is it said to be a causall definition?
When it is made of the general kind, and of the proper causes of the thing
defined.

How many chief kinds of causes be there?
Four, that is, matter, form, cause efficient, and end.

How define you matter?
Matter is that whereof any thing is made, as cloth is the matter whereof a
cloak or coat is made, and wool is the matter of cloth.

What is Form?
Form is the shape whereof any thing takes both his being and his name: and
therefore the Schoolmen do define form to be that which gives a being to
any thing, be it natural or artificial, as in the examples before recited,
the coat or cloak has both his being and name of the shape which it has, and
not of the matter.

What is the cause efficient?
That which makes or works any thing, and is the author thereof, as the
Carpenter is the cause efficient of the house, and Shipwright of the ship.

What is the end, or final cause*
It is that for whose sake any thing is done, as the end of war is to have
peace, the end of study is to get learning and knowledge.

Give examples of definitions made of every one of these causes.
Of matter let this be your example: Beer is a drink made of malt, water,
and hops. Of form thus: Man is a sensible body, endued with a soul
intellectiue or reasonable, which is the true shape of man. Of the cause
efficient thus: That is a Decree of the Senate, which the Senate commands and
ordains; for the Senate is the cause efficient of the Decree. Anger or wrath
is the boiling of the blood about the heart, through the stirring up of choler.
Of the end thus: A house is a building made to defend our bodies from the
injuries of the air and weather.

May not a good definition be made of many of these causes joined together?
Yes indeed.

Give example.
Lo here the example of Demosthenes, in defining what Law is. Law (says he)
is the invention and gift of God, and the decree of wise men, the correction of
crimes, either rashly or advisedly committed, and a common covenant or consent
of the City, according to the which all men ought to live. In this definition,
the first and chiefest cause efficient is God, the second cause efficient is
the common covenant or consent of the City: the matter is the decree of the
wise: the end is the correction of crimes, and the keeping of the Citizens in
good order of life.

When is a definition said to be made by the Relative?
When one Relative is interpreted by another; as thus, He is a father, which
has a son; and he is a master, which has a servant.

When is a definition said to be made by the effects, virtues, or offices of
the thing defined?
When the nature of the thing is plainly declared by showing the said effects
or offices, as thus: An adamant stone is that which being laid nigh to iron or
steel, draws the steel unto him: Justice is a virtue which gives every man
his right.

When is a definition said to be made by numbering up of the parts?
When it contains either the chief, or all the parts of some whole thing, or
else all the special kinds of some general kind.

Give examples of both these ways.
Of the first thus: A house is a building, having a foundation, walls, and
covering. Of the second way thus: A sensible body is that which comprehends
both man and bruit beast.

When is a definition said to be made by heaping up of accidents?
When a thing is rather described, then defined, by such common and proper
accidents as do belong to the same, as fire is an element that is hot and
dry, and exceeds all other elements in lightness: and therefore this last
kind of definition ought rather to be called a description then a definition,
which is usual to the Poets, Orators, and Historiographers, in describing
either person, fact, or thing: also to the Physicians, in describing their
simples, as roots, plants, herbs, and such like.

CHAP. II.
Of the precepts to be observed in Definition.
HOw many precepts are to be observed in making a true definition?
These three: First, that it briefly express the whole power and nature of the
thing defined: Secondly, that there be nothing therein superfluous, nor any
thing wanting: Thirdly, that the definition be not common to many things, but
proper to that thing only which is defined, so as it may make it to differ from
all other things.

What order is to be observed in making a dialecticall definition?
First, you must know in what predicament the thing is contained which you
would define, to the intent that in descending from the most general kind,
down toward the most sp^ciall kind of the same predicament, ye may find out
by the way that which is next general kind to the thing that is to be
defined: which next general kind being found out, ye must then seek out the
special difference or property, the proper cause, effect, or common accidents
belonging to the same: as for example, if ye would define what virtue is, ye
must resort to the predicament of quality, wherein virtue is contained: then
in descending from quality, proceed to habit, from habit to habit of the
mind, which is twofold, that is to say, intellectual and moral, and not
finding it under habit intellectual, proceed to habit moral, for that is the
next general kind to virtue: that done, seek out the difference or
property, true cause or effect: the difference is to be good, wherein it
differs from vice, for vice is also a moral habit as well as virtue: the
effect of virtue is to incline man's will to do always according to right
reason or true judgment, so shall you make a true definition of virtue, in
saying that virtue is a good moral habit, inclining man's will to do always
according to true judgment. And after this sort ye may learn to define any
other thing.

CHAP. III.
Of Division.
WHat is Division?
Division is the parting or dividing of a word or thing that is more general,
unto other words or things less general: for Division is twofold, that is, of
a name, and of a thing.

When is it said to be the division of a name?
When some Equinoke or doubtful word is divided into his manifold
significations, as this word Wolf, into a man having that name* into a
foure-footed beast, into an vlcerous sore, and into a certain fish, each one
called by the name of Wolf: which kind of distinction or division is very
necessar^e, to avoid ambiguitie of speech, which ambiguitie causes many times
great error.

How manifold is the division of a thing?
It is threefold, that is, substantial, partible, and accidental.

When is it properly said to be substantial?
When any general kind is divided by his special differences into his proper
special kinds: as thus; of sensible bodies, one is reasonable, as man, and
another is unreasonable, as a bruit beast.

When is this kind of division to be used?
When the special kinds lack proper names, as most commonly the special
kinds subalternate do, which may be divided again as general kinds into
more special kinds: as for example, of unreasonable beasts some be
terrestrial, some be aquaticall, and some aierie: again, every one of these
may be divided into their special kinds, even until ye come to the lowest
of all, and unto the Indiuiduums comprehended under the same; and that not only
of things contained in the predicament of substance, but also in any other
predicaments of accidents, as of magnitudes, one is long, as a line; another is
broad, as a superficies, and another is thick as a body. This division, though
it ^e of accidents contained in the predicament of quantity, yet it is called
a substantial division, because the general kind here is divided by his
special difference into his proper special kinds.

What call you a partible division?
I call that a partible division, which divides some whole thing into his
par^s, which is called of the Latins, partitio; as if ye would divide the
Roman Commonwealth into Senators, Knights, and Commons. You may also divide a
house into his principal parts, as into the foundation, walls, and roof
thereof. But the better to understand this kind of division, it shall not be
amiss to show you here what kinds of whole, and what kinds of parts there
be: for there is whole substantial, and whole integrall: again, of parts,
some are called substantial, and some integrall; and of parts integrall, some
are called similar or like, and some dissimilar or unlike: again, of the
dissimilar, some are called principal, and some not principal: of all which
things I mind here briefly to speak.

First, I pray you tell what you mean by whole substantial, and whole
integrall.
Whole substantial, is that which consists of substantial parts cleaving
wholly together, and not severally distinct in number, as whole man, consisting
of soul and body: but whole integrall is that which consists of integrall
parts, which though they cleave together, yet they are distinct and several in
number, as man's body, consisting of head, breast, belly, legs, etc.

How define you substantial parts?
Substantial parts are the first and chief parts whereof any thing is
compounded, of which parts if any be wanting, the whole must needs perish, and
loses his name, as the matter and form of any compound thing, be it natural
or artificial, as the body and soul are the first and chief parts of man;
the metal and fashion of a silver cup are the first and chief parts of the
cup, whereof neither can be wanting: for the soul without the body is a
spirit, and not man; and the body without the soul is but a dead carcass:
again, the cup without matter or shape, is no cup at all.

Which be called integrall parts?
Certain secondarie parts, which being all gathered together, do make the
whole perfect, as the head, breast, belly, arms, hands, thighs, legs, and
feet, are the integrall parts of man's body: and of these integrall parts, some
are called similar, and some dissimilar, that is to say, like and unlike.

Which are similar, and which dissimilar?
Similar, or like, are these that be of one kind, and of one self name; and
being divided into parts, every such part, be it never so small, bears also
the name of the whole, as flesh, bone, sinew, skin, and such like: for every
little part of the flesh is called flesh, and every part of bone is called
bone; and so of all the rest. Hitherto also may be referred water, fire, gold,
iron, or any other simple metal, wine, wood, stone, and such like: for every
drop of water is called water, and so of the rest.

Which call you dissimilar or unlike?
Those parts that differ both in kind and name, as the head, breast* belly,
arms, and legs, are the parts dissimilar of a man's body: likewise a house, a
ship, and many other things, have also such parts, of any one of which parts
the whole cannot be spoken: for you cannot say, Because here is the head of a
man, Ergo here is a man. Again, of these dissimilar parts, some are called
principal, whereof if any be wanting, the whole must needs perish; as without
the head, belly, heart, liver, or guts, man's body cannot be. The not
principal, are those parts without the which the body may be: for though those
parts be wanting, yet the body is counted a whole thing, though not perfect in
every point, as without arm^s, hands, legs, or feet, the body may live: that
building also that has a foundation, walls, and roof, is counted to be a
whole house, though it has neither doors nor windows, yet not perfect in
every respect.

Wherein does partition and division differ?
In diverse points: for in division any general kind may be rightly spoken of
every special kind contained under the same; as this word, sensible body,
which is spoken both of man and beast. But in partition, the whole cannot be
spoken of every part: for you cannot say that the soul or body of man is whole
man, nor that the head or foot is his whole body. Again, division divides
universal things into their particulars, and partition divides particulars
into their parts, and most commonly follows division, helping to make
subdiuisions: as for example, when division has divided a sensible body into
man and beast, then follows partition, and divides man into soul and body,
and the body into his integrall parts, as head, breast, belly, legs, and such
like.

How manifold is division accident all?
Threefold: for by that we either divide some subject into his accidents, or
some accident into his subject, or some accident into his accidents.

Give examples of all these three ways.
Of the first let this be your example: Of men, some be free, and some be bond;
some be virtuous, and some be vicious: and after this sort you may divide the
predicament of substance into as many accidents as you will, running thorowout
all the nine predicaments of accidents. Of the second way thus: Of goods, some
are said to be of the mind, some of the body, and some of fortune. Of the
third thus: Of good things, some are said to be honest, some profitable, and
some pleasant or del^ctable: which kind of division is much used of the
Orators. To this also may be referred the common order of dividing any speech
or oration into his parts, which the Orators call partition or distribution,
whereby is set down in what order every thing shall be uttered and declared,
which first, and which last, and so forth.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the precepts to be observed in Division.
HOw many precepts are to be observed in making a true division?
Three: First, that the general kind be divided into his next special
kinds, by such special differences as are merely repugnant one to another,
and do comprehend the whole nature of the thing divided: as thus; Of sensible
bodies, some be reasonable, and some be unreasonable: for it were no good
division, to say* of sensible bodies, one is reasonable, and another is
two-footed.

What is the second precept?
That the parts, being joined together, may be equal to the whole, and may
comprehend neither more nor less then the thing which is divided, as
reasonable soul, and carnal body, being the chief parts of man, do
comprehend neither more nor less then whole man.

What is the third precept?
That no part or special kind be used as a general kind, nor the general
kind as a part or special kind: as in this division which Cicero reproves,
I will show that through the concupiscence, boldness, and covetousness of our
aduer^aries, all mischiefs have chanced to the Commonwealth: here
covetousness is mingled with concupiscence, whereof it is a part: for
concupiscence is the general kind of all lusts or desires. But this precept
seems rather to appertain to a Rhetorical partition, then a Dialecticall
division.

To what end serves Division?
To diverse good ends. First, as Cicero says, it helps great^y to teach
plainly to define, and to make things that be compound, intricate, or confused,
to appear simple, plain, and certain: Secondly, by dividing things orderly
into their parts, it greatly helps memory: and thirdly, it helps to
amplify any kind of speech, and to make it more copious.

CHAP. V.
Of Method.
Having hitherto sufficiently spoken of words, both singular and universal,
and also of Definition and Division, which are the two chief instruments
whereby all simple questions are discussed, I mind here to show with what
order or method every such question is to be handled.

What is Method?
Method is a compendious way of learning or teaching any thing: and it is
threefold, that is to say, Compositiue, Resolutiue, and Diuisiue or definitive.

What is method compositiue?
It is that whereby we compound the whole of his parts, beginning at the
smallest, and so proceed from greater to greater, until we come to the chief
end whereto we tend, which kind of order or method we observe here in writing
this Logic: for first we treat of words or terms, then of a proposition, and
last of all of a Syllogism. So likewise he that will teach the nighest way
from Norwich to London by order compositiue, will bid him first go to Windham,
from Windham to Atleborough, from Atleborough to Thetford, from Thetford to
Newmarket, from Newmarket to Barkway, from Barkway to Ware, from Ware to London.

What is method resolutiue?
It is that whereby any whole thing is resolved into his parts: or when we
proceed from the end to the next and immediate cause thereof, and from that to
the next cause of that, and so from one to another, until we come to the first
cause of all, and most remote and furthest off: as when we resolve a Syllogism
into his Propositions, and a proposition into his uttermost bounds or terms,
which are the subject and the predicate: and this way is unlike to the other
before recited, because it goes backward, as in the former example. If ye will
teach the way from Norwich to London by method resolutiue, ye must say that
there is a Town called Ware, twenty miles from London: next to that is a
Town called Barkway, and so till ye come to that which was first in method
compositiue. To these two methods Galen adds the third method, that is,
method diuisiue or definitive.

What is that method?
It is, when in defining and dividing we descend orderly from a most general
kind to all the special kinds contained under the same, and so to the lowest
of all: as having to speak of quality, we define it, and divide it into his
four special kinds, and every such special kind into his parts and
members, even till we come to the lowest of all, as you see in the Table of
quality before described. Which kind of method is more fully handled by my
friend Accontio, in his little Treatise which he wrote in Latin, de methodo:
the effect of which book I think it not out of purpose to set down even here*

The effect of Accontius his book, de methodo, which he affirms to be the
second part or office of Logic.
FOr the first office of Logic teaches how to find out the truth in any
speech: but method teaches how to attain to the Art or knowledge of any
thing. In which method, three things (as he says) are to be considered: First,
what method is: Secondly, what is the effect or uttermost end thereof: Thirdly,
what be the causes of that end or effect.

Method is a certain right way, whereby we may search out the knowledge of
any thing; and having attained it, how to teach the same commodiously to any
other, without examining whether it be true or false; for that belongs to the
first part of Logic.

The effect or uttermost end of method, is the knowledge of anything.

The causes of that end are these three, form, matter, and cause efficient.

Form here seems to be that which is known by all the parts of such
knowledge, being gathered together (as it were) into one self body: which
parts are these; first, what the thing is; secondly, what be the causes
thereof, and also what be the causes of those causes, even to the last or
uttermost cause: thirdly, what be the effects, and also what be the effects of
those effects, as well when the thing is taken generally, as for some whole
thing, or as when the whole is divided into all his parts, even unto the parts
indivisible.

Matter here is generally taken, and not for the matter of any determinate or
certain kind: unto which matter do appertain all things that be finite,
perpetual, and immutable, that is to say, all universals.

The causes efficient are partly those things that are more known, as first,
to know what the thing is by definition consisting of the general kind, and
of the differences thereto belonging: secondly, what is the effect or end of
the thing, as in those things which do not depend upon our will: and thirdly,
what be the causes of that end or effect, the consideration of which end
belongs to those things which do depend upon our will, and partly the cause
efficient is the right applying or ordering of the more known things, which
order contains two parts: for first we must proceed always from the most
general kinds to the next general kinds, as having to begin with the
definition of the thing which you seek to know, when need requires, you must
proceed from the most general kind of all, that is to say, from the highest
general kind, and so descend downward, until you come to the thing that is
to be defined: but if you have to begin from the uttermost end of the thing,
then next of al consider that, from whence the end does immediately spring, and
what does follow next to that, and so proceed from one to another, till you
come to the first cause of all. Finally, if you have to begin from the first
causes, then you must orderly proceed from that which is first unto the second,
and so to the third, and so forth until you come to the uttermost effect or
last end.

Now as touching the second part of applying or ordering the more known
things, you must have consideration of every whole thing, and of all his parts:
wherefore if you have to define any thing, Art, or science, whereof you treat,
you must define the whole, and then every part thereof, until you come to the
lowest part thereof, and yet every one in his proper place. And if you cannot
comprehend in one definition all those things that are to be referred to one
head, then use division in dividing the whole into his parts, and define every
such part in order. But if all the parts which the thing contains, have not
one self end, but diverse, then divide it by such differences as every part may
have his proper end.

Moreover, if the form, matter, or cause efficient have diverse respects and
considerations, then (according to that diversity) make diverse divisions, and
first declare what is common to all the parts in general* and what is proper
to every one in particular.

Finally, if some one whole thing lies hidden, then it is to be found out by
looking into some of the particular parts thereof. And these are all the
chiefest points contained in the Latin Treatise which my friend A^ontius wrote
de methodo. And though that Petrus Ramus makes but one kind of method, that
is to say, to proceed from the first principles or elements: yet I am sure he
will not deny, but that to go forward and backward, be two diverse things,
though not contrary, as does well appear by the compositiue and resolutiue
method before defined.

I do not yet perfectly understand by all this, with what method a simple
question is to be handled: therefore I pray you show the true way and order
thereof.

The method or way in handling a simple question, depends upon these 9.
Interrogatiues, that is to say, 1. First, what significations the name or word
has, whereof the question is made, and how it is to be taken. 2. Secondly,
whether there be any such thing, or not. 3. Thirdly, what it is. 4. Fourthly,
what be the parts or special kinds thereof. 5. Fifthly, what be the causes. 6.
Sixthly, what be the effects. 7. Seventhly, what things be incident or
appurtenant unto it. 8. Eighthly, what things are like unto it. 9. And ninthly,
what things be contrary to it. All which questions Aristotle reduces into
these four, that is to say, Whether it be? What it is? What manner of thing it
is? and, Why it is?

Give example of a simple question handled according to the nine questions
before recited.
As for example: If we have to treat of virtue, first, we must show the diverse
significations of virtue; for virtue signifies sometime power and ability, as
when we say, virtue attractiue, virtue digestive, or virtue expulsive: but here
virtue is to be taken for a moral habit, bringing forth good and commendable
actions. Secondly, whether virtue be, or not, it plainly appears by the
diverse doings of men, whereof some be good, some be bad. Thirdly, what virtue
is, we know by the definition thereof, in saying, that virtue is a moral
habit, inclining man's will to do that which is always good, and agreeable to
true judgment. Fourthly, the kinds of virtue be diverse, as Prudence, Justice,
Temperance, Fortitude, Modesty* and such like. Fifthly, the causes of virtue be
also diverse; for the cause efficient thereof is good, and man's will obedient to
true reason, and to true judgment: the matter or subject of virtue is the
mind or heart of man: the final cause is blessedness. Sixthly, the effect of
virtue is tranquillity of the mind, and many prosperous successes, and also
public utility and peace. Seventhly, things incident to virtue are these, the
honor, praise, and commendation of good men. Eighthly, things of affinity or
like to virtue, be all good inclinations, dispositions, or good natural
affections, as to be loving, kind, and merciful. Ninthly, things contrary to
virtue, be all manner of vices, as pride, covetousness, hypocrisy,
dissimulation, etc.

What method is to be obserned in handling a compound question?
A compound question is to be handled by arguing and reasoning on both sides,
whereof we shall treat hereafter. In the mean time we have to speak of a
Proposition, without the which no argument can be made: for all arguments do
consist of propositions.

Here ends the second Book.
THE ART OF LOGIC. THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Of a Proposition.
WHat is a Proposition?
It is a perfect speech whereby something is manifestly declared to be true or
false.

Whereof is such speech specially compounded?
Of Noune and Verb, which Noune would be of the Nominative case, and the Verb
of the Indicative Mood, as when I say, Man is a sensible body; for the
Logicians do seldom allow any such speeches as are either of the Optatiue,
Imperative, Interrogatiue, or Vocative Mood, as, I would to God I had a good
horse: this speech is not accounted to be so true or certain, as to say, I
have a good horse.

Of how many parts does a Proposition consist?
Of three, that is to say, the Subject, Predicat, and Copulat.

What is the Copulat?
It is the Verb Substantive, called in Latin, Sum, es, fui, that is, to be,
which does couple or join the Predicat with his Subject, as when we say, Man
is a sensible body: here in this proposition, the word man is the subject, and
the word sensible body is the predicat, and the Verb is is the copulat: which
copulat is not always incident to every proposition, and specially when the
predicat is some other Verb, and not the Verb substantive; as, Plato
disputes, Socrates walks; which is as much to say, as Plato is disputing,
Socrates is walking.

How many ways is a proposition divided?
Three manner of ways, that is, according to substance, quality, and
quantity. According to substance thus: Of propositions, some are said to be
categoricall, that is, simple, and some hypotheticall, that is, compound, of
which compound propositions we mind not to speak, before we have treated of
all things belonging to a categoricall and simple proposition, which is twofold
that is to say, absolute and modall.

What is an absolute categoricall proposition?
It is a speech which affirms or denies something absolutely, without any
respect; as when we say, God is true, or, Every man is a lier: and this is
otherwise called of the Logicians, Propositio categorica de inesse.

How is a simple proposition divided according to quality?
Into an affirmative and negative proposition.

When is it said to be affirmative, and when negative?
It is said to be affirmative, when the predicat is affirmed of the subject; as
when I say, that John is learned: and that is negative, when the predicat is
denied of the subject; as, John is not learned. And note, that in such kind of
speech, the negative is always joined to the Verbo.

How many ways is a simple proposition divided according to quantity?
Four manner of ways, that is to say, into an universal, particular,
indefinite, and singular proposition.

When is it said to be universal?
When some universal sign is added to the subject.

Which words are said to be universal signs?
These: all, every, whatsoever, whosoever, none, no body, not one, none at all,
every where, no where, and such like; as, Every man is a lier, No man is true.

When is it said to be a particular proposition?
When some particular sign is added to the subject*

Which call you particular signs?
These: some, any, many, few, and such like; as, Some man is wise, Few are wise.

When is it said to be indefinite?
When the subject is a common word, having neither universal nor particular
sign added unto it; as when we say, Men in these days be given to great
sollies.

When is it said to be singular?
When the subject is some Indiuiduum, as when we say, that Cicero is eloquent.

What, and how many questions do rise of these three divisions?
These three: that is, of what kind? of what quality? of what quantity? in
Latin thus, quae? qualis? and quanta? for if it be asked what kind of
proposition it is, then you must answer, that it is either categoricall, or
hypotheticall, that is, simple or compound: and if it be demanded of what
quality it be, then you must answer, that it is either affirmative, or
negative: if it be asked of what quantity, then you must answer, that it is
either universal, particular, indefinite, or singular.

CHAP. II.
Of the three properties belonging to a simple proposition.
WHich are those?
These: Opposition, Equiualencie, and Conversion.

What is Opposition?
It is the repugnancie of two simple propositions, having one self subject,
and one self predicat.

How many kinds of opposite propositions be there?
Four: Contrary, Subcontrarie, Contradictorie, and Subalternat.

Which are said to be Contrary?
An universal affirmative, and an universal negative; as, Every man is just,
No man is just.

Which are said to be Subcontrarie?
A particular affirmative, and a particular negative; as, Some man is just,
Some man is not just.

Which are said to be Contradictorie?
Either an universal affirmative, and a particular negative, or else an
universal negative, and a particular affirmative; as, Every man is just, and,
Some man is not just: or, No man is just, Some man is just.

Which are said to be Subalternat?
Either an universal affirmative, and a particular affirmative, or else an
universal negative, and a particular negative: as, Every man is just, and,
Some man is just: No man is just, and, Some man is not just.

All which kind of opposites you may the better remember, by considering with
what order they are placed in this Figure following.



CHAP. III.
Of the Laws and conditions belonging to these four kinds of opposites
before recited: and of the diverse matter of a Proposition.
FOr the better understanding of the laws belonging to the opposites, it shall
be necessary to speak somewhat of the matter of a proposition, whereupon the
said laws do partly depend.

How manifold is that matter?
Threefold, that is to say, natural, casual, and remote or unnatural.

When is a proposition said to consist of matter natural?
When the predicat agrees with his subject essentially, or at the least
necessarily: as when the general kind is spoken of his special kind, and
the special kind of his Indiuiduums, or the difference of his special kind,
or the property of his subject: as, Every man is a sensible body, John is a
man, Every man is reasonable, Every man is apt to speak.

When is a proposition said to consist of matter contingent?
When the predicat agrees with his subject accidentally, so as it may either
be, or not be; as, John is learned.

When is a proposition said to consist of matter remote or unnatural?
When the predicat agrees no manner of way with the subject; as, A man is a
horse, A man is a stone, etc.

What are the laws of contrary propositions?
Contrary propositions can be true no way both together; as, Every man is a
sensible body, No man is a sensible body: but they may be both false, and
specially consisting of matter contingent; as when I say, Every man is just, No
man is just, which are both false.

What are the laws of subcontrarie propositions?
Subcontrarie propositions, consisting of matter natural, cannot be both false
at once; as, Some man is a sensible body, Some man is not a sensible body: but
consisting of matter contingent* both may be sometime true; as, Some man is
just, Some man is not just.

What be the laws of contradictorie propositions?
Those can neither be true nor false b^th at once: for if one be true, the
other must needs be false, whether the matter be natural, or contingent; as,
Every man is just; Some m^n is not just: No man is just; Some man is just.

What be the laws of sub alternat propositions?
If the universal be true, the particular must needs be true; as, Every man is
just, Ergo some man is just; but not contrarily. Again, if the particular be
false, the universal also must needs be false; as, Some man is a stone, Every
man is a stone.

What good is to be reaped by the knowledge of these opposites?
It teaches to know what speeches be repugnant one to another, and thereby to
discern truth from falsehood.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the equiualencie of simple propositions.
WHat is equiualencie?
It is the reconciling or agreeing of two propositions, having one self
subject, and one self predicate, in such sort, that though they be diverse in
words, yet they are made to be all one in signification.

How is such reconciliation made?
By the help of signs, either universal or particular, that are of like
value, and equal one to another, and thereby make the speeches equal.

Give example.
As thus: Who knows not this to be true? Every man knows this to be true:
There is none but that knows this to be true. All these are of like value,
and do signify one self thing. Again, Some men are wise, Few men are wise,
All men are not wise, Not many are wise, are also equivalent speeches. The
Schoolmen do give diverse rules touching the equiualencie of speeches; but
such as, in mine opinion, are neither necessary, no^ profitable, for that they
cause many times barbarous, unusual, and intricate speeches. And therefore I
think good hereto pass them over with silence, wishing all men to judge the
equiualencie of speeches, rather by the ear, and by custom of speaking, and
by usual manner of taking the same in every several tongue or language, then
by any rules, which perhaps will serve in one tongue, but not in another.

CHAP. V.
Of conversion of simple propositions.
WHat is conversion?
It is the changing or turning of the subject and predicate, the one into the
others place.

How manifold is such conversion?
It is threefold, that is, simple, by accident, and by contraposition.

What is simple conversion?
It is that whereby the terms are only changed the one into the others place,
the self same quantity and quality being still reserved.

What propositions are converted by this manner of conversion?
An universal negative, and particular affirmative.

Give examples of both.
Of the first thus: No virtue is discommendable, Ergo no discommendable thing
is virtue. Of the second thus: Some man is a Philosopher, and some Philosopher
is a man. And by this way sometime universal affirmatiues may be also
converted, as those whose terms are conuertible, as the special kind and his
difference or property; as, Every man is reasonable, and every reasonable
thing is man: or, Every man is apt to speak, and every thing that is apt to
speak, is man.

What is conversion by accident?
It is that whereby the terms are changed, and also the quantity of the
propositions, but not the quality.

What propositions are converted this way?
An universal affirmative into a particular affirmative, and an universal
negative into a particular negative.

Give examples.
Every patience is fortitude: Ergo some fortitude is patience. Again: No
virtue is vice: Ergo some vice is not virtue.

What is conversion by contraposition?
It is that whereby neither quantity nor quality is changed, but only terms
finite into terms infinite, that is to say, terms limited into terms
unlimited.

Which call you terms infinite?
All Nounes having a negative set before them, as, not man, not beast.

What propositions are converted this manner of way?
An universal affirmative into an universal affirmative, and a particular
negative into a particular negative.

Give examples.
Of the first thus: Every man is a sensible body, and every thing that is not a
sensible body, is not man. Of the second thus: Some virtue is not Justice:
Ergo, some thing that is not Justice, is not virtue. These speeches in English
have some savor; but to be spoken in Latin, after the School manner, are
very barbarous, or rather monstrous, as Ualerius terms them, as to say,
Quaedam non Iustitia non est non virtus.

CHAP. VI.
Of a Modall Proposition.
WHat is a modall proposition?
It is that which affirms or denies something, not absolutely, but in a
certain respect, sort, or mood, which mood is commonly the predicat in this
kind of proposition, and all the rest of the subject called of the Logicians,
Dictum.

What is a mood?
Mood is a word determining and limiting the signification of some other word
whereunto it is joined, as a wise man, a white horse: for here this word wise
being added to man, does limit and restrain the general signification of the
word man, which otherwise of it self comprehends both wise and foolish. And
the like is to be said of any other general word, whereunto any such addition
is put: but of moods making modall propositions, there are but these four,
that is, Possible, Contingent, Impossible, and Necessary.

How manifold is a modall proposition?
Twofold, that is, Coniunct and Disiunct.

When is it said to be Coniunct?
When the mood is placed either in the beginning or ending of a proposition;
as, It is impossible that John is sick: or thus; That John is sick it is
possible.

When is it said to be Disiunct?
When the mood is placed so, as it divides the one part of the subject from
the other; as, for John it is possible to be sick: and the Disiunct is said
many times to be true, when the Coniunct is false, being both made of self
terms: as for example, the Logicians affirm this to be true, A white man it
is possible to be black: but this other, A white man to be black it is
possible, they affirm to be false.

What makes them so to do, since by construction these two speeches in sense
do seem to be all one?
Because the mood is the Disiunct, which by parting and seuering the Subject,
makes the Proposition to seem spoken in diverse respects, as man to be white
in one respect, and black in another, and so the speech to be true.

CHAP. VII.
Of the proposition, equiualencie, and conversion of modall propositions.
WE told you before, that of modall propositions, some were called coniunct,
and some disiunct: and as for the modals disiunct, they differ but little from
absolute propositions before declared. And therefore we have here chiefly to
deal with opposition, equiualencie, and conversion belonging to modall
coniunct, the matter whereof being not altogether so necessary as some men
affirm, I mind to make no long speech thereof. But for the better
understanding of opposition, equiualencie* and conversion thereof, it is
needful first to declare the quantity and quality of a modall proposition:
of both which things, though Aristotle makes no mention, but only a little of
quality; yet the latter Writers do necessarily suppose modall propositions to
be endued with quantity and quality: for they say that the mood necessary
is much like to a sign universal affirmative; the mood impossible, to a sign
universal negative; the moods possible and contingent, which are both of one
value, are like to signs particular affirmative. Now as touching the quality,
which is to be either affirmative or negative, like as the negative in absolute
propositions is wont to be added to the verb, even so in modall propositions
it is added to the mood, as by the examples set down in the figure of
opposition hereafter following ye may easily perceive.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the opposition of Modals.
HOw many ways are modall propositions said to be opposite?
They are said to be opposite four manner of ways, even as absolute
propositions are, tha is to say, contrarily, subcontrarily, contradictoriy, and
subalternately, as you see in this figure following, wherein the mood is set
before in the place of the subject, the better to show the quantity and
quality of every proposition.



CHAP. IX.
Of the equiualencie and conversion of modall propositions.
THe Schoolmen do affirm, that modall propositions are easily made
equivalent, by reason that they may be uttered four manner of ways, that is
to say, two manner of ways affirmatively, and two manner of ways negatiuely.
The first way affirmatively, is, when no negative is added either to the
subject, or to the mood; as, for a man to be just, it is possible, contingent,
impossible, or necessary. The second way affirmatively, is, when the negative
is added to the verb of the subject, the mood remaining still affirmative; as,
for a man not to be just, it is possible, contingent, etc. The first way
negatiuely, is, when the negative is only added to the mood; as, a man to be
just, it is not possible, contingent, etc. The second way negatiuely, is, when
the negative is both added to the verb of the subject, and also to the mood;
as, a man not to be just, it is not possible, contingent, etc. which is all one
and equivalent to this affirmative proposition, saying, that for a man to be
just, it is possible, contingent, etc. for two negatiues, as well in the Latin
tongue, as in ours, do always make an affirmative. Again, as touching the
conversion of modal propositions, they say, that the disiunct being like to an
absolute or simple proposition, may be converted both simply and per accidens;
but the coniunct suffers no conversion: and though the Schoolmen do set down
diverse and manifold rules, and have invented these 4. words of Art, that is,
PURPUREA, ILIACE, AM ABIMUS, EDENTULI, attributing as well to the vowels, as to
the consonants thereof, certain significations, for the better understanding
and bearing in memory the equiualencies and conuersions of the said modal
propositions: yet because in mine opinion they are more meet to breed
preposterous, intricate and barbarous speeches, then to serve to any other good
purpose, I think it better to pass them over with silence, then to trouble
your memory therewith: wherefore leaving them as things superfluous, I mind now
to treat of an hypotheticall or co^pound proposition, and of all the necessary
accidents thereunto belonging.

CHAP. X.
Of a compound or hypotheticall proposition.
WHat is a compound proposition?
It is that which consists of two or more simple propositions, coupled
together with some conjunction.

How manifold is it?
Threefold, Conditional, Copulative, and Disjunctive.

When is it said to be conditional?
When the conjunction If is set before any simple proposition, as thus: If it
be a man, it is a sensible body.

When is it said to be copulative?
When two simple propositions are joined together with a conjunction
copulative, as, God is true, and man is a lier.

When is it said to be disjunctive?
When two simple propositions are joined together with a conjunction
disjunctive, as thus; Either it is day, or night.

Of how many parts does a compound proposition consist?
Of two, that is, of the antecedent, and of the consequent?

Which call you the antecedent?
That which follows next after the conjunction, as thus: If it be justice, it
is a virtue: here this speech, If it be justice, is the antecedent, and the
rest of the speech, that is to say, it is a virtue, is the consequent: and so
it should be, though the words were contrarily placed, as thus: It is a virtue,
if it be justice.

What things are to be considered in hypotheticall propositions?
These: First, whether they have any quantity, or quality: then, whether any
opposition, equiualence, or conversion do belong to them, or not: thirdly, how
to know the truth or falsehood of every such proposition, be it conditional,
copulative, or disjunctive. And first, as touching quantity, they have none at
all: for quantity is to be measured by signs universal, or particular, which
are only incident to the subjects of categoricall propositions: but quality
they have, in that they affirm or deny some thing, by reason whereof there
may be contradiction in hypotheticall propositions, but it cannot be properly
said, that they be either contrary, subcontrarie, or subalternat, for that
they are without quantity; for want whereof they neither do aptly admit
opposition, equiualence, or conversion, but only contradiction.

How is that Contradiction to be understood?
By reason of affirmation, or negation; which, as in simple propositions is to
be taken on the behalf of the verb copulative, and not of the subject or
predicate: so in compound propositions, it is to be taken on the behalf of the
conjunction, having a negative set before it; and yet not of every conjunction,
but only of that conjunction conditional, If: whereof I cannot aptly give you
any example in our native tongue, because it is contrary to our natural and
usual speech, to put a negative before the conjunction, If; and therefore I
leave to speak thereof any further: and to say the truth, it makes but a
strange kind of speech in the Latin tongue, and I believe is seldom used in
any disputation: as to say thus, Non si animal est, homo est: or, Non si lux
est, dies est: both which are said to be negative speeches, according to the
rule before given, because the negative is set before the conjunction si, and
by virtue thereof (as the Schoolmen say) makes the whole proposition to be
negative.

CHAP. XI.
Of the truth and falsehood of Hypotheticall propositions, and first, of the
Conditional.
WHat is to be considered, to know the truth or falsehood of Conditional
Propositions?
First, whether they be affirmative or negative: for in the affirmatiues it
suffices, that the one part does necessarily follow of the other, as thus: If
it be a man, it is a sensible body: and it makes no matter, though the parts
severally taken, be both false, so as the Cousequent be good: as, If a tree be
a man, a tree is a sensible body: for though both these parts be false, yet
the Consequent conditionally is true: for a conditional Proposition has no
regard to the truth of the parts, but only that the Consequent may necessarily
follow of the Antecedent.

How is the truth of the negative Proposition to be known?
By the Consequent: for if the Consequent be not rightly inferred of the
antecedent, then the negative is true, as thus: it follows not that because a
Lion is a sensible body, that therefore a Lion is a man.

Of the truth and falsehood of propositions copulative.
WHen is a copulative Proposition said to be true or false?
It is said to be true, when both the parts be true, as when I say, God is
true, and man is a liar: again it is said to be false, when either one part or
both parts be false: as when I say, man is a sensible body, and God is not a
Spirit. Here because the first part is true, and the second part false, the
whole Proposition is said to be false. It is said also to be false, when both
parts are false, as thus; Man is true, and God is a liar. Here both parts be
false.

What kind of propositions are wont to be referred to this copulative?
Those which they call Temporal, Local, by similitude and causall: as of time
thus, When a penitent sinner prays, then God hears him. Of place thus,
Where two or three are gathered together in the Name of the Lord, he is in the
midst of them. By similitude thus, As a man deals with his neighbor, so will
God deal with him. Of the cause thus, Because the Sun shines, it is day.
And therefore certain Aduerbes as these, When, Where, Until, so long as, as,
so as, for, therefore, because and such like, have the signification sometime
of the Conjunction (And) and sometime of the Conjunction (If).

Of the truth and falshoode of disiunctiues.
WHat belongs properly to disjunctive Propositions?
To consist of repugnant parts, according to the signification of Conjunctions
disjunctive, such as these be, vel or either, or else, and such like: as
either it is day, or it is night, whereof the one destroys the other: for if
the one be, the other can not be: and therefore they can not be both true: but
they may be both false, if there be any mean betwixt the two contraries: as
when we say, This woman is either white or black, both these are false, if
she be brown, which is a mean color betwixt white and black. But the later
writers affirm the disjunctive to be true, if any one or both of the parts
be true, as thus, Either a man is a sensible body, or else a tree is a
Substance: and to be false when both parts be false, as Either a man is true,
or God is a liar.

The end of the third Book of Logic.
THE ART OF LOGIC. THE FOVRTH BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Of Places.
THough immediately after the Treatise of a Proposition, the old men are wont
to deal with the order of reasoning, called Argumentation, and with the forms
thereof: yet since by order of Nature it is meet to find out matter, before
we go about to form, frame or order the same, and that the matter of proving
any Question is to be fetched from certain common Places, I thought it best to
treat first of those Places, and then to show the order of reasoning.

What is a place?
A Place is a mark or token, showing from whence any Argument apt to prove the
Question propounded, is to be taken.

What difference is betwixt Argument and Argumentation?
Argument is the bare proof or mean term which is invented by him that
disputes, to prove the truth of the Question: but Argumentation is the whole
reasoning it self, of what form so ever it be, comprehending both the
Question, and also the proof thereof: whereof we shall speak hereafter in his
proper place, and give you examples of both.

How manifold is Place?
Twofold, the one of persons, the other of things: the order and distribution
of both which, you may plainly see in the Table following.

To what end serves this manifold division?
That the disputers may the more perfectly know the power and proper nature of
every Argument, according to the great or little force of the Place, from
whence such Arguments are fetched.

How is Place divided according to the Schoolmen?
Into two kinds, the one called Maxim, and the other difference of Maxim.

What is Maxim?
It is a general rule approved and received of all Logicians, in such sort as
no man will deny the same, as of contrary things there must needs be
contrary consequents. Again, Whatsoever agrees with the thing defined,
agrees also with the Definition of the same: and such like.

What is the difference of Maxims?
It is the proper name of every Place whereby one Maxim is known from another,
and to what place every Maxim belongs, as from the Contrary, from the
Definition, from the thing defined: for by these names and such like, we know
to what Place every Maxim belongs.

To what end serves this division?
The Maxims serve as shoote-ankers, and as places of refuge, when the
adversary shall deny our Conclusion: again the differences being few in
number, do cause the multitude of Maxims to be the more easily kept in memory.

The Table of Places.
Of Places, some be Of Persons, as Name, stock, birth, nation, sex, or kind,
age, education, habit of the body, affections of the mind, state, calling, or
condition of life, diet, study, or exercise, acts done, death, wonders chancing
before death, or after death, monuments left of things done, or written, and
kind of Funerals showing how well or evil the person was beloved.
and some be of things, which be, either Artificial Places are either Inward
Places be either Of the substance it self, which be these. The Definition, and
the things defined, The Description, and the thing described. The
Interpretation, and the thing interpreted. The Matter, and the thing made. The
Form, and the thing formed: The general kind, and his special kind. The
Difference and his property. The whole, and his parts Integrall. Principal,
and not principal.
Or, of things accompanying Substance, as these Generation, and the thing
engendered. Corruption, and the thing corrupted. Use, Abuse. Subjects.
Adiacents, and actions. Apposition. Common Accidents. Signs and circumstances,
as time, place, and mean, etc.
The Cause Efficient, and his effect. The End, and the thing ended* The four
Opposites, as Relatiues. Contraries. Priuatiues. Contradictoric^.
Things diverse in kind, called in Latin, Disparata. Comparison, as more or
less* Like, or unlike. Example and Comparison. Also to Comparison may be added
these places. Proportion. Changed proportion. Disproportion. Changed
Disproportion. Translation or Figurative speech. From the Comparatiue to the
Superlatiue. From the Positive to the Co^paratiue. From two Positiues to two
Comparatiues. From two Positiues to two Superlatiues, and contrariwise.

Outward Places be these Or mean places be these three Coniugates. Cases.
Division.

or Inartificiall places, which be these six Fore-iudgements. Rumors.
^ormentes. Writings* Oath. Witnesses.
All which six places are comprehended under the place of Authority, as you
may see in the Table of Authority hereafter following, in which Table are set
down the said inartificiall places, together with the definitions and uses
thereof.


CHAP. II.
Of the Places of Persons.
Glue examples of all the Places of persons.
Though the Places of persons may be very well applied to the place of common
Accidents hereafter following, because they either go before, accompany, or
follow the subjects whereunto they do belong: yet because there is a
difference betwixt persons and things, and that the Places before mentioned in
the Table of persons, do more properly belong to Persons, then to things, I
thought it best to give you examples of every Place belonging to the person,
before I come to treat of the Places of things, and first of the name, then of
the stock and family, and so forth.

Of the name.
Of this Place you may reason either in praise or dispraise more probably then
truly, as to say thus: his name is Goodman: Ergo he ought to be a good man,
for that name imports good. I did once see an evil woman executed at
Tyborne, whose name was Sweepestake, which name was answerable to her
property, which was to sweep all her lovers purses so clean as she could.
Cicero did not let to scoff in like manner with Uerres the Roman extortioner,
against whom he made so many inueyghing Orations, saying many times, that he
had not his name for naught: for Uerres was as much to say as a sweeping
thief, derived of the verb verro, which in English is to sweep.

Of the stock or birth.
Of this Place you may reason thus: He had strong parents: Ergo he is strong.
He came of an evil race: Ergo it is no marvel though he be evil disposed.

Of the nation.
He is of the Island of Crete or Candy: Ergo he is a liar. He is a Flemming,
Ergo a drunkard. He is an Englishman: Ergo a glutton. He is an Italian: Ergo a
dissembler.

Of the sex or kind.
It is the promise of a woman, Ergo not to be performed or trusted.

Of the age.
He is but an Infant, Ergo not malicious. He is young of age, and therefore to
be pardoned.

Of education.
He was evil brought up, and therefore can not be good.

Of the habit of the body.
He is big set, Ergo he is strong. He is red headed, Ergo evil conditioned.

Of the affections of the mind.
He is given to excess and riot, Ergo he is not temperate or modest: to this
place may be referred all manner of virtues and vices.

Of the state, calling, or condition of life.
He is a bond man: Ergo he can neither sue nor be sued.

Of diet.
He loves to fare delicately, and to lie soft: Ergo he is lascivious.

Of study or exercise.
He is very studious and applies his book: Ergo no voluptuous man.

Of things done.
Pompey has had many prosperous and noble victories: Ergo he is most meet to
be sent as General of the war against Mythridates.

Of death.
The death of Scipio was much lamented of the Romans, Ergo he was dearly
beloved of the Romans. Such a one suffered death most constantly for Christ's
sake, Ergo he was a good Christian.

Of things chancing after death.
Honorable Monuments were set up by the people of Rome in the honor of Julius
Caesar after his death, ergo he was honored and beloved of all the people of
Rome in his life time. There were great earthquakes, and dead bodies did arise
immediately after the death of Christ, ergo he was the Son of God, and was
unjustly condemned.

CHAP. III.
Of the Places of things, and first of artificial Places.
^
_^

^
Inward (...) which veeld Arguments either appertaining (...) nature and
substance of the matter in question, or else to such things as do accompany
the substance and nature of the thing.

Which be the Places of Substance?
These, Definition and the thing defined, together with the rest rehearsed
before in the Table.

Of Definition and the thing defined.
WHat is Definition?
It is that which briefly, plainly and properly declares the nature of any
thing, by showing the substantial parts thereof.

How may a man reason from this place?
Both (...) and negatiuely, as well from the Subject as the Predicate of the
Question. Affirmatively thus, Every reasonable body is apt to learn letters,
Ergo man is apt to learn letters. (...) thus, No unreasonable body is apt to
learn letters, Ergo no brute beast is apt to learn* letters.

What be the (...) or general rules of this Place?
The (...), Whatsoever agrees with the ^tion, (...) with (...) thing defined:
and contrariwise whatsoever agrees not with the definition, agrees not with
the thing defined.

What is the thing defined?
That, whose nature and property is declared in the definition.

How may a man reason from this place?
Both affirmatively and negatiuely: affirmatively, as Peter is a man: Ergo he
is a reasonable body. Negatiuely, as an Ape is no man: Ergo an Ape is no
reasonable body.

What be the Maxims of this Place?
Whatsoever agrees with the thing defined, agrees also with the definition
thereof: and whatsoever agrees not with the thing defined, agrees not with
the definition of the same.

Of Description, and the thing described.
WHat is Description?
It is a speech declaring what a thing is, by showing the properties and
accidents whereby it differs from other things.

How may a man reason from this Place?
Both affirmatively and negatiuely: affirmatively thus, Every laudable habit
adorneth his possessor: Ergo virtue adorneth his possessor: negatiuely thus, no
laudable habit shameth his owner or possessor: Ergo no virtue shameth his
owner or possessor.

What is the thing described?
It is that, whose properties either natural or accidental are declared in
the description.

How are arguments to be fetched from this Place?
Both affirmatively and negatiuely: affirmatively thus, This beast is four
footed, having long ears and whole feet: ergo it is an Ass: negatiuely thus;
This four footed beast has no long ears nor whole feet: Ergo it is no Ass.

When are arguments to be confuted, being fetohed from these places?
When the definition or description is not true or proper to the thing defined
or described.

Of Interpretation and the thing interpreted.
WHat is Interpretation?
It is the declaring of a name less known by another that is more known, as
thus, Jesus is as much to say as a Savior, a Philosopher is a lover of
wisdom.

What is the thing interpreted?
That which is declared by the Interpretation, as this word Jesus to be a
Savior, or this word Philosopher to be a lover of wisdom.

How may a man reason from this place?
Both affirmatively and negatiuely, if the terms be conuertible.
Affirmatively thus: He is a lover of wisdom: Ergo a Philosopher. Negatiuely
thus: He is no lover of Wisdom: Ergo no Philosopher.

What be the maxims of these two places?
The Maxims of these Places are like, for whatsoever agreeeth with the one,
agrees with the other, and contrariwise.

Of the Place of Matter, and of the thing made.
WHat is Matter?
That whereof any thing is made, as Silver is the matter of a Silver Cup, and
the Cup is the thing made, called of the Logicians materiatum.

How is Matter divided?
Into Matter permanent, and Matter transient.

What is Matter permanent?
It is that which remains in the thing made, retaining still both nature and
name, as stone and timber is the matter of an house.

What is Matter transient?
It is that which being changed, does not return again into his first nature:
as flower and water being made bread, will never be flower and water again.

How are arguments to be fetched from Matter permanent?
Both affirmatively and negatiuely: affirmatively thus, Here is timber, lime
and stone: Ergo here may be an house: negatiuely thus, Here is neither timber,
lime not s^one: Ergo here is no house.

How are arguments to be fetched from Matter transient?
Affirmatively, but not negatiuely, as here is water and meal: Ergo here may
be bread: but you can not say, here is no meal: Ergo here is no bread: for the
matter permanent being taken away, the effect thereof is also taken away: but
this Maxim takes no place in matter transient, unless the Argument be made
by the preterperfect Tense or time past, as thus: Here was no meal: Ergo here
is no bread.

What be the Maxims of this Place?
The matter being set down, the effect also may be according to the
difference of the matter.

How may we reason from the thing made to the matter?
In matter permanent you may reason from the present Tense to the present
Tense, thus: Here are iron weapons: Ergo here is iron. But in matter
transient we must reason from the present time to the time past, thus; here is
bread: Ergo here has been meal.

What be the Maxims of this Place?
The thing made of matter permanent being set down, the matter also must needs
be: and the thing made of matter transient being set down, the matter thereof
must needs have been.

How may you else reason from these two Places?
By adding these two adjectives (good or evil) as thus: The house is good:
Ergo the timber and stone was good: for the goodness or defect of the matter
permanent, shows the present goodness or defect of the thing made: and any
good or evil thing made of Matter transient, proves the Matter to have been
good or evil.

Of the Places of Form and shape.
WHat is Form?
Form is that which gives shape and being to the thing formed, whereof also
the thing takes his name, as the soul of man is the form, and man is the
thing formed.

How is Form divided?
Into
Form substantial, which is the first being or shape of any thing, and that
is either Mortal, as the soul of a brute beast. Or immortal, as the soul
of man.
And into Form accidental, which is a mere accident, called of the Logicians
Abstractum, as whiteness or blackness.
How are arguments to be fetched from the Form and the thing formed?
Two ways, affirmatively from the substantial form, thus: Here is the soul
of a beast: Ergo here is a beast: from the accidental form thus: Here is
whiteness: Ergo here is some white thing: from the substantial thing formed
thus: The beast is here: Ergo his soul is here: of the accidental thing
formed thus: Here is some white thing: Ergo here is whiteness: Negatiuely
from the substantial form thus: Here is no soul of a beast: Ergo here is no
beast: of the accidental form thus: Here is no whitenes: Ergo here is no
white thing: of the substantial thing formed thus: The beast is not here: Ergo
his soul is not here: of the accidental thing formed thus: Here is no white
thing: Ergo here is no whitenes.

Rehearse the Maxims whereupon these arguments are grounded.
The Maxims be these, where Form is either present or wanting, the thing
formed also must needs be either present or wanting, and contrariwise. Yet this
Maxim fails in the sorme of man, for the soul intellectiue may be, and yet
no man, unless you reason from the inbeing of the Form in the Subject, as, In
the body is a reasonable soul: Ergo it is a man: for every Subject has his
name and being in his shape or form, as has been said before.

Of the general kind.
WHat is general kind?
It is that which comprehends many things differing in special kind, as
has been said before.

How are Arguments to be fetched from the general kind to the special kind?
Both affirmatively and negatiuely: affirmatively thus, Every virtue is to be
desired: Ergo Justice is to be desired. Negatiuely thus, No vice is to be
praised: Ergo drunkenness is not to be praised.

Rehearse the Maxims belonging to the general kind?
To what kind soever agrees the general kind being universally taken (that
is to say) pronounced with some universal sign, a^ All, Every or None, to the
same the special kind does also agree: and whatsoever agrees not with the
general kind (...) taken, agrees not with the special kind: sor if no
universal sign be added to the general kind, you cannot reason
affirmatively, but only negatiuely, thus: It is no sensible body: Ergo it is
no man: but you cannot reason so affirmatively, as to say thus, It is a
sensible body: Ergo it is a man: because the universal sign All, or Every, is
wanting.

How many Places does this Place of general kind comprehend?
Four, (that is to say) All or every in quantity, All or every in respect,
All or every in place, All or every in time.

What is All or every in quantity?
It is when an universal sign is added to the general kind, as every plant
lives, therefore every tree lives.

When is it all or every (...) respect?
When any general kind is understood in some respect, and that the general
signification thereof is restrained by some word added unto it, or by some
secret meaning limiting the (...), as a white beast, a good man: for this word
white restrains the general signification of beast, and this word good the
g^nerall signification of man.

Give examples of this place.
God gave his holy spirit to all faithful men: Ergo to his Apostles.

What is all or every in place?
It is when the general kind is an aduerbe of place, signifying every where
or no where, as Justice is no where truly executed: Ergo neither in France nor
in England.

What is all or every in time?
It is when the general kind is an aduerbe of time, signifying ever or never,
as God is always with us: Ergo now at this present.

What maxims do belong to these places?
The same that do belong to the general kind universally taken before
mentioned, by virtue whereof you may reason both affirmatively and negatiuely,
as I said before.

Of the special kind.
HOw are arguments to be fetched from the special kind to the general kind?
Affirmatively, but negatiuely thus; It is a man: Ergo it is a sensible body.
But now you cannot say, it it no man: Ergo it is no sensible body: for it may
be a horse, or some other sensible thing.

What be the maxims belonging to the special kind?
Where the special kind is, there the general kind must also needs be:
again, all the special kinds being taken away, the general kind is also
taken away.

Of the place of Difference.
THis place is comprehended under the place of definition, for difference is a
good part of the definition, and yet for order sake I have thought good to
place it next to the general kind and special kind before taught.

How may a man reason from this place?
Both affirmatively and negatiuely, as an Oyster has feeling: Ergo it is a
sensible body, a horse has no reason: Ergo he is no man.

What be the maxims in this place?
Whatsoever agrees with the special difference, agrees with the thing that
has that difference, and whatsoever disagreeth with the special difference,
disagreeth with the thing that has that difference, for they be conuertible.

Of the place of Property.
HOw may a man reason from this place?
This place is contained under the place of Description before showed. And from
hence you may reason both affirmatively and negatiuely, as thus; He is apt to
speak: Ergo he is a man; He is not apt to speak: Ergo he is no man.

What be the maxims of this place?
Whatsoever agrees with the property, agrees also with the thing that has
that property. And whatsoever disagreeth with the property, disagreeth also
with the thing whereto such property belongs, for they be conuertible.

Of the place of whole Integrall.
WHat is whole Integrall?
That which consists of parts having quantity.

How may we reason from the whole to every particular part?
Affirmatively, but not negatiuely, thus; It is a house: Ergo it has
foundation, walls and roof: but you cannot reason so negatiuely from the
whole to every particular part, as to say thus; Here is an House: Ergo here is
no foundation or walls.

What be the maxims of this place?
If the whole be, every principal part must needs be: but if the whole be
wanting, some principal part must needs be wanting, though not all: for the
house might be wanting, and yet the walls and foundation may still remain.

Of the place of Integrall parts.
WHat is an Integrall part, and how is it divided?
It is that which certain other parts make up the whole, and such Integrall
part is either principal, or not principal.

Define these two parts?
The principal is that without the which the whole cannot be, as the head or
belly of a living body, or as the foundation, walls, or covering of an house.
The part not principal is that without the which the whole may stand, as a
house without doors or windows: or the body may live without hands or feet.

How may we reason from the principal part to the whole?
Negatiuely thus; Here is no foundation or walls: Ergo here is no house: but
you cannot reason so of the part not principal, but only in having respect to
the perfection of the whole, as thus; Here is neither doors nor windows: Ergo
the house is not perfect.

What be the maxims of this place?
If any principal part be wanting, the whole cannot be. If any part not
principal be wanting, the whole is imperfect.

Of the places of things accompanying Substance.
WHat is the place of things accompanying Substance?
It is that which comprehends such arguments as are not fetched from the
substance of the thing it self, but from that which accompanies the substance
thereof.

Which be those places?
These: Generation, the thing engendered: Corruption, the thing corrupted: Use,
Subject, Adiacents, Actions, Opposition, common Accidents, and Circumstances
and such like.

Of the place of Generation, and of the thing engendered.
WHat is Generation?
It is the first being or springing of any thing.

How are arguments to be fetched from Generation to the thing engendered?
Affirmatively thus: It was good that Christ was borne: Ergo Christ was good;
It was evil for Rome that Catiline was borne: Ergo, Catiline was evil to Rome.

What be the Maxims of this place?
Those things whose generation is good, must needs be good, and those things
whose generation is evil, must needs be evil.

How may we reason from the thing engendered to the Generation?
Affirmatively thus: Catiline was evil to Rome: Ergo, the birth of Catiline
was evil to Rome.

What be the maxims of this place?
If the thing engendered be either good or evil, the generation thereof must
needs be also either good or evil.

Of Corruption, and the thing Corrupted.
WHat is Corruption?
Corruption is contrary to Generation, and is the destruction of the thing
engendered, and the thing destroyed is said to be corrupted.

How may we reason from Corruption, to the thing Corrupted?
Thus: To execute thieves and murderers, is profitable to the Commonwealth:
Ergo, thieves and murderers are hurtful to the Commonwealth. The death of
Uirgil was a great loss to learning: Ergo, Vir. was a great furtherance to
learning.

How may we reason from the thing Corrupted, to the Corruption?
Affirmatively thus: Uirgil was a great furtherance to learning: Ergo, the
death of Virgil was a great loss to learning.

What be the maxims of these two places?
Those things whereof the end and destruction is laudable, must needs of
themselves be pernicious and hurtful. And contrariwise, those things whose
end and destruction is hurtful, must needs of themselves be good and
profitable. Again, of good things, the loss is evil, and of evil things,
the loss is good: but in reasoning from these places, you must take heed that
as well the Corruption, as the thing corrupted, be absolutely good, or evil
of it self, and not by Accident: for it were no good argument to reason thus;
The death of Christ was good: Ergo, Christ was evil: for his death was good by
accident for our salvation, and not for any crime that was in him. Moreover,
you must beware that you use not one self predicate both in your antecedent,
and in your consequent: for if good be the predicate in the antecede^t, evil
must be the predicate in the consequent, and if evil be the predicate in the
antecedent, good must be the predicate in the consequent: for this kind of
reasoning consists of contraries.

Of Use.
WHat is use?
Use is the apt applying of every thing to his proper end, as the use of wine
to comfort the stomach, and to rejoice the heart of man.

How may we reason from this place?
Affirmatively thus: the use of wine is good: Ergo, wine is good: the use of
art Magic is evil: Ergo, the art it self is evil.

What be the maxims of this place?
That thing is good or evil, whereof the use is good or evil.

What is to be observed in this kind of reasoning?
Two things: first, that the thing whereof we speak, have some good or evil
use of it self absolutely, and not by accident: secondly, that we take not the
abuse in stead of the right use, as to say, Wine will make men drunk: Ergo,
wine is not good.

Whereto serve most chiefly these three places last mentioned (that is to say)
the place of Generation, of Corruption, and of Use?
They chiefly serve to prove the natural goodness or euilnesse of any thing.

Of the Subject.
HOw is this word Subject here taken?
For that whereunto accidents and actions do belong: and having to speak here
of common accidents, I thought it good to speak first of the Subjects, because
all manner of Accidents must needs cleave to one Subject or other.

How may we reason from this place?
Affirmatively, and Negatiuely: Affirmatively thus; It is fire: Ergo, it is hot
and apt to burn. He is a man: Ergo, apt to laugh or to weep. Negatiuely thus,
Dead men have no being at all: Ergo, dead men are not miserable. He has no
gall: Ergo, he cannot be angry. There be no Pigmeans: Ergo, they fight not
with Cranes.

Which be the Maxims of this place?
If the Subject be, the natural accidents and actions belonging to the Subject
must also needs be: and the Subject being taken away, all the accidents and
actions thereof must also be taken away.

How may such arguments as are fetched out of this place be confuted;
When the Accidents do not of necessity belong to the Subject, as thus, He is
a man: Ergo, he is a good Poet, for this accident belongs not of necessity
to every man.

Of Adiacents and Actions.
FOr so much as Adiacents, otherwise called perpetual Accidents, and also
natural and proper Actions belonging to any Subject be either contained under
the place of Property, of Difference, or else of common Accidents, and have
like kind of reasoning, I thought good therefore to refer you to those
places, whereof some are taught before, and some do follow hereafter.

Of Apposition.
WHat is Apposition?
Apposition is, when a thing shows what his own quality or operation is, by
being put or added to another thing, as, white Chalk being put to a wall, will
make the wall white, and thereby Chalk shows it self to be white: so
likewise Ink being put to paper, or such like thing, will make it black.

How may a man reason from this place?
Affirmatively thus: Chalk being put to a wall, will make it white: Ergo,
Chalk is white. Fire being put under a Cauldron of water, will make the water
hot: Ergo, fire is hot. By this place also a man may prove conversation or
company with others to be good or evil in this sort. This young man keeping
company with that old man is made virtuous: Ergo, the old man is virtuous. He
is become a thief by keeping company with such a person: Ergo, that person is
a thief. And therefore the Scripture says, cum bonis bonuser^s, and cum
peruersis peruerteris (that is to say) with the good thou shall be good, and
with the froward thou shall learn frowardness.

What be the Maxims of this place?
If one thing being put to another, endueth the same with any quality, that
thing must needs have the same quality it self. I do place this place next
to action, because it seems to me that it appertains to action.

Of common Accidents.
WHat cast ye common Accidents?
I call those common Accidents, such things as are either always, or for the
most part so knit together, as the one goes before or after the other, or else
accompany each one the other: whereof some are necessary, and some probable.

How may we reason from the Necessary?
Both affirmatively and negatiuely, and first affirmatively, by the latter part
thus. This Appletree has flowers: Ergo, it has budded. It has fruit: Ergo,
it has both budded and flowred. This woman is brought to bed of a child:
Ergo, she has conceived. Negatiuely by the former part thus. This woman never
conceived: Ergo, she can bring forth no child. This man never studied: Ergo he
is not learned.

What be the maxims of this place?
If the latter be, the former must needs go before, and if the former were
not, the latter cannot be.

Of Probable Accidents, Conjectures, Presumptions, Signs, and Circumstances.
HOw may we reason from Probable Accidents?
From Probable Accidents you may reason Affirmatively thus: The feast of
Bacehus is this day celebrated: Ergo, there will be many drunken this day. The
general Sessions are holden this day: Ergo, there will be some hanged.

What be the maxims of this place?
If the latter be, it is likely that the former went before, and if the former
be, it is like enough the latter may sollow: but you must beware in reasoning
from this place, that you fetch not your argument from such Accidents as chance
but seldom, or be indifferent, for such be neither necessary nor probable,
but sophistical and fallible, as to reason thus. She is a fair woman: Ergo,
she is unchaste.

Whereto serves the place of common Accidents?
In the Judicial kind it helps greatly to prove the fact. In the
Demonstratiue kind to praise or dispraise. In the Deliberatiue kind to
persuade or dissuade, and to gather together all Conjectures meet for the
purpose and therefore this place is much used of natural Philosophers to prove
things by natural signs, or by Physiognomie: also of Astrologers ^o prove
dearth, mortality, and such like, by wonders, and monsters, as by blazing
stars, and such like impressions. Also it is much used of Chiromancers,
Southsayers, and such as use to judge by Conjectures, and therefore this place
extends very far, and serves to many uses. Hitherto also are referred the
places of circumstances, and chiefly of time and place, from whence good
arguments may be fetched.

Of Time.
HOw are arguments fetched from time?
Negatiuely thus: Pythag was not borne in Numa Pompilius time: Ergo, Numa was
not Pythagoras scholar. The ceremonial laws of Moses were made for a
certain time: Ergo, after that time they do not bind.

What be the Maxims of this place?
Nothing can be without time, for if time be taken away, the thing also must
needs fail.

Of Place.
HOw are arguments fetched from place?
Negatiuely thus: Cicero was not at Rome, when Julius Caesar was slain: Ergo,
Cicero slew him not.

What is the maxim of this place?
No certain body or thing is without a place, neither is one body at one time
in diverse places: and thus much touching inward places.

Of outward Places, and first of Causes.
WHich be outward Places?
Outward places be those which appertain to the thing, and yet do not cleave
thereunto: of which places the first is of Causes and Effects.

What is a Cause?
A Cause is that by virtue whereof another thing follows.

How many chief kinds of Causes be there?
Four, (that is to say) the Cause Efficient, the end, matter, and shape, of
the two last whereof we have spoken before, because they be inward places, and
do belong to the Substance of the thing, and therefore we have to deal only
here, with the cause Efficient and end.

Of the Cause Efficient.
WHat is that cause Efficient, and how is it divided?
Cause Efficient is that from whence proceeds the first beginning of any
thing that is made or done, and is the maker thereof. As for example, the
Carpenter is the Cause Efficient of the house which he makes, and so is every
Artificer of his own work. Causes Efficient are divided into two kinds (that
is to say) Cause Absolute, and Cause Adiuuant. Cause Absolute works by his
own force and virtue, as the fire that burns. Cause Adiuuant works not by
himself, but is a helper, and such cause is sometime principal, as virtue is
a Principal Cause of blessed life, and sometime not Principal, as the gifts of
the body and of fortune be helpers to the happy life: but not Principal Causes
thereof. Again of Causes, some are of Necessity, without which the thing
cannot be made, as the Instrument or matter, and some are said not to be of
Necessity, as when we say, The speaking of truth causes hatred, and yet not
of Necessity. Also of Causes Efficient, some be Universal, and some
Particular, as the Eclipse or evil Conjunction of certain Planets is the
Universal cause of Pestilence: but the corruption of humors in man's body is
the particular cause thereof. Again, of causes some be called of the Latins
Propinquae (that is to say) nigh unto the Effect, as the father and mother be
the nighest Causes of Generation of Children. And some be called Remotae, (that
is to say) removed causes, which be further of, as the Grands^rs, and Grandames
of the said children. Moreover of Causes Efficient some work by a certain
natural Necessity, as those that lack choice and judgment, as fire that
burns, and the Sun that shines, and all other natural things that do work
by their own force and virtue. Some again do work by counsel, reason, and
freewill, as men, Angels, and most chiefly God himself.

How may we reason from the Efficient Cause to the Effect?
From the necessary Efficient Cause you may reason both Affirmatively and
Negatiuely. Affirmatively thus: The Sun is lately gone down: Ergo, it is
twilight. Negatiuely thus: The Sun was not up when Troy was destroyed: Ergo,
Troy was not destroyed in the day time: but from the Efficient not Necessary,
you can reason but only Affirmatively thus: He is slain: Ergo, he is dead:
but you cannot say; he is not slain: Ergo, he is not dead.

What be the maxims of this Place?
The Necessary Cause Efficient not let, the Effect must needs follow: as if
he has drunken poison, he must needs die. But if such Cause fails, the
effect also must needs fail: as the Sun is not up: Ergo, it is not day. He
never studied: Ergo, he is not learned, to which place may be referred the
places of occasion, Instrument, Mean, and Generation.

How may we reason from the Effect, to the Cause Efficient?
From the Necessary Effect, both Affirmatively and Negatiuely thus, it is day:
Ergo, the Sun is up, it is not day: Ergo, the Sun is not up. From the Effect
not Necessary you may only reason Negatiuely, thus: He is not dead: Ergo, He
is not slain, but you cannot reason so Affirmatively, as to say, He is dead:
Ergo, He is slain.

What be the Maxims of this place?
The Effect being put, the necessary Cause must needs be, and the Effect being
taken away, the necessary Cause is also taken away.

When do Arguments fetched from this place fail?
When the Cause is not necessary or proper.

Of the End.
WHat is End, and how is it divided?
The End is that for whose sake any thing is done, and of ends some be chief
and last, and some not chief, but helping: The chief is that which is desired
for it self sake, and such is the best state of every thing in his kind, as
blessed life to Man: courage and fierceness to a Horse of service: heat and
dryness to Fire: coldness and moistness to Water, etc. The helping end is
that which is desired not for it self sake, but for that it helps to attain
the chiefest end, and of such helping ends one may be better then another, as
when we desire money to buy a house, and the house to dwell in, etc.

How may we reason from this place?
Both Affirmatively and Negatiuely, affirmatively thus, Virtue is good, because
blessed Life is good: negatiuely thus, If Adultery be not good to allure
another man's wife, To break wedlock is not good.

What be the Maxims of this place?
That thing whereof the end is good or evil, is also of it self good or evil.

Tell the use of these places of Causes, and whereto they serve?
The use thereof is diverse and manifold: for since that in the Deliberatiue
kind two principal questions are to be discussed; first, whether the thing be
profitable; and secondly, whether it may be possible and conveniently done or
not. Arguments to prove the first, are to be fetched out of the End and Effect.
And to prove the second out of the Cause Efficient. Also in the kind
Demonstratiue to praise or dispraise. Arguments are to be fetched out of the
End and Effect. Thirdly, in the Judicial kind, wherein doubt rises of the
fact, and will of the doer. Arguments are to be fetched from the End, to prove
or disprove the same. Finally, these places, together with the other two
Causes, Matter and Form before taught, do serve to make those kinds of
Definitions which we call Causall.

Of Opposites.
WHat be Opposites?
Things contrary one to another.

How many kinds of Opposites be there?
Four (that is to say) Relatiues, Contraries, Priuatiues, and Contradictories.

And first of Relatiues.
WHen are things said to be Opposites by Relation?
When according to their own significations they have mutual Relation one to
another, as the Father and the Son.

How may we reason from this place?
You may reason from the Affirmation of the one to the denial of the other,
thus Augustus was Octa^s his son: Ergo, He was not his Father.

What be the Maxims of this place?
Since Relatiues be always together by nature, if the one be, the other must
needs be, and if the one be taken away, the other is also taken away.

What is to be observed in fetching Arguments from this place?
You must beware that you have one self respect, and not diverse, for to reason
thus is no good Consequent, This man is a Father: Ergo, He is no Son: or
thus, This man is his Superior: Ergo, Not his Inferior, for in diverse respects
he may be both a Father and a Son; a Superior and Inferior; a Superior in one
respect, and Inferior in another.

Of Contraries.
WHat be Contraries, and how are they divided?
They be two Extremes Repugnant one to another, whereof some are called Mediate
(that is to say) having a mean, and some Immediate having no mean at all.

How may we reason from these two kinds?
From the first kind you may conclude negatiuely, thus, He is prodigal: Ergo,
He is not covetous: from the second kind you may reason both Affirmatively and
Negatiuely, thus, This man is whole: Ergo, He is not sick; This man is not
whole: Ergo, He is sick.

What be the Maxims of this place?
The Maxim of the Affirmative to the Negative is the general Maxim to all
Opposites, thus: Whatsoever agrees with the one Opposite, must needs disagree
with the other Opposite: but the Maxim of the Immediate is thus: If one of the
Contraries Immediate be not, the other must needs be, as the former examples
do plainly show.

Of Priuatiues.
WHat be Priuatiues?
Priuatiues are two Contraries, belonging to one self Subject, apt to receive
the same, in the which Subject, when the one is wanting (at such time as Nature
does appoint) the other must needs be.

How may we reason from this place?
Two ways: first, from Affirmation of the one to the denial of the other,
which is common to all Opposites, as thus, He is blind: Ergo, He sees not.
Secondly, you may reason from the denial of the one to the affirmation of the
other, thus: He cannot speak: Ergo, He is dumb. But this kind of Argument is
not strong, unless the thing required be applied to his proper Subject, and in
such time as nature has appointed, for it were no good argument to say thus: a
sucking child cannot speak: Ergo, he is dumb; or thus, a whelpe of two days
old cannot see: Ergo, he is blind: for nature commonly suffers not the
child to speak before it be two years old, nor the whelpe to see before it
be nine days old.

What be the maxims of this place?
If the one be not in the Subject apt to receive the same at such time as
nature has appointed, the other must needs be.

Of Contradictories.
WHat be Contradictories?
They be Contraries having no mean, whereof the one denies the other.

How may we reason from this place?
Both Affirmatively and Negatiuely thus: he is wife: Ergo, he is no fool: he
is a fool: Ergo, he is not wise.

What is the Maxim of this place?
If the one be, the other cannot be: for two Contradictories cannot be together
at one self time, in one self Subject, and in one self respect.

Of things differing in kind, called of the Latins Disparata.
WHat be they?
They are those things that do differ in nature and kind, as a Man, a Horse,
a Stone, a Tree, whereof every one differs from another in kind and nature.

How may we reason from this place?
From the Affirmation of the one, to the Denial of the other, as thus: Peter
is a Man, Ergo, he is no Horse.

What be the Maxims of this place?
Whatsoever agrees with the one, agrees not with the other.

What is to be observed in reasoning from all these kinds of Opposites?
That the Repugnancy consist in the Predicat, and not in the Subject: for it
were no good Consequent to say thus: whatsoever sees is a sensible body:
Ergo, that which is blind is no sensible body: for here the Contrariety
consists in the Subject, and not in the Predicate.

Of Comparison.
HOw may we reason from the place of Comparison?
Three manner of ways, that is, either from the More to the Less, or from the
Less to the More, or from Like to Like.

Of the More.
THese two words, More or less, how are they to be taken?
We understand here by More, that which has more probability, and by the
Less, that which has less probability.

How may we reason from the More to the Less?
Only Negatiuely, and that three manner of ways: first, from the Subject, as
thus: Cicero was not able to defend this cause, much less any other common
Orator: secondly, from the Predicate thus: If this man be not able to bear one
hundred weight, much less two hundred weight: thirdly, from the Subject, and
Predicate both together thus: A strong man is not able to bear a hundred
weight: Ergo, much less a weak child is able to bear two hundred weight.

What is the Maxim of this place?
If it prevails not in the More, it cannot prevail in the Less.

Of the Less.
HOw may we reason from the Less to the More?
Affirmatively, three manner of ways, as before from the Subject thus: A
little child was able to bear ten pound weight: Ergo, much more a strong man:
From the Predicate thus: If Martyrs were ready to lose their lives for Christ's
sake, much more their temporal goods: From the Subject, and the Predicate both
together thus: Christ suffered most grievous torments for our sakes: Ergo, we
ought to suffer a little pain for his sake.

What is the Maxim of this place?
If the Less prevail, the More must needs avail.

What is to be observed in reasoning from these two places?
You must beware that you take not the More for the Less, nor the Less for
the More, for many times that which seems to be the More in number or
quantity, is the Less in purpose, and contrariwise, as for example: to bear
a hundred weight, is more in quantity, then to bear half a hundred weight,
and yet in purpose it is less, for it is less probable, and less likely to
bear a hundred weight, then to bear half a hundred weight.

Of Like and Unlike.
HOw may we reason from Like to Like?
When the thing which we bring to prove, is like or equal to the thing that is
to be proved: from which place we may reason both Affirmatively and
Negatiuely, thus: Peter is mortal: Ergo, Paul is mortal. The day Labourer is
worthy of his hyre: Ergo, the Preacher or Teacher: A man ought to be drowned in
the sea for killing his Father: Ergo, he ought to be executed with the like
death for killing his Mother.

What is the Maxim of this place?
Of things like, like judgment is to be made: but note that this kind of
reasoning of Like, is more apt to teach and to print in the hearers mind a
lively representation of the thing, then to urge him by any necessity of due
proof to believe the same, because it is impossible, that the two things which
are to be compared can be like in all points, and therefore this is the weakest
kind of argument that is, and yet necessary to such end as is before
declared, and specially for Lawyers, to prove one ruled case, or for judgment
by another Like. To this place also is referred the place of Example.

Of Example.
How may we reason from this place?
Affirmatively thus: Peter slew Ananias for lying: Ergo, without all doubt God
will punish those that use to lie: the Maxim whereof is all one, with that of
like before set down.

Of Unlike.
HOw may we reason from this place?
Negatiuely thus: God is not as man is, for man is a liar: Ergo, God is true
and no liar.

What is the Maxim of this place?
Of things Unlike, unlike judgment is to be made.

Of the degrees of Comparison.
TO the place of Comparison, me thinks it were not amiss to refer all those
places which Aristotle recites, and are taken out of the three degrees of
Comparison, which children learn in their Accidents, (that is to say) the
Positive, the Comparatiue, and the Superlatiue.

From the Comparatiue to the Positiues.
HOw may we reason from the Comparatiue to the Positive?
Affirmatively thus: Uirgil was a more learned Poet then Horace: Ergo, Virgil
was a learned Poet: Honey is sweeter then Milk: Ergo, Honey is sweet.

What is the Maxim of this place?
If the Comparatiue degree be truly and properly applied to any thing: the
Positive must needs be also rightly applied to the same. I say, here properly
to avoid Ambiguitie, for it were no good Consequent to say thus: the sea of
Caspia is more sweet then any other sea: Ergo, it is sweet and not salt: for
this word Sweet has not in this speech his proper signification, but is rather
taken, for that which is less bitter or salt.

From the Positive to the Comparatiue.
HOw may we reason from the Positive to the Comparatiue?
Only Negatiuely thus: Zoilus was no learned Poet: Ergo, he was not better
learned then Homer.

What is the Maxim of this place?
If the Positive be denied, the Comparatiue also must needs be denied.

From two Positiues to two Comparatiues and two Superlatiues.
HOw may we reason from two Positiues, to two Comparatiues, and to two
Superlatiues at once, and contrarily?
In this manner: that which is good, deserves justly to be beloved: Ergo,
that which is better, ought more justly to be beloved, and that which is best,
ought most justly to be beloved. And much after this manner you may reason from
a double Comparatiue, to a double Positive thus: that which is more honest; is
more laudable: Ergo, that which is honest is laudable.

What is to be observed in reasoning from these degrees of Comparison?
You must take heed that the Predicate be spoken of the Subject naturally and
necessarily, and not by Accident, for it were no good Consequent to reason
thus: he that is learned, is honest, therefore he that is more learned, is more
honest: for a man may have much learning, and yet small honesty.

Of Proportion.
WHen are we said to reason from the place of Proportion?
When two like Propositions being compared together, we conclude in this or
such like manner: look what proportion is betwixt 6. and 4. the same
proportion is betwixt 12. and 8. but betwixt 6. and 4. is Proportio
Sesquialtera: Ergo, betwixt 12. and 8. the like proportion is: for when one
number or measure does comprehend another once, and one half thereof, that is
called proportio sesquialtera, as 12. and 8. and if it contain it once, and
one third part thereof, then it is called proportio sesquitertia, as 8. and 6.
for 8. contains 6. once and two over, which is the third part of 6.

What is the Maxim of this place?
Of things having like proportion, like judgment is to be made.

Whereto serves this place?
This place is necessary for Judges and Magistrates that have to consider of
equity in cases of Justice, and in rewarding virtue, or in punishing vice, in
which the Geometrical proportion would be always used. Some do give such
examples of this place, as in my opinion do rather belong to the place of Like
then to this place, for the arguments of this place ought properly to be
fetched out of the Predicament of quantity, and not out of quality, or out of
any other Predicament.

Of Changed Proportion.
WHat is changed Proportion?
Changed Proportion is when the Foundations, and Terms of two like Proportions
are answerable in proportion as well amongst themselves, as one to another.

What mean you by these two words, Foundation and Terms?
The Foundation is that from whence the Comparison first proceeds, as the
Father, and the Term, Bound or end is that whereunto the said Comparison is
applied, and ends in the same, as the Son and therefore the Son is called
the Term, Bound or end: whereof we have spoken before in the Predicament of
Relation.

Give Examples of reasoning from this place.
Look as 8. is to 4. so is 12. to 6. (that is to say) in double proportion one
to the other: Ergo, as 12. is to 8. so is 6. to 4. for each other contains
the other once and a half, which is called proportio sesquialtera. The
manifest Demonstration whereof you may see in this Figure here following.



Why is this Proportion said to be changed or transposed?
Because the order of numbers that are compared, is altered in the conclusion:
for in the Antecedent the first is compared to the second, and the third to the
fourth: but in the Conclusion the third is compared to the first, and the
fourth to the second.

Of Disproportion.
HOw may we reason from this place?
Negatiuely thus: 12. is not to 6. as 8. to 6. but 12. to 6. is double in
proportion: Ergo, 8. to 6. is not double in proportion.

What is the Maxim of this place?
Of things having unlike proportion, unlike judgment is to be made.

From Disproportion changed or transposed.
HOw may we reason from this place?
Negatiuely thus: 12. is not to 6. as 4. to 3. for betwixt the two first is a
double proportion, and betwixt the two last Sesquitertia: Ergo, 12. is not to
4. as 6. to 3. for the one is a tripla, and the other double.

What be the Maxims of this place?
If the first be not to the second, as the third to the fourth, then the first
shall not be to the third, as the second is to the fourth.

To whom are these places most familiar?
To those that are exercised in the Mathematical Sciences.

Of Translation.
WHat is Translation?
Translation, otherwise called a Metaphor, is a figure of speech, whereby the
proper signification of a word is changed into another improper, for some
likeness that is betwixt the thing signified, and being generally taken, it is
rather a Trope, or Figure of Rhetoric, more meet to adorn speech, then to
prove any thing thereby: notwithstanding being taken here as a place of
Logic, you may reason both Affirmatively and Negatiuely, in this sort: A
roaring Lion that seeks to devour, is to be feared: Ergo, the Devil is to be
feared: Love is blind: Ergo, they that be in love, are not able rightly to
judge.

What be the Maxims of this place?
Whatsoever agrees with the Metaphorical name, agrees also with the proper
name, and contrariwise.

Of Mean places.
WHat be mean Places?
Mean Places are those from whence such Arguments are to be fetched, as do
partly agree with the nature of the things to be proved, and do partly differ
from the same.

How are Mean Places divided?
Into Coniugates, Cases, and Division.

And first of Coniugates and Cases.
WHat be Coniugates or Cases?
Coniugates or Cases, be like words derived all of one self word, differing
only in termination or end, as wisdom, wise, and wisely: notwithstanding some
use Coniugates and Cases as several places.

Why, wherein do they differ?
Their Difference is very small, saving that in Arguments fetched from
Coniugates, the Abstract is mentioned, but not in those that are fetched from
Cases.

How may we reason from these two places?
Both affirmatively and Negatiuely, from the Coniugates thus: A just man is to
be praised, ergo Justice is to be praised: a vicious man is not to be praised,
ergo viciousness is not to be praised. From cases thus: He does all things
wisely, ergo he is wise: He does nothing wisely, ergo he is not wise: for in
these two last examples the abstract which is wisdom, is not once mentioned:
what abstract is, look before in the Chapter of predication lib. 1. cap. 5.
but you must beware in reasoning from this place, that your phrase of speech be
natural and proper, and not improper: for it were no good argument to say thus:
white is sweet: Ergo, whiteness is sweetness.

What is the maxim of these two places?
Whatsoever agrees with one of the Coniugates or cases, must needs also agree
with the other.

Of Division.
WHat is Division?
What Division is, and how many kinds there be, and what is to be observed in
every kind has been declared before, lib. 2. cap. 4. when we showed the order
of defining and dividing.

How may we reason from division?
Two manner of ways: first, from the denying of one part or more of the
division, to affirm another part thereof, as thus: Every sensible body is whole
or sick, but Peter is a sensible body and not sick: Ergo, he is whole: or
thus. Of sensible bodies there be some whole, some sick. Peter is a sensible
body and not sick: Ergo, he is whole. In these two kinds of examples the
division consists only of two parts, wherein it suffices to deny the one
for affirming the other. But if the division consist of many parts, then you
must deny all the parts saving that which you would affirm, as in this
example following: Plato disputes, is a proposition, but it is neither
universal, particular, nor indefinite: Ergo, it is a singular proposition: in
which kind of reasoning if you leave out or omit any part that is to be denied,
then the conclusion is naught, for it is no good consequent to say thus: this
proposition Plato disputes, is neither universal nor particular: Ergo, it is
indefinite. Notwithstanding, if you join the part omitted in your Antecedent
with a conjunction disjunctive, the argument may be made good; as to say thus:
this proposition Plato disputes, is neither universal nor particular: Ergo,
it is either indefinite or singular.

What is the Maxim of this first way of reasoning?
The Maxim is thus: whatsouer agrees with the thing divided, must needs agree
with some one of the parts thereof.

What is the second way of reasoning from Division?
The second way is to proceed from the affirming of one of the parts to the
denying of the other, if it consist but of two, or to the denying of all the
rest, if it consist of many. Of two parts let this be your example: Of
sensible bodies some be whole, some sick, but this sensible body is whole:
Ergo, he is not sick. Of many parts thus: of propositions one is universal,
another particular; one indefinite, another singular: but this proposition
Plato disputes* is singular: Ergo, it is neither universal, particular, nor
indefinite.

What is the Maxim of this way of reasoning?
Whatsoever agrees with one of the parts, must needs disagree with all the
rest, for every good division would be made of parts mere repugnant, or at the
least diverse in kind one from another: for it is a principal condition
requisite to division, whereupon the second way of reasoning is grounded even
as the first way is grounded upon another good condition belonging also to
division, which is that the thing divided may not contain more or less then
his proper parts.

Of inartisiciall places.
Having sufficiently spoken of places, inward, outward, and mean, which as I
said before are places artificial, it is meet now that we speak of the places
inartificiall, which according to Quintilian be these six; Foreiudgements,
Rumors, Torture, Writings or Evidences, Oath, and Witnesses: All which are
briefly and plainly set forth in the Table of Authority here following,
because they are all contained under the place of Authority.

Of Authority.
HOw is Authority here to be taken?
Authority is here to be taken for any testimony worthy of credit.

How may we reason from this place?
Affirmatively thus: the learned Philosophers say that there be four
elements, whereof all other things are mixed and compounded: Ergo, it is true.
Christ says that whosoever is baptized, and believes in him, shall be saved:
Ergo, it is true.

What be the Maxims of this place?
Whatsoever is allowed by the most part of the wise and learned, is to be
believed as a thing probable, neither ought we rashly to descent from their
opinion and judgment. Again, every man is to be believed in his own Art: but
for so much as Authority is twofold (that is to say) divine and humane, and
that all arguments fetched from this place be not of like value, for some be
true and infallible, some probable, and some Sophistical: this Table therefore
here following shall plainly set forth every kind by it self, whereby you
shall easily discern the one from the other.

The Table of Authority here following.
Authority is twofold, Divine which is twofold: Written, Of the written which
we call holy Scriptures, sound arguments are made, so long as the words are
truly expounded according to the meaning if the holy Ghost. But they be weak
and captious if the authority be corrupted either by addition, subtraction, or
alteration of any word, syllable, or letter, or by wresling the senseotherwise
then the holy Ghost meant it.
or unwritten tradition: As for tradition or unwritten verity of what value it
is and what credit it has, I leave to the judgment of the learned Divines,
amongst whom is no small strife and contention in these days for the same. The
Painims were wont to refer to divine Authority the Oracles and answers of
their false Gods, Priests, Prophets, and Southsayers, which true Christians
ought utterly to reject, and to abhor: notwithstanding Lactantius lets not
to prove the birth, death and passion of Christ against the Painims by Sybils
prophesies, because he knew they would give more credit to them then to the
holy Scriptures.
or Humane which is threefold: Writings, as Histories, Laws, Statutes,
Decrees, Judgments, ruled Cases, Maxim^, Proverbs, general Rules, Patents,
Warrants, Lycenses, Commissions from the Prince, Charters, Deeds, (...),
CourtRolles, Extents, Accounts, Obligations, Indent^es, Wills and Testaments,
and such like.
Things uttered by mouth. If it be by mouth, it is either free and voluntary,
as voluntary Confession, or Testimony, Rumor, Opinion, and the speech of the
Wise. Or else forced by Oath or Torture.
And the third kind of Humane Authority, is that which is allewed by use and
custom of the people.




As for such Arguments as are fetched from humane Authority, the laws do
teach (...) large, which be sound, and which be weak: notwithstanding, for
so much as Quintilian affirms, that the inartificial places, are the six
places aboue-mentioned, I have thought good to set down according to Valerius,
the definition of every place, and briefly to show how every such place may be
confirmed or impugned.

And first of Fore-iudgements or Ruled Cases.
What call you Fore-iudgements or Ruled Cases?
They be Judgments or sentences heretofore pronounced, whereby Judges take
example to give like judgment in like Cases.

How may a man confirm or impugn Fore-iudgements?
You shall confirm them by aggravating the authority of those that first
pronounced them, and by the likeness of the Cases: but you shall impugn or
confute them by extenuating or diminishing the authority of the first
pronouncers, and by the unlikeness of the Cases.

Of Rumor and Fame.
What difference is betwixt Rumor and Fame?
Rumor is a particular assertion or affirmation proceeding of some suspicion,
without any certain Author. But Fame is a common affirmation, having some
certain Author: either of which whosoever will impugn, must call it an
uncertain brute or clamor, taking his beginning first of malice, and his
increase through credulity and lightness of belief, and that the same may
chance to the most innocent man, that is, through the Fraud of his enemies,
publishing abroad false surmises against him. Contrarily, he that will defend
Fame or Rumor, must say that it rises not of naught, nor is spread abroad
without some just cause, and that it is accounted as a public Testimony,
according to the old Proverb; which says; vox populi, vex Dei, the voice of
the people is the voice of God.

Of Torture.
What is Torture?
Torture is a painful kind of punishment, invented for the inquisition of
truth, and violently to wrest or wring the same out of such as would not
otherwise confess it.

How is this place to be confirmed or impugned?
It is to be confirmed by aggravating the necessary use of torture for the
finding out of the truth; but whosoever will impugn it, must say, that such
Torture causes many times more lies then true tales to be told: for those that
be strong and able to endure pain, and of a resolute mind, will never yield
for any torment to say otherwise then they list themselves. Again, if they be
weak and not able to suffer pain, it makes them to say whatsoever you will
have them, be it never so false.

Of Writings and Evidences.
What is meant by Writings?
Deeds, Indentures, Releases, Obligations, and such like other Evidences
before rehearsed.

How is this place to be impugned?
You may impugn Evidences or Writings, if ye can prove them to be imperfect
any manner of way, as to be forged, to be made by some collusion or fraud, or
to be extorted by force from some that was put in fear, and such like.

Of Oaths.
What is an Oath?
It is a religious affirming or denying some thing, by calling God to witness,
which is the strongest bond that may be, to bind man's faith and conscience.

How is this place to be confirmed or impugned?
He that will prove by this place, must aggrauate the integrity, honesty and
holiness of the parties that are sworn, saying, that the Oath of an honest,
holy, and religious man is of great importance: And he that will impugn it,
must do clean contrary, saying, That they are naughty men that are sworn,
and common Jurors, which by reason of wicked custom of swearing will easily
be forsworn: or he must say that the party swears for fear, love,
hatred, for hope of gain, reward, and such like.

Of Witnesses.
What be Witnesses?
Witnesses be proofs of things done or not done, whose office is to speak
what they have heard or known: the confirmation or confutation of which proof
depends upon the goodness or euilnesse of the persons.

To what end serves the knowledge of places?
He that will write or speak of any matter probably, wisely, or copiously: or
will understand the effect, tenor, arguments, and proofs of other men's
speeches, and writings, has as much need to be practiced in these places, as a
Huntsman is in knowing the haunts of his game which he hunteth, for without
that, he shall wander long time in vain, and hardly find that which he
seeks: neither is it enough to know the places, unless you can aptly apply
them and use them when occasion shall serve, in disputations made either by
mouth or pen, which requires a continual exerciso of such as will be perfect
therein. And therefore to the intent you might the better learn how to
exercise your self in the foresaid places, I have thought good here to give
you at the least one example set down by Hunneus in his Logic: the Theme of
which example is thus: Man ought to embrace virtue: which Theme he does not
only handle after the Logical manner with short speech, but also after the
Rhetorical manner with copious speech, using therein this threefold order: For
first, he brings in such proofs as are to be gathered in respect of the
subject of the Theme. Secondly, those that are to be gathered in respect of
the Predicate of the same: and thirdly, those that are to be had in respect of
both.

The Theme or Proposition. From the definition of the subject.

MAn ought to embrace virtue.

What arguments are to be gathered on the behalf of the subject of this
Proposition?
These that follow, and first, from the definition thus: Since of all sensible
creatures man is the most noble and most worthy creature, for that he is endued
with reason and counsel, and was created like to the image of God: it is most
meet therefore that such a creature should be like his Creator, in life
adorned with such virtue and goodness as is answerable to true judgment,
which the Logicians would briefly express in this manner: it becomes every
sensible body endued with reason to love virtue: Ergo, every man ought to love
virtue.

From the Etymology.
IT becomes every creature that is made of the slime of the earth, to be void
of all arrogancy and pride, to be lowly, humble, and obedient to his Creator,
and to embrace virtue in observing the Law of God devoutly and religiously,
wherefore man called in Latin homo, of this word humo, (that is to say) earth,
or rather slime of the earth, taking his original from so base and vile a
thing, ought to be humble and void of all pride and arrogancy, and to love
virtue above all things, being always obedient to God his Creator, and ready
to do his most holy precepts and commandments.

Logically thus:
Every sensible creature that is created of the slime of earth, ought to be
obedient to his Creator and to embrace virtue, therefore man ought to be
obedient to his Creator, and to embrace virtue.

From the Matter.
MAn is made of the self same Matter of which all other vnliuing, dumb and
vnsen^ble creatures are made, (that is to say) of the four elements, whereby
he is subject to alteration and corruption: wherefore man ought not to be proud
or arrogant, but modest, humble, lowly, and obedient, showing in all the
actions of his life, that he is not unmindful of his base estate and
condition, nor ignorant from whence he came, and what he is, even no better
then earth and dust.

Logically thus.
Man is made of a base matter, as all other things are, therefore Man ought not
to be proud, but to love the virtue of humility and obedience.

From the form or shape of Man.
IT has been always most firmly, and with one whole consent agreed and
believed, even from the beginning of the world, that the true shape of Man is a
reasonable Soul, immortal, and capable of everlasting blessedness, which
Soul God of his goodness did breathe into man, to the intent that he should
continually serve, honor, and obey him during this mortal life, and after
death enjoy eternal life: what great madness were it then to think, that Man
having obtained at Gods hands so noble a shape, ought not to embrace all noble
virtues, and to govern all his actions in such godly and virtuous manner, as
he may at length attain to the everlasting joy whereunto he was first created
and formed?

Logically thus:
Man consists of a Soul capable of eternal felicity: Ergo, Man ought to
love virtue, whereby he may attain to that felicity.

From the general kind.
Since it is given by nature to every sensible Body to seek his own safety,
and to be best affected (that is) to have his full perfection according to his
Kind: the love of virtue therefore, whereby Man is made not only perfect in
this life, but also attaineth thereby everlasting joy in the life to come, must
needs be to him most natural.

Logically thus:
Every sensible body willingly desires that which is agreeable to his nature
and kind, therefore Man must needs love virtue, as a thing most fit for his
kind.

From the special kind.
BOth Men and Women, Rich and Poor, Young and Old, of what state or calling
soever they be, if they intend to lead a good and godly life, have need of
virtue: wherefore all Men that will live well, ought to embrace virtue.

Logically thus:
Both Rich and Poor, Young and Old ought to love virtue: Ergo, every Man ought
to love virtue.

From the common Accidents.
EVery Man, after that he has ended this short course of life, must appear
at the last day before the terrible judgment seat of God, there to render
account of all his deeds and words both good and bad, whereas every man that
has done well, shall receive for his good deeds a most glorious reward, even
life everlasting: but the wicked for his evil deeds shall be condemned to hell
fire, that never shall be quenched, a just reward for his deserts: wherefore
all men ought in this life to fly vice, and to embrace virtue, from whence all
good actions do spring.

Logically thus:
Every man shall render account at the last day, of all his deeds both good and
bad, and shall receive a just reward according to the same: Ergo, Every man
whilst he lives in this world, ought to fly vice, and to embrace virtue.

From the cause efficient.
Since Man was created by God the Creator of all things, and Author of all
goodness, excellency, and virtue, and was formed according to the very Image
and likeness of God: it behooves man therefore to imitate his Creator, and by
leading a godly and virtuous life, to show that he is somewhat like him,
though not able in all things to attain to the perfection of so perfect a
pattern.

Logically thus:
God the cause efficient is good, therefore Man being the effect, ought to be
good.

From the End.
THe Prophets and Apostles inspired with the Holy Ghost* Author of all Truth,
by many their writings do testify, that the greatness and excellency of
that blessedness whereunto Man is created, is such as no man is able to
express with tongue, nor in his heart or mind to conceive the same: wherefore
since Man is created to such exceeding great blessedness, it behooves him to
embrace virtue, which is the very mean and way to bring him to that
blessedness.

Logically thus:
Since most glorious blessedness is the end of Man, Man therefore ought to embrace
virtue, that he may attain to that end.

What arguments are to be gathered on the behalf of the Predicate, and from
what places?
These that follow, and such like, and first from the definition thus:

From the Definition of the Predicate.
Since Virtue is a moral habit, whereby Man's will and all his actions are
always directed to God, and governed according to true judgment, and thereby
are made most acceptable both to God and Man: Man therefore ought to embrace
Virtue, from whence such noble fruits do spring.

Logically thus:
Man ought to love that habit from whence all honest actions do spring:
therefore man ought to love Virtue.

From the Description.
MAn ought with all endeavor to follow that thing whereby he may attain not a
vain and transitory glory, but a true and everlasting glory, and thereby to
be made acceptable both to God and Man: Wherefore Man ought to embrace Virtue,
from whence such glory springs.

Logically thus:
That thing is worthy to be beloved of Man, which gets him everlasting
glory: Therefore Virtue is worthy to be beloved.

From the Etymology.
Since Virtue, if you diligently consider and weigh the signification of the
word, is none other thing but a Noble affection of the mind, of great
excellency, and most meet for Man: it is not to be doubted, but that those
(which leaving so precious a thing, do set their whole delight in seeking
after worldly riches and bodily pleasure) are much deceived, and do greatly
offend.

Logically thus:
Such excellency as is most meet for Man, becomes Man best: Therefore Virtue
becomes him best.

From the general Kind.
Since it is well known that Man ought with all diligence to seek after those
habites, whereby humane nature is best adorned, and made most perfect: And that
Virtue amongst such habites is the chiese: because that thereby the mind of
Man is taught to know what truth is, and his will thereby is always inclined
to honest and laudable actions: Man therefore ought with all his power and
endeavor to embrace Virtue.

Logically thus:
Man ought chiefly to love those habites, whereby his nature is made perfect:
Therefore man ought to love Virtue.

From the special Kind.
IT is most meet, yea most necessary for all men to love fortitude and
temperance: for by temperance Man's will is bridled, and kept from all evil
lusts and affections, and by fortitude he is made free from fear of death: and
as without temperance man's life cannot be honest, so without fortitude his
death cannot be commendable: wherefore it plainly appears how necessary a
thing it is for a man to embrace Virtue, as that which chiefly makes his life
honest and laudable, and his death glorious and honorable.

Logically thus:
A man ought to love fortitude and temperance: Ergo, He ought to love Virtue.

From the corruption of the Subject.
THe destruction of Virtue is the cause of most grievous evils, for the light
of Virtue being extinct, the mind is immediately wrapped in such darkness,
as it cannot see nor discern what is honest, what is profitable, or what is
hurtful, by means whereof man falls into most filthy vices, which do so
infect and corrupt the life of man, as it becomes most detestable both to God
and Man: whereby it plainly appears how noble a thing Virtue is, and with
what love and diligence it ought to be embraced of all men.

Logically thus:
The destruction of Virtue is evil: therefore Virtue is good and worthy to be
beloved.

From the use of the Subject.
THe use of Virtue makes man's life commendable, holy, glorious, and acceptable
both to God and Man: then which nothing can be in this world more to be
desired of man: wherefore it manifestly appears, that Virtue is so noble a
thing, as all men ought to bestow all their study, labor and care in
obtaining the same.

Logically thus:
The use of Virtue is good: Therefore Virtue is good.

From common Accidents.
Since all men do greatly desire to have their consciences quieted, and their
minds free from all evil lusts, affects, and passions, which with continual
strife do molest the same: and thereby do cause Man to lead a miserable life:
Man therefore ought to refuse no pain nor labor, so as he may attain to
Virtue, which is always accompanied with that tranquillity of mind and
conscience that is so much desired.

Logically thus:
The tranquillity of the mind and conscience is to be desired: Ergo, Virtue
which is always accompanied with that tranquillity is to be desired.

From the cause Efficient.
Since true Virtue is not to be gotten by any man's labor, exercise, or
industry, without the great grace of God, who is chief Author and Giver of
all good gifts: it well appears that Virtue is a most excellent thing, and
most worthy to be had in admiration, and therefore with fervent love and
diligence to be embraced of all men.

Logically thus:
God the chief Author of all good, is the cause Efficient of Virtue: therefore
Virtue proceeding of so worthy a cause, must needs be an excellent thing, and
worthy of all men to be embraced.

From the Effect.
TRue honor and glory has been always had amongst all men in great
admiration: because it seems not only by man's judgment, but also by the
divine judgment of God, to be always attributed to virtue: wherefore since
Virtue does yield such noble fruits and effects, Virtue must needs be a noble
thing it self, and worthy of all men to be embraced.

Logically thus:
The Effect of Virtue, which is true honor and glory, is good, and to be
desired.

From the End.
Since everlasting blessedness is of such excellency, as neither tongue is
able to express the joys thereof, nor mind to conceive the same, and
therefore ought to be desired above all things, as the just reward of all
goodness, and final end of all evil, and that Virtue is the only mean to
bring man to that blessed End: who then will once think that Virtue is not to
be esteemed above all things, and worthy of all men to be embraced?

Logically thus:
The end of Virtue, which is everlasting felicity, is to be desired: Ergo,
Virtue is to be desired.

Hitherto you have showed how the aforesaid Theme is to be proved with
Arguments fetched as well from the Subject as the Predicate: now show what
Arguments are to be fetched from both joined together?
These that follow and such like, and first by Comparison, from the Less to
the More.

From the Less to the More.
IF men will not let to bestow any pain, labor or cost to preserve their
bodies from death, sickness, or any other hurt: how much more then ought they
to endeavor themselves to obtain Virtue, which will preserve their souls from
all corrupt affections and evil vices, and thereby deliver them from death
everlasting?

Logically thus:
Man ought to be careful of his bodily health: Ergo, Much more of his souls
health, which is chiefly preserved by Virtue.

From Similitude or Likeness.
AS the beauty of the body is pleasant to man's eyes: even so the beauty of
the mind or soul is as acceptable to God: and therefore as man will be
diligent and careful in decking and adorning his body to please the eyes of
men: even so he ought to be most careful to deck his soul and mind, with
such Virtues, as do make the same in Gods sight most acceptable.

Logically thus:
As the decking of the body is pleasant to men's eyes: so the decking of the
Soul is pleasing to God.

From Authority.
David the Prophet in the 34. Psalm says thus: Turn from evil, and do that
which is good. The Prophet Micheas also agrees hereunto in saying thus: Deal
justly with all men, love mercy, and walk diligently in the way of God. By
which words these two godly Prophets do teach no other thing, then that Man
forsaking all kind of vice, should with all diligence embrace Virtue.

Logically thus:
God teaches by his Prophet David, and also by Micheas, that Man should fly
Vice, and love Virtue: Ergo, Man ought to love Virtue. By daily exercising your
self in such examples as this is, you shall in short time learn the right use
of the places, and be able thereby readily to apply them to every good purpose.

Here ends the fourth Book of Logic.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF LOGIC.
CHAP. I.
Of Argumentation, and of the four kinds thereof in general, and also of the
first Principles of a Syllogism.
Having hitherto sufficiently spoken of words both simple and compound, whereof
all questions do consist, also of definition and division, of Method, of
Propositions, and of the places: It rests now that I declare unto you the
forms and kinds of reasoning called Argumentatio^, which be the means whereby
in all compound questions the truth may be discerned from falsehood, wherein
consists the chiefest fruit of Logic: and therefore you shall understand
that there be four principal kinds or forms of Argumentation, (that is) a
Syllogism, an Induction, an Ethymeme, and Example, I say here principal,
because there be diverse other forms which though they be not so necessary, yet
I will briesly treat of them hereafter: But for so much as the Syllogism is
the chiefest, whereunto all others are reserred as things imperfect, unto a
thing perfect, I will first speak of a Syllogism, and of all the parts
thereof: but yet before I define or divide a Syllogism, I think it very
necessary to declare unto you the first Principles as well Material, as
Regular, of a simple Syllogism consisting of simple Propositions.

Which call you Material Principles?
Material Principles are three simple Propositions, and three terms, (that is
to say) the Subject, the Predicate, and the mean term hereafter defined,
whereof the Subject and the Predicate are said to be the outermost limits or
bounds of any simple Proposition.

Why are they called Terms or limits?
Because they limite a Proposition, even as Dole-stones or Meares do limite a
piece of ground in the field, and be the uttermost parts or bounds whereunto
any Proposition is to be resolved, as for example in this Proposition, every
man is a sensible body: these two words, man, and sensible body, are the
terms, limits, or bounds, whereof as the said Proposition is compounded, so
into the same it is to be resolved, as into his uttermost parts that have any
signification: for letters and sillables of themselves be without
signification, and therefore can limite no speech, so that the terms of
Propositions must be either Nounes, or Verbes, which be only voices
significatiue, as have been said before.

Which be the Principles regulatiue?
The Principles regulatiue of a Syllogism be these two phrases of speech, to
be spoken of all, and to be spoken of none.

What is to be spoken of all?
That is, when the predicate being truly spoken of the Subject, must needs be
also spoken of all that is comprehended under the said subject: as when I say
every man is a sensible body: here this word sensible body, is not only spoken
of man in general, but also of Peter and John, and of every other man in
particular, comprehended under the foresaid Subject, man.

What is to be spoken of none?
It is when the Predicate being denied to be spoken of the Subject, is denied
also to be spoken of any thing contained in the Subject: as when I say no man
is a stone, here like as this word stone is denied to be spoken of man, so it
is also denied to be spoken of Peter and John, and of every other singular man:
out of which Definitions are gathered two necessary rules.

Which be they?
The first rule is, whatsoever is truly affirmed of his natural and proper
Subject, is also affirmed of all those things which are contained under the
said Subject: the second rule is thus, whatsoever is denied to be spoken of
any Subject, is also denied to be spoken of every thing contained under the
said Subject.

Whereto serve these rules?
The first rule confirms all Syllogismes affirmative, and the second
confirms all Syllogismes negative.

CHAP. II.
Of a Syllogism, what it is, how it is divided; and of what parts it
consists.
WHat is a Syllogism?
A Syllogism is a kind of argument containing three Propositions, whereof the
two first, commonly called the premises, being disposed according to mood,
and figure, and granted, the third Proposition, otherwise called the
conclusion, differing from the other two, follows of necessity, by virtue of
the premises: how these three Propositions are called, and what mood and
figure is, shall be declared hereafter; In the mean time mark well the two
other points touching this Definition: first, that the Conclusion must not be
all one, but differing from the premises: secondly, that the said Conclusion
be necessarily inferred of the premises, as in this example: every sensible
body is a substance: every man is a sensible body: Ergo, every man is a
substance: for if the Conclusion were thus: Ergo, every sensible body is a
substance, or every man is a sensible body, the argument should not be good,
because the Conclusion should be all one with one of the premises: the reason
why the Conclusion must needs be inferred of the premises, and so
consequently follow of the same, shall be declared unto you hereafter.

How is a Syllogism divided according to the Schoolmen?
First, they divide it according to the diversity of the Propositions wherofit
consists, into two kinds, viz. Categoricall, and Hypotheticall, (that is to
say) simple and compound, calling that simple, which is made of simple
Propositions, and that compound, which is made of compound Propositions: what
simple and compound Propositions are, has been before Lib. 3. cap. 1.
defined. Again, they divide the simple Syllogism three manner of ways, first
according to the diversity of the terms into a common and into a singular
Syllogism, for if the terms whereof the Syllogism consists, be common, or
general, and specially the mean term, or proof, then that Syllogism is
called a common Syllogism: but if the mean term or proof be Indiuiduum,
then that Syllogism is said to be a singular Syllogism, called of them,
Syllogismus expositorius, whereof we shall speak hereafter: Secondly, they
divide a simple Syllogism, according to the diversity of the figure, into a
perfect, and imperfect Syllogism.

When is it said to be perfect?
When it needs not to be altered any manner of way, otherwise then it is, that
the consequent may manifestly appear.

When is it said to be imperfect?
When the Consequent does not manifestly appear, unless the Syllogism be
altered either by conversion, or transposing of the premises, whereof we shall
speak hereafter: Thirdly, they divide a simple Syllogism, according to the
matter of the Propositions whereof it is made, into three kinds, that is, into
a Syllogism Demonstratiue, Dialecticall, and Sophistical: of which three
kinds we shall speak hereafter, and in their proper places; so as in all,
the Schoolmen make four several divisions of a Syllogism, the first
according to the diversity of the Propositions, the second according to the
diversity of the Terms, the third according to the diversity of the figure,
and the fourth according to the diversity of the matter of the Propositions
whereof we have spoken before, and showed how manifold such matter is: but in
the mean time we will show you of what parts a simple common Syllogism
consists.

Of how many parts does a simple Syllogism consist?
Of two; that is, Matter, and Form.

CHAP. III.
Of the Matter and Form of a simple common Syllogism.
WHat things are said to be the Matter of a Syllogism?
The Matter whereof a Syllogism is made, are three terms, and three
Propositions, which we called before Material principles, and the Form
consists of figure and mood, whereof we shall speak in the next Chapter.

Define what these three Terms be?
The one is called the Mayor term, or Mayor extremity, which is the Predicate
of the question that is to be proved, the other is called the Minor term, or
minor extremity, which is the subject of the question, and these two Terms are
knit together in the Conclusion, and made to agree by help of a third Term,
called the Mean term or proof.

What is the Mean term?
It is the proof of the question which is twice repeated before the
Conclusion, and not once mentioned in the same.

How is such proof to be found out?
Four manner of ways, (that is to say) by experience, by quickness of wit,
by erudition, and by searching the common places.

Give examples of all these four ways.
1 By experience, as when we affirm that intemperance is to be fled, because
we know by experience, that it consumes both body and goods in vain pleasures.
2 By wit, as to prove that the covetousness of wicked men is infinite: because
wit and reason teaches us, that if covetous men did either care for the Law of
God, or for reason, they would not exceed so far the bounds thereof. 3 By
erudition, as to prove that riches are not to be desired ouer-greedily, but to
serve necessity: because it appears by the doctrine of S. Paul, that such as
greedily seek to be rich, do fall into temptation, and into the snares of the
Devil. 4 By searching the common places: as when the proof of any question is
fetched from any of the common places before taught, as from the general
kind, from the special kind, from the difference, or property, and such
like, whereof you have had examples before.

Which be the three Propositions whereof a Syllogism does consist?
These three: The Mayor, the Minor, and the Conclusion.

Which call you the Mayor?
That which consists of the Predicate of the question, otherwise called the
Mayor term, and of the Mean, or Proof, being both joined together in one
self Proposition; which Proposition is the whole strength of the Syllogism,
for it is the cause and proof of the Conclusion.

Which call you the Minor?
That which consists of the Subject of the question called the Minor term,
and of the Mean or proof joined together, which two Propositions are called
by one general name, premises, because they go before the Conclusion.

What is the Conclusion?
It is that which consists of the Predicate, and of the Subject, and is the
question it self concluded.

Give example.
For example, let this be your question: whether man be a substance or not,
here you have two extremes or terms, whereof substance being the Predicate, is
the Mayor term, and man being here the subject, is the minor term: now to
prove that this word Substance, is properly and naturally spoken of man, as of
his Subject, and that you may truly knit these two extremes, or terms
together, you must seek out some cause or proof, otherwise called the Mean
term, which being once found out, the Syllogism is soon made: let the Mean
term therefore be this word, Sensible body, for every sensible body is a
Substance, which proof is fetched from the general kind, then form your
Syllogism thus: every sensible body is a substance: but man is a sensible
body: Ergo, man is a substance. Here you see that the Mean term or proof is
twice repeated before the Conclusion: (that is to say) in the Mayor
Proposition, together with the Predicate of the question, called the Mayor
term; and also in the Minor Proposition together with the subject of the
question called the Minor term, and not once mentioned in the Conclusion. Thus
much touching the Matter whereof a Syllogism consists: now of the Form
thereof.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the Form of a Syllogism.
YOu said before, that the Form of a Syllogism comprehended Figure, and
Mood, now therefore tell what Figure and Mood is, and how many of them there
be.

Figure is no other thing, but the diverse placing or disposing of the mean
term in the premises: which figure is threefold; that is, First, Second, and
Third: for if the mean term be the Subject in the Mayor Proposition, and
Predicate in the Minor, as in the example above, then it makes a Syllogism of
the first figure, and if it chance to be Predicate in both Propositions, then
it makes a Syllogism of the second figure, as thus: no stone is a sensible
body: but man is a sensible body: Ergo, no man is a stone: for here the mean
term, Sensible body, is Predicate in both Propositions: but if the mean be
subject in both Propositions, then it makes a Syllogism of the third figure,
as thus: every man is a substance: every man is a sensible body: Ergo, some
sensible body is a substance: for here the mean term, that is, Man, is
subject in both the first Propositions, and to these three figures do belong
certain moodes.

What is ameode?
A mood, called in Latin modus, amongst the Logicians, is none other but the
true ordering as well of the premises, as of the conclusion in a Syllogism,
according to due quantity, and quality: what the quantity and quality of a
Proposition is, has been taught before, lib. 3. cap. 1.

How many moodes do belong to the first figure?
To the first figure do belong 9. moodes, thus named:

Barbara: Celarent: Darij: Ferio: Baralipton: Celantes: Dabitis: Fapesmo:
Frisesomorum.
Whereof the first four, because they conclude directly, are called perfect
moodes, making perfect Syllogismes: and the other five, because they conclude
indirectly, are called imperfect moodes, making imperfect Syllogismes.

What is to conclude directly or indirectly?
That mood is said to conclude directly, when the Mayor term is made the
Predicate, and the Minor term the subject in the conclusion. But if in the
conclusion the Minor term be the Predicate, and the Mayor term the subject,
then that mood is said to conclude directly: as for example: Every sensible
body is a substance: Man is a sensible body: Ergo, man is a substance. This
Syllogism concludes directly, because the Mayor term, substance, is the
Predicate in the conclusion: but if the conclusion were thus: Ergo, some
substance is a man, then it should conclude indirectly: because this word man
which was the subject of the question in this conclusion, is made the Predicate.

How many moodes do belong to the second figure?
These four: Caesare, Camestres, Festino, Baroco.

How many moodes do belong to the third Figure?
These six: Darapti, Felapton, D^samis, Da^isi, Bocardo, and Feriso^: which
words being otherwise called Terms of Art, and every one consisting of three
sillables, were purposely invented by the Schoolmen, to signify the quantity
and quality of every Proposition contained in a Syllogism, and are briefly
set down in these four verses following.

Barbara, Celarent, Darij, Ferio, Baralipton: Celantes, Da^itis, Fapesmo,
Frisesomorum: Caesare, Camestres, Festino, Baroco, Darapti: Felapton, Disamis,
Datisi, Bocardo, Ferison.
It seems to me that these names do not eauenly consist each one of three
Syllables, for in the two first verses there be two Moods or names, whereof the
one called Baralipton, contains four Syllables, and the other called
Frisesomorum, contains five Syllables.

You say true, but these Syllables are no part of these two Moods, but serve
only to fill up the verse: for this Syllable ton, is no part of the Mood
Baralip: nor the two Syllables morum, are any part of the Mood Friseso.

What is to be considered in these words of Art or Moods?
Two things, (that is to say) the Vowels and the Consonants contained in every
Mood, and what they signify.

Which are those Vowels, and what do they signify?
The Vowels be these four, a. e. i. o. whereof a. signifies an universal
Affirmative, ^. an universal Negative, i. a particular Affirmative, o. a
particular Negative: of all which you shall have examples in the sixth Chapter
of this Book here following.

Which be the Consonants, and what do they signify?
We shall have cause to speak of them hereafter in a fitter place.

In the mean time, then give examples of the Moods belonging to all the
Figures?
Before we give examples, it shall not be amiss to set down certain rules
requisite to all the three Figures, as well in general, as in particular.

CHAP. V.
Of certain Rules, as well General, as Special, belonging to the three
Figures.
HOw many General Rules be there, which are common to all the three Figures?
Four: two of quantity, and two of quality.

Which is the first of those that belong to quantity?
In every Syllogism it behooves either one or both of the premises to be
universal.

Why so?
Because that of two mere particular Propositions, nothing by order of Logic
can consequently follow: As for example, This Syllogism is not good: Some
sensible body is a Man, but some Horse is a sensible body: Ergo, a Horse is a
Man. The like reason is also to be understood, when the premises are indefinit
Propositions, yea or singular Propositions, if the mean term be not likewise
singular, for then it makes a Syllogism expositorie, whereof we shall speak
hereafter.

Which is the second Rule that belongs to quantity?
If any of the premises be particular, then the conclusion also must be
particular.

Why so?
Because the conclusion being employed of the premises, ought always to follow
the weaker part of the same premises, but the particular is always accounted
weaker then the universal, and the Negative weaker then the Affirmative.

What is the first Rule belonging to quality?
In every Syllogism it behooves either one or both of the premises to be
affirmative.

Why so?
Because that of two pure Negative Propositions nothing can be orderly
concluded, as in this example: No man is a tree, but no Pear tree is a man:
Ergo, No Pear tree is a tree: which Syllogism cannot be good, for the
premises are both true, and the conclusion is false.

Which is the second Rule belonging to quality?
If any of the premises be Negative, then the conclusion must also be Negative.

Why so?
Because (as it has been said before) the conclusion must follow the weaker
part.

Which be the special Rules belonging to the three Figures?
In the first four Moods of the first Figure directly concluding the Minor,
may not be a Negative, nor the Mayor particular, but universal.

In the second Figure, the Mayor must not be particular, and one of the
premises must be a Negative.

In the third Figure, the Minor must not be a Negative, nor the conclusion
universal: but as for the quantity and quality of every Proposition in every
kind of Syllogism, of what Figure soever it be, it shall plainly appear by
the Vowels, or rather Syllables of the Moods, otherwise called words of Art,
annexed to the examples hereafter following.

First give examples of Syllogismes of the first Figure, and of his four
perfect Moods directly concluding.

CHAP. VI.
Examples of the four perfect Moods belonging to the first Figure.
THe first Mood of the first Figure, is when three terms being given, a
Syllogism is made of two universal Affirmatiues directly concluding an
universal Affirmative, as this Syllogism here following: the terms whereof
be these, Sensible body, Substance, and Man placed in this sort.

Bar- Every sensible body is a substance, ba- But every man is a sensible
body: ra. Ergo, Every man is a substance.
The name of this Mood is called Barbara, divided into three Syllables, placed
in the margent right against the Syllogism, to show the quantity and quality
of every Proposition, according to the significations of the Vowels contained
in every Syllable: and so are all the other names of the Moods hereafter
following.

The second Mood is, when three terms being given, a Syllogism is made of an
universal Negative Mayor, and of an universal Affirmative Minor, directly
concluding an universal Negative: As for example, let the terms be these:
Sensible Body, a Man, a Stone, and the Syllogism thus:

C^- No sensible body is a stone, la- But every man is a sensible body: rent.
Ergo, No man is a stone.
The name of this Mood is Celarent.

The third Mood is, when three terms being given, a Syllogism is made of an
universal Affirmative Mayor, and of a particular Affirmative Minor, directly
concluding a particular Affirmative: As for example, let these be the terms:
Sensible Body, Substance, and Man, and the Syllogism thus:

Da- Every sensible body is a substance, ri- But some man is a sensible body:
j. Ergo, Some man is a substance.
The name of this Mood is Darij.

The fourth Mood is, when three terms being given, a Syllogism is made of an
universal Negative Mayor, and a particular Affirmative Minor, directly
concluding a particular Negative: As for example, let these be the terms:
Sensible Body, Man, and Stone: and the Syllogism thus:

Fe- No sensible body is a stone, ri- But some man is a sensible body: o. Ergo,
Some man is a stone.
The name of this Mood is Ferio.

CHAP. VII.
Examples of the five imperfect Moods of the first Figure.
Glue examples of the five Moods of the first Figure directly concluding.
The first Imperfect Mood of the first Figure indirectly concluding, is when
the Mayor and Minor, being both universal Affirmatiues, do conclude
indirectly a particular Affirmative, as thus:

Ba- Every sensible body is a substance, ra- Every man is a sensible body: lip.
Ergo, Some substance is a man.
The name of this Mood is Baralipton, whereof the last syllable, ton, is only
to fill up the verse, as has been said before.

The second Imperfect Mood, is when a Syllogism is made of an universal
Negative Mayor, and an universal Affirmative Minor, indirectly concluding an
universal Negative, as thus:

Ce- No sensible body is a tree, lan- Every man is a sensible body: it is. Ergo,
No tree is a man.
The name of this Mood is Celantis.

The third Imperfect Mood, is when a Syllogism is made of an universal
Affirmative Mayor, and of a particular Affirmative Minor, indirectly concluding
a particular Affirmative, as thus:

Da- Every sensible body is a substance, by- Some man is a sensible body:
it is. Ergo, Some substance is a man*
The name of this Mood is Dabitis.

The fourth Imperfect Mood, is when a Syllogism is made of an universal
Affirmative Mayor, and of an universal Negative Minor, indirectly concluding a
particular Negative, as thus:

Fa- Every sensible body is a substance, pes- No tree is a sensible body: mo.
Ergo, Some substance is not a tree.
The name of this Mood is Fapesmo.

The fifth Imperfect Mood, is when a Syllogism is made of a particular
Affirmative Mayor, and of an universal Negative Minor, indirectly concluding a
particular Negative, as thus:

Fri- Some sensible body is a substance, se- But no tree is a sensible body:
so. Ergo, Some substance is not a tree.
The name of this Mood is Frisesomorum, whereof the two last syllables (as has
been said before) are only put to make up the verse.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the four Moods belonging to the second Figure.
Give examples of the four Moodes belonging to the second Figure.
The first Mood of the second Figure, is when a Syllogism is made of an
universal Negative Mayor, and of an universal Affirmative Minor, directly
concluding an universal Negative, thus:

Ce- No stone is a sensible body, sa- Every man is a sensible body: re. Ergo,
No man is a stone.
The name of this Mood is Caesare.

The second Mood, is when a Syllogism is made of an universal Affirmative
Mayor, and of an universal Affirmative Minor, directly concluding an
universal Negative, as thus:

Ca- Every man is a sensible body, mes- But no stone is a sensible body:
tres. Ergo, No stone is a man.
The name of this Mood is Camestres.

The third Mood is when a Syllogism is made of an universal Negative Mayor,
and of a particular Affirmative Minor, directly concluding a particular
Negative, as thus:

Fes- No stone is a sensible body, ti- But some man is a sensible body no.
Ergo, Some man is not a stone.
The name of this Mood is Festino.

The fourth Mood, is when a Syllogism is made of an universal Affirmative
Mayor, and of a particular Minor, directly concluding a particular Negative, as
thus:

Ba- Every man is a sensible body, to- But some stone is not a sensible body:
co. Ergo, Some stone is not a man.
The name of this Mood is Baroco.

CHAP. IX.
Of the six Moods belonging to the third Figure.
Give examples of the six Moodes belonging to the third Figure.
The first is when a Syllogism is made of an universal Affirmative Mayor, and
of an universal Affirmative Minor, directly concluding a particular
Affirmative, as thus:

Da- Every man is a substance, rap- But every man is a sensible body: ti.
Ergo, Some sensible body is a substance.
The name of this Mood is Darapti.

The second Mood, is when a Syllogism is made of an universal Negative Mayor,
and of an universal Affirmative Minor, directly concluding a particular
Negative, as thus:

Fe- No Man is a stone, lap- But every man is a substance: ton. Ergo, Some
substance is not a stone.
The name of this Mood is Felapton.

The third Mood, is when a Syllogism is made of a particular Affirmative
Mayor, and of an universal Affirmative Minor, directly concluding a particular
Affirmative, as thus:

Di- Some man is a substance, sa- But every man is a sensible body: mis. Ergo,
Some sensible body is a substance.
The name of this Mood is Disamis.

The fourth Mood, is when a Syllogism is made of an universal Affirmative
Mayor, and of a particular Affirmative Minor, concluding a particular
Affirmative, as thus:

Da- Every man is a substance, ti- But some man is a sensible body: si. Ergo,
Some sensible body is a substance.
The name of this Mood is Datisi.

The fifth Mood, is when a Syllogism is made of a particular Negative Mayor,
and of an universal Affirmative Minor, directly concluding a particular
Negative, as thus.

Bo- Some man is not a stone, car- But every man is a sensible body: do. Ergo,
Some sensible body is not a stone
The name of this Mood is Bocardo.

The sixth Mood, is when a Syllogism is made of an universal Negative Mayor,
and of a particular Affirmative Minor, directly concluding a particular
Negative, as thus:

Fe- No man is a stone, ri- But some man is a sensible body: son. Ergo, Some
sensible body is not a stone.
The name of this Mood is Ferison.

Thus you have all the three Figures, together with their Moods, plainly set
forth with examples.

CHAP. X.
Of a Syllogism expositorie.
ANd now because a Syllogism expository is said to be a Syllogism of the
third Figure: I think it most meet to give you an example there of even here:
sor I have already defined the same before.

Yea, I remember ye said it was expositorie, when the proof or mean term is
an Indiuiduum: but if ye give example, I shall the better understand it.

Let this then be your example, to prove some men to be both Orators and
Philosophers, by a Syllogism expositorie thus: Cicero was an Orator: but
Cicero was a Philosopher: Ergo, some men are both Orators and Philosophers:
again, to prove that some rich men are not wise, thus: Crassus was not wise,
but Crassus was rich: Ergo, some rich men are not wise, thus you see that this
kind of Syllogism serves to prove both affirmatively and negatiuely, as it
were by way of example.

CHAP. XI.
An objection concerning the three Figures, and Moodes belonging to the same.
TO what purpose serve so many figures and moodes, since the first figure, and
the four first moodes belonging to the same are only perfect, yea, and so
perfect indeed, as the Mathematicians in seeking out the truth of any problem,
will use none other, because the first figure alone does suffice to conclude
all kinds of problemes whatsoever they be, whereby it should seem, that the
two other figures, with their moodes, be superfluous?

They be not altogether superfluous; for as the first figure serves chiefly
and only to conclude an universal affirmative, so the second figure serves to
conclude an universal negative, and the third figure to conclude both a
particular affirmative, and also a particular negative, as you may perceive
very well by the examples before rehearsed; neither be the fifteen imperfect
moodes so imperfect, but that they may easily be reduced unto the four
perfect, by one of these ways here following, (that is to say) either by
conversion, or by transposing of the premises: or else by a Syllogism leading
to impossibility, of which three ways of Reduction we come now to speak: by
which things it does plainly appear what difference there is betwixt a
perfect and imperfect Syllogism; for the perfect Syllogism has no need of
these helps to make the Conclusion manifest, as has been said before.

CHAP. XII.
Of Reduction, and of the kinds thereof, and also of the signification of
certain consonants in the words of Art serving to Reduction.
WHat is Reduction?
Reduction here is none other thing, but a declaration, proving or showing the
goodness of an imperfect Syllogism, by a Syllogism of a perfect mood.

How manfold is such Reduction?
Twofold; for it is either offensive, or else by impossibility.

What is Reduction offensive?
Reduction offensive is, when a Syllogism is reduced to his perfection, either
by conversion, or by transposing the premises, or else by both at once.

What mean ye by transposing of the premises, for as touching conversion ye
have spoken thereof before, lib. 3. cap. 6.
The premises are said to be transposed, when the Mayor is put in the Minors
place; or contrariwise the Minor into the Majors place.

What is Reduction by impossibility?
Reduction by impossibility is, when the goodness of the Syllogism is so
proved, as the adversary denying the same, must needs be brought to some
absurdity, as to confess two Contradictories to be both true at once, or some
proposition to be false, which he has confessed before to be true, or is
manifestly true of it self. But first we will speak of Reduction offensive,
and then of Reduction by impossibility; and because that Reduction offensive is
done sometime by conversion, and sometime by transposition, and sometime by
both at once: and again, that sometime one of the premises, sometime both, and
sometime no more but the Conclusion only is converted, and that sometime by
simple conversion, and sometime by conversion per accidens: the Schoolmen for
^asement of the memory, have made eight of the Consonants, besides the Vowels
in the words of Art before mentioned, to be significatiue, and to declare how
every proposition ought to be reduced.

For first, these four Consonants, b. c. d. f. (with one of the which every
imperfect mood does begin) do show that such imperfect moodes ought to be
reduced into those perfect moodes, which do begin with the like letter, as,

Baralipton, Baroco, Bocardo, into Barbara, C^lantes, Caesare, Camestres, into
Celarent, Dabitis, Darapti, Disamis, Datisi, into Darij, Fapesmo, Frisesomorum,
Felapton, Ferison, Festino, into Darij
Which be the other four Consonants, and what do they signify?
The other four Consonants put betwixt the Vowels, be these, s. p. m. c.
where of s. signifies simple conversion, (that is to say) that the Vowell,
which next before this Consonant, is to be simply converted, p. signifies
conversion per accidens, m. betokens transposition of the premises, c. in
the latter end or midst of the mood, betokens Reduction by impossibility as
in Baroco, and Bocardo.

Give examples, and show how such Reduction is to be made.
First, as touching reduction by conversion, Cesare is reduced into Celarent by
simple conversion of the Mayor: as this Syllogism in Cesare.

Ce- No tree is a sensible body, which is reduced into Celarent, thus: sa- But
every man is a sensible body: which is reduced into Celarent, thus: re. Ergo,
no man is a tree. which is reduced into Celarent, thus:
Ce- No sensible body is a tree, la- But every man is a sensible body: rent.
Ergo, no man is a tree.
And Camestres is reduced into Celarent by simple converting the Conclusion,
and also by transposing the premises, as this Syllogism in Camestres.

Ca- Every man is a sensible body, which is reduced into Celarent, thus: mes-
But no tree is a sensible body: which is reduced into Celarent, thus: tres.
Ergo, no tree is a man. which is reduced into Celarent, thus:
Ce- No sensible body is a tree, la- But every man is a sensible body: rent.
Ergo, No man is a tree.
Festino is reduced into Ferio, by simply converting the Mayor, as in this
Syllogism in Festino.

Fes- No stone is a sensible body, which is reduced into Ferio thus. ti- But
some man is a sensible body: which is reduced into Ferio thus. no. Ergo, Some
man is not a stone. which is reduced into Ferio thus.
Fe- No sensible body is a stone, ri- But some man is a sensible body: o. Ergo,
Some man is not a stone.
Darapti is reduced from Darij by converting the minor per accidens, as this
Syllogism in Darapti.

Da- Every man is a substance, which is reduced into Darij thus. rap- But every
man is a sensible body: which is reduced into Darij thus. ti. Ergo, some
sensible body is a substance. which is reduced into Darij thus.
Da- Every man is a substance, ri- But some sensible body is a man: j. Ergo,
Some sensible body is a substance.
Ferison is reduced into Ferio, by simple conversion of the minor, as this
Syllogism in Ferison.

Fe- No man is a stone. which is reduced into Ferio thus. ri- But some man is a
sensible body: which is reduced into Ferio thus. son. Ergo, some sensible body
is not a stone which is reduced into Ferio thus.
Fe- No man is a stone, ri- But some sensible body is a man: son. Ergo, some
sensible body is not a stone.
And so forth in all the rest, according as the significatiue Consonants do
direct you.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Reduction by Impossiblitie.
HOw is Reduction by impossibility made?
By joining the Contradictorie of the concluon to one of the premises, and to
dispose the same according to some one of the perfect moodes of the first
figure, in such sort as you may thereby make your Conclusion contradictory to
the premisse which you left out, and was granted by your adversary, whereby
your adversary is brought into an absurdity, to con fesse two contradictories,
to be true both at once.

Give examples.
As for example, if your adversary would deny this Syllogism in Baroco,
every man is a sensible body: but some tree is not a sensible body: Ergo, some
tree is not a man: then you may reduce it to the first Mood of the first
figure, which is Barbara, by making the contradictorie of your Conclusion to be
the Minor of your Syllogism in this sort, every man is a sensible body: but
every tree is a man: Ergo, every tree is a sensible body, which argument he
cannot deny, because he has granted the Minor to be true: for if this
Proposition, some tree is not a man, be false, then this proposition, every
tree is a man, must needs be true, for two Contradictories cannot be both
true at once, and two true premises must needs infer a true Conclusion; and
note that according to the diversity of the figures, the Contradictory of the
Conclusion is diversely disposed (that is to say) made either Mayor or Minor
accordingly; for in all the Moodes of the second figure it must be made the
Minor, the former Mayor being still reserved; and in the third figure it must
be the Mayor, the former Minor being still reserved.

To which of the perfect Moodes is every imperfect Mood to be reduced by
imp^ssibilitie?
To know this, it shall be needful to learn, first the use of certain words
compounded of diverse sillables, and invented by the Schoolmen for this purpose.

Which be those words?
The words be these contained in this verse following, nesciebatis: odiebam:
letare Romany: whereof the first nesciebatis, containing five sillables,
represents the five imperfect moods of the first figure: odiebam having four
sillables, betokens the four imperfect moodes of the second figure: letare
Romany, containing six sillables, signifies the six imperfect moods of the
third figure: in all which words the four vowels, a. e. i. o. do still retain
their old significations before taught, serving here chiefly to show the
quantity and quality of every Conclusion, for every imperfect mood must be
reduced to that perfect mood of the first figure, which has such Conclusion
as that vowel of the syllable representing that imperfect mood does signify:
as for example in this word nesciebatis, here you see, that in the syllable
nes. representing the first imperfect mood called before Baralipton, the vowel
e. signifying an universal negative, does show that this mood is to be
reduced into Celarent, whose conclusion is an universal negative, so as the
order of the sillables in the word nesciebatis, together with the signification
of the vowels contained in the said sillables, you may plainly perceive that
Baralipton is to be reduced into Celarent: Celantes into Darij, Dabitis into
Celarent, Fapesmo into Barbara, Friselon into Darij. The like observation and
consideration is to be had in the other words, representing the rest of the
imperfect moodes of the second and third figure: for odiebam appoints Cesare
to be reduced into Ferio, Camestres to Darij, Festino to Celarent, Baroco to
Barbara: again letare Romany appoints Darapti to Celarent, Felapton to
Barbara, Disamis to Celarent, Datisi to Ferio, Bocardo to Barbara, and Ferison
to Darij, whereof I give you no examples, because I would have you to exercise
your self in examining the former examples of the three figures, and to see
how you can reduce each imperfect mood, to his perfect mood by
impossibility, according to these short rules here set down.

The Schoolmen after they have taught the use of the moodes, and of reduction,
do immediately treat of a syllogism, made in oblique cases, and also of the
six habilities, and three defects of a Syllogism: all which I willingly pass
over with silence, as things more curious then profitable, for truly I know
not whereto the Syllogism made in oblique Cases, does serve more then for
variety sake.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of Syllogismes made in oblique Cases, and of the six Habilities, and three
defects of a Syllogism.
WHat mean you by oblique Cases?
You learned in your Accidents, that every Noune has six Cases, (that is to
say) the Nominative, the Genitive, the Dative, the Accusative the Vocative, and
the Ablative, whereof the Nominative is only right, and all the rest are called
oblique: as this is a Syllogism made in oblique Cases: every drawing beast
belongs to man, or is the beast of man: but an ox is a drawing beast: Ergo,
an ox belongs to man, or is the beast of man, and as for the six habilities
called sex potestates Syllogismi, they are but means to prove the goodness of
one Syllogism by another, or to show which is more universal, or
comprehends more then another, or to conclude a truth of false premises,
which God wot is a silly kind of conclusion, the best parts of which
habilities are more easily learned by the rules and examples before given, then
by those that they set down in their treatises touching the same. Likewise the
three defects, are none other but Elenches, or Fallaxes, whereof there be
thirteen kinds set down by Aristotle himself, whereof we shall speak
hereafter, in their place, so as they might say that there are thirteen
defects as well as three, and therefore leaving to trouble you with these
things, I mind here to treat of a compound Syllogism.

CHAP. XV.
Of a compound Syllogism, and of the diverse kinds thereof.
WHat is a compound Syllogism, and how many kinds thereof be there?
A compound Syllogism is that which is made of compound Propositions, whereof
as there be three sorts, so they make three kinds of compound Syllogismes,
(that is to say) conditional, disjunctive, and copulative.

Of how many parts does a compound Syllogism consist?
Of three, as well as a simple Syllogism, that is, of the Mayor, containing
two simple Propositions, and of the Minor, repeating the one part of the Mayor,
and of the Conclusion, concluding the other part of the Mayor, as in this
example: if this woman has had a child, she has lain with a man: but she
has had a child: Ergo, she has lain with a man.

How is the truth of a compound Syllogism to be sound out?
By reducing the same into a simple Syllogism thus; every woman that has had
a child, has lain with a man: but this woman has had a child: Ergo, she
has lain with a man.

Are there no other kinds of compound Syllogismes?
No, if you consider the order of concluding, there be but three kinds or
ways, (that is to say) conditional, disjunctive and copulative; but if you
consider the variety in uttering such Syllogismes, you may make seven sorts or
ways, whereof three appertain to the conditional, two to the disjunctive,
and two to the copulative.

Which is the first way?
The first way is of the antecedent, which being granted, the consequent must
needs follow, both affirmatively, and negatiuely: Affirmatively thus: if he be
godly, he is blessed: he is godly, therefore blessed: negatiuely thus, if he be
not godly, he shall not be blessed, but he is not godly: Ergo, he is not
blessed.

Which is the secondway?
The second way is of the Consequent, which failing, the Antecedent must also
needs fail, as thus: If he be wise, he is sree; but he is not free: Ergo, not
wise.

Which is the third way?
The third way, is when by granting the Antecedent, the Consequent fails, as
thus: If he be not wise, he is wretched; but he is wise: Ergo, not wretched.

Which is the fourth way?
The fourth way, is when the former part of the mayor Proposition disjunctive
being put, the latter part is clean taken away, as thus: He is either good or
evil; but he is good: Ergo, not evil.

Which is the fifth way?
The fifth way, is when the former part of the Disjunctive being taken away, the
latter part must needs stand, as thus: He is either good or evil; but he is
not good: Ergo, he is evil; for all Syllogismes Disjunctive, are made for the
most part of parts repugnant, whereof there can be no more, but one true part.

Which is the sixth way?
The sixth way, is by putting a Negative before the Conjunction copulative, so
as it makes the Antecedent to stand, and takes away the Consequent, as thus:
He is not both wise and wretched; but he is wise: Ergo, not wretched.

Which is the seventh way?
The seventh way, is when the Negative is placed in like manner before the
Conjunction copulative, but yet so as the Antecedent being taken away, the
Consequent does stand, as thus: He is not both wise and wretched; but he is not
wise: Ergo, wretched.

CHAP. XVI.
Of a Consequent, and by what means and rules the goodness thereof is to be
known.
But since the goodness of an Hypotheticall Syllogism depends upon the
goodness of the Consequent: it shall not be amiss to treat here of a
Consequent, and first to define what it is, and to show how it is divided.

What is a Consequent?
A Consequent, is a speech consisting of such parts as do follow one another,
and are joined together with some rational, (that is to say) an inferring or
employing Conjunction, as Ergo, then, therefore, and such like.

How many parts are requisite in a Consequent?
Three, that is, the Antecedent, the Consequent, and the inferring Sign or
Note, for of these three parts every Consequent consists.

How is it divided?
Into two, that is, Good and Evil: again, the good is divided into two, that
is, Formal and Material.

When is it said to be Formal?
When the Antecedent being true, the Consequent does necessarily follow
thereof, as when I say: This woman has had a child, Ergo, she has lain with
a man.

When is it said to be Material?
When the Consequent does not of necessity, but casually follow, the
Antecedent being true: as Socrates walks abroad: Ergo, it is fair weather.

Whereupon does the goodness of a Consequent chiefly depend?
It depends not so much of the truth of the Antecedent, and of the
Consequent, as of the necessary connection, or knitting of them together: and
if the same be in form of a Syllogism, it requires also the precepts of Mood
and Figure before taught to be observed.

How else shall a man know whether a Consequent be good or not?
By examining the same with the Maxims or general rules of the places:
whereof some do yield proofs or causes necessary, some probable, and some
only coniecturall.

What rules do the Schoolmen set down to know a good Consequent?
They set down some more, some less, but Caesarius only recites two, which
are these: The first is, if a Consequent does necessarily follow of his
Antecedent, then the contrary of the Antecedent must needs necessarily follow
the contrary of the Consequent: As for example, because this is a good
Co^sequent to say, it is a man: Ergo, it is a sensible body: it is a good
Conquent to say, it is no sensible body: Ergo, it is no man: the reason thereof
is, because the contrary of the Consequent and the Antecedent cannot be both
true together, but one of them must needs be false. The second rule is, that
whatsoever follows upon a good Consequent, must needs also follow upon the
Antecedent thereof: As for example, if it be a good Consequent to say, it is a
man: Ergo, it is a sensible body: ye may as well say, if it be a sensible body:
Ergo, it is a substance: and since that a sensible body is a substance, you may
therefore as well conclude that a man is a substance. To these rules you may add
also the third, which is, that of true things, nothing can follow but truth:
but of false things, sometime that which is false, and sometime that which is
true, as has bin said before: and yet such truth follows not by virtue of
the false premises, but because the conclusion or Consequent is a true
Proposition of it self: As in this example. Every sensible body is a tree, but
every Pearetree is a sensible body: Ergo, every Peare-tree is a tree.

CHAP. XVII.
Of a Syllogism Demonstratiue.
HItherto we have treated of a Syllogism, according to the first three of the
four divisions thereof, before mentioned: for if ye remember well, we said
that according to the first division, a Syllogism is either Categoricall or
Hypotheticall, according to the second division, either common or expository,
according to the third division, either perfect or imperfect, and according to
the fourth division, either Demonstratiue, Dialecticall, or Sophistical,
whereof we come now to speak, and first of a Syllogism demonstratiue.

What is a Syllogism Demonstratiue?
A Syllogism Demonstratiue is that which is made of necessary, immediate,
true, certain, and infallible Propositions, being first and so known, as they
need none other proof.

What mean ye by necessary and immediate Propositions?
Necessary Propositions be those which cannot be otherwise, as those which
do consist of the general kind, of the special kind, of the difference, or
of the property, as has been said before: and therefore Aristotle makes a
difference betwixt a Demonstratiue and a Dialecticall Proposition, for a
Demonstratiue Proposition consisting of matter natural, is necessarily true,
and cannot be otherwise, but a Dialecticall Proposition, consisting of matter
contingent, or casual, is only probable, and may be otherwise.

What be immediate Propositions?
Immediate Propositions are those which are first, and have none before them,
whereby they can be proned: as every sensible body endued with reason is apt
to learn. Aristotle also sets down three properties or conditions
belonging to the Subject and Predicate of a Demonstratiue Proposition.

Which be those Properties?
These, to be spoken of all, by it self, and universally.

What is to be spoken of all?
It is when the Predicate is known to be altogether and always in the
Subject, either as a part of the substance thereof, as when it is a general
kind, the special kind, the difference, or the property, as some inseparable
accident always incident to the said subject, as when I say: Every man is a
sensible body: or every man is endued with reason: or every man is apt to
speak: or every Swanne is white: or every fire is hot.

What is to be spoken by it self?
That is, when the Predicate is either the definition of the Subject, as a man
is a sensible body endued with reason: or else some part of the Definition, as
man is a sensible body, or man is endued with reason.

What is to be spoken universally?
It is when the Predicate is in the Subject, and in every such Subject by it
self; and first, as when I say, a man is a sensible body endued with reason:
here this Predicate sensible body endued with reason, is not only spoken of
man, but of every man in general by it self: and first: for if ye should
say, Peter or Socrates is a sensible body endued with reason: here the
Predicate is not spoken of any of these, as first, but in the second place,
because they are comprehended under the word man. For general kinds are said
to be before special kinds, and special kinds before Indiuiduums, as has bin
said before.

How does Aristotle define Demonstration?
In this sort: Demonstration is a Syllogism made of such Propositions as are
true: first immediate, and manifestly known, and be the causes of the
conclusion: first and immediate here is all one, signifying such Propositions
as need not to be proved or made more evident by any other former Propositions.
Again, the premises must be more known then the conclusion, for otherwise it
should neither be Demonstration, nor yet good Syllogism. Finally, the Premises
must render the very cause of the conclusion: and therefore Aristotle in
another place says, that Demonstration is a Syllogism causing knowledge and
science.

What is Science?
It is a firm and assured knowledge of any thing.

What is to know?
We are said to know a thing, when we know the true causes thereof, and that it
cannot be otherwise: for to make a perfect Demonstration, we must not only show
that there is such a thing as we go about to prove, but also we must show the
cause why it is so: for (as Aristotle says) every discipline and doctrine
intellectiue depends upon a former knowledge, which is twofold, whereof the
one is to know that the principles (that is to say) the premises of the
Demonstration be true, and the other is to know the true signification of the
Subject and Predicate of the question: for unless a man know what the name of
the Subject signifies, whereof the question rises, and also the proper
qualities of the same, how shall he be able to judge, whether the proof which
is brought in to prove the question withal be to the purpose or not? Again,
unless he know the premises to be true, the Demonstration shall breed no
certain knowledge in him.

Give example of a Syllogism Demonstratiue.
Let this be your example: Every sensible body endued with reason, is apt to
learn: but every man is a sensible body endued with reason: Ergo, every man is
apt to learn. Here you see that in this Syllogism the premises being true
and first, do render the cause of the conclusion: and thereby do imply a most
true Consequent: for whosoever would go about to demonstrate any of the premises
by some other former, or more known Propositions, should lose his labor, since
there is none before them more certain, nor more known to prove this
conclusion withal then they: for to understand the truth of these premises, it
suffices only to know the signification of the terms, and to have some
experience of the thing called Man: and therefore this kind of Demonstration
is called of the Schoolmen, Syllogismus Scientificus, because it yields the
perfect knowledge and Science of the thing in question.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the certainty of Man's knowledge.
WHereof depends the certainty of Man's knowledge?
Of three things, that is, of universal experience, of principles, and of
natural knowledge that a man has in judging of Consequents: for these be
three infallible rules of certitude or truth in all kinds of doctrine.

What is universal experience?
Universal experience is the common judgment of men, in such things as are to
be perceived and known by the outward senses: as Fire to be hot, the Heavens
to turn round about, Wine and Pepper to be hot in operation, Women to bring
forth children, and not Men: which things all men (unless they be mad, and
out of their wits) must needs confess to be true.

What be Principles?
Principles be certain general conceptions and natural knowledges grafted
in man's mind of God, to the intent that by the help thereof, he might invent
such Arts as are necessary in this life for man's behoof; for by the natural
knowledge of the mind we understand, Number, Order, Proportion, and all other
necessary Arts and Sciences.

How does Aristotle define Principles?
In this manner: Principles be true Propositions, having credit of themselves,
and need no other proof.

How many Divisions do the Schoolmen make Principles?
Diverse.

Rehearse those Divisions.
The first is, of Principles, some be called Speculatiue, and some Practiue:
The speculatiue be those natural knowledges or Propositions, whereof Natural
Philosophy or the Mathematical Sciences be grounded, as these: The whole is
more then his part: Those things which are equal to a third, are equal among
themselves: of one simple body, there is but one natural moving, and such
like. The Principles Practiue, be those natural knowledges, whereby men's
manners are governed: for by this natural light we know the difference betwixt
good and evil: As for example: these be Principles Practiue: God is to be
honored and obeyed: Justice is to be embraced: civil society is to be
maintained, and the disturbers thereof to be punished: these and such like
Propositions are naturally received of all men as infallible verities. Again,
of Principles, some be called General, and some Proper. The General, be those
that may be applied to many Sciences, as these: the whole is more then any of
his parts, if equal be taken from equal, equal do remain and such like.
The proper Principles be those, that are properly belonging to some one
certain Science, as a line to be a length without breadth, is a principle of
Geometry: Again, this proposition, every thing is, or is not, is a principle
of Logic: and to be short, every Science has his proper principles: of which
some be called dignities or Maxims, and some Positions.

Wherefore are they called Dignities or Maxims?
For that they are worthy to be credited for their self sake, for so soon as
we hear them in such speech as we understand, we naturally know them to be
true without any further proof, as these. Take equal from equal, and equal
will remain: the whole is more then any of his parts, etc.

What be Positions?
Positions be those principles, which although they need no other proof, yet
they be not so easily understood of all men at the first uttering, as Maxims
be: for in these, besides the knowledge of the terms, it is needful to have
also some experience, as in these Principles. Every thing that is compounded of
matter and form is moveable: whatsoever is heavy, tends naturally
downward, and whatsoever is light, tends upwards. Again, of Positions, some
are called Definitions, and some Suppositions, and of Suppositions, some are
called Petitions, called in Latin Postulata, and some Suppositions assumpted.

Define these kinds.
1 Definition shows what the thing is. 2 Supposition is that which supposes
a thing to be, or not to be, as the Geometricians do suppose that there is
Punctum, (that is to say) a prick, or a thing indivisible, having neither
length, breadth, nor depth. 3 Petition is a Proposition asked and granted to be
true: as this is a petition in Geometry, that a man may draw a right line from
one point to another. 4 Supposition assumpted is, when a manifest supposition
is assumpted to prove another thing withal, as to prove that demonstration
consists of true Propositions, the disputer will assumpt this assertion,
which says, that of false things there is no certain knowledge: and truth is
not known but of true things.
What is the third thing whereof the certainty of man's knowledge depends?
It is the knowledge that man has in judging of consequents, which is not
altogether artificial, but partly natural, for God thought it not sufficient
for man's behoof to know simple Propositions, as principles or common
conceptions gotten by experience, unless he could also compare them together,
and join things like, and agreeable together, and sever things unlike, and
disagreeing one from another, and by such comparison and composition to find
out things before not known: and to the intent we should not err or wander
out of the right way, God has showed us an order, and prescribed certain
bounds and limits of necessity to be observed in such composition, which
bounds are Syllogismes rightly made: for so do the Consequents plainly appear:
And because that proportions are known by nature, it shall not be amiss to
give you an example in numbers: for three known numbers being placed in true
order of a Syllogism, a fourth number unknown, of necessity does follow, as
in this question: If one pound of wax be worth a groat, what is ten pound of
wax worth? Marry ten groates, which is proved by a Syllogism in this
manner: Every pound of wax is worth a groat, but here is ten pound of wax:
Ergo, they are worth ten groats: and like as in these kinds of Syllogismes
Arithmeticall, the proportion which is to be judged by man's natural knowledge,
does show the Consequent to be infallible, even so the Consequents in other
Syllogismes are showed to be infallible, by such demonstrations as are not
far fetched, or doubtful, but are manifest, plain and evident.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the two kinds of Demonstration.
HOw do the Schoolmen divide Demonstration?
Into two; that is, perfect and imperfect: and they call the perfect,
demonstratio propter quid: and the imperfect, demonstratio quia est.

It is perfect, when it proceeds from the proper cause to the effect, called
of the Schoolmen, a priore: for in that demonstration the Antecedent
contains the proper and true cause of the consequent; as when we say, the Sun
is up: Ergo, it is day.

What is to be observed in a perfect Demonstration?
That the Predicate of the Conclusion, which is also Predicate in the Mayor, be
first, properly, always, and that really and accidentally, incident to the
subject of the Mayor, and to every thing contained under the same, which
subject must be some general kind, and the very mean or proof of your
conclusion: As for example, if you would prove a Cock to be a feathered
foul, it were not a sufficient demonstration to say, that every flying beast
is a feathered foul; for some beasts fly, that have no feathers; as Backs,
that fly in the night season. But if you say, that every bird is a feathered
foul, and every Cock is a bird: Ergo, every Cock is a feathered foul: you
shall make a perfect demonstration, because the Subject, and Predicate of the
Mayor, have such conditions as are before required; for this Mayor shows the
thing to be, and also wherefore it is, which is done so often as the Predicate
is the true definition of the Subject: as when I say, Every man is a sensible
body endued with reason, or else some chief part of the definition, as when I
say, Every man is endued with reason, as has been said before: for every good
demonstration is either made of a true definition, or taken from the general
kind, special kind, or else from the special difference, or property, yea,
and sometime they may be taken out of the whole and of the parts, of the
proper causes and effects, of perpetual adiacents, otherwise called common
accidents, of proper acts, of contrarieties, and of divine authority, whereof
you have had examples before in the treatise of places, and seats of arguments.

When is it said to be an imperfect Demonstration?
When the premises are true, implying a true Consequent, but yet are not
first, neither do they show the original cause of the Conclusion; as in this
example: Every sensible body is nourishable; but every man is a sensible body:
Ergo, every man is nourishable: here though the premises be true Propositions,
yet they be not first, neither do they show the original cause of the
Conclusion: for the Mayor of this Syllogism may be proved by a former and more
known Proposition; for that which is more general, is more known then that
which is less general, as thus: Every living body is nourishable; but every
sensible body is a living body: Ergo, every sensible body is nourishable.
Again, it is said to be imperfect, when we proceed from the effect to the
cause; as when we say, it is day: Ergo, the Sun is up. But that demonstration
which proceeds from the cause to the effect, is the more worthier, because we
use therein discourse of reason and understanding: and in the other we only
judge by the outward senses, whereof spring two principal kinds of Method,
(that is to say) compendious or short orders or ways of teaching in all manner
of Sciences whereof the one is called composition, proceeding forward from the
first to the last, and the other is called resolution, proceeding backward from
the last to the first, as has been said before in the (...) Method. Lib. 2.
cap. 5.

CHAP. XX.
Of Science, Opinion, Ignorance, Wit, and of the four Sciencial questions.
WHat other things are wont to be treated of by the Schoolmen in
demonstration?
Diverse things; as what difference is betwixt Science and Opinion: also they
treat of the diverse kinds of Ignorance, of prompt Wit: and of the four
Scienciall questions.

What difference is betwixt Science and opinion?
Science, as has been said before, is that which consists of necessary,
certain, and infallible Propositions, and of such things as cannot be
otherwise. Opinion is the knowledge of things casual, which may be sometime
false, and sometime true.

How many kinds of Ignorance do the Schoolmen make?
Two: that is to say, absolute, which of the Schoolmen is called Ignorantia
negationis, and ignorance by false conception, which they call Ignorantia
affectionis. The first is, when we utterly deny to have any knowledge of a
thing at all: The other is, when we think to know that which we know not,
being deceived by some false persuasion, whereunto we are affected, whereof it
is called Ignorantia affectionis.

How does Aristotle define prompt Wit, called of the Latins Solertia?
He defines it to be a promptness or readiness, in quickly finding out the
proof or cause of any thing that is in question, without any study.

Which be the four Sciential questions?
These: whether the thing be, what it is, how it is, and wherefore it is:
whereof the first enquireth of the Subject, whether it be: the second of the
Predicate, as what it is: the third, how it is, (that is to say) how the
Predicate is spoken of the Subject: and the fourth asks the cause why it is
spoken of the Subject? And thus much of a Syllogism Demonstratiue: now of a
Syllogism Dialecticall, or probable.

CHAP. XXI.
Of a Syllogism Dialecticall.
WHat is a Dialecticall Syllogism?
A Dialecticall Syllogism is that which is made of probable and credible
Propositions.

What things are said to be probable?
Things probable, according to Aristotle, are these that seem true to all men,
or to the most part of men, or to all wise men, or to the most part of wise
men, or else to the most approved wise men: whereby it appears that things
probable may be said five manner of ways.

Show how.
First, those things are probable, which unto all men as well learned as
unlearned being in their right wits, do seem to be true, as these: Every
mother loves her child: we love them that love us: we must do good to them
that do good to us. Secondly, those things that seem true to most men, as
these: it is better for a communalty to be ruled by one Prince, then by many:
It is not good to serve many masters at once. Thirdly, those things that seem
true to all wise men, as these: what thing soever is honest, the same is also
profitable: Virtue is better then riches. Fourthly, those that seem true to
the most part of the wise and learned, as thus: the soul of man is immortal:
the Sun is greater then the earth. Fifthly, those things that seem true to
the most approved wise men, as these: The world had a beginning: it is better
for a Prince to be loved, then feared of his Subjects. And generally under
things probable are contained all true Propositions that be casual, and not
implying any necessity. I say here true Propositions, to exclude false
Propositions, whereof Sophistical Syllogismes are made, and not those which we
call probable or Logical Syllogismes; and yet such Propositions be not so true
in deed, as those that be required in a Syllogism demonstratiue, but only
do seem true, ingendring a certain opinion in man's mind, doubting
notwithstanding the contrary: for it breeds not a perfect knowledge as
Science does, whereby the mind is of all doubts thoroughly resolved. And note
here, that the Schoolmen do make the matter (whereof a Dialecticall
Syllogism does consist) to be twofold, that is, Materia remota, in English,
far off: and Materia propinqua, (that is to say) nigh, or near at hand.

What does Materia remota contain?
These four Dialecticall Predicates, (that is) Definition, called of the
Schoolmen Terminus, property, general kind, and Accident: All which
Predicates are before defined, and are called Predicates, because they are
common words spoken of others. But truly I see no cause why these four
Predicates should be attributed to a Dialectical Syllogism, more then to a
Syllogism demonstratiue: for sure I am, that as good demonstrations may be
made of these as of any other Predicats.

What is contained under Materia propinqua?
These: a Dialecticall Proposition, Problem, and Position.

What difference is betwixt these three words, Dialecticall Proposition,
Problem, and Position?
A Dialecticall Proposition is a probable question uttered with a simple
Interrogatory; as whether the mother loves her child? which is no question in
deed, but to him that asks.

A Problem is a doubtful question uttered with a double Interrogatory, as
whether the least fixed star in the firmament be greater then the Moon or
not? or whether that the Sun be bigger then the earth or not? Position is a
wonderful opinion maintained by some excellent Clerk, as to say, that all
things are but one essence or being, as Melissus affirmed, or that all things
do continually flow and change, as Heraclitus held, or that the earth moves,
and not the heavens, as Copernicus supposes, only to find out thereby the
true motions of the Planets, and not for that he thought so in deed.

CHAP. XXII.
Of a sophistical Syllogism.
WHat is a Sophistical or false Syllogism?
A false Syllogism is that which is either made of false Propositions, or else
of such as seem probable, and be not in deed, or else of probable premises
not rightly concluding: and of such Syllogismes there be three sorts, the one
failing in matter, the other in form, the third in both.

When is it said to fail in matter?
It fails in matter, when the Syllogism having true form, is made of such
Propositions as seem probable, and be not probable in deed, as thus: no
opposites are both true at once, but subcontraries are opposites: Ergo, they
are not true. Here though this Mayor seems probable, because many opposites,
as contraries, and contradictories be never both true at once, yet it is not
probable in deed: for those opposites which be called subcontrarie and
subalternate, may be both true at once as has been before.

When is it said to fail in form?
It fails in form, when it is made of probable premises, not rightly
concluding: because they be not orderly disposed according to Mood and Figure,
as thus: Some opposites are both true at once, but contradictories are
opposites: Ergo, Contradictories are both true at once. Here the premises be
probable, but the Syllogism halteth in form, because that of mere
particulars no good conclusion can follow.

When is it said to fail both in matter and form?
It fails both in matter and form, when the premises are neither probable,
nor yet do conclude rightly according to the rules of Logic, as thus: No
opposites are both true at once, but subcontraries are opposites: Ergo, no
subcontraries are both true at once. Here first it fails in matter, because
the Mayor, (as has been said before) is not probable in deed. Again, it
fails in form, because that contrary to the rules of a Syllogism, an
universal conclusion is implied, one of the premises being particular, which
should not be.

Is there no other kinds of false Syllogismes?
Yes, there is another kind of false Syllogism, called of Aristotle,
Syllogismus falsigraphus, which proceeds of the proper principles of some
discipline, misconstrued, or not rightly understood, as thus: All lines drawn
from one selfe-point to another selfe-point, be equal, a right line and a
crooked line be drawn from one selfe-point to another selfe-point: Ergo, a
right line and a crooked line be equal, as you see in the figure
a. b. in the Margent: Here the Mayor being a principle in Geometry, is not
rightly understood; for the right meaning of the principle is, that the lines
should be also drawn in one self space, and then they must needs be equal,
(that is to say) all of one length: but as touching false Syllogismes, we
shall treat of them hereafter more at large in the Elenches: in the mean time
we mind to speak of the other kinds of arguments before mentioned; and first
of Induction.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Induction.
WHat is Induction?
Induction is a kind of argument, wherein we proceed from many particulars to
a universal conclusion, comprehending all the said particulars: and by the
particulars here I mean not only singularities, called in Latin Indiuidua, but
also such things as be less common then that universal which is concluded; as
when we proceed from many special kinds, to some general kind comprehending
the same, or from things less common to more common.

What is to be observed in this kind of reasoning?
That the particulars be all of like nature; for if there be any one contrary
or unlike to the rest, then the Induction is not good.

How manifold is Induction?
Twofold: Perfect, and Imperfect: it is called perfect, when all the
singularities are rehearsed: and imperfect, when but some certain parts are
only recited.

Give example of Induction.
Of an Induction, proceeding from mere singularities unto universal, let this
be your example: Malmesie is hot, Gascoin wine is hot, Romney wine is hot, Sack
is hot, Renish wine is hot, French wine is hot, and sic de singulis: Ergo,
Every wine is hot; which may be brought into a Syllogism thus: Every thing
that is wine, be it either of Greece, Spain, Italy, Germany, France, or of any
other country is hot, but every wine is one of these: Ergo, every wine is hot.

Give example of an Induction proceeding from the special kinds to their
general kinds?
Of an Induction proceeding from the special kinds to the general kind, let
this be your example: Every Man has moving, every Horse has moving, every Ox
has moving, and sic de singulis: Ergo, every sensible body has moving. In
which example you see, that to every special kind is added an universal
sign to make your Induction good, which would not be so, if you should use a
particular sign, in saying, some Man, some Horse, some Ox, and so forth.

Which of these two kinds of reasoning, either an Induction or a Syllogism is
most familiar and easy to man?
Induction is more familiar to man then a Syllogism, for the Syllogism
proceeds from universalities unto particularities, which universalities be
more known to nature (that is to say) to the discourse of reason, and less
known to our outward senses. But Induction proceeds from particularities
unto universalities, which particularities are more known unto us, (that is to
say) to our outward senses, and less known to Nature. Again, by Induction
we are able to prove the principles of Demonstration, which are not otherwise
to be proved, as this principle: Every whole is more then his part, may be
proved by Induction in this sort: This whole is more then his part, and that
whole is more then his part, neither is there to be found any whole, but that
is more then his part: Ergo, Every whole is more then his part. Also this
principle, Every sensible body endued with reason is apt to learn, may be
proved thus: This man is apt to learn; and that man is apt to learn, and so
of the rest: Ergo, Every sensible body endued with reason is apt to learn.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of an Enthimeme.
WHat is an Enthimeme?
An Enthimeme is an imperfect Syllogism, made for haste or speed of two
Propositions only, (that is) of one of the Premises, called in this kind of
argument the Antecedent, and of the conclusion called here the Consequent, for
the other of the Premises being supposed to be true and well known, is left
out of purpose, as a thing superfluous, and not needful to be recited, and
sometime the Mayor is left out, as thus: Voluptuousness is not perpetual nor
proper, it is not therefore the chief felicity: and sometime the Minor is
left out, as here: Every good thing makes his possessor the better, therefore
voluptuousness is not good.

How shall a man know when the Mayor or Minor is left out?
It is easy to know which of the Premises is left out by this means, for if
the Subject of the Antecedent and of the Consequent be all one, then the Mayor
is left out, but if they be not all one, but diverse, then the Minor is left
out, as you may see in the two last examples, and the part lacking, being
reduced together with the rest into a Syllogism, will quickly show the truth
or falsehood of the Argument.

From whence are such kinds of Arguments gathered?
They are gathered for the most part from signs, which if they be necessary,
then the Enthimeme also is necessary, as thus: The woman gives milk: Ergo,
she has had a child, or is with child; if the signs be probable, then the
Enthimeme is also probable, as thus: This man is a night-gadder: Ergo, he is a
thief.

CHAP. XXV.
Of an Example.
WHat is an Example?
An Example is a kind of Argument, wherein we proceed from one particular to
prove another particular, by reason of some likeness that is betwixt them, as
thus: God did not punish the Ninevites because they repented: Ergo, He will
not punish us if we repent. God did not let to plague King David for adultery:
Ergo, He will not let to plague any other King for committing the same offense.

Wherein differs this kind of Argument from the rest?
This kind of Argument differs in form from all the rest before taught, for
a Syllogism proceeds from the general kind to the special kind, or
otherwise. An Enthimeme imitating a Syllogism, recites in his Antecedent the
cause of the Conclusion. Again, an Induction out of many particularities
gathers an universality, none of which things is to be found in an Example,
proceeding only from one particular to another like particular.
Notwithstanding Aristotle says, that it may be reduced partly to an Induction,
and partly to a Syllogism: for in taking the first particular, you may by an
imperfect Induction imply an universal Proposition. And so from that
universal Proposition to proceed by order of Syllogism unto the other
particular employed in the conclusion of the Example, as in this Example: Iuaas
died evil: Ergo, Pilate also died evil: it may be first reduced into an
imperfect Induction thus: Judas dyed evil, because he was the author of
Christ's death, and did not repent: Ergo, Every man that was author of Christ's
death, and did not repent, died evil. Into a Syllogism thus: Every man that
was author of Christ's death, and did not repent, died evil; but Pilat was
author of Christ's death, and did not repent: Ergo, Pilate died evil.

Whereto serves this kind of reasoning by Example?
Examples are very good in all moral matters, to persuade, or dissuade.

What is to be observed in reasoning by way of Example?
You must in any wise be sure that the similitude or likeness of the
particulars do make to the purpose which you intend, and that it be the very
cause why the Predicate of the Antecedent properly belongs to the Subject,
for otherwise the argument is not good; for if you should reason thus: Judas
died evil: Ergo, Peter died evil: because they were both sinners: for their
likeness in this behalf is not the cause that Judas died evil, but the cause
before alleged.

From whence is this kind of argument fetched?
From the places of Comparison, as from the like, from the more, and from the
less, of all which the general rule or Maxim is thus: In things like, is
like judgment or reason, as has been said before in the Treatise of Places.
Thus far of the four principal kinds of reasoning: now of the rest, and
first.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the Argument called Sorites.
WHat is Sorites?
Sorites is a kind of Argument proceeding as it were by certain degrees unto
the Conclusion, which is gathered of many Propositions necessarily following
one another, and are knit together, so as the Predicate of the first
Proposition is the Subject of the second, and the Predicate of the second the
Subject of the third, and so forth even to the last Proposition, whose
Predicate being joined to the Subject of the first Proposition, does make the
Conclusion as thus: The Soul of man does move it self: whatsoever moves it
self, is the beginning of moving: the beginning of moving has no end,
whatsoever has no end, is immortal: Ergo, the Soul of man is immortal.

When is this kind of Argument said to be of force?
When it is made of Affirmative Propositions, wherein words of affinity are
necessarily joined together, as when kinds general, differences, or
properties, are joined with those special kinds, of whom they are spoken, or
when proper effects are joined with their proper causes, for if the
Propositions be either Negative, or do not necessarily hang together, then it
is no good Argument, as in Negatiues let this be your example: A Man is not a
Lion, a Lion is a sensible beast: Ergo, Man is not a sensible beast. Now of
Propositions not hanging necessarily together, because that proper effects are
not joined with their proper causes, let this common jest be your example:

Whosoever drinks well, sleeps well,
Whosoever sleeps well, sins not,
Whosoever sins not, shall be blessed:
Ergo, Whosoever drinks well, shall be blessed.
Which is no good Conclusion, for much drink is not always the cause of
sleep, nor sleeping the cause of not sinning.

The Rhetoricians use another kind of Argument, called Gradatio, which is much
like to Sorite^, saving that the Subject of the first Proposition is not
rehearsed in the Conclusion, for they use it rather as an ornament of speech,
then as a proof, as the virtue of SCIPIO wanne him Fame, Fame got him Enemies,
and his Enemies procured his death.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of diverse other kinds of Arguments, and first of a Dilemma, and what kinds
it comprehends.
THere be also other forms of Arguments, whereof some be Fallaxes, and some
are good Conclusions, and they be these, Dilemma, Enumeratio, Simplex
Conclusio, Subiectio, Oppositio, Violatio.

What is Dilemma?
Dilemma is an Argument made of two members, repugnant one to another, whereof
which soever thou grantest, thou art by and by taken, as thus: It is not good
to marry a wife, for if she be fair, she will be common, if foul, then
loathsome: notwithstanding, this is but a slipperie kind of argument, unless
both the repugnant parts be such, as neither of them can be turned again upon
the maker of the argument, for then by conversion, the Dilemma is soon
confuted, as for example, you may convert both parts of the argument last
recited thus: It is good to marry a wife, for if she be fair, she shall not be
loath some, if foul, then not common: much like to this is that captious
Argument, which Protagoras the Lawyer made against his Scholar Euathlus, who
had couenanted to pay his Master a certain sum of money at the first Suite or
Action that he should win by pleading at the Law: whereupon his Master did
afterward commence an Action against him, and in reasoning with him of the
matter, made him this Dilemma: Either (says he) judgment shall be given
against thee, or with thee: if against thee, then thou must pay me by virtue of
the judgment; if judgment be given with thee, then thou must also pay me by
covenant; which the Scholar immediately confuted by conversion in this sort:
Either (says he) judgment shall be given with me, or against me; if with me,
then I shall be quit by Law; if against me, then I ought to pay nothing by
covenant.

What other iutricate kinds of reasoning are said to be comprehended under
Dilemma?
Diverse, whereof some be called Certains or horned Arguments, some
Crocodolites, some Assistatons, some Pseudomenons.

Define all these kinds, and give examples.
1 The horned Argument is, when by some subtle and crafty manner of
questioning, we seek to have such an answer, as we may take vantage thereof,
as the Pharisees did, when they questioned with Christ touching the payment of
Tribute to Caesar. 2 The Crocodolite is, when being deceived by some crafty
manner of questioning, we do admit that which our Adversary turns again
upon us, to our own hindrance, as in the fable of the Crocodile, whereof this
name Crocodolite proceeds: for it is said, that the Crocodile having taken
away a child from his mother, reasoned with her in this sort; I will deliver
thee thy child again, if thou will say a troth: whether therefore shall I
deliver him or not? The mother answered, thou shall not deliver him, and
therefore of right thou ought to deliver him. No, says he, I will not
deliver him, to the intent it may seem that thou have said troth; and though
thou had said that I should deliver him, yet I would not deliver him
indeed, for making thee a liar. 3 Assistaton, is a kind of cauelling, not
consisting of any sure ground, as if a man did say, that he does hold his
peace, or lies, or knows nothing; another by and by might cavil thereof in
this sort: Ergo, He that holds his peace, speaks, he that lies, says
truth, he that knows nothing, knows something. 4 Pseudomenon, is a false or
lying kind of cauelling, as thus: The heaven covers all things: Ergo, it
covers it self. Epimenides, being a Candiot himself, said, That the
Candiotes were liars; the question is, whether he said true or not; for though
he said true, and that the Candiotes were liars, yet it is false, because a
Candiot said it: again, if the Candiotes be no liars, nor Epimenides is a
liar, then he is to be believed.
How are the Fallaxes of these captious Arguments to be found out?
The Fallaxes of all these kinds of captious Arguments are soon found out, if
we consider well the rules before taught, touching the rep^gnances of
Propositions, as whether there be any ambiguitie in the Terms, and whether the
selfsame Terms in the repugnant parts have respect to one selfe-thing, time,
or place, or not: it is good also to consider the substance, quantity, and
quality of the Propositions: for in the last example, this saying Candiotes be
liars, is a Proposition indefinite, and therefore is not of such force, as to
say, all Candiotes be liars, which is an universal Proposition, for of
particular Premises nothing rightly follows. In the other examples you shall
find that there is some doubtfulnesse in the Terms, having respect either to
diverse things, to diverse times, or diverse places, as to say, he holds his
peace when he speaks: Here is doubtfulnesse in the Terms, having respect to
diverse things, that is to say, as well to those things, which he means to
keep in silence, as to those words which he utters by mouth: so in this
word, Suite, in the example of Protagoras was doubtfulnesse, for that
Protagoras meant some other Suite, and not that which he himself commenced.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Enumeration.
WHat is Enumeration?
Enumeration is a kind of Argument, wherein many things being reckoned up and
denied, one thing only of necessity remains to be affirmed, as thus: Since
thou have this Horse, either thou did buy him, or he came to thee by
inheritance, or he was given thee, or bred at home with thee, or else thou
did take him from thine enemy in time of war; or if none of these were,
then thou must needs steal him: but thou neither boughtest him, nor he fell
not unto thee by inheritance, nor was given thee, ^or bred up at home with
thee, nor yet taken by thee from the enemy: it follows therefore of
necessity that thou have stolen him.

When is this kind of argument to be confuted?
When your adversary can prove any necessary part to be left out.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of a simple Conclusion.
WHat is a simple Conclusion?
A simple Conclusion is no other thing, but a necessary Enthymeme, in the which
the Consequent does necessarily follow the antecedent, as thus: she has had a
child: Ergo, she has layne with a man.

CHAP. XXX.
Of Subjection.
WHat is Subjection?
Subjection is a questioning kind of Argument, in the which we confute each
question with a reason immediately following the same, as thus: How is this
fellow become so well moneyed? had he any great Patrimony left him? No, for all
his Fathers lands were sold. Came there any inheritance to him by descent any
otherwise? No, for he was disinherited of all men. Came there any goods unto
him by Executorship, etc. If then he has not been enriched by any of these
honest ways, either he has a golden Mine at home, or else he is come to
these riches by some unlawful means. This argument fails when any
principal part is left out, and therefore differs not much from Enumeration
before recited.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of Opposition.
WHat is Opposition?
Oppositio^ is a kind of Argument, made of Repugnant parts, wherein we reuert
from the Opposite of the first Proposition, unto the same Proposition again,
as thus: If I were in the City at such time as this man was slain in the
Country, then I slew him not; this Proposition is now a simple Conclusion, and
may be made an Opposition in this manner: If I had been in the Country at such
time as you say this man was slain, then you might well suspect me to have
slain him: but since I was not there at that time, there is no cause therefore
why you should suspect me.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of Violation.
WHat is Uiolation?
Violation is a kind of Concluding, more meet to confute then to prove,
whereby we show the reason of our adversary, to make for us, and not for him,
as thus: it is not good to marry a wife, because that of marriage many times
comes the loss of children to our great sorrow, yea, rather it is good
therefore to marry a wife, to get other children for our comfort. Thus much
touching the diverse kinds of reasoning: now we will treat of Fallaxes, or
false Conclusions, and show how ^o confute them.

Here ends the fifth Book of Logic.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF LOGIC.
CHAP. I.
Of Confutation.
THere be some that make two kinds of Confutation, the one belonging to person,
the other to matter. Confutation of person is done either by taunting, railing,
rendering check for check, or by scorning, and that either by words, or else
by countenance, gesture and action: which kind of Confutation, because it
belongs rather to scoffing then to true order of reasoning, I will leave to
speak thereof, dealing only with that Confutation that belongs to matter,
which is twofold, the one general, the other special: it is general, when
we affirm that the Argument fails either in form, in matter, or in both.
Again, the general Confutation is done three manner of ways, that is, either
by denying the Consequent, by making distinction, or by instance, (that is to
say) by bringing in a contrary Example.

Show when these three ways are to be used.
If the Argument fail in form, then we must deny the consequent.

Give Examples.
Discipline is necessary, but the Ceremonies of Moses are discipline,
therefore the Ceremonies of Moses are necessary: here you must deny the
Consequent, because that of mere particulars nothing follows: and to be
short, when any Argument is made contrary to the rules of Figure and Mood
before taught, the Consequent is not good, and therefore to be denied, as
here: every covetous man does violate the laws of liberality; but every
prodigal man does violate the laws of liberality; therefore every prodigal
man is a covetous man: This Syllogism, being of the second Figure, is made in
Barbara, which Mood belongs not to that Figure: But if the Argument fail in
matter, that is, when either one of the premises, or both are false, then it
may be confuted as well by denying the false part, be it Mayor or Minor, as by
using distinction: and to find out the falsenesse of the matter, it is
necessary always to have respect to the Maxims of the places, from whence the
proof is fetched; for they do show which Propositions are true, and which are
not; as for example in this Argument: No painted speech becomes Philosophers,
but eloquence is painted speech: Ergo, eloquence becomes no Philosophers:
here the Mayor is to be denied, because it is a false definition: for the true
definition of eloquence is to speak wisely, aptly, adornedly, and to the
purpose, and not to use painted words vainly: Again, whosoever worshippe^h God
the Creator, worshippeth the true God; the Turks worship God the Creator:
Ergo, the Turks worship the true God: This Argument is to be denied, because
the Minor is false; for no man can truly worship God the Creator, unless he
worship also Jesus Christ his Son, which the Turks do not, and therefore
they worship a fained Idol, and not the true God.

When is distinction to be used?
When either the words or matter is doubtful.

Give examples of both.
All Verbes active do signify action, but God used this Verb Active
Indurabo, in saying, I will harden Pharaohs heart: Ergo, God did harden
Pharaohs heart: here distinction is to be made; for Verbes active have diverse
significations, according to the diversities of the Tongues wherein they are
uttered: for in the Hebrew Tongue, Verbes active do signify permission or
sufferance, as well as action; as these words I will harden Pharaohs heart (is
as much to say) as I will suffer Pharaohs heart to be hardened; likewise
whereas we say in the Lords Prayer, Lead us not into temptation, is as much
to say, as, suffer us not to be led into temptation: Again, ambiguitie may
be in this matter, as thus: no sins are heard of God: but all men are
sinners; therefore no men are heard of God: here distinction is to be made
betwixt penitent sinners, and impenitent: for God will he are the penitent
sinner: although he will not hear the impenitent sinner.

When is confutation by instance used?
When the Argument, though it fail neither in sorme, nor matter, yet perhaps
it is neither so strong, nor so probable, but that a stronger and more probable
may be made against it.

Give example.
Whosoever kills any Ambassadors in their iourneying, does violate the Laws of
Arms: but the Frenchmen killed our Ambassador iourneying to Spain: Ergo, the
Frenchmen in so doing did violate the Laws of Arms: Here to the Mayor a man
may answer by instance, thus: the Athenians killed the Ambassadors of the
Lacedaemonians iourneying to the Kings of Persia, because they went to procure
his aid, to destroy the City of Athens: So likewise the Romans did intercept
the Legates of Hanibal going to the King of the Macedonians for the like
intent; and yet neither of these people did think to break the Laws of
Arms, by doing that which should preserve their State and Commonweal.

CHAP. II.
Of special confutation.
WHat is special confutation?
Special Confutation is, when we confute any false argument, by detecting and
showing the Fallax thereof, naming the Fallax by his proper name.

What order do h Aristotle observe in treating of special Confutation?
Aristotle first treats in general of all those things that commonly
appertain to the disputations of learned men, as first he treats of an
Elench, which is as much to say as reprehension, then of Syllogismes, and of
disputation, and also of the marks and ends of Sophistry, and whereto they
tend.

How defines he an Elench or Reprehension?
Reprehension or Elench (says he) is a Syllogism which gathers a
conclusion contrary to the assertion of the respondent, as if a man would
defend Medea: not to love her child because she killed it, another might
reason against him in this manner: every mother loves her child: but Medea is a
mother: Ergo, Medea loves her child: the Conclusion of this Syllogism is
contrary to the first assertion: and note here by the way, that there be two
sorts of Elenches, the one true and the other false, it is said to be true*
when it rightly gathers a contrary conclusion to the respondents assertion:
And false, when it fails in any part requisite to a true Elench: of which
parts we shall speak hereafter, when we come to treat of the Fallax called
Ignorance of the Elench, which is one of the five ends or marks whereunto
Sophistry tends, for a true Elench seems to belong unto Dialecticall
disputation, rather then to Sophistical disputation. But now leaving to define
a Syllogism, because it has been defined before, and therefore not needful
here again to be rehearsed, I will proceed to Disputation.

CHAP. III.
Of Disputation: and how manifold it is.
DIsputation is a contention about some question taken in hand, either for
finding out of truth, or else for exercise sake, and there be four kinds of
disputation, whereof the first is called doctrinall, because it appertains to
Science.

The second is called Dialecticall, which belongs to probable opinion.

The third is called Tentatiue, which serves to try another man's knowledge,
in any kind of Science.

The fourth is called Sophistical, which tends only to deceive.

Give examples of all these four kinds?
The Doctrinal Disputation uses no other but Syllogismes Demonstratiue as this
is, whatsoever has reason, is capable of learning; but John has reason: Ergo,
John is capable of learning. Dialecticall Disputation uses only probable
Syllogismes, as the former example of Medea, every mother loves her child; but
Medea is a mother: Ergo, Medea loves her child: against this another probable
argument may be made thus: whosoever kills her child, loves not her child:
but Medea killed her child: Ergo, she loved not her child. Tentatiue
disputation uses such arguments as are made of the first common principles of
any science, in which principles who so is ignorant, cannot be skilful in that
Science; as if a man would profess Geometry, and know not the definitions of
a point, or prick of a line, or superficies, or of such common Maxims, as
these are; the whole is more then his part: take equal from equal, and equal
remain, etc. should quickly bewray his own ignorance.

Sophistical disputation uses nothing but decei^full arguments, or Fallaxes,
whereof there be thirteen kinds hereafter set down: but first I will show
you which be the five Marks and Ends of Sophistry.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the five Marks and Ends of Sophistry.
ARistotle says, that the fraudulent disputation of the Sophister, tends
always to one of these five Ends or Marks; that is, either by force of
argument, to bring you into some absurdity, which he calls Elench; that is
to say, a reprehension or reproof, or else to make you to confess that which
is manifestly false, or to grant some Paradox, which is as much to say as an
opinion contrary to all men's opinions: or to allow of incongrue speech
contrary to the rules of Grammar, called in Latin, Solecismus, or to admit
some vain repetition, called in Latin Nugatio.

Give example of all these five Marks.
Of the first Mark, let this be your example: If in disputing of Virtue, you
have perhaps granted, that the meditation of Virtue does make a man sad, the
Sophister will force you by argument, to deny again that which you before
granted, thus: all things that be contrary, har^ contrary effects: but it is
proper to vice to make the mind of man sad: Ergo, Virtue makes his mind
glad: This kind of reasoning is more plainly taught before, when we talked
of Reduction by impossibility.

Of the second Mark let this be your example: Every dog has power to bark;
but there is a certain Star called the Dog: Ergo, that star has power to
bark. The Fallax of this argument consists only in the word Dog, which is
equiuoke, as shall be declared more at large hereafter, when we come to
speak of that Elench or Fallax.

Of the Paradox, which is the third Mark, let this be your example: the
Sophister will make you to grant, that a rich and happy King is wretched, by
force of argument, thus: Whosoever is subject to sin, is wretched: but all rich
and happy Kings are subject to sin: Ergo, all rich and happy Kings are
wretched and miserable: in this is also a Fallax, because that happiness is
spoken here in two respects, for there is worldly happiness, and heavenly
happiness.

Of the fourth mark called incongruitie of speech, I can hardly give you any
fit example in our native tongue, because that our English Adjectives do not
differ in Case, Gender, and Number, and therefore I pray you content your self
with this Latin example, for it is an easier matter for an Englishman to
speak false Latin, then false English: the Sophister will make you to allow
of this false Latin, mulier est candidus, by force of argument thus: Omnis
homo est candidus, at mulier est homo, ergo mulier est candidus; the English
whereof is thus: Every man is white, but woman is man: Ergo, a woman is white:
here this word white in the Latin is of the Masculine gender, contrary to
the rules of Grammar, but this may be very well referred to the Fallax, called
form of speech, hereafter declared.

Of the fifth mark called Nugation, let this be your example: the Sophister
will make you to allow of this vain repetition: Plato is learned, a man
learned, by force of argument thus: Plato is learned, but Plato is a man
learned: Ergo, Plato is learned; a man learned: here the premises and the
conclusion are all one thing, and therefore contrary to the rules of Logic.
But leaving these things as superfluous, and in my judgment serving to small
purpose, if I may so say without offense, I mind therefore now to return to
my matter first intended.

CHAP. V.
How to confute all manner of Elenches, or Fallaxes whatsoever they be.
EVery Fallax consists either in words or in things: and of those that
consist in words, there are in number six, and of others consisting in things,
there are seven, so as in all there be thirteen, as I said before.

Which be those six that consist in words?
Equivocation, Amphibologie, or doubtful speech, Conjunction, Division,
Accent, and Figure, or form of speech.

Show what these Fallaxes be, and give examples?
Equivocation is, when the deceit consists in the doubtfulnesse 1 Equiuocatio.
of some one word, having diverse significations, as for example: Every Dog is
a sensible body, there is a certain Star called a Dog: Ergo, That Star
is a sensible body: here the Conclusion is to be denied, because this word
Dog has diverse significations: another example, the Propher says that there
is no evil in the City, but God does it; but there be horrible evils in the
City: Ergo, God is the Author of evil: the Conclusion is to be denied,
because in the Mayor this word evil signifies punishment, and in the Minor it
signifies sin: another example, Whosoever loves Christ, observes his word,
and is beloved of the Father: but no body that breaks the Law, observes the
word of Christ; therefore no body is beloved of the Father: here the Mayor is
doubtful, because this voice, Word, may be taken either for the word of the
Law, or else for the word of the Gospel, which the Apostles did ever keep, as
Christ himself says, and therefore they were beloved of the Father, and so
consequently every true Christian, that does keep the pure doctrine of Christ,
is beloved of the Father: but the word of the Law says, that every one is
cursed that abides not in all.

Amphibologia or doubtful speech, is when some whole 2 Amphibologia.
sentence is doubtful, and may be interpreted diverse ways, as the Oracle of
Apollo, in saying that Cressus passing the River of Halis, shall overthrow a
great Empire, by which Oracle was meant that he should overthrow his own
Empire, and not the Persian Empire, which by wrong construing that Oracle, he
hoped to subdue.

Composition or conjunction, is the joining together of 3 Compositio.
things that are to be severed. As for example, two and three be even and odd,
but five makes two and three, therefore five is both even and odd: which
kind of argument is to be denied, because those things are joined together,
which ought to be severed.

Division is, when things are severed, which should be joined 4 Diuisio.
together, as, all the wise men of Greece are seven: Solon and Periander are
wise men of Greece* therefore Solon and Periander are seven: here the
Consequent is to be denied, because Solon and Periander are severed from the
rest whereunto they should be joined.

The Fallax of Accent is, when words are not rightly and 5 Accentus*
simply pronounced, as when we do add to, or take from a word, any
aspiration, letter, or syllable, and thereby alter the true signification
thereof, as this Latin word, Hara, signifying a Swines cote, being pronounced
without H, does signify an Altar. In English let this be your example* Every
Hare is swift on foot, but this is a Hayer, (that is to say) a cloth to dry
Malt, therefore it is swift on foot. Of like sort is this old jest of a
Master that said to his servant: Go heat this Capons leg, who immediately
did eat it: then his Master being angry, said, I bade thee heat it, with an
h: no Sir (said the servant) I did eat it with bread. Likewise this Fallax may
chance by not observing the right quantity of syllables, in any word, as
Populus having o, long, is a Popple tree, but having o, short, it signifies a
people. Or when a word used Interrogatiuely, is made to have an Affirmative
signification, as for example: Caiphas said to Christ, Art thou a King? Ergo,
He confessed Christ to be a King. Or when a word pronounced ironiously is
turned to good earnest, in speaking one thing and meaning another, as thus: My
Master said, Come hither, you honest man: Ergo, He said that I was an honest
man, when indeed he called him knave.

The Fallax of form or manner of speech may be diverse 6 Forma Orationis.
ways, as first, when words are falsely supposed to be like either in
signification, in case, or in gender, or to be of one self Predicament,
because they are like in termination, as Poeta, in English a Poet, and Poema,
in English a Poesy or poetical work: these two words, because they end both
in a: Ergo, they are both of the Masculine gender. Also colored and numbered
are like in termination: Ergo, they are of one self Predicament, and yet the
first belongs to the Predicament of quality, and the other to quantity.
Secondly, when a word is used in one self argument, sometime according to his
proper signification, and sometime as a term of Art: as for example, God is
every where: every where is an Aduerbe, therefore God is an Aduerbe. A Mouse
eats cheese, but a Mouse is a syllable: Ergo, a syllable eats cheese. Here
Mouse in the Mayor has his proper signification, and in the Minor is used as a
term of Art: and the like is to be said of the word Every where in the first
example. Thirdly, when a word has not his proper signification, or is not used
according to the true phrase of speech wherein it is uttered, as thus:
Whatsoever thou have not lost, thou have still, but thou have lost no horns:
Ergo, thou have horns. Here this word, to lose, has not his proper
signification, for we are said to lose properly that which we had, and not
that which we never had. And finally, this Fallax is called the common refuge
and receptacle of all such kind of Sophistry. Hitherto of the Fallaxes in
words, now of the Fallaxes in things.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Fallaxes in things.
OF these Fallaxes there be seven kinds (that is to say) Fallacia Accidentis,
a dicto secundum quid ad dictum Simpliciter, Ignoratio Elenchi, Petitio
principij, Fallacia Consequentis, Cansa pro n^n cansa, Plura interrogata pro
vno responsu: which may be Englished thus: The Fallax of the Accident, the
Fallax of speech respective, in stead of speech absolute, ignorance of the
Elench, Petition of the principle, a cause that is not the cause indeed, and
many questions comprehended in one.

Define what these be, and give examples.
Fallacia Accidentis, may be diverse ways: as first, when any 1 Fallacia
accidentis.
thing belonging only to the substance of some thing, is attributed also to
some accident of the said substance, and contrariwise, as thus: Whatsoever thou
have bought, thou have eaten, but thou have bought raw flesh: Ergo, thou have
eaten raw flesh: here the Consequent is to be denied, because the Mayor has
respect to the substance, and the Conclusion to the quality. Another example,
What I am, thou art not, but I am a man: Ergo, thou art none. Here in this the
Mayor has respect to the quality, and the Conclusion to the substance.
Secondly, when Accidents are not rightly joined together, as when the qualities
of the body are joined with the qualities of the mind: as Homer is a Poet,
and Homer is blind: Ergo, Homer is a blind Poet: here the Conclusion is to
be denied, because to be blind, and to be a Poet, are diverse qualities,
whereof the one belongs to the mind, and the other to the body, and
therefore are not rightly joined together. Thirdly, as ( Melancthon says) when
an accidental cause is is made a principal cause, as thus: Elias was an holy
Prophet, but Elias was clad with Camels hair: Ergo, I being clad with Camels
hair, am a holy Prophet. Here the Conclusion is to be denied, because to be
clad with Camels hair, was not the cause of Elias holiness. But me thinks
that this and such like examples do belong rather to the Fallax of Causa pro
non causa (whereof we shall speak hereafter) then to the Fallax of the
Accident.

The Fallax A dicto secundum quid ad dictum Simpliciter, 2 Dictum secundum quid.
chances when we go about to make a thing to seem absolute, that is spoken
in some respect, or to be in all, when it is but in part, as a Moore has white
teeth: Ergo, a Moore is white. Again, it may be in respect, by reason of time,
place, person, comparison, and such like. Of time as thus: I saw John
yesterday, but I saw him not to day: Ergo, I did see him, and not see him. Of
place thus: It is not good to buy and sell in the Church: Ergo, it is not good
to buy and sell. Of person thus: A Magistrate may kill a thief: Ergo, every
man may kill a thief. Of comparison, thus: Riches are not good to him that
cannot use them: Ergo, Riches are not good.

Having now to speak of the Fallax, called the Ignorance 3 Ignoratio Elenchi.
of the Elench: I think good to call again to your remembrance the definition
of an Elench before briefly set down, which is a Syllogism rightly gathering
a Conclusion contrary to the assertion of the respondent, which contrariety
consists of four principal points or respects, whereof, if any be wanting,
then the contrariety is not perfect.

Which be those four points?
First, that it be to one self thing. Secondly, in one self respect. Thirdly,
in one self manner. And fourthly, in or at one self time: for if you be
deceived at any time by some false Elench, in thinking that it rightly
gathers a Conclusion mere contrary to your assertion, when it is not so
indeed, by reason that it fails in some part requisite and incident to a true
Elench: then it may be rightly said that you are deceived by ignorance of the
Elench, which Fallax, as Aristotle says, comprehends almost all others, and
therefore he makes a long and obscure definition of an Elench, rehearsing all
the particularities thereof, nothing apt to be uttered in our English tongue.

Yet I pray you to give examples of the four chief points before mentioned.
Of the first, let this be your example: four is double to two, but not to
three: Ergo, four is double and not double; this is not to one self thing. Of
the second thus: This piece of timber is double in length to that piece, but it
is not double to the same in breadth: Ergo, it is to one self thing, both
double, and not double to one self thing, but not in one self respect. Of the
third thus: This Prince rules mightily, but not mercifully: Ergo, he rules,
and not rules; this is not in like manner. Of the fourth thus: I saw John
yesterday, but not this day: Ergo, I saw him, and saw him not; this is not in
one self time. And all these four ways in mine opinion are comprehended in
the second point; which is when any thing is spoken not absolutely, but in
diverse respects: wherefore, it differs not much from the Fallax of speech
respective before declared, saving that this Fallax is more general, and
comprehends more kinds of Fallaxes then that does.

Petition of the Principle is, when the Antecedent does not 4 Petitio principij.
prove the consequent, which chances most commonly three manner of ways: that
is, either when the proof is as little known, as the thing that is to be
proved. Secondly, when the proof is less known then the thing to be proved.
Thirdly, when the proof, and the thing to be proved, do not differ, but is
all one speech, signifying one self thing, called of the Greeks Tautologia.

Give example of these three ways.
Of the first thus: The Sun moves not, but stands still in the midst of
heaven, giving light to all the world: Ergo, the earth is moveable; or thus:
The Heavens are not made of Elementall matter, subject to corruption: Ergo, the
Heavens are incorruptible. Here in both these examples the Antecedent is as
doubtful as the Consequent, and therefore proves nothing. Of the second way
thus: Every sensible body sometime sleeps: Ergo, Man sometime sleeps.
Here it is more to be doubted whether all sensible Bodies, all Beasts, Fowls
and Fishes, do sometimes sleep or not, then whether man does sometime sleep:
for it is an easier matter to know the nature and property of one special
kind, then of all, or many kinds. Of the third way, thus: John is learned:
Ergo, John is learned. The soul does live ever: Ergo, it is immortal.

The Fallax of the Consequent chances two manner of 5 Fallacia Consequentis.
ways, that is, either when we think the Consequent to be conuertible with
the Antecedent, but it is not so in deed, or else when we think, that upon
the contrary of the Antecedent, the contrary of the Consequent must needs also
follow.

Give examples of both these ways.
This is a man: Ergo, it is a sensible body: now if I would hereof by
conversion conclude thus: it is a sensible body: Ergo, it is a man: this were
no good Consequent; for every sensible body is not a man. Likewise when it
raineth, the ground is wette: Ergo, when the ground is wette, it rayneth; for
these speeches are not conuertible. Of the second way thus: It is a man: Ergo,
it is a sensible body. It is no man: Ergo, it is no sensible body. Here you see
that this Proposition, it is no man, is the contrary of the first Antecedent,
which says, It is a man. Of which contrary, the contrary of the Consequent
does not necessarily sollowe: for though it be no man, yet it may be some
other sensible body. This Fallax comprehends all such false Arguments, as do
not observe the Rules of right and true Consequents before given.

The Fallax of non causa pro causa, is, when that thing is 6 Causa pro non
causa.
made to be the cause of the Conclusion, which is not the cause in deed; as
Wine is naught, because it will make a man drunk. Of which drunkenness, Wine
is not the cause, but the intemperance of the man, and his immoderate use
thereof, for many things that be good of themselves may be abused, yea, even
the liberty of the Gospel, and yet the doctrine of the Gospel is not cause
thereof, but the malice of 7 Plura interrogata pro vno responsu.
man abusing the same.

The seventh and last Fallax, is when unadvisedly, and without using any
distinction, you make an answer to many questions, as though they were but
one; as for example, The Sophister, seeing two men standing together, whereof
the one is blind, and the other has his fight, will ask you perhaps whether
they see, or not; whereunto if you answer directly, either yea, or no, you are
by and by taken: for if you say that they see, then you grant that the blind
man also sees, and if you say, that they do not see, then you grant, that he
which sees, is blind; but if you answer, that the one sees, and the other
not, you shall by such distinction easily avoid the Sophisters cauillation: for
diverse questions hudled up in one, do always require diverse answers. And
thus I end, with the order of confuting all false Elenches, and Fallaxes; the
knowledge whereof is very necessary, for the maintenance of the truth, which
God loves, who is the fountain of all truth, yea, and very truth it self;
to whom be all honor, glory and praise, world without end,

Amen.
FINIS.

