A DIRECTION FOR THE PLANTATION IN VLSTER.

Containing in it, six principal things, Viz.
1. The securing of that wild Country to the Crown of England. 2. The
withdrawing of all the charge of the Garrison and men of war. 3. The
rewarding of the old Seruitors to their good content. 4. The means how to
increase the Revenue to the Crown, with a yearly very great sum. 5. How to
establish the Purity of Religion there. 6. And how the undertakers may with
security be enriched.
Imprinted at London by Ed. Allde for John Budge, dwelling at the great South
door of S. Paul's Church. 1610.

TO THE MIGHTY and High renowned Prince, HENRY, Prince of great Britain, all
happiness.
Mighty and High renowned PRINCE, the fourth part of Ireland, depopulated
VLSTER, but now redeemed, delivered and quite acquitted by the Kings Majesty's
(your most loving Fathers) wonderful wisdom and industry, from the usurping
tyranny of Traitors, and from a long and a most lamentable captivity:
Dispoyled, she presents her-selfe (as it were) in a ragged sad sabled Robe,
ragged (indeed) there remains nothing but ruynes and desolatio^, with a very
little show of any humanity: of her self she abounds with many the very
best blessings of God: amongst the other Provinces belonging to great
Britains Imperial Crown, not much inferior to any. The^ regard her, for
unto your Highness it belongs chiefly to regard her.

Fair England, she has more People then she can well sustain: goodly Vlster
for want of people unmanured, her pleasant fields and rich grounds, they
remain if not desolate, worsse.

Would your Excellency with favorable respects, but countenance the Action,
then the neuer-satisfied desires of a few, should not quite disgrace and
utterly overthrow the good and exceeding good purposes of many, but with an
excellent Plantation it would be Peopled plentifully, yea fortified and
replenished with such and so many goodly strong Corporations, as it would be a
wonder to behold: Without which it is not possible (for I say what certainly
I know) so sufficiently to secure that wild Country any long time. The
desire whereof has carried (or rather violently drawn me to this presumption) I
being a plain Countryman and one of the Undertakers in Farmannagh.

If my endeauours may in any respect be so auailable; that fair successions,
long posterity may at length behold her with security in some proportion
beautified, then I shall be of many, the most happy, especially if your
Highness shall give good acceptance to these my desires. The Almighty GOD of
Heaven bless and preserve your Excellency still and evermore, with those his
super-exceding graces.

Your Excellencies most humble suppliant: Thomas Blener hasset.

For the Plantation of VLSTER.
EXcellent and High Renowned Prince, since such time as it has pleased the
Lord Treasurer to refer the Peticion of M. Henry Honnings, unto the Irish
Commissioners, for the undertaking of threescore thousand Acres of the
Escheated Lands in the North of Ireland, to be planted by certain English
Gentlemen, of which my self being one, considering the greatness of the Action,
to satisfy my self I passed the Seas, and not far from the Lyfford I found
that very worthy Gentleman, Sir Arthur Chichester, the Kings Lord Deputy with
other Commissioners, surueying those escheated Lands from the Church Lands, and
from their Lands who have hitherto been loyal.

I being there conversant with some of the chief Knights and Captains,
desired of them to know the cause why they themselves were not forward to
undertake those profitable seats and rich grounds: I was answered, that to
build Castles and Fortes was chargeable, neither then if there should be a
Manor erected with twentye or fortye Tennants, would they and it secure their
goods: for although that Castle or Forte would serve for a sufficient refuge to
preserve their lives upon any extremity, yet the cruel wood-kerne, the
deuowring Woolfe, and other suspicious Irish, would so attend on their business,
as their being there should be little profitable unto them. For an example: Sir
Tobye Cawlfield he dwells in Charlemount a Forte of many other the best, and
well furnished with men and munition: yet now (even in this fair calm of
quiet) his people are driven every night to lay up all his Cattle as it were in
ward, and do he and his what they can, the Woolfe and the Wood-kerne (within
Calieuer shot of his Forte) have often times a share: yet I do verily believe,
no man keeps better order, as well for the safeguard of himself and his
neighbors, as for the government of al those parts about him.

The like I have observed in many other places* and to speak the truth, all
men there in all places do the like, and that within the English Pale (as they
a long time have called it) Sir John King he dwells within half a mile of
Dublin: Sir Henry Harringto^ within half a mile on the other side thereof,
Few men that ever I have seen better seated for much good Soil: they also
do the like, for those sore named enemies, do every night survey the Fields
to the very walls of Dublin, whatsoever is left abroad is in danger to be lost:
so they cannot for the foresaid causes contriue any thing to much profit,
although it has been inhabited a long time.

The consideration whereof satisfied me with the impossibility of planting a
Ma^nor under the protection of any strong built Castle; but after that I had
travailed amongst the mere Irish, and had sufficiently informed my self with
their conditions, their nature, and manner of life, I found it most certainly
impossible by such kind of plantation to improve any thing with security, to
any great profit, neither any with whom I conferred, would or could set down
how with security any thing might be undertaken.

Therefore the principal studd of this frame must be wrought with a tennor
more substantial then has been hitherto by any one mentioned.

I acknowledge and see it sufficiently, that many Castles and fortes well
fortified, does and will restrain the violence of such a scattered people as
they are, being at this present altogether without men of conduct or armor,
but I think those Castles and Fortes more necessary in time of war; for then
thereby the Cattle of the Rebels are cut off, and they are enforced to unite
themselves into many strong troops, otherwise the garrisons of those places
would bereave them of all their victuals, and hinder their commerce, and all
their other intentions whatsoever, for they cannot be strong enough at one
instant in every place to encounter the force of those millitary garrisons, who
are maintained at a great rate (as I think) out of the Exchequer: for these
undertakers to plant themselves so in this time of quiet, I do verily believe
it would be to small avail, and not the best way to secure themselves with
their goods, and that wild country to the Crown of England; for although
there be no apparent enemy, nor any visible maine force, yet the wood-kerne and
many other (who now have put on the smiling countenance of contentment) do
threaten every hour, if opportunity of time and place does serve, to burn and
steal whatsoever: and besides them there be two, the chief supporters of al
their insolency, the inaccessable woods, and the not passible bogs: which ot
subject to our desires is not easy, and that not performed, it is not possible
to make a profitable, improuement, no not by any means in any place.

Moreover the frowning countenance of chance and change, (for nothing so
certain as that all things are most uncertain) does also incite a provident
undertaker to lay such a foundation, as it should be rather a violent storm
then a fret of foul weather that should anoy him. A scattered plantation will
never effect his desire: what can the countenance of a Castle or Bawne with a
few followers do? even as they at this present do: which is nothing to any
purpose.

What shall we then say? or to what course shall we betake our selves? surely by
building of a well fortified Town, to be able at any time at an hours warning
with five hundred men well armed, to encounter all occasions: neither will that
be sufficient, except that be seconded with such another, and that also (if it
may be, as easily it may) with a third: so there will be help on every side,
to defend, and offend: for as in England, if a privy watch be set, many
malefactors are apprehended, even amongst their cups: so there when the
spaces in the Woods be cut out, and the bogges be made somewhat passible, then
these new erected towns intending a reformation, must often times at the first
set a universal great hunt, that a sudden search may be made in all
suspicious places, for the Woolfe and the Wood-kerne, which being secretly and
wisely appointed by the governors, they with the help of some Irish, well
acquainted with the holes and holds of those offenders, the generallitie shall
search every particular place.

For an example, the fourth day of March, the Lyfford, the Omigh, they in
Farmanagh, Donganon, and Colrayne, shall on that day send forth from every one
of those places, an hundred men; which five hundred men shall as then make
search in all, or in all the most suspicious places: and by being at one
instant dispersed with furniture fit for such business, they shall discover all
the Caves, holes, and lurking places of that country, even for an hundred miles
compass: and no doubt it will be a pleasant hunt, and much preye Hassets Hunt.
will fall to the followers: for what does escape some, will fall to the hands
of others, and bring such a terror, that the woolfe himself will not dare to
continue his haunt, where such so sudden incursions shall be used, although
it be but once in a month: the charge none, the pleasure much, the profit
more: then may they make enclosures, and venture their Cattle abroad, for to
starve in the night does overthrow the feed of the day, with the general
improuement and chief profit, for the feeding of al kind of Cattle: then may
they sow, mow, plant, thrive and be merry, for this kind of planting will not
only supplant those domestical enemies, but there will be out of those towns
five thousand well armed men, to encounter any foreign enemy, that shall offer
arrival to invade, whereby his Majesty shall shortly have little need of
those so chargeable garrisons: For these undertakers will easily restrain the
mutinies of them at home, and confront the power of any inuader whatsoever, and
those good fellows in trowzes, I mean the every where dispersed creatures in
the creats, seeing this course, they will no longer hearken after change, nor
entertain the lurking wood-kerne, as now they do.

Throughout all Ireland where there be Fortes and garrisons in pay, if all
those places were planted with this kind of undertaking, and the old worthy
Soldiers, who in those places have garrisons in pay, with every one of their
Soldiers, if they were rewarded with the fee simple thereof, to them and to
their heirs, paying after one life yearly unto his Majesty a fee-farme, as
the other undertakers do: but these Captains and Soldiers would have their
pay continued, otherwise they shall not be able to proceed with the charge of
planting, and then other lands there next adjoining laid also to such places,
that many might join with them to erect corporations: which may be performed
now ten times better cheap then it will be hereafter: their security would be
much better, and the societye far excel, and so the charge of the garrisons
might be withdrawn, the old worthy warrior who has gone already through
with the brunt of that business, shall with a good satisfaction be rewarded, and
all Vlster a whole hundred times better secured unto the Crown of England: for
the generation of the Irish, (who do at this time increase ten to one more
then the English, nay I might well say twenty) will never otherwise be
sufficently brideled: of all which I would satisfy your highness by an example.

The Lyfford, whereas there be an hundred Soldiers in pay, (as is reported)
which cannot come unto less then a thousand pounds yearly, and if there were
in that kingdom many such, it would amount unto a great sum by the year,
and many of them peradventure like this, able indeed a small time to withstand
the first or second assault of a weak enemy. But if the Lyfford and the Lands
adjoining near thereunto, were undertaken by many, their many helping hands
(every man respecting his own profit) they would not regard charge, not be
weary with labor and pains to frame a perpetual security, and good success
to their business: and so there might out of dout by that goodly river side,
be laid out so much land, (besides the Governors and Soldiers allowance) as
the undertakers would clear all that pay, and the like in many such other
places: and give unto the Crown a hundred pou^ds yearly for a fee-farme for
ever, which would rise in that kingdom, to every great mass, and the great
charge of the garrisons withdrawn. I might say the like of the Omigh, of
Dongannon, and of many such other places, and so there would be in stead of
popery true religion; and a comfortable society, whereas at this present, there
is small appearance and much defect of them, and of all other the chiefest
things to make the life of man happy, only plenty of good victual excepted.

How exceedingly well stands Ardmath, better seat for rich soil there cannot
be, but so poor, as I do verily think all the household stuff in that City
is not worth twenty pounds, yet it is the Primate of all Ireland, and as they
say for antiquity, one of the most ancient in all Europe: it is also of so
small power as forty resolute men, may rob, rifle, and burn it: were it a
defenced corporation it would soon be rich and religious, and the security
would make one acre more worth then now twenty be. At this present it is a most
base and abject thing, not much better then Strebane, and not able to
restrain, no, not the violence of the Woolte. Moreover many be the commodities
of this kind of undertaking a scattered pla^tation, for many undertakers to be
dispersed three score miles in compass, alas they shall be now at the first
like the vnboundsticks of a brush faggot, easy to be gathered, hewn and had to
the fire, neither shall there be true Religion, sweet society, nor any
comfortable security amongst them, no, nor any other the principal respects
and commodities that man's life desires, as they who there now do live do know
very well: but in one and the selfsame estate for many to be bound up
together in the band of one hope, so as all must be but one, It must be the
power of some great Monarch, who receiving more blows then benefits, shall
buy the unbinding of this faggot, at a much greater rate then will be for his
gain or reputation.

But some peradventure will say here is much speech of corporations, but
nothing how the Lands which lies far remote, which these undertakers must
take up, shall be used, for it will be very inconvenient that unto this
corporation all the commodities of that great quantity of ground shall be
presently transported, both for the distance of the place, and other
discommodities: and it is expected that there should be Manors erected, and not
that one corporation should contain so great a circuit. My answer is, that
the corporation shall contain all that quantity of ground, for when they
therein have framed the country to their desires, then there shall be by these
undertakers many Manors erected, and after the first or second year, most of
the houses within this corporation built by these undertakers, (for every man
according to the quantity of his land must put to his aid) although these
houses shall be still their own, yet then, when the great Huntes before
mentioned, have reduced the country to such pass, as in the seueralties of
every man, their Cattle may be in security, then most of those buildings in
the corporation shall be left, and every man of the undertakers shall build on
his demeanes a strong Manor house, and certain Tenements for his Tenants
about him, on such Lands as he shall allot them by copy of Court role, or
otherwise, to them and their heirs for ever: and within the corporation, every
one of the undertakers shall still retain his mansion house, there to dwell at
his pleasure, and all the other of his houses there, shall be set over unto
tradesmen; as Shoomakers, Smithes, Carpenters, Weauers, and such like: so in
Summer he may remain with his tennants in the country, and in winter with his
farmers the tradesmen in the corporation, which I hope to see a fair well
governed and a very strong City, which will serve at all times to defend them
and all their moueables, if invasion or any other violent storm should come:
so all the land far remote shall be built and inhabited with good security.

On this word Mine is a strong warrior, every man for his own will adventure
far, the Mercinary Rutter will often times have his charge empty with men,
when his purse shall be full with dead pays. This my valiant and provident
warrior Mine, he will rather increase then decrease his number, he does watch
and ward night and day without ceasing. Therefore in this our undertaking, let
all the people be such as shall enjoy every man more or less of his own, and
if they were such as had no other estate then there, it were the better.

But I fear, if many shall peruse this recital, most of them will be utterly
deterred with the charge, saying, it is easy to be spoken, but to their
capacity very difficult to be performed, and so they will withdraw themselves
and their conceits from embracing that which I would have them entertain
cherefully in the best fashion. Therefore I do incite them to consider, that
all those great and sumptuous buildings which former ages have left unto
everlasting posterity, were not erected any where, where continuance of peace
had improued all things to a high rate and great price, but the original of
all nations, was where and when the Lands and all the commodities of those
places were of small worth. To enter into the particular hereof would be
rather tedious then necessary.

There be twelve of us under the assignation of the right honorable, Gilbert
Earl of Shrewesbury, who intend by the help of almighty God to imploye a good
part of our substance, and bestow our best endeavors therein: for discoursing
will not do it, it must be a paineful hand, and a discreet mind furnished
with knowledge and much experience: we cannot enjoy the happy Elizian fields,
but by passing over the black river Stix: for heaven will not be had without
some tribulation, neither may we feed upon the delicates prepared in a rich
and pleasant banqueting Gallery, except we do strain our feet to pass upon
the first and second staire: so difficult is the thing that we intend, Demidium
toti, qui been caepit, habet. If any thing seem difficult, rouse up thy
spirit, and put to both thy hands. Great things without much labor can not be
obtained: Rome was not built in one day, but this in five years may be
performed without admiration, especially if all these planters do draw closely
together without dissentio^, or muteny: therefore there must especial regard be
had, that in this corporation the chief Governor be of wisdom, wealth, and
authority, such a one as will be obeyed, yet will confer with other, and not
be too much addicted to his own conceits: without government there is nothing
but confusion: so many heads so many opinions. Let all the undertakers have
recourse unto the consultations, the meanest may sometimes bring forth a
necessary knowledge, therefore let every man's opinion be heard, but let the
Governor with his assistants determine, and let all the rest consent thereto,
or endure condign punishment.

And as for thee that put diffidence in the assurance, which thou shall
have from his Majesty, thou need not trouble thy head therewith, there has
been already two suruaies to know the parcels and precincts exactly: no doubt
upon the division there will be proclamation, that whosoever can justly and
apparently claim any part of those Lands to these undertakers by Pattent
assigned, he shall then within some convenient time put in his claim or else
be silent for ever.

So before thou do charge thy self any way, thy portion shall be clear, or
else thou shall have some other that shall be void of all incombrance.

Furthermore, to comfort thy fearful spirit, there thou shall have many good
neighbors, for all they thy countrymen that are already there estated with part
of those Lands, of which there be many of the chief in that kingdom, they are
hearty well willers unto al undertakers, both for that your good proceedings
will second, and as it were fortify their already beginnings: and they be
indeed Gentlemen of such sort and quality, as they speak always what they
think, and perform what they speak. They do not after the fashion of this
age carry bread in the one hand and a stone in the other; but they have a sword
always ready to mainetaine truth and equity; besides a very excellent course
of proceeding by law: And to knit thy affection more firmly to the hope of thy
well doing there, I do insure thee, there be excellent warriors, and they such
worthy men as will willingly back thy business, and in time of need violently
abate the violence of any that shall inte^d thy trouble: so Mars himself shall
protect thee, and perhaps Mercury too: and if thou be honestly content with
that which is thine, thou may there live and never trouble the Lawyer, and
thou shall find it to be a great blessing. All which I have written to
encourage thy fainting spirit, which rather then fail will object the charges
thither, and the danger, which is nothing so much as amongst good fellows it
is, to be beastly drunk at home.

To conclude, what art thou? one whom kindenes, casualty, or want of wit has
decayed? make speed, get thee to Vlster, serve God, be sober, if thou can
not govern, be governed, thou shall recover thy self, and thy happiness there
will make thee rejoice at thy former fortunes.

Art thou rich, possessed with much revenue? make speed without racking of
rents, or other offenciue means; thou shall do God and thy Prince excellent
service. Thou have the three brayded band which will bind Bears, use there
thy talent, it will be quickly a million.

Art thou a poor indigent fellow? and have neither faculty nor money? go not
thither, for though there be plenty of all things, thou shall starve there,
Loyterers and lewd persons in this our new world, they will not be endured.
Art thou a Tradesman? a Smith, a Weauer, a Mason, or a Carpenter? go thither,
thou shall be in estimation, and quickly enriched by thy endeavors. Art thou
an husband man, whose worth is not past ten or twenty pounds? go thither,
those new Manor-makers will make thee a Copy holder: thou shall whistle
sweetly, and feed thy whole family if they be six for six pence the day. Art
thou a Gentleman that take pleasure in hunt? the Fox, the Woolfe, and the
Wood-kerne do expect thy coming: and the comely well cabbazed Stagge will
furnish thy feast with a full dish. There thou shall have elbowe room, the
Eagle and the Earne and all sorts of high flying fowls do attend thee. Art
thou a Minister of Gods word? make speed, the harvest is great but the laborers
be few: thou shall there see the poor ignorant untaught people worship stones
and sticks: thou by carrying millions to heaven, may be made an Archangell,
and have whiles thou do live for worldly respects, what not. So Vlster which
has been hitherto the receptacle and very den of Rebels and deuowring
creatures, shall far excel Munster, and the ciuellest part of all that
country, and peradventure in ciuility and sincere Religion, equal even fair
England herself, with a christian and comfortable society, of neighborhood,
and so they at the least In all Ireland
three hundred thousand souls, besides Children (which are no less in number)
may come unto the true knowledge of God, and by faith in Jesus Christ may be
freede from everlasting damnation. So the Kings majesty shall be disburthened
of a very great charge out of the Exchequer, the Country safely secured unto
the Crown, and we his Majesty's subjects enriched by our endeauours, which God
of his unspeakable mercy grant, for his dear son Jesus Christ his sake.
Amen.

The Conclusion, containing an exhortation to England.
Fair England, thy flourishing Sister, brave Hibernia, (with most respective
terms) commends unto thy due consideration her youngest daughter, depopulated
Vlster: not doubting (for it cannot but come unto thy understanding) how the
long continuance of lamentable wars, have raced and utterly defaced,
whatsoever was beautiful in her to behold, and has so bereaved all her
royalties, goodly ornaments, and well beseeming tyers, as there remains but
only the Majesty of her naked personage, which even in that plite is such, as
whosoever shall seek and search all Europes best Bowers, shall not find many
that may make with her comparison. Behold the admirable worth of her worthiness!
even now she gives the world to understand by testimonial known sufficiently
to all that know her, that if thou will now but assist her with means to
erect her ruynes, she will nourish thee with much dainty provision, and so
furnish thee, as thou shall not need to send to thy neighbour-kingdomes for
corn, nor to the Netherlands for fine Holland: she will in requital of thy
kindness provide those things, with some other, such as thy heart most
desires. Art thou ouerchargde with much people? Vlster her excellency will
embrace that thy overplus in her amourous sweet arms: she will place them as
it were by Euphrates, and feed them with better Ambrosia then ever Jupiter
himself knew.

Then proclaim, and let all the inhabitants of spacious Brittane know, that
(in respect even of their own good) it is convenient and most necessary that
every one of the^ should in some proportion put to his assistance: did thou,
and were thy people indeed willing? with Horse, with men, with munition, and
money, oftentimes, and ever anon to abate their insolency, whose pride sought
to bereave from thee and them, your right and interrest in her fields and
forests? true it is, and some thousands, no doubt thou did employ to keep
her from the captivity of traitors: do then, and let thy people willingly
finish the work which you so valiantly have (although not performed) yet
brought to such pass as now there remains nothing but how to cover her
nakedness, and to furnish her coasts with corporations and other such means,
as hereafter there shall be no doubt of change or chance, but that she may
repose her self in such sweet security, as her beautiful bosom shall by
peace and plenty abound with so many dainty goodly things, as it will be a
wonder to behold. Some of thy most loving and well-beloved children, to their
great glory and everlasting renown, with fervent minds, they have taken this
task in hand, thinking it no small honor for the^ to adventure their lives,
their livings, and all their endeavors therein.

The County of Farmannagh, sometime Mack Gueres country, rejoice: many
undertakers, al incorporated in mind as one, they there with their followers,
seek and are desirous to settle themselves. Woe to the Wolf and the
Wood-kerne; the Islands in Loughearne shall have habitations, a fortified
corporation, market towns, and many new erected Manors, shall now so beautify
her desolation, that her inaccessible Woods, with spaces made tractable, shall
no longer nourish deuowrers, but by the sweet society of a loving
neighborhood, shall entertain humanity, even in the best fashion. Go on
worthy Gentlemen, fear not, the God of heaven will assist and protect you, the
rather for that simply of your selves, you do desire to perform so honorable
an action. And they the successors of high renowned Lud, will there reedifie a
new Troy. Their spacious coffers have the receipts of Englands treasure, and
the continual resplendancy of his Majesty's presence does so illustrate with
the neuer-discending-beames of his euer-respecting favor, their
super-exceeding good, that all whatsoever by imagination may be thought of, or
by policy of man be devised, so much absolutely have they from thence,
therefore they will not capitulate the fresh and flourishing County of Colraine,
with the exceeding bounty ol the Band that may suffice. They have Ocanes
Country, The River of the Band.
and whatsoever Irelands Eden can afford, and therefore even in respect of
their own reputation, they of them selves will perform this the most
honorable action that ever they attempted. Therefore let Colraine rejoice, for
the heart of England (London herself) will no doubt make her more beautiful
then many, and furnish Loughfoyle with a goodly fleet. O powerful England! no
doubt if thou will extend the bounty of thy liberal hand, to other less able
to perform such designs, then they also will undertake the other Counties, so
as within three years their endeauours shall bring thee and thine altogether
out of doubt, ever hereafter to be charged with any taxation for her defense:
for certainly so she shall shortly be able rather to lend then to borrow aid.

Let not then these kind undertakers want any kind of kindness. Little do
many of thy inhabitants, care to spend a pound or two to pass away one hour
(as it were) at a merry meeting; and presently it is forgotten. Let every one
of worth give but his crown to this honorable intention and merry meeting, it
shall remain as a crown of glory to everlasting posterity, and free every one
of them peradventure from the expense of many pounds. And this Trophy of al thy
triumphs the most renowned, obtained with the lives of many thousands of thine
(as the every where dispersed sculles of slain men do there at this present
manifestly declare) if it be now neglected, they thy next neighbors and those
the Princes and people far remote, will suppose thee very poor both in power
and policy. And thus (fair England) having laid before thy amiable eyes, how
naked Vlster may be relieved, decked, and richly adorned, and thy self
certainly disburdned of much charge: I refer the effecting thereof to the
Kings most excellent Majesty, who has power to command, and will no doubt
provide for Vlsters prosperity.

FINIS.

