ENGLANDS HELICON.

OR THE MUSES HARMONY.

The Courts of Kings hear no such strains,
As daily lull the Rusticke Swains.
GOD IS MY HELPER
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON: Printed for RICHARD MORE, and are to be sold at his Shop in S.
Dunstanes Churchyard. 1614.

TO THE TRVLY VIRTUOUS AND Honorable Lady, the Lady ELIZABETH CARRY.
DEigne worthy LADY, (Englands happy Muse,
Learnings delight, that all things else exceeds)
To shield from Enuies pawe and times abuse:
The tunefull noates of these our Shepherds reeds.
Sweet is the concord, and the Music such
That at it Rivers have been seen to dance,
When these Musicians did their sweet Pipes tuch
In silence lay the vales, as in a trance.
The Satyr stopped his race to hear them sing,
And bright Apollo to these lays has given
So great a gift, that any favoring
The Shepherds quill, shall with the lights of Heaven
Have equal fate: Then cherrish these (fair Stem)
So shall they live by thee, and thou by them.
Your Honors ever to command RICHARD MORE.

THE TABLE OF all the Songs and Pastorals, with the Authors names, contained in
this Book.
Songs. Authors. THE Shepherd to his chosen Nymph. Sir. Phil. Sidney. A
Shepherds Edillion. E. B. Astrophels Love is dead. Sir. Phil. Sidney. A
Palinode. E. B. Astrophel the Shepherd, his complaint to his Flock. Sir Phil.
Sidney. Hobbinols Dittie in praise of Eliza, Queen of the Shepherds. Edm.
Spen. The Shepherds Daffadill. Michaell Drayton. A Canzon Pastoral in honor
of her Majesty. Edmund Bolton. Milicertus Madrigale. To. Green. Old Damons
Pastoral. Thom. Lodge. Perigot and Cuddies Roundelay. Edmund. Spencer.
Phillida and Coridon. N. Breton. To Colin Cloute. Shepherd Tonie. Rowlands
Song in praise of the fairest Beta. Mich. Draiton. The Barginet of Antimachus.
Thom. Lodge. Menaphons Roundelay. To. Green. A Pastoral of Phillis and
Coridon. N. Breton. Coridon and Melampus Song. Geor. Peele. Tityrus to his
fair Phillis. I. D. Shepherd. I. M. Another of the same Author. I. M.
Menaphon to Pesana. To. Green. A sweet Pastoral. N. Breton. Harpalus
complaint on Phillidaes love bestowed on Corin, who loved her not, and denied
him that loved her. L. T. Howard, Earl of Surrie. Another of the same subject,
but made as it were in answer. Shep. Tonie. The Nymphs meeting their May
Queen, entertain her with this Dittie. Tho. Watson. Colin Cloutes mournful
Dittie for the death of Astrophell. Edm. Spen. Damaetas Iigge in praise of his
Love. John Wootton. Montanus praise of his fair Phaebe. Thom. Lodge. The
complaint of Thestilis the forsaken Shepherd. L. T. Howard, Earl of Surrie.
To Phillis the fair Shepherdess. S. E. D. The Shepherd Dorons Iigge. To.
Green. Astrophell his Song of Phillida and Coridon. N. Breton. The passionate
Shepherds Song. W. Shakespeare. The unknown Shepherds complaint. Ignoto.
Another of the same Shepherds. Ignoto. The Shepherds allusion of his own
amorous infelicitie, to the offense of Actaeon. T. Watson. Montanus Sonnet to
his fair Phaebe. Thom. Lodge. Phaebes Sonnet, a reply to Montanus passion.
Thom. Lodge. Coridons supplication to Phillis. N. Breton. Damaetas Madrigall in
praise of his Daphnis. I. Wootton. Dorons description of his fair
Shepherdess Samela. To. Green. Wodenfrides Song in praise of Amargana. W. H.
Another of the same. W. H. An excellent Pastoral Dittie. Shep. Tonie.
Phillidaes Loue-call to her Coridon, and his replying. Ignoto. The Shepherds
solace. Tho. Watson. Syrenus Song to Eugerius. Bar. Young. The Shepherds
Arsileus reply to Syrenus Song. Bar. Young. A Shepherds dream. N. Breton. The
Shepherds Ode. Rich. Barnefield. The Shepherds commendation of his Nymph.
Earl of Oxenford. Coridon to his Phillis. S. E. Dyer. The Shepherds
description of Love. Ignoto. To his Flocks. H. C. A Roundelay between two
Shepherds. Michaell Drayton. The solitary Shepherds Song. Thom. Lodge. The
Shepherds resolution in Love. Thom. Watson. Coridons Hymn in praise of
Amarillis. T. B. The Shepherd Carillo his Song. Bar. Young. Corins dream of
his fair Chloris. W. S. The Shepherd Damons passion. Thom. Lodge. The
Shepherd Musidorus his complaint. S. Phil. Sidney. The Shepherds braule, one
half answering the other. S. Phil. Sidney. Dorus his comparisons. S. Phil.
Sidney. The Shepherd Faustus his Song. Bar. Young. Another of the same, by
Firmius the Shepherd. Bar. Young. Damelus Song to his Diaphenia. H. C. The
Shepherd Eurymachus to his fair Shepherdess Mirimida. To. Green. The
Shepherd Firmius his Song. Bar. Young The Shepherds praise of his sacred
Diana. Ignoto. The Shepherds dumpe. S. E. D. The Nymph Dianaes Song. Bar.
Young. Rowlands Madrigall. Michaell Drayton. Alanius the Shepherd, his doleful
Song, complaining of Ismeniaes cruelty. Bar. Young. Montana the Shepherd, his
love to Aminta. Shep. Tonie. The Shepherds sorrow for his Phaebes disdain. I.
F. Espilus and Thetion, their contention in Song for the May-Lady. Sir Phil.
Sidney. Old Melibeus Song, courting his Nymph. Ignoto. The Shepherd Syluanus
his Song. Bar. Young. Coridons Song. Thom. Lodge. The Shepherds Sonnet. Rich.
Barnefield. Seluagia and Siluanus, their Songs to Diana. Bar. Young. Montanus
his Madrigall. To. Green. Astrophell to Stella, his third Song. S. Phil.
Sidney. A Song between Syrenus and Syluanus. Bar. Young. Ceres Song in
emulation of Cinthia. Ignoto. A Pastoral Ode to an honorable friend. E. B. A
Nimphs disdain of Love. Ignoto. Appollos Love Song for fair Daphne. Ignoto.
The Shepherd Delicius his Dittie. Bar. Young. Amyntas for his Phillis. Tho.
Watson. Faustus and Firmius sing to their Nymph by turns. Bar. Young. Sireno a
Shepherd, having a lock of his fair Nimphs hair, wrapped about with green
silk, mournes in a Loue-Dittie. S. Phil. Sidney. A Song between Taurisius and
Diana, answering verse for verse. Ba. Young Another Song before her Majesty at
Oxford, sung by a comely Shepherd, attended on by sundry other Shepherds and
Nimphs. Anonimus. The Shepherds Song: a Caroll or Himne for Christmas. E. B.
Arsileus his Caroll, for joy of the new marriage, between Syrenus and Diana.
Bar. Young. Philistus farewell to false Clorinda. Out of M. Morleyes Madrigals.
Rosalindes Madrigall. Thom. Lodge. A Dialogue Song between Syluanus and
Arsilius. Bar. Young. Montanus Sonnet. S. E. D. The Nymph Seluagia her Song.
Bar. Young. The Heard man's happy life. Out of M. Birds set Songs. Cinthia the
Nymph, her Song to fair Polydora. Bar. Young. The Shepherd to the Flowers.
Ignoto The Shepherd Arsilius his Song to his Rebeck. Bar. Young. Another of
Astrophell to his Stella. S. Phil. Sidney. Syrenus his Song to Dianaes Flocks.
Bar. Young. To Amarilius. Out of M Birds set Songs. Cardenia the Nymph, to her
false Shepherd Faustus. Bar. Young. Of Phillida. Out of M. Birds set Songs.
Melisea her Song, in scorn of her Shepherd Narcissus. Bar. Young. His answer
to the Nimphs Song. Bar. Young. Her present answer again to him. Bar. Young.
His last reply. Bar. Young. Philon the Shepherd, his Song. Out of M Birds set
Songs. Lycoris the Nymph, her sad Song. Out of M. Morleyes Madrigals. To his
Flocks. Ignoto. To his Love. Ignoto. Another to his Cynthia. Ignoto. Montanus
Sonnet in the Woods. S. E. D. The Shepherds sorrow, being disdained in Love.
Thom. Lodge. A Pastoral Song between Phillis and Amarillis, two Nimphs, each
answering other line for line. H. C. The Shepherds Antheme. Mich. Drayton. The
Countess of Pembrokes Pastoral. Shep. Tonie. Another of Astrophell. Sir Phil.
Sidney. An Inuectiue against Love. Ignoto. Fair Phillis and her Shepherd. I.
G. The Shepherds Song of Venus and Adonis. H. C. Thirsis the Shepherd his
deaths Song. Out of M. N. Young, his Musica Transalpina. Another Stanza added
after. Out of the same. Another Sonnet thence taken. Ignoto. The Shepherds
slumber. Ignoto. Dispraise of Love, and Lovers follies. Ignoto. Another Sonnet.
Sir Phil. Sidney. Of disdainefull Daphne. M. N. Howell. The passionate
Shepherd to his Love. Chr. Marlow The Nimphs reply to the Shepherd. Ignoto.
Another of the same nature, made since. Ignoto Two Pastorals, upon three
friends meeting. Sir Phil. Sidney The wood-mans walk. Shep. Tonie Thirsis the
Shepherds, to his Pipe. Ignoto An Heroycall Poem. Ignoto An excellent Sonnet
of a Nymph. Sir Phil. Sidney A Report Song in a dream, between a Shepherd
and his Nymph. N. Breton Another of the same. N. Breton The Lovers absence kills
me, her presence cures me. Ignoto The Shepherd conceit of Prometheus. S. E. D.
Another of the same. Sir Phil. Sidney The Shepherds Sun. Shep. Tonie Love
the only price of Love. Ignoto Colin, the enamored Shepherd, sings the
passion of love. Geo. Peele Oenones complaint in blanke verse. Geo. Peele The
Shepherds Consort. Out of M. Morleys Madrigals. Thirsis praise of his
Mistress. W. Brown. A defiance to disdainefull Love. Ignoto. An Epithalamium;
or a Nuptial Song, applied to the Ceremonies of Marriage. Christopher Brook.
FINIS.
ENGLANDS HELICON.
The Shepherd to his chosen Nymph.
Only joy, now here you are,
Fit to hear and ease my care:
Let my whispring voice obtain
Sweet reward for sharpest pain.
Take me to thee, and thee to me,
No, no, no, no, my Dear, let be.
Night has closed all in her cloak,
Twinkling stars Loue-thoughts provoke,
Danger hence good care does keep
Jealousy it self does sleep.
Take me to thee, and thee to me:
No, no, no, no, my Dear, let be.
Better place no wit can find,
Cupids yoke to loose or bind,
These sweet flowers on fine bed too,
Us in their best language woo,
Take me to thee, and thee to me,
No, no, no, no, my Dear, let be.
This small light the Moon bestows,
Serves thy beams but to enclose,
So to raise my hap more hie,
Fear not else, none can us spy.
Take me to thee, and thee to me:
No, no, no, no, my Dear, let be.
That you heard was but a Mouse,
Dumb sleep holds all the house,
Yet a-sleepe me thinks they say,
Young folks, take time while you may.
Take me to thee, and thee to me:
No, no, no, no, my Dear, let be.
Niggard Time threats, if we miss
This large offer of our bliss
Long stay, ere he grant the same,
(Sweet then) while each thing does frame,
Take me to thee, and thee to me:
No, no, no, no, my Dear, let be.
Your fair Mother is a bed,
Candles out, and Curtains spread,
She thinks you do Letters write,
Write, but let me first indite.
Take me to thee, and thee to me,
No, no, no, no, my Dear, let be.
Sweet (alas) why saine you thus?
Concord better fitteth us.
Leave to Mars the force of hands,
Your power in your beauty stands.
Take me to thee, and thee to me:
No, no, no, no, my Dear, let be.
Woe to me, and you do swear
Me to hate, but I forbear,
Cursed be my destinies all,
That brought me to so high a fall.
Soon with my death I will please thee:
No, no, no, no, my Dear, let be.
FINIS.
Sir Phil. Sidney.

THEORELLO. A Shepherds Edillion.
YOu Shepherds which on hillocks lit,
like Princes in their Thrones:
And guide your Flocks, which else would flit
your Flocks of little ones:
Good Kings have not disdained it,
but Shepherds have been named:
A sheepe-hooke is a Scepter fit
for people well reclaimed.
The Shepherds life so honored is and praised:
That Kings less happy seem, though higher raised.
The Summer Sun has gilded fair,
with morning rays the Mountains:
The birds do caroll in the air,
and naked Nimphs in Fountains.
The Siluanes in their shagged hair,
with Hamadriades trace:
The shadie Satires make a Quiere,
which rocks with Echoes grace.
All breathe delight, all solace in the season:
Not now to sing, were enemy to Reason.
Cosma my Love, and more then so,
the life of mine affections:
Nor life alone, but Lady too,
and Queen of their directions.
Cosma my Love, is fair you know,
and which you Shepherds know not:
Is ( Sophi said) thence called so,
but names her beauty show not.
Yet has the world no better-name then she:
And then the world, no fairer thing can be.
The Sun upon her forehead stands,
or (jewel Sunne-like glorious,)
Her forehead wrought with Jove's own hands,
for heavenly white notorious.
Her golden locks like Hermus sands,
(or then bright Hermus brighter:)
A spangled Cavil binds in with bands,
then silver morning lighter.
And if the Planets are the chief in skies:
No other stars then Planets are her eyes.
Her cheek, her lip, fresh cheek, more fresh
then selfe-blowne buds of Roses:
Rare lip, more red then those of flesh,
which thousand sweetes encloses:
Sweet breath, which all things does refresh.
and words then breath far sweeter:
Cheek firm, lip firm, not frail nor nesh,
as substance which is fleeter.
In praise do not surmount, although in placing:
Her crystal neck, round breasts, and arms embracing.
The thorough-shining air I ween,
is not so perfect clear:
As is the sky of her fair skin,
whereon no spots appear.
The parts which ought not to be seen,
for sovereign worth excel:
Her thighs with Azure braunched been,
and all in her are well.
Long Iuorie hands, legs straighter then the Pine:
Well shapen feet, but virtue most divine.
Nor clothed like a Shepherdess,
but rather like a Queen:
Her mantle does the forms express,
of all which may be seen.
Roabe fitter for an Empress
then for a Shepherds love.
Roabe fit alone for such a Less
as Emperors does move.
Roabe which heavens Queen, the bride of her own brother,
Would grace herself with, or with such another.
Who ever (and who else but Jove?)
embroidered the same,
He knew the world, and what did move,
in all the mighty frame.
So well (belike his skill to prove)
the counterfeits he wrought:
Of Wood-Gods, and of every Grove,
and all which else was ought.
Is there a beast, a bird, a fish worth note?
Then that he drew, and pictured in her coat.
Avail of Lawne like vapor thin
unto her anckle trailes:
Through which the shapes discerned bin,
as too and fro it sails.
Shapes both of men, who never lin
to search her wonders out:
Of Monsters and of Gods a kin,
which her empale about.
A little world her flowing garment seems:
And who but as a wonder thereof deemes?
For here and there appear forth towers,
among the chalkie downs:
Cities among the Country bowers,
which smiling Sunshine crowns.
Her metal buskins decked with flowers,
as the earth when frosts are gone:
Besprinkled are with Orient showers
of hayle and pebble stone.
Her feature peerless, peerless her attire,
I can but love her love, with zeal entire.
O who can sing her beauties best,
or that remains vnsung?
Do thou Apollo tune the rest,
unworthy is my tongue.
To gaze on her, is to be blessed,
so wondrous fair her face is;
Her fairness cannot be expressed,
in Goddesses nor Graces.
I love my Love, the goodly work of Nature:
Admire her face, but more admire her stature.
On thee (O Cosma) will I gaze,
and read thy beauties ever:
Delighting in the blessed maze,
which can be ended never.
For in the luster of thy rays,
appears thy Parents brightness:
Who himself infinite displayes
in thee his proper greatness.
My Song must end, but never my desire:
For Cosma's face is Theorellos fire.
FINIS.
E. B.

Astrophels Love is dead.
RIng out your Belles, let mourning shows be spread,
For Love is dead.
All love is dead infected
With plague of deep disdain:
Worth, as naught worth rejected,
And faith fair scorn does gain.
From so ungrateful fancy,
From such a female frenzy,
From them that use men thus:
Good Lord deliver us.
Weep neighbors weep, do you not hear it said
That Love is dead?
His deathbed Peacocks folly,
His winding sheet is shame:
His will false, seeming holy,
His sole exectour blame.
From so ungrateful fancy.
From such a female frenzy,
From them that use men thus:
Good Lord deliver us.
Let Dirge be sung, and Trentals richly read,
For Love is dead.
And wrong his Tomb ordains,
My Mistress marble heart:
Which Epitaph contains,
Her eyes were once his Dart.
From so ungrateful fancy,
From such a female frenzy,
From them that use men thus:
Good Lord deliver us.
Alas, I lie, rage has this error bred,
Love is not dead.
Love is not dead, but sleeps
In her unmatched mind:
Where she his counsel keeps,
Till due desert she find.
Therefore from so vile fancy,
To call such wit a frenzy,
Who love can temper thus:
Good Lord deliver us.
FINIS.
Sir Phil. Sidney.

A Palinode.
AS withers the Primrose by the river,
As fades Summers-Sunne from gliding fountains;
As vanishes the light blown bubble ever,
As melts Snow upon the mossie Mountains.
So melts, so vanishes, so fades, so withers,
The Rose, the shine, the bubble and the snow
Of praise, pomp, glory, joy (which short life gathers,)
Fair praise, vain pomp, sweet glory, brittle joy.
The withered Primrose by the mourning river,
The faded Summers-sunne from weeping fountains:
The light-blowne bubble, vanished for ever,
The molten snow upon the naked mountains.
Are Emblems that the treasures we vp-lay,
Soon wither, vanish, fade, and melt away.
For as the snow, whose lawne did ouer-spread
The Ambitious hills, which Giant-like did threat
To pierce the heaven with their aspiring head,
Naked and bare does leave their craggie seat.
When as the bubble, which did empty fly
The daliance of the undiscerned wind:
On whose calm rolling waves it did rely,
Has shipwreck mad^, where it did daliance find:
And when the Sunshine which dissolved the snow,
Colored the bubble with a pleasant vary,
And made the rathe and timely Primrose grow,
Swarth clouds with-drawne (which longer time do tarry)
Oh what is praise, pomp, glory, joy, but so
As shine by fountains, bubbles, flowers or snow?
FINIS.
E. B.

Astrophell the Shepherd, his complaint to his Flock.
Go my Flock, go get ye hence,
Seek a better place of feeding:
Where ye may have some defense
From the storms in my breast breeding,
And showers from mine eyes proceeding.
Leave a wretch in whom all woe,
can abide to keep no measure:
Merry Flock, such one forgo
unto whom mirth is displeasure,
only rich in mischiefs treasure.
Yet (alas) before you go,
hear your woeful Masters Story?
Which to stones I else would show,
sorrow only then has glory:
when it is excellently sorry.
Stella, fiercest Shepherdess,
fiercest, but yet fairest ever:
Stella, whom the heavens still bless,
though against me she persevere,
though I bliss, inherit never.
Stella, has refused me,
Stella, who more love has proved
In this Caitiffe heart to be,
Then can in good by us be moved:
Toward Lambkins best beloved:
Stella, has refused me,
Astrophell that so well served
In this pleasant Spring must see
while in pride flowers be preserved:
himself only Winter-sterued.
Why (alas) then does she swear,
that she loves me so dearly:
Seeing me so long to bear
coals of love that burn so clearly:
and yet leave me helpless merely?
Is that love? Forsooth I trow,
if I saw my good dog grieved:
And a help for him did know,
my Love should not be believed:
but he were by me relieved.
No, she hates me, well away,
faigning love, somewhat to please me:
Knowing, if she should display
all her hate, Death soon would seize me:
and of hideous torments ease me.
Then my dear Flock now adieu,
but (alas) if in your straying,
Heavenly Stella meet with you,
tell her in your pittious blaying:
her poor slaves unjust decaying.
FINIS.
S. Phil. Sidney.

Hobbinolls Dittie in praise of Eliza, Queen of the Shepherds.
YE dainty Nymphs that in this blessed Brook
Do bath your breast;
Forsake your watery Bowers, and hither look
At my request.
And you fair Virgins that on Parnasse dwell,
Whence flows Helicon the learned well:
Help me to blaze
Her worthy praise,
Who in her sex does all excel.
Of fair Eliza be your silver song,
That blessed wight:
The flower of Virgins, may she flourish long
In Princely plight:
For she is Sirinx daughter, without spot,
Which Pan the Shepherds God on her begot:
So sprung her Grace,
Of heavenly race:
No mortal blemish may her blot.
See where she sits upon the grassie green,
O seemly sight:
Yclad in scarlet, like a maiden Queen,
And Ermines white.
Upon her head a crimson Coronet,
With Daffadils and Damask Roses set,
Bay leaves between,
And Primeroses green:
Embellish the sweet Violet.
Tell me, have ye beheld her Angels face,
Like Phoebe fair?
Her heavenly hauiour, her Princely Grace,
Can well compare
The red-Rose meddled and the white yfere,
In either cheek depeincten lively cheer.
Her modest eye,
Her Majesty.
Where have you seen the like but there?
I saw Phoebus thrust out his golden head,
On her to gaze:
But when he saw how broad her beams did spread:
It did him maze.
He blushed to see another Sun below,
Ne durst again his fiery face out-show:
Let him if he dare
His brightness compare
With hers, to have the overthrow.
Show thy self Cynthia with thy silver rays,
And be not abasht,
When she the beams of her beauty displayes,
Oh how art thou dashed?
But I will not match her with Latonaes seed,
Such folly great sorrow to Niobe did breed,
Now is she a stone,
And makes deadly moan,
Warning all other to take heed.
Pan may be proud, that ever he begot
Such a Bellibone:
And Sirinx rejoice, that ever was her lot
To bear such a one.
Soon as my Younglings cryen for the dam,
To her will I offer a milke-white Lamb.
She is my Goddess plain,
And I her Shepherds Swain,
Albe for-swonck and for-swat I am.
I see Caliope speed her to the place,
Where my Goddess shines:
And after her the other Muses trace
With their Violines.
Bin they not Bay-branches which they do bear:
All for Eliza in her hand to wear?
So sweetly they play,
And sing all the way,
That it a heaven is to hear.
Lo how finely the Graces can it foot,
to the Instrument:
They dauncen deffely, and singen foot
In their merriment.
Wants not a fourth Grace to make the dance even?
Let that room to my Lady be given.
She shall be a Grace,
To fill the fourth place,
And reign with the rest in heaven.
And whether runs this beuie of Ladies bright,
Ranged in a roe?
They been all Ladies of the Lake behight
That unto her go:
Chloris, that is the chief Nymph of all,
Of Oliue-branches bears a Coronall:
Olives been for peace
When wars do surcease,
Such for a Princess been principal.
Bring hither the Pinke and purple Cullumbine.
With Gillyflowers:
Bring sweet Carnasions, and Sops in Wine,
Worn of Paramours.
Strew me the ground with Daffa-down-Dillies,
And Cowslips, and Kings-cups, and loved Lillies,
The pretty Paunce,
And the Cheuisaunce,
Shall match with the fair flower-Delice.
Ye Shepherds daughters that dwell on the green,
Hye you there a pace,
Let none come there but such as Virgins been,
To adorn her Grace.
And when you come where as she is in place:
See that your rudeness do not you disgrace.
Bind your Fillets fast,
And gird on your wast,
For more finenesse, with a Tawdrie lace.
Now rise up Eliza, decked as thou art,
In royal ray:
And now ye dainty Damsels may depart
Each one her way.
I fear I have troubled your troops too long:
Let dame Eliza thank you for her Song.
And if you come hither,
When Damzins I gather
I will part them all, you among.
FINIS.
Edm. Spencer.

The Shepherds Daffadill.
GOrbo, as thou came this way
By yonder little hill,
Or as thou through the fields did stray,
Saw thou my Daffadill?
She Is in a frock of Lincolne-greene,
The color Maids delight,
And never has her Beauty seen
But through a veil of white.
Then Roses richer to behold,
That dress up Lovers Bowers,
The Pansie and the Marigold
Are Phoebus Paramours.
Thou well describ'st the Daffadill,
It is not full an hour
Since by the Spring near yonder hill
I saw that lovely flower.
Yet with my flower thou did not meet,
Nor news of her do bring,
Yet is my Daffadill more sweet
Then that by yonder Spring.
I saw a Shepherd that does keep
In yonder field of Lillies,
Was making (as he fed his sheep)
A wreath of Daffadillies.
Yet Gorbo: thou delud'st me still,
My hour thou did not see.
For know; my pretty Daffadill
Is worn of none but me.
To show itself but near her seat
No Lilly is so bold,
Except to shade her from the heat,
Or keep her from the cold.
Through yonder vale as I did pass
Descending from the hill,
I met a smerking Bonny-lasse,
They call her Daffadill.
Whose presence as a-long she went
The pretty flower did greet
As though their heads they downe-ward bent,
With homage to her feet.
And all the Shepherds that were nie,
From top of every hill;
Unto the Valleys loud did cry,
There goes sweet Daffadill.
I gentle Shepherd now with joy
Thou all my Flock do fill:
Come go with me thou Shepherds Boy,
Let us to Daffadill.
FINIS.
Michaell Drayton.

A Canzon Pastoral in honor of her Majesty.
ALas what pleasure now the pleasant Spring
Has given place,
To harsh black frosts the sad ground covering,
Can we, poor we embrace,
When every bird on every branch can sing
Naught but this note of woe alas?
Alas this note of woe why should we found?
With us as May, September has a prime,
Then birds and branches your alas is fond,
Which call upon the absent Summer time:
For did flowers make our May
Or the Sunbeams your day.
When Night and Winter did the World embrace,
Well might you wail your ill, and sing alas.
Lo Matron-like the Earth her self attires
In habit grave,
Naked the fields are, bloomelesse are the brires,
Yet we a Summer have,
Who in our clime kindles these living fires,
Which bloomes can on the briers save.
No Ice does christallize the running Brook,
No blast deflowres the flowre-adorned field,
Crystal is clear, but clearer is the look
Which to our climes these living fires does yield:
Winter though every where,
Has no abiding here:
On Brooks and Briers she does rule alone,
The Sun which lights our world is always one.
FINIS.
Edmund Bolton.

Milicertus Madrigale.
What are my Sheep, without their wonted food?
What is my life, except I gain my Love?
My Sheep consume, and faint for want of blood,
My life is lost unless I Grace approve.
No flower that saplesse thriues,
No Turtle without pheare.
The day without the Sun does lower for woe,
Then woe mine eyes, unless they beauty see:
My Son Samelaes eyes, by whom I know,
Wherein delight consists, where pleasures be.
Naught more the heart reuiues,
Then to embrace his Dear.
The stars from earthly humors gain their light,
Our humors by their light possess their power:
Samelaes eyes fed by my weeping sight,
Infuse my pains or joys, by smile or lower.
So wends the source of love,
It feeds, it fails, it ends.
Kind looks, clear to your Joy, behold her eyes,
Admire her heart, desire to taste her kisses:
In them the heaven of joy and solace lies,
Without them, every hope his succor misses.
Oh how I live to prove,
Whereto this solace tends?
FINIS.
To. Green.

Old Damons Pastoral.
FRom Fortunes frowns and change removed,
wend silly Flocks in blessed feeding:
None of Damon more beloved,
feed gentle Lambs while I sit reading.
Careless Worldlings, outrage quelleth
all the pride and pomp of City:
But true peace with Shepherds dwells,
(Shepherds who delight in pity.)
Whether grace of heaven betideth,
on our humble minds such pleasure:
Perfect peace with Swains abides,
love and faith is Shepherds treasure.
On the lower Plains the thunder
little thriues, and naught prevails:
Yet in Cities breeds wonder,
and the highest hills assaileth.
Envy of a foreign Tyrant
threatens Kings, not Shepherds humble:
Age makes silly Swains delirant,
thirst of rules garres greatmen stumble.
What to other seems sorry,
abject state and humble biding:
Is our joy and Country glory,
highest states have worse betiding.
Golden Cups do harbor poison,
and the greatest pomp, dissembling:
Court of seasoned words has foyson,
treason haunts in most assembling.
Homely breasts do harbor quiet,
little fear, and mickle solace:
States suspect their bed and diet,
fear and craft do haunt the Palace.
Little would I, little want I,
where the mind and store agrees,
Smallest comfort is not scantie,
least he longs that little sees.
Time has been that I have longed,
foolish I, to like of folly:
To converse where honor thronged,
to my pleasures linked wholly.
Now I see, and seeing sorrow
that the day consumed, returns not:
Who dare trust upon to morrow,
when nor time, nor life soiournes not?
FINIS.
Thom. Lodge.

Perigot and Cuddies Roundelay.
IT fell upon a holy-Eue,
hey hoe holy day:
When holy-Fathers wont to shriue,
now ginneth this Roundelay.
Sitting upon a hill so hie,
hey hoe the high hill:
The while my Flock did feed thereby,
the while the Shepherds self did spill.
I saw the bouncing Belly-bone,
hey hoe Bonny-bell:
Tripping over the Dale alone,
she can trip it very well.
Well decked in a Frock of gray,
hey hoe gray is greet:
And in a Kirtle of green Say,
the green is for Maidens meet.
A Chaplet on her head she wore,
hey hoe the Chaplet:
Of sweet Violets therein was store,
she is sweeter then the Violet.
My Sheep did leave their wonted food,
hey hoe silly Sheep:
And gazed on her as they were wood,
wood as he that did them keep.
As the Bonny-lasse passed by,
hey hoe Bonny-lasse:
She rol'd at me with glauncing eye,
as clear as the Christall-glasse.
All as the Sunnie-beame so bright,
hey hoe the Sun-beame:
Glaunceth from Phoebus face forth-right,
so love into my heart did stream.
Or as the thunder cleaues the clouds,
hey hoe the thunder:
Wherein the lightsome leuin shrouds,
so cleaues my soul asunder.
Or as Dame Cynthias silver ray,
hey hoe the Moone-light:
Upon the glistering wave does play,
such play is a pitteous plight.
The glaunce into my heart did glide,
hey hoe the glider:
Therewith my soul was sharply gride,
such wounds soon wexen wider.
Hasting to raunch the arrow out,
hey hoe Perigot:
I left the head in my heart root,
it was a desperate shot.
There it rankleth aye more and more,
hey hoe the arrow:
Ne can I find salve for my sore,
love is a curelesse sorrow.
And though my bale with death I bought,
hey hoe heavy cheer:
Yet should thilke Less not from my thought,
so you may buy gold too dear.
But whether in painful love I pine,
hey hoe pinching pain:
Or thrive in wealth, she shall be mine,
but if thou can her obtain.
And if for graceless grief I dye,
hey hoe graceless grief:
Witness, she slew me with her eye,
let thy folly be the preefe.
And you that saw it, simple sheep,
hey hoe the fair Flock:
For priefe thereof my death shall weep,
and moan with many a mock.
So learned I love on a holy-Eue,
hey hoe holy day:
That ever since my heart did grieve;
now ends our Roundelay.
FINIS.
Edm. Spencer.

Phillida and Coridon.
IN the merry month of May,
In a morn by break of day,
Forth I walked by the Wood-side,
When as May was in his pride:
There I spied all alone,
Phillida and Coridon.
Much a-doo there was God wot,
He would love, and she would not.
She said never man was true,
He said, none was false to you.
He said, he had loved her long,
She said, Love should have no wrong.
Coridon would kiss her then,
She said, Maids must kiss no men,
Till they did for good and all.
Then she made the Shepherd call
All the heavens to witness truth:
Never loved a truer Youth.
Thus with many a pretty oath,
Yea and nay, and faith and troath,
Such as silly Shepherds use,
When they will not Love abuse;
Love, which had been long deluded,
Was with kisses sweet concluded.
And Phillida with garlands gay:
Was made the Lady of the May.
FINIS.
N. Breton.

To Colin Cloute.
Beauty sat bathing by a Spring,
where fairest shades did hide her.
The winds blew calm, the birds did sing,
the cool streams ran beside her.
My wanton thoughts enticed mine eye,
to see what was forbidden:
But better Memory said, fie,
so, vain Desire was chidden.
Hey nonnie, nonnie, etc.
Into a slumber then I fell,
when fond imagination:
Seemed to see, but could not tell
her feature or her fashion.
But even as Babes in dreams do smile,
and sometime fall a weeping:
So I awakt, as wise this while,
as when I fell a sleeping.
Hey nonnie, nonnie, etc.
FINIS
Shepherd Tonie.

Rowlands Song in praise of the fairest Beta.
O Thou silver Thames, o clearest crystal flood,
Beta alone the Phaenix is of all thy watery brood.
The Queen of Virgins only she,
And thou the Queen of floods shall be.
Let all the Nimphs be joyful then, to see this happy day,
Thy Beta now alone shall be the subject of my Lay.
With dainty and delightsome strains of sweetest Virelayes,
Come lovely Shepherds sit we down, and chaunt our Betas praise.
And let us sing so rare a verse,
Our Betas praises to rehearse,
That little Birds shall silent be, to hear poor Shepherds sing:
And Rivers backward bend their course, and flow unto the spring.
Range all thy Swannes fair Thames together on a rank:
And place them duly one by one upon thy stately bank.
Then set together all a-good,
Recording to the silver flood:
And crave the tunefull Nightingale to help ye with her Lay;
The Osell and the Thrustlecocke, chief music of our May.
O see what troops of Nimphs been sporting on the strands;
And they been blessed Nimphs of peace, with Olives in their hands.
How merrily the Muses sing,
That all the flowrie Meddowes ring
And Beta sits upon the bank in purple* and in pall.
And she the Queen of Muses is, and wears the Coronall.
Trim up her golden tresses with Apollos sacred tree,
O happy sight unto all those that love and honor thee,
The blessed Angels have prepared
A glorious Crown for thy reward.
Not such a golden Crown as haughty Caesar wears:
But such a glittering starrie Crown as Ariadne bears.
Make her a goodly Chaplet of azurd Cullumbine,
And wreath about her Coronet with sweetest Eglantine.
Bedeck our Beta all with Lillies.
And the dainty Daffadillies,
With Roses Damask, white and red, and fairest flowre-Delice:
With Cowslips of Jerusalem, and Cloaues of Paradise.
O thou fair Torch of heaven, the days most dearest light,
And thou bright-shining Cynthia, the glory of the night.
You stars the eyes of heaven,
And thou the gliding leven,
And thou O gorgeous Iris, with all strange colors dyed:
When she streams forth her rays, then dashed is all your pride.
See how the Day stands still, admiring of her face,
And Time lo stretches forth his arms thy Beta to embrace.
The Sirens sing sweet Lays,
The Trytons sound her praise,
Go pass on Thames, and hie thee fast unto the Ocean Sea:
And let thy billows there proclaim thy Betas holy day.
And water thou the blessed root of that green Olive tree,
With whose sweet shadow all thy banks with peace preserved be.
Laurel for Poets and Conquerours:
And Myrtle for Loves Paramours.
That fame may be thy fruit, the boughs preserved by peace,
And let the mournful Cypres die, now storms and tempest cease
We Will strew the shore with pearl, where Beta walks alone,
And we will paue her Princely Bower with richest Indian stone.
Perfume the air, and make it sweet,
For such a Goddess it is meet.
For if her eyes for purity contend with Titans light:
No marvel then, although they so do dazell humane sight.
Sound out your Trumpets then from Londons stately Towers,
To beat the stormy winds a-backe, and calm the raging showers.
Set to the Cornet and the Flute,
The Orpharion and the Lute:
And tune the Taber and the Pipe to the sweet Violons:
And move the thunder in the air with lowdest Clarions.
Beta, long may thine Altars smoke with yearly sacrifice,
And long thy sacred Temples may their Sabbaths solemnise,
Thy Shepherds watch by day and night,
Thy Maids attend the holy light,
And thy large Empire stretch her arms from East unto the West:
And Albion on the Appenines advance her conquering crest.
FINIS.
Mich. Drayton.

The Barginet of Antimachus.
IN pride of youth, in midst of May,
When birds with many a merry Lay,
salute the Suns vp-rising:
I sat me down fast by a Spring,
And while these merry Chaunters sing,
I fell upon surmizing.
Amidst my doubt and minds debate,
Of change of time, of worlds estate,
I spyed a boy attired
In silver plumes, yet naked quite,
Save pretty feathers fit for flight,
wherewith he still aspired.
A bow he bare to work men's wrack,
A little Quiver at his back,
with many arrows filled:
And in his soft and pretty hand,
He held a lively burning brand,
wherewith he Lovers killed.
Fast by his side, in rich array,
There sat a lovely Lady gay,
his mother as I guessed:
That set the Lad upon her knee,
And trimd his bow and taught him flee,
and mickle Love professed.
Often from her lap at sundry stowres,
He leapt, and gathered Summer flowers,
both Violets and Roses:
But see the chance that followed fast,
As he the pomp of prime does wast,
before that he supposes:
A Be that harbored hard thereby,
Did sting his hand, and made him cry
Oh Mother, I am wounded:
Fair Venus that beheld her Son,
Cried out alas, I am undone,
and there-vpon she swounded,
My little Lad the Goddess said,
Who has my Cupid so dismayed?
he answered: Gentle Mother
The hony-worker in the Hiue,
My grief and mischief does contriue,
alas it is none other.
She kissed the Lad: Now mark the chance,
And strait she fell into a trance,
and crying, thus concluded:
Ah wanton boy, like to the Be,
Thou with a kiss have wounded me,
and hapless Love included.
A little Be does thee affright,
But ah, my wounds are full of spright,
and cannot be recured:
The boy that kissed his Mothers pain,
Began smile, and kissed her whole again,
and made her hope assured.
She sucked the wound, and swag'd the sting,
And little Love ycurde did sing,
then let no Lovers sorrow:
To day though grief attaint his heart,
Let him with courage bide the smart,
amends will come to morrow.
FINIS.
Thom. Lodge.

Menaphons Roundelay.
When tender Ewes brought home with evening Sun,
Wend to their Folds,
And to their holds
The Shepherds trudge when light of day is done:
Upon a tree,
The Eagle, Jove's fair bird did perch,
There rests he.
A little Fly his harbor then did search,
And did presume, (though others laughed thereat.)
To perch whereas the Princely Eagle sat.
The Eagle Frowned, and shook his royal wings,
And charged the Fly
From thence to hie.
Afraid, in have the little creature flings,
Yet seeks again,
Fearful to pearke him by the Eagles side.
With moodie vain
The speedy poast of Ganimede replide:
Vassaile auaunt, or with my wings you die.
Is It fit an Eagle seat him with a Fly?
The Fly craved pity, still the Eagle frownd.
The silly Fly
Ready to die:
Disgraced, displaced, fell groueling to the ground.
The Eagle saw:
And with a royal mind said to the Fly,
Be not in awe,
I scorn by me the meanest creature die.
Then seat thee here: The joyful Fly vp-flings,
And sat safe shadowed with the Eagles wings.
FINIS.
To. Green.

A Pastoral of Phillis and Coridon.
ON a Hill there grows a flower,
fair befall the dainty sweet:
By that flower there is a Bower,
Where the heavenly Muses meet.
In that Bower there is a chair,
fringed all about with gold:
Where does sit the fairest fair,
that ever eye did yet behold.
It is Phillis fair and bright,
she that is the Shepherds joy:
She that Venus did despite,
and did blind her little boy.
This is she, the wise, the rich,
that the world desires to see:
This is ipsa quae the which,
there is none but only she.
Who would not this face admire?
who would not this Saint adore?
Who would not this sight desire,
though he thought to see no more?
Oh fair eyes, yet let me see,
one good look, and I am gone:
Look on me for I am he,
thy poor silly Coridon.
Thou that art the Shepherds Queen,
look upon thy silly Swain:
By thy comfort have been seen
dead men brought to life again.
FINIS.
N. Breton.

Coridon and Melampus Song.
Cor. MElampus, when will Love be void of fears?

Mel. When Jealousy has neither eyes nor ears.

Cor. Melampus, when will Love be thoroughly shrieued?

Mel. When it is hard to speak, and not believed.

Cor. Melampus, when is Love most male content?

Mel. When Lovers range, and bear their bows unbent.

Cor. Melampus, tell me, when takes Love least harm?

Mel. When Swains sweet pipes are puffed, and Truls are warm.

Cor. Melampus, tell me, when is Love best fed?

Mel. When it has sucked the sweet that ease has bred.

Cor. Melampus, when is time in Love ill spent?

Mel. When it earnes meed, and yet receaues no rent.

Cor. Melampus, when is time well spent in Love?

Mel. When deeds win meeds, and words Love works do prove.

FINIS.
Geor. Peele.

Tityrus to his fair Phillis.
THE silly Swain whose love breeds discontent,
Thinks death a trifle, life a loathsome thing,
Sad he looks, sad he lies:
But when his fortunes malice does relent,
Then of loves sweetness he will sweetly sing,
thus he lives, thus he dies.
Then Tityrus whom Love has happy made,
Will rest thrice happy in this Myrtle shade.
For though Love at first did grieve him:
yet did Love at last relieve him.
FINIS.
I. D.

Shepherd.
SWeet thrall, first step to Loves felicity,
Shepherdess. Sweet thrall, no stop to perfect liberty.

He. O life.

She. what life?

He. Sweet life.

She. No life more sweet:

He. O Love.

She. What love?

He. Sweet love.

She. No love more meet.

FINIS.
I. M.

Another of the same Author.
FIelds were ouer-spread with flowers,
Fairest choice of Floraes treasure:
Shepherds there had shady Bowers,
Where they often reposed with pleasure.
Meadows flourished fresh and gay,
where the wanton Herds did play.
Springs more clear then Crystal streams.
Seated were the Groves among:
Thus nor Titans scorching beams,
Nor earths drouth could Shepherds wrong.
Fair Pomonaes fruitful pride:
did the budding branches hide.
Flocks of sheep fed on the Plains,
Harmless sheep that roamd at large:
Here and there sat pensive Swains,
Waiting on their wandering charge.
Pensive while their Lasses smiled:
Lasses which had them beguiled.
Hills with trees were richly dight,
Valleys stored with Vestaes wealth:
Both did harbor sweet delight,
Naught was there to hinder health.
Thus did Heaven grace the soil:
Not deformed with work-mens toil.
Purest plot of earthly mold,
Might that Land be justly named:
Art by Nature was controld,
Art, which no such pleasures framed.
Fayrer place was never seen:
Fittest place for Beauties Queen.
FINIS.
I. M.

Menaphon to Pesana.
Fair fields proud Floraes vaunt, why is it you smile,
when as I languish?
You golden Meades, why strive you to beguile
my weeping anguish?
I live to sorrow, you to pleasure spring,
why do ye spring thus?
What, will not Boreas tempests wrathful King,
take some pity on us?
And send forth Winter in her rustie weed,
to wail my bemoanings:
While I distressed do tune my Country Reed
unto my groanings.
But Heaven and Earth, time, place, and every power,
have with her conspired:
To turn my blisfull sweet to balefull sower,
since I this desired.
The Heaven whereto my thoughts may not aspire,
aye me unhappy:
It was my fault t'imbrace my bane the fire
that forces me die.
Mine be the pain, but hers the cruel cause,
of this strange torment:
Wherefore no time my banning prayers shall pause,
till proud she repent.
FINIS.
To. Green.

A sweet Pastoral.
GOod Muse rock me a sleep
with some sweet Harmony:
This weary eye is not to keep
thy wary company.
Sweet Love be gone a while,
thou know my heaviness:
Beauty is borne but to beguile
my heart of happiness.
See how my little flock
that loved to feed on hie:
Do headlong tumble down the Rock,
and in the Vallie die.
The bushes and the trees
that were so fresh and green:
Do all their dainty color leese,
and not a leaf is seen.
The Blacke-bird and the Thrush,
that made the woods to ring:
With all the rest, are now at hush,
and not a note they sing.
Sweet Philomele the bird,
that has the heavenly throat,
Does now alas not once afford
recording of a noate.
The flowers have had a frost
each herb has lost her favor:
And Phillida the fair has lost
the comfort of her favor.
Now all these careful sights,
so kill me in conceit:
That how to hope upon delights
it is but mere deceit.
And therefore my sweet Muse
that know what help is best:
Do now thy heavenly cunning use,
to set my heart at rest.
And in a dream bewray
what fate shall be my friend:
Whether my life shall still decay,
or when my sorrow end.
FINIS
N. Breton.

Harpalus complaint on Phillidaes love bestowed or Corin, who loved her not,
and denied him that loved her.
PHillida was a fair maid,
as fresh as any flower:
Whom Harpalus the Heards-man praide
to be his Paramour,
Harpalus and eke Corin,
were Heards-men both yfere:
And Phillida could twist and spinne,
and thereto sing full clear.
But Phillida was all too coy,
for Harpalus to win:
For Corin was her only joy,
who forced her not a pin.
How often would she flowers twine?
how often Garlands make:
Of Cowslips and of Cullumbine,
and all for Corins sake?
But Corin he had Hawks to lure,
and forced more the field:
Of Lovers law he took no cure,
for once he was beguild.
Harpalus prevailed naught,
his labor all was lost:
For he was furthest from her thought,
and yet he loved her most.
Therefore woxe he both pale and lean,
and dry as clod of clay:
His flesh it was consumed clean,
his color gone away.
His beard it had not long been shave,
his hair hung all unkempt:
A man most fit even for the grave,
whom spiteful Love had spent.
His eyes were red and all fore-watcht,
his face besprent with tears:
It seemed unhap had him long hatched,
in midst of his dispaires.
His clothes were black and also bare,
as one forlorn was he:
Upon his head he always ware
a wreath of Willow-tree.
His beasts he kept upon the hill,
and he sat in the Dale:
And thus with sighs and sorrows shrill,
he began to tell his tale.
Oh Harpalus, thus would he say,
unhappiest under Sun:
The cause of thine unhappy day,
by love was first begun.
For thou went first by suit to seek,
a Tiger to make tame:
That sets not by thy love a Leeke,
but makes thy grief a game.
As easy were it to convert
the frost into a flame:
As for to turn a froward heart
whom thou so feign would frame.
Corin, he lives careless,
he leapes among the leaves:
He eats the fruits of thy redress,
thou reap'st, he takes the sheaues.
My beasts awhile your food refrain,
and hark your Heard-mans sound:
Whom spightfull Love alas has slain,
through-girt with many a wound.
Oh happy be ye beasts wild,
that here your Pasture takes:
I see that ye be not beguild,
of these your faithful makes.
The Heart he feeds by the Hind,
the Bucke hard by the Do:
The Turtle-Doue is not unkind
to him that loves her so.
The Eweshe has by her the Ram,
the young Cow has the Bull:
The Calfe with many a lusty Lamb,
do feed their hunger full.
But well-away that Nature wrought,
thee Phillida so fair:
For I may say that I have bought
thy beauty all too dear.
What reason is it that cruelty
with beauty should have part?
Or else that such great tirannie,
should dwell in woman's heart?
I see therefore to shape my death,
she cruelly is pressed:
To the end that I may want my breath,
my days been at the best.
Oh Cupid grant this my request,
and do not stop thine ears:
That she may feel within her breast,
the pain of my despaires.
Of Corin that is careless,
that she may crave her fee:
As I have done in great distress,
that loved her faithfully.
But since that I shall die her slave,
her slave and eke her thrall:
Write you my friends upon my grave,
this chance that is befall.
Here lies unhappy Harpalus,
by cruel Love now slain:
Whom Phillida unjustly thus,
has murdered with disdain.
FINIS.
L.T. Haward, Earl of Surrie.

Another of the same subject, but made as it were in answer.
ON a goodly Summers day,
Harpalus and Phillida,
He a true hearted Swain,
She full of coy disdain,
drove their Flocks to field:
He to see his Shepherdess,
She did dream on nothing less,
Then his continual care,
Which to grim-fac'd Despair,
wholely did him yield.
Corin she affected still,
All the more thy heart to kill.
Thy case does make me rue,
That thou should love so true,
and be thus disdained:
While their Flocks a feeding were,
They did meet together there.
Then with a curtsie low,
And sighs that told his woe,
thus to her he plained.
Bide a while fair Phillida,
List what Harpalus will say
Only in love to thee,
Though thou respect not me,
yet vouchsafe an ear:
To prevent ensuing ill,
Which no doubt betide thee will,
If thou do not foresee,
To shun it presently,
then thy harm I fear.
Firm thy love is, well I wot,
To the man that loves thee not.
Lovely and gentle Maid,
Thy hope is quite betrayde,
which my heart does grieve:
Corin is unkind to thee,
Though thou think contrary.
His love is grown as light,
As is his Faulcons flight,
this sweet Nymph believe.
Mopsus daughter, that young maid,
Her bright eyes his heart has strayde
From his affecting thee,
Now there is none but she
that is Corins bliss:
Phillis, men the Virgin call,
She is Buxome, fair and tall,
Yet not like Phillida:
If I my mind might say,
eyes often deem amiss.
He commends her beauty rare,
Which with thine may not compare.
He does extol her eye,
Silly thing, if thine were by,
thus conceit can err:
He is ravished with her breath,
Thine can quicken life in death.
He praises all her parts;
Thine, winnes a world of hearts,
more, if more there were.
Look sweet Nymph upon thy Flock,
They stand still, and now feed not,
As if they shared with thee:
Grief for this injury,
offered to true love.
Pretty Lambkins, how they moan,
And in bleating seem to groan,
That any Shepherds Swain,
Should cause their Mistress pain:
by affects remove.
If you look but on the grass,
It Is not half so green as 'twas:
When I began my tale,
But is as witherd pale,
all in mere remorce.
Mark the Trees that bragd even now,
Of each goodly greene-leau'd bow,
They seem as blasted all,
Ready for Winters fall,
such is true loves force.
The gentle murmur of the Springs,
Are become contrary things,
They have forgot their pride,
And quite forsake their glide,
as if charmed they stand.
And the flowers growing by,
Late so fresh in every eye,
See how they hang the head,
As on a sudden dead,
dropping on the sand.
The birds that chaunted it yer-while,
Ere they heard of Corins guile,
Sit as they were afraid,
Or by some hap dismaide,
for this wrong to thee:
Hark sweet Phil, how Philomell,
That was wont to sing so well,
Iargles now in yonder bush,
Worser then the rudest Thrush,
as it were not she.
Phillida, who all this while
Neither gave a sigh or smile:
Round about the field did gaze,
As her wits were in a maze,
poor despised Maid.
And revived at the last,
After streams of tears were past,
Leaning on her Shepherds hook,
With a sad and heavy look,
thus poor soul she said.
Harpalus, I thank not thee,
For this sorry tale to me.
Meet me here again to morrow,
Then I will conclude my sorrow
mildly, if may be:
With their Flocks they home do fare,
Eithers heart too full of care,
If they do meet again,
Then what they further said,
you shall here from me.
FINIS.
Shep. Tonic.

The Nymphs meeting their May Queen, entertain her with this Dittie,
With fragrant flowers we strew the way,
And make this our chief holy day.
For though this clime were blessed of yore:
Yet was it never proud before.
O beauteous Queen of second Troy:
Accept of our unfeigned joy.
Now The Air is sweeter then sweet Balm,
And Satyrs dance about the Palm,
Now earth with verdure newly dight,
Gives perfect signs of her delight.
O beauteous Queen, etc.
Now birds record new harmony,
And trees do whistle melody,
Now every thing that Nature breeds,
Does clad it self in pleasant weeds.
O beauteous Queen, etc.
FINIS.
Tho. Watson.

Colin Clouts mournful Dittie for the death of Astrophell.
Shepherds that wont on pipes of Oaten Reed
Oft-times to plain your Loves concealed smart;
And with your pitteous Lays have learned to breed
Compassion in a Country-Lasses heart:
Harken ye gentle Shepherds to my Song,
And place my doleful plaint your plaints among.
To you alone I sing this mournful verse,
The mournfulst verse that ever man heard tell:
To you whose softened hearts it may impierce
With dolours dart for death of Astrophell.
To you I sing, and to none other wight:
For well I wot, my rimes been rudely dight.
Yet as they been, if any nicer wit
Shall hap to hear, or covet them to read:
Think he, that such are for such ones most fit,
Made not to please the living, but the dead.
And if in him found pity ever place:
Let him be moved to pity such a case.
FINIS.
Edm. Spencer.

Damaetas Iigge in praise of his Love.
Jolly Shepherd, Shepherd on a hill
on a hill so merrily,
on a hill so cherily,
Fear not Shepherd there to pipe thy fill,
Fill every Dale, fill every Plain:
both sing and say; Love feels no pain.
Jolly Shepherd, Shepherd on a green,
on a green so merrily,
on a green so cherily,
Be thy voice shrill, be thy mirth seen,
Heard to each Swain, seen to each Trull:
Both sing and say; Loves joy is full.
Jolly Shepherd, Shepherd in the Sun,
in the Sun so merrily,
in the Sun so cherily,
Sing forth thy Songs, and let thy rimes run
Down to the Dales, to the hills above:
both sing and say; No life to love.
Jolly Shepherd, Shepherd in the shade,
in the shade so merrily,
in the shade so cherily,
Joy in thy life, life of Shepherds trade,
Joy in thy love, love full of glee:
both sing and say; Sweet Love form.
Jolly Shepherd, Shepherd here or there,
here or there so merrily,
here or there so cherily,
Or in thy chat, either at thy cheer,
In every ligge, in every Lay:
both sing and say; Love lasts for aye.
Jolly Shepherd, Shepherd Daphnis Love,
Daphnis love so merrily,
Daphnis love so cherily,
Let thy fancy never more remove,
Fancy be fixed, fixed not to fleet,
still sing and say; Loves yoke is sweet.
FINIS.
John Wootton.

Montanus praise of his fair Phaebe.
PHaebe sat,
Sweet she sat,
sweet sat Phaebe when I saw her,
White her brow
Coy her eye,
brow and eye, how much you please me?
Words I spent,
Sighs I sent,
sighs and words could never draw her,
Oh my Love,
Thou art lost,
since no sight could ever ease thee.
Phaebe sat
By a Fount,
sitting by a Fount I spide her,
Sweet her touch,
Rare her voice,
touch and voice, what may distaine you?
As she sung,
I did sigh,
And by sighs whilst that I tried her,
Oh mine eyes
You did loose,
her first sight whose want did pain you.
Phaebes Flocks
White as wool,
yet were Phoebes looks more whiter,
Phaebes eyes
Doue-like mild,
Doue-like eyes both mild and cruel,
Montane swears
In your Lamps,
he will die for to delight her,
Phaebe yield
Or I die,
shall true hearts be fancies fuel?
FINIS.
Thom. Lodge.

The complaint of Thestilis the forsaken Shepherd.
THestilis a silly Swain, when Love did him forsake,
In mournful wise amid the Woods, thus began his plaint to make,
Ah woeful man (quoth he) fallen is thy lot to moan,
And pine away with careful thoughts, unto thy Love unknown.
Thy Nymph forsakes thee quite, whom thou did honor so:
That aye to her thou were a friend, but to thy self a foe.
Ye Lovers that have lost your hearts-desired choice:
Lament with me my cruel hap, and help my trembling voice
Was never man that stood so great in Fortunes grace,
Nor with his sweat (alas too dear) possessed so high a place:
As I whose simple heart, aye thought himself still sure,
But now I see high springing tides, they may not aye endure.
She knows my guiltless heart, and yet she lets it pine:
Of her untrue professed love, so feeble is the twine.
What wonder is it then, if I berent my hairs:
And craving death continually, do bathe my self in tears?
When Craesus King of Lide, was cast in cruel hands,
And yielded goods and life into his enemies hands:
What tongue could tell his woe? yet was his grief much less
Then mine for I have lost my Love, which might my woe redress.
Ye Woods that shroud my limbs, give now your hollow sound:
That ye may help me to bewail, the cares that me confound.
Ye Rivers rest a while, and stay your streams that run:
Rue Thestilis, the wofulst man that rests under the Sun.
Transport my sighs ye winds, unto my pleasant so:
My trickling tears shall witness bear, of this my cruel woe:
Oh happy man were I, if all the Gods agreed:
That now the Sisters three should cut in twain my fatal thread
Till life with love shall end, I here resign allioy,
Thy pleasant sweet I now lament, whose lack breeds mine annoy.
Farewell my dear therefore, farewell to me well known,
If that I die, it shall be said: that thou have slain thine own.
FINIS.
L.T. Howard, E. of Surrie.

To Phillis the fair Shepherdess.
MY Phillis has the morning Sun,
at first to look upon her:
And Phillis has morne-waking birds,
her risings still to honor.
My Phillis has prime-featherd flowers,
that smile when she treads on them:
And Phillis has a gallant Flock,
that leapes since she does own them.
But Phillis has too hard a heart,
alas that she should have it:
It yields no mercy to desert,
nor grace to those that crave it.
Sweet Sun, when thou look on,
pray her regard my moan.
Sweet birds, when you sing to her,
to yield some pity, woo her,
Sweet flowers that she treads on,
tell her, her beauty deads one.
And if in life her love she nill agree me:
Pray her before I die, she will come see me.
FINIS.
S. E. D.

The Shepherd Dorons Iigge.
THrough the shrubs as I can crack,
for my Lambs pretty ones,
among many little ones,
Nimphs I mean, whose hair was black
As the Crow.
Like as the Snow
Her face and brows shined I ween,
I saw a little one,
a bonny pretty one,
As bright, buxome, and as sheene:
As was she
On her knee
That lulled the God, whose arrows warmes
such merry little ones,
such faire-fac'd pretty ones,
As dally in Loves chiefest harms.
Such was mine,
Whose gray eyne
Made me love: I began to woo
this sweet little one,
this bonny pretty one.
I wooed hard a day or two,
Till she bad,
Be not sad,
Woo no more, I am thine own,
thy dearest little one,
thy truest pretty one.
Thus was faith and firm love shown,
As behooues
Shepherds Loves.
FINIS.
To. Green.

Astrophell his Song of Phillida and Coridon.
Fair in a morn, (O fairest morn)
was never morn so fair:
There shone a Sun, though not the Sun,
that shines in the air.
For the earth, and from the earth,
(was never such a creature:)
Did come this face, (was never face,)
that carried such a feature.
Upon a hill, (O blessed hill,
was never hill so blessed)
There stood a man, (was never man
for woman so distressed.)
This man beheld a heavenly view,
which did such virtue give:
As cleares the blind, and helps the lame,
and makes the dead man live.
This man had hap, (O happy man
more happy none then he;)
For he had hap to see the hap,
that none had hap to see.
This silly Swain, (and silly Swains
are men of meanest grace:)
Had yet the grace, (O gracious guest)
to hap on such a face.
He pity cried, and pity came,
and pitied so his pain:
As dying, would not let him die,
but gave him life again.
For joy whereof he made such mirth,
as all the Woods did ring:
And Pan with all his Swains came forth,
to hear the Shepherds sing.
But such a Song sung never was,
nor shall be sung again:
Of Phillida the Shepherds Queen,
and Coridon the Swain.
Fair Phillis is the Shepherds Queen,
(was never such a Queen as she,)
And Coridon her only Swain,
(was never such a Swain as he.)
Fair Phillis has the fairest face,
that ever eye did yet behold:
And Coridon the constant'st faith,
that ever yet kept Flock in fold.
Sweet Phillis is the sweetest sweet,
that ever yet the earth did yield:
And Coridon the kindest Swain,
that ever yet kept Lambs in field.
Sweet Philomell is Phillis bird,
though Coridon be he that caught her:
And Coridon does hear her sing,
though Phillida be she that taught her.
Poor Coridon does keep the fields,
though Phillida be she that owes them:
And Phillida does walk the Meades,
though Coridon be he that mowes them.
The little Lambs are Phillis Love,
though Coridon is he that feeds them:
The Gardens fair are Phillis ground,
though Coridon be he that weeds them.
Since then that Phillis only is,
the only Shepherds only Queen:
And Coridon the only Swain,
that only has her Shepherd been.
Though Phillis keep her bower of state,
shall Coridon consume away?
No Shepherd no, work out the week,
and Sunday shall be holy day
FINIS.
N. Breton.

The passionate Shepherds Song.
ON a day, (alack the day,)
Love whose month was ever May:
Spied a blossom passing fair,
Playing in the wanton air.
Through the velvet leaves the wind,
All unseen began passage find:
That the Shepherd (sick to death,)
Wished himself the Heavens breath.
Air (quoth he) thy cheeks may blow:
Air, would I might triumph so.
But alas, my hand has sworn,
Nere to pluck thee from thy thorn.
Vow (alack) for youth unmeet,
Youth so apt to pluck a sweet.
Thou for whom Jove would swear,
Juno but an Aethiope were,
And deny himself for Jove,
Turning mortal for my Love.
FINIS.
W. Shakespeare.

The unknown Shepherds complaint.
MY Flocks feed not, my Ewes breed not,
My Ramines speed not, all is amiss:
Love is denying, Faith is defying,
Hearts renying, causer of this.
All my merry ligges are quite forgot,
All my Ladies love is lost God wot,
Where her faith was firmly fixed in love,
There a nay is placed without remove.
One silly cross, wrought all my loss;
O frowning Fortune, cursed fickle Dame.
For now I see, inconstancy
More in women then in men remain.
In black mourn I, all fears scorn I,
Love has forlorn me, living in thrall:
Heart is bleeding, all help needing,
O cruel speeding, fraughted with gall.
My Shepherds pipe can sound no deal,
My Weathers bell rings doleful knell.
My curtaile dog that wont to have plaide,
Plays not at all, but seems afraid.
With sighs so deep, procures to weep,
In howling-wise, to see my doleful plight:
How sighs resound, through hartlesse ground.
Like a thousand vanquished men in bloody fight.
Clear Wels spring not, sweet birds sing not,
Green plants bring not forth their die:
Herds stand weeping, Flocks all sleeping,
Nimphs back peeping fearfully.
All our pleasure known to us, poor Swains,
All our merry meeting on the Plains.
All our evening sports from us are fled,
All our love is lost, for Love is dead.
Farewell sweet Love, thy like nere was,
For sweet content, the cause of all my moan:
Poor Coridon must live alone,
Other help for him, I see that there is none.
FINIS.
Ignoto.

Another of the same Shepherds.
AS it fell upon a day,
In the merry month of May,
Sitting in a pleasant shade,
Which a grove of Mirtles made.
Beasts did leap, and Birds did sing,
Trees did grow, and plants did spring.
Every thing did banish moan,
Save the Nightingale alone.
She poor Bird, as all forlorn,
Leaned her breast against a thorn,
And there sung the dolefull'st Ditty,
That to hear it was great pity.
Fie, fie, fie, now would she cry
Teru, Teru, by and by.
That to hear her so complain,
Scarce I could from tears refrain.
For her griefs so lively shown,
Made me think upon mine own.
Ah (thought I) thou mourn'st in vain,
None takes pity on thy pain.
Senseless trees, they cannot hear thee,
Ruthlesse beasts, they will not cheer thee.
King Pandion he is dead,
All thy friends are lapt in Lead.
All thy fellow birds do sing,
Careless of thy sorrowing.
Even so poor bird like thee,
None a-liue will pity me.
FINIS.
Ignoto.

The Shepherds allusion of his own amorous infelicitie, to the offense of
Actaeon.
ACtaeon lost in middle of his sport
Both shape and life, for looking but awry:
Diana was afraid he would report
What secrets he had seen in passing by.
To tell but truth, the self same hurt have I:
By viewing her for whom I daily die.
I leese my wonted shape, in that my mind
Does suffer wrack upon the stony rock
Of her disdain, who contrary to kind
Does bear a breast more hard then any stock;
And former form of limbs is changed quite:
By cares in love, and want of due delight.
I leese my life, in that each secret thought,
Which I conceive through wanton fond regard,
Does make me say, that life avails naught,
Where service cannot have a due reward.
I dare not name the Nymph that works my smart,
Though Love has grau'n her name within my heart.
FINIS.
T. Watson.

Montanus Sonnet to his fair Phaebe.
A Turtle sat upon a leauelesse tree,
Mourning her absent pheare,
With sad and sorry cheer.
About her wondering stood,
The Citizens of wood.
And whilst her plumes she rents,
And for her Love laments:
The stately trees complain them,
The birds with sorrow pain them.
Each one that does her view,
Her pains and sorrows rue.
But were the sorrows known,
That me has ouer-throwne:
Oh how would Phaebe sigh, if she did look on me?
The loue-sicke Polipheme that could not see,
Who on the barren shore,
His fortunes did deplore:
And melts all in moan,
For Galatea gone,
And with his cries
Afflicts both earth and skies,
And to his woe betook,
Does break both pipe and hook.
For whom complains the morn.
For whom the Sea-Nimphs mourn.
Alas his pain is naught,
For were my woe but thought:
Oh how would Phaebe sigh, if she did look on me?
Beyond compare my pain,
yet glad am I:
If gentle Phaebe daine,
to see her Montane die.
FINIS.
Thom. Lodge.

Phaebes Sonnet, a reply to Montanus passion.
Down a down,
Thus Phillis sung,
By fancy once distressed:
Who so by foolish Love are stung
are worthily oppressed.
And so sing I, with down a down, etc.
When Love was first begot,
And by the mothers will:
Did fall to humane lot,
His solace to fulfill,
Deuoid of all deceit,
A chaste and holy fire:
Did quicken man's conceit,
And women's breasts inspire.
The Gods that saw the good,
That mortals did approve:
With kind and holy mood,
Began to talk of Love.
Down a down,
Thus Phillis sung
By fancy once distressed, etc.
But during this accord,
A wonder strange to hear:
Whilst Love in deed and word,
Most faithful did appear;
False semblance came in place,
By Jealousy attended:
And with a double face,
Both love and fancy blended.
Which made the Gods forsake,
And men from fancy fly:
And Maidens scorn a make,
Forsooth and so will I.
Down a down,
Thus Phillis sung,
By fancy once distressed:
Who so by foolish Love are stung,
Are worthily oppressed.
And so sing I, with down a down, etc.
FINIS.
Thom. Lodge.

Coridons supplication to Phillis.
SWeet Phillis, if a silly Swain,
may sue to thee for grace:
See not thy loving Shepherd slain,
with looking on thy face.
But think what power thou have got,
upon my Flock and me:
Thou see they now regard me not,
but all do follow thee.
And if I have so far presumed,
with prying in thine eyes:
Yet let not comfort be consumed,
that in thy pity lies.
But as thou art that Phillis fair,
that Fortune favor gives:
So let not Love dye in despair,
that in thy favor lives.
The Dear do brouse upon the bryer,
the Birds do pick the Cherries:
And will not Beauty grant Desire,
one handful of her berries?
If it be so that thou have sworn,
that none shall look on thee:
Yet let me know thou do not scorn,
to cast a look on me.
But if thy beauty make thee proud,
think then what is ordained.
The heavens have never yet alow'd,
that Love should be disdained.
Then lest the Fates that favor Love,
should curse thee for unkind:
Let me report for thy behooue,
the honor of thy mind,
Let Coridon with full consent,
set down what he has seen:
That Phillida with Loves content,
is sworn the Shepherds Queen.
FINIS.
N. Breton.

Damaetas Madrigall in praise of his Daphnis.
TVne on my pipe the praises of my Love,
Love fair and bright:
Fill earth with sound, and ayrie heavens above,
heauen's Jove's delight,
with Daphnis praise.
To pleasant Tempe Groves and Plains about,
Plains, Shepherds pride:
Resounding Echoes of her praise ring out,
ring far and wide
my Daphnis praise,
When I begin to sing, begin to sound,
sounds loud and shrill:
Do make each note unto the skies rebound,
skies calm and still,
with Daphnis praise.
Her tresses are like wiers of beaten gold,
Gold bright and sheene:
Like Nisus golden hair that Scilla pold,
Scill, ore-seene
through Minos love.
Her eyes like shining Lamps in midst of night,
Night dark and dead:
Or as the Stars that give the Seamen light,
Light for to lead
their wandering Ships.
Amidst her cheeks the Rose and Lilly strive,
Lilly, snow white:
When their contend does make their color thrive.
Color too bright
for Shepherds eyes.
Her lips like Scarlet of the finest die,
Scarlet blood-red:
Teeth white as Snow, which on the hills does lie.
Hills ouer-spread
by Winters force.
Her skin as soft as is the finest silk,
Silk soft and fine:
Of color like unto the whitest milk,
Milk of the Kine
of Daphnis Heard.
As swift of foot as is the pretty Roe,
Roe swift of pace:
When yelping Hounds pursue her to and fro,
Hounds fierce in chase,
to reaue her life.
Cease tongue to tell of any more compares,
Compares too rude:
Daphnis deserts and beauty are too rare,
Then here conclude
fair Daphnis praise.
FINIS.
I. Wootton.

Dorons description of his fair Shepherdess Samela.
LIke to Diana in her Summer weed,
Girt with a Crimson roabe of brightest die:
goes fair Samela.
Whiter then be the flocks that straggling feed,
When washed by Arethusa, faint they lie.
is fair Samela.
As fair Aurora in her morning gray,
Decked with the ruddy glister of her love:
is fair Samela.
Like lovely Thetis on a calmed day,
When as her brightness Neptunes fancies move.
shines fair Samela.
Her tresses gold, her eyes like glassie streams,
Her teeth are pearl, the breasts are Iuorie:
of fair Samela.
Her cheeks like Rose and Lilly yield forth gleames,
Her brows bright arches framed of Ebonie,
thus fair Samela
Passes fair Venus in her brightest hew,
And Juno in the show of Majesty:
for she is Samela.
Pallas in wit, all three if you well view,
For beauty, wit, and matchless dignity,
yield to Samela.
FINIS.
To. Green.

Wodenfrides Song in praise of Amargana.
THe Sun the season in each thing
Reuiues new pleasures, the sweet Spring
Has put to flight the Winter keen:
To glad our lovely Summer Queen.
The paths where Amargana treads,
With flowrie tap'stries Flora spreads.
And nature clothes the ground in green:
To glad our lovely Summer Queen.
The Groaues put on their rich array,
With Hawthorne bloomes imbroydered gay,
And sweet perfumed with Eglantine:
To glad our lovely Summer Queen.
The silent River stays his course,
Whilst playing on the crystal sourse,
The silver scaled fish are seen,
To glad our lovely Summer Queen.
The Woods at her fair sight reioyces,
The little Birds with their loud voices,
In consort on the briars been,
To glad our lovely Summer Queen.
The fleecie Flocks do scud and skip,
The wood-Nimphs, Fawnes, and Satires trip,
And dance the Myrtle trees between:
To glad our lovely Summer Queen.
Great Pan (our God) for her dear sake,
This feast and meeting bids us make,
Of Shepherds, Lads, and Lasses sheene:
To glad our lovely Summer Queen.
And every Swain his chance does prove,
To win fair Amarganaes love,
In sporring strifes quite void of spleen:
To glad our lovely Summer Queen.
All happiness let Heaven her lend,
And all the Graces her attend.
Thus bid me pray the Muses nine,
Long live our lovely Summer Queen.
FINIS.
W. H.

Another of the same.
HAppy Shepherds sit and see,
with joy,
The peerless wight:
For whose sake Pan keeps from ye
annoy,
And gives delight,
Blessing this pleasant Spring,
Her praises must I sing.
List you Swains, list to me:
The whiles your Flocks feeding be.
First her brow a beauteous Globe
I deem,
And golden hair;
And her cheek Auroraes roabe
does seem.
But far more fair.
Her eyes like stars are bright.
And dazzle with their light,
Rubies her lips to see,
But to taste, Nectar they be.
Orient pearls her teeth, her smile
does link
The Graces three:
Her white neck does eyes beguile
to think
it Iuorie.
Alas her Lilly hand,
How it does me command?
Softer silk none can be:
And whiter milk none can see.
Circes wand is not so strait,
as is
Her body small:
But two pillars bear the weight
of this
maiesticke Hall.
Those be I you assure,
Of Alabaster pure,
Polished fine in each part:
Never Nature yet showed like Art.
How shall I her pretty tread
express
when she does walk?
Scarce she does the Primerose head
depresse,
or tender stalk
Of blew-veind Violets,
Whereon her foot she sets.
Virtuous she is, for we find,
In body fair, a beaut'ous mind.
Live fair Amargana still
extold
In all my rhyme:
Hand want Art, when I want will
t'vnsold
her worth divine.
But now my Muse does rest,
Despair closed in my breast,
Of the valor I sing:
Weak faith that no hope does bring.
FINIS.
W. H.

An excellent Pastoral Dittie.
A Careful Nymph, with careless grief oppressed,
Under the shadow of an Ashen tree:
With Lute in hand did paint out her unrest,
unto a Nymph that bare her company.
No sooner had she tuned every string:
But sob'd and sighed, and thus began to sing.
Ladies and Nimphs, come listen to my plaint,
on whom the cheerful Sun did never rise:
If pitties strokes your tender breasts may taint,
come learn of me to wet your wanton eyes.
For Love in vain the name of pleasure bears:
His sweet delights are turned into fears.
The trustlesse shows, the frights, the feeble joys,
the freezing doubts, the guilefull promises:
The feigned looks, the shifts, the subtle toys,
the brittle hope, the steadfast heaviness.
The wished war in such uncertain peace:
These with my woe, my woes with these increase.
Thou dreadful God, that in thy Mothers lap
do lie, and hear the cry of my complaint,
And see, and smilest at my sore mishap,
that lack but skill my sorrows here to paint:
Thy fire from heaven before the hurt I spide,
Quite through mine eyes into my breast did glide.
My life was light, my blood did spirt and spring,
my body quick, my heart began to leap:
And every thornie thought did prick and sting,
the fruit of my desired joys to reap.
But he on whom to think, my soul still tyers:
In bale forsook, and lest me in the briars.
Thus Fancy strung my Lute to lays of Love,
and Love has rocked my weary Muse a-sleepe:
And sleep is broken by the pains I prove,
and every pain I feel does force me weep.
Then farewell fancy, love, sleep, pain, and sore.
And farewell weeping, I can wail no more.
FINIS.
Shep. Tonie.

Phillidaes Loue-call to her Coridon, and his replying.
Phil. COridon, arise my Coridon,
Titan shines clear:

Cor. Who is it that calls Coridon,
who is it that I hear?

Phil. Phillida thy true-Loue calls thee,
arise then, arise then;
arise and keep thy Flock with me:

Cor. Phillida my true-Loue, is it she?
I come then, I come then,
I come and keep my flock with thee.

Phil. Here are cherries ripe my Coridon,
eat them for my sake:

Cor. Here Is my Oaten pipe my lovely one,
sport for thee to make.

Phil. Here are threeds my true-Loue, fine as silk,
to knit thee, to knit thee
a pair of stockings white as milk.

Cor. Here are Reeds my true-Loue, fine and neat,
to make thee, to make thee
a Bonnet to with-stand the heat.

Phil. I will gather flowers my Coridon,
to set in thy Cap:

Cor. I will gather Pears my lovely one,
to put in thy lap.

Phil. I will buy my true-Loue Garters gay,
for Sundays, for Sundays,
to wear about his legs so tall.

Cor. I will buy my true-Loue yellow Say,
for Sundays, for Sundays,
to wear about her middle small.

Phil. When my Coridon sits on a hill,
making melody:

Cor. When my lovely one goes to her wheel
singing cherily.

Phil. Sure me thinks my true-Loue does excel
for sweetness, for sweetness,
our Pan that old Arcadian Knight:

Cor. And me thinks my true-Loue bears the bell
for clearenesse, for clearenesse,
beyond the Nimphs that be so bright.

Phil. Had my Coridon, my Coridon,
been (alack) my Swain:

Cor. Had my lovely one, my lovely one,
been in Ida plain.

Phil. Cinthia Endimion had refused,
preferring, preferring
my Coridon to play with-all:

Cor. The Queen of Love had been excused,
bequeathing, bequeathing,
my Phillida the golden ball.

Phil. Yonder comes my Mother, Coridon,
whether shall I fly?

Cor. Under yonder Beech my lovely one,
while she passes by.

Phil. Say to her thy true-Loue was not here,
remember, remember,
to morrow is another day:

Cor. Doubt me not, my true-Loue, do not fear,
farewell then, farewell then,
heaven keep our loves always.

FINIS.
Ignoto.

The Shepherds solace.
PHoebus delights to view his Laurel tree,
The Poplar pleases Hercules alone:
Melissa mother is and sautrixe to the Be,
Pallas will wear the Olive branch alone.
Of Shepherds and their Flocks Pales is Queen:
And Ceres ripes the Corn was lately green.
To Chloris every flower belongs of right,
The Dryade Nimphs of Woods make chief account:
Orcades in hills have their delight,
Diana does protect each bubling Fount.
To Hebe lovely kissing is assigned:
To Zephire every gentle-breathing wind.
But what is Loves delight? To hurt each where
He cares not whom, with Darts of deep desire:
With watchful jealousy, with hope, with fear,
With nipping cold, and secret flames of fire.
O happy hour, wherein I did forgo:
This little God, so great a cause of woe.
FINIS.
Tho. Watson.

Syrenus Song to Eugerius.
LEt now the goodly Springtide make us merry,
And fields, which pleasant flowers do adorn:
And Vales, Meads, Woods, with lively colors flourish,
Let plenteous flocks the Shepherds riches nourish,
Let hungry Wolves by dogs to death be torn,
And Lambs rejoice, with passed Winter weary.
Let every Rivers Ferrie
In waters flow, and silver streams abounding,
And fortune, ceaselesse wounding.
Turn now thy face, so cruel and unstable,
Be firm and favorable.
And thou that kill'st our souls with thy pretenses:
Molest not (wicked Love) my inward senses.
Let Country plainness live in joys not ended,
In quiet of the desert Meades and mountains,
And in the pleasure of a Country dwelling
Let Shepherds rest, that have distilled fountains
Of tears: prove not thy wrath, all pains excelling,
Upon poor souls, that never have offended.
Let thy flames be incended
In haughty Courts, in those that swim in treasure,
And live in case and pleasure.
And that a sweetest scorn (my wonted sadness)
A perfect rest and gladness
And hills and Dales, may give me: with offenses
Molest not (wicked Love) my inward senses.
In what law find'st thou, that the freest reason
And wit, unto thy chains should be subjected,
And harmless souls unto thy cruel murder?
O wicked Love, the wretch that flies further
From thy extremes, thou plagu'st. O false, suspected,
And careless boy, that thus thy sweets do season,
O vile and wicked treason.
Might not thy might suffice thee, but thy fuel
Of force must be so cruel?
To be a Lord, yet like a Tyrant minded,
Vain Boy with error blinded.
Why do thou hurt his life with thy offenses:
That yields to thee his soul and inward senses?
He erres (alas) and soulely is deceived
That calls thee God, being a burning fire:
A furious flame, a playning grief and clamorous,
And Venus son (that in the earth was amorous,
Gentle, and mild, and full of sweet desire)
Who calls him, is of his wits bereaved.
And yet that she conceived
By proof, so vile a son and so unruly:
I say (and yet say truly)
That in the cause of harms, that they have framed,
Both justly may be blamed:
She that did breed him with such vile pretenses,
He that does hurt so much our inward senses.
The gentle Sheep and Lambs are ever flying
The ravenous Wolves and beasts, that are pretending
To glut their mawes with flesh they tear asunder.
The milke-white Doves at noise of fearful thunder
Fly home a-maine, themselves from harm defending.
The little Chick, when Puttocks are a crying.
The Woods and Meadows dying
Foreign of heaven (if that they cannot have it)
Do never cease to crave it.
So every thing his contrary resists,
Only thy thrall persisteth
In suffering of thy wrongs without offenses:
And lets thee spoil his heart and inward senses.
A public passion, Natures laws restrayning,
And which with words can never be declared,
A soul twixt love, and fear, and desperation,
And endless plaint, that shunnes all consolation.
A spendlesse flame, that never is impaired,
A friendlesse death, yet life in death maintaining,
A passion, that is gaining
On him that loves well, and is absented,
Whereby it is augmented.
A jealousy, a burning grief and sorrow,
These favors Lovers borrow
Of thee fell Love, these be thy recompenses:
Consuming still their soul and inward senses.
FINIS.
Bar. Young.

The Shepherds Arsileus reply to Syrenus Song.
O Let that time a thousand months endure,
Which brings from heaven the sweet and silver showers,
And joys the earth (of comfort late deprived,)
With grass and leaves, fine buds, and painted flowers,
Ecchoe, return unto the woods obscure,
Ring forth the Shepherds Songs in love contrived.
Let old Loves be revived,
Which angry Winter buried but of late,
And that in such a state
My soul may have the full accomplishment
Of joy and sweet content.
And since fierce pains and griefs thou do control:
Good Love, do not forsake my inward soul.
Presume not (Shepherds) once to make you merry,
With springs, and flowers, or any pleasant Song,
(Unless mild Love possess your amorous breasts)
If you sing not to him, your Songs do weary,
Crown him with flowers, or else ye do him wrong,
And consecrate your Springs to his behests.
I to my Shepherdess
My happy Loves with great content do sing,
And flowers to her do bring.
And sitting near her by the River side,
Enjoy the brave Springtide.
Since then thy joys such sweetness does enroule:
Good Love, do not forsake my inward soul.
The wise (in ancient time) a God thee named,
Seeing that with thy power and supreme might,
Thou did such rare and mighty wonders make:
For thee a heart is frozen and enflamed,
A fool thou make a wise man with thy light,
The coward turns courageous for thy sake.
The mighty Gods did quake
At thy command: To birds and beasts transformed,
Great Monarchs have not scorned
To yield unto the force of beauties lure:
Such spoils thou do procure
With thy brave force, which never may be told:
With which (sweet love) thou co^quer'st every soul
In other times obscurely I did live
But with a drowsy, base, and simple kind
Of life, and only to my profit bend me:
To think of Love my self I did not give,
Or for good grace, good parts, and gentle mind,
Never did any Shepherdess commend me.
But crowned now they send me
A thousand Garlands, that I wone with praise,
In wrestling days by days,
In pitching of the Bar with arm most strong,
And singing many a Song.
After that thou did honor, and take hold
Of my (sweet Love) and of my happy soul.
What greater joy can any man desire,
Then to remain a Captive unto Love:
And have his heart subjected to his power?
And though sometimes he taste a little sower
By suffering it, as mild as gentle Dove
Yet must he be, in hew of that great hire
Whereto be does aspire:
If Lovers live afflicted and in pain,
Let them with cause complain
Of cruel fortune, and of times a^^
And let not them accuse
Thee (gentle-Loue) that does with (...)
Within thy sweetest joys each la^ (...)
Behold a fair sweet face, and shining eye^
Resembling two most bright and twinkling
Sending unto the soul a perfect light:
Behold the rare perfections of those w^^^^
And Iuorie hands, from griefs most surest bars
That mind wherein all life and glory lies,
That joy that never dies,
That he does feel, that loves and is beloved,
And my delights approved,
To see her pleased, whose love maintains me here,
All those I count so dear,
That though sometimes Love does my joys control:
Yet am I glad he dwells within my soul.
FINIS.
Bar. Young.

A Shepherds dream.
A Silly Shepherd lately sat
among a Flock of Sheep:
Where musing long on this and that,
at last he fell a sleep.
And in the slumber as he lay,
he gave a pitteous groan:
He thought his sheep were run away,
and he was left alone.
He whoopt, he whistled, and he called,
but not a sheep came near him:
Which made the Shepherd sore appalled,
to see that none would hear him.
But as the Swain amazed stood,
in this most solemn vain:
Came Phillida forth of the Wood,
and stood before the Swain.
Whom when the Shepherd did behold,
he straight began to weep:
And at the heart he grew a cold,
to think upon his sheep.
For well he knew, where came the Queen,
the Shepherd durst not stay:
And where that he durst not be seen,
the sheep must needs away.
To ask her if she saw his Flock,
might happen patience move:
And have an answer with a mock,
that such demanders prove.
Yet for because he saw her come
alone out of the Wood:
He thought he would not stand as dombe,
when speech might do him good,
And therefore falling on his knees,
to ask but for his sheep:
He did awake, and so did leese
the honor of his sleep.
FINIS.
N. Breton.

The Shepherds Ode.
NIghts were short, and days were long,
Blossoms on the Hawthorne hong,
Philomell (Night-Musiques King,)
Told the coming of the Spring:
Whose sweet-siluer-sounding-voyce,
Made the little birds rejoice,
Skipping light from spray to spray,
Till Aurora showed the day.
Scarce might one see, when I might see
(For such chances sudden be.)
By a Well of Marble-stone,
A Shepherd lying all alone.
Weep he did, and his weeping
Made the fading flowers spring.
Daphnis was his name I ween,
Youngest Swain of Summers Queen.
When Aurora saw it was he
Weep she did for company:
Weep she did for her sweet Son,
That (when antique Troy was won)
Suffered death by lucklesse Fate,
Whom she now laments too late:
And each morning (by Cocks crewe)
Showers down her silver dew,
Whose tears falling from their spring,
Give moisture to each living thing
That on earth increase and grow,
Through power of their friendly foe.
Whose effect when Flora felt,
Tears, that did her bosom melt,
(For who can resist tears often,
But she whom no tears can soften?)
Peering strait above the banks,
Showed her self to give her thanks.
Wondering thus at Natures work
(Wherein many meruailes lurk)
Me thought I heard a doleful noise,
Consorted with a mournful voice,
Drawing near, to hear more plain,
Hear I did, unto my pain,
(For who is not pained to hear
Him in grief whom heart holds dear?
Silly Swain with grief ore-gone
Thus to make his pitteous moan.
Love I did, alas the while,
Love I did, but did beguile
My dear Love with loving so,
Whom as then I did not know.
Love I did the fairest Boy
That these fields did ere enjoy.
Love I did fair Ganimede,
Venus darling, beauties bed:
Him I thought the fairest creature,
Him the quintessence of Nature.
But yet (alas) I was deceau'd,
(Love of reason is bereaved.)
For since then I saw a Less,
Less that did in beauty pass,
Pass fair Ganimede as far
As Phoebus does the smallest star.
Love commanded me to love,
Fancy bad me not remove
My affection from the Swain
Whom I never could obtain:
(For who can obtain that favor
Which he cannot grant the crauer?)
Love at last (though loath) prevailed,
Love that so my heart assailed,
Wounding me with her fair eyes,
Ah how Love can subtillize?
And devise a thousand shifts
How to work men to his drifts,
Her it is, for whom I mourn,
Her, for whom my life I scorn.
Her, for whom I weep all day,
Her, for whom I sigh, and say
Either she, or else no creature
Shall enjoy my love: whose feature
Though I never can obtain,
Yet shall my true-loue remain:
Till (my body turned to clay)
My poor soul must pass away,
To the heavens; where I hope
It shall find a resting scope:
Then since I loved thee alone,
Remember me when I am gone.
Scarce had he these last words spoken,
But me thought his heart was broken,
With great grief that did abound,
(Cares and grief the heart confound,)
In whose heart thus riu'd in three,
Eliza written I might see
In Caracters of crimson blood,
Whose meaning well I understood.
Which, for my heart might not behold:
I hied me home my Sheep to fold.
FINIS.
Rich. Barnefielde.

The Shepherds commendation of his Nymph.
What Shepherd can express
The favor of her face?
To whom in this distress
I do appeal for grace.
A thousand Cupids fly
About her gentle eye.
From which each throws a Dart
That kindles soft sweet fire
Within my sighing heart,
Possessed by desire.
No sweeter life I try
Then in her love to die.
The Lilly in the field,
That glories in his white:
For pureness now must yield
And render up his right.
Heaven pictured in her face,
Does promise joy and grace.
Fair Cynthiaes silver light,
That beats on running streams:
Compares not with her white,
Whose hairs are all Sunbeams.
So bright my Nymph does shine
As day unto my eyne.
With this there is a red,
Exceedes the Damaske-Rose:
Which in her cheeks is spread,
Whence every favor grows.
In Sky there is no star,
But she surmounts it far.
When Phoebus from the bed
Of Thetis does arise:
The morning blushing red,
In fair Carnation wise:
He shows in my Nimphs face,
As Queen of every grace.
This pleasant Lilly white,
This taint of Roseate red:
This Cynthiaes silver light,
This sweet fair Dea spread,
These Sunbeams in mine eye,
These beauties make me die.
FINIS.
Earl of Oxenford.

Coridon to his Phillis.
ALas my heart, mine eye has wronged thee,
Presumptuous eye, to gaze on Phillis face:
Whose heavenly eye no mortal man may see,
But he must die, or purchase Phillis grace.
Poor Coridon, the Nymph whose eye does move thee:
Does love to draw, but is not drawn to love thee.
Her beauty, Natures pride, and Shepherds praise,
Her eye, the heavenly Planet of my life:
Her matchless wit and grace, her fame displaies,
As if that Jove had made her for his wise.
Only her eyes shoot fiery darts to kill:
Yet is her heart as cold as Caucase hill.
My wings too weak to fly against the Sun,
Mine eyes unable to sustain her light:
My heart does yield that I am quite undone,
Thus has fair Phillis slain me with her sight.
My bud is blasted, withred is my leaf:
And all my Corn is rotted in the sheafe.
Phillis, the golden fetter of my mind,
My fancies Idol, and my vital power:
Goddess of Nimphs, and honor of thy kind,
This ages Phoenix, beauties richest bower.
Poor Coridon for love of thee must die:
Thy beauties thrall, and conquest of thine eye.
Leave Coridon to plough the barren field,
Thy buds of hope are blasted with disgrace:
For Phillis looks no hearty love do yield,
Nor can she love, for all her lovely face.
Die Coridon, the spoil of Phillis eye:
She cannot love, and therefore thou must die.
FINIS.
S. E. Dyer.

The Shepherds description of Love.
Melibeus. Shepherd, what is Love, I pray thee tell?

Faustus. It is that Fountain, and that Well,
Where pleasure and repentance dwell,
It is perhaps that sauncing bell,
That toules all into heaven or hell,
And this is love as I heard tell,

Meli. Yet what is Love, I pre-thee say?

Faust. It is a work on holy day,
It is December matched with May,
When lustie-bloods in fresh array,
Hear ten months after of the play,
And this Love, as I hear say.

Meli. Yet what is Love, good Shepherd saine?

Faust. It is a Sunshine mixed with rain,
It is a toothache, or like pain,
It is a game, where none does gain,
The Less says no, and would full feign:
And is Love, as I hear saine.

Meli. Yet Shepherd, what is Love, I pray?

Faust. It is a yea, it is a nay,
A pretty kind of sporting fray,
It is a thing will soon away,
Then Nimphs take vantage while ye may:
And this is Love as I hear say.

Meli. Yet what is Love, good Shepherd show?

Faust. A thing that creepes, it cannot go,
A prize that passes to and fro,
A thing for one, a thing for more,
And he that proves shall find it so;
And Shepherd this is love I trow.

FINIS.
Ignoto.

To his Flocks.
Feed on my Flocks securely,
Your Shepherd watched surely,
Run about my little Lambs,
Skip and wanton with your Dammes,
Your loving Heard with care will tend ye:
Sport on fair flocks at pleasure,
Nip Vaestaes flowring treasure,
I my self will duly hark,
When my watchful dog does bark,
From Woolfe and Fox I will defend ye.
FINIS.
H.C.

A Roundelay between two Shepherds.
1. Shep. TEll me thou gentle Shepherds Swain,
Who is younder in the Vale is set?

2. Shep. Oh it is she, whose sweetes do stain
The Lilly, Rose, the Violet.

1. Shep. Why does the Sun against his kind,
Fix his bright Chariot in the skies?

2. Shep. Because the Sun is strooken blind,
With looking on her heavenly eyes.

1. Shep. Why do thy flocks forbear their food,
Which sometime were thy chief delight?

2. Shep. Because they need no other good,
That live in presence of her light.

1. Shep. Why look these flowers so pale and ill,
That once attired this goodly Heath?

2. Shep. She has robbed Nature of her skill,
And sweetens all things with her breath.

1. Shep. Why slide these brooks so slow away,
Whose bubling murmur pleased thine ear?

2. Shep. Oh marvel not although they stay,
When they her heavenly voice do hear.

1. Shep. From whence come al these Shepherds Swains,
And lovely Nimphs attired in green?

2. Shep. From gathering Garlands on the Plains,
To crown our fair the Shepherds Queen.

Both. The Sun that lights this world below,
Flocks, flowers, and brooks will witness bear:
These Nimphs and Shepherds all do know,
That it is she is only fair.

FINIS.
Michaell Drayton.

The solitary Shepherds Song.
O Shadie Vale, O fair enriched Meades,
O sacred woods, sweet fields, and rising mountains
O painted flowers, green herbs where Flora treads,
Refresht by wanton winds and watery fountains.
O all you winged Queristers of wood,
that pearcht aloft, your former pains report:
And strait again recount with pleasant mood,
your present joys in sweet and seemly sort.
O all you creatures whosoever thrive
on mother Earth, in Seas, by Air, by Fire:
More blessed are you then I here under Sun,
love dies in me, when as he does revive
In you, I perish under beauties ire,
where after storms, winds, frosts, your life is wun.
FINIS.
Thom. Lodge.

The Shepherds resolution in love.
IF Jove himself be subject unto Love.
And range the woods to find a mortal pray.
If Neptune from the Seas himself remove,
And seek on sands with earthly wights to play:
Then may I love my Shepherdess by right,
Who far excels each other mortal wight?
If Pluto could by Love be drawn from hell.
To yield himself a silly virgins thrall.
If Phoebus could vouchsafe on earth to dwell,
To win a rusticke Maid unto his call:
Then how much more should I adore the sight,
Of her in whom the heavens themselves delight?
If Country Pan might follow Nimphs in chase,
And yet through love remain deuoide of blame,
If Satires were excused for seeking grace,
To joy the fruits of any mortal Dame:
My Shepherdess, why should not I love still.
On whom nor Gods nor men can gaze their fill?
FINIS.
Thom. Watson.

Coridons Hymn in praise of Amarillis.
Would mine eyes were crystal Fountains,
Where you might the shadow view
Of my greefes, like to these mountains
Swelling for the loss of you.
Cares which curelesse are alas,
Helpelesse, hapless for they grow:
Cares like tares in number pass,
All the seeds that love does sow.
Who but could remember all
Twinkling eyes still representing
Stars which pierce me to the gall?
Cause they lend no more contenting.
And you Nectar-lips, alluring
Humane sense to taste of heaven:
For no Art of man's manuring,
Finer silk has ever weauen.
Who but could remember this,
The sweet odours of your favor?
When I smeld I was in bliss.
Never felt I sweeter savor.
And your harmless heart anointed,
As the custom was of Kings:
Shows your sacred soul appointed,
To be prime of earthly things.
Ending thus remember all,
Clothed in a mantle green:
It Is enough I am your thrall,
Leave to think what eye has seen.
Yet the eye may not so leave,
Though the thought do still repine:
But must gaze till death bequeath,
Eyes and thoughts unto her shrine,
Which if Amarillis chance,
Hearing to make haste to see:
To life death she may advance.
Therefore eyes and thoughts go free.
FINIS.
T. B.

The Shepherd Carillo his Song.
Guarda mi las Vaccas
Carillo, por tu fe,
Besa mi Primero,
Yo te las guardare.
I Pre-thee keep my Kine for me
Carillo, will thou? Tell.
First let me have a kiss of thee.
And I will keep them well.
If to my charge or them to keep,
Thou do commend thy Kine or Sheep,
for thee I do suffice:
Because in this I have been bred,
But for so much as I have fed
By viewing thee, mine eyes;
Command not me to keep thy beast:
Because my self I can keep least.
How can I keep, I pre-thee tell,
Thy Kie, my self that cannot well
defend, nor please thy kind
As long as I have served thee?
But if thou will give unto me
a kiss to please my mind:
I ask no more for all my pain,
and I will keep them very feign.
For thee, the gift is not so great
That I do ask, to keep thy Neat,
but unto me it is
A guerdon, that shall make me live.
Disdain not then to lend, or give
so small a gift as this,
But if to it thou can not frame:
Then give me leave to take the same.
But if thou do (my sweet) deny
To recompense me by and by,
thy promise shall relent me:
Here-after some reward to find,
Behold how I do please my mind,
and favors do content me,
That though thou speak it but in jest,
I mean to take it at the best.
Behold how much love works in me,
And how ill recompensed of thee
that with the shadow of
Thy happy favors (though delayed)
I think my self right well appay'd,
although they prove a scoff.
Then pity me, that have forgot,
My self for thee that carest not.
O in extreme thou art most fair,
And in extreme unjust despair
thy cruelty maintains:
Oh that thou were so pitiful
Unto these torments that do pull
my soul with senseless pains,
As thou show in that face of thine:
Where pity and mild grace should shine.
If that thy fair and sweetest face
Assures me both peace and grace,
thy hard and cruel heart:
Which in that white breast thou do bear,
Does make me tremble yet for fear
thou will not end my smart.
In contraries of such a kind:
Tell me what succor shall I find?
If then young Shepherdess thou crave
A Heards-man for thy beast to have,
with grace thou may restore
Thy Shepherd from his barren love,
For never other shall thou prove,
that seeks to please thee more:
And who to serve thy turn, will never shun,
The nipping frost, and beams of parching Sun.
FINIS.
Bar. Young.

Corins dream of his fair Chloris.
What time bright Titan in the Zenith sat,
And equally the fixed poales did heat:
When to my flock my daily woes I chat,
And underneath a broad Beech took my seat.
The dreaming God which Morpheus Poets call
Augmenting fuel to my Aetnaes fire,
With sleep possessing my weak senses all,
In apparitions makes my hopes aspire.
Me thought I saw the Nymph I would embrace,
With arms abroad coming to me for help:
A lust-led Satire having her in chase,
Which after her about the fields did yelpe,
I seeing my Love in such perplexed plight,
A sturdie bat from off an Oak I reft:
And with the Rauisher continued fight,
Till breathless I upon the earth him left.
Then when my coy Nymph saw her breathless foe,
With kisses kind she gratifies my pain:
Protesting rigor never more to show,
Happy was I this good hap to obtain.
But drowsy slumbers flying to their Cell,
My sudden joy converted was to bale:
My wonted sorrows still with me do dwell,
I looked round about on H^and Dale:
But I could neither my fair Chloris view,
Nor yet the Satire which yer-while I slew.
FINIS.
W.S.

The Shepherd Damons passion.
AH trees, why fall your leaves so fast?
Ah Rocks, where are your roabes of moss?
Ah Flocks, why stand you all aghast?
Trees, Rocks, and Flocks, what, are ye pensive for my loss?
The birds me thinks tune naught but moan,
The winds breath naught but bitter plaint:
The beasts forsake their dens to groan,
Birds, Winds, and Beasts, what, does my loss your powers attaint?
Floods weep their springs above their bounds,
And Echo wailes to see my woe:
The roabe of ruthe does cloth the grounds,
Floods, Echo, grounds, why do ye all these tears bestow?
The Trees, the Rocks and Flocks reply,
The Birds, the Winds, the Beasts report:
Floods, Echo, grounds for sorrow cry,
We grieve since Phillis nill kind Damons love consort.
FINIS.
Thom. Lodge.

The Shepherd Musidorus his complaint.
COme Shepherds weeds, become your Masters mind,
Yield outward show, what inward change he tries:
Nor be abashed, since such a guest you find,
Whose strongest hope in your weak comfort lies.
Come Shepherds weeds, attend my woeful cries,
Disuse your selves from sweet Menalcas voice:
For other be those tunes which sorrow ties,
From those clear notes which freely may rejoice.
Then pour out plaint, and in one word say this:
Helpless his plaints, who spoils him self of bliss.
FINIS.
S. Phil. Sidney.

The Shepherds braule, one half answering the other.
1. WE love, and have our loves rewarded?

2. We love, and are no whit regarded.

1. We find most sweet affections snare:

2. That sweet but sower dispairefull care.

1. Who can despair, whom hope does bear?

2. And who can hope, that feels despair?

All. As without breath no pipe does move,
No Music kindly without love.

FINIS.
S. Phil. Sidney.

Dorus his comparisons.
MY Sheep are thoughts, which I both guide and serve,
Their pasture is fair hills of fruitless love:
On barren sweetes they feed, and feeding sterue,
I wail their lot, but will not other prove.
My Sheepe-hooke is wanne hope, which all vpholds:
My weeds, desires, cut out in endless folds,
What wool my Sheep shall bear, while thus they live:
In you it is, you must the judgment give.
FINIS.
S. Phil. Sidney.

The Shepherd Faustus his Song.
A fair Maid wed to prying Jelousie.
One of the fairest as ever J did see:
If that thou will a secret Lover take,
(Sweet life) do not my secret love forsak.
ECclipsed was our Sun,
And fair Aurora darkened to us quite,
Our morning star was done,
And Shepherds star lost clean out of our sight,
When that thou did thy faith in wedlock plight.
Dame Nature made thee fair,
And ill did careless Fortune marry thee,
And pity with despair
It was, that this thy hapless hap should be,
A fair Maid wed to prying Jealousy.
Our eyes are not so bold
To view the Sun, that flies with radiant wing:
Unless that we do hold
A glass before them, or some other thing.
Then wisely this to pass did Fortune bring
To cover thee with such a veil:
For heretofore, when any viewed thee,
Thy sight made his to fail,
For (sooth) thou art: thy beauty tells me,
One of the fairest as ever I did see.
Thy graces to obscure,
With such a froward husband, and so base
She meant thereby most sure
That Cupids force, and love thou should embrace,
For it is a force to love, no wondrous case.
Then care no more for kin,
And doubt no more, for fear thou must forsake,
To love thou must begin,
And from henceforth this question never make,
If that thou should a secret Lover take.
Of force it does behooue
That thou should be beloved, and that again
(Fair Mistress) thou should love,
For to what end, what purpose, and what gain,
Should such perfections serve? as now in vain
My love is of such art,
That (of it self) it well deserves to take
In thy sweet love a part:
Then for no Shepherd, that his love does make,
(Sweet life) do not my secret love forsake.
FINIS.
Bar. Young.

Another of the same, by Firmius the Shepherd.
IF that the gentle wind
does move the leaves with pleasant sound,
If that the Kid behind
Is left, that cannot find
her Dam, runs bleating up and down:
The Bagpipe, Reed, or Flute,
only with air if that they touched be,
With pity all salute,
And full of love do^ brute
thy name, and sound Diana, seeing thee:
A fair Maid wed to prying Jealousy.
The fierce and savage beasts
(beyond their kind and nature yet)
With pitteous voice and breast,
In mountains without rest
the self same Song do not forget.
If that they stayed at (Fair)
and had not passed to prying Jealousy,
With plaints of such despair
As moved the gentle air
to tears: The Song that they did sing, should be
One of the fairest as ever I did see.
Mishap, and fortunes play,
ill did they place in Beauties breast:
For since so much to say,
There was of beauty sway,
they had done well to leave the rest.
They had enough to do,
if in her praise their wits they did awake:
But yet so must they too,
And all thy love that woe,
thee not too coy, nor too too proud to make,
If that thou will a secret Lover take.
For if thou had but known
the beauty, that they here do touch,
Thou would then love alone
Thy self, nor any one,
only thy self accounting much.
But if thou do conceive
this beauty, that I will not public make,
And mean not to bereave
The world of it, but leave
the same to some (which never peer did take,)
(Sweet life) do not my secret love forsake.
FINIS.
Bar. Young.

Damelus Song to his Diaphenia.
DIaphenia like the Daffa-down-dilly,
White as the Sun, fair as the Lilly,
heigh hoe, how I do love thee?
I do love thee as my Lambs
Are beloved of their Dams,
how blessed were I if thou would prove me?
Diaphenia like the spreading Roses,
That in thy sweetes all sweetes incloses,
fair sweet how I do love thee?
I do love thee as each flower,
Loves the Suns life-giuing power,
for dead, thy breath to life might move me.
Diaphenia like to all things blessed,
When all thy praises are expressed,
dear Joy, how I do love thee?
As the birds do love the Spring:
Or the Bees their careful King,
then in requite, sweet Virgin love me.
FINIS.
H. C.

The Shepherd Eurymachus to his fair Shepherdess Mirimida.
When Flora proud in pomp of all her flowers
sat bright and gay:
And gloried in the dew of Iris showers,
and did display
Her mantle checkered all with gaudie green,
Then I
alone
A mournful man in Ericine was seen.
With folded arms I trampled through the grass,
Tracing as he
That held the Throne of Fortune brittle glass,
And love to be
Like Fortune fleeting, as the restless wind
Mixed
with mists
Whose dampe does make the clearest eyes grow blind.
Thus in a maze, I spied a hideous flame,
I cast my sight,
And saw where blithely bathing in the same
With great delight
A worm did lie, wrapped in a smoakie sweat:
And yet
it was strange,
It careless lay, and shrunk not at the heat.
I stood amazed, and wondering at the sight,
while that a dame,
That shone like to the heavens rich sparkling light,
Discourst the same,
And said, My friend, this worm within the fire:
Which lies
content,
Is Venus worm, and represents desire.
A Salamander is this princely beast,
Decked with a Crown,
Given him by Cupid as a gorgeous creast,
Against Fortunes frown.
Content he lies, and bathes him in the flame,
And goes
not forth,
For why, he cannot live without the same.
As he, so Lovers live within the fire
Of fervent love:
And shrink not from the flame of hot desire,
Nor will not move
From any heat that Venus force imparts:
But lie
content,
Within a fire, and waste away their hearts.
Up flew the Dame, and vanished in a cloud,
But there stood I,
And many thoughts within my mind did shroud
My love: for why
I felt within my heart a scorching fire,
And yet
as did
The Salamander, it was my whole desire.
FINIS.
To. Green.

The Shepherd Firmius his Song.
Shepherds give ear, and now be still,
Unto my passions, and their cause,
and what they be:
Since that with such an earnest will,
And such great signs of friendships laws,
you ask it me.
It is not long since I was whole,
Nor since I did in every part
free will resign:
It is not long since in my sole
Possession, I did know my heart,
and to be mine.
It is not long, since even and morrow,
All pleasure that my heart could find,
was in my power:
It is not long, since grief and sorrow,
My loving heart began to bind,
and to devour.
It is not long, since company
I did esteem a joy indeed
still to frequent:
Nor long, since solitarilie
I lived, and that this life did breed
my sole content.
Desirous I (wretched) to see,
But thinking not to see so much
as then I saw:
Love made me know in what degree,
His valor and brave force did touch
me with his law.
First he did put no more nor less
Into my heart, then he did view
that there did want:
But when my breast in such excess
Of lively flames to burn I knew,
then were so scant.
My joys, that now did so abate,
(My self estranged every way
from former rest:)
That I did know, that my estate,
And that my life was every day,
in Deaths arrest.
I put my hand into my side,
To see what was the cause of this
unwonted vain:
Where I did find, that torments hied
By endless death to prejudice
my life with pain.
Because I saw that there did want
My heart, wherein I did delight,
my dearest heart:
And he that did the same supplant,
No jurisdiction had of right
to play that part.
The Judge and Robber, that remain
Within my soul, their cause to try,
are there all one:
And so the giver of the pain,
And he that is condemned to die
or I, or none.
To die I care not any way,
Though without why, to die I grieve,
as I do see:
But for because I heard her say,
None die for love, for I believe
none such there be.
Then this thou shall believe by me
Too late, and without remedy
as did in brief:
Anaxerete, and thou shall see,
The little she did satisfy
with after grief.
FINIS.
Bar. Young.

The Shepherds praise of his sacred Diana.
PRaised be Dianaes fair and harmless light,
Praised be the dewes, wherewith she moists the ground:
Praised be her beams, the glory of the night,
Praised be her power, by which all powers abound.
Praised be her Nimphs, with whom she decks the Woods,
Praised be her Knights, in whom true honor lives:
Praised be that force, by which she moves the floods,
Let that Diana shine which all these gives.
In heaven Queen she is among the Spheres,
She Mistresse-like makes all things to be pure.
Eternity in her often change she bears,
She beauty is, by her the fair endure.
Time wears her not, she does his Chariot guide,
Mortality below her Orb is plast:
By her the virtue of the stars down slide.
In her is Virtues perfect Image cast.
A knowledge pure it is her worth to know:
With Circes let them dwell, that think not so.
FINIS.
Ignoto.

The Shepherds dumpe.
LIke desert Woods, with darksome shades obscured,
Where dreadful beasts, where hateful horror reigns,
Such is my wounded heart, whom sorrow paineth.
The Trees are fatal shafts, to death inured,
That cruel love within my heart maintains,
To whet my grief, when as my sorrow waineth.
The ghastly beasts, my thoughts in cares assured,
Which wadge me war, whilst heart no succor gains,
With false suspect, and fear that still remains.
The horrors, burning sighs, by cares procured,
Which forth I send, whilst weeping eye complains,
To cool the heat the helpless heart contains.
But shafts, but cares, sighs, horrors vnrecured,
Were naught esteemed, if for their pains awarded,
Your Shepherds love might be by you regarded.
FINIS.
S. E. D.

The Nymph Dianaes Song.
When that I poor soul was borne,
I was borne unfortunate:
Presently the Fates had sworn,
To foretell my hapless state.
Titan his fair beams did hide,
Phaebe' clips'd her silver light:
In my birth my Mother died,
Young and fair in heavy plight.
And the Nurse that gave me suck,
Hapless was in all her life:
And I never had good luck,
Being maid or married wife.
I loved well, and was beloved,
And forgetting, was forgot:
This a hapless marriage moved,
Greeuing that it kills me not.
With the earth would I were wed,
Then in such a grave of woes
Daily to be buried,
Which no end nor number knows.
Young my Father married me,
Forced by my obedience:
Syrenus, thy faith, and thee
I forgot without offense.
Which contempt I pay so far,
Never like was paid so much:
Iealousies do make me war,
But without a cause of such.
I do go with jealous eyes,
To my Folds, and to my Sheep:
And with jealousy I rise,
When the day begins to peep.
At his Table I do eat,
In his bed with him I lie:
But I take no rest, nor meat,
Without cruel jealousy.
If I ask him what he ails,
And whereof he jealous is?
In his answer then he fails,
Nothing can he say to this.
In his face there is no cheer,
But he ever hangs the head:
In each corner he does peer,
And his speech is sad and dead.
Ill the poor soul lives ywis:
That so hardly married is.
FINIS.
Bar. Young.

Rowlands Madrigall.
Fair Love rest thee here,
Never yet was morn so cloere,
Sweet be not unkind,
Let me thy favor find,
Or else for love I die.
Hark this pretty bubling spring,
How it makes the Meadows ring,
Love now stand my friend,
Here let all sorrow end,
And I will honor thee.
See where little Cupid lies,
Looking babies in her eyes.
Cupid help me now,
Lend to me thy bow,
to wound her that wounded me.
Here is none to see or tell,
All our Flocks are feeding by,
This bank with Roses spread,
Oh it is a dainty bed,
fit for my Love and me.
Hark the birds in yonder Groaue,
How they chaunt unto my Love,
Love be kind to me,
As I have been to thee,
for thou have won my heart.
Calm winds blow you fair,
Rock her thou sweet gentle air,
O the morn is noone,
The evening comes too soon,
to part my Love and me.
The Roses and thy lips do meet,
Oh that life were half so sweet,
Who would respect his breath,
That might die such a death,
oh that life thus might die.
All the bushes that be near,
With sweet Nightingales beset,
Hush sweet and be still,
Let them sing their fill,
there is none our joys to let.
Sun why do thou go so fast?
Oh why do thou make such have?
It is too early yet,
So soon from joys to flit,
why art thou so unkind?
See my little Lambkins run,
Look on them till I have done,
Have not on the night,
To rob me of her sight,
that live but by her eyes.
Alas, sweet Love, we must depart,
Hark, my dog begins to bark,
Some body's coming near,
They shall not find us here,
for fear of being chid.
Take my Garland and my Glove,
Wear it for my sake my Love,
Tomorrow on the green,
Thou shall be our Shepherds Queen,
crowned with Roses gay.
FINIS.
Michaell Drayton.

Alanius the Shepherd, his doleful Song, complaining of Ismeniaes cruelty.
NO more (O cruel Nymph,) now have thou prayed
Enough in thy revenge, prove not thine ire
On him that yields, the fault is now appayed
Unto my cost: Now mollify thy dire
Hardness, and breast of thine so much obdured:
And now raise up (though lately it has erred,)
A poor repenting soul, that in the obscured
Darkness of thy oblivion lies enterred.
For it falls not in that, that should commend thee:
That such a Swain as I may once offend thee.
If that the little Sheep with speed is flying
From angry Shepherd (with his words afraid)
And runs here and there with fearful crying,
And with great grief is from the Flock estrayed:
But when it now perceiues that none does follow,
And all alone, so far estraying mourns,
Knowing what danger it is in, with hollow
And fainting bleates, then fearful it returns
Unto the Flock, meaning no more to leave it:
Should it not be a just thing to receive it?
Lift up those eyes (Ismenia) which so stately
To view me, thou have lifted up before me,
That liberty, which was mine own but lately,
Give me again, and to the same restore me:
And that mild heart, so full of love and pity,
Which thou did yield to me, and ever owe me;
Behold (my Nymph) I was not then so witty
To know that sincere love that thou did show me:
Now woeful man, full well I know and rue it,
Although it was too late before I knew it.
How could it be (my enemy?) say, tell me,
How thou (in greater fault and error being
Then ever I was thought) should thus repel me?
And with new league and cruel title seeing
Thy faith so pure and worthy to be changed?
And what is that Ismenia, that does bind it
To love, whereas the same is most estranged,
And where it is impossible to find it?
But pardon me, if herein I abuse thee:
Since that the cause thou gave me does excuse me.
But tell me now, what honor have thou gained,
Auenging such a fault by thee committed,
And thereunto by thy occasion trained?
What have I done, that I have not acquitted?
Or what excess that is not amply paid,
Or suffer more, that I have not endured?
What cruel mind, what angry breast displayed,
With savage heart, to fierceness so adjured?
Would not such mortal grief make mild and tender:
But that, which my fell Shepherdess does render?
Now as I have perceived well thy reasons,
Which thou have had, or have yet to forget me,
The pains, the griefs, the guilts of forced treasons,
That I have done, wherein thou first did set me:
The passions, and thine ears and eyes refusing
To pear and see me, meaning to undo me:
Came thou to know, or be but once perusing
Th'vn sought occasions, which thou gave unto me:
Thou should not have wherewith to more torment me:
Nor I to pay the fault my rashness lent me.
FINIS.
Bar. Young.

Montana the Shepherd, his love to Aminta.
I Serve Aminta, whiter then the snow,
Straighter then Cedar, brighter then the glass:
More fine in trip, then foot of running Roe,
More pleasant then the field of flowring grass.
More gladsome to my withering joys that fade:
Then Winters Sun, or Summers cooling shade,
Sweeter then swelling Grape of ripest wine,
Softer then feathers of the fairest Swan:
Smoother then let, more stately then the Pine,
Fresher then Poplat, smaller then my span.
Clearer then Phoebus fiery pointed beam:
Or Icie crust of Christals frozen stream.
Yet is she curster then the Bear by kind,
And harder hearted then the aged Oak:
More glib then Oil, more fickle then the wind,
More stiff then steel, no sooner bent but broake.
Lo thus my service is a lasting sore:
Yet will I serve, although I die therefore.
FINIS.
Shep. Tonie.

The Shepherds sorrow for his Phaebes disdain.
OH Woods unto your walks my body hies,
To loose the traiterous bonds of tyring Love,
Where trees, where herbs, where flowers,
Their native moisture poures
From forth their tender stalks, to help mine eyes,
Yet their united tears may nothing move.
When I behold the fair adorned tree,
Which lightnings force and Winters frost resists,
Then Daphnes ill betide,
And Phoebus lawless pride
Enforce me say, even such my sorrows be:
For selfe-disdaine in Phaebes heart consists.
If I behold the flowers by morning tears
Look lovely sweet: Ah then forlorn I cry
Sweet showers for Memnon shed,
All flowers by you are fed.
Whereas my pitteous plaint that still appears,
Yields vigor to her scorns, and makes me die.
When I regard the pretty glee-full bird,
With teare-full (yet delightful) notes complain:
I yield a terror with my tears,
And while her music wounds mine ears,
Alas say I, when will my notes afford
Such like remorce, who still be-weepe my pain?
When I behold upon the leafelesse bough
The hapless bird lament her Loves depart:
I draw her biding nigh,
And sitting down I sigh,
And sighing say: Alas, that birds auow
A settled faith, yet Phaebe scorns my smart.
Thus weary in my walk, and woeful too,
I spend the day, fore-spent with daily grief:
Each object of distress
My sorrow does express.
I doat on that which does my heart undo:
And honor her that scornes-to yield relief.
FINIS.
I. F.

Espilus and Therion, their contention in Song for the May-Lady.
Espilus. TVne up my voice, a higher note I yield,
To high conceit, the Song must needs be hie:
More high then stars, more firm then flintie field
Are all my thoughts, in which I live and die.
Sweet soul to whom I vowed am a slave:
Let not wild woods so great a treasure have.

Therion. The highest note comes often from basest mind,
As shallow Brooks do yield the greatest sound:
Seek other thoughts thy life or death to find,
Thy stars be fallen, plowed is thy flinty ground.
Sweet soul, let not a wretch that serves sheep
Among his Flock so sweet a treasure keep.

Espilus. Two thousand Sheep I have as white as milk,
Though not so white as is thy lovely face:
The pasture rich, the wool as soft as silk,
All this I give, let me possess thy grace.
But still take heed, lest thou thy self submit:
To one that has no wealth, and wants his wit.

Therion. Two thousand Dear in wildest woods I have,
Them can I take, but you I cannot hold:
He is not poor who can his freedom save,
Bound but to you, no wealth but you I would.
But take this beast, if beasts you fear to miss:
For of his beasts the greatest beast he is.

Both kneeling to her Majesty. Espilus. Judge you, to whom all beauties force
is lent:

Therion. Judge you of love, to whom all love is bent.

This Song was sung before the Queens most excellent Majesty, in Wansted
Garden: as a contention between a Forrester and a Shepherd for the May-Ladie.
FINIS.
S. Phil. Sidney.

Old Melibeus Song, courting his Nymph.
Loves Queen long waiting for her true-Loue,
Slain by a Boar which he had chased,
Left off her tears, and me embraced,
She kissed me sweet, and called me new-Loue,
With my silver hair she toyed,
In my stayed looks she ioyed.
Boys (she said) breed beauties sorrow:
Old men cheer it even and morrow.
My face she named the seat of favor,
All my defects her tongue defended,
My shape she praised, but most commended
My breath, more sweet then Balm in savor.
Be old man with me delighted,
Love for love shall be requited.
With her toys at last she wone me:
Now she coyes that has undone me.
The Shepherd Syluanus his Song.
MY life (young Shepherdess) for thee
Of needs to death must post:
But yet my grief must stay with me,
After my life is lost.
The grievous ill, by death that cured is,
Continually has remedy at hand:
But not that torment that is like to this,
That in slow time, and Fortunes means does stand.
And if this sorrow cannot be
Ended with life (at most:)
What then does this thing profit me)
A sorrow won or lost?
Yet all is one to me, as now I try
a flattering hope, or that that had not been yet:
For if to day for want of it I die,
Next day I do no less for having seen it.
Feign would I die, to end and free
This grieefe, that kills me most:
If that it might be lost with me,
Or die when life is lost.
FINIS.
Bar. Young.

Coridons Song.
A Blithe and bonny Country-Lasse,
heigh hoe bonny-Lasse,
Sat sighing on the tender grass,
and weeping said: will none come woo me?
A smicker Boy, a lither Swain:
heigh hoe a smicker Swain:
That in his love was wanton feign,
with smiling looks straight came unto her.
When as the wanton Wench espied,
heigh hoe when she espied,
The means to make her self a Bride,
she simpred smooth like bonnie-bell:
The Swain that saw her squint-eyed kind,
heigh hoe squint-eyed kind,
His arms about her body twined
and said, Fair Less, how fare ye, well?
The Countrie-Kit said, well forsooth,
heigh hoe well forsooth,
But that I have a longing tooth,
a longing tooth that makes me cry:
Alas (said he) what garres thy grief,
heigh hoe what garres thy grief?
A wound (quoth she) without relief,
I fear a maid that I shall die.
If that be all, the Shepherd said,
heigh hoe the Shepherd said,
He make thee wiue it gentle Maid,
and so recure thy malady:
Hereon they kissed with many an oath,
heigh hoe many an oath,
And fore God Pan did plight their troath,
so to the Church apace they hie.
And God send every pretty peate,
heigh hoe the pretty peate,
That fears to die of this conceit,
so kind a friend to help at last:
Then Maids shall never long again,
heigh hoe to long again.
When they find ease for such a pain.
thus my Roundelay is past.
FINIS.
Thom. Lodge.

The Shepherds Sonnet.
MY fairest Ganimede disdain me not,
Though silly Shepherd I, presume to love thee,
Though my harsh Songs and Sonnets cannot move thee:
Yet to thy beauty is my love no blot:
Apollo, Jove, and many Gods beside
S'dain'd not the name of Country Shepherd Swains,
Nor want we pleasures, though we take some pains.
We live contentedly: A thing called pride
Which so corrupts the Court and every place,
(Each place I mean where learning is neglected,
And yet of late, even learnings selfe's infected,)
I know not what it means in any case.
We only (when Molorchus gins to peep,)
Learn for to fold, and to unfold our Sheep.
FINIS.
Rich. Barnefield.

Seluagia and Siluanus, their Songs to Diana.
Sell. I See thee jolly Shepherd merry,
And firm thy faith, and sound as a berry.

Sil. Love gave me joy, and Fortune gave it,
As my desire could wish to have it.

Sell. What did thou wish, tell me (sweet Lover,)
Whereby thou might such joy recover?

Sil. To love where love should be inspired:
Since there is no more to be desired.

Sell. In this great glory, and great gladness,
T'hinkst thou to have no touch of sadness?

Sil. Good Fortune gave me not such glory:
To mock my Love, or make me sorry.

Sell. If my firm love I were denying,
Tell me, with sighs would thou be dying?

Sil. Those words (in jest) to hear thee speaking:
For very grief this heart is breaking.

Sell. Yet would thou change, I pre-thee tell me,
In seeing one that did excel me?

Sil. O no, for how can I aspire,
To more, then to mine own desire?

Sell. Such great affection do thou bear me:
As by thy words thou seem to swear me?

Sil. Of thy deserts, to which a debtor
I am, thou may demand this better.

Sell. Sometimes me thinks, that I should swear it,
Sometimes me thinks, thou should not bear it.

Sil. Only in this my hap does grieve me,
And my desire, not to believe me.

Sell. Imagine that thou do not love mine,
But some brave beauty that is above mine.

Sil. To such a thing (sweet) do not will me,
Where fayning of the same does kill me.

Sell. I see thy firmness gentle Lover,
More then my beauty can discover.

Sil. And my good fortune to be higher
Then my desert, but not desire.

FINIS.
Bar. Young.

Montanus his Madrigall.
IT was a Vallie gawdie green,
Where Dian at the Fount was seen,
Green it was,
And did pass
All other of Dianaes bowers,
In the pride of Floraes flowers.
A Fount it was that no Sun sees,
Cirkled in with Cipres trees,
Set so nie,
As Phoebus eye
Could not do the Virgins scathe,
To see them naked when they bathe.
She sat there all in white,
Color fitting her delight,
Virgins so
Ought to go:
For white in Armorie is plaste.
To be the color that is chaste.
Her taffata Cassock you might see,
Tucked up above her knee,
Which did show
There below
Legs as white as Whales bone,
So white and chaste was never none.
Hard by her upon the ground,
Sat her Virgins in a round,
Bathing their
Golden hair,
And singing all in notes hie:
Fie on Venus flattering eye.
Fie on Love, it is a toy,
Cupid witless, and a boy,
All his fires,
And desires,
Are plagues that God sent from on hie:
To pester men with misery.
As thus the Virgins did disdain
Lovers joy and Lovers pain,
Cupid nie
Did epsy
Greeuing at Dianaes Song,
Slily stole these Maids among.
His bow of steel, darts of fire,
He shot amongst them sweet desire,
Which strait flies
In their eyes,
And at the entrance made them start,
For it ran from eye to heart.
Calisto strait supposed Jove,
Was fair and frolique for to love,
Dian she,
Escaped not free,
For well I wot here upon,
She loved the Swain Endimion.
Clitia, Phoebus, and Chloris eye
Thought none so fair as Mercury.
Venus thus
Did discuss
By her Son in darts of fire:
None so chaste to check desire.
Dian rose with all her Maids,
Blushing thus at Loves braides,
With sighs all
Show their thrall,
And flinging thence, pronounced this saw:
What so strong as Loves sweet law?
FINIS.
To. Green.

Astrophell to Stella, his third Song.
IF Orpheus voice had force to breathe such musiques love
Through pores of senseless trees, as it could make them move:
If stones good measure daunc'd, the Thebane walls to build
To cadence of the times, which Amphyons Lyre did yield:
More cause a like effect at leastwise brings,
O stones, O trees, learn hearing, Stella sings.
If Love might sweet'n so a boy of Shepherds brood,
To make a Lyzard dull to taste Loves dainty food:
If Eagle fierce could so in Grecian Maid delight,
As his light was her eyes, her death his endless night:
Earth gave that Love, heaven I trow Love defines,
O Beasts, O Birds, look, Love, lo, Stella shines.
The birds, stones, and trees, feel this, and feeling Love,
And if the trees, nor stones stir not the same to prove:
Nor beasts, nor birds do come unto this blessed gaze,
Know, that small Love is quick, and great Love does amaze,
They are amazed, but you with reason armed,
O eyes, O ears of men, how are you charmed?
FINIS.
S. Phil. Sidney.

A Song between Syrenus and Syluanus.
Syrenus. Who has of Cupids cates and dainties prayed,
May feed his stomach with them at his pleasure:
If in his drink some ease he has assayed,
Then let him quench his thirsting without measure:
And if his weapons pleasant in their manner,
Let him embrace his standard and his banner.
For being free from him, and quite exempted:
Joyful I am, and proud, and well contented.

Syluanus. Of Cupids dainty cates who has not prayed,
May be deprived of them at his pleasure:
If wormwood in his drink he has assayed,
Let him not quench his thirsting without measure:
And if his weapons in their cruel manner,
Let him abjure his standard and his banner:
For I not free from him, and not exempted,
Joyful I am, and proud, and well contented.

Syrenus. Love's so expert in giving many a trouble,
That now I know not why he should be praised:
He is so false, so changing, and so double,
That with great reason he must be dispraised.
Love in the end is such aiarring passion,
That none should trust unto his peevish fashion,
For of all mischief he is the only Master:
And to my good a torment and disaster.

Syluanus. Love's so expert in giving joy, not trouble,
That now I know not but he should be praised:
He is so true, so constant, never double,
That in my mind he should not be dispraised.
Love in the end is such a pleasing passion,
That every one may trust unto his fashion.
For of all good he is the only Master:
And foe unto my harms, and my disaster.

Syrenus. Not in these sayings to be proou'd a liar,
He knows that does not love, nor is beloved:
Now nights and days I rest, as I desire,
After I had such grief from me removed.
And cannot I be glad, since thus estranged,
My self from false Diana I have changed?
Hence, hence, false Love, I will not entertain their
Since to thy torments thou do seek to train me.

Syluanus. Not in these sayings to be proved a liar,
He knows that loves, and is again beloved:
Now nights and days I rest in sweet desire,
After I had such happy fortune proved
And cannot I be glad, since not estranged,
My self into Seluagia I have changed?
Come, come, good Love, and I will entertain thee.
Since to thy sweet content thou seek'st to train me.

FINIS.
Bar. Young.

Ceres Song in emulation of Cinthia.
SWell Ceres now, for other Gods are shrinking,
Pomona pineth,
Fruitless her tree:
Fair Phoebus shines
Only on me.
Conceit does make me smile whilst I am thinking,
How every one does read my story,
How every bough on Ceres lowreth,
Cause heaven plenty on me powers,
And they in leaves do only glory,
All other Gods of power bereauen,
Ceres only Queen of heaven.
With roabes and flowers let me be dressed,
Cinthia that shines
Is not so clear:
Cinthia declineth
When I appear.
Yet in this Isle she reigns as blessed,
And every one at her does wonder,
And in my ears still fond fame whispers
Cinthia shall be Ceres Mistres,
But first my Carre shall riue in sunder.
Help Phoebus help, my fall is sudden:
Cinthia, Cinthia must be Sovereign.
This Song was sung before her Majesty, at Bissam, the Lady Russels, in
prograce, The Authors name unknown to me.

A Pastoral Ode to an honorable friend.
AS to the blooming prime,
Bleake Winter being fled:
From compass of the clime,
Where Nature lay as dead,
The Rivers dulled with time,
The green leaves withered.
Fresh Zephyri (the Western brethren) be:
So the honor of your favor is to me.
For as the Plains revive,
And put on youthful green:
As plants begin to thrive,
That disattir'd had been:
And Arbours now alive,
In former pomp are seen,
So if my Spring had any flowers before:
Your breath Fauonius has encreast the store.
FINIS.
E. B.

A Nimphs disdain of Love.
HEy down a down did Dian sing,
amongst her Virgins sitting:
Then love there is no vainer thing,
for Maidens most unfitting,
And so think I, with a down down derrie.
When women knew no woe,
but lived themselves to please:
Men's fayning guiles they did not know,
the ground of their disease.
Unborn was false suspect,
no thought of jealousy:
From wanton toys and fond affect,
the Virgins life was free.
Hey down a down did Dian sing, etc
At length men used charms,
to which what Maids gave ear:
Embracing gladly endless harms:
anon enthralled were.
Thus women welcomed woe,
disguised in name of love:
A jealous hell, a painted show,
so shall they find that prove
Hey down a down did Dian sing,
amongst her Virgins sitting:
Then love there is no vainer thing,
for Maidens most unfitting.
And so think I, with a down down derrie.
FINIS.
Ignoto.

Apollos Loue-Song for fair Daphne.
MY heart and tongue were twins, at once conceived,
The eldest was my heart, borne dumb by destiny:
The last my tongue, of all sweet thoughts bereaved,
Yet strung and tuned, to play hearts harmony.
Both knit in one, and yet a-sunder placed.
What heart would speak, the tongue does still discover:
What tongue does speak, is of the heart embraced,
And both are one, to make a newfound Lover.
Newfound, and only found in Gods and Kings,
Whose words are deeds, but deeds not words regarded:
Chaste thoughts do mount, and fly with swiftest wings,
My love with pain, my pain with loss rewarded.
Engraue upon this tree Daphnes perfection:
That neither men nor Gods can force affection.
This Dittie was sung before her Majesty, at the right honorable the Lord
Chandos, at Sudley Castle, at her last being there in prograce. The Author
thereof unknown.

The Shepherd Delicius his Dittie.
Never a greater foe did Love disdain,
Or trod on grass so gay,
Nor Nymph green leaves with whiter hand has rent,
More golden hair the wind did never blow,
Nor fairer Dame has bound in white attire,
Or has in Lawne more gracious features tied,
Then my sweet Enemy.
Beauty and chastity one place refrain,
In her bear equal sway:
Filling the world with wonder and content.
But they do give me pain and double woe,
Since love and beauty kindled my desire,
And cruel chastity from me denied
All sense of iollitie.
There is no Rose, nor Lilly after rain,
Nor flower in month of May,
Nor pleasant meade, nor green in Summer sent,
That seeing them, my mind delights so,
As that fair flower which all the heavens admire,
Spending my thoughts on her, in whom abide
All grace and gifts on hie.
Me thinks my heavenly Nymph I see again
Her neck and breast display:
Seeing the whitest Ermine to frequent
Some plain, or flowers that make the fairest show.
O Gods, I never yet beheld her nier,
Or far, in shade, or Sun, that satisfied
I was in passing by.
The Meade, the Mount, the River, Wood, and Plain,
With all their brave array,
Yield not such sweet, as that fair face that is bent
Sorrows and joy in each soul to bestow
In equal parts, procured by amorous fire
Beauty and Love in her their force have tried,
to blind each humane eye.
Each wicked mind and will, which wicked vice does stain,
her virtues break and stay:
All airs infect by air are purged and spent,
Though of a great foundation they did grow.
O body, that so brave a soul do hire,
And blessed soul, whose virtues ever pried
above the starrie sky.
Only for her my life in joys I train
my soul sings many a Lay:
Musing on her, new Seas I do invent
Of sovereign joy, wherein with pride I row.
The deserts for her sake I do require,
For without her, the Springs of joy are dried
and that I do defy.
Sweet Fate, that to a noble deed do strain,
and lift my heart to day:
Sealing her there with glorious ornament,
Sweet seal, sweet grief, and sweetest overthrow.
Sweet miracle, whose fame cannot expire,
Sweet wound, and golden shaft, that so espied
such heavenly company
Of beauties graces in sweet virtues died,
As like were never in such years descried.
FINIS.
Bar. Young.

Amyntas for his Phillis.
AVrora now began to rise again,
From watery couch, and from old Tithons side:
In hope to kiss upon Acteian plain
Young Cephalus, and through the golden glide
On Eastern coast he cast so great a light,
That Phoebus thought it time to make retire
From Thetis bower, wherein he spent the night,
To light the world again with heavenly fire.
No sooner began his winged Steedes to chase
The Stigian night, mantled with duskie vale:
But poor Amyntas hastes him a pace,
In deserts thus, to weep a woeful tale.
You silent shades, and all that dwell therein,
As birds, or beasts, or worms that creep on ground:
Dispose your selves to tears, while I begin
To rue the grief of mine eternal wound.
And doleful ghosts, whose nature flies the light,
Come seat your selves with me on every side:
And while I die for want of my delight,
Lament the woes through fancy me betide.
Phillis is dead, the mark of my desire,
My cause of love, and shipwreck of my joys,
Phillis is gone that set my heart on fire,
That clad my thoughts with ruinous annoyes.
Phillis is fled, and bides I wot not where,
Phillis (alas) the praise of woman-kinde:
Phillis the Sun of this our Hemisphere,
Whose beams made me, and many others blind.
But blinded me (poor Swain) above the rest,
That like old Oedipus I live in thrall:
Still feel the woorst, and never hope the best,
My mirth in moan, and honey drowned in gall.
Her fair, but cruel eyes, bewitched my sight,
Her sweet, but fading speech enthralled my thought:
And in her deeds I reaped such delight,
As brought both will and liberty to naught.
Therefore all hope of happiness adieu,
Adieu desire, the source of all my care:
Despair tells me, my weal will nere renew,
Till thus my soul does pass in Charons Crare.
Mean time my mind must suffer Fortunes scorn,
My thoughts still wound, like wounds that still are green:
My weakened limbs be laid on beds of thorn,
My life decays, although my death's foreseen.
Mine eyes, now eyes no more, but Seas of tears,
Weep on your fill, to cool my burning breast:
Where love did place desire, twixt hope and fears,
(I say) desire, the Author of unrest.
And would to God, Phillis where ere thou be,
Thy soul did see the sower of mine estate:
My joys eclipsed, for only want of thee
My being with my self at foul debate.
My humble vows, my sufferance of woe,
My sobs and sighs, and euer-watching eyes:
My plaintiue tears, my wandering to and fro,
My will to die, my neuer-ceasing cries.
No doubt but then these sorrows would persuade,
The doom of death, to cut my vital twist:
That I with thee amidst the infernal shade,
And thou with me might sport us as we list.
Oh if thou wait on fair Proserpines train,
And hear Orpheus near th'Elizian springs:
Entreat thy Queen to free thee thence again,
And let the Thracian guide thee with his strings.
FINIS.
Tho. Watson.

Faustus and Firmius sing to their Nymph by turns.
Firmius. OF mine own self I do complain,
And not for loving thee so much,
But that in deed thy power is such
That my true love it does restrain,
And only this does give me pain,
For feign I would
Love her more, if that I could.

Tell me O hair of gold,
If I then faulty be:
That trust those killing eyes I would,
Since they did warrant me?
Have you not seen her mood,
What streams of tears she spent:
Till that I swear my faith so stood,
As her words had it bent?
Who has such beauty seen,
In one that changes so?
Or where one loves, so constant been,
Who ever saw such woe?
Ah hairs, you are not grieved,
To come from whence you be:
Seeing how once you saw I lived,
To see me as you see.
On sandy bank of late,
I saw this woman sit:
Where, Sooner die then change my state,
She with her finger writ.
Thus my belief was stayed,
Behold Loves mighty hand
On things, were by a woman said,
And written in the sand.
Translated by S. Phil. Sidney, out of Diana of Montmaior.

A Song between Taurisius and Diana, answering verse for verse.
Taurisius. THe cause why that thou do deny
To look on me, sweet foe impart?

Diana. Because that does not please the eye.
Which does offend and grieve the heart.

Taurisius. What woman is, or ever was,
That when she looks, could be moved?

Diana. She that resolves her life to pass,
Neither to love, nor to be loved.

Taurisius. There is no heart so fierce and hard
That can so much torment a soul:

Diana. Nor Shepherd of so small regard,
That reason will so much control.

Taurisius. How falls it out Love does not kill
Thy cruelty with some remorce?

Diana. Because that Love is but a will,
And free will does admit no force.

Taurisius. Behold what reason now thou have,
To remedy my loving smart:

Diana. The very same binds me as fast,
To keep such danger from my heart.

Taurisius. Why do thou thus torment my mind,
And to what end thy beauty keep?

Diana. Because thou call'st me still unkind,
And pitiless when thou do weep.

Taurisius. Is it because thy cruelty
In killing me does never end?

Diana. Nay, for because I mean thereby,
My heart from sorrow to defend.

Taurisius. Be bold so foul I am no way
As thou do think, fair Shepherdess:

Diana. With this content thee, that I say,
That I believe the same no less.

Taurisius. What, after giving me such store
Of passions, do thou mock me too?

Diana. If answers thou will any more,
Go seek them without more adoo.

FINIS.
Bar. Young.

Another Song before her Majesty at Oxford, sung by a comely Shepherd,
attended on by sundry other Shepherds and Nimphs.
Herbs, words, and stones, all maladies have cured,
Herbs, words, and stones, I used when I loved:
Herbs smells, words wind, stones hardness have procured,
By stones, nor words, nor herbs her mind was moved.
I asked the cause: this was a woman's reason,
Among herbs are weeds, and thereby are refused:
Deceit as well as truth speaks words in season,
False stones by foiles have many one abused.
I sighed, and then she said, my fancy smoaked,
I gazed, she said, my looks were follies glancing:
I sounded dead, she said, my love was choked,
I started up, she said, my thoughts were dancing.
Oh sacred Love, if thou have any Godhead:
Teach other rules to win a maydenhead:
FINIS.
Anonimus.

The Shepherds Song: a Caroll or Himne for Christmas.
SWeet Music, sweeter sarre
Then any Song is sweet:
Sweet Music heavenly rare,
Mine ears (O peers) does greet.
You gentle Flocks, whose fleeces pearl'd with dew,
Resemble heaven, whom golden drops make bright:
Listen, O listen, now, O not to you
Our pipes make sport to shorten weary night.
But voices most divine,
Make blisfull Harmony:
Voices that seem to shine,
For what else cleares the sky?
Tunes can we hear, but not the Singers see:
The tunes divine, and so the Singers be.
Lo how the firmament,
Within an azure fold:
The flock of stars has pent,
That we might them behold.
Yet from their beams proceeds not this light,
Nor can their Christals such reflection give:
What then does make the Element so bright?
The heavens are come down upon earth to live.
But harken to the Song,
Glory to glories King:
And peace all men among,
These Queristers do sing.
Angels they are, as also (Shepherds) he,
Whom in our fear we do admire to see.
Let not amazement blind
Your souls (said he) annoy:
To you and all mankind,
My message brings joy.
For lo the worlds great Shepherd now is borne
A blessed Babe, an Infant full of power:
After long night, vp-risen is the morn,
Renowning Bethlem in the Savior.
Sprung is the perfect day,
By Prophets seen a far:
Sprung is the mirthfull May,
Which Winter cannot mar.
In David's City does this Sun appear:
Clouded in flesh, yet Shepherds sit we here.
FINIS.
E. B.

Arsileus his Caroll, for joy of the new marriage, between Syrenus and Diana.
LEt now each Meade with flowers be depainted,
Of sundry colors sweetest odours glowing:
Roses yield forth your smells so finely tainted,
Calm winds the green leaves move with gentle blowing,
The Crystal Rivers flowing
With waters be increased:
And since each one from sorrow now has ceased gladness
From mournful plaints and sadness.
Ring forth fair Nimphs your joyful Songs for
Let Springs and Meades all kind of sorrow banish,
And mournful hearts the tears that they are bleeding:
Let gloomie clouds with shining morning vanish,
Let every bird rejoice that now is breeding.
And since by new proceeding,
With marriage now obtained,
A great content by great contempt is gained, gladness.
And you deuoyd of sadness,
Ring forth fair Nimphs your joyful Songs for
Who can make us to change our firm desires,
And soul to leave her strong determination,
And make us freeze in Ice, and melt in fires,
And nicest hearts to love with emulation,
Who rids us from vexation,
And all our minds commands?
But great Felicia, that his might withstandeth gladness.
That filled our hearts with sadness,
Ring forth fair Nimphs your joyful Songs for
Your fields with their distilling favors cumber
(Bridegroom and happy Bride) each heavenly power
Your Flocks, with double Lambs increased in number,
May never taste unsavory grass and sower.
The Winters frost and shower
Your Kids (your pretty pleasure)
May never hurt, and blessed with so much treasure,
To drive away all sadness:
Ring forth fair Nimphs your joyful Songs for gladness.
Of that sweet joy delight you with such measure,
Between you both fai^e issue to engender:
Longer then Nestor may you live in pleasure,
The Gods to you such sweet content surrender,
That may make mild and tender
The beasts in every mountain,
And glad the fields, and Woods, and every Fountain,
Abiuring former sadness,
Ring forth fair Nimphs, your joyful Songs for gladness.
Let amorous birds with sweetest notes delight you,
Let gentle winds refresh you with their blowing:
Let fields and Forests with their good requite you,
And Flora deck the ground where you are going.
Roses and Violets strowing,
The Iasmine and the Gilliflower,
With many more, and never in your bower,
To taste of household sadness:
Ring forth fair Nimphs your joyful Songs for gladness.
Concord and peace hold you for aye contented,
And in your joyful state live you so quiet:
That with the plague of jealousy tormented
You may not be, nor fed with Fortunes diet.
And that your names may fly yet,
To hills unknown with glory.
But now because my breast so hoarce, and sorry.
It faints, may rest from singing:
End Nimphs your Songs, that in the clouds are ringing.
FINIS.
Bar. Young.

Philistus farewell to false Clorinda.
CLorinda false adieu, thy love torments me:
Let Thirsis have thy heart, since he contents thee.
Oh grief and bitter anguish,
For thee I languish,
Feign I (alas) would hide it,
Oh, but who can abide it?
I can, I cannot I abide it.
Adieu, adieu then,
Farewell,
Leave my death now desiring:
For thou have thy requiring.
Thus spoke Philistus, on his hook relying:
And sweetly fell a dying.
FINIS.
Out of M. Morleys Madrigalls.

Rosalindes Madrigall.
Love in my bosom like a Be,
does suck his sweet:
Now with his wings, he plays with me,
now with his feet.
Within mine eyes he makes his nest,
His bed amidst my tender breast,
My kisses are his daily feast,
And yet he robs me of my rest.
Ah wanton will ye?
And if I sleep, then pierces he,
with pretty slight:
And makes his pillow of my knee,
the liue-long night.
Strike I my Lute, he tunes the string,
He music plays if I but sing,
He lends me every lonely thing,
Yet cruel he my heart does sting.
Whilst wanton, still ye.
Else I with Roses every day
will whip ye hence:
And bind ye when ye long to play,
for your offense.
I Will shut mine eyes to keep ye in,
I Will make you fast it for your sin,
He count your power not worth a pin.
Alas, what hereby shall I win
If he gainsay me?
What if I beat the wanton Boy
with many a rod?
He will repay me with annoy
because a God.
Then sit thou safely on my knee,
And let thy bower my bosom be:
Lurk in mine eyes, I like of thee.
O Cupid, so thou pity me,
Spare not, but play thee.
FINIS.
Thom. Lodge.

A Dialogue Song between Syluanus and Arsilius.
Syl. Shepherd, why do thou hold thy peace?
Sing, and thy joy to us report:

Arsil. My joy (good Shepherd) should be less,
If it were told in any sort.

Syl. Though such great favors thou do win,
Yet daigne thereof to tell some part:

Arsil. The hardest thing is to begin,
In enterprises of such Art.

Syl. Come make an end, no cause omit,
Of all the joys that thou art in:

Arsil. How should I make an end of it,
That am not able to begin?

Syl. It is not just, we should consent,
That thou shoul'dst not thy joys recite:

Arsil. The soul that felt the punishment,
Does only feel this great delight.

Syl. That joy is small, and nothing fine,
That is not told abroad to many:

Arsil. If it be such a joy as mine,
It never can be told to any.

Syl. How can this heart of thine contain
A joy, that is of such great force?

Arsil. I have it, where I did retain
My passions of so great remorse.

Syl. So great and rare a joy is this,
No man is able to withold:

Arsil. But greater that a pleasure is,
The less it may with words be told.

Syl. Yet have I heard thee heretofore,
Thy joys in open Songs report:

Arsil. I said, I had of joy some store,
But not how much, nor in what sort.

Syl. Yet when a joy is in excess,
It self it will oft-times unfold:

Arsil. Nay such a joy would be the less,
If but a word thereof were told.

FINIS.
Bar. Young.

Montanus Sonnet.
When the dog
Full of rage
With his irefull eyes
Frowns amidst the skies:
The Shepherd to assuage
The fury of the heat,
Himself does safely seat
By a Fount
Full of fair,
Where a gentle breath
Mounting from beneath,
tempereth the air.
There his flocks
Drink their fill,
And with ease repose,
While sweet sleep does close
Eyes from toyling ill,
But I burn,
Without rest,
No defensive power
Shields from Phoebus lower,
sorrow is my best.
Gentle Love
Lower no more,
If thou will invade
In the secret shade,
Labor not so sore,
I my self
And my flocks,
They their Love to please,
I my self to ease,
Both leave the shadie Oaks,
Content to burn in fire,
Since Love does so desire.
FINIS.
S. E. D.

The Nymph Seluagia her Song.
Shepherd, who can pass such wrong,
And a life in woes so deep,
Which to live is too long,
As it is too short to weep,
Grievous sighs in vain I waste,
Leesing my affiance, and
I perceive my hope at last,
with a candle in the hand.
What time then to hope among
bitter hopes that never sleep?
When this life is too too long,
as it is too short to weep.
This grief which I feel so rife,
(wretch) I do deserve as hire:
Since I came to put my life
in the hands of my desire.
Then cease not my complaints so strong,
for (though life her course does keep:)
It is not to live so long,
as it is too short to weep.
FINIS.
Bar. Young.

The Heard-mans happy life.
What pleasure have great Princes,
more dainty to their choice,
Then Heardmen wild, who careless,
in quiet life rejoice?
And Fortunes Fate not fearing,
Sing sweet in Summer morning.
Their dealings plain and rightful
are void of all deceit:
They never know how spightfull,
it is to kneel and wait;
On favorite presumptuous,
Whose pride is vain and sumptuous.
All day their flocks each tends,
at night they take their rest:
More quiet then who sends
his ship into the East;
Where Gold and Pearl are plenty,
But getting very dainty.
For Lawyers and their pleading,
they 'steeme it not a straw:
They think that honest meaning,
is of it self a law;
Where conscience judges plainly,
They spend no money vainly.
Oh happy who thus lives,
not caring much for gold:
With clothing which suffices,
to keep him from the cold.
Though poor and plain his diet:
Yet merry it is and quiet.
FINIS.
Out of M. Birds set Songs.

Cinthia the Nymph, her Song to fair Polydora.
Near to the River banks, with green
And pleasant trees on every side,
Where freest minds would most have been,
That never felt brave Cupids pride,
To pass the day and tedious hours:
Amongst those painted meades and flowers.
A certain Shepherd full of woe,
Syrenus called, his flocks did feed:
Not sorrowful in outward show,
But troubled with such grief indeed
As cruel Love is wont t'impart.
Unto a painful loving heart.
This Shepherd every day did die,
For love he to Diana bare:
A Shepherdess so fine perdie,
So lively, young, and passing fair,
Excelling more in beauties feature:
Then any other humane creature.
Who had not any thing, of all
She had, but was extreme in her,
For meanly wise none might her call,
Nor meanly fair, for he did err
If so he did: but should devise
Her name of passing fair and wise.
Favors on him she did bestow,
Which if she had not, then be sure
He might have suffered all that woe
Which afterward he did endure
When he was gone, with lesser pain,
And at his coming home again.
For when indeed the heart is free
From suffering pain or torment smart:
If wisdom does not ouer-see
And bears not the greatest part;
The smallest grief and care of mind:
Does make it captive to their kind.
Near to a River swift and great,
That famous Ezla had to name:
The careful Shepherd did repeat
The fears he had by absence blame,
Which he suspect where he did keep:
And feed his gentle Lambs and Sheep.
And now sometimes he did behold
His Shepherdess, that there about
Was on the mountains of that old
And ancient Leon, seeking out.
From place to place the pastures best.
Her Lambs to feed, her self to rest.
And sometime musing, as he lay
When on those hills she was not seen:
Was thinking of that happy day,
When Cupid gave him such a Queen
Of beauty, and such cause of joy:
Wherein his mind he did employ.
Yet said (poor man) when he did see
Himself so sunk in sorrows pit:
The good that Love has given me,
I only do imagine it,
Because this nearest harm and trouble:
Hereafter I should suffer double.
The Sun for that it did decline,
The careless man did not offend
With fiery beams, which scarce did shine
But that which did of love depend,
And in his heart did kindle fire:
Of greater flames and hot desire.
Him did his passions all inuit,
The green leaves blown with gentle wind:
Christaline streams with their delight,
And Nightingales were not behind,
To help him in his loving verse:
Which to himself he did rehearse.
FINIS.
Bar. Young.

The Shepherd to the Flowers.
SWeet Violets (Loves Paradise) that spread
Your gracious odours, which you couched bear
Within your palie faces:
Upon the gentle wing of some calme-breathing-winde
That plays amidst the Plain,
If by the favor of propitious stars you gain
Such grace as in my Ladies bosom place to find:
Be proud to touch those places.
And when her warmth your moisture forth does wear,
Whereby her dainty parts are sweetly fed:
Your honors of the flowrie Meades I pray.
You pretty daughters of the Earth and Sun:
With mild and seemly breathing strait display
My bitter sighs, that have my heart undone.
Vermillion Roses, that with new days rise
Display your crimson solds fresh locking fair,
Whose radiant bright, disgraces
The rich adorned rays of roseate rising morn,
Ah if her Virgins hand
Do pluck your pure, ere Phoebus view the land,
And veil your gracious pomp in lovely Natures scorn.
If chance my Mistress traces
Fast by your flowers to take the Summers air:
Then woeful blushing tempt her glorious eyes,
To spread their tears, Adonis death reporting,
And tell Loves torment, sorrowing for her friend:
Whose drops of blood within your leaves consorting,
Report fair Venus moanes to have no end.
Then may remorse, in pitying of my smart:
Dry up my tears, and dwell within her heart.
FINIS.
Ignoto.

The Shepherd Arsilius his Song to his Rebeck.
NOw Love and Fortune turn to me again,
And now each one enforces and assures
A hope, that was dismayed, dead, and vain:
And from the harbor of mishaps assures
A heart that is consumed in burning fire,
With unexpected gladness, that admires
My soul to lay a-side her mourning tire,
And senses to prepare a place for joy,
Care in oblivion endless shall expire.
For every grief of that extreme annoy
Which when my torment reigned, my soul (alas)
Did feel, the which long absence did destroy,
Fortune so well appayes, that never was
So great the torment of my passed ill,
As is the joy of this same good I pass.
Return my heart, sursaulted with the fill
Of thousand great vnrests, and thousand fears:
Enjoy thy good estate, if that thou will.
And wearied eyes, leave off your burning tears,
For soon you shall behold her with delight,
For whom my spoils with glory Cupid bears.
Senses which seek my star so clear and bright,
By making here and there your thoughts estray:
Tell me, what will you feel before her sight?
Hence solitariness, torments away,
Felt for her sake, and wearied members cast
Off all your pain, redeemed this happy day.
O stay not time, but pass with speedy have,
And Fortune hinder not her coming now.
O God, betides me yet this grief at last?
Come my sweet Shepherdess, the life which thou
(Perhaps) did think was ended long ago,
At thy command is ready still to bow.
Comes not my Shepherdess desired so?
O God, what if she is lost, or if she stray
Within this wood, where trees so thick do grow?
Or if this Nymph that lately went away,
Perhaps forgot to go and seek her out:
No, no, in (her) oblivion never lay.
Thou only art my Shepherdess, about
Whose thoughts my soul shall find her joy and rest:
Why comm'st not then to assure it from doubt?
O see thou not the Sun pass to the West?
And if it pass, and I behold thee not:
Then I my wonted torments will request,
And thou shall wail my hard and heavy lot.
FINIS.
Bar. Young.

Another of Astrophell to his Stella.
IN a Grove most rich of shade,
Where Birds wanton music made;
May, then young, his pyed weeds showing,
New perfumed, with flowers fresh growing.
Astrophell with Stella sweet,
Did for mutual comfort meet
Both within themselves oppressed,
But each in the other blessed.
Him great harms had taught much care,
Her fair neck a foul yoke bare:
But her sight his cares did banish,
In his sight her yoke did vanish.
Wept they had, alas the while,
But now tears themselves did smile.
While their eyes by Love directed,
Enterchangeably reflected.
Sigh they did, but now betwixt
Sighs of woes, were glad sighs mixed,
With arms crossed, yet testifying
Restless rest, and living dying.
Their ears hungry of each word,
Which the dear tongue would afford,
But their tongues restrained from walking,
Till their hearts had ended talking.
But when their tongues could not speak,
Love it self did silence break,
Love did set his lips a-sunder,
Thus to speak in love and wonder.
Stella Sovereign of my joy,
Fair triumpher of annoy,
Stella, star of heavenly fire,
Stella, Loadstarre of desire.
Stella, in whose shining eyes,
Are the lights of Cupids skies,
Whose beams where they once are darted,
Love therewith is strait imparted.
Stella, whose voice when it speaks,
Senses all asunder breaks,
Stella, whose voice when it sings,
Angels to acquaintance brings.
Stella, in whose body is
Writ each Character of bliss,
Whose face all, all beauty passes,
Save thy mind, which it surpasses.
Grant, O grant: but speech alas
Fails me, fearing on to pass.
Grant, O me, what am I saying?
But no fault there is in praying.
Grant (O dear) on knees I pray,
(Knees on ground he then did stay)
That not I, but since I love you,
Time and place for me may move you.
Never season was more fit,
Never room more apt for it.
Smiling air alowes my reason,
The birds sing, now use the season.
This small wind, which so sweet is,
See how it the leaves does kiss,
Each tree in his best attyring
Sense of love to love inspiring.
Love makes earth the water drink,
Love to earth makes water sink:
And if dumb things be so witty,
Shall a heavenly grace want pity?
There his hands in their speech, feign
Would have made tongues language plain.
But her hands, his hands repelling:
Gave repulse, all grace excelling.
Then she spoke; her speech was such,
As not ears, but heart did touch:
While such wise she love denied,
As yet love she signified.
Astrophell, said she, my Love,
Cease in these effects to prove.
Now be still, yet still believe me,
Thy grief more then death does grieve me.
If that any thought in me,
Can taste comfort but of thee,
Let me feed with hellish anguish,
Ioylesse, helpless, endless languish.
If those eyes you praised, be
Half so dear as you to me:
Let me home return stark blinded
Of those eyes, and blinder minded.
If to secret of my heart
I do any wish impart:
Where thou art not foremost placed;
Be both wish and I defaced.
If more may be said, I say
All my bliss on thee I lay.
If thou love, my love content thee,
For all love, all faith is meant thee.
Trust me, while I thee deny,
In my self the smart I try.
Tirant, honor does thus use thee,
Stellaes self might not refuse thee.
Therefore (dear) this no more move,
Least, though I leave not thy love,
Which too deep in me is framed:
I should blush when thou art named.
There-with-all, away she went,
Leaving him to passion rent:
With what she had done and spoken,
That therewith my Song is broken.
FINIS.
S. Phil. Sidney.

Syrenus his Song to Dianaes Flocks.
PAssed contents,
Oh what mean ye?
Forsake me now, and do not weary me.
Will thou hear me O memory?
My pleasant days, and nights again,
I have appai'd with seauen-fold pain.
Thou have no more to ask me why,
For when I went, they all did die,
As thou do see:
O leave me then, and do not weary me.
Green field, and shadowed valley, where
Sometime my chiefest pleasure was,
Behold what I did after pass.
Then let me rest, and if I bear
Not with good cause continual fear:
Now do you see,
O leave me then, and do not trouble me.
I saw a heart changed of late,
And wearied to assure mine:
Then I was forced to recure mine
By good occasion, time and fate,
My thoughts that now such passion hate,
O what mean ye?
Forsake me now, and do not weary me.
You Lambs and Sheep that in these Lays,
Did sometime follow me so glad:
The merry hours, and the sad
Are passed now, with all those days.
Make not such mirth and wonted plays
As once did ye.
For now no more, you have deceived me.
If that to trouble me you come,
Or come to comfort me indeed:
I have no ill for comforts need.
But if to kill me: Then (in some)
Now my joys are dead and dombe,
Full well may ye
Kill me, and you shall make an end of me.
FINIS.
Bar. Young.

To Amarillis.
THough Amarillis dance in green,
Like Fairie Queen,
And sing full clear,
With smiling cheer.
Yet since her eyes make heart so sore,
hey hoe, chill love no more.
My Sheep are lost for want of food
And I so wood
That all the day:
I sit and watch a Heard-mayde gay,
Who laughs to see me sigh so sore:
hey hoe, chill love no more.
Her loving looks, her beauty bright,
Is such delight,
That all in vain:
I love to like, and loose my gain,
For her that thanks me not therefore,
hey hoe, chill love no more,
Ah wanton eyes, my friendly foes,
And cause of woes,
Your sweet desire
Breeds flames of Ice, and freeze in fire.
You scorn to see me weep so sore:
hey hoe, chill love no more.
Love ye who list, I force him not,
Since God it wot
The more I wail:
The less my sighs and tears prevail.
What shall I do, but say therefore,
hey hoe, chill love no more?
FINIS.
Out of M. Birds set Songs.

Cardenia the Nymph, to her false Shepherd Faustus.
FAustus, if thou will read from me
These few and simple lines,
By them most clearly thou shall see,
How little should accounted be
Thy feigned words and signs.
For noting well thy deeds unkind,
Shepherd, thou must not scan:
That ever it came to my mind,
To praise thy faith like to the wind,
Or for a constant man.
For this in thee shall so be sound,
As smoke blown in the air:
Or like Quicksilver turning round,
Or as a house built on the ground
Of sands that do impair.
To firmness thou art contrary,
More slipp'rie then the Eele:
Changing as Weather-cocke on hie,
Or the Camelion on the die,
Or Fortunes turning wheel.
Who would believe thou were so free,
To blaze me thus each hour?
My Shepherdess, thou live in me,
My soul does only dwell in thee,
And every vital power.
Pale Atropos my vital string
Shall cut, and life offend:
The streams shall first turn to their spring.
The world shall end, and every thing,
Before my love shall end.
This love that thou did promise me,
Shepherd, where is it found?
The word and faith I had of thee,
O tell me now, where may they be,
Or where may they resound?
Too soon thou did the title gain
Of giver of vain words:
Too soon my love thou did obtain,
Too soon thou lou'dst Diana in vain,
That naught but scorns affords.
But one thing now I will thee tell,
That much thy patience moves:
That though Diana does excel
In beauty, yet she keeps not well
Her faith, not loyal proves,
Thou then have chosen, each one says,
Thine equal, and a shrow:
For if thou have undone thy faith,
Her Love and Lover she betrayeth,
So like to like may go.
If now this Sonnet which I send
Will anger thee: Before
Remember Faustus (yet my friend,)
That if these speeches do offend,
Thy deeds do hurt me more.
Thus let each one of us amend,
Thou deeds, I words so spent:
For I confess I blame my pen,
Do thou as much, so in the end,
Thy deeds thou do repent.
FINIS.
Bar. Young.

Of Phillida.
AS I beheld, I saw a Heardman wild,
with his sheepe-hooke a picture fine deface:
Which he sometime his fancy to beguile,
had carved on bark of Beech in secret place.
And with despite of most afflicted mind,
through deep despair of heart, for love dismayed:
He pulled even from the tree the carved rind,
and weeping sore, these woeful words he said.
Ah Phillida would God thy picture fair,
I could as lightly blot out of my breast:
Then should I not thus rage in deep despair,
and tear the thing sometime I liked best.
But all in vain, it booteth not God wot:
What printed is in heart, on tree to blot.
FINIS.
Out of M. Birds set Songs.

Melisea her Song, in scorn of her Shepherd Narcissus.
YOung Shepherd turn a-side, and move
Me not to follow thee:
For I will neither kill with love,
Nor love shall not kill me
Since I will live, and never show,
Then die not, for my love I will not give
For I will never have thee love me so,
As I do mean to hate thee while I live.
That since the Lover so does prove
His death, as thou do see:
Be bold I will not kill with love,
Nor love shall not kill me.
FINIS.
Bar. Young.

His answer to the Nimphs Song.
IF to be loved it thee offend,
I cannot choose but love thee still:
And so thy grief shall have no end,
Whiles that my life maintains my will.
O let me yet with grief complain,
since such a torment I endure:
Or else fulfill thy great disdain,
to end my life with death most sure.
For as no credit thou will lend,
and as my love offends thee still:
So shall thy sorrows have no end,
whiles that my life maintains my will.
If that by knowing thee, I could
leave off to love thee as I do:
Not to offend thee, then I would
leave off to like and love thee too.
But since all love to thee does tend,
and I of force must love thee still:
Thy grief shall never have an end,
whiles that my life maintains my will.
FINIS.
Bar. Young.

Her present answer again to him.
ME thinks thou take the worser way,
(Enamored Shepherd) and in vain
That thou will seek thine own decay,
To love her, that does thee disdain.
For thine own self, thy woeful heart
Keep still, else art thou much to blame:
For she to whom thou gave each part
Of it, disdaines to take the same.
Follow not her that makes a play,
And lest of all thy grief and pains:
And seek not (Shepherd) thy decay.
To love her that thy love disdaines.
FINIS.
Bar. Young.

His last reply.
SInce thou to me were so unkind,
My self I never loved, for
I could not love him in my mind,
Whom thou (fair Mistress) do abhor.
If viewing thee, I saw thee not,
And seeing thee, I could not love thee:
Dying, I should not live (God wot)
Nor living, should to anger move thee.
But it is well that I do find
My life so full of torments, for
All kind of ills do fit his mind
Whom thou (fair Mistress) do abhor.
In thy oblivion buried now
My death I have before mine eyes:
And here to hate my self I vow,
As (cruel) thou do me despise.
Contented ever thou did find
Me with thy scorns, though never (for
To say the truth) I ioyed in mind,
After thou did my love abhor.
FINIS.
Bar. Young.

Philon the Shepherd, his Song.
While that the Sun with his beams hot,
Scorched the fruits in vale and mountain:
Philon the Shepherd late forgot,
Sitting besides a Crystal Fountain:
In shadow of a green Oake-tree,
Upon his Pipe this Song played he.
Adieu Love, adieu Love, untrue Love,
Untrue Love, untrue Love, adieu Love:
Your mind is light, soon lost for new love.
So long as I was in your sight,
I was your heart, your soul, and treasure:
And evermore you sob'd and sighed,
Burning in flames beyond all measure.
Three days endured your love to me:
And it was lost in other three.
Adieu Love, adieu Love, untrue Love, etc.
Another Shepherd you did see,
To whom your heart was soon enchained:
Full soon your love was leapt from me,
Full soon my place he had obtained.
Soon came a third, your love to win:
And we were out, and he was in.
Adieu Love, etc.
Sure you have made me passing glad,
That you your mind so soon removed:
Before that I the leisure had,
To choose you for my best beloved.
For all your love was past and done:
Two days before it was begun.
Adieu Love, etc.
FINIS.
Out of M. Birds set Songs.

Lycoris the Nymph, her sad Song.
IN dew of Roses, steeping her lovely cheeks,
Lycoris thus sat weeping.
Ah Dorus false, that have my heart bereft me,
And now unkind have left me.
Hear alas, oh hear me,
Aye me, aye me,
Cannot my beauty move thee?
Pity, yet pity me,
Because I love thee.
Aye me, thou scorn'st, the more I pray thee:
And this thou do, and all to slay me.
Why do then,
Kill me, and vaunt thee:
Yet my Ghost
Still shall haunt thee.
FINIS.
Out of M. Morleyes Madrigalis.

To his Flocks.
BVrst forth my tears, assist my forward grief,
And show what pain imperious Love prouokes
Kind tender Lambs lament Loves scant relief,
And pine, since pensive care my freedom yoakes,
Oh pine, to see me pine, my tender Flocks.
Sad pining care, that never may have peace,
At Beauties gate, in hope of pity knocks:
But mercy sleeps, while deep disdaines increase,
And Beauty hope is her fair bosom yoakes:
Oh grieve to hear my grief, my tender Flocks.
Like to the winds my sighs have winged been.
Yet are my sighs and suits repaide with mockes:
I plead, yet she repineth at my teene,
O ruthlesse rigor, harder then the Rocks,
That both the Shepherd kills, and his poor Flocks.
FINIS.
To his Love.
COme away, come sweet Love,
The golden morning breaks:
All the earth, all the air,
Of love and pleasure speaks.
Teach thine arms then to embrace,
And sweet Rosy lips to kiss:
And mix our souls in mutual bliss.
Eyes were made for beauties grace,
Viewing, ruing Loves long pain:
Procured by beauties rude disdain.
Come away, come sweet Love,
The golden morning wastes:
While the Sun from his Sphere
His fiery arrows casts,
Making all the shadows fly,
Playing, staying in the Groaue:
To entertain the stealth of love.
Thither sweet Love let us hie
Flying, dying in desire:
Winged with sweet hopes and heavenly fire.
Come away, come sweet Love,
Do not in vain adiorne
Beauties grace that should rise
Like to the naked morn.
Lillies on the Rivers side,
And fair Cyprian flowers new blown,
Desire no beauties but their own.
Ornament is Nurse of pride,
Pleasure, measure, Loves delight:
Have then sweet Love our wished flight.
FINIS.
Another of his Cynthia.
AWay with these selfe-louing-Lads,
Whom Cupids arrowe never glads.
Away poor souls that sigh and weep,
In love of them that lie and sleep,
For Cupid is a Meadow God:
And forces none to kiss the rod.
God Cupids shaft like destiny,
Does either good or ill decree.
Desert is borne out of his bow,
Reward upon his feet does go.
What fools are they that have not known,
That Love likes no laws but his own?
My Songs they be of Cynthias praise,
I wear her Rings on Holy Days,
On every Tree I write her name,
And every day I read the same.
Where Honor, Cupids rival is:
There miracles are seen of his.
If Cynthia crave her Ring of me,
I blot her name out of the tree.
If doubt do darken things held dear:
Then welfare nothing once a year.
For many run, but one must win:
Fools only hedge the Cuckoe in.
The worth that worthiness should move,
Is love, which is the due of love.
And love as well the Shepherd can,
As can the mighty Noble man.
Sweet Nymph it is true, you worthy be,
Yet without love, naught worth to me.
FINIS.
Another to his Cynthia.
MY thoughts are winged with hopes, my hopes with love,
Mount love unto the Moon in clearest night:
And say, as she does in the heavens move,
On earth so waines and wexeth my delight.
And whisper this but softly in her ears:
Hope often does hang the head, and trust shed tears
And you my thoughts that some mistrust do carry,
If for mistrust my Mistress do you blame:
Say, though you alter, yet you do not vary.
As she does change, and yet remain the same.
Distrust does enter hearts, but not infect,
And love is sweetest, seasoned with suspect.
If she for this, with clouds do mask her eyes,
And make the heavens dark with her disdain:
With windy sighs dispierce them in the skies,
Or with thy tears dissolve them into rain.
Thoughts, hopes, and love, return to me no more,
Till Cynthia shine, as she has done before,
FINIS.
These three Ditties were taken out of Master John Dowlands Book of Tableture
for the Lute, the Authors names not there set down, and therefore left to
their owners.

Montanus Sonnet in the Woods.
ALas, how wander I amidst these Woods,
Whereas no day bright shine does find access?
But where the melancholy fleeting floods,
(Dark as the night) my night of woes express,
Disarmed of reason, spoiled of Natures goods,
Without redress to salve my heaviness
I walk, whilst thought (too cruel to my harms,)
with endless grief my heedlesse judgment charms.
My silent tongue assailed by secret fear,
My traiterous eyes imprisoned in their joy:
My fatal peace devoured in fained cheer,
My heart enforced to harbor in annoy.
My reason robbed of power by yielding care,
My fond opinions, slave to every joy.
Oh Love, thou guide in my uncertain way:
Woe to thy bow, thy fire, the cause of my decay.
FINIS.
S. E. D.

The Shepherds sorrow, being disdained in love.
Muses help me, sorrow swarmeth,
Eyes are fraught with Seas of languish:
Hapless hope my solace harmeth,
Minds repast is bitter anguish.
Eye of day regarded never,
Certain trust in world untrusty:
Flattering hope beguileth ever,
Weary old, and wanton lusty.
Dawne of day beholds enthroned,
Fortunes darling proud and dreadlesse:
Darksome night does hear him moaned,
Who before was rich and needless.
Rob the Sphere of lines united,
Make a sudden void in nature:
Force the day to be benighted,
Reaue the cause of time and creature.
Ere the world will cease to vary,
This I weep for, this I sorrow:
Muses, if you please to tarry,
Further help I mean to borrow.
Courted once by Fortunes favor,
Compast now with Enuies curses:
All my thoughts of sorrows savor,
Hopes run fleeting like the Sourses.
Aye me, wanton scorn has maimed
All the joys my heart enjoyed:
Thoughts their thinking have disclaimed,
Hate my hopes have quite annoyed.
Scant regard my weal has scanted,
Looking coy, has forced my lowering;
Nothing liked, where nothing wanted,
Weds mine eyes to ceaselesse showring.
Former love was once admired,
Present favor is estraunged:
Loathed the pleasure long desired,
Thus both men and thoughts are changed.
Lovely Swain with luckie speeding,
Once, but now no more so friended:
You my Flocks have had in feeding,
From the morn, till day was ended.
Drink and fodder, food and folding
Had my Lambs and Ewes together:
I with them was still beholding,
Both in warmth and Winter weather.
Now they languish, since refused,
Ewes and Lambs are pained with pining:
I with Ewes and Lambs confused,
All unto our deaths declining.
Silence, leave thy Cave obscured,
Daigne a doleful Swain to tender:
Though disdaines I have endured.
Yet I am no deep offender.
Phillips Son can with his finger
Hide his scarre, it is so little:
Little sin a day to linger,
Wise men wander in a tittle.
Trifles yet my Swain have turned,
Though my Sun he never shows:
Though I weep, I am not mourned,
Though I want, no pity grows.
Yet for pity, love my Muses,
Gentle silence be their cover:
They must leave their wonted uses,
Since I leave to be a Lover.
They shall live with thee enclosed,
I will loath my Pen and Paper:
Art shall never be supposed,
Sloth shall quench the watching Taper.
Kiss them silence, kiss them kindly,
Though I leave them, yet I love them:
Though my wit have led them blindly,
Yet a Swain did once approve them.
I will travail soiles removed,
Night and morning never merry:
Thou shall harbor that I loved,
I will love that makes me weary.
If perchance the Shepherd strayeth,
In thy walks and shades unhaunted:
Tell the teene my heart betrayeth,
How neglect my joys have daunted.
FINIS.
Thom. Lodge.

A Pastoral Song between Phillis and Amarillis, two Nimphs, each answering
other line for line.
FIe on the sleights that men devise,
heigh hoe silly sleights:
When simple Maids they would entice,
Maids are young men's chief delights.
Nay, women they witch with their eyes,
eyes like beams of burning Sun:
And men once caught, they soon despise,
so are Shepherds often undone.
If any young man win a maid,
happy man is hec:
By trusting him she is betraide,
fie upon such treachery.
If Maids win young men with their guiles,
heigh hoe guilefull grief:
They deal like weeping Crocodiles,
that murder men without relief.
I know a simple Country Hind,
heigh hoe silly Swain:
To whom fair Daphne proved kind,
was he not kind to her again?
He vowed by Pan with many an oath,
heigh hoe Shepherds God is he:
Yet since has changed, and broke his troath,
troth-plight broke, will plagued be.
She had deceived many a Swain,
fie on false deceit:
And plighted troth to them in vain,
there can be no grief more great.
Her measure was with measure paid,
heigh hoe, heigh hoe equal meede:
She was begui'ld that had betraide,
so shall all deceivers speed.
If every Maid were like to me,
heigh hoe hard of heart:
Both love and lovers scorned should be,
scorners shall be sure of smart.
If every Maid were of my mind,
heigh hoe, heigh hoe lovely sweet:
They to their Lovers should prove kind,
kindness is for Maiden's meet.
Me thinks love is an idle toy,
heigh hoe busy pain:
Both wit and sense it does annoy,
both sense and wit thereby we gain.
Tush Phillis cease, be not so coy,
heigh hoe, heigh hoe coy disdain:
I know you love a Shepherds boy,
fie that Maidens so should fame.
Well Amarillis, now I yield,
Shepherds pipe aloude:
Love conquers both in town and field,
like a Tirant, fierce and proud.
The evening star is up ye see,
Vesper shines, we must away:
Would every Lover might agree,
so we end our Roundelay.
FINIS.
H. C.

The Shepherds Antheme.
Near to a bank with Roses set about,
Where pretty Turtles joining bill to bill:
And gentle springs steal softly murmuring out,
Washing the foot of pleasures sacred hill.
There little Love sore wounded lies,
his bow and arrows broken:
Bedewde with tears from Venus eyes.
Oh that it should be spoken.
Bear him my heart, slain with her scornful eye,
Where sticks the arrow that poor heart did kill:
With whose sharp pyle, yet will him ere he die,
About my heart to write his latest will.
And bid him send it back to me,
at instant of his dying:
That cruel, cruel she may see,
my faith and her denying.
His Hearse shall be a mournful Cypres shade,
And for a Chauntrie, Philomels sweet lay:
Where prayer shall continually be made,
By Pilgrim lovers, passing, by that way.
With Nimphs and Shepherds yearly moan,
his timelesse death beweeping:
And telling that my heart alone,
has his last will in keeping.
FINIS.
Mich. Drayton.

The Countess of Pembrokes Pastoral.
A Shepherd and a Shepherdess,
sat keeping sheep upon the downs:
His looks did gentle blood express,
her beauty was no food for clownes.
Sweet lovely twain, what might you be?
Two fronting hills bedeckt with flowers,
they chose to be each other seat:
And there they stole their amorous hours,
with sighs and tears, poor lovers meat.
Fond Love that feed'st thy servants so.
Fair friend, quoth he, when shall I live,
That am half dead, yet cannot die?
Can beauty such sharp guerdon give,
to him whose life hangs in your eye?
Beauty is mild, and will not kill.
Sweet Swain, quoth she, accuse not me,
that long have been thy humble thrall:
But blame the angry destiny,
whose kind consent might finish all.
Ungentle Fate, to cross true Love.
Quoth he, let not our Parents hate,
disioyne what heaven has linckt in one:
They may repent, and all too late
if childlesse they be left alone,
Father nor friend, should wrong true love.
The Parents frown, said she, is death,
to children that are held in awe:
From them we drew our vital breath.
they challenge duty then by law,
Such duty as kills not true Love,
They have, quoth he, a kind of sway,
on these our earthly bodies here:
But with our souls deal not they may,
the God of love does hold them dear.
He is most meet to rule true love.
I know, said she, it is worse then hell,
when Parents choice must please our eyes:
Great hurt comes thereby, I can tell,
forced love in desperate danger dies.
Fair Maid, then fancy thy true love.
If we, quoth he, might see the hour,
of that sweet state which never ends.
Our heavenly gree might have the power,
to make our Parents as dear friends.
All rank our yields to sovereign love.
Then God of love, said she, consent,
and show some wonder of thy power:
Our Parents, and our own content,
may be confirmde by such an hour,
Grant greatest God to further love.
The Fathers, who did always tend,
when thus they got their private walk,
As happy fortune chaunc'd to send.
unknown to each, heard all this talk.
Poor souls to be so crossed in love.
Behind the hills whereon they sat,
they lay this while and listened all:
And were so moved both thereat,
that hate in each began to fall.
Such is the power of sacred love.
They showed themselves in open sight,
poor Lovers, Lord how they were mazde?
And hand in hand the Fathers plight,
whereat (poor hearts) they gladly gazde.
Hope now begins to further love.
And to confirm a mutual band,
of love, that at no time should cease:
They likewise joined hand in hand,
the Shepherd and the Shepherdess.
Like fortune still befall true love.
FINIS.
Shep. Ionie.

Another of Astrophell.
THE Nightingale so soon as April brings
Unto her rested sense a perfect waking:
While late bare earth, proud of new clothing springs,
Sings out her woes, a thorn her Song-booke making.
And mournefully bewailing
Her throat in tunes expresses,
What grief her breast oppresses,
For Tereus force, on her chaste will prevailing.
Oh Philomela fair, oh take some gladness,
That here is iuster cause of plaintfull sadness.
Thine earth now springs, mine fades:
Thy throne without, my thorn my heart inuadeth.
Alas, she has no other cause of languish
But Tereus love, on her by strong hand wroken:
Wherein she suffering all her spirits languish,
Full woman-like complains, her will was broken.
But I, who daily craving,
Cannot have to content me:
Have more cause to lament me,
Since wanting is more woe, then too much having.
Oh Philomela fair, oh take some gladness,
That here is iuster cause of plaintfull sadness,
Thine earth now springs, mine fades:
Thy thorn without, my thorn my heart inuadeth.
FINIS.
S. Phil. Sidney.

An Inuectiue against Love.
ALL is not gold that shines bright in show,
Not every flower so good, as fair, to sight,
The deepest streams, above do calmest flow,
And strongest poisons often the taste delight,
The pleasant bait does hide the harmfull hook,
And false deceit can lend a friendly look.
Love is the gold whose outward hew does pass,
Whose first beginnings goodly promise make
Of pleasures fair, and fresh as Summers grass,
Which neither Sun can parch, nor wind can shake:
But when the mould should in the fire be tried,
The gold is gone, the dross does still abide.
Beauty the flower, so fresh, so fair, so gay,
So sweet to smell, so soft to touch and taste:
As seems it should endure, by right, for aye,
And never be with any storm defast,
But when the baleful Southern wind does blow,
Gone is the glory which it erst did show.
Love is the stream, whose waves so calmely flow
As might entice men's minds to wade therein:
Love is the poison mixed with sugar so,
As might by outward sweetness liking win,
But as the deep ore'flowing stops thy breath,
So poison once received brings certain death.
Love is the bait, whose taste the fish deceiues,
And makes them swallow down the choking hook,
Love is the face whose fairness judgment reaues,
And makes thee trust a false and fained look.
But as the hook the foolish fish does kill,
So flattering looks, the lovers life does spill.
FINIS.
Fair Phillis and her Shepherd.
Shepherd, saw you not
my fair lovely Phillis,
Walking on this Mountain,
or on yonder plain?
She is gone this way to Dianaes Fountain,
and has left me wounded,
with her high disdain.
Aye me, she is fair,
And without compare.
Sorrow come and sit with me:
Love is full of fears,
Love is full of tears,
Love without these cannot be.
Thus my passions pain me,
For my love has slain me,
Gentle Shepherd bear a part:
Pray to Cupids mother,
For I know no other
that can help to ease my smart.
Shepherd, I have seen
thy fair lovely Phillis
Where her flocks are feeding,
by the Rivers side:
Oh, I much admire
she so far exceeding
In surpassing beauty,
should surpass in pride.
But alas I find,
They are all unkind
Beauty knows her power too well:
When they list they love,
When they please they move,
thus they turn our heaven to hell.
For their fair eyes glauncing,
Like to Cupids dancing,
roll about still to deceive us:
With vain hopes deluding,
Still dispraise concluding,
Now they love, and now they leave us.
Thus I do despair,
have her I shall never,
If she be so coy,
lost is all my love:
But she is so fair
I must love her ever,
All my pain is joy,
which for her I prove.
If I should her try,
And she should deny
heavy heart with woe will break:
Though against my will,
Tongue thou must be still,
for she will not hear thee speak.
Then with sighs go prove her,
Let them show I love her,
gracious Venus be my guide:
But though I complain me,
She will still disdain me,
beauty is so full of pride.
What though she be fair?
speak, and fear not speeding,
Be she nere so coy,
yet she may be wunne:
Unto her repair,
where her Flocks are feeding,
Sit and tick and toy
till set be the Sun.
Sun then being set,
Fear not Vulcanes net,
though that Mars therein was caught:
If she do deny
Thus to her reply
Venus laws she must be taught.
Then with kisses move her,
That Is the way to prove her,
thus thy Phillis must be wone:
She will not forsake thee,
But her Love will make thee,
When Loves duty once is done.
Happy shall I be,
If she grant me favor,
Else for love I die
Phillis is so fair:
Boldly then go see,
thou may quickly have her,
Though she could deny,
yet do not despair.
She is full of pride,
Venus be my guide,
help a silly Shepherds speed,
Use no such delay,
Shepherd, go thy way,
venture man and do the deed.
I will sore complain me,
Say that love has slain thee,
if her favors do not feed:
But take no denial,
Stand upon thy trial,
spare to speak, and want of speed.
FINIS.
I. G.

The Shepherds Song of Venus and Adonis.
VEnus fair did ride,
silver Doves they drew her,
By the pleasant lawnds
ere the Sun did rise:
Vestaes beauty rich
opened wide to view her,
Philomel records
pleasing Harmonies.
Every bird of spring
cheerfully did sing,
Paphos Goddess they salute:
(...) Birds and beasts my laws effect:
Mirrha thy fair mother,
most of any other,
did my lovely hests respect.
Be with me delighted,
Thou shall be requited,
every Nymph on thee shall tend:
All the Gods shall love thee,
Man shall not reprove thee,
Love himself shall be thy friend.
Wend thee from me Venus,
I am not disposed,
Thou wring'st me too hard,
pre-thee let me go:
Fie, what a pain it is
thus to be enclosed.
If love begin with labor,
it will end in woe.
kiss me, I will leave,
here a kiss receive,
a short kiss I do it find:
Will thou leave me so?
yet thou shall not go,
breathe once more thy balmie wind.
It smells of the Mirth-tree,
That to the world did bring thee,
never was perfume so sweet:
When she had thus spoken,
She gave him a token,
and their naked bosoms meet.
Now he said, let us go,
hark, the Hounds are crying,
Grisly Boar is up,
Hunts-men follow fast:
At the name of Boar,
Venus seemed dying,
Deadly colored pale,
Roses ouer-cast.
Speak said she, no more,
of following the Boar,
thou unfit for such a chase:
Course the fearful Hare,
Venson do not spare,
if thou will yield Venus grace.
Shun the Boar I pray thee,
Else I still will stay thee,
herein he vowed to please her mind,
Then her arms enlarged,
Loath she him discharged,
forth he went as swift as wind.
Thetis Phoebus Steedes
in the West retained,
Hunting sport was past,
Love her love did seek:
Sight of him too soon
gentle Queen she gained,
On the ground he lay
blood had left his cheek.
For an orped Swine,
smit him in the groyne,
deadly wound his death did bring:
Which when Venus found,
she fell in a swound,
and awaked, her hands did wring.
Nimphs and Satyrs skipping,
Came together tripping,
Echo every cry expressed:
Venus by her power,
Turned him to a flower,
which she wears in her creast.
FINIS.
H. C.

Thirsis the Shepherd his deaths Song.
THirsis to die desired,
marking her eyes that to his heart was nearest:
And she that with his flame no less was fired,
said to him: Oh heart's love dearest:
Alas, forbear to die now,
By thee I live, by thee I wish to die to.
Thirsis that heat refrained,
wherewith to die poor Lover then he hasted,
Thinking it death while he his looks maintained,
full fixed on her eyes, full of pleasure,
and lovely Nectar sweet from them he tasted.
His dainty Nymph, that now at hand espied
the harvest of Loves treasure,
Said thus, with eyes all trembling, faint and wasted:
I die now,
The Shepherd then replied,
and I sweet life do die to.
Thus these two Lovers fortunately died,
Of death so sweet, so happy, and so desired:
That to die so again their life retired.
FINIS.
Out of Master N. Young his Musica Transalpina.

Another Stanza added after.
THirsis enjoyed the graces,
Of Chloris sweet embraces,
Yet both their joys were scanted:
For dark it was, and candlelight they wanted.
Wherewith kind Cynthia in the heaven that shined,
her nightly veil resigned,
and her fair face disclosed.
Then each from others looks such joy derived:
That both with mere delight died, and revived.
FINIS.
Out of the same.

Another Sonnet thence taken.
ZEphirus brings the time that sweetly senteth
with flowers and herbs, which Winters frost exileth:
Progne now chirpeth, Philomel lamenteth,
Flora the Garlands white and red compileth:
Fields do rejoice, the frowning sky relenteth,
Jove to behold his dearest daughter smileth:
The air, the water, the earth to joy consents,
each creature now to love him reconcileth,
But with me wretch, the storms of woe persevere,
and heavy sighs which from my heart she straineth
That took the key thereof to heaven for ever,
so that singing of birds, and spring-times flowring:
And Ladies love that men's affection gains,
are like a Desert, and cruel beasts devouring.
FINIS.
The Shepherds slumber.
IN Pescod time, when Hound to horn
gives ear till Buck be killed:
And little Lads with Pipes of corn,
sat keeping beasts a field.
I went to gather Strawberies tho,
by Woods and Groaues full fair:
And parcht my face with Phoebus so,
in walking in the air
That down I laid me by a stream,
with boughs all ouer-clad:
And there I met the strangest dream,
that ever Shepherd had.
Me thought I saw each Christmas game,
each revel all and some:
And every thing that I can name,
or may in fancy come.
The substance of the sights I saw,
in silence pass they shall:
Because I lack the skill to draw,
the order of them all.
But Venus shall not pass my pen,
whose maidens in disdain:
Did feed upon the hearts of men,
that Cupids bow had slain.
And that blind Boy was all in blood,
be-bath'd up to the ears:
And like a Conqueror he stood,
and scorned Lovers tears.
I have (quoth he) more hearts at call,
then Caesar could command:
And like the Dear I make them fall,
that runs over the lawnd.
One drops down here, another there,
in bushes as they groan;
I bend a scornful careless ear,
to hear them make their moan.
Ah Sir (quoth Honest Meaning) then,
thy boy-like brags I hear:
When thou have wounded many a man,
as Hunts-man does the Dear.
Becomes it thee to triumph so?
thy Mother wills it not:
For she had rather break thy bow,
then thou should play the sot.
What saucie merchant speaks now,
said Venus in her rage:
Art thou so blind thou know not how
I govern every age?
My Son does shoot no shaft in wast,
to me the Boy is bound:
He never found a heart so chaste,
but he had power to wound,
Not so fair Goddess (quoth Free Will,)
in me there is a choice:
And cause I am of mine own ill,
if I in thee rejoice.
And when I yield my self a slave,
to thee, or to thy Son:
Such recompense I ought not have,
if things be rightly done.
Why fool, stepped forth Delight, and said,
when thou art conquered thus:
Then lo dame Lust, that wanton Maid,
thy Mistress is iwus.
And Lust is Cupids darling dear,
behold her where she goes:
She creepes the milk-warme flesh so near,
she hides her under close.
Where many privy thoughts do dwell,
a heaven here on earth:
For they have never mind of hell,
they think so much on mirth.
Be still Good Meaning, quoth Good Sport,
let Cupid triumph make:
For sure his Kingdom shall be short
if we no pleasure take.
Fair Beauty, and her play-feares gay,
the virgins Vestalles to:
Shall sit and with their fingers play,
as idle people do.
If Honest Meaning fall to frown,
and I Good Sport decay:
Then Venus glory will come down,
and they will pine away.
Indeed (quoth Wit) this your device,
with strangeness must be wrought,
And where you see these women nice,
and looking to be sought:
With scowling brows their follies check,
and so give them the Fig:
Let Fancy be no more at beck,
when Beauty looks so big.
When Venus heard how they conspired,
to murder women so:
Me thought indeed the house was fier'd,
with storms and lightning tho.
The thunderbolt through windows burst.
and in their steps a wight:
Which seemed some soul or sprite accursed,
so ugly was the sight.
I charge you Ladies all (quoth he)
look to your selves in have:
For if that men so wilful be,
and have their thoughts so chaste;
That they can tread on Cupids breast,
and martch on Venus face:
Then they shall sleep in quiet rest,
when you shall wail your case.
With that had Venus all in spite
stirred up the Dames to ire:
And Lust fell cold, and Beauty white
sat babbling with Desire.
Whose mutt'ring words I might not mark,
much whispering there arose:
The day did lower, the Sun wext dark,
away each Lady goes.
But whether went this angry flock?
our Lord himself does know:
Wherewith full lowdly crew the Cock,
and I awaked so.
A dream (quoth I?) a dog it is,
I take thereon no keep:
I gage my head, such toys as this,
does spring from lack of sleep.
FINIS.
Dispraise of Love, and Lovers follies.
IF Love be life, I long to die,
Live they that lift form:
And he that gains the most thereby,
A fool at least shall be.
But he that feels the sorest fits,
Scapes with no less then loss of wits,
Unhappy life they gain,
Which Love do entertain.
In day by fained looks they live,
By lying dreams in night,
Each frown a deadly wound does give,
Each smile a false delight.
If It hap their Lady pleasant seem,
It is for others love they deem:
If void she seem of joy,
Disdain does make her coy.
Such is the peace that Lovers find,
Such is the life they lead.
Blown here and there with every wind
Like flowers in the Mead.
Now war, now peace, now war again,
Desire, despair, delight, disdain,
Though dead in midst of life,
In peace, and yet at strife.
FINIS.
Ignoto.

Another Sonet.
IN wonted walks, since wonted fancies change,
Some cause there is, which of strange cause does rise:
For in each thing whereto my mind does range,
Part of my pain me seems engraued lies.
The Rocks which were of constant mind, the mark
In climbing steep, now hard refusal show:
The shading Woods seem now my sun to dark,
And stately hills disdain to look so low.
The restfull Caves, now restless visions give,
In dales I see each way a hard assent:
Like late mowne Meades, late cut from joy I live,
Alas, sweet Brooks, do in my tears augment.
Rocks, woods, hills, caves, dales, meades, brooks answer me.
Infected minds infect each thing they see.
FINIS.
S. Phil. Sidney.

Of disdainefull Daphne.
SHall I say that I love you,
Daphne disdainful?
Sore it costs as I prove you,
loving is painful.
Shall I say what does grieve me?
Lovers lament it:
Daphne will not relieve me,
late I repent it.
Shall I die, shall I perish,
through her unkindness?
Love untaught love to cherish,
shows his blindness.
Shall the hills, shall the valleys,
the fields, the City,
With the sound of my outcries,
move her to pity?
The deep falls of fair Rivers,
and the winds turning:
Are the true Music giuers
unto my mourning.
Where my Flocks daily feeding,
pining for sorrow:
At their Masters heart bleeding,
shot with Loves arrow.
From her eyes to my heart-string,
was the shaft launced:
It made all the Woods to ring
by which it glaunced.
When this Nymph had used me so,
then she did hide her:
Hapless I did Daphne know,
hapless I spied her.
Thus Turtle-like I wail'd me,
for my Loves loosing:
Daphnes trust thus did fail me,
woe worth such choosing.
FINIS.
M. N. Howell.

The passionate Shepherd to his Love.
COme live with me, and be my Love,
And we will all the pleasures prove,
That Valleys, Groves, hills and fields,
Woods, or steepie mountains yields.
And we will sit upon the Rocks,
Seeing the Shepherds feed their Flocks,
By shallow Rivers, to whose falls,
Melodious birds sings Madrigalls.
And I will make thee beds of Roses,
And a thousand fragrant poesies,
A cap of flowers, and a kirtle
Imbroydered all with leaves of Myrtle.
A gown made of the finest wool,
Which from our pretty Lambs we pull,
Fair lined slippers for the cold:
With buckles of the purest gold.
A belt of straw, and Iuie buds,
With Coral clasps and Amber studs,
And if these pleasures may thee move,
Come live with me and be my Love.
The Shepherd Swains shall dance and sing,
For thy delight each May-morning,
If these delights thy mind may move;
Then live with me, and be my Love.
FINIS.
Chr. Marlow.

The Nimphs reply to the Shepherd.
IF all the world and love were young,
And truth in every Shepherds tongue,
These pretty pleasures might me move,
To live with thee, and be thy Love.
Time drives the Flocks from field to fold,
When Rivers rage, and Rocks grow cold,
And Philomell becomes dombe,
The rest complains of cares to come.
The flowers do fade, and wanton fields,
To wayward Winter reckoning yields,
A honey tongue, a heart of gall,
Is fancies spring, but sorrows fall.
Thy gowns, thy shoes, thy beds of Roses,
Thy cap, thy kirtle, and thy posies,
Soon break, soon wither, soon forgotten:
In folly ripe, in reason rotten.
Thy belt of straw and Iuie buds,
Thy Coral claspes and Amber studs,
All these in me no means can move,
To come to thee, and be thy Love.
But could youth last, and love still breed,
Had joys no date, nor age no need,
Then these delights my mind might move,
To live with thee, and be thy Love.
FINIS.
Ignoto.

Another of the same nature, made since.
COme live with me, and be my dear,
And we will revel all the year,
In plains and groves, on hills and dales:
Where fragrant air breeds sweetest gales.
There shall you have the beauteous Pine,
The Cedar, and the spreading Vine,
And all the woods to be a Skreene:
Least Phoebus kiss my Summers Queen.
The seat for your disport shall be
Over some River in a tree,
Where silver sands, and pebbles sing,
Eternal ditties with the spring.
There shall you see the Nimphs at play,
And how the Satires spend the day,
The fishes gliding on the sands:
Offering their bellies to your hands.
The birds with heavenly tuned throtes,
Possess woods Echoes with sweet notes,
Which to your senses will impart
A music to inflame the heart.
Upon the bare and leafe-lesse Oak,
The Ring-Doues woings will provoke
A colder blood then you possess,
To play with me and do no less.
In bowers of Laurel trimly dight,
We will out-weare the silent night,
While Flora busy is to spread:
Her richest treasure on our bed.
Ten thousand Glow-wormes shall attend,
And all their sparkling lights shall spend,
All to adorn and beautify:
Your lodging with most majesty.
Then in mine arms will I enclose
Lillies fair mixture with the Rose.
Whose nice perfections in loves play:
Shall tune me to the highest key.
Thus as we pass the welcome night,
In sportfull pleasures and delight,
The nimble Fairies on the grounds,
Shall dance and sing mellodious sounds.
If these may serve for to entice,
Your presence to Loves Paradise,
Then come with me, and be my dear:
And we will strait begin the year.
FINIS.
Ignoto.

Two Pastorals, upon three friends meeting.
Join mates in mirth to me,
Grant pleasure to our meeting:
Let Pan our good God see,
How grateful is our greeting.
Join hearts and hands, so let it be.
Make but one mind in bodies three.
Ye Hymns and singing skill
Of God Apolloes giving,
Be pressed our reeds to fill,
With sound of music living.
Join hearts and hands, etc.
Sweet Orpheus Harp, whose sound
The steadfast mountains moved,
Let here thy skill abound,
To join sweet friends beloved.
Join hearts and hands, etc.
My two and I be met,
A happy blessed Trinity,
As three most jointly set,
In firmest hand of unity.
Join hearts and hands, etc.
Welcome my two to me, E.D. F.G. P.S.
The number best beloved,
Within my heart you be
In friendship unremoved.
Join hands, etc.
Give leave your flocks to range,
Let us the while be playing,
Within the Elmy grange,
Your flocks will not be straying.
Join hands, etc.
Cause all the mirth you can,
Since I am now come hither,
Who never joy but when
I am with you together.
Join hands, etc.
Like lovers do their love,
So joy I in your seeing:
Let nothing me remove
From always with you being.
Join hands, etc.
And as the turtle Dove
To mate with whom he lives,
Such comfort, fervent love
Of you to my heart gives.
Join hands, etc.
Now joined be our hands,
Let them be never asunder,
But linkt in binding bands
By metamorphoz'd wonder.
So should our severed bodies three
As one for ever joined be.
FINIS.
S. Phil. Sidney.

The wood-mans walk.
THrough a fair Forest as I went
upon a Summers day,
I met a Wood-man quaint and gent,
yet in a strange array.
I maruail'd much at his disguise,
whom I did know so well:
But thus in terms both grave and wise,
his mind he began to tell.
Friend, muse not at this fond array,
but list a while to me:
For it has help me to suruay
what I shall show to thee.
Long lived I in this Forest fair,
till weary of my weal
Abroad in walks I would repair,
as now I will reveal.
My first days walk was to the Court,
where beauty fed mine eyes:
Yet found I that the Courtly sport,
did mask in sly disguise.
For falsehood sat in fairest looks,
and friend to friend was coy:
Court-fauour filled but empty books,
and there I found no joy.
Desert went naked in the cold,
when crouching craft was fed:
Sweet words were cheaply bought and sold,
but none that stood in sted.
Wit was employed for each man's own,
plain meaning came too short:
All these devises seen and known,
made me forsake the Court.
Unto the City next I went,
in hope of better hap:
Where liberally I lanch'd and spent,
as set on Fortunes lap.
The little stock I had in store,
me thought would nere be done:
Friends flockt about me more and more,
as quickly lost as wone.
For when I spent, then they were kind,
but when my purse did fail:
The foremost man came last behind,
thus love with wealth does quail.
Once more for footing yet I strove,
although the world did frown:
But they before that held me up,
together troad me down.
And least once more I should arise,
they sought my quite decay:
Then got I into this disguise,
and thence I stole away.
And in my mind (me thought) I said,
Lord bless me from the City:
Where simplenes is thus betraide,
and no remorce or pity.
Yet would I not give over so,
but once more try my fate:
And to the Country then I go,
to live in quiet state.
There did appear no subtle shows,
but yea and nay went smoothly:
But Lord how Country-folkes can gloss,
when they speak most untruly?
More craft was in a buttond cap,
and in old wives rail:
Then in my life it was my hap,
to see on Down or Dale.
There was no open forgerie,
but vnder-handed gleaning:
Whch they call Country policy,
but has a worser meaning,
Some good bold-face bears out the wrong,
because he gains thereby:
The poor man's back is cracked ere long,
yet there he lets him lie.
And no degree among them all,
but had such close intending,
That I upon my knees did fall,
and prayed for their amending.
Back to the woods I got again,
in mind perplexed sore:
Where I found ease of all this pain,
and mean to stray no more.
There, City, Court, nor Country to,
can any way annoy me:
But as a wood-man ought to do,
I freely may employ me.
There live I quietly alone,
and none to trip my talk:
Wherefore when I am dead and gone,
think on the Wood-mans walk.
FINIS.
Shep. Tonie.

Thirsis the Shepherd, to his Pipe.
LIke Desert woods, with darkesome shades obscured,
Where dreadful beasts, where hateful horror reigns:
Such is my wounded heart, whom sorrow paineth.
The trees are fatal shafts, to death inured,
That cruel love within my breast maintains.
To whet my grief, when as my sorrow waineth.
The ghastly beasts, my thoughts in cares assures,
Which wage me war, while heart no succor gains:
With false suspect, and fear that still remains.
The horrors, burning sighs by cares procured,
Which forth I send, whilst weeping eye complains:
To cool the heat, the helpelesse heart contains.
But shafts, but cares, but sighs, horrors vnrecured,
Were naught esteemed, if for these pains awarded:
My faithful love by her might be regarded.
FINIS.
Ignoto.

An Heroical Poem.
MY wanton Muse that whilome wont to sing,
Fair beauties praise and Venus sweet delight,
Of late had changed the tenor of her string
To higher tunes then serve for Cupids fight.
Shrill Trumpets sound, sharp swords and Lances strong,
War, blood and death, were matter of her song.
The God of Love by chance had heard thereof,
That I was proved a rebel to his crown,
Fit words for war, quoth he, with angry scoff,
A likely man to write of Mars his frown.
Well are they sped whose praises he shall write,
Whose wanton Pen can naught but love indite.
This said, he whiskt his party-colored wings,
And down to earth he comes more swift then thought,
Then to my heart in angry haste he flings,
To see what change these news of wars had wrought.
He pries, and looks, he ransacks every vain,
Yet finds he naught, save love, and lovers pain.
Then I that now perceived his needless fear,
With heavy smile began to plead my cause:
In vain (quoth I) this endless grief I bear,
In vain I strive to keep thy grievous Laws,
If after proof, so often trusty found,
Unjust suspect condemn me as unsound.
Is this the guerdon of my faithful heart?
Is this the hope on which my life is staide?
Is this the ease of neuer-ceasing smart?
Is this the price that for my pains is paid?
Yet better serve fierce Mars in bloody field,
Where death, or conquest, end or joy does yield.
Long have I served, what is my pay but pain?
Often have I sude, what gain I but delay?
My faithful love is quited with disdain,
My grief a game, my pen is made a play.
Yea love that does in other favor find,
In me is counted madness out of kind.
And last of all, but grievous most of all,
Thy self, sweet love, has killed me with suspect:
Could love believe, that I from love would fall?
Is war of force to make me love neglect.
No, Cupid knows, my mind is faster set,
Then that by war I should my love forget.
My Muse indeed to war enclines her mind,
The famous acts of worthy Brute to write:
To whom the Gods this Islands rule assignde,
Which long he sought by Seas through Neptunes spite,
With such conceits my busy head does swell.
But in my heart naught else but love does dwell.
And in this war thy part is not the least,
Here shall my muse Brutes noble Love declare:
Here shall thou see thy double love increast,
Of fairest twins that ever Lady bare:
Let Mars triumph in armor shining bright,
His conquered arms shall be thy triumphs light.
As he the world, so thou shall him subdue,
And I thy glory through the world will ring,
So by my pains, thou will vouchsafe to rue,
And kill despair. With that he whis'kt his wing.
And bid me write, and promised wished rest,
But sore I fear false hope will be the best.
FINIS.
Ignoto.

An excellent Sonnet of a Nymph.
Virtue, beauty, and speech, did strike, wound, charm,
My heart, eyes, ears, with wonder, love, delight:
First, second, last, did bind, enforce, and arm,
His works, shows, suits, with wit, grace, and vowes-might:
Thus honor, liking, trust, much, far, and deep,
Held, pearst, possessed, my judgment, sense, and will;
Till wrongs, contempt, deceit, did grow, steal, creep,
Bands, favor, faith, to break, defile, and kill.
Then grief, unkindness, proof, took, kindled, taught,
Well grounded, noble, due, spite, rage, disdain:
But ah, alas, (in vain) my mind, sight, thought,
Does him, his face, his words, leave, shun, refrain.
For nothing, time, nor place, can loose, quench, ease:
Mine own, embraced, sought, knot, fire, disease.
FINIS.
S. Phil. Sidney.

A Report Song in a dream, between a Shepherd and his Nymph.
SHall we go dance the hay? The hay?
Never pipe could ever play
better Shepherds Roundelay.
Shall we go sing the Song? The Song?
Never Love did ever wrong:
fair Maids hold hands all a-long.
Shall we go learn to woo? To woo?
Never thought came ever to,
better deed could better do.
Shall we go learn to kiss? To kiss?
Never heart could ever miss
comfort, where true meaning is.
Thus at base thy run, They run,
When the sport was scarce begun:
but I awak't, and all was done.
FINIS.
N. Breton.

Another of the same.
SAy that I should say, I love ye?
would you say, it is but a saying?
But if Love in prayers move ye?
will you not be moved with praying?
Think I think that Love should know ye?
will you think, it is but a thinking?
But if Love the thought do show ye,
will ye loose your eyes with winking?
Write that I do write you blessed,
will you write, it is but a writing?
But if truth and Love confess it:
will ye doubt the true enditing?
No, I say, and think, and write it,
write, and think, and say your pleasure:
Love, and truth, and I endite it,
you are blessed out of measure.
FINIS.
N. Breton.

The Lovers absence kills me, her presence kills me.
THE frozen Snake oppressed with heaped snow
By struggling hard gets out her tender head,
And spies far off from where she lies below
The winter Sun that from the North is fled.
But all in vain she looks upon the light,
Where heat is wanting to restore her might.
What does it help a wretch in prison pent,
Long time with biting hunger ouer-prest,
To see without, or smell within, the sent,
Of dainty fare for others tables dressed?
Yet Snake and prisoner both behold the thing,
The which (but not with sight) might comfort bring.
Such is my state, or worse if worse may be,
My heart oppressed with heavy frost of care,
Debarred of that which is most dear to me,
Killed up with cold, and pinde with evil fare,
And yet I see the thing might yield relief,
And yet the sight does breed my greater grief.
So Thisoe saw her Lover through the wall,
And saw thereby she wanted that she saw:
And so I see, and seeing want withal,
And wanting so, unto my death I draw.
And so my death were twenty times my friend,
If with this verse my hated life might end.
FINIS.
Ignoto.

The Shepherds conceit of Prometheus.
PRometheus, when first from heaven hie,
He brought down fire, ere then on earth unseen:
Fond of delight, a Satyr standing by,
Gave it a kiss, as it like sweet had been.
Feeling forthwith the other burning power,
Wood with the smart, with shoutes and shrikings shrill:
He sought his case in River, Field, and bower,
But for the time his grief went with him still.
So silly I, with that unwonted sight.
In humane shape, an Angel from above:
Feeding mine eyes, the impression there did light,
That since I run, and rest as pleases Love,
The difference is, the Satires lips, my heart,
He for a while, I evermore have smart.
FINIS.
S. E. D.

Another of the same.
A Satyr once did run away for dread,
with sound of Horn, which he himself did blow:
Fearing, and feared thus, from himself he fled,
deeming strange evil in that he did not know.
Such causeless fears, when coward minds do take,
it makes them fly that which they feign would have:
As this poor beast, who did his rest forsake,
thinking not why, but how himself to save.
Even thus might I, for doubts which I conceive
of mine own words, mine own good hap betray:
And thus might I, for fear of may be, leave
the sweet pursuit of my desired pray.
Better like I thy Satire, dearest Dyer:
Who burnt his lips, to kiss fair shining fire.
FINIS.
S. Phil. Sidney.

The Shepherds Sun.
Fair Nimphs, sit ye here by me,
on this flowrie green:
While we this merry day do see,
some things but sildome seen.
Shepherds all, now come sit a round,
on yond checkquer'd plain:
While from the Woods we here resound,
some comfort for Loves pain.
Every bird sits on his bough,
As brag as he that is the best:
Then sweet Love, reveal how
our minds may be at rest.
Echo thus replied to me,
Sit under yonder Beechen tree,
And there Love shall show thee
how all may be redrest.
Hark, hark, hark the Nightingale,
in her mourning lay:
She tells her stories woeful tale,
to warn ye if she may.
Fair Maids, take ye heed of love,
it is a perilous thing:
As Philomell her self did prove,
abused by a King.
If Kings play false, believe no men.
That make a seemly outward show:
But caught once, beware then,
for then begins your woe.
They will look babies in your eyes,
And speak so fair as fair may be:
But trust them in no wise,
example take by me.
Fie, fie, said the Threstle-cocke,
you are much too blame:
For one man's fault, all men to blot,
impairing their good name.
Admit you were used amiss,
by that ungentle King,
It follows not that you for this,
should all men's honors wring.
There be good, and there be bad,
And some are false, and some are true:
As good choice is still had
amongst us men, as you.
Women have faults as well as we,
Some say for our one, they have three.
Then smite not, nor bite not,
when you as faulty be.
Peace, peace, quoth Madge-Howlet then,
sitting out of sight:
For women are as good as men,
and both are good alike.
Not so, said the little Wrenne,
difference there may be:
The Cock always commands the Hen,
the men shall go for me.
Then Robbin-Redbrest stepping in,
Would needs take up this tedious strife,
Protesting, true loving,
In either lengthened life.
If I love you, and you love me,
Can there be better harmony?
Thus ending, contending,
Love must the vmpiere be.
Fair Nimphs, Love must be your guide,
chaste, unspotted love:
To such as do your thralls betide,
resolved without remove.
Likewise jolly Shepherd Swains
if you do respect,
The happy issue of your pains,
true love must you direct.
You hear the birds contend for love.
The bubling springs do sing sweet love,
The Mountains and Fountains
do Echo naught but love.
Take hands then Nymphs and Shepherds all
And to this Rivers musickes fall
Sing true love, and chaste love
begins our Festival.
FINIS.
Shep. Tonie.

Love the only price of love.
THe fairest Pearls that Northern Seas do breed,
For precious stones from Eastern coasts are sold.
Naught yields the earth that from exchange is freed,
Gold values all, and all things value Gold.
Where goodness wants an equal change to make,
There greatness serves, or number place does take.
No mortal thing can bear so high a price,
But that with mortal thing it may be bought,
The corn of Sicill buies the Western spice,
French wine of us, of them our cloth is sought.
No pearls, no gold, no stones, no corn, no spice.
No cloth, no wine, of love can pay the price.
What thing is love, which naught can counteruaile?
Naught save it self, even such a thing is love.
All worldly wealth in worth as far does fail,
As lowest earth does yield to heaven above.
Divine is love, and scorneth worldly pelf,
And can be bought with nothing, but with self.
Such is the price my loving heart would pay,
Such is the pay thy love does claim as due.
Thy due is love, which I (poor I) assay,
In vain assay to quite with friendship true:
True is my love, and true shall ever be,
And truest love is far too base for thee.
Love but thy self, and love thy self alone,
For save thy self, none can thy love require:
All mine thou have, but all as good as none,
My small desert must take a lower flight.
Yet if thou will vouchsafe my heart such bliss,
Accept it for thy prisoner as it is.
FINIS
Ignoto.

Colin the enamoured Shepherd, sings this passion of love.
O Gentle Love, ungentle for thy deed,
thou make my heart,
a bloody mark,
With piercing shot to bleed.
Shoot soft sweet Love, for fear thou shoot amiss,
for fear too keen,
thy arrows been:
And hit the heart, where my beloved is.
Too fair that fortune were, nor never I
shall be so blessed,
among the rest:
That love shall ceaze on her by simpathie.
Then since with Love my prayers bear no boot,
this does remain,
to ease my pain,
I take the wound, and die at Venus foot.
FINIS.
Geo. Peele.

Oenones complaint in blanke verse.
MElpomene the Muse of tragic Songs,
With mournful tunes in stole of dismal hue,
Assist a silly Nymph to wail her woe,
And leave thy lusty company behind.
This lucklesse wreathe becomes not me to wear,
The Poplar tree for triumph of my love,
Then as my joy, my pride of love is left;
Be thou unclothed of thy lovely green.
And in thy leaves my fortunes written be,
And then some gentle wind let blow abroad,
That all the world may see, how false of love,
False Paris has to his Oenone been.
FINIS.
Geo. Peele.

The Shepherds Consort.
Hark jolly Shepherds,
hark yond lusty ringing:
How cheerfully the Bells dance,
the whilst the Lads are springing?
Go we then, why sit we here delaying:
And all yond merry wanton Lasses playing?
How gaily Flora leads it,
and sweetly treads it?
The Woods and Groves they ring,
lovely resounding:
With Echoes sweet rebounding.
FINIS.
Out of M. Morleys Madrigals.

Thirsis praise of his Mistress.
ON a hill that graced the plain
Thirsis sat, a comely Swain,
Comelier Swain nere graced a hill:
Whilst his Flock that wandered nie
Cropped the green grass busily,
Thus he tuned his Oaten quill.
Ver has made the pleasant field
Many seu'rall odours yield,
Odors aromaticall:
From fair Astra's cherrie lip,
Sweeter smells for ever skip,
They in pleasing passen all.
Leauie Groves now mainely ring,
With each sweet birds sonnetting,
Notes that make the Eccho's long:
But when Astra tunes her voice,
All the mirthfull birds rejoice,
And are listening to her Song.
Fairly spreads the Damask Rose,
Whose rare mixture does disclose
Beauties, pensils cannot feign:
Yet if Astra pass the bush,
Roses have been seen to blush,
She does all their beauties stain.
Phoebus shining bright in sky
Gilds the floods, heates mountains hie,
With his beams all-quickning fire:
Astra's eyes, (most sparkling ones)
Strikes a heat in hearts of stones,
And enflames them with desire.
Fields are blessed with flowrie wreath,
Air is blessed when she does breath,
Birds make happy every Grove,
She each Bird when she does sing,
Phoebus heat to earth does bring,
She makes Marble fall in love.
Those, blessings of the earth, we Swains do call:
Astra can bless those blessings earth and all.
FINIS.
W. Brown.

A defiance to disdainefull Love.
NOw have I learned with much ado at last,
By true disdain to kill desire,
This was the mark at which I shot so fast,
Unto this height I did aspire.
Proud Love, now do thy worst, and spare not,
For thee and all thy shafts I care not.
What have thou left wherewith to move my mind?
What life to quicken dead desire?
I count thy words and oaths as light as wind,
I feel no heat in all thy fire.
Go change thy bow, and get a stronger,
Go break thy shafts, and buy thee longer.
In vain thou bait'st thy hook with beauties blaze,
In vain thy wanton eyes allure.
These are but toys, for them that love to gaze,
I know what harm thy looks procure:
Some strange conceit must be devised,
Or thou and all thy skill despised.
FINIS.
Ignoto.

An Epithalamium; or a Nuptial Song, applied to the Ceremonies of Marriage.
Sun rising.
AVrora's Blush (the Ensign of the Day)
Has wak't the God of Light, from Tythons bower,
Who on our Bride, and Bridegroom does display
His golden Beams, auspitious to this Hour.
Strewing of Flowers.
Now busy Maidens strew sweet Flowers,
Much like our Bride in Virgin state;
Now fresh, then pressed, soon dying,
The death is sweet, and must be yours,
Time goes on Croutches till that date,
Birds sledg'd, must needs be flying.
Lead on whiles Phoebus Lights, and Hymen's Fires,
Inflame each Heart with Zeal to Loves Desires.
Chorus. Io to Hymen, Paeans sing
To Hymen, and my Muses King.
Going to Church. Bride Boys.
Forth honored Groom; behold not far behind
Your willing Bride; led by two strengthlesse Boys;
For Venus Doves, or Thread but single twined
May draw a Virgin, light in Marriage Joys:
Vesta grows pale, her Flame expires
As ye come under Iunos Phane,
To offer at Jove's Shrine
The simpathie of Hearts desires
Knitting the Knot, that does contain
Two souls, in Gordian Twine.
The Rites are done; and now (as it is the guise)
Loves Fast by Day, a Feast must solemnize.
Chorus. Io to Hymen; Paeans sing,
To Hymen, and my Muses King.
The Board being spread, furnished with various Plenties; Dinner.

The Brides fair Object in the Middle placed;
While she drinks Nectar, eats Ambrosiall dainties,
And like a Goddess is admired and graced:
Bacchus and Ceres fill their veins;
Each Heart begins to open a vent;
And now the Healths go round;
Their Bloods are warmed; cheered are their Brains
All do applaud their Loves Consent;
So Love with Cheer is crowned.
Let sensual souls joy in full Bowls sweet Dishes;
True Hearts, and Tongues, accordin joyful wishes.
Chorus. Io to Hymen, etc.
Now whiles slow Hours do feed the Times delay, Afternoon Music.

Confused discourse, with Music mixed among,
Fills up the semy-circle of the Day;
Now draws the date our Lovers wished so long.
A bounteous Hand the Board has spread; Supper.

Lyeus stirs their Bloods anew;
All louiall full of cheer;
But Phoebus see, is gone to Bed; Sun set.

Lo Hesperus appears in view,
And twinckles in his sphere.
Now ne plus vltra; end, as you begin;
Ye waste good Hours; Time lost in Love, is sin.
Chorus. Io to Hymen, etc.
Break off your Complement; Music, be dombe,
And pull your Cases over your Fiddles cares;
Cry not, a Hall, a Hall; but Chamber-roome;
Dancing is lame; Youth's, old at twenty years.
Going to Bed.
Matrons; ye know what follows next;
Conduct the shame-fac'd Bride to Bed,
(Though to her little rest)
Ye well can comment on the Text,
And in Loves learning deeply read,
Advise, and teach the best.
Forward's the Word; you are all so in this Arrant;
Wives give the Word; their Husbands give the Warrant.
Chorus. Io to Hymen, etc.
Modesty in the Bride.
Now droopes our Bride, and in her Virgin state,
Seems like Electra amongst the Pleyades;
So shrinkes a Maid when her Herculean Mate
Must pluck the fruit in her Hesperides.
As she is a Bride, she glorious shines,
Like Cynthia, from the Suns bright Sphaere,
Attracting all men's Eyes;
But as she is Virgin, waines, and pines,
As to the Man she' approaches near;
So Maiden glory dies.
But Virgin Beams no real brightness render;
If they do shine, in dark they show their splendour.
Chorus. Io to Hymen, etc.
Then let the dark Foil of the Geniall Bed
Extend her brightness to his inward sight,
And by his sense he will be easly led
To know her virtue, by the absent light.
Youth's; take his Points; your wonted right; Bride Points. Garters.

And Maidens; take your due, her Garters;
Take hence the Lights; be gone;
Love calls to Arms, Duel his Fight;
Then all remove out of his Quarters,
And leave them both alone:
That with substantial heat, they may embrace,
And know Loves Essence, with his outward grace.
Chorus. Io to Hymen, etc.
Hence Jealousy, Rival to Loves delight;
Sow not thy seed of strife in these two Hearts;
May never cold affect, or spleenefull spite,
Confound this Music of agreeing parts:
But Time (that steals the virtuall heat
Where Nature keeps the vital fire)
(My Heart speaks in my Tongue)
Supply with Fuel Life's chief seat,
Through the strong fervor of Desire;
Love, living; and live long.
And even as Thunder rises against the Wind;
So may ye fight with Age; and conquer Kind
Chorus. Io to Hymen; Paeans sing
To Hymen, and my Muses King.
FINIS.
Christopher Brook.


