THE Theoriques of the seven Planets, showing all their diverse motions, and
all other Accidents, called Passions, thereunto belonging. Now more plainly set
forth in our mother tongue by M. Blundeuile, than ever they have been
heretofore in any other tongue whatsoever, and that with such pleasant
demonstratiue figures, as every man that has any skill in Arithmeticke, may
easily understand the same. A Book most necessary for all Gentlemen that are
desirous to be skillful in Astronomy, and for all Pilots and Seamen, or any
others that love to serve the Prince on the Sea, or by the Sea to travel into
foreign Countries.

Whereunto is added by the said Master Blundeuile, a brief Extract by him
made, of Maginus his Theoriques, for the better understanding of the
Prutenicall Tables, to calculate thereby the diverse motions of the seven
Planets.

There is also hereto added, The making, description, and use, of two most
ingenious and necessary Instruments for Seamen, to find out thereby the
latitude of any Place upon the Sea or Land, in the darkest night that is,
without the help of Sun, Moon, or Starr^. First invented by M. Doctor
Gilbert, a most excellent Philosopher, and one of the ordinary Physicians to
her Majesty: and now here plainly set down in our mother tongue by Master
Blundeuile.

LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip. 1602.

A Table, showing all the principal points contained in the Theoriques of the
seven Planets.
A Table showing the diverse shapes of the Moon. Page. 43. A comparison,
showing in what things the Moon and Mercury do agree or differ, in
describing their Ouale Figures. 125. Of the Passions of the seven Planets. 145.
When and how these Passions do chance. 158. How to know whether the Moon be
in the 90 degree, or not. 173. Of the Eclipses of the Moon. 174. How to know
the bounds or limits, whereby is easily known what kind of Eclipse of the Moon
will happen, when she is at the Full. 186. Of the twelve digits, whereinto the
body of the Moon is wont to be divided, to know thereby how much at any Full
she is eclipsed. 187. Of the continuance of the Moons Eclipse, what it is, and
how many things are wont by the Astronomers to be considered therein. 190. Of
the Eclipse of the Sun, how and when it chances. 194. Of the variety of the
Solar Eclipses, and why they be not always like, but do differ as well in
magnitude as in time of continuance. 200. Of the two special kinds of Solar
Eclipses, that is, Total and Partial. 202. Of the Partial Eclipse of the
Sun. 204. Of the bounds or limits of the Solar Eclipses. 206. Of the
ecliptical digits belonging to the Solar Eclipses. 208. What things are to be
considered touching the continuance of the Solar Eclipse. 209. How to find out
the quantities, increasing, decreasing, beginning, and ending of the Suns
Eclipses, without any offense of your eyesight. 210. The Methodicall doctrine
of the Eclipses, set down by Reinoldus in his Comment arie upon Purbachius.
211.
A Table of all the Chapters contained in Maginus his Theoriques.
Chap. Page. 1. THe description of the eleventh heaven or first mouable,
together with such definitions as are contained therein. 216. 2. Of the tenth
Heaven. 217. 3. Of the ninth Heaven. 220. 4. Of the eight Heaven. 223. 5. Of
the seventh Heaven, that is, the heaven of Saturn. 226. 6. Of the sixth Heaven,
or heaven of Jupiter. 239. 7. Of the fifth Heaven, or heaven of Mars. 240. 8. Of
the fourth Heaven, or heaven of the Sun. 242. 9. Of the third Heaven, or
heaven of Venus. 255. 10. Of the second Heaven, or heaven of Mercury. 258. 11.
Of the first Heaven, or haven of the Moon. 263.

The making, description, and use, of two most ingenious and necessary
Instruments for Seamen, the one whereof is described in Page 280. And the other
in 287.

To the Reader.
BEing advertised by diverse of my good friends, how favorably it has pleased
the Gentlemen, both of the Court and Country, and specially the Gentlemen of
the Innes of Court, to accept of my poor Pamphlets, entitled Blundeuiles
Exercises; yea, and that many have earnestly studied the same, because they
plainly teach the first Principles, as well of Geographie as of Astronomy: I
thought I could not show my self any way more thankful unto them, than by
setting forth the Theoriques of the Planets, which I have collected, partly
out of Ptolomey, and partly out of Purbachius, and of his Commentator
Reinholdus, also out of Copernicus, but most out of Mestelyn, whom I have
cheefely followed, because his method and order of writing greatly contenteth
my humor. I have also in many things followed Maginus, a later writer, who
came not unto my hands, before that I had almost ended the first part of my
book, neither should I have had him at all, if my good friend M. Doctor
Brown, one of the ordinary Physicians to her Majesty, had not gotten him for
me, with which good Doctor I have had in times past at Norwiche many learned
conferences, and have received at his hands many good documents, whom I take to
be so universally learned in all manner of good and liberal Sciences, as any
other that I know in these days: and besides his great learning, I know him to
be very wise and honest, which two virtues I wish to reign in all learned men,
because they be the greatest ornaments that belong to learning. I have divided
this my book into two parts, whereof the first part treats of the diverse
motions of the Planets; and the second part, of their Passions; and that so
plainly, and with such facility, as I hope that every man of a mean
capacity may understand the same. For I thought good to collect out of the
foresaid Authors no more but that which only was meet and fit for that
purpose, praying all those that be learned, hereafter to add to this my book
any necessary thing, that I through age and want of clear sight, have
negligently omitted. And so I leave to trouble you, praying you to take this my
labor in good part, so shall I have just cause to think the same well
bestowed. Vale.

THE THEORIQVES of the seven Planets, showing all their diverse motions, and
all other accidents (called passions) thereunto belonging.
Since every art has his proper terms, without the knowledge whereof, no art
is easily learned: Minding therefore here to treat of the Theoriques of the
Planets, I think it best first to set down all the terms together with the
true significations thereof: which terms, though they be manifold, yet they
may be all reduced into seven. For whatsoever term it be, it signifies
either a point, a center, a line, a circle, a semicircle, a portion of a circle
otherwise called an arche, or an orb, called in Latin Orbis, which is as much
to say, as a round hoope or sphere, having breadth and thickenesse, and
sometime it is taken for a circle. And you see here, that I make a difference
betwixt a point and a center; for though every center is a point, yet every
point is not a center. Again, I make a difference betwixt a circle and an
orb; for though they be like, in that they both have round shape, yet they
differ, in that the orb has both breadth and thickenesse, and the circle has
neither. But before I define the terms belonging to the Theorique of any
Planet, I think it best, according to the method and order used by Michaell
Mestlyn, to set down four principal intentions, meet to be used in
describing the Theorique of every Planet: of which four intentions,

1. The first is to show of how many particular orbs every Theorique
consists.

2. The second is to show toward what part such orbs are moved, and in what
time they make their reuolutions, and also upon what centres or poles they make
their regular mouings.

3. The third intention, is plainly to describe all such points, lines,
arches, semicircles, and such like things as are needful to be known for the
calculating of the mouings of any Planet.

4. The fourth intention, is to show how much latitude every Planet (having
latitude) has: for every Planet has latitude, more or less, the Sun only
excepted, which has no latitude, because he never departs from the
Eclipticke line, with whose Theorique I mind here first to deal.

Why deal you first with the Theorique of the Sun?
FOr four causes. First, because his Theorique is more easy than all the rest.

Secondly, as well for that he excels in dignity all the other Planets, as
also for that the moving of all the other Planets depends upon his moving:
which unless it be known, none of the others can be thoroughly known.

Thirdly, for that the mouings and reuolutions of all the rest of the Planets
are counted by his yearly reuolutions.

Fourthly, by the authority of Ptolomey, and other ancient writers, which in
treating of the Theoriques, do first begin with the Theorique of the Sun.

NOw here follows the first Intention, showing by certain figures, of how
many orbs the Theorique of the Sun consists, that is, of three orbs,
hereafter described, and are contained in this figure next following.

The first figure belonging to the Theorique of the Sun, showing his three
orbs, and their centres, and also the two points called Auges, hereafter
defined.
THough the Theorique of the Sun consists but of three orbs, yet you see
here, that in this figure there be four orbs or circles, that is, two black,
and two white: whereof the upper black circle, marked with the letter D is
called the upper deferent of the Auges; and the lower black circle, marked
with the letter E. is called the inferior or lower deferent of the Auges; and
the largest and greatest white circle, marked with the letter C. is called the
Excentricke or deferent of the Sun, having the body of the Sun fixed
therein: and in the middle white roundle are set down two pricks or centres,
whereof that which is marked with the letter A. is the center of the world; and
the other next above that, marked with the letter B. is the center of the
deferent of the Sun, otherwise called the Excentricke; and the point which is
in the upper lymbe of the deferent of the Sun, marked with the letter F. is
called in the Arabike tongue Aux, in Greek Apogaeon, in Latin Absis summa,
that is to say, the highest point, which I mean to call in our tongue in the
singular number, Auge, and in the plural number, Auges: the opposite point
whereof, marked with the letter G. is called in Greek Perigaeon, and in Latin
Absis ima, that is to say, the lowest Auge. It is also called Oppositum Augis,
that is, the point opposite to the Auge: so as by this figure you may perceive,
that the point Auge is a point in the deferent of the Sun, farthest distant
from the center of the earth, and therefore is called of some Longior longitudo,
that is, the farthest longitude, marked in the former figure with the letter F;
and the opposite point to that, is called Propior longitud^, that is, the
nigher longitude, because it is nigher to the center of the earth, and is
marked in the said figure with the letter G. There be also in the said
deferent, two other points of the mean longitude, whereof we shall speak
hereafter. You see also, that the prick, marked with the letter A. is the
center of the world; and that the other prick, marked with the letter B. is the
center of the deferent of the Sun, which, because it is out of the center of
the world, and distant from the same, it is called the center of the
excentricke: and the distance betwixt these two centres, is called in Latin
excentricita^; and I likewise from henceforth will call such distance the
excentricitie.

Now describe the three foresaid circles or orbs, and show whereto they serve?
THe first, called the orb excentricke, which in the former figure is made
white, and marked with the letter C. is that which carries the body of the Sun,
and therefore is called in Latin Deferens Solis, and I will also call it the
deferent of the Sun: in the uttermost circumference whereof, are set the
foresaid two Auges, the one right opposite to the other, marked with the
letters F. G. as before is said. The other two black orbs, marked with the
letters D. E. are those which carry the Auges, and therefore are called the
deferents of the Auges, which be two several orbs; and yet to avoid Vacuum,
do enclose one another in such sort, as the slenderest or narrowest part of
the uppermost orb, marked with the letter D. does join close to the thickest
or fullest part of the nether orb, marked with the letter E. and the
slenderest or narrowest part of the nether orb, joyneth close to the thickest
or fullest part of the upper orb: and these two orbs do contain within them
the orb excentrique, or deferent of the Sun, and also do make the whole
sphere of the Sun to be concentrique, that is to say, to have all one center
with the center of the world: and yet in certain respects, these two orbs are
also excentrique, that is to say, having a center distant from the center of
the world: for the concaue superficies of the uppermost black orb, and the
convexe superficies of the nethermost black orb, being severally taken, have
the self same center which the deferent of the Sun has, which is the center
excentricke, marked with the letter B. All which things the former figure does
plainly show.

Wherefore was the deferent of the Sun supposed to be excentrique?
FOr three principal causes. First, for that the moving of the Sun is
unequal, now slower, now swifter.

Secondly, for that the body of the Sun, by his unequal distance from the
earth, seems to our sight sometime greater, and sometime lesser, the
grossness or thinness of the air being no cause thereof.

Thirdly, for that the Sun being in this or that part of the Zodiake, the
eclipse of the Moon continues longer or shorter time, so as she abides under
the shadow of the earth more one time than another. All which things are
salued by supposing an excentricke.

Is the deferent of the Sun, and the circle excentrique, one self thing?
NO, for though they have both one self center, called the center of the
excentrique, yet the circle excentricke is the circumference of a circle
imagined to be in the middle of the deferent, and is described by the center of
the Suns body, dividing the deferent into two equal parts or hemispheres, as
you may see in the second figure next following.

The second Intention shows what moving these orbs and circles before
mentioned have, and upon what poles and axletrees they are turned about.
BEfore I come to the declaration thereof, it shall be necessary to set down
one other figure, containing the most part of such lines, points, centres,
circles, semicircles, and arches, as do belong to the Theorique of the Sun,
and to show what they signify. I say here fore the most part, because both
these and all the rest shall be more fully declared, when we come to the third
Intention, whose office is to show all such things at the full.

The second figure belonging to the Theorique of the Sun.
IN this figure, the outermost white orb signifies the Zodiake, in which are
described the characters of the twelve signs. And the next white orb within
that, is the deferent of the Sun, in which is a little circle, representing
the body of the Sun, whose center is marked with the letter H. and the two
black orbs are the two deferents of the Auges of the Sun before described;
and in the middle white rundle are set down the two centres before described,
that is, the center of the world, marked with the letter A. and the center of
the deferent of the Sun marked with the letter B. Moreover, in this figure
are drawn certain right lines, whereof the long perpendiculer line passing
through both the foresaid centres, marked with the letters C. D. is called the
line of the Auges, and the overthwart line passing through the center of the
world to the Zodiake, marked with the letters E. F. signifies the Axe tree of
the Zodiake, whose outermost ends are the poles of the eclipticke. Then there
is another overthwart right line parallel to the foresaid line E. F. which
passing through the center excentrique extends unto the deferent of the
Sun, from the one side to the other side thereof, whose outermost ends are
the poles of the said deferent, marked with the letters K. L. Besides these
three lines, there are three other lines, whereof that which passes from the
center of the world to the Zodiake, marked with the letters A. G. is called the
line of the Suns mean moving. Then there is another line parallel to that,
which passes from the center of the deferent to the center or midst of the
Suns body, marked with the letters B. H. And the third line passing from the
center of the world through the midst of the Suns body, even to the Zodiake,
is called the line of the Suns true moving, marked with the letters A. H. I.
There are also in this figure certain portions of circles called arches, which
have their proper significations, as the arch of the Zodiake, contained betwixt
the first point of Aries, and the line of the Auges, marked with the letters E.
C. is called the Auge of the Sun in his second signification, and the arch
contained betwixt E. and G. is called the mean moving of the Sun, and the arch
contained betwixt E. and I. is called the true moving of the Sun, and the
arch contained betwixt G. and I. is called the equacion of the Sun, and the
arch contained betwixt the line of the mean moving of the Sun, and the line
of the Auges marked with the letters C. G. is called of some Argumentum, and of
some Anomalia, that is, the inequality of the Suns moving. All which arches
shall be more fully showed and declared in the third figure next following.

There be also in this figure three little semicircles, whereof the two,
marked with the letters K. P. and L. M. do signify those circles which the
poles of the excentrique do describe by the moving of the two deferents of the
Auges; and the third semicircle marked with the letters B. N. signifies that
circle which the center of the excentrique describes by the moving of the said
deferents of the Auges about the center of the world, the semidiameters of all
which circles are equal.

Does the Theorique of the Sun only consist of the three orbs about
mentioned, that is, of the deferent of the Sun, and of the two deferents of
the Auges?
THough the ancient Astronomers do appoint no more but those three, yet
Copernicus having found by many observations made by himself and others since
their time, that the Auges of the Sun do move unequally, and that the
excentricitie does alter: he therefore to salve that appearance, does add
another orb called the excentor of the excentrique; which indeed are two
shaddowed orbs, enclosing one another like as the two black orbs do, the
shape whereof you may see plainly expressed in the sphere of Mercury,
hereafter following.

Now show how the foresaid three orbs are moved, and first how the
excentrique of the Sun is moved, and in what time he makes his revolution?
THe excentrique or deferent of the Sun is regularly moved upon his own
center, according to the succession of the signs right under the eclipticke,
and makes his revolution in the space of one whole year, that is in 365
days, and almost six hours, and by the revolution of this orb is described
or limited the Suns year. And you have to note, that the tables of Alphonsus
and the Prutenicall tables do in a manner agree, touching the daily moving of
this orb, which is i59^ ii8^ iii19^ iiii37^ and v.24^ so as his yearly
revolution contains 365 days, 5. hours. i49^ ii15^ iii46^ saving that the
tables of Alphonsus do fail in the daily moving, v.5^ and thereby in the
yearly revolution do exceed the Prutenicall tables by iii13^ and so much is
the equal tropicall year, according to Copernicus, counting the same from the
very equinoctial point: but the daily moving of the Sun being counted from
the first star of the Rams horn, is i59^ ii8^ iii11^ iiii22^ v.10^ so as his
yearly revolution contains 365 days, 6 hours, i9^ and ii39^ and this is
called the syderall year.

The poles of this orb do equally observe the poles of the eclipticke, and
therefore the center of the Suns body does never swerve from the eclipticke
line.

Why does not this Orb also carry the Sun equally about the center of the
world?
BEcause that every circuler moving that is equal, makes in equal time in
his circumference both equal arches and also equal angles, upon the center of
equacion; which center in this Theorique, is all one with the center of the
excentrique marked with B. though in other Planets the center of equacion is a
several center by it self. And this kind of moving is only regular upon one
center, and not upon many or diverse centres, as you may perceive by the third
figure next following: in which figure the Sun being in his excentrique, and
turning about the center B. is said to be equal, for whilst he descends from
F. to H. on the left hand of the figure, he makes the arch of his excentrique
to be F. H. and the angle to be F. B. H. upon his own center B. which is an
obtuse or blunt angle: but upon the center A. he makes a lesser angle, which
is F. A. H. for that is a right angle; and so by this means the angle F. B. H.
should be equal to the angle F. A. H. that is to say, the greater to the
lesser, which is impossible. Wherefore the angles made upon A. the center of
the world, are not equal to the angles made upon the center of the equal
moving, marked with B. and therefore the moving of the Sun about the center
of the world, appears to be unequal, sometime slower and sometime swifter,
according to the unequal arches of the excentrique, subtending equal angles in
the center of the world.

How are the deferents of the Auges moved?
THey are moved about the center of the world, and upon the poles of the
Eclipticke, according to the succession of the signs, making by virtue of the
eight sphere, one revolution together with the said sphere, according to
Alphonsus, in 49000 years, and by this moving they put forward the Auge of the
excentrique by little and little into the next following degrees of the
Eclipticke, and by reason of the incredible slownesse of these orbs in their
moving, the Astronomers do not agree in the quantity of their revolution. For
Ptolomey thought them to be immoouable, and the followers of Alphonsus thought
their revolution to be unequal, and to be made in 49000 years, as before. But
Copernicus being helped by the observations of many ages, does show that these
orbs do pass through the Zodiake in 17108 Egyptian years, and that they
pass through the orb of the fixed stars almost in 50718 Egyptian years; and
that the other orb called the excentor of the excentor, which he himself
adds to the other orbs, does make his revolution upon his own center, which
is the center of a little circle, contrary to the succession of the signs, in
3434 Egyptian years: and by the moving of this orb, he shows that the true
Auge of the Sun creeps on unequally, and that the excentricitie does alter
and change.

The dimension or measure of the Suns sphere.
THe greatest excentricitie of the Sun, according to the demonstrations of
Copernicus, contains two degrees,i50^ andii7^ such like parts or degrees I
say, as the semidiameter B. F. of the excentrique contains sixty degrees.
And the least excentricitie contains but one such part, i55^ and ii53^ And by
the demonstrations of the said Copernicus, the foresaid semidiameter B. F.
does contain 1142 semidiameters of the earth. And A. B. in his greatest
excentricitie contains almost 48 semidiameters of the earth. And the said A.
B. in his least excentricitie contains almost 37 semidiameters of the earth,
so as when the excentricitie was greatest, and that the Sun was in his Auge,
according to the line A. F. set down in the third next figure, he was then
distant from the center of the earth 1190 semidiameters of the earth, which
distance Ptolomey thought to be 1210 semidiameters of the earth. And when the
Sun was in the point opposite to the Auge, he was then distant from the center
of the earth, according to the line A. G. set down in the said third figure,
1094 semidiameters of the earth. But when the excentricitie is least, as it is
in this our age, then the Sun being in his Auge, is distant from the center
of the earth 1179 semidiameters of the earth, but in these days the point
opposite to the Auge, approaches not so nigh to the earth, as it has done in
times past, for his distance now contains 1105 semidiameters of the earth,
which is further off than the former distance was, by eleven semidiameters of
the earth. And you have to note, that one semidiameter of the earth contains
3436 Italian miles, and 821^ of a mile.

The third Intention, showing what points, lines, and arches are necessary to
be known touching the Theorique of the Sun.
THough I have heretofore partly described such things in the first and second
figures, yet I mind once again to declare the same again according to
Mestlyn, who describes every thing, and sets down a third figure,
expressing the same in such order as follows.

Seeing the moving of the Sun, by reason of the orb excentrique, is unequal,
and that the true moving does differ from the mean moving, for that cause it
is necessary to know what the point Auge and his opposite point is, and their
moving: Also which are the lines of the mean moving and true moving of the
Sun, and what is the yearly inequality of such moving, called of Alphonsus,
argumentum, and what the mean moving and true moving of the Sun is, and
finally, what the Equacion is.

What is the moving of the point Auge, and of his opposite point?
IT is an arch of the Eclipticke, contained betwixt the beginning of Aries, and
the line of the Auges, which arch is called of Purbachius and others the Auge
of the Sun, in his second signification: for Auge in the first signification,
is only a point before described in both the former figures.

The third figure belonging to the Theorique of the Sun.
ALl the circles of this figure are like in signification to the circles before
set down in the second figure, and in this figure betwixt the letter E.
signifying here the beginning of Aries, and the letter C. signifying the point
Auge, is contained the arch E. C. limitting the moving of the point Auge,
counting from the beginning of Aries: but Ptolomey found in his time, that the
said point was in the fifth degree i30^ of Gemini, which point in these days,
according to Copernicus his calculation, is almost in the ninth degree of
Cancer.

The maintainers of Alphonsus his tables have over boldly, as well here as else
where, swarued from Ptolomey: in affirming the Auge of the Sun to have been
in his time contrary to his own observations, in the 13 degree i30^ of
Gemini, so as in these days that point ought to be in the first degree of
Cancer: to whom no credit in this matter is to be given, because it is
contrary to all the modern observations.

What is the line of the mean moving of the Sun?
IT is a right line drawn from the center of the world to the Eclipticke, and
equally distant from another line drawn from the center of the excentrique to
the center or midst of the Sun, which other line in the Theoriques of the
other Planets ought to be drawn from the center of equacion: but because in the
Theorique of the Sun the center of the excentrique, and that of the equacion
is all one, the one therefore may be indifferently taken for the other: and
this line of the mean moving is marked in the third figure with the letters
A. I. being parallel to the line B. K.

What is the line of the true moving of the Sun?
IT is a right line drawn from the center of the world, through the center of
the Sun to the very ecliptic, represented here in the third figure by the
letters A. K.

What is the arch of the mean moving of the Sun, and also what is the arch
of his true moving?
THe arch of his mean moving is an arch of the eclipticke contained betwixt the
first point of Aries, marked with the letter E. and the line of the mean moving
before described, and this arch is marked with the letters E. F. And the arch
of the true moving of the Sun, is an arch of the Eclipticke, contained
betwixt the beginning of Aries, and the line of the true moving of the Sun,
which arch is marked with the letters E. K. And both these arches are always
to be counted from the equinoctial point, according to the succession of the
signs.

Copernicus makes two kinds of this true moving of the Sun, that is,
simple, and compound, counting the simple moving from the first starte of the
Rams horn, as from a beginning which is immovable: but he counts the
compound moving from the beginning of the vernall equinoxe, which is mouable.

What is the yearly Anomalia or Inequality of the Suns moving?
IT is an arch of the Eclipticke, contained betwixt the line of the Auges and
the line of the Suns moving, according to the succession of the signs, and
this Inequality is twofold, that is, mean and true: the mean, is that which
ends at the line of the mean moving, and is marked with the letters C. I.
And the true Inequality is that which ends at the line of the true moving of
the Sun, and is marked with the letters C. K. And this yearly Inequality is
called the Inequality or Anomalie of the excentrique: but the followers of
Alphonsus do call it Argumentum Solis.

What is the equacion of the Suns moving?
THat is an arch of the Eclipticke, contained betwixt the line of the true
moving, and the line of the mean moving of the Sun, marked in the third
figure with the letters I. K. and this arch does make with the center of the
world the angle K. A. I. equal to the angle A. H. B: Which angle the line of
the true moving together, with the line drawn from the center of the
excentrique to the center of the Sun, does comprehend. And you have to note,
that when the Sun is either in his Auge, or in the opposite point thereof,
then there is no such arch at all, by reason that the two foresaid lines of the
true and mean moving do at that time meet and concur in one, making one
self line, but the said arch is greatest when the Sun is in his mean
longitude, hereafter defined. When the Sun therefore descends from his Auge
toward the point opposite of the Auge, this arch to show his true place,
takes away the equacion from the mean moving. But when the Sun ascends
from the opposite point toward the Auge, then this arch adds so much to the
mean moving.

Wherefore since this arch does increase toward the mean longitude, and going
again from thence, is deminished; it falls out, that the moving of the Sun,
which is equal in his own excentrique, appears in the center of the world
to be unequal, and to be most slow, the Sun being in his Auge: and the more
that he descends from thence, his moving waxes by little and little the
swifter. But it is equal to the mean moving, when the Sun is in the mean
longitude, but if he be in the point opposite to the Auge, then his moving is
most swift, and it observes the same course, though by a contrary way, that
is, by decreasing, whilst the Sun ascends from the opposite point of the Auge
toward the Auge.

What call you the mean longitude?
THe mean longitude may be taken two manner of ways.

For first the point of the orb excentrique, in which his equacion is
greatest, is called the mean longitude, of which points there be in the
excentrique, two: and that mean longitude is bounded in the third figure with
the right line A. H. K. which line makes right angles with the line of the
Auge in the center A. and in that place is found the angle A. H. B. or the arch
marked in the said figure with the letters I. K. on the left hand of the
figure, which is the equacion in the greatest excentricitie of the Sun, and
that is two degrees, i323^ ii24^ but in the least excentricitie the equacion is
no more than one degree, i55^ ii41^

Secondly, the mean longitude is a point of the excentrique, in which the
Sun or any other Planet has a mean distance from the center of the world,
that is to say, it is in the midst betwixt the greatest and least distance.
For this word longitude is generally taken for the distance of any Planet from
the earth, which distance is greatest, when the Planet is in his Auge, and is
least when he is in the opposite point of the Auge: so likewise the mean
longitude is taken for that distance which exceeds the least so much as it is
exceeded of the greatest, and is equal to the semidiameter of the excentrique.

Here now should follow the fourth Intention, showing the mou^ng of the Sun,
according to latitude: which fourth Intention, in this Theorique only has no
place, for the Sun never swarueth one jot from the Eclipticke line, and
therefore that line is called the way of the Sun, by which line all the
latitudes and wanderings of the other Planets are to be measured and examined.
And thus I end with the Theorique of the Sun.

The Theorique of the Moon.
Why do you deal with the Moon next after the Sun, since she is the lowest
Planet of all?
FOr three causes. First, for that the Moon though she has some more variety
in her moving than the Sun, yet her Theorique is not so intricate as those
of the rest of the Planets.

Secondly, since the Sun gives light to the world by day, describing the
years and days, it is meet therefore, that the Theorique of the Moon, which
gives light in the night, and describes the months of the year, should follow
next after that of the Sun.

Thirdly, because all the ancient Astronomers treating of the Planets, do
place the Theorique of the Moon next unto the Sun, whom it becomes us very
well to follow therein.

The first Intention, showing of how many orbs the Theorique of the Moon
consists.
IT consists of these five, whereof the first is the Excentrique, carrying
the Epicicle: Then the two deferents of the Auges: and the fourth is the
Epicicle, carrying the body of the Moon: (but both Copernicus and Maginus do
appoint to the Moon, two Epicicles, that is, the first and second Epicicle, as
shall be declared and demonstrated hereafter in my extract out of Maginu^ his
Theoriques:) and the fifth is the Orb equant, enuironing all the rest of the
Orbs. All which Orbs you may see plainly set down in the figure next
following, and also the two Centres, the one of the world, and the other of the
excentrique, by help of eight letters, set down also in the said figure, that
is, A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H.

The first figure belonging to the Theorique of the Moon.
IN this figure the letter A. signifies the center of the world. And B. the
center of the excentrique: which center, in going about the center of the
world, describes a little circle marked with the letters B. H.

And C. signifies the orb excentrique, whose middle line being described by
the center of the Epicicle, is specially to be observed in demonstrating the
motion of the Moon.

D. signifies the upper deferent of the Auges.

E. signifies the nether deferent of the Auges.

F. signifies the Epicicle, whereunto the body of the Moon is fixed.

G. signifies the orb equant, which is the outermost white orb, and is
otherwise called the circle or deferent of the two nods or sections, signifying
the head and tail of the Dragon.

Why do the Astronomers appoint unto the Theorique of the Moon an orb
excentrique?
BEcause the equacions of the Epicicle which the excentrique carries, are
observed to be somewhere greater, and somewhere lesser, as shall be declared
hereafter in the fifth Figure belonging to the Theorique of the Moon. And this
appearance is to be salued by supposing an excentrique.

Wherefore are the deferents of the Auges added to the Theorique of the Moon?
FOr the selfsame causes which are before set down in the Theorique of the
Sun.

Why is the Epicicle supposed to be needful in this Theorique?
FOr two causes: First, because the Moon has another inequality in her
moving, whereunto one only excentrique cannot supply: for in like and
selfsame places the motion of the Moon is found to be sometime swifter, and
sometime flower.

Secondly, because the Moon (other things being like) is observed to be
sometime higher from the earth, and sometime lower, which is to be seen as
well by the apparent magnitude of her body, as also by the continuance and
quantity of her Eclipses.

Why was it needful to add to this Theorique the Orb equant?
FOr two causes: First, that the varieties of the Moons latitude might be
salued thereby.

Secondly, that the moving of the excentrique, which is found to be irregular
about his own center, might be equated or made equal by the center of this
circle, being as it were the very point of equacion, and thereof it is called
the circle equant.

Wherefore is this circle made to enuiron all the rest of the orbs?
THough as touching the demonstration of the moouings, it makes no great
matter whether this orb be without or within the rest of the orbs, yet since
that by carrying about the nodes and limits of the two latitudes of the sphere
of the Moon, and that by this motion the whole composition of the Moons
sphere does alter: it is more meet that this orb should compass in all the
rest, than to be compassed of them. For it is more likely, that the inferior
orb is moved and turned about of his superior, than the superior of the
inferior.

The second Intention, showing toward what part such orbs are moved, and in
what time such orbs make their revolutions, and also upon what centres or
poles they make their regular mouings: and first, how and in what manner the
excentrique of the Moon, carrying the Epicicle, is moved.
THe excentrique of the Moon is equally moved about the center of the world,
according to the succession of the signs, and about his own poles, which are
distant on both sides from the poles of the Eclipticke five degrees, making his
revolution in the space of one month, and by this moving it carries about
the center of the Epicicle equally through the Zodiake. And the daily moving
of this excentrique, or of the center of the Epicicle under the Zodiake, is 13
degrees, i10^ ii35^ iii1^ iiii7^ v.22^ so as his whole revolution is made in 27
days, seven hours, i43^ ii5^ iii8^ and so much is the perodicall month,
which is otherwise called of John de Sacro Busto the month of peragration,
whereof I have spoken in my Treatise of the sphere, in the 46 chapter of the
first book thereof.

What follows of this inequality of the excentrique?
TWo things. First, since that the Astronomers by often observation have found,
that the orb excentrick or center of the Epicicle does equally turn about
the center of the world, it must needs follow, that the moving of the said
excentrique is unequal, as well about his own center, as about any other
point, clean contrary to that which has been said touching the moving of
the excentrique, or deferent of the Sun. Secondly, the moving of this
excentrique is swifter, when the center of the epicicle is in the upper part,
nigh unto the Auge; for a greater portion thereof does belong to the equal
arches of the Zodiake, when she is nigh to the Auge, than when she is nigh to
the opposite point of the Auge. Which things do plainly appear in the third
and last figure belonging to the Theorique of the Sun before described. In
which figure suppose the letters F. H. G. to represent the excentrique of the
Moon, whose moving because it is equal about the center A. must needs be
unequal about the center B. Moreover, because the medieties or halfes of the
Zodiake, divided by the right line E. A. H. K. are turned about in equal time,
so as the greater portion of the excentrique is answerable to the upper half,
and the lesser portion to the nether half, it easily appears, that the
center of the Epicicle makes in his moving a greater bent or bowt upward, and
a lesser downward, that is to say, it goes faster being in the upper half,
than when it is in the nether half.

How are the deferents of the Auges of the Moon moved?
THey are equally moved, contrary to the succession of the signs about the
center of the world, and about the same poles that the excentrique is, and do
make their revolution almost in 32 days. And by this moving they carry about
the point Auge, or the whole line of the Auge, equally through the Zodiake,
contrary to the succession of the signs. And they also cause the center of
the excentrique to describe a little circle about the center of the world,
whose semidiameter is equal to the excentricitie, which little circle you may
see in the first figure of the Moons Theorique, marked with the letters B. H
enuironning the center of the Zodiake, marked with the letter A. And the daily
moving of these deferents of the Auge, contrary to the succession of the
signs is eleven degrees, i12^ ii18^ iii21^ iiii52^ v.33^ making one whole
revolution in 32 days, three hours, i4^ ii38^ iii^

How and in what manner is the Epicicle m^ued or turned about?
THis Epicicle being placed in the excentrique, and elevated above the center
of the Zodiake, is moved in the upper part of the excentrique, contrary to the
succession of the signs, and in the nether part of the said excentrique,
according to the succession of the signs upon his proper axletree, standing
perpendicularly upon the plane of the excentrique, and being moved equally from
the mean Auge, makes his revolution in 27 days and almost in 13 hours, by
which moving the body of the Moon is carried round about the center of the
Epicicle. And the daily moving of this Epicicle from the mean Auge, is 13
degrees, i3^ ii53^ iii56^ iiii23^ v^8^ so as it makes his whole revolution in
27 days, 13 hours, i18^ ii34^ iii52^ But for the better understanding of the
motion of the Epicicle, you have to note, that there be three special points
belonging to the Epicicle, that is, the mean Auge, the true Auge, and the
Touch-point, otherwise called the point of concauitie.

How are these three points described?
THe mean Auge is described by a right line, which being drawn from that point
in the little circle, which is opposite to the center of the excentrique,
passes through the center of the Epicicle, even to the circumference thereof,
marked in the figure next following with the letter M.

The true Auge of the Epicicle is described by a right line, which being drawn
from the center of the world, passes also through the center of the Epicicle,
even to the circumference thereof, and is marked with the letter V.

The point of concauitie or Touch-point is described by a right line, which
being drawn from the center of the excentrique, passes also through the
center of the Epicicle, even to the circumference thereof, marked in the figure
following with the letter P. which point is called the point of concauitie,
because you must imagine, that in the plane of the excentrique there is a
certain concauitie, wherein the plane superficies of the Epicicle is turned
about, which concauitie of it self is immouable, because it is moved only
according unto the motion of the excentrique: to the plane of which
excentrique, if you attribute so much thickness or deapth toward the center
thereof, as is the diameter of the Epicicle, it must needs fall out, that the
circumference of the Epicicle will touch the concaue superficies of the upper
deferent of the Auges in one only point. And therefore this point of the
Epicicle may be as well called the Touch-point, as the point of concauitie: and
this point is said to be immoouable, because it never changes his place, as
the other two points, that is, the mean and true Auge of the Epicicle do;
which are sometime more or less distant one from another, the center of the
Epicicle being out of the line of the Auge of the excentrique; for being in
that line, those three point are united, and do meet all three in one. And the
differing distance of the mean and true Ange of the Epicicle, in any place out
of the foresaid line, is always to be measured by the Touch-point, because it
is immouable, and not wandering as the other two points are, as you shall more
plainly perceive by the figure next following, and by that which shall be said
hereafter.

The second figure belonging to the Theorique of the Moon.
THe outermost circle in this figure signifies the Zodiake, whose center is
marked with the letter A. and the next inner great circle signifies the
excentrique of the Moon, whose center is marked with the letter B. which
center by going about the center A. describes the little circle B. C. which
point C. is the opposite point to B. And the five little circles placed
severally upon the excentrique, do signify every where the Epicicle of the
Moon, whose centres are marked with these five letters, D. E. F. G. H. Again
the right lines, marked with the letters B. P. passing through the centres of
all the five Epicicles do show in the circumference of the said Epicicles, the
point of concauitie, otherwise called the touch point, marked with the letter
P. And the right lines, marked with A. V. do show the true Auge of the
Epicicle, marked with the letter V. and the right lines, marked with the letter
C. M. do show the mean Auge of the Epicicle, marked with the letter M.

What conclusions are to be gathered out of this Inequality of the Epicicle?
THese four here following.

1 First, for so much as it is found by observation, that the motion of the
mean Auge of the Epicicle, marked with the letter M. is regular and equal,
going every day 13 degrees and almost i4^ it must needs follow that the motion
of the other two points, that is, the true Auge of the Epicicle, marked with
the letter V. and the touch point marked with P. is irregular and unequal,
because the mean Auge of the Epicicle is a vagarant point, so called, because
it keeps not always one certain place in the Epicicle, and yet is the
beginning of the motion of the Epicicle.

2 Secondly, if the center of the Epicicle be in the Auge or opposite Auge of
the excentrique, then these three points, that is, the Touch-point, the true
Auge, and the mean Auge of the Epicicle be all one, that is to say, do
concur or meet all in one self line. But if the center of the Epicicle be
out of any of the said points, viz. out of the Auge or opposite Auge of the
excentrique, then they are so separated, as the true Auge of the Epicicle
marked with the letter V. is in the midst betwixt the mean Auge, marked with
M, and the Touch-point marked with P, because the center of the world is
always in the midst betwixt the center of the excentrique and the point C,
which point C in the little circle, is opposite to the center of the said
excentrique, marked with B. And the greatest distance of these points is
beneath the mean longitudes of the Excentrique. What those mean longitudes
are, shall be declared hereafter.

3 Thirdly, in that half of the excentrique, which descends from the Auge of
the said excentrique unto the opposite Auge of the same, the two Auges of the
Epicicle, both true and mean, marked with the letters V and M, do go before
the Touch^point, in respect of the motion of the Epicicle, which is contrary
to the succession of the signs. But in respect of the motion of the
excentrique, which is always according to the succession of the signs, the
two points M and V do follow the Touch-point P, as you may easily perceive by
the former figure last set down: for the center of the Epicicle being in the
Auge of the excentrique, marked with D, or in the opposite Auge of the same,
marked with G, the three foresaid points are all joined together in one self
line. But when the Epicicle descends from D to E, then P V and M are
separated, and P goes before V and M: and the letter V being the true Auge of
the Epicicle, is in the midst betwixt P and M. And such digression or
separation is encrased by little and little until the center of the Epicicle
do come to the letter F, for from thence they begin again to approach and to
grow nigher together, until they fall into the point G, whereas they join
again, and are all one. But the contrary happens when those points are in
the other ascending half of the excentrique, for then M and V do go before
P, proceeding according to the succession of the signs.

4 Fourthly, the moving of the Epicicle is swifter in the upper part of the
excentrique, than in the nether part thereof, for there the mean Auge of the
Epicicle proceeds contrary to the succession of the ^ignes, that is to say,
toward that part into the which the Epicicle is moved: but the contrary
happens in the lower part of the excentrique. And you have to note, that the
Touch-point P is the measure of the digression or separation of both the Auges
of the Epicicle, as well true as mean, because the Touch-point does at no time
wander from his place but remains immoouable.

The demonstration of this fourth conclusion is plainly set forth in the
former second figure of the Moon, whereby you may perceive, that when the
Epicicle is come to the letter H, nigh unto the mean longitude of the
Excentrique, whereas the distance of the foresaid points M V and P is always
greatest; then immediately both the Auges, M and V, begin again to approach unto
the Touch-point P, wherefore M proceeds toward P, contrary to the
succession of the signs, until it meets with P in the Auge of the
excentrique, marked with the letter D. And from thence M departs again from
P, contrary to the succession of the signs, until it arriueth to the other
mean longitude of the excentrique, whereas it is furthest distant from P. And
by reason that the Epicicle is also moved into that part, it falls out, that
the two moouings meeting in one self part, the moving of the Moon in the
Epicicle, or rather the Epicicle it self by following the wandering mean
Auge, is swifter in his gate. But contrariwise, in the nether part of the
excentrique, from the place nigh unto F (whereas the distance of M P is
greatest) unto the other place of the greatest distance of the said points nigh
unto H, the mean Auge of the Epicicle is moved according to the succession of
the signs: and there, according to the quantity of his moving, it takes so
much away from the swiftness of the Epicicle, as thereby the Epicicle in that
place is much more slower in his gate.

How is the circle equant of the Moon moved, which is otherwise called the
circle of the two nodes or intersections, signifying the head and tail of the
Dragon?
THis circle is equally moved, contrary to the succession of the signs, about
the center and poles of the Eclipticke, making his revolution almost in 19
years: and by the moving of this circle, the poles of the deferents of the
Auge are carried about the poles of the ecliptic: and the daily moving of this
orb under the eclipticke, is but i3^ ii10^ iii38^ iiii23^ and v.24^ so as it
makes his whole revolution in 6798 days, that is to say, in 18 Egyptian
years, 228 days, 3 hours, i49^ ii40^ and iii16^ of an hour.

How is the moving or departing of the Moon from these Intersections called?
IT is called the moving, or rather the Anomalie of the Moons latitude: and
the Moon, or rather the center of her Epicicle, makes one return to these
Intersections in 27 days and 5 hours, for in that time the Moon
accomplisheth all the varieties and changes of her latitude both North and
South, and in one day she is separated from these Intersections 13 d^grees, i1^
ii45^ iii39^ iiii30^ and v46^ and makes her return to the said Intersections
in 27 days, 5 hours, and ii36^ of an hour.

You said before that the motions of all the other Planets were governed by the
Sun: Tell therefore, in what moving of any Orb belonging to the sphere of the
Moon, there appears any harmony or agreement of the Moon with the Sun.
THeir harmony consists in the moving of the deferents of the Auge of the
Moon, and in those things which depend of those deferents. For the deferents
of the Moon Auge do keep such proportion with the excentrique of the Moon,
as look how much the line of her mean moving by the moving of the excentrick
is moved forward from the line of the mean moving of the Sun, according to
the succession of the signs, beginning at the conjuction or opposition of the
said lines of the mean moving, as well of the Sun as of the Moon: so much
do those deferents carry backward the Auge of the excentrique from the same
line of the mean moving of the Sun, contrary to the succession of the
signs, as you shall more easily perceive by this figure or instrument next
following, used by Reinholdus in his Commentaries made upon the Theoriqes of
Purbachius, the description and use whereof here follows.

The third figure belonging to the Theorique of the Moon.
THis figure consists of certain Orbs and Circles, whereof some are
moouable, and some immouable. The first lowest and greatest immouable circle
being divided into 180 parts, every one containing two degrees, which makes in
all 360 degrees, signifies the Zodiake. And the limb of this circle is
divided into two spaces, in the outermost whereof are set down the caracters
of the twelve signs: and in the innermost space are first set down above on
the left hand nine little stars, each one representing the body of the Sun,
And right under them are set down the first five aspects: the first whereof
standing right under the letter A, signifies the Conjunction of the Sun and
Moon, marked thus. and next to that on the left hand, is the Sextile aspect,
marked thus. and then the Quadrat aspect, marked thus. and next to that the
Trine aspect marked thus. and then the Opposition, marked thus. and these are
called the first aspects, because they go before the Full of the Moon: and
then follows again the Trine aspect, the Quadrat, the Sextile aspect, and
the Conjunction, which are called the second aspects, because they chance
after the Full. And the first Conjunction is placed right under the letter A,
which standing in the very top of the figure in the outermost space of the
limb, signifies the beginning of Aries. Moreover, in the innermost space of
the limb are set down these letters, viz. BRCQDPEOFNGMH, which letters do
serve to show the motion as well of the Excentrique, as of the Auge of the
Moon.

And next to the foresaid Zodiake are placed 2 mouable black orbs, which are
the deferents of the Moons Auge, and opposite Auge, signified by the 2 little
tapes fastened to the uppermost black orb; whereof the one tape is marked with
the letter X, signifying the Moons Auge, and the other tape being unmarked,
signifies her opposite Auge.

Next betwixt the faid two black orbs, is a mouable white orb, signifying
the excentrique or deferent of the Moons Epicicle, to which is put a little
tape to show the place of the center of the Epicicle, which center is marked
with the letter Y, and in the circumference of the said Epicicle is fixed the
body of the Moon. And within the Orb excentrique is another immoouable white
orb or roundell, the center whereof is the center of the world, marked with
the letter T, about which is a little circle described by the center of the
excentrique of the Moon, by turning round about the center of the world, which
center of the excentrique is marked with the letter S, and the opposite point
to that, is marked with the letter V, and the circumference of the said little
circle is divided into nine equal parts, marked with Arithmeticall figures, as
1. 2. 3. and so forth to nine, to show the place of the center of the
excentrique, marked with S, in every aspect. For the center of the Moons
Epicicle being in conjunction with the Sun, the center S is found to be in
the upper point of the little circle, marked with the figure 1, and being in
the first Sextile aspect, the center S is in the point marked with the figure
2, and so proceeds from point to point, according to the order of the nine
aspects, before set down.

The use of this Figure or Instrument is plainly showed by this one example
here following.
SVppose therefore the Conjunction of the Sun and Moon to be under the letter
A. wherefore you must place in one self line both the Auge of the excentrique,
marked with the letter X, and also the center of the Epicicle, marked with the
letter Y, right under the letter A. And because the center of the Epicicle
does move toward the left hand, according to the succession of the signs,
and that the Auge of the Moon does move toward the right hand, contrary to
the succession of the signs, you must bring the center Y to the letter B, for
there will his place be within four days next after the Conjunction, and
there having stayed the center Y, turn the Auge X toward the right hand, even
to the letter M, and stay it there, so shall you find the midde body of the
Sun, who then follows the Moon, to be in the midst betwixt the two letters
B and M, right over the Sextile aspect; and at that time the Moon is said to be
in a Sextile aspect to the Sun, for then she is nigh to the mean longitudes,
signified here in this figure by a white right line, always crossing the line
of the Auges (which is also white) in the center of the world with right
angles, and the shape of the Moons light is then horned, like a sycle, called
in Greek Minoides, and in Latin Falcata. But at the seventh day after the
Conjunction, her light will increase somewhat more, wherefore by turning the
center Y to the letter C, and the Auge X to the letter N, you shall find the
center of the Sun to be in the very midst betwixt those two letters, right
over the Quadrat aspect, and the Moon to be right in the opposite Auge, and
thereby to be in a Quadrat aspect to the Sun, at which time the shape of her
light is said to be halfed, which may be called the half Moon, in Greek
Diochotomos, and in Latin Dimidia or Dimidiata. But the eleventh day after the
Conjunction, she will seem round bodied, though not at the full: wherefore you
must bring the center Y to the letter D, and the Auge X to the letter O, so
shall you find the center of the Sun to be in the midst betwixt those two
letters, right over the mark of the Trine aspect; for then the Moon being
again in the mean longitude, is said to be in a Trine aspect to the Sun, and
the shape of her light is round like a bowl, and may be called the whole Moon,
though not the full Moon, and in Greek it is called A^^phichyrtos, in Latin
Vtrinque gibbosa.

Again, when the Moon is fifteen days old, then bring both the center Y,
and also the Auge X to the letter E, for then you shall find the Sun to be
right over the mark of Opposition, so as the Moon is then opposite to the
Sun, and then she is at the full, called in Latin Pleni Lunium, and in
Greek Panselmos.

But the nineteenth day of her age the center Y will be in the letter F, and
the Auge X in the letter H, and then the Moon is the third time in the mean
longitude, and then she is again in a Trine aspect to the Sun, as she was
before at the eleventh of her age. And when the Moon is two and twenty days
old, then the center Y shall be in G, and the Auge X in Q, and then the Moon
shall be again in a Quadrat aspect to the Sun, as she was before when she was
seven days old. And when she is six and twenty days old, then the center Y
shall be in H, and the Auge X in R, and then the Moon being the fourth time
in the mean longitude, shall be in a Sextile aspect, as she was before, being
but four days old. And when she shall be thirty days old, then the center Y
and the Auge X shall meet together under A, and so the Moon shall be again in
Conjunction with the Sun. All which things are breefely set down by
Reinholdus in this Table following, consisting of seven Collums: In the first
whereof are set down the days of the Moons age during her increase, that is
to say, from the Conjunction to the full, containing fifteen days, descending
downward: in the second Collum are set the first five Aspects: and in the
third Collum the places or points of the Excentrique. In the fourth Collum the
names of the Moons diverse shapes of lights, serving as well to her increase as
decrease. In the fifth Collum are set again the places of the Excentrique. In
the sixth Collum the second Aspects, like to the first. And in the last Collum,
the days of the Moons age after the full, during her decrease or wane, that
is, from 15 to 30, ascending upward.

The Table follows in the next Page. A TABLE SHOWING THE DIVERSE SHAPES OF THE
MOON.
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. The days or age of the Moon. The first five Aspects of
the Moon. The places of the Excentrique The diverse shapes and names of the
lights of the Moon The places of the Excentrique. The second five Aspects of
the Moon. The dates. 1. In the Auge. Coniunctio, the new Moon. In the Auge.
30. 4.. In the mean longitude of the Excentrique. Falcata, the horned Moon. In
the mean longitude of the Excentrique.. 26. 7.. In the opposite Auge. Demidiata,
the half Moon. In the opposite Auge.. 22. 11.. In the mean longitude of the
Excentrique. Vtrinquegihbosa, almost round. In the mean longitude of the
Excentrique.. 19. 15.. In the Auge. Pleni luniu^, the full Moon. In the Auge.
opposition;. 15.

How is this digression or departing of the Moon from the Sun, called?
IT is commonly called the longitude or moving of the Moon from the Sun: and
the Moon returns again to the Sun, or rather ouertaketh him in 29 days
and one half day, in which time she accomplisheth all her diverse illuminations
or shapes of light, that is to say, she sustaineth all her aspects to the
Sun, and shows to the earth all the diversities of her lights and
apparances. And this month is called the month sinodicall: for there are two
kinds of Lunar months, the one periodicall, in which she goes through the
whole Zodiake, and the other sinodicall, in which she ouertaketh the Sun;
which Sacrobust^ calls the month of Consecution, who makes four Lunar
months, that is, the month of Peragration, the month of Apparition, the
month Medicinal, and the month of Consecution, which are all declared in the
six and fortieth Chapter of my first book of the Sphere. And you have to
understand, that the daily moving of the Moon from the Sun, contains 12
degrees, i11^ ii26^ iii41^ iiii29^ v58^ and the sinodicall month consists of
29 days, 12 hours, i44^ ii3^ iii11^

What conclusions do accompany this harmony of the Sun and Moon?
THese four here following.

First, in every mean Conjunction or Opposition of the Sun and Moon (which
mean Conjunction or Opposition is said to be when the center of the Moons
Epicicle is either in Conjuction or in Opposition to the center of the Sun)
the center of the Epicicle is found to be in the Auge of the Excentrique, but
in every Quadrat aspect the center of the Epicicle is in the opposite Auge of
the Excentrique.

Secondly, by this means, in every Conjuction and Opposition, as well the
Excentrique as the Epicicle, are most swift in their motions; but in the
quarters they are slowest, because their Anomalie or Inequality is thereby
altered, as has been said a little before.

Thirdly, the Moon in one sinodicall month passes twice through the orb
Excentrique.

Fourthly, the center of her Epicicle in one ^inodicall month describes about
the center of the world a certain Ovale figure, like to this here following:

The fourth figure belonging to the Theorique of the Moon.
IN which Figure, the letter A signifies the center of the world, or of the
whole sphere of the Moon, and therefore at the new Moon the center of the
excentrique is in B, which center B, by turning round about the center A,
describes a little circle in the midst of this figure, marked with the
letters DFNKMOR: and the four little circles placed upon the Ovale circle, do
signify the Epicicle of the Moon, the four centres whereof are marked with
these four letters, CIPE: and the letter C signifies here also the Auge of
the excentrique, and so does the letter P, but the letters IE do each of them
signify the opposite point of the Auge. Moreover, the line AC signifies here
the line of the mean moving of the Sun, from which line when the center B
departs toward the right hand, and comes to the point D, which is in the
little circle, then the center of the Epicicle marked with C, descends on the
left hand to the point E, which is in the Ovale circle, and then the angles
BAD, and BAE are equal through the equality of their mouings. Likewise, when
the center of the excentrique comes to the point in the little circle, marked
with F, the center of the Epicicle is in the point G. And when the center of
the excentrique falls into the point H, and there has described a quarter of
the little circle, then the center of the Epicicle has likewise made a quarter
of the Zodiake, which is 90 degrees, counting from the line of the mean moving
of the Sun, whereof such distance of the Moon from the Sun is called a
quarter, and is found to be in the point 1, being then in the opposite Auge of
the excentrique, and so the Moon gives light with half her body, and is
then nighest to the earth. Again, when the center of the excentrique comes
down into K, then the center of the Epicicle departing from the earth, comes
to the point L: and when the center of the excentrique comes to the point M,
then the center of the Epicicle is in the point N. Lastly, when the center of
the excentrique falls into O, the center of the Epicicle shall be in P, so as
OP shall be both in one right line, and thereby the center of the Epicicle and
the center of the excentrique shall be distant from the Sun half a circle,
which is a hundred and eighty degrees, and then the Moon shining with her
whole body, is opposite to the Sun. And look what course the Epicicle has
kept in the first half of the Ovale circle during the Moons increase, the like
course it observes in the other half of the said circle, whilst the Moon
decreaseth.

How are the Orbs belonging to the sphere of the Moon, to be measured?
AS the line of the Auge marked with the letters AC, or AP, in the former
fourth figure, contains 60 degrees or parts, even so the opposite Auge, marked
with the letters AI, or AQ, contains according to Ptolomey of the like
degrees or parts, 39 degrees and i22^ and the semidiameter of the excentrique,
contains 49 degrees, i41^ and the excentricitie AB contains 10 degrees,
i19^ and the semidiameter of the Epicicle contains 5 degrees, i13^ But if the
degrees be such, as the semidiameter of the earth contains but one degree or
one part thereof, then he proves by demonstration, that the line of the Auge
contains but 59 such degrees; and the line of the opposite Auge to contain no
more but 38 degrees and i43^ and the semidiameter of the excentrique to
contain 48 degrees, i51^ ii30^ and the excentricitie to contain 10 degrees,
i^^ ii30^ and the semidiameter of the Epicicle to contain 5 degrees, i10^ And
hereof it comes to pass, that the altitudes of the Moon are measured by the
semidiameters of the earth. For the greatest altitude of the new of full Moon,
being then in the Auge of the excentrique, is 64 degrees, i10^ and her least
altitude when she is in the said Ange, is 53 degrees, i50^ but the greatest
altitude of the Moon, being in the beginning of any of her quarters, and in the
opposite Auge of the excentrique, is 43 degrees, i53^ and her least altitude is
then 33 degrees, i^^ of the semidiameter of the earth, whereof every such part
is equal to the semidiameter of the earth. And note, that by the altitude of
the Moon is meant here a right line, extending from the center of the earth to
the center of the Moon, in what part of heaven soever she be. But Copernicus
correcting these things, in his suppositions or particular propositions,
proves the greatest altitude of the Moon, being either new or full, to
contain 65 degrees, i^0^ and her least altitude to contain 55 degrees, i8^
and being in the beginning of any of her quarters, her greatest altitude to
contain 68 degrees, i20^ and her least altitude to contain 52 degrees, i17^
Such degrees, I say, whereof the semidiameter of the earth is but one.

The third Intention, showing what points, lines, and arches are requisite to be
known in the Theorique of the Moon, which are these here following.
1. THe line of the mean, and also the line of the true moving of the Moon.
2. The mean and true moving of the Moon. 3. The longitude or distance of the
Moon from the Sun. 4. The doubled longitude or center. 5. The center of the
equality. 6. The Auge and opposite Auge of the excentrique. 7. The Auge and
opposite Auge, both mean and true, and also the Touch-point, or point of
Concauitie, all three belonging to the Epicicle of the Moon. 8. The Equacion
of the Center. 9. The argument equal or mean. 10. The argument equated. 11.
The Equacion of the Epicicle. 12. The diversity of the Diameter. 13. The
proportional minutes: and to these may be added the Intersections, called the
head and tail of the Dragon. Also the North and South limit, and the mean and
true moving of the same. And finally, the mean and true Anomalie or
Inequality of the Moons latitude.
What is the line of the mean moving of the Moon?
IT is a right line, which being drawn from the center of the world, passes
through the center of the Epicicle even to the Zodiake. And this line by means
of the regular moving of the excentrique upon the center of the world, is
equally carried through the Zodiake, showing the mean place of the Moon, and
therewith the true place of the center of the Epicicle: which line in the sixth
figure hereafter following, is represented by the letters M B, which line
passes through the center of every one of the four Epicicles set down in the
said sixth figure. And this line in the Theorique of the Sun is threefold,
whereof one proceeds from the center of the excentrique to the body of the
Sun, the second. line being equally distant from the first, proceeds from
the center of the world to the Zodiake. The third line proceeding also from the
center of the world, passes through the body of the Sun to the Zodiake. All
which three lines are before plainly set down in the second figure belonging
to the Theorique of the Sun. And these three lines in this Theorique of the
Moon, by reason that the center of equality, and the center of the world is
here all one, they do make but one self line.

What is the line of the true moving of the Moon?
IT is a right line, which being drawn from the center of the world, passes
through the midde body of the Moon, even to the Zodiake, which the letters M F
C in the sixth figure following do show.

What is the mean and true moving of the Moon?
THe mean moving of the Moon is an arch of the Zodiake, which extends from
the beginning of Aries, according to the succession of the signs, unto the
line of the mean moving of the Moon. And the true moving of the Moon is an
arch of the Zodiake, extending in like manner from Aries to the line of the
true moving of the Moon.

The fifth figure belonging to the Theorique of the Moon.
THis figure is used by Mestelyn to show the armonie of the Sun and Moon,
which is already more plainly demonstrated by Reinholdus his figure before
set down, and it is the third figure belonging to the Theorique of the Moon.
And the outermost circle of this fifth figure signifies the Zodiake, divided
into 360 degrees, and the next greater circle is the excentrique of the Moon,
which carries the Epicicle, whose center is marked with the letter F. And A is
the center of the Zodiake: and B is the center of the excentrique, which by
turning about the center A, describes the little circle in the midst of the
Figure, and the line A F is the line of the mean moving of the Moon, being in
G, and the line A B D is the line of the Moons Auge, or of her excentrique,
being in E, and the line A C is the line of the mean moving of the Sun, who
unless the Moon and he be in Conjunction or Opposition, is always in the
midst betwixt the Auge of the Moon, and the center of her Epicicle, as is
more plainly declared before in the third figure. And therefore I have set down
this fifth figure here, only to show the longitude and double longitude of the
Moon, and the equacion of the center, as follows.

What is the longitude of the Moon from the Sun?
IT is an arch of the Zodiake, proceeding according to the succession of the
signs from the line of the Suns mean moving, to the line of the Moons mean
moving, which the arch C G in the former fifth figure does show.

What is the double longitude or center of the Moon?
IT is an arch of the Zodiake, proceeding according to the succession of the
signs, from the Auge of the excentrique unto the line of the Moons mean
moving, represented in the former fifth figure by the letters E C G, and is
called the double longitude, because it is double so much as is the distance of
the Moon from the Sun, represented in the said figure by the letters C G, as
you may easily try with your Compass. Alphonsus and his followers do call it
the center of the Moon, because it depends upon the Auge of the excentrique,
and is answerable to that arch, which in the Theorique of the Sun is called
the yearly Inequality or Argument of the Sun, which is twofold, that is,
mean and true, represented in the third figure of the Suns Theorique by the
letters C I and C K. And this double longitude is called of Coperni^us, Motus
secundi Epicicli, the moving of the second Epicicle; which second, and also
the first Epicicle, shall be declared hereafter in the eleventh chapter of my
extract out of Maginus.

What is the Equacion of the Center, or of the Excentrique?
IT is an arch of the Epicicle, contained betwixt the mean and true Auge of
the said Epicicle, represented in the said fifth figure of the Moon, by the
letters M N: and whenever the center of the Epicicle is either in the Auge or
opposite Auge of the Excentrique, then this arch is no arch at all. But if the
center of the Epicicle be out of those two points, and is found to be in that
half of the Excentrique which descends from the Auge toward the opposite
point thereof, then it adds to the Inequality of the Epicicle hereafter
defined, some portion: but in the other half it takes so much away from the
Inequality of the Epicicle, for there the mean Auge of the Epicicle goes
backward from the true Auge thereof, contrary to the succession of the signs,
toward that part into which the Epicicle tends; but in the first half it is
clean contrary. And note, that according to the tables of Alphonsus and of
Ptolomey, the greatest equacion of the center or excentrique contains 13
degrees, i9^ but according to the Prutenicall Tables, it contains no more but
^2 degrees, i27^ the difference whereof springs of the diversity of their
suppositions.

What is the Anomalia or Inequality of the Epicicle, both mean and true?
THe mean Inequality of the Epicicle, is an Arch of the Epicicle, contained
betwixt the mean Auge of the Epicicle and the midde body of the Moon,
counted toward that part whereunto the Epicicle is moved: But the true
Inequality is an arch contained betwixt the true Auge of the Epicicle, and the
midde body of the Moon. This Inequality is called of Ptolomey, Anomalia, of
Alphonsus, Argumentum; and of Copernicus, motus primi Epicicli.

What is the equacion of the Epicicle, called of Alphonsus, Equatio Argumenti?
IT is an arch of the Zodiake, contained betwixt the line of the mean moving
and the line of the true moving of the Epicicle. And this arch is none at all,
when the Moon is in the true Auge, or in the true opposite Auge of the
Epicicle. And whilst the Moon passes through the first half of the Epicicle,
this equacion makes the true moving of the Moon lesser than her mean
moving, and in the other half of the Epicicle it makes her true moving
greater than her mean moving. And this equacion of the Epicicle may be
sometime greater, and sometime lesser, according as the center of the Epicicle
is more or less distant from the Auge of the excentrick, but it is said to be
greatest when the center of the Epicicle is in the opposite Auge of the
excentrique, and to be least when the center of the Epicicle is in the Auge of
the said excentrique. But to understand this and many other things belonging to
this equacion, it shall be necessary to set down this sixth figure here
following, and appertaining to the Theorique of the Moon.

The sixth figure belonging to the Theorique of the Moon.
THis figure as you see consists of certain circles both greater and lesser,
and of certain lines and points, marked with certain letters to show what
they signify. You have then to understand, that the greatest and outermost
circle of this figure signifies the Zodiake, whose center is marked with the
letter M: and the circle that is blacker than his fellows, signifies the
circle excentrique, which carries the Epicicle of the Moon, whose center is
marked with the letter N. There be also within the Zodiake seven other circles,
all drawn upon the center M, making six equal spaces, every space containing
10 minutes, so as there be in all 60 minutes, which are called the
proportional minutes; the use whereof, and whereto they serve, we shall show
here by and by. Moreover, there be four little circles, signifying the
Epicicle of the Moon, every one having his center placed upon the excentrique,
marked with the four letters H I K L. And the letters B C set down in four
sundry places upon the Zodiake, right against every one of the Epicicles, do
signify the arch of the Zodiake, which is called the equacion of the Epicicle,
which arch is contained betwixt the line M B, passing through the very center
of the Epicicle to the Zodiake, and the line M C passing through the midst of
the Moon, marked with the letter F, betwixt which letter F and the letter D
(set down in every Epicicle) is contained an arch of the Epicicle, whereof the
arch of the Zodiake B C is said to be the equacion. And the four letters H I K
L before mentioned, do not only signify the center of the Epicicle, but also
certain other points in the excentrique to show the increase and decrease of
the equacion of the Epicicle. For the point H standing above, signifies the
Auge of the excentrique, in which point whenever the center of the Epicicle
is found to be, then the equacion is least, containing but 4 degrees, i56^
ii20^ But when the center of the Epicicle is in the point I, then the equacion
is somewhat greater: and when it is in the point L, the equacion is greater
than that of I, because the more distant from the Auge of the Excentrique, the
greater is the equacion. But when the center of the Epicicle is in the opposite
Auge of the Excentrique, marked with the letter K, then the equacion is
greatest of all, containing 7 degrees, i40^ and the difference betwixt the
greatest and least equacion, is called of Alphonsus, Diuersitas diametri, and
of Ptolomey, Excessus, because the diameter of the Auge of the Excentrique,
marked in this figure with the letters M H, does far exceed in length the
diameter of the opposite Auge of the Excentrique, marked with the letters M K,
as you may easily try with your Compass, by applying the shortest diameter K M
unto the longest diameter M H: the excess or overplus whereof is divided as
you see into six equal spaces or sections, every one containing ten minutes,
through which sections the seven circles before mentioned, do pass, making in
all sixty minutes; which sixty minutes are not only set down in the right
line of the Auges of the Excentrique, but also in each half of the
circumference of the said Excentrique, proceeding on both sides downward from
the Auge unto the opposite Auge of the Excentrique: and these sixty
proportional minutes were invented to know thereby how much the equacion of
the Epicicle does increase or decrease, according as the center of the
Epicicle is more or less distant from the Auge of the Excentrique. For if you
suppose the center of the Epicicle to be in the point I, then like as the
diameter M I is lesser or shorter than the diameter M H, by twenty of the said
minutes, so the equacion of the Epicicle marked upon the Zodiake with B C, is
greater than the equacion of the Epicicle, being in H, by twenty such
minutes: which excess is marked with the letters A C upon the Zodiake. Again,
when the center of the Epicicle is in the point L, then as the diameter M L is
lesser than the diameter M H by i40^ so is the equacion of the Epicicle, marked
with B C, greater than the equacion of the Epicicle, being in H, by i40^ which
excess is also marked on the Zodiake with the letters A C. And to speak
breefely, the further that the center of the Epicicle is distant from the Auge
H, the shorter is the diameter or right line drawn from the center M to the
center of the Epicicle, and thereby the equacion of the Epicicle is the
greater. Now though these proportional minutes may be described another way,
that is, by dividing the overplus or excess, whereby the arch of the greatest
equacion does exceed the arch of the least equacion into sixty minutes, and
thereby to know the diversity of every equacion, in what place soever of the
Excentrique the center of the Epicicle is found to be (being out of the Auge:)
yet I omit to speak thereof, because the other way before set down, is the
easier of the two, and is only the way whereby the tables of calculating the
said equacions are made.

The fourth Intention, showing the twofold latitude of the Moon, and of the
head and tail of the Dragon.
THe latitude of the Moon is none other thing but her distance from the
Eclipticke line, which distance is never above five degrees. And her latitude
is twofold, that is, Northern and Southern. For the deferent of the Moon in
the space of one month cutteth the Eclipticke in two places right opposite one
to another, and thereby the one half of her deferent enclineth toward the
North, and the other half thereof enclineth toward the South: and those two
sections are called the two nodes, the one ascendent, which is the beginning of
the Moons departing and ascending from the Eclipticke toward the North, and
the other node is called the node descendent, from which node the Moon
descends toward the South. And as the Eclipticke or way of the Sun is
divided into four parts by the four principal points, that is, the two
equinoctial points, and the two solsticiall points: even so the deferent of
the Moon is divided into four quarters by the two foresaid nodes, and by the
two limits of her greatest latitude. And as the node ascendent shows the
East, and the node descendent the West, so of the two limits the one shows
when the Moon is farthest North, and the other shows when she is furthest
South, as you may plainly see by the figure next following.

The seventh figure belonging to the Theorique of the Moon.
THe outermost circle of this figure drawn upon the center A, signifies the
Zodiake, having the caracters of the twelve signs described therein, and is
marked with the letters C M N E D, within which circle are drawn two other
circles, crossing one another in two points opposite, whereof that which is
drawn upon the center B, and is marked with the letters F I H G, is the
excentrique or deferent, carrying the Epicicle of the Moon. And the other
circle drawn upon the center A, and marked with the letters K I L G,
signifies the eclipticke or way of the Sun, and these two circles are equal
(because their semidiameters are equal) crossing one another in two points
opposite: whereof that Intersection which is on the right hand, is called the
node ascendent or head of the Dragon, figured thus, and that on the left hand
is called the node decendent or tail of the Dragon, figured thus, and the
limits are marked with the two letters F H, whereof the letter F signifies the
North limit, and H the South limit. And you have to note, that the head of the
Dragon has two motions or mouings, the one mean and the other true. His mean
moving is an arch of the Zodiake, extending from the beginning of Aries, marked
in the former Figure with the letter C, contrary to the succession of the
signs by the moving of the orb equant unto the letter D, showing the place of
the head of the Dragon in the Zodiake, whereunto the line A G does point, which
arch is marked with the letters C D. Again, his true moving is an arch of the
Zodiake, extending according to the succession of the signs, from the
beginning of Aries unto the head of the Dragon. And this arch is marked with
the letters C M N E D, which two arches being added together, do make up the
whole Zodiake, and the selfsame moouings are also incident to the other three
points, that is, to the tail of the Dragon, and to the two limits.

Of the Inequality of the Moons latitude both mean and true.
What is the Inequality or Anomalie of her latitude?
IT is an arch of the Zodiake, extending according to the succession of the
signs, from the Dragons head unto the place of the Moon: which if it be her
mean place, then such arch is called the mean Inequality of her latitude:
but if it be the true place of the Moon, then that arch is called the true
Inequality of her latitude. How to know her mean and true place has been
showed before.

But you have to note, that though the followers of Alphonsus do make this
arch of latitude to begin at the Dragons head: even as the Eclipticke is said
to begin at the vernall Equinoctial point: yet Ptolomey and Copernicus, and
also the Prutenicall Tables, do make the said arch to begin at the North limit
of the Moons latitude, and so to extend, according to the succession of the
signs: by help of which arch the latitude of the Moon is always to be found
in the said Tables.

The Theorique of the three Superior Planets, that is, Saturn, Jupiter, and
Mars.
Why are these three called the Superior Planets?
BEcause they are placed above the Sun: even as the other three Planets, that
is, Venus, Mercury, and the Moon, are called the Inferior Planets, because
they are placed under the Sun, who is chief governor of them all. The
Theorique of which three superior Planets, we think it best here to describe
next after the Moon, because that though they be subject to more diversities
of mouings than either the Sun or Moon, yet to fewer than Venus or Mercury.

Why are these three Planets joined together all in one Theorique?
BEcause in the quality of their moouings, as well according to longitude as
latitude, they be like, differing only in quantity, and their orbs have like
uniformity, and therefore may be very well described in one self Theorique.

The first Intention, showing how many orbs do belong to the Theorique of
every one of these Planets.
VIZ. Four orbs, and one circle, that is, the Excentrique carrying the
Epicicle, then the two deferents of the Auge and opposite Auge of the
Excentrique, and the Epicicle carrying the body of the Planet, whereto is added
the circle Equant: all which are set down in the Figure next following.

The first figure of the three upper Planets.
THis figure as you see is also environed with a great circle, signifying here
the orb which carries the two sections, called the head and tail of the
Dragon, and is the outermost circle of all, marked with the letter M, whose
center is the letter A, which is the center of the world. And next to that are
the two black deferents of the Auges, whereof the upper deferent is marked
with D, and the nether deferent with E, both which are in diverse respects
concentrique with the center of the world, and also excentrique: and within
those two deferents is placed the Excentrique which carries the Epicicle, and
the center of the excentrique is marked with the letter B, and the little
circle above is the Epicicle, whose center is F, which center by turning round
about upon the plane of the Excentrique, describes in the very midst thereof
a circle marked with the letter C, which circle is crossed in two points
opposite by another circle, called the circle equant, marked with the letter G,
whose center is marked with the letter H.

Why are these four orbs placed in this Theorique of the three upper Planets?
THe Excentrique is needful as well to show their unequal distances from the
earth, as also for that the equacions of their Epicicles are sometime greater,
and sometime lesser, as has been demonstrated before in the sixth figure of the
Moon. And the two deferents of the Auges are here placed for the selfsame
causes that are before declared. Again, the Epicicle is necessarily supposed,
because it is well known by often observation, that every one of these three
Planets in like and selfsame places of his Excentrique is found to have
diverse and sundry motions, whereof they are said to be sometime swift and
sometime slow, now stationarie and now retrograde; moreover, they are sometime
nigher to the earth, and sometime further off, as manifestly appears by the
mutabilitie of their apparent greatness: all which apparences are salued, by
supposing an Epicicle.

Wherefore is the circle equant added to this Theorique?
BEcause the conuersions of the Excentriques and of the Epicicles of these
three Planets are not observed to be equated to their own centres, but to some
other point, which point is called the center equant, marked in the former
figure with the letter H: and because it is not needful to appoint to that
center any peculiar orb, since there is no use thereof, the Astronomers think
it sufficient only to describe about that center a circle upon the Plane of
the Excentrique, equal to the circle Excentrique in every respect; for having
both equal semidiameters, as I said before, they must needs be equal.

Has the Orb which carries the two nodes, no use in this Theorique?
YEs, they may be used as well in the Theorique of these Planets, as in the
rest. And yet because the varieties of the latitudes are observed to proceed
equally according to the succession of the signs, together with the Auges, the
office of carrying the Nodes, is most commonly by the Astronomers appointed to
the two deferents of the Auges, so as this orb in this Theorique having none
other use, is not thought so needful.

The second Intention, showing toward what part such Orbs are moved, and in
what time they make their reuolutions, and also upon what centres or poles they
make their regular mouings: and first of all, how and in what manner the
Excentriques, carrying the Epicicles of these Planets, are moved.
THe Excentrique of every one of these Planets, is moved according to the
succession of the signs, upon his own proper poles, declining unequally on
both sides from the poles of the Eclipticke, and yet it moves equally about
the center of the circle equant: and the Excentrique of Saturn is commonly
said to make his revolution in thirty years, and the Excentrique of Jupiter
in twelve years, and that of Mars almost in two years.

How much is the precise daily motion and perfect revolution of every one of
these Excentriques?
TO understand this the better, you had need to remember Coper^icus his
division of the beginning of moving before mentioned, which is twofold, the one
compound, and the other simple. The compound moving is to be accounted from
the vernall equinoctial point, which point of beginning is unstable: and the
simple moving is to be counted from the first star of the Rams horn, called
of the Astronomers, The firm and stable point, or beginning of moving:
wherefore if you count from the Equinoctial point, then the daily moving of
the Ex^^ntrique of Saturn contains i2^ ii0^ iii35^ iiii33^ v2^ that of
Jupiter, i4^ ii59^ iii15^ iiii49^ v53^ and that of Mars, i31^ ii26^ iii39^
iiii14^ v6^ And one whole revolution of Saturn, counting from the Equinoctial
point, contains 29 Egyptian years, 161 days, 22 hours, i28^ ii^ iii22^
And the re^olution of Jupiter, counting also from the Aequinoctiall point,
contains 11 Egyptian years, 315 days, 15 hours, i^ ii^10^ iii30^ And that
of Mars contains one Egyptian year, 321 days, 22 hours, i19^ ii49^ iii48^
But if you count their moving from the first star of the Rams horn, then the
Excentriques of these Planets will not make their reuolutions so soon, but be
somewhat longer in returning to that first point of moving, for the
excentrique of Saturn will then make his revolution in 29 Egyptian years,
174 days, 4 hours, i58^ ii25^ iii30^ And that of Jupiter in 11 Egyptian
years, 317 days, 14 hours, i49^ ii31^ iii56^ And that of Mars in one
Egyptian year, 321 days, 23 hours, i31^ ii56^ iii49^

In what place is the center of the circle equant to be found?
IN the line of the Auge of the excentrique toward the same Auge, whose
distance from the center of the world is double to the excentricitie of the
excentrique: which excentricitie is the space contained betwixt the center of
the world, and the center of the excentrique.

What follows upon this Inequality or Irregularitie of the Excentriques?
WE have showed you before in the Theorique of the Moon, that the center of
equality is toward the opposite Auge of her Excentrique, and is all one with
the center of the earth, and thereby the moving of her excentrique, whilst her
Epicicle moves toward the Auge, is the swifter. But because in this
Theorique of the three Planets, the center of the equant is toward the Auge of
the Excentrique, the Excentrique therefore moves the more slowly; for a lesser
portion of the Excentrique belongs to the upper half of the circle equant,
and a greater portion thereof is due to the nether half of the circle equant,
as plainly appears by the former figure: for if you draw a right line
through the center of the equant, so as it may cut the line of the Auge with
right angles, it will divide the circle equant into two equal semicircles, but
it will divide the Excentrique into two unequal portions, whereof the
uppermost is the lesser, and the nethermost the greater. And since the moving of
the Excentrique is equal about the center of the equant, and that these
unequal portions of the Excentrique do turn about the said center in equal
time, it must needs move more slowly above, and more quickly beneath.

How are the deferents of the Auges moved?
THey are moved according to the succession of the signs, about the center
and poles of the Eclipticke, by virtue of the eighth sphere, and according to
Alphonsus do make their whole revolution in 49000 years, by which moving
they put forward by little and little the Auges of the Excentriques.

How and in what manner are the Epicicles of these Planets moved?
THey are moved in their upper part according to the succession of the signs,
and in their nether part contrary to the succession of the signs, which is
clean contrary to the moving of the Moons Epicicle before declared. And every
one of these Epicicles is equally moved from his mean Auge, upon his own
proper axletree, which is also mouable, standing upon the plane of the
Excentrique obliquely or slopewise, and not perpendicularly. And the Epicicles
of Saturn and Jupiter do go about in the space of one year and a few days
more, but the Epicicle of Mars goes about in a little more than two years:
and by this moving every Epicicle carries about with him the body of his
proper Planet.

What is the daily moving and also the periodicall revolution of every one of
these Epicicles?
THe daily moving of the Epicicle of Saturn, is i57^ ii7^ ii^4^ iii4^ v22^ and
that of Jupiter, is i54^ ii9^ iii3^ iiii^7^ v31^ and that of Mars, is i27^
ii41^ iii40^ iiii23^ v19^ So as the Epicicle of Saturn makes one period in
378 days, which is one year, 13 days, and 6 hours, i24^ ii57^ iii26^ And
the Epicicle of Jupiter makes one period in 398 days, which is one year, 33
days, and 21 hours, i13^ ii15^ iii33^ And the Epicicle of Mars makes one
period in 779 days, which is two years, 49 days, 22 hours, i28^ i^9^ iii49^

How is the mean Auge of every one of these Epicicles described?
BY a right line drawn from the center of the circle equant through the center
of the Epicicle, even to the circumference thereof, making there a point marked
in the figure next following with the letter M, which is furthest distant from
the center of the equant. And the center of the equant governs the moving as
well of the Epicicle, as of the Excentrique, as you may plainly see by this
figure following.

The second figure belonging to the Theorique of the three superior Planets.
THis figure consists of diverse circles and centres, lines, and points,
whereof the outermost circle signifies the Zodiake, whose center is marked
with the letter A, and of the two greater circles drawn within that, cutting
one another in two points opposite, the one is the circle equant, whose center
is marked with the letter C, and the other is the Excentrique, whose center is
marked with the letter B, and the Auge of the Excentrique is marked with the
letter D, and the opposite Auge thereof is marked with the letter E: and the
four lesser circles placed upon the Excentrique, are Epicicles, whereof two
have their centres, marked with the letter H, as well on the right hand as on
the left hand of the figure, for the right line C H M does point to the mean
Auge of the Epicicle, marked with the letter M on both sides of the figure, and
the right line A H V does point to the true Auge of the Epicicle, marked
likewise on both sides of the figure with the letter V, and the right line B H
P shows the Touch-point, marked also on both sides of the figure with the
letter P, which is always in the midst betwixt the mean and true Auge of
the Epicicle, being out of the line of the Auges. Now what the other letters
set down in the outside of this figure do signify, shall be showed when we
come to describe the points, lines, and arches, belonging to this Theorique.

What conclusions do follow upon this Inequality of the Epicicle?
1. THese four: First, the moving of the Planet to any other point in the
circumference of the Epicicle, than to the mean Auge of the Epicicle and to
the opposite Auge, is unequal.

2. Secondly, when the center of the Epicicle is either in the Auge or opposite
Auge of the Excentrique, then the three points, that is, the mean Auge, the
true Auge, and the Touch-points are all united, and do meet in one self line:
but being out of the line of the Auge, they are so severed, as the Touch-point
is in the midst betwixt the mean and true Auge of the Epicicle, because that
the center of the Excentrique is in the midst betwixt the center of the
Equant, and the center of the Eclipticke.

3. Thirdly, in the descending half of the excentrique from the Auge toward
the opposite Auge thereof, that is from D to E, the mean Auge of the Epicicle,
marked with M, goes before the Touch-point, marked with P, according to the
succession of the signs; and the true Auge of the Epicicle follows the said
Touch-point, according to the succession of the signs. But in the other
ascending half of the Excentrique, the true Auge of the Epicicle being out of
the line of the Auges of the Excentrique, always enclineth from the
Touch-point toward the Auge of the Excentrique, and the mean Auge of the
Epicicle enclineth toward the opposite Auge of the Excentrique.

4. Fourthly, in the upper part of the Excentrique the moving of the Planet is
swifter than in the lower part of the Excentrique, because that the mean Auge
of the Epicicle goes in the upper part of the Excentrique, according to the
succession of the signes^. But in the other nether half of the Excentrique,
the moving of the Planet is slower, going there contrary to the succession of
the sign.

What harmony is there betwixt the moving of the Sun, and the mouings of the
three superior Planets, and whereof depends such harmony*
IT chiefly depends upon the periodical reuolutions and mouings of their
Epicicles: for it is well known by good observation, that in every mean
conjunction of the Sun with any of the said three Planets, the Planet it
self is in the mean Auge of his Epicicle; and in every mean opposition of
the Sun with any of the said three Planets, the Planet it self is in the
mean opposite Auge of his Epicicle: and in any other place look how much the
mean place of the Sun is distant from the mean place of the Planet, so much
is the Planet it self distant from the mean Auge of the Epicicle, as you
shall easily perceive by this figure following. What mean Conjunction or
Opposition is, shall be declared hereafter in the second book, treating of the
passions of the Planets.

The third figure belonging to the Theorique of the three superior Planets.
THis figure as you see consists of two several circles, whereof the lesser
circle which stands above, signifies the Epicicle, carrying the Planet,
whose center is marked with the letter B. And the greater circle beneath, is
the deferent of the Sun. In each of which circles are set down the caracters
of the five Aspects, whereof in both circles, that of the Conjunction is placed
above, and that of the Opposition beneath: and on each hand on both sides are
placed the caracters of the other three aspects, that is, the Sextile, the
Quadrat, and the Trine aspect. The letters set down on both sides of either
circle, do serve to show the points of moving, as well of the Sun in his
deferent, as of the Planet in his Epicicle: for when the Sun by his mean
moving is in the point C of his deferent, and the Planet in the mean Auge of
his Epicicle, marked with D, then are both their mean mouings joined in one
self line, and so be in a Conjunction. And as the Sun departing from thence to
the point E, set down on the left hand of his deferent, has gone a sixth part
of his deferent, and thereby is in the first Sextile aspect: so the Planet
departing from the mean Auge of his Epicicle, and coming to the point F, has
gone also a sixth part of his Epicicle, and is thereby in the first Sextile
aspect: and when the Sun comes to the point G, and the Planet to the point
H, then they are both in a Quadrat aspect: and when the Sun comes to the
point I, and the Planet to the point K, then are they both in a Trine aspect:
and when the Sun is in the point L, and the Planet in the point M, then they
are just opposite one to another, being both in one self line: and in departing
from thence, they observe like order in going through the other half of their
circles, until they come again to be in a Conjunction, as the letters N P R
on the right hand, being the half of the Suns deferent, and the letters O Q
S on the right hand, being the half of the Epicicle, do show.

Of this harmony do follow three conclusions.
1. FIrst one period of the Epicicle is justly accomplished in so much time as
passes betwixt two Conjunctions of the Sun and of the Planet.

2. Secondly, look how many degrees the Sun by his mean moving is distant
from the mean moving of the Planet, so much does the Planet depart from the
mean Auge of his Epicicle. And therefore the mean moving of the center of the
Epicicle, and the mean moving of the Planet in his Epicicle, being joined
together, are equal to the mean moving of the Sun.

3. Thirdly, of this way may be gathered, that the Epicicle and the Excentrique
as touching their swiftness and slownesse of gate in making their periodicall
reuolutions, are clean contrary one to another, for in those places whereas
the moving of the Excentrique is slowest, there the moving of the Epicicle is
swiftest, and yet their mouings being all joined together, are equal to the
moving of the Sun.

What measure does Ptolomey appoint to every one of their Orbs?
THeir measures do depend of the semidiameter of the Excentrique, which is
supposed to contain 60 parts or degrees, and of such like parts the
excentricitie of the excentrique of Saturn contains 3 degrees, i25^ and that
of Jupiter 2 degrees, i45^ and that of Mars 6 degrees, i0^ Again, the
excentricitie of the equant of Saturn contains 6 degrees, i50^ and that of
Jupiter contains 5 degrees, i30^ and that of Mars 12 degrees, i0^ And the
semidiameter of the Epicicle of Saturn contains 6 degrees, i30^ and that of
Jupiter 11 degrees, i30^ and that of Mars 39 degrees, i30^ And the least
altitude from the earth of Saturn, is 50 degrees, i5^ and that of Jupiter is
45 degrees, i45^ and that of Mars is 14 degrees, i30^ And the greatest altitude
from the earth of Saturn is 69 degrees, i55^ and that of Jupiter is 74
degrees, I^15. and that of Mars is 105 degrees, i30.

The third Intention, showing what points, lines, and arch^s are necessary to
be known in the Theoriques of the three upper Planets, which are these here
following.
1. FIrst, the Auge and opposite Auge as well of the Excentrique, as of the
circle equant. 2. The lines of the mean and true moving of the Epicicle, and
of the Planet. 3. The mean and true moving of the Epicicle, and of the Planet.
4. The Inequality or center of the Excentrique, both mean and true. 5. The
mean and true Auge of the Epicicle. 6. The equacion of the Excentrique, or of
the center, as well in the Excentrique as in the Epicicle. 7. The inequality
of commutation or argument, both mean and true. 8. The equacion of the
argument. 9. The mean longitude. 10. The excess of the longer longitude. 11.
The excess of the nigher longitude. 12. The proportional minutes both nigher
and more remote. 13. The diameter of the Auges. 14. The diameter of the mean
longitude in the Epicicle. 15. The upper and nether half of the Epicicle. 16.
The oriental and occidentall half of the Epicicle, the descriptions of all
which things do here follow.
But first as touching the Auges and opposite Auges, as well of the Excentrique
as of the Equant, they are already before described.

The line of the mean moving of the Planet or of his Epicicle, is a right
line drawn from the center of the world to the Zodiake, and is a parallel or
equally distant to another line, drawn from the center of the Equant, and
passing through the center of the Epicicle. Of which two lines, the first is
marked in the second Figure on the right hand thereof, with the letters A I,
and the other line is marked on the same hand with the letters C H.

But the line of the true moving of the Epicicle, is a right line drawn from
the center of the world through the center of the Epicicle even to the Zodiake,
represented on both hands of the said figure with the letters A K.

Now the line of the true moving of the Planet, is a right line drawn from the
center of the world through the body of the Planet unto the Zodiake, signified
by the letters A L set down on both sides of the said second figure. But if the
Planet be either in the true Auge or opposite Auge of the Epicicle, then the two
lines AK and AL are united. But if the center of the Epicicle be either in the
Auge or opposite Auge of the Excentrique, that is either in D or E, then the
three lines AI, AK, and CHM, are all one.

The mean moving of the Planet or of his Epicicle, is an arch of the Zodiake,
extending from the vernall Aequinoctiall point, according to the succession of
the signs unto the line of the mean moving of the Planet or Epicicle, marked
in the said figure with the letters N F I, proceeding toward the left hand.

The true moving of the Epicicle is an arch of the Zodiake, extending
according to the succession of the signs from the said Aequinoctiall point to
the line of the true moving of the Epicicle, marked with the letters N F K.

But the true moving of the Planet is an arch of the Zodiake, extending in like
manner from the Aequinoctiall point to the line of the true moving of the
Planet, marked in the said figure with the letters N F L.

And remember, that the letter N always signifies the vernall Aequinoctiall
point, whereto is set the caracter of Aries.

Of the Inequality of the Excentrique, both mean and true.
THe mean Inequality of the Excentrique is an arch of the Zodiake, extending
according to the succession of the signs, from the line of the Auge of the
Excentrique unto the line of the mean moving of the Planet or Epicicle: which
Inequality the followers of Alphonsus do call Centrum medium, marked on the
left hand of the foresaid figure with the letters F I.

But the true Inequality of the Excentrique is an arch of the Zodiake,
extending according to the succession of the signs, from the line of the Auge
of the Excentrique unto the line of the true moving of the Epicicle; which arch
is marked on the left hand in the said figure with the letters F K.

What is the equaction of the Excentrique?
IT is an arch of the Excentrique, contained betwixt the line of the mean
moving and the line of the true moving of the Epicicle, and is marked on both
sides of the foresaid figure with the letters I K.

What is the Equacion of the center in the Epicicle?
IT is an arch of the Epicicle contained betwixt the mean and true Auge of the
Epicicle, and is marked on both hands of the said figure with the letters V M.
But this arch is no arch, when the center of the Epicicle is in the Auge of the
Excentrique, and it is greatest when the center of the Epicicle is in any of
the two mean longitudes. And you have to note, that the equacion of the center
in the Excentrique, and the equacion of the center in the Epicicle are always
like. Moreover, whilst the Epicicle descends in the one half of the
Excentrique from the Auge of the Excentrique, marked with D, toward the
opposite Auge thereof marked with E, this equacion is taken away from the mean
Inequality of the Excentrique, and is added to the mean argument (which is
here by and by defined) so as it may make thereby and in that place, as well the
equated Inequality of the Excentrique, as the equated argument. But whilst
the Epicicle ascends in the other half of the Excentrique, it is clean
contrary: for when the right line AHV in the foresaid second figure falls
into the two paralels A I and C H M, it makes the two angles I A H and M H V
to be equal. And to the two equal angles do belong two like arches,
represented in the said figure by the letters I K, and V M, which arches or
equacions are not to be added or subtracted both together. But when the one is
added, the other is always to be taken away, because the one cleaves to the
end, and the other to the beginning of their circles, tending toward one self
part.

What is the mean and true argument?
THe mean argument is an arch of the Epicicle, contained betwixt the mean
Auge thereof, and the body of the Planet, to be counted toward that part
whereinto to the Epicicle is moved: which arch is represented in the said
second figure by the letters M L. And the true argument is an arch of the
Epicicle, contained betwixt the true Auge of the Epicicle and the body of the
Planet, marked in the foresaid figure with the letters V L.

What is the equacion of the Epicicle, or of the argument?
IT is an arch of the Zodiake, contained betwixt the line of the true moving of
the Epicicle, and the line of the true moving of the Planet, marked in the
foresaid second figure with the letters K L: and this arch is no arch when the
Planet is either in the true Auge or in the true opposite Auge of the Epicicle.
And it is greatest when the Planet is in the line, which being drawn from the
center of the world, touches in one point the outside of the Epicicle, which
line is marked in the foresaid second figure on the left hand thereof, with the
letters A L, and on the right hand, with the letters A I. And note, that when
the Planet is in the first half of the Epicicle, descending from the true Auge
to the opposite Auge, it adds this equacion to the true moving of the
Epicicle, but in the other half of the Epicicle it takes so much away.

But now for the better understanding of the equacions both least and greatest
of all the three superior Planets, and of all the other terms belonging to
the said three Planets, it shall be necessary to set down this other figure
here following.

The fourth figure belonging to the Theoriques of the three upper Planets.
THis figure differs not much from the sixth figure belonging to the Theorique
of the Moon before set down, for the outermost circle of this figure
signifies as well here as there the Zodiake, whose center is marked with the
letter A: and the inner blacker circle signifies the Excentrique, carrying the
Epicicle of any of the three upper Planets, whose center is marked with the
letter B: and above that center is placed the center of the circle Equant,
marked with the letter C. but the circle it self cannot fitly be made here,
because it must be equal in every respect to the Excentrique, as has been
said before. And each one of the five little circles, placed upon the
Excentrique, does signify the Epicicle whereto the body of any of the three
Planets is fixed. And the 7 half circles making 6 spaces, every space
containing ten minutes, as well above as beneath the center A, do show the
proportional minutes, which are partly described before in the sixth figure of
the Moon, and shall be more fully again described here.

Now, as touching the rest of the letters placed as well within the figure, as
round about the same, we come now to show their significations: for the letters
E F G H do signify the Excentrique, whose Auge is marked with the letter E,
and his opposite Auge with the letter G.

A description of the mean longitudes.
Moreover, there is a point in the midst betwixt the center A and the center
B, marked with the letter I, through which point is drawn a right line, marked
with the letters F I H, which falling perpendicularly upon the line E A G,
crosses the same in the point I with right angles, and thereby shows the two
mean longitudes in the Excentrique, marked with the letters F H, in which two
places the center of the Epicicle is always equally distant as well from the
center B, as from the center A. And therefore those two points do show the
mean longitudes. And when the center of the Epicicle comes to any of those
two points, then the greatest equacion of the Excentrique of Saturn is 6
degrees, i30^ ii30^ and that of Jupiter is 5 degrees, i14^ and that of Mars is
11 degrees, i6^ But when the center of the Epicicle is in the Auge of the
Excentrique, marked with E, then the arch Q R shows the greatest equacion for
Saturn to be 5 degrees, i55^ ii33^ and for Jupiter 10 degrees, i30^ ii15^ and
for Mars 36 degrees, i54^ ii20^ And when the center of the Epicicle is in the
opposite Auge of the Excentrique, marked with G, then the arch QT shows the
greatest equacion for Saturn to be 6 degrees, i38^ ii40^ and for Jupiter 11
degrees, i31^ ii30^ and for Mars 46 degrees, i38^ ii15^

What be the excesses of the longer and nigher longitudes?
BEfore I define what they be, it shall not be amiss to advertise you, that
both Ptolomey, Purbachius, and the followers of Alphonsus, in counting or
measuring the equacions of the Epicicle of the Moon, or of the argument (as
they term it) they have regard only to the excess of the longer and shorter
diameter of the Auges of the Excentrique, which excess they call the
diversity of the diameter; which is plainly described before in the sixth
figure belonging to the Theorique of the Moon, and therefore resort thereunto,
that you may the better bear it in mind. But in the other Planets they make
two excesses, whereof they call the one the excess of the longer longitude,
and the other the excess of the nigher longitude. The excess of the longer
longitude, is an arch of the Zodiake, showing the equacion of the Epicicle,
when the center thereof is in any of the two mean longitudes, marked in the
Excentrique on the right hand with the letter H, and on the left hand with the
letter F: for then the foresaid arch of the Zodiake is greater than that which
shows the equacion of the Epicicle, his center being in the Auge of the
Excentrique, marked with E. But when the center of the Epicicle is in the
opposite Auge of the Excentrique, then the foresaid arch of the Zodiake which is
right against the mean longitude, marked with H, is lesser than the arch of
the Zodiake, which represents the equacion of the Epicicle, his center being
in the said opposite Auge of the Excentrique, and therefore is called the
excess of the nigher longitude. And of these two excesses do rise two sorts
of proportional minutes, that is, the longer and the nigher. All which things
you shall better understand, by help of the last fourth Figure: in which
figure the arch marked with the letters Q R S on the right hand of the said
figure is the arch of the Zodiake, representing the equacion of the Epicicle
when his center is in the point H, signifying the mean longitude of the
Excentrique, which arch is greater than the arch marked with Q R, in the top of
the Figure, showing the equacion of the Epicicle, when his center is in the
Auge of the Excentrique, marked with E, by so much as that little portion of
the Zodiake, marked on the right hand of the figure with the letters R S, does
show, as you may easily try with your Compasses. And the said arch Q R S is
lesser than the arch Q T, standing in the lowest part of the figure, whe^eas
the center of the Epicicle is in the opposite Auge of the Excentrique, marked
with the letter G, by so much as the letters S T on the right hand do show, so
as in this figure the letters R S on the right hand do show the excess of the
longer longitude, and the letters S T on the same hand do show the excess of
the nigher longitude: of which two excesses do spring the two kinds of
proportional minutes before mentioned, which do serve to show how much every
equacion of the Epicicle is greater or lesser than another, when the center of
the Epicicle is in any other place of the Excentrique, and is clean out of the
Auge or opposite Auge, and also out of the mean longitude of the Excentrique.
And as in the sixth figure of the Moon the equacions of the Epicicle in every
place of the Excentrique (his center being neither in the Auge nor in the
opposite Auge of the Excentrique) is known by the proportional minutes, for
that as well the excess of the longest, as the excess of the shortest
diameter of the Auges of the Excentrique is each of them there divided into
sixty minutes: so here likewise the said proportional minutes are found out
by dividing the difference or overplus that is betwixt the diameter of the
mean longitude, and the longest diameter of the Auge of the Excentrique into
60 minutes; and also by dividing into 60 minutes the overplus or difference
that is betwixt the diameter of the mean longitude and the shortest diameter
of the Auges of the Excentrique, as you may plainly perceive by the last
fourth figure, wherein as the line A E signifying the longer diameter of the
Auges of the Excentrique, exceeds in length the diameter of the mean
longitude, marked on the right hand with A H, and on the left hand with A F, by
a third part and somewhat more (which excess or overplus is divided into 60
minutes:) even so the difference or overplus, whereby the diameter A H or A F
exceeds the shorter diameter of the Auges of the Excentrique, marked with the
letters A G, is also divided into 60 minutes; of which the first i60^ are
called the longer proportional minutes, and the last i60^ are called the
nigher proportional minutes, because they are nigher to the center of the earth.

And according as any other right line drawn from A the center of the world to
the center of the Epicicle, being in any other place of the Excentrique, out of
the Auge or opposite Auge of the Excentrique, or out of the mean longitudes, is
longer or shorter; so does the equacion of the Epicicle increase or decrease:
For as by supposing the center of the Epicicle to be in the point K of the
Excentrique, you shall find the right line A K to be longer than the line A H
by 40 minutes; even so the equacion of the Epicicle in K, marked with Q S, is
lesser than the equacion of the Epicicle in the point H, marked also with Q S,
by 40 of such minutes, as the little arch R S, signifying the excess of the
longer longitude, does contain 60 minutes. Likewise, as the line A L is
shorter than the line A H by 40 minutes, even so the equacion of the Epicicle,
marked with Q S (his center being in L) is greater than the equacion of the
said Epicicle, marked also with Q S, his center being in the point H, by 40 of
such minutes, as the arch S T, signifying the nigher longitude, does contain
60 minutes. And remember here, that in seeking in this figure to know the
length of the line A K by the minutes, you must put the firm foot of your
Compass in the center A, and the moouable foot in the point L, and so to draw
the moouable foot from thence to the line A H Q, upon which line the numbers of
the 60 proportional minutes are set down: and to know the length of the line
A L, you must fit your Compasses to A L, and then draw the mouable foot to the
line A G Q, upon which line are also set down the 60 proportional minutes, in
like manner as they are upon the line A H Q, saving that in the line A H Q the
said 60 minutes are to be counted from H toward Q, and in the line A G Q they
proceed upward from Q to G, according as the inferior half circles do show.
And after this manner you must deal, to know the length of any other line
drawn from the center A to any other point of the Excentrique, whereinto the
center of the Epicicle chances to fall; considering always whether such line
be either longer or shorter than the line A H, passing through the point of the
mean longitude, to the intent you may know thereby how to apply the length of
every line to the right number of the proportional minutes belonging to the
same. But you have to note, that neither Copernicus nor the Prutenicall tables
do make any more kinds of excesses or proportional minutes, but that only
which is plainly declared before in the sixth figure of the Moon.

What is the diameter of the Auges in the Epicicle?
IT is a right line passing through the center of the Epicicle, and also
through the true Auge and the true opposite Auge of the said Epicicle: which
line deuideth the plane of the Epicicle into two equal hal^es, whereof the one
is called the Oriental half, and the other the Occidentall half, hereafter
described in the sixth figure.

What is the diameter of the mean longitudes in the Epicicle?
IT is a right line drawn through the center of the Epicicle, erected
perpendicularly upon the diameter of the true Auges of the said Epicicle next
before defined: and when the Planet falls into this line, it shows the
mean distance that is betwixt the greatest longitude in the Auge of the
Epicicle, and the least longitude in the opposite Auge of the said Epicicle, and
thereof is called the diameter of the mean longitudes. And this line deuideth
also the plane of the Epicicle into two halfes, that is, the upper half, and
the nether half. The upper half is that which is above the diameter of the
mean longitudes, and is farthest from the earth: and the lower or nether half
is beneath the said diameter, and is nigher to the earth.

What is the Oriental and Occidentall half of the Epicicle?
THe Oriental half is that, which being contained betwixt the Auge and
opposite Auge, looks toward the East: and the other half looking toward the
West, is called the Occidentall half. And you have to note, that as well in
these three Planets, as in the other two Planets next following, that is, Venus
and Mercury, the first half of the Epicicle is Oriental, and the later half
Occidentall: but in the Moon the later half of her Epicicle is Oriental, and
the first half thereof is Occidentall, For the Epicicle of every one of the
foresaid five Planets going from the Auge, in his upper part, according to the
succession of the signs, carries the Planet first into the Oriental half:
but in the Moon it is clean contrary.

The fourth Intention, showing the twofold latitude of the three upper Planets,
and wherein their latitude differs from the latitude of the Moon.
THe latitude of the Moon is simple, having only respect to the distance of
her Excentrique or Deferent, from the Eclipticke line; whose greatest distance
from thence, either toward the North or South, is but five degrees, as has
been said before, by reason that the poles of her Excentrique are distant from
the poles of the Ecliptic no more but five degrees. But the latitude of the
three upper Planets is to be considered two manner of ways: First, according
to the distance of any of their excentriques from the Eclipticke: and secondly,
according to the distance of any of their Epicicles from the Excentrique
thereof, which two kinds of latitude Purbachius describes the first in this
manner: The first (says he) chances by reason that the plane or superficies
of the Excentrique of the Planet declineth from the plane of the Eclipticke in
two parts opposite, the greatest distance of such declination remaining always
invariable like as in the Moon, and yet the two Nodes or Intersections, that
is to say, the node ascendent and descendent, otherwise called the head and
tail of the Dragon, are not moved contrary to the succession of the signs (as
in the Moon) but according to the moving of the eighth sphere, so as the Auges
of the deferents of those Nodes do describe on the North side, parallel
circumferences that be equally distant from the Eclipticke: and though such
Auges be always septentrionall, yet notwithstanding those Auges be not in all
the three planets the very points or limits of the greatest latitude of their
deferents from the Eclipticke; yea that falls out only in Mars, the Auge of
whose excentrique does most decline from the Eclipticke to the North; but in
Saturn the point or limit of his greatest latitude goes before the Auge of
his excentrique, contrary to the succession of the signs, and is distant from
his Auge 50 degrees; and in Jupiter such point goes after the Auge of his
excentrique according to the succession of the signs, and is distant from his
Auge 20 degrees. All which things you shall more plainly perceive by this
figure here following, set down by Reinholdus in his Comment upon Purbacchius.

The fifth figure of the three superior Planets.
IN this figure the letter D signifies the center of the world, whereupon is
drawn a circle signifying the plane of the Eclipticke: and the said point D,
represents also both the poles of the Eclipticke. And upon the point C is
drawn another circle, signifying the plane or superficies of the excentrique,
marked in the upper part with the letters A B E, enclining as you see toward
the plane of the Eclipticke. And because the two planes, that is, the plane of
the Excentrique and the plane of the Eclipticke do cross or cut one another
in the very center of the world, marked with D; and because the Auges of the
three Planets are all distant from the Eclipticke toward the North; therefore
the centres of their Excentriques must needs be also Northerly, and out of the
center of the Eclipticke: so as the center of the Excentrique for Saturn, is
to be found in the line A D, and for Mars, in the line B D, and for Jupiter, in
the line E D. And the Auge of Saturn is marked with A, and that of Mars with
B, and that of Jupiter with E. Moreover, the right line, marked with the
letters B F C G H, represents the plane of the greatest circle, passing as
well through the poles of the Eclipticke, as also through that right line,
which passing through the center of the world is erected with right angles upon
the plane of the excentrique: For this plane of the greatest circle does divide
the arches, as well of the Excentrick, as also of the Eclipticke, two manner of
ways: which arches are distinguished in this figure by the two usual
caracters, signifying the two nodes, otherwise called the head and tail of the
Dragon: and either of the two distances, F B, or G H, shows the greatest
declination of the two planes, And finally, the point B is the limit of the
North latitude, and G the limit of the South latitude of any of the three
Planets. Thus you may perceive, that the Auge of the Excentrique of Mars is
always in the North limit, and his opposite Auge in the South limit, but the
Auge of Jupiters Excentrique, marked in the former Figure with E, goes before
the North limit B, that is to say, the center of Jupiters Epicicle comes to
the Auge of his Excentrique, before that it arriueth to the North limit. And
finally, the Auge of Saturn his Excentrique, marked in the said figure with A,
follows after the North limit, so as the center of his Epicicle arriueth to
the North limit, before it comes to the Auge of his Excentrique. And the
followers of Alphonsus do make the Node ascendent of Mars to be at this day in
the sixteenth degree of Taurus, and his Node descendent to be in the sixteenth
degree of Scorpio: and the Node ascendent of Jupiter to be in the 14 degree of
Cancer, and his Node descendent to be in the 14 degree of Capricorn, and his
North limit to be in the 14 degree of Libra. And the Node ascendent of Saturn
to be in the 24 degree of Cancer, and his Node descendent to be in the 24
degree of Capricorn, because his North limit is in the 24 degree of Libra, so
as there is no great difference betwixt Saturn and Jupiter, touching their
limits. And partly hereby, and partly by that which follows hereafter, it
shall manifestly appear that Saturn whilst he passes through the one half
of the Zodiake, counting from the 24 degree of Cancer unto the 24 degree of
Capricorn, he has always North latitude; and whilst he passes through the
other half of the Zodiake, he has always South latitude. Wherefore
considering that he makes his whole revolution in thirty years, he has
continually during the space of 15 years North latitude, and during the other
15 years South latitude: and the like is to be judged of Jupiter and Mars,
according to the time of their entire reuolutions; for Jupiter makes his
revolution in 12 years, and Mars in 2 years.

But Mestlyn following Copernicus, sets down the places of the North limit
and Node ascendent of every one of the three upper Planets in this manner, that
is to say, the North limit of to be in these days in the 9 degree, i10 of m,
and that of to be in the 26 degree, i40 of, and that of to be in the 28 degree,
i24 of Again, the node ascendent of to be in the 9 degree, i10 of, and that of
to be in the 26 degree, i40 of 69, and that of to be in the 28 degree, i24 of.
And as for the South limit and the node descendent of every Planet, each one
does occupy in the Zodiake such degree and minutes as is opposite to the place
of the North limit, and of the node ascendent of every one of the said Planets
before set down. And Mestlyn says, That as the greatest latitude of the Moon
either North or South from the Eclipticke, is only five degrees, so he
appoints to the greatest latitude of the Excentrique of from the Eclipticke
but 2 degrees, i30 and to that of 1 degree, i30 and to that of 1 degree, i0

Now to show the second manner of latitude belonging to the three upper
Planets, caused by the enclining of the true Auge of the Epicicle from the
Excentrique, I mind therein to follow Mes^lyn, who affirms that kind of
latitude to be twofold, whereof the one is called Inclination, and the other
Reflection: neither of them being fixed, but mutable, and yet proportionable to
the period of their Excentriques, for the better understanding whereof he
sets down this figure following.

The sixth figure belonging to the three upper Planets.
IN which figure the center A is the center of the world, whereupon is drawn
the outermost circle, signifying the plane of the Zodiake, marked with the
letters B C D E, passing through the poles of the Ecliptique, marked with the
letters C E. Then upon the center F is drawn another circle, signifying the
plane of the Excentrique, marked with the letters G H I K, passing through the
poles of the Excentrique, marked with the letters M O, and also through the
North limit, marked with L, and through the South limit, marked with N; and the
two little circles placed upon the Excentrique, each of them signifies the
Epicicle. And you have to note, that the plane of the motion of the said
Excentrique is signified here by the right line, marked with the letters L F N,
which cutteth the Eclipticke in the center A; so as when the center of the
Epicicle is in L, it has then his greatest North latitude, likewise being in
N, it has his greatest South latitude: and by this Figure you may perceive,
that the one pole of the Excentrique is more distant from the pole of the
Eclipticke than the other, for O is more distant from K, than H from M. The
signification of the rest of the letters wherewith the Epicicles are marked,
shall be declared hereafter. In the mean time we will speak first of the
latitude, called the Inclination of the Epicicle, in Greek En^lysis, which
causes the diameter of the Auges of the Epicicle to decline on both sides of
the plane of the Excentrique, that is to say, as well inwardly as outwardly, in
manner and form following: for when the center of the Epicicle is in any of the
two Nodes, the diameter of the Auges does not decline at all either from the
Excentrique orfrom the plane of the Eclipticke, because then it falls just
into their mutual fection. But when the center of the Epicicle departs from
any of the Nodes, then in the upper half of the Excentrique, containing the
Auge of the Epicicle, the foresaid diameter of the Auges declineth inwardly
from the Excentrique toward the plane of the Eclipticke, and yet arriueth not
to the same. But when the center of the Epicicle is in the nether half of the
Excentrique, containing the opposite Auge of the Epicicle, the diameter of the
Auges declineth outwardly from the Excentrick toward the Eclipticke, and yet
arriueth not to the same. And the greatest declination of this diameter is when
the center of the Epicicle is in any of the limits; and yet such declination is
no where so great, as that being out of the Nodes, it can reach unto the
Eclipticke: and this declination makes his revolution upon the diameter of the
mean longitudes. The most part of which things you may see plainly set forth
in the sixth figure before described, in which both the Epicicles are marked
with the letters P Q R, whereof P signifies in either of the Epicicles the
Auge, and R signifies the opposite Auge of the Epicicle, and the arch P Q
signifies the greatest Inclination of the diameter of those Auges to the
Excentrique. So as when the center of the Epicicle is in the North limit marked
with L, the foresaid Auge P declineth inwardly from the plane of the
Excentrique toward the Eclipticke, and R the opposite Auge flees outwardly
from the Eclipticke. But when the center of the Epicicle is in the South limit,
marked with N, then the Auge P being on the other side of the Excentrique,
declineth again toward the Eclipticke, and R the opposite Auge occupies the
opposite place to P. And you have to understand, that the greatest declination
here signified by the arch P Q for contains 4 degrees, i30 and for 2 degrees,
i30 and for 2 degrees, i15 And to the intent that you may the better conceive
all the variety of the foresaid Inclination, Mestlyn sets down this other
Figure here next following, which also serves to demonstrat the second kind of
latitude, called Reflection, in Greek Loxasis, hereafter by him plainly
described.

The seventh figure belonging to the The^rique of the three upper Planets.
IN this figure upon the center F, signifying the center of the world, is
drawn a great circle, which signifies the whole sphere of the Planet, whose
poles are marked with D E, whereof D is the North pole, and E the South pole.
And within this circle are drawn two other oblique circles of shape, ovale;
whereof the outermost marked with the letters A B C, signifies the Ecliptic:
and the inward circle signifies the Excentrique, whereon are placed four
Epicicles, the highest whereof has his center marked with G, signifying here
the North limit; and the center of the lowest Epicicle is marked with N,
signifying the South limit; and the center of the Epicicle on your right hand
is marked with M, signifying the Node ascendent; and the center of the Epicicle
on your left hand is marked with O, signifying the Node descendent. Moreover,
every Epicicle is crossed with two diameters, whereof that which is marked with
H K, does signify in every Epicicle the line of the Auges of the Epicicle,
that is to say, H the Auge, and K the opposite Auge; and the other diameter
marked with I L, signifies the line of the mean longitudes. Wherefore
whenever the center of the Epicicle is in the Node ascendent, marked with M,
then there is no Inclination of the diameter of the Auges, because it falls
into the common Intersection, as well of the Excentrique as of the Eclipticke:
but the more that the diameter of the Auges departs from thence toward the
North limit, the more it falls upon the line of the mean longitudes, marked
with I L, insomuch, as when it arriueth to the North limit, marked with G, the
inclination then is greatest, and the line of the Auge falls directly and
perpendicularly upon the line of the mean longitudes, and from thence the
inclination decreaseth, until the diameter of the Auges arriueth to the Node
descendent, marked with O, in which point it has again no declination. But
departing from thence toward N, the inclination of this diameter goes unto
the other side of the Excentrique. For as the Auge of the Epicicle passing
first from M through G into O, declineth from the plane of the Excentrique
toward E the South pole: even so departing from O, and passing through N to M,
it declineth toward D the North pole: and so the Auge H is found again to
incline to the Eclipticke: and K the opposite Auge to flee from the same until
it has his greatest declination, which is in the point N, and from thence it
returns to M, and there again has no declination at all.

Of the second latitude, caused by the Epicicle, called the Reflection.
BY this Reflection the diameter of the mean longitudes of the Epicicle, marked
in the former seventh figure with the letters I L, reflecteth or turns
backward, as well within as without the plane of the Excentrique, saving that
when the center of the Epicicle is in any of the limits, for then this diameter
falls just and wholly upon the plane of the Excentrique, but when the center
of the Epicicle departs from any of the limits, then the Occidentall half of
this diameter turns inwardly within the plane, as well of the Excentrique as
of the Eclipticke; and the Oriental half of the said diameter turns
outwardly, that is, on the outside of both the said planes. What the
Occidentall and Oriental half is, has been described before in the third
Intention. And note, that the greatest reflection of this diameter chances when
the center of the Epicicle is in any of the Nodes, which greatest reflection for
Saturn, is 2 degrees, i30 and for Jupiter one degree, i30 and for Mars one
degree, i0 And this greatest reflection is like unto the greatest obliquitie or
latitude of the Excentrique from the Eclipticke, as is before set down.
Moreover, you have to note, that as in the former kind of latitude, called
Inclination, the diameter of the Auges of the Epicicle makes his revolution
upon the diameter of the mean longitudes; so in this second kind of latitude
called Reflection, the diameter of the mean longitudes makes his revolution
upon the diameter of the Auges. And for the better understanding of that which
has been said here touching the reflection of the diameter of the mean
longitudes, mark well the former seventh figure, in which you may see, that
when the center of the Epicicle is in the North limit, marked with G, the
diameter of the mean longitudes, marked with I L, lies full upon the plane of
the Excentrique, without any reflection. But when the center departs from
thence, then the Occidentall half of the said diameter, contained betwixt the
center and the letter L, bends inwardly toward the South pole, and this
Occidentall half still remains within the Eclipticke and within the
Excentrique, until the center of the Epicicle falls into the Node
descendent, marked with O, in which place the said diameter has his greatest
reflection, and even there is united to the plane of the Eclipticke. And the
center of the Epicicle departing from thence the said Occidentall half,
remaining out of the Eclipticke and out of the Excentrique, approaches again
to the plane of the Excentrique, and is united to the same in the point N: but
in the other Oriental half it happens clean contrary.

What conclusions do follow upon these two kinds of latitudes, called the
Inclination and Reflection.
1. THese seven here following: for first, whenever the center of the
Epicicle is in any of the Nodes, then the whole plane of the Epicicle falls
into the plane of the Eclipticke, for then the diameter of the Auges of the
Epicicle is also there, having no Inclination at all. And then there is also
the diameter of the mean longitudes of the Epicicle, whose obliquite from the
Excentrique, is always so much as is the obliquite of the Excentrique from the
Eclipticke. But the Epicicle is never united to the plane of the Excentrique,
because neither of the foresaid diameters do decline both at once from the
plane of the Excentrique.

2. Secondly, the center of the Epicicle being in any of the Nodes, the
axletree of the Epicicle stands perpendicularly upon the axletree of the
Eclipticke, from which it is then equally distant. But it is not equally
distant to the axletree of the Excentrique.

3. Thirdly, hereof may be gathered, that the planes of the Excentriques and of
the Epicicles do cut one another always in a diverse diameter, for in the two
nodes such section is made upon the diameter of the Auges, but in the two
limits such section is made upon the diameter of the mean longitudes: and in
all other mean places betwixt the said nodes and limits, such section chances
sometime in one place, and sometime in another.

4. Fourthly, the line of the mutual section, whereas the Epicicle and the
Excentrique do cut one another, does wander through the plane of the Epicicle
in such sort, as the one half of the Epicicle looking up toward the North
limit, declineth from the plane of the Excentrique toward the South. And the
other half approaching nigher to the South limit, declineth from the
Excentrique toward the North, as you may plainly perceive by the former
seventh figure, in which, that half of the Epicicle which looks toward the
North limit, marked with G, is the upper half of the Epicicle, marked with the
letters L H I: but when that half comes unto the Node descendent, marked
with O, then it is called the Occidentall half, marked with the letters K L H:
and when it is come to the South limit, marked with N, then it is called the
inferior or nether half, marked with the letters I K L: But when that half
arriueth to the Node ascendent, marked with M, then it is called the Oriental
half, and is marked with the letters H I K. And the other half of the
Epicicle declining from the plane of the Excentrique toward the North pole,
looks toward the South limit.

5. Fifthly, when the Planet is in the upper half of the Epicicle, in which
the Auge is, then he always walks betwixt the Eclipticke and the
Excentrique: but when he is in the nether half, he goes clean without them
both.

6. Sixthly, the diameter of the Auge being in the upper half of the Epicicle,
and out of the Nodes, declineth toward the Eclipticke, and being again in the
nether half, departs from the Eclipticke toward that part whereunto the
Excentrique declineth. Hereof it must needs follow, that the Planet whilst he
is in the Oriental half, increases his latitude, and in the Occidentall
half deminisheth the same, but yet so, as his latitude from the Node ascendent
to the Node descendent, is always Northerly, and from thence to the node
ascendent it is always Southerly.

What be the greatest latitudes of the three Planets, as well in the North and
South limit, as also in the North and South true Auges of the Epicicle?
ACcording to the tables of Alpho^sus, when the Planet is in the North limit of
the Excentrique, and also in the North true Auge of the Epicicle, then the
greatest North latitude for Saturn is 2 degrees, i3. for Jupiter 1 degree, i5.
and for Mars only i5. And when the Planet is in the North limit of the
Excentrique, and therewith in the North opposite Auge of the Epicicle, then the
greatest North latitude for Saturn is 3 degrees, i3. for Jupiter 2 degrees,
i5. and for Mars 4 degrees, i21. But when the Planet is in the South limit of
the Excentrique, and therewith in the South true Auge of the Epicicle, then the
greatest South latitude for Saturn is two degrees, i5. for Jupiter 1 degree,
i4. and for Mars only i2. And if the Planet be in the South limit of the
Excentrique, and therewith in the South opposite Auge of the Epicicle, then the
greatest South latitude for Saturn is 3 degrees, i1. for Jupiter 2 degrees,
i8. and for Mars 7 degrees, i30. But betwixt Alphonsus his tables and the
Prutenicall tables there is some difference, for the Prutenicall tables when
the Planet is in the North Auge of the Epicicle, do allow for the greatest
North latitude of Saturn 2 degrees, i3. for Jupiter 1 degree, i6. and for Mars
i5. Again, the Planet being in the North opposite Auge, they allow for the
greatest North latitude of Saturn 3 degrees, i2. for Jupiter 2 degrees, i4.
and for Mars 4 degrees, i30. and when the Planet is in the South true Auge of
the Epicicle, they allow for the greatest South latitude of Saturn 2 degrees,
i2. for Jupiter 1 degree, i5. and for Mars i4. Again, when the Planet is in
the South opposite Auge of the Epicicle, they allow for the greatest South
latitude of Saturn 3 degrees, i5. for Jupiter 2 degrees, i7. and for Mars 6
degrees, i50.

The seventh Conclusion.
THe diameter of the mean longitudes, and the diameter of the mutual sections
of the Epicicle and of the Excentrique, are always in a manner equally distant
to the diameter of the section of the Excentrique and of the Eclipticke, and
thereby are equally distant also, in a manner to the Eclipticke it self. I say
here in a manner, because that neither of the foresaid diameters being out of
the limits or nodes, are justly equally distant from the Eclipticke, yet the
difference is so small, as it is scant sensible, and therefore may be taken for
one simple latitude, whereby the plane of the Epicicle, which in the Nodes is
united to the Eclipticke, makes the diameter, which is parallel to the line
drawn through both the limits to decline upon that diameter, which is a
parallel to a right line drawn through both the Nodes, which the former
seventh figure plainly shows: for when the Epicicle is either in M or in O,
then the diameter of Inclination, marked with I L, is parallel to the line G F
N, drawn through the two limits, and also through the center F. But when the
Epicicle is in G or N, then the diameter H K, looking upward, is all one with
the line G F N. Again, the Epicicle being in M and O, such declination is made
upon the overthwart diameter H K, which then is all one with the line drawn
through the Nodes, marked with the letters O F M: but the Epicicle being in G
or N, the same Inclination is made upon the diameter I L, being parallel to the
line O F M, so as in the mean places that are betwixt the limits and the
Nodes, the enclining diameter looks upward, and that diameter whereupon the
Inclination is made, is always transverse or overthwart. From hence the
Astronomers do calculate the latitudes of these three Planets, having regard
only to the position or placing of the Epicicles in the two limits, and by the
proportional minutes do find out the equacion in every other place or
position, according as the said Position is more or less distant from the
limits, or from the Eclipticke.

The Theorique of Venus.
THe first Intention belonging to the Theorique of Venus, shows of how many
orbs her Theorique consists, which are in number five, like unto the
Theorique of any of the three upper Planets, before described, viz. the
Excentrique, the two deferents of the Auges of the said Excentrique, the
Epicicle, and the circle Equant; all which are necessarily used in this
Theorique for the selfsame causes that are before declared in the first
Intention belonging to the Theorique of the three upper Planets, the first
figure whereof by certain letters plainly shows all the orbs belonging to
this Theorique of Venus. Wherefore I wish you to resort thereunto, thinking it
superfluous here again to describe the same.

The second Intention, showing the diverse motions of the orbs whereof this
Theorique consists, and upon what centres, axletrees, and poles, they make
their reuolutions, and in what time.
First s^ew how and in what manner the Excentrique of Venus is moved?
THe Excentrique of Venus is moved according to the succession of the signs,
upon his own axletree and poles, together with the poles of the two deferents
of the Auges, and that equally about the center of the circle Equant, making
his full revolution in the space of one year precisely together with the
Excentrique of the Sun.

Where is the center of the circle Equant placed, about which the Excentrique
of Ve^^s makes his regular motion?
THe center of the circle Equant is placed in the line of the Auge beyond the
center of the Excentrique, being double so much distant from the center of the
world, as is the excentricitie of the Excentrique: and hereof it follows,
that the orb excentrique does carry the Epicicle more slowly about the point
Auge, and more swiftly about the opposite Auge.

How are the deferents of the Auges moved?
THey are moved according to the succession of the signs upon their own
poles, about the center of the world, as well beyond as on this side of the
vagarant poles of the Eclipticke, by virtue of the eighth sphere, making their
revolution according to the account of Alphonsus, in 49000 years. And by this
motion the Auge and opposite Auge of the Excentrique are by little and little
put forward. And this unstableness of the poles of the two deferents causes
also the poles of the Excentrique to be unstable and to wander on either side.

Ptolomey in his time found the Auge of Venus to be in the 25 degree of Taurus,
and he thought that it crept forward one degree in a 100 years, even as the
sphere of the fixed stars does. But according to the later observations of
Copernicus, the Auge of Venus in these days is found to be in the 16 degree
and i20. of.

Now as touching the moving of the Auge of Venus, Copernicus agrees with the
ancient Astronomers, affirming, that it turns about together with the fixed
stars, always keeping a firm and fixed place under the Orb of the fixed
stars. But as touching the time of the whole revolution of the said Auge,
Ptolomey affirms it to be 36000 years, and the followers of Alphonsus do
make the same to be 49000 years.

Copernicus affirms that time of revolution to be no more but 25810
Egyptian years. Neither is the error of the Alphonsines here to be kept
silent, who do not let to affirm, That the Auge of Venus and that of the
Sun, are continually joined together, and that either of them in Ptolomeyes
time, was in the 13 degree, i30. of, which is clean contrary to his own
observation. By which their false calculation, the Auge of Venus and of the
Sun should be in these days in the 2 degree of Cancer, whereas indeed it is
in the 16 degree, i^0. of.

How and in what manner is the Epi^icle of Venus moved?
IT is moved in the upper part thereof according to the succession of the
signs, and in the nether part contrary to the succession of the signs, upon
his own moouable axletree, standing slopewise upon the plane of his
Excentrique, and is equally moved from his mean Auge, making his whole
revolution almost in 19 months. And his daily moving is i36ii59iii28iiii0^v7^
so as he makes one period in 583 days, that is to say, in one year, 7
months, 8 days, 22 hours, i10ii38iii31

How is the mean Auge of the Epicicle described?
EVen as it is in the Epicicles of the three upper Planets, by help of a right
line, being drawn from the center of the Equant through the center of the
Epicicle to the circumference thereof. And you have to note, that all the
conclusions belonging to the moving of this Epicicle, are like and all one with
those that are gathered out of the moving of the Epicicles of the three upper
Planets, before set down.

What harmony is betwixt the moouings of Venus, and of the Sun?
THe periodicall moving of her Excentrique is like unto that of the
Excentrique of the Sun; with whose Excentrique, her Excentrique is exactly
carried about. And the Alphonsines do not let to affirm, That both their
Auges are continually joined together, contrary to the observation of
Ptolomey, and of all others, as has been said before.

What conclusions do follow of this harmony?
THese here following: for first the Sun and Venus in their mean moving are
always joined together: and hereof it follows, that they both must needs
have one self line of mean moving, whereby their mean moving is bounded. And
this line is a parallel as well to the right line which is drawn from the
center of the Sun his Excentrique to the center of his body, as also to that
right line which is drawn from the center of Venus her Equant to the center of
her Epicicle; whereby it appears, that Venus can stray no further from the
Sun, than the greatness of her Epicicle will suffer her. And hereto may be
added, that the excentricitie of the Excentrique of the Sun and that of the
equant of Venus are like, for in Ptolomeyes time they were both like: And
though that Copernicus found either of them in our time to be decreased, yet
the equacions of their Excentriques cannot much dif^er, but be equal.

Show the dimension of the Orbs belonging to the sphere of Venus.
AS the semidiameter of the Excentrique of Venus contains 60 parts or
degrees, even so of the like degrees Ptolomey says, that the excentricitie of
the said Excentrique contains 1 degree, and i15. and that the excentricitie
of her Equant contains 2 degrees, and i30. like to that of the Sun: and
that the semidiameter of her Epicicle contains 43 degrees, and i10. and
hereof it appears, that the least altitude of Venus from the earth is 15
degrees, i35. and her greatest altitude is 104 degrees, i25. But Copernicus
says, That in these days the excentricitie of her Equant is no more but 2
degrees, i6. so as by that means the excentricitie of the Excentrique should be
no more but i51. like to that of the Sun, being also deminished as he says,
in his particular propositions.

The third Intention, describing all such points, lines, arches, semicircles,
and such like things as are needful to be known for the calculating of the
mouings of Venus.
IN this Theorique all such things are described in like manner as they be in
the Theorique of the three upper Planets, and therefore resort to the third
Intention of their Theorique before set down: but yet the line of the mean
moving of Venus is all one with that of the Sun, and both their mean mouings
are also like and the self same. And the greatest equacion of Venus her
Excentrique, is according to the tables of Alphonsus 2 degrees i10 and
according to the Prutenicall tables it is no more but 2 degrees, i17 And the
greatest equacion of her argument (the center of her Epicicle being in the Auge
of the said Excentrique) is according to the tables of Alphonsus 44 degrees,
i44 but according to the Prutenicall tables it is 45 degrees, i10 ii30 But when
the center of her Epicicle is in the opposite Auge of her Excentrique, then the
greatest equacion of her argument according to Alphonsus his tables, is 47
degrees, i11 and according to the Prutenicall tables 46 degrees, i5^ ii30^

The fourth Intention, showing the moving of Venus according to latitude.
Since the varieties of Venus her latitudes are like in all respects unto those
of Mercury, I leave to speak thereof, until I come to treat of the motion of
Mercury according to his latitudes, and so I end with Venus.

The Theorique of Mercury.
The first Intention belonging to the Theorique of Mercury, showing of what
and how many orbs his Theorique consists.
THis Theorique consists of seven Orbs, that is, the Excentrique, the two
deferents, carrying the Auge of the Equant, the excentor of the Excentrique,
the Epicicle, the circle Equant, and the circle of the Nodes, as this figure
shows.

The first figure belonging to the Theorique of Mercury.
IN which figure the letter A signifies the center of the world, and B the
center of the Excentrique, and C signifies the Orb Excentrique, which is a
white orb: and the two black orbs, marked with the letters D E, are the two
deferents of the Auge of the Excentrique, and the letter F signifies the
center of the Epicicle, in whose circumference the star of Mercury is turned
about: and the letter G signifies the circle Equant, whose center is marked
with the letter H, in the line of the Auge, a little above the center A. And B
H is the diameter of the little circle, which little circle is almost in the
midst of the foresaid first figure, and the center of that little circle is
marked with the letter I, in the circumference of which little circle is
carried about the center of the Excentrique, marked with B. And the letter I is
also the center of the Orb called Excentrus excentri, which indeed are two
orbs going close together, marked with the letters L and K, and are shaddowed
with little lines; and these two orbs do contain within the compass thereof
the whole orb Excentrique, which carries the Epicicle of Mercury. And the
outermost circle of all, marked with M, signifies here the deferent of the
nodes.

Wherefore is the excentor of the Excentrique added to the sphere of Mercury?
BEcause he has a peculiar variety in his moving, not common to the other
Planets, for his equacions in departing from the Sun, are found to be least
but once, and to be greatest twice, as though he ascended but once to the Auge,
and descended twice to the opposite Auge: which things are salued by adding this
orb to his Theorique. And all the rest of the orbs are placed in this
Theorique for the selfsame causes that are before declared.

How and in what manner is the Excentrique of Mercury moved?
IT is moved in like manner as is the Excentrique of Venus, according to the
succession of the signs, upon his own axletree and proper poles, vagarant
together with the poles of the deferents of the Auges, and that equally about
the center of the circle Equant, making one period in the space of one year
precisely together with the Excentrique of the Sun.

Where is the center of Mercury his circle Equant to be found, about the
which his Excentrique goes regularly?
THe center of Mercury his Equant is in the line of the mean Auge, in the very
midst betwixt the center of the world and the center of that orb which is
called the excentor of the Excentrique: for it occupies the lowest part of the
little circle, described by the center of the Excentrique, and this center of
the Equant is marked in the former figure with the letter H.

How many Auges do belong to the Excentrique of Mercury?
TWo, that is, the true Auge and the mean Auge. The true Auge is in the
Excentrique, described by a right line drawn from the center of the world
through the center of the Excentrique: and this Auge by reason that the center
of the Excentrique goes round about the little circle, is not stable, nor
keeps always one place. But the mean Auge belonging as well to the
Excentrique as also to the circle Equant, is described by a right line, drawn
from the center of the world through the center of the Excentrique, and also
through the center of the Equant, both which centres are in one self line. And
this mean Auge is the rule of the true Auge, because it remains fixed under
the deferents of the Auges. And therefore these two deferents of the Auges are
also said to carry about this Auge of the Equant.

What is to be gathered hereof?
THat the Excentrique of Mercury, like as that of the Moon, is swifter in his
upper part toward the Auge, than in his nether part: for there the center of
the Equant approaches nigher unto the opposite Auge, than to the Auge.

How are the deferents moved, that do carry the Auge of the Equant, otherwise
called the mean Auge?
THey are moved according to the succession of the signs, about the center of
the world, upon their proper poles, both on this side and beyond the vagarant
poles of the Eclipticke, by virtue of the eigth heaven, making their revolution
together with that heaven according to the Alphonsynes doctrine, in 49000.
years: and by this moving the Auge and opposite Auge of the Equant are put
forward. And this instabilitie of the poles of the deferents, do also make the
poles of either Excentrique to wander on both sides of the Eclipticke.

Ptolomey in his time found the Auge of Mercuries Equant to be in the 10 degree
of Libra, thinking that according to the observations of the former times, the
said Auge, together with the sphere of the fixed stars, went but one degree
in a hundred years. But according to Copernicus his observations, the said
Auge is found to be in the beginning of Sagittarius: Whereby he gathers, That
the said Auge under the sphere of the fixed stars, makes one degree in 63
years (so as the motion of that Auge is equal:) and according to these
observations, it makes his whole revolution under the Orb of the fixed
stars, in 22405 Egyptian years, but under the Zodiake it makes his period
in 11995 Egyptian years, which lacks but five years of 12000 Egyptian
years. And the tables of Alphonsus clean contrary to the manifold
observations of Ptolomey do make the Auge of Mercury to have been in his time
in the 12 degree i40 of Libra, according to which account, it ought to be in
these days in the first degree and i12 of Scorpio.

How is the excentor of the Excentrique moved?
IT is equally moved contrary to the succession of the signs, about his own
center, which is also the center of the little circle, and upon his own
axeltree and proper poles vagarant, together with the poles of the two
deferents that do carry the Auge of the Equant: and it makes his period in
the space of one year, in which time the Excentrique also goes once about the
line of the Auge. And you have to note, that the excentor of the Excentrique,
as the Excentrique it self, do both return in like time to the line of the
Auge, that is to say, the excentor contrary to the succession of the signs,
and the Excentrique according to the succession of the signs, both I say in
the space of 365 days, 6 hours, i33 ii8 and iii35

What conclusions do follow of the moving of this Orb?
Diverse, but specially these three here following.

1. First, that the center of the Excentrique is carried about the circumference
of the little circle.

2. Secondly, that the excentricitie of the Excentrique is sometime changed,
for many times it is threefold so much as is the excentricitie of the Equant,
and specially when the center of the Excentrique is in the top of the little
circle; but when the center of the Excentrique is in the lowest part of the
little circle, then the excentricitie of the Excentrick is equal to the
excentricitie of the equant.

3. Thirdly, that the Auge and opposite Auge of the Excentrique is turned about
the Auge and opposite Auge of the Equant, as well contrary as also according to
the succession of the signs, and yet does never ex^eed his bounds, that is to
say, the twelfth part of the Zodiake. Now for the better understanding of this
which has been and shall be said hereafter, all those that do write of the
Theoriques do set down this figure here following.

The second figure belonging to the Theorique of Mercury.
THis figure as you see consists of diverse circles, some greater, some
lesser; and of diverse right lines, some longer, some shorter: and of the
circular lines there is one that has a shape Ovale, like to an egg; and there
be two others, the one like to a half Moon, and the other like to an Oyster
shell or Cockle shell: all which things, whereto they serve and what they
signify, shall be here declared by help of the letters therein contained: for
the double, round, and greatest circle being divided into twelve equal parts,
marked with Arithmeticall figures, signifies the circle Equant, whose Auge is
marked above with the letter A, and his opposite Auge being beneath, is marked
with the letter B, and the line A B is the line of the Auges, which passes
through these three centres, that is, the center of the world marked with the
letter C, the center of the Equant marked with the letter D, and the center of
the little middle circle marked with the letter E, which little circle is made
by the turning of the center of the Excentrique about the center E, and
therefore when the center of the Excentrique comes to the very top of the
little circle, marked with the letter F, then is his excentricitie three times
as much as is the excentricitie of the equant, which lies betwixt D and C, for
Ptolomey found the right line D C to be equal unto the semidiameter of the
said little circle. But when the center of the Excentrique falls down from F
to D, his excentricitie is least of all, and there the Excentrique is also
united to the Equant it self, and the Auge also of the Excentrique falls into
the line A B: but if the center of the Excentrique does fall from that line
into any other part of the circumference of the said little circle, then his
Auge does wander either into the West part going contrary to the succession of
the signs, or else into the East part, going according to the succession of the
signs; as suppose the center of the Excentrique to be in the point marked with
P in the little middle circle on the right hand, then his Auge will be in G, and
his opposite Auge in L: and if his center be in O, then his Auge shall be in I,
and his opposite Auge in M: and if his center be in R, then his Auge will be in
S, and his opposite Auge in T: but if his center be in V, then his Auge will be
in X, and his opposite Auge in Y: so likewise if his center be in Z, his Auge
will be in a, and his opposite Auge in d: and if his center be in C, then his
Auge will be in B, and his opposite Auge in E. And the outermost bounds of the
wanderings of the Auges are the two letters G and I: and the bounds of the
wanderings of the opposite Auges are the two letters L and M, which bounds do
limit these four angles, that is, G C A, I C A, L C B, and M C B. To every one
of which angles in the circular concentrique does answer one whole sign of
the Zodiake, which Mestelyn does prove by certain propositions of E^clides
first book, which for brevity I here omit. You have also to note, that the
foresaid Auge describes the upper circle, made in a manner like a half Moon,
marked with the letters N S G X A B I a: and the opposite Auge describes the
nether circle, made like an Oyster shell, marked with the letters Q T L Y B e M
d, and upon the long Ovale circle are placed two little circles, of each hand
one, signifying the Epicicle of Mercury, whose centres are marked with the
letters K and H: for the center of his Epicicle describes the said Ovale
figure, but not altogether like unto the Ovale figure of the Moon, as shall be
showed hereafter. In the mean time you have to note, that when the center of
the Excentrique is in the top of the little circle, marked with F, then the
Epicicle is furthest distant from the earth, because he is then in the Auge.
But when the Epicicle is come down in the Ovale figure unto the point H, and
the center of the Excentrique is also come down in the little circle unto the
point P, having made a third part of that circle, even as the Epicicle has
made a third part of the Equant, then the Epicicle is nighest unto the earth.
But when the center of the Excentrique is come down to the point D, and the
Epicicle is come to the opposite Auge, marked with B, then he is more distant
from the earth, than when he was in the point H, the demonstration whereof I
here omit: and the Epicicle being come to the opposite Auge, has then passed
through the whole excentor of the Excentrique, and has made one period, and
does the like in the other half: whereby you may gather first, that the center
of the Epicicle in making one period does pass twice through the excentor of
the Excentrique: secondly, that the said center of the Epicicle in making one
revolution, is but once in the Auge of the Excentrique, at which time he is
most distant from the earth. But being in the very opposite Auge, he is not so
nigh unto the earth, as when he is in the other two points before mentioned,
each of which points is distant 120 degrees from the Auge of the Equant, and in
those points is nearest to the earth. Thirdly, that the center of the Epicicle,
by these manifold motions, describes the said Ovale figure, which
notwithstanding is not like in many respects unto the Ovale figure of the
Moon; how and wherefore, we come now to show.

A comparison showing in what things the Moon and Mercury by their motions do
agree or differ, in describing their Ovale figures: and first, they agree in
these things following.
FOr look how much the Excentrique of either Planet does proceed according to
the succession of the signs, that is to say, the Excentrique of the Moon from
the line of the mean moving of the Sun, and the Excentrique of Mercury from
the line of the mean Auge; so much do the orbs of unequal thickenesse
reuert contrary to the succession of the signs, that is to say, the two
deferents carrying the Auge of the Moon, and the excentor of the Excentrique
of Mercury do make like circuits as well to the foresaid lines, as to their
opposite parts. Secondly, the center of either of their Excentriques by the
going backward of the said orbs, describes about the centres of the same
orbs a little circle. Thirdly, whilst the Excentrique makes one period to
the foresaid lines, the center of the Epicicle of either Planet goes twice
about the foresaid orbs. Wherefore it follows of necessity, that the
Epicicle in every revolution is twice nighest, and twice furthest off from the
center of the little circle: and by this means, the Epicicle of either Planet
in making one period describes with his center the figure Ovale. Thus much
touching their likeness or agreement in describing the figure Ovale of either
Planet. Now we will show you wherein they disagree in making the figure Ovale.
The center of the little circle in the sphere of the Moon, is also the center
of the world; but in the sphere of Mercury all that little circle is
excentricall, because that in Mercury it is described by an orb which is
excentricall, and in the sphere of the Moon it is described by those orbs,
which in some respect are concentricall. Wherefore the Auge of the Moon does
wander equally throughout the whole Zodiake: but the Auge of Mercury is turned
and wrythed on each side of his mean Auge: and by his turning and wandering,
now on this side, and now on that side, both the Auge and also the opposite Auge
do each of them make a figure that wrieth in and out, and that which the Auge
makes, is marked in the former figure with the letters N S G X A b I a, almost
like to a half Moon; and that which the opposite Auge makes, is marked with
these letters, Q T L Y B e M d, much like to an Oyster shell, as has been
said before. Whereof it follows, that the Auge of the Moon is only moved
contrary to the succession of the signs. But the Auges of Mercury does
sometime proceed by a reciprocke moving according to the succession of the
signs. Moreover, the excentricitie of the Moon in a whole period is never
changed, but abides always one and the same: but the excentricitie of
Mercury is continually changed. Again, the Moon in every her revolution
falls twice into the Auge, and twice into the opposite Auge, by means whereof
she is twice furthest from the earth, and twice nighest to the same; and the
limits of those distances is a just quarter of a circle one from another, which
is 90 degrees. But Mercury falls neither into the Auge nor opposite Auge but
once only, and he is furthest distant from the earth when he is in the Auge.
But he is nighest to the earth twice (not when he is in the opposite Auge) but
in two places, each of them being distant on either side from the Auge the
third part of a circle, which is 120 degrees. Finally, the Epicicle of the
Moon describes a figure, more like to a figure Lenticular, than to a figure
Ovale. And the Epicicle of Mercury describes a figure more Ovale than
otherwise, the cause whereof is, for that the center of the Moons Equant
(about which her Excentrique makes his regular motion) is also the center of
the little circle. But the center of Mercuries Equant is resident in the lowest
part of the said little circle, notwithstanding each figure is commonly called
an Ovale figure.

How and in what manner is the Epicicle of Mercury moved?
THe Epicicle of Mercury in the upper part is moved according to the
succession of the signs, and in the nether part contrary to the succession of
the signs, about his own moouable axletree, standing slopewise upon the plane
of the Excentrique. And it is equally moved from the mean Auge, making his
revolution almost in 4 months, and his daily moving contains 3 degrees, i6
ii^4 iii14 iiii5 v16 so as it makes one period in 115 days, 21 hours, i^
ii20 iii54

How is the mean Auge of this Epicicle described?
IT is described by a right line drawn from the center of the Equant, and
passing through the center of the Epicicle, even to the circumference thereof.

What conclusions are to be gathered hereof?
FIrst, that the Epicicle of Mercury, contrary to that which happens in the
three upper Planets, and also in Venus, is slower of gate in the upper part of
the Excentrique, and quicker of gate in the lower part of the Excentrique,
because the center of the Equant in this Theorique of Mercury approaches
nigher to the opposite Auge, but in the other Planets last named, the center of
their Equant approaches nigher to the Auge.

Secondly, when the center of the Epicicle is in the line of the Auges, then
both the mean and true Auge of the Epicicle, and also the point of concauitie
are all three united together in one self line, yea, the mean Auge and also
the point of concauitie are again united, when the center of the Epicicle is in
any of the two points of next approach to the earth, marked in the former second
figure with the letters H K: and from thence above those points of next approach
toward the Auge of the Excentrique, the mean Auge of the Epicicle is always
in the midst betwixt the true Auge and the point of concauitie. But beneath
the foresaid points of next approach toward the opposite Auge of the
Excentrique, the point of concauitie is in the midst of the mean and true
Auge of the Epicicle: the demonstration whereof for brevity sake I do here
omit.

What harmony or agreement is there betwixt Mercury and the Sun?
Mercury as well as Venus, in the periodicall moving of their Excentrique,
does follow the Sun: for the revolution of Mercury agrees most exactly
with the Excentrique of the Sun. And hereto you may also add, that the
excentor of the Excentrique of Mercury, makes his revolution together with
the Excentrique of the Sun, not simply, but in having respect to the mean
Auge of Mercury, or of the Equant: yea, and moreover according to the late
observations and special conclusions touching the orbs of the Sun (whereof
we have spoken before in the Theorique of the Sun) Mercury touching so much
as appertains to his moving according to longitude, agrees with the
Theorique of the Sun, both in number and in like disposition or placing of
the orbs, and also in the quality of the moving of the said orbs. For
according to Copernicus, there is in both Theoriques an excentor of the
Excentrique, going contrary to the succession of the signs, whereby the mean
Auge is on both sides most distant from the true Auge, and causes the
excentricitie to be mutable.

What conclusions do follow of this harmony?
THese here following: for first you have to note, that the Sun and Mercury,
and also Venus, are always joined together in their mean moving: and as they
have all three one self mean moving, so they must needs have also one self
line of their mean moving. And hereof it follows, that neither Mercury nor
Venus can depart from the Sun any further than the bigness of their Epicile
will suffer them. Moreover, look how much the Sun proceeds forward from the
mean Auge of Mercury: so much the center of Mercuries Excentrique goes
backward in the little circle.

How are the Orbs belonging to the sphere of Mercury to be measured?
OF such like parts as the semidiameter of the Excentrique, marked with the
letters D A, or with P H, in the former figure, contains 60 parts, the
excentricitie of the Equant, marked in the said figure with the letters C D,
contains according to Ptolomey three parts, and the greatest excentricitie of
the Excentrique, marked with the letters C F, contains 9 such parts. And the
line of the Auge, marked with C N, contains 69 such parts or degrees. And the
line of the opposite Auge marked with C Q, (such as it is then) contains 51
degrees. But when the center of the Epicicle is in the very opposite Auge it
self, marked with D, then the line of the said opposite Auge, marked with C B,
contains 57 parts. But the line of the nighest approach, marked on the left
side of the former figure with C H, and on the right side with C K, is said to
contain 55 degrees, and i3 and so the semidiameter of the Epicicle contains
22 degrees and i30 Hereof it follows, that the greatest distance of Mercury
being placed in the Auge of his Excentrique and of his Epicicle, contains 91
degrees and i30 and if his excentricitie did continue always fixed and
vnmoouable, the altitude of Mercury being in the opposite Auges of those orbs,
should be 28 degrees, and i30 And though that Mercury himself with his body
do never descend so far, for such causes as are before declared, yet it is
necessary that this capacity be attributed to his orb. And when Mercury is
in any of the points of nighest approach, then his least altitude is 33 degrees
and i4.

The third Intention, showing what points, lines, and arches are meet to be
known in the Theorique of Mercury.
IN all these things Mercury agrees with Venus and with the three upper
Planets, which being already set down in those Theoriques, need not here
again to be rehearsed, and therefore resort to the third Intention, as well of
the three upper Planets, as to that of Venus. In the tables as well of
Ptolomey, as in those of Alphonsus and of their followers, the equacions of the
arguments are counted at that place of the Excentrique, in which the distance
of the center of the Epicicle from the earth is equal unto the semidiameter of
the Excentrique. And to these equacions may be added the excess of the longer
longitude, and also the excess of the nigher longitude, not that when the
Planet is in the very opposite Auge, but when he is in any of the two points of
nighest approach. To these equacions also may be referred the proportional
minutes both longer and nigher.

The equacions of the Parallax or of the Epicicle which are set down in the
Prutenicall tables, do appertain to the Auge of the Equant. But the excess do
belong to the points of next approach, marked in the second figure with the
letters H K. What this word Parallax does signify, shall be declared
hereafter. And you have to understand, that the greatest equacion of the center
contains 3 degrees, i0^ ii30^ and that the greatest equacion of the argument,
when the center of the Epicicle is in the Auge of the Excentrique, contains
19 degrees, i3^ ii6^ But when the Epicicle is in any of the 2 points of next
approach, then it contains 23 degrees, i51^ ii40^

The fourth Intention, showing the latitudes, as well of Venus as of Mercury,
and wherein they do agree or disagree.
IN quality these two Planets are most like, for look in what manner the
Excentrique of Venus does decline toward the Ecliptic, or her Epicicle to the
Excentrique; in like manner does the Excentrique and the Epicicle of Mercury
make their declination, but yet with this difference, that look in what sort
those two circles in the Theorique of Venus do decline toward the North, in
like sort the said two circles in the Theorique of Mercury do decline toward
the South.

How manifold is the latitude of these two Planets?
THreefold, whereof one depends upon the moouable obliquitie or slopenesse of
the Excentrique, and the other two latitudes do depend of the inclinations of
the Epicicles, which inclinations are also twofold and mouable, whereof the one
in Greek is called Engclysis, and the other Loxosis, as shall be declared
hereafter.

What manner of latitude is that which the Excentrique of either Planet causes?
WE have said before, that the poles of the deferents of the Auges do wander
both beyond and also on this side of the poles of the Eclipticke, and therefore
the plane of the Excentrique has obliquitie or slopenesse, and yet not fixed
as in the other upper Planets but moouable. And as well the mutual section, as
the swaying of the planes of the Excentrique and of the Eclipticke is made upon
the diameter of the world, standing with right angles upon the line of the
Auge, and therefore the diameter which governs this declination, is the line
of the Auge and of his opposite Auge. And by this means it falls out, that
the Auge and opposite Auge, or rather the each half of the plane of the whole
Theorique does sway from the Eclipticke, now toward the North, and now toward
the South, but the nodes of such swaying are always distant from the Auge one
whole quarter of the Zodiake: and this moving of latitude is commonly called
the declination of the Excentrique.

What proportion does the swaying of the declination of the Excentrique, as
well of Mercury as of Venus observe in the making of their periods?
THis here following: for when the center of the Epicicle is either in the Node
ascendent or descendent, all the whole plane of the Excentrique does fall into
the Eclipticke; for though the center of Mercury his Epicicle does never
ascend to the North, nor the center of the Epicicle of Venus to the South, yet
we may call the one node ascendent, and the other descendent, as well for the
likeness or proportion that is betwixt those two Planets and the other
Planets, as also for that the one node is in the ascendent half of the
Excentrique toward the Auge, and the other node is in the descendent half of
the Excentrique toward the opposite Auge. But if the center of the Epicicle be
in the upper half above the diameter of the section or swaying toward the
Auge, then the Auge, or rather the whole upper half of the Excentrique does
decline from the Eclipticke, that is to say, in Venus toward the North, and in
Mercury toward the South. But if the center of the Epicicle be in the nether
half, then the Auge of Venus declineth toward the South, and the opposite Auge
toward the North: but in Mercury it is clean contrary, and the greatest
declination is when the center of the Epicicle is either in the Auge or opposite
Auge of the Excentrique.

What conclusions may be gathered hereof?
FIrst, that the Auges are not always found to be in the North nor in the
South, as it chances in the three upper Planets, but sometime in the one
place, and sometime in the other.

Secondly, that the center of Venus her Epicicle does never arrive unto the
South, nor the center of Mercuries Epicicle to the North: for this swaying is
of such manner, as that half of the Excentrique, into which the Epicicle at
any time enters, does by and by begin to decline into the said North part for
Venus, and into the South part for Mercury: and this Inclination of the
Excentriques, causes that the North latitudes of Venus be always greater than
her South latitudes; but in Mercury it is clean contrary. And you have to
note, that the greatest angle or section of the Excentrique and Eclipticke, is
for Venus, i10^ and for Mercury, i45^ But for the better understanding, as
well of this that has been said before, as of that which is to be said
hereafter touching the foresaid latitudes, it shall be needful to set down
this figure here following.

The third figure showing the latitudes of the said two Planets.
THis figure, made somewhat like to a Butterfly, with her wings spread open,
contains three several planes of orbs, cutting one another in the diameter
of the world, which passes through the center of the world, marked here with
A: which three planes do represent no more but one only plane, that is, the
Excentrique of Venus or of Mercury, to show the diverse positions or placings
of the said Excentrique, caused by the latitude of their inclination. And ye
have to understand, that the middlemost of these three planes or orbs, marked
with the letters L K M T, and containing therein four Epicicles, does
signify, that the Excentrique being in either of the two points K or T, is
united to the Eclipticke: but the other two planes, whereof the first having
the line of the Auge drawn through the limits of the greatest declination,
marked with the letters B C, and the second plane having a line marked with Q
P, does signify the declination of the Excentrique from the Epicicle.
Moreover, in this figure the two planes B C, and Q P, hard by the mutual
section which is nigh unto K and T, are cut off, not for that such orbs are to
be cut off indeed; but that by this means the Epicicles being in K or T, might
be the better seen in the middlemost plane, marked with the letters L K M T.
You see also, that in this figure the circumference of every one of the four
Epicicles is marked with these four letters, G H F I, but yet placed in diverse
order, according to the diverse moving of the Epicicle. And you have to note,
that when the center of any of those Epicicles is in the Node ascendent, marked
with K, then the plane of the Excentrique, whose diameter by passing through
the Auge L, and the opposite Auge M, is the line L A M, wholly united to the
Eclipticke, having no declination at all, whereby the axletree of the said
plane, marked with N O, hangs perpendicularly upon the plane of the
Eclipticke. But when the center of the Epicicle ascends from the Node K
toward the Auge of the Excentrique, marked with B, then the upper part of the
Excentrique does by and by decline from the Eclipticke toward the North for
Venus, and toward the South for Mercury; as when the center of the Epicicle
is in the Auge B, for then the diameter B A C, or rather the whole upper half
of the Excentrique is found to be on this side of the Eclipticke, and the
inferior part of the Excentrique to be beyond the Eclipticke, and the axletree
of the Excentrique is then the line D E. But when the center of the Epicicle is
come down to the Node descendent, marked with T, then the plane of the
Excentrique is united again to the Eclipticke, and the right line L A M is
again the diameter of the Auge. But when the Epicicle is once passed the Node
descendent, marked with T, then the upper part of the Excentrique which was
before on this side of the Eclipticke, begins now to decline beyond the
Eclipticke, wherefore the lower part of the Excentrique begins now to have
the same declination which the upper part had before, that is to say, toward
the North for Venus, and toward the South for Mercury. And therefore the
center of the Epicicle being in the opposite Auge, marked with P, the position
of the Excentrique is the line P A Q, and the axletree thereof, is the line R
S. It appears therefore, when the center of the Epicicle is in any of the
Nodes, either K or T, that then the Excentrique is united to the Eclipticke.
But if the center of the Epicicle be out of those Nodes, then as well toward
the Auge B, as toward the opposite Auge P, the Excentrique has the like
latitude as before, that is, North latitude for Venus, and South latitude for
Mercury. And therefore the center of the Epicicle does not go beyond the
Eclipticke, either toward C or Q.

What manner of latitudes have the Epicicles, as well of Venus as of Mercury?
THe planes of their Epicicles, whose axletrees we have said before to be
oblique or sloping to the Excentriques upon the two diameters, that is to say,
upon the diameter of the Auges, and upon the diameter of the mean longitudes
are inclined and swaied on both sides of their Excentriques, and yet
proportionally answerable to the periods of their Excentriques.

How is the first diameter, passing through the Auges, declined?
THe diameter of the Auges declineth on both hands from the plane of the
Excentrique, in such sort as follows: for when the center of the Epicicle is
in any of the limits, that is to say, either in the Auge or opposite Auge of the
Excentrique, marked in the former figure with B P, then the diameter of the
Auges have no declination at all, because it falls just into the plane of the
Excentrique; but the declination thereof is greatest, when the center of the
Epicicle is in any of the two Nodes, yet with such difference, as the
inclination of this diameter, or rather of the one half of the plane of the
Epicicle being made in the descending half of the Excentrique, is for Venus
Northward, and for Mercury Southward: but in the ascending half of the
Excentrique, the half of this diameter for Venus is Southward, and for
Mercury Northward. And this declination is made upon the diameter of the mean
longitudes, which the former figure does plainly show: for the Epicicle being
in B or P, which are the two limits, the declination of the diameter of the
Auges is nothing at all. But the center of the Epicicle being in T, which is
the Node descendent, the upper part of this diameter, marked with T G,
declineth from the plane of the Excentrique Northward for Venus, and Southward
for Mercury: but the lower half, marked with T F, enclineth contrariwise,
that is to say, Southward for Venus, and Northward for Mercury. And because
that the declination is greatest when the Epicicle is in any of the Nodes, then
the aforesaid diameter begins again to approach unto the plane of the
Excentrique, and in the limit P is united again to the plane of the
Excentrique, and from thence the upper part of the said diameter declineth
beyond the plane of the Excentrique to the other side, and the inferior part to
this side. Wherefore the Auge of the Epicicle, marked with G, being in the
point K, which before was for Venus Northward, is now Southward, and for
Mercury clean contrary. The greatest angle of this Inclination of the plane
of the Epicicle unto the Excentrique, is demonstrated by Ptolomey and
Copernicus, to be for Venus two degrees, and i30^ and for Mercury 6 degrees,
and i15^ To these from the Auge of the Epicicle to the center of the world, do
agree for Venus one degree, and i3^ and for Mercury one degree, and i46^ But
from the opposite Auge of the Epicicle to the center of the world, it is for
Venus 6 degrees, and i22^ and for Mercury 4 degrees, and i5^ Hitherto of the
first manner of the declination of the Epicicles from their Excentriques,
called in Latin Inclinatio, or Deviatio, in Greek Engclisis.

Now show in what manner the other diameter, passing through the mean
longitudes of the Epicicle, makes his declination?
THis kind of declination of the Epicicle, is commonly called the reflection,
in Greek Loxosis, because it makes the diameter of the mean longitudes to
reflect on both sides from the plane of the Excentrique in such manner as
follows: for while the center of the Epicicle is in any of the Nodes, which
is distant a just quarter of the Zodiake from the Auge or opposite Auge, then
the reflection of this diameter is nothing at all, because then it falls
wholly into the plane of the Excentrique; but such reflection is greatest, when
the center of the Epicicle is in any of the limits, or in the Auge or opposite
Auge. And yet with such difference, as the reflection of the half of this
diameter, called the Oriental half of the Epicicle, may be in the upper half
of the Excentrique, Northward for Venus, and Southward for Mercury. But in the
lower half of the Excentrique, the said Oriental half of the Epicicle
reflecteth for Venus toward the South, and for Mercury toward the North. And
this reflection is made upon the diameter of the Auges, all which things the
former figure does plainly show. For when the center of the Epicicle is in K
or T, which be the two Nodes, then the diameter of the mean longitudes, marked
with H I, has no reflection at all, but lies whole upon the plane of the
Excentrique, as you may see in the Node ascendent, marked with K: but in the
upper part of the Excentrique toward the Auge, when the center of the Epicicle
is in the Auge B, then the Oriental half of the diameter H I, marked in the
highest Epicicle of this figure with the letters H B, or else the Oriental
half of the said highest Epicicle, marked with the letters G H F, does reflect
from the plane of the Excentrique for Venus Northward, and for Mercury
Southward. But the Occidentall half of the said diameter, marked with B I, or
that half of the Epicicle marked with F I G, does reflect clean contrary,
that is to say, for Venus toward the South, and for Mercury toward the
North. And when the reflection is greatest, then this diameter approaches the
Eclipticke, and falls into the same in the point T, that is to say, in the
Node descendent. And departing from thence downward toward the limit P, the
said half of the diameter reflecteth on the other side beyond the Eclipticke,
and then the Occidentall half succeeds, which as when it was in the upper
part of the Excentrique, was for Venus South, and for Mercury North: so now by
going from T to P, and so to K, it is made for Venus Northward, and for
Mercury Southward. And the greatest angle of the reflection of this diameter
unto the Excentrique, is demonstrated to be for Venus 3 degrees, i30^ and for
Mercury 7 degrees: and to these do agree at the center of the world the
latitudes for Venus to be 2 degrees, i30^ and as much for Mercury.
Notwithstanding, because Mercury has a greater excentricitie, this angle in
the Auge of the Excentrique, has to the center of the world two degrees, ii15^
and in the opposite Auge of the said Excentrique, it has 2 degrees, ii45^

What conclusions are to be gathered of the inclinations and reflections of the
Epicicles?
1. THese here following: First, the plane of the Epicicle is never united with
the plane of the Excentrique or of the Eclipticke, by reason of the continual
inclinations of the one or of the other diameter. And therefore the axletree of
the Epicicle is never perpendicular to any of those planes.

2. Secondly, the declinations of the diameter of the Auges, and of the mean
longitudes of the Epicicle of these two Planets, that is to say, of Venus and
Mercury, are contrary to the declinations of the three upper Planets, for
there the declinations of the diameters of the Auges are greatest in the
limits, and nothing in the nodes, but the declinations of the said diameters in
these two Planets are greatest in the nodes, and nothing in the limits. Again,
the reflections in the three upper Planets are greatest in the nodes, and
nothing in the limits, whereas in these two Planets the reflections are greatest
in the limits, and nothing in the nodes.

3. Thirdly, the planes of the Excentriques and Epicicles of these two Planets
do cut one another in diverse diameters: for in the nodes such section is made
in the diameter of the mean longitudes, but in the limits the same section is
made in the diameter of the Auges; and in the mean places such section
chances sometime in one place, and sometime in another, betwixt the said
diameters: but the said section in the three upper Planets, observes contrary
order, as has been said before.

4. Fourthly, the line of the mutual section of the Epicicle and of the
Excentrique does wander through the plane of the Epicicle in such sort, as the
one half of the said plane departs from the plane of the Excentrique for
Venus toward the North, and for Mercury toward the South: so the other half
of the said plane declineth clean contrary, that is to say, for Venus toward
the South, and for Mercury toward the North: but in the three upper Planets
such line of mutual section observes a contrary order. By these conclusions
it is manifest, that the latitude of Mercury and Venus has three variations,
the first by reason of the moouable obliquitie of the Excentrique: the second
by reason of the mouable declinations of the Epicicle: and the third by reason
of the moouable reflections of the said Epicicle. All which things you may the
more easily perceive by the former figure, for the Epicicle being in the Node
ascendent, marked with K, the diameter of the mean longitudes, marked with H
I, is in the very plane of the Excentrique: but the diameter of the Auges of
the said Epicicle, marked with FG, has then greatest declination, so as the
whole nether half of the said Epicicle, marked with the letters H F I, looking
toward the Node descendent, is for Venus Northward, and for Mercury
Southward. And the upper half of the said Epicicle, marked with the letters I
G H, being partly hidden from our sight, by reason that it is under the
Excentrique, is for Venus Southerly, and for Mercury Northerly: and the
d^ameter of the section, marked with H I, is aparalell to the line of the Auge
of the Excentrique, which line is marked with these letters, L A M, whereof L
signifies the Auge, and M the opposite Auge of the Excentrique, and A the
center of the world: so in the other Node, marked with T, the selfsame
diameter H I is in the mean longitudes, but there the upper half of the
Epicicle, marked with the leters I G H, looking toward the same part as
before, is then for Venus toward the North, and for Mercury toward the
South. But the lower half of the Epicicle, marked with the letters H F I,
(whereof some part is now again hidden and covered as it were with the plane
of the Excentrique) is for Venus toward the South, and for Mercury toward
the North. The like and the same does chance when the center of the Epicicle
is either in the Auge B, or the opposite Auge P; for in those places the
diameters of the Auges, marked with F G, having no declination, the Epicicles
are divided, and the diameters H I have their greatest reflection: and yet
after the same manner as before, that is, when the East half is in B, and the
West half in P, which letters do signify as well the two limits, that is, B
the North limit, and P the South limit, as the two Auges; for here again the
one half of the Epicicle is wholly to be seen, in which whilst it goes
toward the Node descendent, Venus is Northward, and Mercury Southward. But
the other half of the Epicicle, (which the plane of the Excentrique does
partly hide and cover) does reflect or turn backward on the the other side
from the Excentrique. And even so it fares in like manner in all the mean
places that are betwixt the limits and the nodes.

And here ends the first book of the Theoriques.
The second Book or Part, treating of the Passions or Accidents of the Planets.
Having sufficiently spoken of the three several latitudes, belonging as well
to Venus as to Mercury, I mind here to make an end of the first part of the
Theoriques; wherein have been plainly declared all the diverse motions of the
Planets, as well according to their longitude as latitude: and so now to
proceed to the second part, wherein we have to treat of the passions,
qualities, or accidents of the Planets; of which, though Purbachius makes five
kinds, counting their motions according to latitude to be one of those five:
yet me thinks that Mestelyn has more reason to make but four general kinds,
since the latitude of every Planet, that has latitude, is rather a principal
part of his motion than a passion: for all their motions are either according
to longitude, or to latitude, and therefore minding herein to follow Mestelyn,
I will set down but four kinds of passions, as he does, which do grow of
four several comparisons. First, by comparing the moving of the Epicicle of
any Planet together with the moving of his Excentrique. Secondly, by comparing
the moving of the Planets one to another. Thirdly, by comparing their moouings
to the Sun. And fourthly, by comparing their moouings or rather places to the
center of the world and to the globe of the earth, every one whereof contains
certain special kinds of passions or accidents, hereafter declared.

What special accidents do belong to the first general kind, consisting of
the comparison of the moving of the Epicicle to the moving of his Excentrique?
BY this passion the Planets are said to be sometime direct, sometime
retrograde, and sometime stationarie; which three accidents do belong only
unto the five Planets, the Sun and Moon not being reckoned. Moreover, they
are said to be sometime swift, sometime slow, and sometime in a mean. Sometime
also they are said to be either increased or deminished in number, and sometime
to be ascendent, and sometime descendent.

When is any Planet said to be direct, retrograde, or stationarie?
IT is said to be direct, when the line of the true moving of the Planet,
drawn from the center of the world through the midde body of the Planet,
proceeds forward according to the succession of the signs, following the
line of the true moving of the center of his Epicicle, which goes always
according to the succession of the signs. And it is said to be retrograde,
when the line of the true moving of the Planet goes more backward, contrary
to the succession of the signs, than the line of the true moving of the
center of the Epicicle proceeds forward according to the succession of the
signs. And it is said to be stationarie, when both these lines are drawn to
the Zodiake with an equal moving into diverse parts of heaven, so as the line
of the Planets true moving makes as great an arch of the Zodiake in going
backward contrary to the succession of the signs, as the line of the true
moving of the center of the Epicicle makes, in proceeding forward according to
the succession of the signs, for then the Planet for a while seems to stand
still, and not to be moved from his place, and thereof is said to be
stationarie, like to any of the fixed stars. And you have to understand, that
these diversities of motions under the Zodiake proceeds of the moving of the
Epicicle, which in his upper part carries the Planet according to the
succession of the signs, and in his nether part carries the same contrary to
the succession of the signs, called his retrogradation. In which inferior or
nether part of the Epicicle are the two points of station. But for the better
understanding of that which has been said touching the direction,
retrogradation, and station of any Planet, it shall be needful to set down
this figure here following, together with the description thereof, the
signification of whose parts the letters do show as you may see in the page
next following.

The first figure of the second Book.
IN this figure the letter A standing at the nether end of the right lines,
signifies the center of the world, from whence all the said right lines are
drawn to the Zodiake: and B signifies the center of the Epicicle: and the
middle right line A B passing through the true Auge of the Epicicle, marked
with C, does show the true place of the said Auge under the Zodiake, marked
with the letter D: and the letter E shows the true opposite Auge of the
Epicicle: and the highest arch above, containing certain degrees of division,
signifies a portion of the Zodiake: and the two outermost lines, A F G, and A
H I, be lines of contingence, touching the Epicicle in the two points, marked
with H and F: and the two inner right lines, marked with the letters A N, and A
L, drawn from the center A through the two points of station, marked with K
and M, do show in the Zodiake the retrogradation, marked with the letters L N:
and the two points H F do divide the Epicicle into two parts or halfes,
whereof the one is called the upper half, marked with the letters H C F, and
the other the nether half, marked with the letters F E H. And as the point F
shows the Oriental or East part, so H shows the Occidentall or West part:
and every one of the five Planets in the upper half of the Epicicle, marked
with H C F, is said to go from H to F, according to the succession of the
signs, describing the arch of the Zodiake, marked with I D G, which is called
his direction or progression: but in the lower half, marked with F E H, the
Planet is said to go contrary to the succession of the signs, called his
retrogradation: and when he is in any of the two points, marked with K M, then
he is said to be stationarie; whereof the point K is the point of the first
station, whereas the Planet begins first to be retrograde, and M is the
point of the second station, whereas the Planet ends his retrogradation, and
begins his progression: which two points are always beneath the two
Touch-points F H, toward the opposite Auge of the Epicicle, marked with E, from
which the two points of station are always equally distant, and also from the
true Auge of the Epicicle. And the letters C F K do show the arch of the first
station, which arch is otherwise called the first station in the second
signification; and C F K M do show the arch of the second station, otherwise
called the second station in the second signification: and the letters M H C F
K, do show the arch of progression, and KM do show the arch of
retrogradation. But you have to note, that though the two points of station are
always equally distant as well from the opposite Auge, as from the Auge of the
Epicicle, yet such distance is not always of like quality, neither is the
arch of their progression, nor the arch of their retrogradation always of one
bigness, but do alter and that for four causes: First, for that the Epicicle
through the moving of his Excentrique is sometime nigher and sometime further
off from the center of the earth: for the nigher that the epicicle is to the
earth, the more are the stational points distant from the true opposite Auge of
the Epicicle in all the five Planets, saving in Mercury. The second cause may
be the diverse magnitude of the Epicicle, being compared to his Excentrick, for
the stationall points of a greater Epicicle do approach nigher unto the opposite
Auge, than the stationall points of a lesser Epicicle do. The third cause is
the periodicall slownesse or swiftness of the Epicicle, being compared to the
periodicall moving of his Excentrique, for the slower revolution of the
Epicicle makes the stationall points to be nigher to the opposite Auge of the
Epicicle, and thereby as well the arch of progression as of retrogradation do
increase and decrease. Fourthly, the diversities of their excentricities may
cause the stationall points to alter in their distances from the opposite Auge
of the Epicicle.

Wherefore is the Moon and Sun exempted from these passions?
THe Sun has no Epicicle, and though the Moon has an Epicicle, yet she is
neither said to be stationarie nor retrograde, by means of the swiftness of
the center of her Epicicle, which makes every day a greater arch of the
Zodiake, according ^n the succession of the signs, than she can go backward,
because her Epicicle is both small and slow in her gate. And though Saturn
has a very small Epicicle, yet the swiftnes thereof does supply that want, and
thereby he is both stationarie and retrograde, and so are the other four
Planets, viz. Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury.

When are the Planets said to be swift, slow, or in a mean?
THey are said to be swift, when their true moving is quicker, according to
the succession of the signs, than their mean moving is: and they are said to
be slow, when their true moving is slower (according to the succession of the
signs) than their mean moving is: and they are said to be in a mean, when
their true moving (according to the succession of the signs) is equal unto
their mean moving.

When are Planets said to be increased or deminished in number?
THey be increased when the line of the true moving goes (according to the
succession of the signs) before the line of their mean moving. And they are
said to be deminished in number, when the line of their true moving does
follow after the line of their mean moving.

When is any Planet said to be ascendent or descendent?
HE is said to be as^endent, whilst he ascends from the opposite Auge of his
Epicicle to the Auge thereof: and he is said to be descendent, whilst he
descends in the other half of the Epicicle from the Auge to the opposite Auge
of his said Epicicle.

The second general kind of passions, rising of the comparison made by
comparing the moving of every Planet one to another, comprehending the five
Aspects of the Planets, which be these here following.
THat is to say, their Conjunction, their Sextile aspect, their Quadrile
aspect, their Trine aspect, and their Opposition: whose caracters are here set
down, together with the definition of every such Aspect.

1. The Conjunction, marked thus ^. is when two Planets are both in one self
sign, and in one self degree, which aspect in Greek is called Synodos.

2. The Sextile aspect, marked thus *, is when two Planets are distant one from
another by a sixth part of the Zodiake, that is to say, by two whole signs, or
60 degrees, which aspect is called in Greek Exagon^s.

3. The Quadrile aspect, marked thus ^, is when two Planets are distant the one
from the other three whole signs, or 90 degrees of the Zodiake, and is called
in Greek Tetragonos.

4. The Trine aspect, marked thus ^, is when two Planets are distant the one
from the other by four whole signs or 120 degrees of the Zodiake, and is
called in Greek Trigonos.

5. The Opposition, marked thus, is when two Planets are right opposite the one
to the other, and are distant the one from the other by six whole signs or 180
degrees of the Zodiake, and is called in Greek Diametros, that is to say, a
diametrall aspect, as when one is right against another in a right line. But
you have to understand, that Ptolomey comprehends as well the Opposition as
Conjunction of any two Planets, but especially of the Sun and Moon, under
this Greek name Syzigias.

And you have to note, that three of these aspects, that is, the Sextile,
Quadrile, and Trine aspect, are said to be double, because they look two
manner of ways, that is, toward the left hand, called the sinister aspect,
and toward the right hand called the dexter aspect. The direction of the
sinister aspect is according to the succession of the twelve signs, which
succession begins at Aries, and so proceeds forward to Taurus, Gemini, and
Cancer, and so forth to the last point of Pisces. But the direction of the
dexter aspect is contrary to the succession of the signs, looking backward
from Aries toward Pisces, Aquarius, Capricornus, and so forth to the last
point of Taurus. As for example, if one Planet be in the beginning of Aries,
and another in the beginning of Gemini, those two Planets do look one to
another with a sinister Sextile aspect. But if the one Planet be in Aries, as
before, and the other in Aquarius, then they look one to another with a dexter
Sextile aspect, as you may see by this figure following, which does plainly
show as well those aspects as all the other aspects before mentioned; it
shows also with what aspect every one of the twelve signs do regard one
another.

The figure of Aspects.
But you have to understand, that all the Planets do not regard or behold one
another with all the foresaid five aspects, for though the three upper Planets
and the Moon may behold one another, or any of the rest with every one of the
said five Aspects, yet Venus and Mercury cannot so do, for Venus is never
distant from the Sun above 48 degrees, nor Mercury above 29 degrees: and yet
they may be distant one from another by a Sextile aspect. And of the foresaid
aspects, some are said to be mean, and some to be true, and specially their
Conjunctions and Oppositions, whereof the Astronomers do not make any great
account, but only of the Conjunctions and Oppositions belonging to the Sun
and Moon, which two Planets the Astronomers do call in Latin Luminaria, that
is to say, The two chief lights: the knowledge of whose mean and true
Conjunctions and Oppositions, is necessary, for the better understanding of
their Eclipses.

When are their Conjunctions and Oppositions said to be mean or true?
THey are said to be mean, when the two lines of both their mean mouings do
meet in one self point of the Zodiake, and do make one self line. And they
are said to be true, when the two lines of their true moouings do meet and
make both one self line in one self degree of the Zodiake, and their
Oppositions are either mean or true, according as the said lines do meet in
the opposite points of the Zodiake. And the true Conjunctions of the said two
lights are said to be true, sometime according to longitude only, as when the
foresaid true lines do meet in one self point only according to longitude:
for the Moon does oftentimes wander from the Eclipticke line, and therefore
though the line of her true moving do meet with the line of the Suns true
moving in one self point under the Zodiake (the Moon having then latitude)
yet that is according to longitude only: but if those two lines do meet when
the Moon has no latitude, but is right under the Eclipticke line, then such
Conjunction is both according to latitude, and also according to longitude,
which is called a Corporal or Eclipticall Conjunction. And the like is to be
said of their true Oppositions, when the said lines do meet in like manner in
the opposite points of the Zodiake. Moreover, you have to note, that the true
Conjunctions may differ from the mean Conjunctions by reason of time, for
sometime the one may go before or after the other, and sometime meet both at
one instant. They may meet both at one instant two manner of ways: First, when
the Sun or Moon are in the Auge or opposite Auge of their Excentriques, or
when the one is in the Auge, and the other in the opposite Auge, for then the
foresaid lines of their mean and true mouings are all one. Secondly, they do
meet at one instant, when the equacions of their arguments are equal and of
like quality, which is to be known by the Prutenicall tables. But the true
Conjunctions and Oppositions do go before the mean Conjunctions or
Oppositions, when at the time of the mean Conjunction and Opposition the place
of the Sun is before the place of the Moon. And the true Conjunctions and
Oppositions do follow the mean, when at the time of the mean Conjunction and
Opposition the place of the Moon is before the place of the Sunn^. The like is
to be said also touching their quarters, both mean and true. And you have to
note, that one whole period betwixt every two Conjunctions or Oppositions of
the Sun and Moon does contain a Synodicall month, which is 29 days and a
half,

The third general kind of Passions, made by comparing of the mouings of all
the six Planets, unto the Sun, contains these three special kinds of
Passions here following.
1. FOr first they are said to be either increased or decreased in light, or
else to be combust, called in Greek Hyppaugi, that is to say, hidden or covered
with the beams of the Sun, so as they cannot yield their light.

2. Secondly, they are said to be Oriental or Occidentall.

3. Thirdly, to have diverse kinds of rising and setting, like as the fixed
stars have, that is to say, they rise or set sometime Cosmice, sometime
Achronice, and sometime Helyace; of which three Poetical kinds of rising and
setting, though I have somewhat spoken before in my first book of the Sphere,
chap. 35. yet I will declare the same here once again more at the full,
according to Maginus, who does set them down in such manner as hereafter
follows.

Show how and when these Passions do chance?
THe Planets are said to be increased in light, when after that any of them
has been in Conjunction with the Sun, either the Sun departs from that
Planet, or the Planet departs from the Sun, until it be at his furthest
distance from the Sun. And it is said to be deminished in light, when after
such furthest distance either the Planet approaches to the Sun, or the Sun
to the Planet. And it is said to be combust, when the Planet is hidden under
the beams of the Sun, so as it cannot yield his light, as is before said.
Secondly, all stars are said to be Oriental or Matutine, when they rise
before the Sun; and they are said to be Occidentall, when they go down
after the Sun; and yet with some difference as Maginus says: for the three
upper Planets (that is to say) Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, are said to be
Oriental, Matutine, and to go before the Sun from the time of their being
in Conjunction with the Sun, until they come to be in Opposition to the
Sun, as well when they are seen, as not seen: and this happens whilst
any of those three Planets descends from the Auge of his Epicicle through the
mean longitudes unto the opposite Auge of the said Epicicle: but the two
inferior Planets, that is, Venus and Mercury, are said to be Oriental,
Matutine, and to go before the Sun, when either of them ascends from the
opposite Auge of his Epicicle unto the Auge of the said Epicicle, which you may
evidently see by the first figure of this second book. But as for the Moon,
she is said to be Oriental, Matutine, and to go before the Sun, during the
time of her wane or decrease. Again, the three upper Planets are said to be
Occidentall, Vespertine, and to follow the Sun from their being in Opposition
with the Sun, until they come again to be in Conjunction with the Sun;
which chances whilst any of them is carried from the opposite Auge of the
Epicicle through the mean longitudes, unto the Auge of the same Epicicle. But
Venus and Mercury are said to be Occidentall, Vespertine, and to follow the
Sun, whilst either of them descends from the Auge of their Epicicle unto
the opposite Auge of the same. But as for the Moon, she is said to be
Occidentall, Vespertine, and to follow the Sun all the time that she is in her
increase. Now you have to understand, that the rising and going down of the
fixed stars, as well Matutine as Vespertine, is twofold, that is, true and
apparent. The Matutine rising is said to be true, when the star rises
together with the Sun in one self point of the Eclipticke, and at one self
instant, at which time the star remains hidden under the beams of the Sun:
but such Matutine rising is said to be apparent, when the star having been
hidden a little before with the beams of the Sun, does get out from thence,
so as in the morning it may be seen, which chances when the Sun goes from
the star. Again, the Vespertine rising is said to be true, when the star is
right opposite in any part of the Eclipticke to the Sun, at the time of his
going down, and is so much elevated above the Horizon, as after the evening
twilight it may be seen: but such Vespertine rising is said to be apparent,
when the star in the evening after Sun setting, does shine, and begins to
appear in the West. Now the Matutine going down of any star is said to be
true, when the star goes down at such time as the Sun rises, and is in
the opposite point of the Eclipticke, to the Sun. But the Matutine going down
is said to be apparent, when the star at the rising of the Sun (which a
little before night have been seen) is now hidden under the beams of the
Sun. Moreover, the Vespertine going down of any star is said to be true,
when it goes down together with the Sun at one self instant. And such
Vespertine going down is said to be apparent, when the star at the going
down of the Sun is hidden, which a little before might have been seen, and
so continues hidden until the morning, until it may get from under the
beams of the Sun.

Out of this difference of rising and going down of the Planets may be
gathered these 6 rules here following.

1. First, that the three upper Planets, the Moon, and also the fixed stars
are subject to the true rising and setting as well Matutine as Vespertine; but
neither the apparent rising Vespertine, nor the apparent setting Matutine do
belong to any of them, but only to the Moon, which notwithstanding suffers
neither the apparent rising Matutine, nor the apparent rising Vespertine.

2. Secondly, though Venus and Mercury be subject to the apparent rising and
setting, as well Matutine as Vespertine, yet they cannot have the true Matutine
setting, or the true Vespertine rising.

3. Thirdly, of all the fixed stars and of the three upper Planets, their
true rising and setting Matutine, are before their apparent rising and setting
Matutine: but their true Vespertine rising and setting are after their apparent
rising and setting.

4. Fourthly, in the two inferior Planets, that is, Venus and Mercury, their
apparent Matutine and Vespertine rising are after their true Matutine and
Vespertine setting; but their apparent Matutine and Vespertine setting are
before their true Matutine and Vespertine rising.

5. Fifthly, the apparent Matutine rising of the Moon does follow her true
Matutine rising, and contrary her apparent Matutine setting, does go before
her true Matutine setting.

6. Sixthly, it is meet that there be some distance of space betwixt any star
and the Sun, whereby they should either appear to be out of the beams of
the Sun, or else to be hidden under the Sun.

And this distance is not of like quantity in every star, but varieth
according to the greatness or littleness of the star, for the greater and
more lightsome that the star is, the lesser time it stays under the beams of
the Sun. And the limits of the quantity of distance that do belong to every
star, as well to the fixed stars as to the Planets, are to be found in a
great circle, passing both through the body of the Sun, and also through the
pole of the Horizon. For to every limit the Astronomers do appoint his proper
arch of quantity, called of them the arch of vision.

Define what that arch is.
THe Arch of Vision, is that portion of the Vertical circle that is
comprehended betwixt the Horizon and the Sun, at such time as the star
first begins to appear, or else cease to be seen: which arches of vision
in fixed stars are greater or lesser, according to the magnitude of the said
stars, for to those stars, that be of the first bigness, they make the
arch of vision to contain 12 degrees, and to those of the second bigness 13
degrees, and to those of the third bigness 14 degrees, and to those of the
fourth bigness 15 degrees, and to those of the fifth bigness, 16 degrees, and
to those of the sixth bigness 17 degrees, and to the least fixed stars of all,
they appoint 18 degrees, which 18 degrees is the beginning as well of the day
light in the morning, as of the twilight in the evening: for when the Sun is
departed from the Horizon 18 degrees, either upward or downward, it begins
to wax day light in the morning, or twilight in the evening. Now as touching
the quantity of the said arch of vision belonging to every one of the five
Planets, they appoint to Saturn 11 degrees, to Jupiter 10 degrees, to Mars 11
degrees,. to Venus 5 degrees, and to Mercury 10 degrees: so as by knowing the
degree of the Ecl^pticke, wherewith any star rises or goes down, and also
the arch of vision, together with the angle of section, whereas the Eclipticke
and Horizon do cross one another in one self part, you shall know what time
the star spends in his rising or setting. And for the better understanding
of the said arch of vision, Maginus sets down this figure here following,
together with the description thereof, by help of certain letters therein
contained*

The figure showing the arch of vision.
THis figure as you see consists of two whole circles being of like
greatness, and also it contains the portion of a great circle. The whole
circle, marked with G E C, signifies the Horizon, whose pole or Zenith is
marked with the letter A: and the other whole circle, marked with the letters F
E D, signifies the Eclipticke, whose pole is marked with the letter B: and the
letter D shows the place of the Sun, being hidden beneath the Horizon. And
imagine the place of the star his appearing or departing to be in C, in the
very Horizon it self. Now the portion of the great circle, drawn through the
Vertical point of the Horizon, and also through the body of the Sun, is
marked with the letters A C D. And the arch C D is the arch of vision. But now
you have to understand, that the Moon observes not like law or order of hi^
appearing, after that she has been in Conjunction with the Sun. For though
the ancient Astronomers, as Theon, Alexandrinus, Alfraganius, Albategnus, and
others, do appoint to her arch of vision twelve degrees of the Aequinoctiall,
yet that is not always certain, but sometime more, and sometime less, since
the Moon does show her self sometime sooner and sometime later after her
Conjunction with the Sun, and that for three causes or respects, first by
reason of the inclination of the Zodiake to the Horizon, for whilst she is in
the ascending half of the Zodiake, which is from the beginning of Capricorn to
the end of Gemini, which is the half of long discension, she appears sooner
above the Horizon, than when she is in the other half of short discension,
which is from Cancer to Capricorn, because the Moon goes down later and not
before that the Sun be deeply hidden under the Horizon, making thereby a
greater twilight. The second cause is the latitude of the Moon from the
Ecliptic, for the more North latitude she has, the more slowly she goes
down, and thereby is the sooner seen, and specially to those that dwell
betwixt the Tropicke of Cancer, and the circle Artique. The third cause is the
swiftness of her true moving, for in her swift moving she is sooner seen than
in her slow moving. And when all those three causes do concur, it is
possible that she may be seen the selfsame day that the change is, albeit
that seldom chances, and that only in those places, whose latitude is very
far Northern. But if two of the foresaid causes do concur, then she may
be seen the next day after her Conjunction with the Sun: if there be no more
but one cause, then she is commonly seen the third day after the change. But
if she be in the descending half of the Zodiake, and have therewith South
latitude, and is slow of gate, there may pass four days before she
appears. Here also it is meet to speak of the diversity of her shape,
according as she is distant from the Sun, as well in her increase as
decrease: for during her increase, she follows the Sun, and turns her
horns from the Sun toward the East, and her lightsome part to the Sun,
and rises above the Horizon immediately after the Sun is set. But during her
decrease, which is from the full unto the change, she goes before the Sun,
and turns her horns toward the West, and rises in the morning before the
Sun. And as for the diverse names which she has both in Greek and Latin,
according to her diverse aspects to the Sun, are plainly set down before in a
table made by Reinholdus, which table immediately follows the third figure
belonging to the Theorique of the Moon; and therefore I would wish you to
resort thereunto, because I think it superfluous to repeat it again here.
Notwithstanding lo here the figure which is commonly used to show the diverse
shapes of her light, as well in her increase as decrease.

The fourth general kind of passions of the Planets, that do^ chance by
comparing their mouings unto the globe of the earth.
But you have to understand, that the passions rising of this comparison, are
not so properly incident to all the Planets, as to the Moon; because that the
greatness of the earth is not to be esteemed in respect of the other Planets,
or at the least not with any great sensibilitie or affection.

Show what passions the Moon has to the earth, or the earth to the Moon?
THese three here following: for first the greatness of the earth does not
suffer the true place of the Moon to be all one with her visible place.

Secondly, the earth sometime takes away the light of the Sun from the
Moon, and so causes her to be eclipsed.

Thirdly, the Moon with her apparent magnitude takes away the light of the
Sun, causing the same in some parts of the earth to be eclipsed. And hereof
depends the whole doctrine of the Eclipses, whereof we shall treat hereafter.

In the mean time show what is the true place, and also what is the visible
place of the Moon, or of any other star?
THe true place of the Moon or of any other star, is apoint in the outermost
heaven, determined by a right line being drawn from the very center of the
earth through the body of the Moon or star, unto the said outermost heaven.
And the visible place to our sight, is a point in the outermost heaven,
determined by a right line passing through the body of the Moon or star from
our eye unto the said heaven, whilst we stand upon the upper face of the earth
to behold the star. And the distance or portion of circle contained betwixt
those two points, is called in Greek Paralaxis, which in English may be called
the diversity of Aspects. All which things you may see plainly expressed in
this figure following.

THis figure as you see is made like a Quadrant: the nether right line whereof,
commonly called the Base, signifies the Horizon, and the perpendicular right
line falling upon the same, and making therewith a right angle, is the axletree
of the Horizon: and the said right angle, marked with the letter A, signifies
the center of the earth, whose half globe, made like a half circle, is drawn
upon the said center, and the short line, marked with the letters A B,
signifies the semidiameter of the earth, and the letter F signifies the
Zenith, from which F to G is drawn the arch of the Quadrant, signifying here
the Vertical circle. And you have to understand, that the right line that is
drawn from A through the body of the Moon, marked with the letter C unto the
point D, set down in the arch of the Quadrant or Vertical circle, shows the
true place of the Moon: and the right line drawn from B, through the body of
the Moon unto the point of the foresaid arch, marked with E, shows the
apparent place of the Moon visible to our sight from the upper face of the
earth: and the little arch contained betwixt D and E, is the Parallax or
diversity of Aspects. And you have to note, that the apparent or visible place
of the Moon is always lower in the heaven, than her true place, unless the
Moon do chance to be in the right line of the Zenith, for then there is no
Parallax at all, because both the lines and places do concur and meet in one,
as the two lines A B and B F do show, making both one self line: and the
further that the Moon is distant from the earth, the lesser is the Parallax,
and the nigher that she is to the earth, the greater Parallax she has. But
the true quantity of her Parallax in every place is to be learned by the
Prutenicall tables. And you have to understand, that the Astronomers do make
the Parallax of the Moon to be threefold, that is, first simple, then
according to longitude, and thirdly according to latitude. For if you have
only respect to the Vertical circle, then it is said to be simple, which is
before defined: but if you have respect to the Zodiake, then it is said to be
sometime according to longitude, and sometime according to latitude.

What is the Parallax according to longitude?
IT is an arch of the Eclipticke, intercepted or contained betwixt two great
circles drawn through the poles of the said Eclipticke; so as the one circle
does pass through the true place of the Planet, and the other great circle
passes through the apparent or visible place of the said Planet.

What is the Parallax according to latitude?
IT is an arch of a great circle, falling perpendicularly upon the Eclipticke,
and is drawn either through the true place, or else through the apparent and
visible place of the Moon, which arch is intercepted betwixt two circles,
paralels to the Eclipticke, whereof the one passes through the true place, and
the other through the apparent place of the Moon. For the better understanding
of all which things, it shall be necessary to set down here once again the
Quadrant before described, together with his proper letters of signification;
and then to add to the said Quadrant the Eclipticke line, and also the two
circles which are paralels to the same; and thirdly, the two circles that are
drawn from the pole of the Zodiake, so as the one may pass through the true
place, and the other through the apparent place of the Moon: all which things
this figure plainly shows.

A figure showing all the three kinds of Paralaxes.
The description of the figure.
FIrst the Quadrant of this figure, together with his former letters, do show
the simple Parallax, otherwise called of some the mixed Parallax, because it
comprehends both the other two Parallaxes, unto which Quadrant is added first
the Eclipticke line, divided into degrees, and is signified by the letters I H:
the arch whereof, marked with K L, intercepted betwixt the true and apparent
place of the Moon, shows the Parallax according to longitude: then the two
circles, Paralels to the Eclipticke, which are marked with the letters N M, and
Q P, through which two Paralels, and also through the Eclipticke are drawn
from the pole of the Zodiake, marked with S, two great circles, whereof the one
passes through the true place of the Moon, marked with S D R, and the other
passes through the apparent place of the Moon, marked with S O E: so as each
of the arches, intercepted betwixt the foresaid Paralels, that is to say,
either D R or O E, signifies the Parallax according to latitude; and the
Diagonall arch, marked with the letters D E, do show the simple or mixed
Parallax.

How the two Parallaxes of longitude and latitude are to be compared together.
TO do this, it is first necessary to know what the 90 degree of the Moon is,
which is a point in the Eclipticke, dividing that semicircle of the Eclipticke,
which is above the Horizon, into two equal Quadrants, and is in the very
midst of the said semicircle betwixt East and West: and this point is readily
found by help of a celestial globe, in manner and form following. For first
having set the globe at our latitude, which is 52, suppose the Moon to be in
the first point of Taurus: here if you bring that point to the mouable
Meridian, you shall find, that the 17 of Leo then rises above the Horizon, and
that the 17 of Aquarius goes down beneath the Horizon, which is the one half
of the Eclipticke; of which half, by counting 90 degrees from the East point,
that is, from the 17 of Leo, and so forward, you shall find, that the 17 of
Taurus is the middle point or 90 degree, and the same to be nigher to the South
than to the East. Now how to compare together the two foresaid Parallaxes,
these five rules following do show.

1. First, if the Moon be in the 90 degree of the Eclipticke above the Horizon,
then there is no Parallax of longitude, but only of latitude.

2. Secondly, when the Eclipticke passes through the Zenith, there is no
Parallax of latitude, but only of longitude.

3. Thirdly, when the Eclipticke passes not through the Zenith, the two
foresaid Parallaxes shall be differing one from another, and shall not fall one
into another.

4. Fourthly, to those that have more latitude than 30 degrees, the Moon
always appears more to the South, because her Parallaxes do always fall
more Southerly.

5. Fifthly, the Moon from her rising until she come to the 90 degree,
appears more Eastward: but from the 90 degree to her setting, she appears
more Westward, as the globe plainly shows.

How to know whether the Moon be in the 90 degree, or not.
YOu shall know this by observing the horns of the Moon, for if both the tips
of the horns of the Moon do rightly hang one over another by a perpendicular
line, then the Moon is in the 90 degree of the Ecliptic above the Horizon:
but if the upper horn do more incline to the East than the nether horn does,
then the Moon is short of the 90 degree. But if the upper horn be more to the
West, then the Moon is past the 90 degree.

And here I end with the description of the Parallax, and all the kinds
thereof: minding now to treat of the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, which are
meet to be accounted amongst the cheifest Passions of these two Planets.

Of the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, and first of the Moon.
THough this word Eclipse may be generally taken for the hiding or darkening of
any star from our sight, yet here it is cheefely to be referred to the Eclipse
of the Sun or Moon, which is the depriving of their light from the sight of
us that dwell here upon the earth: but first we will treat of the Eclipse of
the Moon, and show how and when it chances. The Moon having no light of it
self, but only from the Sun, is never eclipsed, but when the earth is
betwixt her and the Sun, which cannot chance, but when the Moon is at the
full, and diametrally opposite to the Sun: and also when such Opposition is
either in the head or tail of the Dragon, or somewhat nigh thereunto, which are
nothing else but two sections of two circles, that is, the Eclipticke and the
deferent of the Moon, cutting one another in two opposite points, otherwise
called the two Nodes, which are before described in the Theorique of the Moon,
and are also plainly declared in the first part of my sphere, chap. 15. But
for so much as there be many other needful things to be known touching those
two Eclipses, I mind here to treat thereof more at large.

And first of the Eclipse of the Moon, showing first the causes why her
eclipse is not always after one manner.

Secondly, what shape the shadow of the earth has at the time of her Eclipse,
and how many kinds of shadows there be.

Thirdly, how many ways she may be said to be eclipsed, either totally or in
part.

Fourthly, which be the bounds, within which she being at the full, may be
eclipsed.

Fifthly, how many points or digits she may be eclipsed.

Sixthly, what things are to be considered touching the durance or continuance
of her Eclipse, and how they are defined. And lastly, at what part the Moon
begins to be eclipsed, and from what part her light is to her again
restored.

The causes why the Eclipse of the Moon is not always after one manner, but
variable as well in magnitude as in continuance, are these four here following.

1. The first cause is the unequal latitude of the Moon, for sometime her
latitude is very little or nothing at all, and then is her eclipse greater in
magnitude, and longer in continuance: and sometime her latitude is so great,
that she comes but a very little within the shadow of the earth, and thereby
loses but a small portion of her light: and sometimes she comes not within
the compass of the shadow of the earth at all, and so she is not eclipsed.
For this is a general rule, that when the latitude of the Moon, at the time
of the true Opposition of the Moon and Sun is lesser than the sum of the
two semidiameters, that is, of the shadow and of the Moons body, being added
together, there will be an Eclipse of the Moon. And the greater and more that
the excess of those two semidiameters of the Moon and of the shadow is than
her latitude, the greater and longer will the Eclipse be. And if the sum of
those two semidiameters be just equal unto the latitude of the Moon, then
she shall only touch the shadow, and so pass without any Eclipse.

2. The second cause of the change or variable shape of the eclipse of the
Moon, is the unequal thickenesse of the shadow of the earth: for the higher
that the shadow of the earth arises, the more narrow it grows, ending with a
sharp point, because the body of the Sun is greater than the body of the
earth, and therefore the shadow cannot be of any other shape than Conicall:
for there be three kinds of shadows, that is, Conicall, Cylindricall, and
Calathoidall. The shadow Conicall is that which ends with a sharp point.
The Cylindricall is of like bigness euerywhere, like a round pillar. And the
Calathoidall shadow, the further it extends, the greater it is, like a cup or
bowl, that is narrow at the bottom and broad at the brim; of which shape that
shadow takes his name, for Calathos in Greek is as much to say as a cup: as
these three figures do plainly show.

Conicall. Cylindricall. Calathoidall.
ANd it is to be noted, that when the Moon is in the lower part of her
Epicicle near unto the opposite Auge thereof, her Eclipse continues longer
than it does when she is near unto the Auge of her said Epicicle.

3. The third cause is the variable thickenesse of the shadow which the earth
yields, according as the Sun is either in the Auge or opposite Auge of his
Excentrick, as you may easily perceive by this figure following, consisting of
three circles and certain right lines.

IN which figure, each one of the two upper circles signifies the body of the
Sun: and the little circle made half black, signifies the body of the
earth. Suppose then the point C in the upper circle to signify the center of
the Suns body, being in his Auge: and the point F in the second circle to be
the center of his body, being in the opposite Auge of his Excentrique: and
suppose the letters H G to be the diameter of the earth: and the letter I to be
the center of the earth. Here you see, that when the Sun is in C, the shadow
extends further with his sharp point, than when the Sun is in F; for then
the foresaid shadow ends at the point L, and so the shadow is shorter and
narrower. For if the outermost lines A G, and B H, touching the earth, be
drawn out in length, they will meet in the point K, making the shadow to be G
H K, whose axletree is the middle line I K, determined by the letters C I K.
But if the two right lines D G and E H be drawn out, they will meet in the
point L, so as the axletree of the shadow shall be I L, which is shorter than
the axletree I K: and therefore the Moon being in the beginning of her Eclipse
in the point M, and having to pass to N, finds the shadow to be thicker
when the Sun is in the Auge of his Excentrique, than when he is in the
opposite Auge thereof, and thereby the Eclipse of the Moon is then both
greater, and continues longer. To know the exact quantity of such shadow at
any time is to be learned by the Prut^nicall tables.

4. The fourth cause of the variety of her Eclipses is her unequal moving in
her true motion, either swift or slow, for when she is in her swift motion, the
continuance of her Eclipse must needs be shorter than when she is in her slow
motion. And to know her hourly motion, either mean or true, is to be found by
the Prutenicall tables.

But now though her Eclipse be thus variable, as you see, yet such variety may
be brought into two chief heads, that is, when she is said to be totally, or
partly, eclipsed; whereof we come now to speak.

The total Eclipse of the Moon is twofold, that is, either without any
continuance of time, or else with some continuance of time. In the former, so
soon as she has lost her whole light, she presently begins to recover the
same again: but in the latter, she being wholly eclipsed, the same continues
some quantity of time. The first way chances when the latitude of the Moon
and the semidiameter of her body being both added together, the sum thereof
is equal unto the semidiameter of the earth, as this figure plainly shows.

The first figure belonging to the Eclipse of the Moon.
IN which figure, the great black circle signifies the shadow of the earth,
and the three lesser circles being all of like bigness, each of them
represents the body of the Moon: and what the right lines do signify, the
letters do show: for the letters B D do represent the semidiameter of the
shadow of the earth, when the Moon is eclipsed: and B K shows the latitude
of the Moon from the Eclipticke, which Eclipticke is marked with the letters A
C. Now K D signifies the semidiameter of the Moons body, and the letter I
shows the center of her body in the beginning of her Eclipse, and the letter
H the center of her body at the end of her Eclipse. And the right line I K H
signifies the way of the Moon during the time of her Eclipse. Here for so much
as the two semidiameters D K, and K B, being both added together, are equal
unto B D, which is the semidiameter of the shadow, you may perceive, that the
Moon being in the point I, began to loose her light by little and little,
until she came to the point K, and there was wholly darkened, from whence she
presently began again without any stay to recover her light, until she came to
the point H, whereas she is fully restored again to her light.

The second kind of total Eclipses of the Moon, is when she is wholly
eclipsed, and the same continues some quantity of time, which always
happens when the semidiameter of the shadow of the earth in the place of the
Eclipse, is greater than the latitude of the Moon and of her bodily
semidiameter being both added together: as this second figure next following
plainly shows.

The second figure belonging to the Eclipse of the Moon.
IN which figure, suppose the semidiameter of the shadow of the earth in the
place of the Eclipse to be the line B K, and the line B D to be the latitude
of the Moon at the time of the middle of the Eclipse from the Eclipticke,
marked with the letters A C, and the line R D to be the semidiameter of the
Moon, and H I to be the way of the Moon in the time of her darkness, and I to
be the place of the beginning of her Eclipse, and H the ending of the Eclipse,
and M her place when she is wholly darkened, and L her place when she begins
to recover her light again. Now you see, that when she comes to the point M,
she is wholly eclipsed, like as she is also when she comes to the point L,
and because she spends some quantity of time in going from M to L, and is
wholly darkened, therefore is this called a Total Eclipse with continuance.
Thus much touching the Total Ecllipse of the Moon, now we will speak of the
Partial Eclipse of the Moon. The Partial Eclipse is when some part of the
Moon is darkened, and not the whole: and of this Partial Eclipse there are
three sorts. The first is, when half of the Moons diameter is darkened, and
the other half keeps still her light, which happens when the latitude of
the Moon is equal unto the semidiameter of the shadow of the earth in the
place of the Eclipse, as you may perceive by this third figure next following.

The third figure belonging to the Eclipse of the Moon.
IN which figure, B D signifying the latitude of the Moon from the Eclipticke
A C, is just equal unto the semidiameter of the shadow of the earth, marked
also with B D.

The second sort of partial Eclipse of the Moon, is when a lesser part than
the semidiameter of the Moon is darkened, which happens when her latitude is
more than the semidiameter of the shadow of the earth, as you may see by this
fourth figure.

The fourth figure belonging to the Eclipse of the Moon.
IN which figure B K signifies the semidiameter of the shadow, and B D
signifies the latitude of the Moon: now for that B D is more than B K, you see
that there is but a little of her light taken away by the shadow of the earth.

The third sort of Partial Eclipses is, when more than the semidiameter of the
Moon is darkened: which happens when the latitude of the Moon is less than
the semidiameter of the shadow of the earth, as you may see by this fifth
figure.

The fifth figure belonging to the Eclipse of the Moon.
IN which figure, B D signifying the latitude of the Moon, is less than B K,
representing here the semidiameter of the shadow, and therefore more than the
semidiameter of the Moon is eclipsed.

How to know the bounds or limits, whereby is easily known what kind of
Eclipse of the Moon will happen when she is at the full.
THe limits are most certainly known by the latitude of the Moon at the time
of her true opposition to the Sun: for if you find the latitude of the Moon
by the Prutenicall tables, or otherwise, to be more than the sum of the
semidiameters of the shadow and of the Moon being added together, then there
will be no Eclipse at that full, but if the latitude of the Moon be less than
the sum of the two said semidiameters added together, you may be sure, that
the Moon will be eclipsed at her full: so that the terms or bounds of the
Eclipses are known by comparing the latitude of the Moon with the sum of
the foresaid two semidiameters being added together. The least sum of which
two semidiameters, that is to say, of the Moon and of the shadow of the earth
is i53^ ii53^ which is, when the Moon is in the Auge of her Epicicle, and the
Sun in the opposite Auge of his Excentrique, and that in his least
excentricitie. But the greatest sum of the said apparent diameters that can
be, is one degree, i7^ ii5^ which happens when the Moon is in the opposite
Auge of her Epicicle, and the Sun in the Auge of his Excentrique, and that in
his greatest excentricitie. And hereof you may gather these three rules.

First, if the latitude of the Moon at the time of her true opposition to the
Sun be less than i53^ ii53^ she must needs be eclipsed.

Secondly, if her latitude be more than i67^ ii52^ she cannot be eclipsed at
the Full.

Thirdly, if her latitude be more than i53^ ii5^ and less than i67^ ii52^ then
she may happen to be eclipsed, but not necessarily. And these bounds or limits
may also be determined by the distance of the Moon from any of the two Nodes,
that is, from the head or tail of the Dragon, which distance is never less
than 10 degrees, i22^ neither at any time greater than 13 degrees, i5^ which
bounds or limits are set down by Ptolomey thus. If the distance of the Moon
at the time of her true Opposition from either of the two Nodes, be less than
12 degrees, i12^ or if the said distance of the Moon from either of the said
Nodes at the time of her mean Opposition, be less than 15 degrees, and i12^
(the said distance being reckoned either according to the succession of the
signs, or contrary to the succession of the signs, upon the Eclipticke) then
the Moon may be eclipsed.

Of the twelve Digits, whereinto the body of the Moon is wont to be divided,
to know thereby how much at any Full she is eclipsed.
THough that the diameters of the Moon and of the shadow may be accounted by
degrees and minutes, yet notwithstanding, the magnitude or greatness of her
Eclipses is usually reckoned by digits, or inches, by dividing the diameter of
her body into 12 equal parts, because her diameter appears to our sight as it
were a foot in length: and therefore as the foot is divided into 12 inches, so
is the diameter of the Moon supposed to be also divided into 12 parts, which
parts are called digits or points, and by them is the greatness of her Eclipse
determined, and therefore they be called Eclipticall digits or points. And
although that the diameter of the Moon is divided but into 12 digits, yet
nevertheless the Eclipse of the Moon may sometimes happen to be very near 23
digits, by reason of the thickness of the shadow of the earth, whose
semidiameter sometime exceeds the diameter of the Moon, and such excess is
wont to be divided also into 12 such parts as is the diameter of the Moon, and
so the Moon may be eclipsed more than 12 points, as you may more plainly
perceive by this sixth figure next following.

The sixth figure belonging to the Eclipse of the Moon.
IN which figure, the letters D K represents the semidiameter of the shadow,
and R S the diameter of the Moon at the time of her greatest darkness. Now
supposing the said R S to be divided into 12 equal parts, the said 12 parts
are called the Eclipticall digits: and for that some part of the semidiameter
of the shadow, namely, S K, extends further than R S, which is the diameter
of the Moon, the overplus S K is supposed also to be divided in this Eclipse
into certain equal parts, namely into three such parts, as the diameter of the
Moon contains 12, so as the eclipticall digits in this Eclipse are 15: for
you may easily perceive, that if the semidiameter of the Moon were longer by
three digits than it is, yet it might be wholly eclipsed: and as you see the
number of eclipticall digits in this Eclipse to be 15: even so the number of
the said digits may amount sometime to be 22 digits and 51 minutes. For you may
remember that I said before, that the sum of the semidiameter of the Moon
and of the shadow being added together, may sometimes happen to be i69^ ii52^
when the Sun is in his greatest excentricitie, and in the Auge of his
Excentrique, and the Moon in the opposite Auge of her Epicicle: at which time
the semidiameter of the Moon, is i17 ii49^ and so consequently her whole
diameter is i35^ ii38^ then say by the rule of proportion, if i35^ ii38^ are
equal unto 12 digits, what shall i67^ ii52^ be equal unto? so shall you find
the fourth proportional number to be 22 digits and 51 minutes: and this is the
greatest number of Eclipticall digits, that any Eclipse of the Moon can have.
And the more Eclipticall digits that any Eclipse has, the longer is the time
of durance or continuance thereof.

Of the continance of the Moons Eclipse, what it is, and how many things are
wont by the Astronomers to be considered therein.
THe continuance of the Eclipse is that space of time which she spends in
going from the very beginning of the Eclipse to the midst of the same,
whereas she is most darkened. And these five things are wont therein to be
considered, that is, the minutes of Incidence, the minutes of the half
continuance, the time of Incidence, the time of half continuance, and the
half continuance it self.

1. And first you have to note, that the minutes of Incidence are accounted in
partial Eclipses after one way, and in total Eclipses with continuance
another way: for in partial Eclipses and also in total Eclipses without
continuance, the minutes of Incidence are said to be the arch of the Moons way
which she makes in her moving of longitude from the beginning of her Eclipse
to the midst thereof, where she is fully darkened, as appears by the third,
fourth, and fifth figures of partial Eclipses before set down: in all which,
the point L signifies the place of the Moon at the beginning of her Eclipse,
and the point D the place of the Moon at the middle of her Eclipse. Now the
arch of her way from L to D, is called the minutes of Incidence, for so long
her light decreaseth by little and little, until so much be taken away, as can
be in any of those partial Eclipses. But if the Eclipse be total, without any
continuance, as in the first figure, then the way of her motion in going from
the point I unto the point K, where she is wholly darkened, is called the
scruples of Incidence. But if the total Eclipse have any continuance, then the
minutes or scruples of Incidence are that portion of the Ecliptic, through
which the Moon goes from the very beginning of her Eclipse, until the time
that she be wholly eclipsed, as in the second and last figures the letter I
signifies the point, in which the Moon is at the beginning of her Eclipse, and
M the point in which she is fully darkened: and the arch I M is called the
minutes or scruples of Incidence, and these minutes in the end of the Eclipse
are called minutes of repletion, as in the third, fourth, and fifth figures, the
arch of the Moons way, namely D M, or K H in the first figure, or L H in the
second and last figures, do show: which minutes of repletion are reckoned from
the very time of the beginning of her clearing unto the time that she has
fully recovered her whole light: and the minutes or scruples of repletion are
equal to the minutes or scruples of Incidence.

2. The second thing which is considered in accounting of the continuance of
Eclipses, is the scruples of half continuance, which is nothing else but the
arch which the Moon makes in going from the Sun, from the time of her whole
darkness unto the very middle of the Eclipse: from which middle Eclipse, the
Moon going still forward until she begin again to recover her light, the
said arch is called the scruples of Emersion, as in the second and last figures
the arch M D does show, whereof M represents the place in which she loses
her whole light, until she come to the point D, which signifies her place
when she is in the middle of her Eclipse, or in her diametrall Opposition to
the Sun. And this is called the scruples of half continuance: but the arch
of her motion from D to L, where she begins again to receive her light, is
called the minutes of Emersion, and these minutes of Emersion are equal unto
the scruples of half continuance, as the scruples of Repletion were equal
unto the minutes of Incidence.

3. The third thing to be considered in accounting the Eclipse of the Moon, is
the time of Incidence: which is nothing else but the very time which the Moon
spends in going of the minutes of Incidence, or the time of Incidence is that
portion of time which the Moon spends in moving from the beginning of the
Eclipse unto the point where she is most darkened (if the Eclipse be partial)
as in the third, fourth, and fifth figures, the time which the Moon spends in
her moving from the point L, where she begins to be eclipsed unto the point
D, where her darkness is greatest, is called the time of Incidence. Likewise
if the Eclipse be total, the time which she spends in moving from the
beginning of the Eclipse, unto the point in which she is wholly obscured, as in
the first figure the time which she spends unto her moving from the point I
unto the point K, so the time which she spends in going from I to D, in the
second and last figures is called the time of Incidence.

4. The fourth thing to be considered, is the time of half continuance, which
is that quantity of time which the Moon spends in her moving from the
point in which she loses her whole light, unto the point of the middle
Eclipse, as in the second and last figures the time which she spends in going
from the point M to the point D, is called the time of half continuance. And
the time which she spends in her moving from D to L, in the said second and
last figures is called the time of her Emersion: which time is equal unto the
time of half continuance, saving that the variable motion of the Moon being
swifter in the one than in the other, may make a little difference, which in so
short a time cannot be sensible. And in like manner, the time of Repletion is
equal unto the time of Incidence, unless the variety of her motion do make
a little insensible difference.

5. The last thing that is to be considered in the continuance of the Eclipse,
is the half time of durance, which is nothing else but the time which the Moon
spends in going from the point in which she began to be eclipsed, unto the
point of the middle Eclipse: and this time is equal to the time of Incidence
in Partial Eclipses, as in the third, fourth, and fifth figures, the time
which she spends in going from L to D, is the time of half durance: and
likewise the time which she spends in her moving from I to K in the first
figure, is the time of half durance: but if the Eclipse be total with
continuance, then is the time of half durance equal unto the time of
Incidence, and also to the time of half continuance, being both added together.

Furthermore, you have to note, that the Eclipse of the Moon does always
begin on the East side of her body (I call that the East side which is toward
the East) for since that her motion is from West to East, and that very swift,
in respect of the Sun or of the shadow of the earth, it must needs follow,
that the East side of her body first touches the shadow in the beginning of
her Eclipse, and so continues her moving through the said shadow, leaving the
same behind her on the West side of her body. And although that this be true
in all Eclipses of the Moon, yet in partial Eclipses, if the latitude (...)
if the Moon be North, then is the South part of her body darkened, but if her
latitude be South, then is the North part of her body darkened. And note, that
whenever any Eclipse does happen the said Eclipse may be seen of all them,
above whose Horizon she is in the time of her Eclipse, and that at one self
instant or moment of time, be it the beginning, middle, or ending of any such
Eclipse: but it is not so in the Eclipse of the Sun, neither can any other of
the Planers be eclipsed or darkened by the shadow of the earth, because the
same shadow reaches not so high as any of the three higher Planets are: and
as for Venus and Mercury, their place is always so nigh unto the place of the
Sun, as they cannot be eclipsed at any time.

Thus much touching the Eclipse of the Moon, and now I will speak of the
Eclipse of the Sun.

Of the Eclipse of the Sun, how and when it chances.
THe Eclipse of the Sun is nothing but the darkening or depriving of his
light from our sight, caused by the interposition of the body of the Moon
betwixt the body of the Sun and the body of the earth: and this Eclipse
never happens but when the Moon and the Sun are in a visible Conjunction.
For you have to note, that there be three kinds of Conjunctions, that is,
mean, true and visible, or apparent to our sight. What the mean and true
Conjunction is, has been before defined: and it is called a visible
Conjunction, when a right line being drawn from our eye or sight, passes
through the center of the Moon unto the center of the Sun, whereby the said
two Planets appear to our sight to be in one self degree (...), that is to
say, in one self point of the Eclipticke. For although that the center of the
Moon be betwixt the center of the Sun and the center of the earth at every
true Conjunction, and also near to any of the Nodes, yet perhaps it shall
appear no Eclipse to our sight, because the two Planets be not in a visible
Conjunction, as have been demonstrated before, when we did speak of the
Parallax, whereupon cheefely depends the knowledge of the Eclipses: neither
can the body of the Moon, being far lesser than the earth, possibly shadow
at any time all the earth: and the body of the Sun is far bigger than either
of them both, by reason whereof, the Eclipse of the Sun may chance to one
part of the earth, and not to another: neither can any Eclipse of the Sun or
Moon chance, but when those two Planets are either in the head or tail of the
Dragon, or else very nigh the same. All which things you shall better understand
by this figure here following.

The first figure belonging to the Eclipse of the Sun.
THis figure as you see consists of certain circles, both greater and
lesser, and of certain right lines: in which figure, the highest circle
signifies the body of the Sun, whose center is marked with the letter P:
and the middle lesser circle beneath that, made most part black, signifies
the body of the Moon eclipsed, whose center is marked with the letter C, and
the diameter thereof is marked with the letters L K: and the lowest lesser
circle represents the body of the earth, whose center is marked with the
letter A: and the two great circles, crossing one another in two points
opposite, that is to say, in C, where also would be set the caracter of the
Dragons head; and in the other cross point opposite, is set the caracter of the
Dragons tail; of which two circles, the one is called the deferent of the
Moon, and the other the Eclipticke. Now what the right lines do signify, the
letters do show: for the two outermost right lines, F H, and G I, do signify
the outermost beams of the Sun, which do fall upon the earth: but the two
inner lines F L, and G K, do signify the beams of the Sun which do fall
upon the Moon: which two lines being drawn out in length, do concur and
meet in the point A, representing the center of the earth, and thereby do make
the cone to be F A G, the axle^^^e of which cone, is the right line P A: and
the little shaddowed cone, marked with the letters L K A, signifies the cone
of the Moons shadow at the time of a true Conjunction, when the Sun is
eclipsed; the axle^ee of which little cone is signified by the line C A: and
the two lines, K E, and L D, do signify the outermost sides of the Moons
shadow, falling upon the earth in the two points D and E. Now hereby you may
perceive, that those people which have their dwelling betwixt D and E, are
wholly deprived of the light of the Sun: but those that dwell betwixt E and I,
or betwixt D and H, do still retain the light of the Sun. Moreover, the
Sun is to some inhabitants of the earth totally eclipsed, and to some partly,
and to some nothing at all, as this figure next following does plainly show.

The sec^nd figure belonging to the Eclipse of the Sun, with the description
thereof.
THis figure as you see consists of three circles and certain right lines:
of which circles, the highest and greatest represents the body of the Sun,
whose center is marked with P: and the middle little circle, made almost all
black, signifies the body of the Moon, whose center is marked with the
letter C, and her semidiameter with C B, and her whole diameter with L K, and
the small upper portion of her body, made white, is that which is lightened by
the Sun, all the rest of her body being darkened. The third and lowest
circle being greater than that of the Moon, signifies the body of the earth,
whose center is marked with A, and the semidiameter thereof with A E. Now as
touching the signification of the right lines, the letters thereto belonging
do show: for the outermost lines marked with Q K, and O L, do signify the
outermost beams of the Sun that do fall upon the body of the Moon,
concurring or meeting in the point I, enclosing the Conicall shadow of the
Moon, marked with the letters L K I, the axletree of which Conicall shadow is
the middle line C I, for to those that dwell upon the earth under the point I,
the Sun is totally eclipsed, and to those that dwell under the point N, he is
partly eclipsed, and partly not, and to those that dwell betwixt N and H, he is
not eclipsed at all. Again, the Moon is not always right under the
Eclipticke line, as the Sun is, and therefore her shadow at the time of the
Eclipse cannot point to the center of the earth, as it does when she is in
either of the two Nodes: but sometime Northward and sometime Southward from the
center of the earth, according as her latitude is either Northerly or
Southerly: so likewise her said shadow after every true Conjunction will point
Eastward, and before a true Conjunction Westward.

And further you have to note, that the true and visible Conjunctions do never
happen together, except the true Conjunction of the Sun and Moon chance to
be in the 90 degree, which what it is, is before declared, for in the 90 degree
there is no Parallax at all. But in all other places, the true and visible
places do differ, and the visible Conjunction is before the true Conjunction,
if the said true Conjunction be in the East part of the Zodiake, that is,
betwixt the Sun rising and the 90 degree. But if the true Conjunction be in
the West part of the Zodiake, that is, betwixt the 90 degree and the Sun
setting, then the true Conjunction is before the visible Conjunction. And
generally, the further that the true Conjunction is from the 90 degree, the
greater is the difference betwixt the true Conjunction and the visible
Conjunction, which things are before fully declared, whereas I speak of the
Parallax, and by help of the celestial globe are easily perceived.

Of the variety of the Solar Eclipses, and why they be not always like, but
do differ as well in magnit^de as in time of continuance.
OF this variety there be four causes.

1. First, the unequal apparent latitude of the Moon: for the greater that
the latitude of the Moon is, the lesser and shorter is the Eclipse of the
Sun: but the lesser that her latitude is, the greater and longer is the
Eclipse of the Sun. For this is a general true rule, that if the apparent
latitude of the Moon at the time of the visible Conjunction be greater than
the sum of the two semidiameters of the Sun and of the Moon, being both
added together, then the Sun shall not be eclipsed at the visible
Conjunction: but if the apparent latitude of the Moon be less than the sum
of the two said semidiameters, being added together, then shall the Sun be
eclipsed at that visible Conjunction: and the greater that the difference
betwixt the sum of the two semidiameters, and the Moons latitude is, the
greater is the Eclipse of the Sun.

2. The second cause of the varieties of the Eclipse of the Sun, is the
unequal distance as well of the Sun as of the Moon, from the earth: for the
changing of their distances from the earth, makes the diameters of their
bodies to appear greater or lesser. For the nearer that they approach to the
earth, the greater do their diameters appear unto us: for when the Sun is in
the Auge of his Excentrique, and therewith in his greatest excentricitie, the
semidiameter of his shadow is i15 ii40 But if he be in his greatest
excentricitie, and in the opposite Auge of his Excentrique, then his
semidiameter is i17 ii2 which is greater than it was before by i1 ii22^ And if
the Sun be in his least excentricitie (as it is almost in these our days)
and also in his Auge, then his semidiameter is i15 ii49 but being in the
opposite Auge of his Excentrique, then his semidiameters is ii16^ i2 which is
greater than it was before by i1 ii3 Likewise, when the Moon is in her Auge,
whether it be at her Conjunction with the Sun, or at her Opposition to the
Sun, her semidiameter is but i15 ii0 but being in her opposite Auge, her
semidiameter will be i17 ii49 which is greater than it was before by i2 ii49
whereby it happens, that sometime the whole body of the Sun seems to be
darkened, and at other times but some part of his body, and that either at
some side thereof, or else in the very midst of his body, and then there
appears round about him a narrow bright circle, which we commonly call a
borrough, all the other part in the midst of his body being darkened.

3. The third cause of the variety of the Solar Eclipses, is the twofold
inequality of the Moons motion, whereof the first depends upon the motion
of her Epicicle, whereby she is sometimes swift, and sometimes slow of ga^e.
And the second inequality of her motion happens by reason of her Parallax,
which makes her motion to appear variable every hour, and thereby her
apparent motion is also sometime swift and sometimes slow. And it happens,
that not only the time of the continuance of the Eclipse alters, but also
the time of Incidence is made to be unequal unto the time of repletion.

4. The fourth cause of the inequality of the Suns Eclipses, is the small
quantity of the body of the Moon, in respect of the Sun, or of the Earth,
and the small distance of the Moon from the Earth: for by these two means
neither can the Solar Eclipses appear of a like bigness in all places in
which they may be seen, neither yet can the said Eclipses be seen at one time
in all places of the earth, as was showed before. Lastly, by these two means
it happens that the Eclipse of the Sun appears not at one self time in
diverse places, and it begins sooner to them which dwell Westward, than to
those which dwell Eastward, in such sort, as the said Eclipse of the Sun will
be ended in one place before it begin in another. And thus much touching the
causes of the variety of the Eclipses of the Sun.

Of the two special kinds of Solar Eclipses, that is, total and partial.
THe Total Eclipse is when the Sun is wholly darkened, or seems to us to
have lost his whole light, and this Eclipse is always without continuance,
which happens when the Moon has no apparent latitude at the time of the
visible Conjunction, as this figure plainly shows.

The third figure belonging to the Solar Eclipse.
IN which figure, suppose the letter A to be the center of the Suns body, and
the line A H to be the semidiameter of his body, and D B to be the Eclipticke
line, and A B to be the semidiameter of the circle, in which the Moon is at
the beginning and ending of the Eclipse, and the line F G to be the way of the
Moons motion, during the time of the Eclipse, crossing the line D B in the
point A, which point A may also signify the head or tail of the Dragon, and
the letter F signifies the South latitude, and G the North latitude: and the
point F does also signify the center of the Moon at the beginning, and G the
center of the Moon at the ending of the Eclipse, and the line R F or G S does
signify the semidiameter of the body of the Moon. Now you see, that the Moon
by her motion comes by little and little to shadow the light of the Sun
until she have moved from the point F, where the Eclipse began, unto the
point A, where his whole light is taken away; and then without any stay she
moves on forward from the point A unto G, where the Eclipse ends. And
although it falls out sometimes, that the Moon does shadow more than the
body of the Sun (which is very seldom or never, although it may so happen) yet
does the total darkness continue so little a time, as it is insensible: and
therefore the total Eclipse of the Sun is always without continuance.

Of the Partial Eclipse of the Sun.
THe Partial Eclipse of the Sun is when some part of the Suns light is
taken away, and not all his body darkened; and of this kind there are three
sorts.

1. The first is, when the semidiameter of the Sun is darkened: which
happens when the apparent latitude of the Moon is equal unto her apparent
semidiameter.

2. The second sort is when more than the semidiameter of the Sun is
darkened, which happens when the apparent latitude of the Moon is less than
the apparent semidiameter of her body.

3. The third, is when less than the semidiameter of the body of the Sun is
darkened, which happens when the apparent latitude of the Moon is greater
than the apparent semidiameter of her body. Of all which three kinds, I have
set an example in these three figures here following.

Three figures showing the three kinds of the Suns Partial Eclipses.
OF which figures, the first shows the first kind of Partial Eclipse, the
second figure shows the second kind, and the third figure shows the last
kind of Partial Eclipses. In every of which figures, the letter A signifies
the center of the Sun, and the semidiameter of his body is the right line A
B, and upon the center A is drawn a great circle, marked with the letters C S
D L, whereof the letter C signifies the North, D the South, L the West, and S
the East: unto which circle when the Moon comes on the West part, the
Eclipse of the Sun begins; and it ends when the Moon comes to the
said circle on the East side. And the right line S L signifies the Eclipticke
line, and the right line H I signifies the deferent of the Moon: and the
point marked with the letter E, signifies the place of the Moon at the
beginning of the Eclipse, and G her place at the ending of the Eclipse, and F
her place at the middle of the Eclipse, or at the time of her greatest
darkness: and the right line F V in the second figure is the semidiameter of
the Moon at the time of her greatest darkness. The caracters of the Nodes on
the East or West side of any of the foresaid figures do show what way the head
or tail of the Dragon does stand, and to which of the Nodes the Eclipse is
nearest.

Of the bounds or limits of the Solar Eclipses.
ANd now that you know the several kinds of Eclipses, it will not be hard to
judge which of them will happen at the time of any Eclipse of the Sun,
especially if you know the bounds or limits within which the Eclipse of the
Sun must needs be before he can be eclipsed: which bounds cannot be better
determined, than by the apparent latitude of the Moon; for if the said
latitude be more than the two semidiameters of the Sun and of the Moon being
both added together, it is impossible that the Sun should be eclipsed at that
Conjunction: but if the apparent latitude be less than the said two
semidiameters, then may the Sun be eclipsed: and the least sum of the two
semidiameters of the Sun and Moon that can be (which is when both the Sun
and Moon are in the Auges of their orbs, and the Sun in his greatest
excentricitie) is i30. ii40. and the greatest sum of the said two
semidiameters that can be, is but i34. ii1. from hence you may gather these
three rules here following.

1. First, if the apparent latitude of the Moon at the time of the visible
Conjunction be less than i30. ii40. it cannot be but that the Sun must be
eclipsed.

2. Secondly, if the apparent latitude of the Moon at the time of the visible
Conjunction be more than i30. ii40. and less than i34. ii31. it may be that
the Sun shall be eclipsed in some part at the time of the visible Conjunction.

3. Thirdly, if the apparent latitude of the Moon be more than i34. ii51. the
Sun cannot loose any of his light. But Ptolomey determines the said bounds of
the Solar Eclipses by the distance of the Moon from either of the two Nodes:
for if the Moon be distant from either of the Nodes 20 degrees, i40. toward
the North, or 11 degrees, i20. toward the South at the time of the mean
Conjunction, then it may fall out that the Sun shall be eclipsed: but if she
be further distant from the said Nodes at the time of the mean Conjunction,
then cannot the Sun be eclipsed. And note, that Ptolomey makes the North
bounds bigger than the Southern bounds, because of the Parallax. And this
distance from the Nodes may be reckoned either according to the succession or
contrary to the succession of the signs.

Of the Eclipticall digits belonging to the Solar Eclipses.
AS the Eclipticall digits of the Moon were 12, so likewise are there 12
Eclipticall digits of the Eclipse of the Sun; but the Eclipse of the Sun
can never exceed 12 digits and 15 minutes: for the greatest apparent
semidiameter of the Moon is but i17. ii49. and the least apparent semidiameter
of the Sun is i15. ii40. which two semidiameters if you add together, the
sum will be i33. ii29. Then having doubled the least semidiameter of the
Sun, which is i15. ii40. the sum will be i31. ii20. which is the least
apparent semidiameter of the Sun: then say by the rule of proportion, if i31.
ii20. be equal to 12 digits, to what or how much shall i33. ii29. be equal?
so shall you find the fourth proportional number to be very near 12 digits and
50 minutes: and this is the greatest number of Eclipticall digits that any
Eclipse of the Sun can have. And this may happen when the Sun is in the
Auge of his Excentrique, and in his greatest excentricitie: and the Moon in
her opposite Auge, and therewith insuch places as are situated within the
compass of the Moons shadow, the diameter of which shadow may at that time
be very near 280 miles in length of our English miles, or 70 Germane miles,
within which compass whosoever dwells, may loose the whole light of the
Sun at that Eclipse. And you shall know the number of the Eclipticall digits
by the 62 precept of the Prutenicall tables. And many times it may fall out,
that although the Moon haae no apparent latitude, yet the Eclipse of the Sun
will not be so great, for if the Moon be in her Auge, and the Sun in the
opposite Auge of his Excentrique, and therewith in his least excentricitie, the
number of the Eclipticall digits can be no more but 11 degrees, and 15 minutes,
so as the Sun will appear to have lost his light in the very midst; and round
about that Eclipse will appear a little circle as it were three quarters of an
inch in breadth. All which things touching the Eclipticall digits, will not be
hard to conceive, if you remember what was spoken of this matter in the
Eclipses of the Moon.

What things are to be considered touching the continuance of the Solar Eclipse.
IN accounting the continuance of the Eclipse of the Sun, the Astronomers do
only observe two things.

1. The first is the scruples of Incidence, which are nothing else but the way
or arch of the circle of the Moons deferent, in which she goes from the
beginning of the Eclipse unto the middle of the same: which in the three last
figures is signified by the line E F.

2. The second thing which they usually observe, is the time of Incidence,
which is nothing else but the quantity of time which the Moon spends whilst
she is in going of the said minutes of Incidence: both which two things you
shall easily find, as also the minutes of repletion, by the 63 precept of the
Prutenicall tables. And as the Eclipse of the Moon does begin on the East side
of her body and ends on the West side thereof, even so the Eclipse of the
Sun begins on the West side of his body, and ends on the East; which
happens by the motion of the Moon, which motion is from West to East: and if
the Eclipse of the Sun be partial, and the apparent latitude of the Moon be
North, then is the North side of the Sun eclipsed, and the South side
retains still his light: but if her apparent latitude be South, then is the
South side of the Sun darkened, and the North side keeps still his light.
And this is a general observation, that no Eclipse of the Sun is universal
(except that which was against nature at the death of Christ) but always
particular, that is, it may be seen in some few places, but not in all places
of the world: neither does it begin or end in all places at one self instant,
neither does it appear in all places of one self bigness, or of one shape,
but in one place is total, and in another place at the same time Partial, and
in other places again there appears no Eclipse at all. The causes of which
diversity have been before declared.

How to find out the quantities, increasing, decreasing, beginning, and ending
of the Suns Eclipses, without any offense of your eiesight.
Having learned by the Ephemerides, or by some other Almanacke at what time the
Eclipse shall be, resort to some tower or high loft, the higher the better, and
see that the place whereas you would make your observation, be without light,
and so dark, as you can possibly make it, leaving only a little hole or rift,
through which the beams of the Sun may streeke through: and upon the
pauement or on the wall that looks right against that hole or rift, behold
what light the Sun yields, for that light will represent the true shape of
the Sun at that present, and plainly show so much portion to be wanting from
the lightsome circle, as the Moon coming betwixt the Sun and the earth,
does take away from our sight. Wherefore if you divide the diameter of the said
lightsome circle into 12 parts or points, which the Astronomers do call
digits, you shall find out all the things above mentioned, without looking up
to the heaven.

The Methodicall doctrine of the Eclipses, set down by Reinoldus in his
Commentary upon Purbachius.
FIrst Ptolomey found out the true latitude of the Moon, and divided the same
from her apparent latitude, as he teaches in the 12 chapter of his fifth book:
for in the Eclipses of the Moon it is very necessary to have knowledge both
of her true latitude, and also of her apparent latitude, for the Eclipse of the
Sun without having knowledge of her apparent latitude, and of her Parallaxes,
can never be well foreknowne: and by this he did not only judge of other
things, but also by a Geometrical way found, that the greatest distance of the
Moon from the earth, she being either at the change or at the full, did contain
64 semidiameters of the earth, and one sixth part. Moreover, by other
observations he did know the proportions of the semidiameters, as well of the
Moons excentrique, and of her Epicicle, as also of her excentricitie. Then by
other observations he sought out the quantities of the apparent diameters of
the Sun, of the Moon, and of the shadow, as well at the new Moon, as at
the full, in manner and form following: for first by the help of an
instrument, having a Diopter, he found the Sun and Moon to be in one self
angle when she was most distant from the earth. Then he attributed to the
Moon two Eclipses, in the one whereof, when her latitude was i48. ii30. the
shadow darkened one quarter of her diameter: and in the other Eclipse, the
shadow darkened the one half of her diameter, when as her latitude was i40.
ii40. and in either of the Eclipses the Moon was very nigh to the height of
her Epicicle. Hereof it manifestly appeared, that a quarter of the Moons
diameter, when she was most distant from the earth, contained in heaven
according to our aspect, i57. ii0^. which being reckoned four times, do show
that the diameter of the Moon was at that time i31. ii20. whereunto the
observed diameter of the Sun was then equal: and the semidiameter of the
shadow in the later Eclipse did appear to be i40. ii40. for the center of the
Moons body did then touch the outermost brim of the shadow. Hereby it
likewise appears, that the diameter of the shadow has such proportion to
the diameter of the Moons body, as 13 has to 5, and keeps the selfsame
proportion in all other Eclipses of the Moon: and though it most manifestly
appears by this, that the diameter of the shadow does exceed in greatness
the diameter of the Moon, yet it follows not by and by thereof, that the
Moon is lesser than the earth. Now therefore Ptolomey by comparing according to
the doctrine of plain triangles, the semidiameters of the Moon and of the
shadow together with the distance of the said Moon, being measured by the
semidiameters of the earth, he found the semidiameter of the Moon only to
contain i17. ii^3. and the semidiameter of the shadow to contain i45. and
ii38. such like minutes, I say, as the semidiameter of the earth has 60. And
therefore it appears hereby, that either of the semidiameters, that is, of
the Moon, or of the shadow, is less than the semidiameter of the earth: for
the semidiameter of the earth is almost in like proportion to the semidiameter
of the shadow, as 4 is to 3, and being compared to the semidiameter of the
Moon, it is almost in such proportion, as 17 is to 5: whereof it follows
necessarily, that the shadow of the earth is Conicall, that is, round, growing
to a sharp point, and therefore the Sun must needs be greater than the
earth. Neither could any right judgment have been made touching the quantities
of the said three bodies, that is, the Sun, the Moon, and the earth, unless
that the Parallaxes of the Moon had first showed the distance of the Moon
from the earth, the said distance being measured by the semidiameters of the
earth. For if you suppose the distance betwixt the Moon and the earth to be 48
semidiameters of the earth, you shall find that the semidiameter of the shadow
will be altogether equal to the semidiameter of the earth, and so the shadow
shall be Cylindricall, that is to say, in all parts round like a pillar. And if
you suppose the said distance of the Moon from the earth to be greater, as to
be 170 semidiameters of the earth, then the semidiameter of the shadow (the
Moon being in Transit^) will contain two semidiameters of the earth, and so
the shadow shall be Calathoidall, that is to say, like a cup or top, extending
together with his length in breadth and wideness more and more infinitely. All
which three shapes of shaddows are before plainly set forth in their figures.
By this Ptolomey does prove, that the distance of the Sun from the center of
the earth, contains 1270 semidiameters of the earth, and that the
semidiameter of the Suns body contains five such semidiameters and a half,
as the earth has, and that the diameter of the Sun to the diameter of the
earth is in such proportion as is 11 to 2. Finally, he proves the axletree of
the shadow to contain 268 such semidiameters as the earth has. Wherefore
according to the opinion of Ptol^mey, the excentricitie of the Sun should
contain 48 semidiameters of the earth, and almost one fourth part. Now by
knowing the diameters of the three bodies, it is easy to find out their
proportions: for by the last proposition of Euclide his twelfth book, look
what proportion is betwixt the diameters of any two spheres, the same
proportion being tripled, is the proportion betwixt the said two spheres. And
therefore because the diameter of the Sun is to the diameter of the earth in
like proportion, as 11 is to 2, the same proportion being tripled, shall be
1331 to 8, so as the body of the Sun does contain the body of the earth 166
times and almost one half. In like manner you shall find the body of the Moon
to be almost the 40 part of the body of the earth: for the diameter of the
earth to the diameter of the Moon is in such proportion as is 17 to 5, so as
the body of the earth contains the body of the Moon almost 40 times, as was
said before. And the body of the Sun contains the body of the Moon almost
6600 times. The proportions of which three bodies are these numbers here
following, that is to say, for the Sun 6539203, and for the Earth 39304, and
for the Moon 1000.

A brief Extract of Maginus his Theoriques, showing all the definitions of
such names and motions as are needful to be known for the calculating of the
places of any of the seven Planets, or other motions of any Heaven whatsoever,
that are to be found out by the Prutenicall Tables.
TO avoid the Paradoxicall supposition of Copernicus, supposing the Earth to
move, and the Sun to stand still in the midst of heaven, Maginus is fain
to suppose that there be three mouable heavens above the eight heaven, and so
makes in all eleven mouable heavens, which is one more than all the other
Astronomers have heretofore set down. And he calls the highest or eleventh
heaven, the first mouable, describing the same as hereafter follows: next to
which is placed in his Theoriques the tenth heaven, then the ninth and eight
heaven, and under that, the seven Planets, that is, first Saturn, then
Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury, and Luna, which is the lowest heaven of
all. Of which his Theoriques I thought good to make a brief Extract, because
that more terms belonging to the Prutenicall Tables are therein both defined
and demonstrated, than are set down either by Purbachius or by Mes^elyn in
their Theoriques. And according to the number of this eleven Heavens, I have
divided this Extract into 11 chapters.

CHAP. I.
The description of the eleventh Heaven or first mouable, together with such
definitions as are contained therein.
THe first mouable is the greatest or highest heaven, which carries all the
inferior heavens round about from East to West in 24 hours. The concaue
superficies whereof is imagined to be traced with certain circles, whereof
some be greater and some lesser.

2. The greater circles cheefely serving for our purpose, are these, the
Aequinoctiall, the Eclipticke, and the two Colures, the one called the Colure
of the Equinoxes, and the other the Colure of the Solstices.

3. The Aequinoctiall is a great circle supposed to be in the unequal
superficies of the first mouable, dividing the same superficies into two equal
parts, the poles of which circle are the poles of the world, upon which poles
the said first mouable continually moves, making his revolution in 24 hours.

4. The Eclipticke of the first mouable is also a great circle, dividing the
superficies thereof into two equal parts, and cutteth the Aequinoctiall in two
opposite points, which points are called the Equinoxes, one of them being called
the Vernall Equinox, and the other the Autumnall Equinox: and the poles of this
Eclipticke are always distant from the poles of the world 23 degrees, i40^ and
do never alter. And this Eclipticke is called the mean Eclipticke.

5. The Colure of the Equinoxes, is a great circle passing through the two
Equinoxes, and the two poles of the world.

6. The Colure of the Solstices, is also a great circle dividing the
superficies of the first moouable into two equal parts, and is drawn both
through the poles of the world, and also through the poles of the mean
Eclipticke.

CHAP. II.
Of the tenth Heaven.
THe tenth Heaven is a great Orb next unto the first mouable, having contrary
motion to the first moouable, that is, from West to East upon the poles of the
Eclipticke of the first moouable or mean Eclipticke, and makes his revolution
in 3434 Egyptian years, and 10 days.

2. In this heaven are imagined to be described such like greater circles, as
are before described in the first mouable: for the Aequinoctiall of this heaven
and the two Colures are in one self plain, right under the Aequinoctiall and
Colures of the first moouable: but the Eclipticke of this heaven is mouable, by
reason of the vnstabilitie of the poles of the Eclipticke of the said tenth
sphere: for the better understanding of which vnstabilitie, Maginus sets
down this figure.

In which, imagine the letter A to be the pole of the mean Eclipticke of the
first moouable, and also the pole of the tenth heaven, about which pole the
tenth sphere makes his revolution in 3434 Egyptian years, and 10 days. And
upon the point A imagine also a lesser circle to be drawn, whose semidiameter
is A B, containing in length i^ and imagine the same lesser circle to be the
circle B D F, in the circumference whereof, suppose the center of another
lesser circle equal to that, to be placed in the point D, and let the
semidiameter of the said second lesser circle be D E, containing in length i6^
the center of which second circle, viz. D, you must suppose never to change his
place, but to move about the pole A, as the tenth heaven moves about the
same pole A. And so likewise suppose the second little circle A H E to be
fastened to the first, so as the said second circle has no other motion but
that which the center D has, and imagine the right perpendicular line C G to
be part of the Solisticiall colure of the first mouable; which Colure the
circumference of the second little circle A H E will cut in some one point or
other, as in the point H, the place of which intersection wheresoever that
happens upon the line C G, is the pole of the Eclipticke of the tenth heaven,
whose pole does continually alter his place, and therefore the place of the
Eclipticke of the said tenth heaven, must needs alter, being sometimes far
from the mean Eclipticke, and sometimes near unto it, and sometimes united
therewith. But the greatest distance that can be betwixt the two Ecliptickes,
is i12^ according to the greatest distance which is betwixt the poles of the
Eclipticke, and the poles of the first moouable: for the poles of the
Eclipticke of the tenth heaven can never exceed i12^ and the Ecliptic of this
tenth heaven is called the true Eclipticke, whose poles do differ from the
poles of the mean Eclipticke i12^ as have been said before.

3. And such distance is called the equacion of the obliquitie of the
Eclipticke, which the former figure does plainly demonstrate: for the letter A
is supposed to be the pole of the mean Eclipticke, and H the pole of the true
Eclipticke: and this equacion of the obliquitie is to be found in the 16 Cannon
of the Prutenicall tables, by help of which equacion or Prosthapherisis, you
may find at any time the obliquitie of the true Eclipticke, as is taught in the
13 precept of the said tables. But now because the said Prosthapherisis cannot
be found but by the Anomalia of the obliquitie, you are to know first what
that Anomalia is, which the foresaid figure does also show. In which figure,
you must suppose the right line A E to be the diameter of the second lesser
circle, the one end whereof is always fixed in the point A: and the other end
marked with E, by the motion of the tenth heaven, describes the great circle C
E G.

4. And this circle is called the circle of Anomalia of the obliquitie of the
true Eclipticke.

5. And the arch or portion of this circle, marked with the letters C E, is the
Anomalia of the obliquitie of the true Eclipticke: the motion of which Anomalia
you shall find at any time by the Prutenicall tables in the 14 Cannon under the
title Anomalia Aequinoctiorum in such order as the eight precept teaches.

CHAP. III.
Of the ninth Heaven.
THe ninth Heaven is a sphere situated next and immediately under the tenth
heaven: the motion of which ninth sphere is from North to South upon his proper
poles, which are fixed in the two Aequinoctiall points, called the true
Aequinoctiall points of the tenth heaven, about which poles he makes his
revolution in 1717 Egyptian years and 5 days.

In this sphere are imagined certain circles both greater and lesser to be
drawn, as in the former two heavens: but the greater circles whereof we shall
have most use, are these, that is, the Eclipticke and the Aequinoctiall.

2. The Eclipticke of this ninth sphere is always in the plane of the
Eclipticke of the tenth sphere, and therefore does not differ from the true
Eclipticke, because it never swarueth from the same: but the Aequinoctiall line
of this ninth sphere is mouable, according as the two Aequinoctiall points in
which it crosses the true Eclipticke, are moouable, being carried both backward
and forward, and sometimes are conjoined together with the Aequinoctiall points
of the tenth heaven, and sometimes again are removed from the said true
Aequinoctiall points of the tenth sphere, and the greatest distance that the
said two points can have from the Aequinoctiall points of the tenth sphere is 1
degree, i12^ ii22^ iii30^

The motion of which Aequinoctiall points, and also of the sphere it self, you
shall more easily understand by this figure here following.

IN which, the point A signifies the Vernall Aequinoctiall point, as well of
the tenth heaven, as of the first mouable, which point we will hereafter call
the true vernall Aequinox, in which point one of the poles of the ninth sphere
is supposed to be fixed, and the other pole is in the opposite point, which is
the true Autumnall Aequinoctiall point. Now upon the center A imagine a little
circle to be drawn, whose semidiameter is A B, containing in length upon the
superficies of the said ninth sphere, i^5^ ii41^ iii15^ and in the same unequal
superficies imagine a second little circle to be drawn, equal unto the
former, the center of which second circle is in the circumference of the first
little circle, viz. in the point C, the semidiameter whereof is C D, containing
in length i35^ ii41^ ii15^ so shall the whole diameter A D contain in length 1
degree, i11^ ii22^ iii30^ and suppose the right line K G to be the true
Eclipticke, and the right overthwart line I F to be the AEquinoctiall line of
the tenth heaven and also of the first mouable. Now the circumference of the
second little circle will cross the true Eclipticke K G in some one point or
other, as in the point E, which point of Intersection, wheresoever it happens
to be, is the place of the Vernall Aequinoctiall point of the ninth sphere:
which Vernall Aequinoctiall point we will henceforth call the mean Equinox, as
the point A is the true Equinox. So that hereby you may perceive, that the
mean Equinox is nothing else but that point in which the Aequinoctiall line of
the ninth sphere crosses the Eclipticke line of the said ninth sphere or true
Eclipticke.

3. The Prosthapheresis of the Equinox is the distance which is betwixt the
true and mean Equinox, as is the line A E: and this Prosthapheresis you shall
find in the 16 Cannon, under the title Praecessionis Aequinoctiorum, the manner
of finding whereof is taught in the 10 Precept. But because the said
Prosthapheresis cannot be found but by help of the Anomalia of the Equinox.

4. I will therefore show what the said Anomalia of the Equinox is. For the
understanding whereof, resort to the former figure, in which you see how the
tip or extreme point of the diameter of the second circle, viz. the point D
describes by his motion, that is, by the motion of the ninth sphere, the
circle D F G H I K L, which circle is called the circle of Anomalia, wherein
the motion of the Anomalia is always reckoned: and the distance betwixt the
point L and the point D, is the Anomalia of the Equinox it self, and is
always double unto the Anomalia of the obliquitie of the true Eclipticke, and
therefore we use to do no more but to double the Anomalia of the said
obliquitie, otherwise called the simple Anomalia, which is to be found by the
14 Cannon, under the title, Anomalia Aequinoctiorum, in such order as the eight
Precept teaches.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the eight Heaven.
1. THe eight Heaven is situated under the ninth Heaven, and moves from West
to East contrary to the motion of the first moouable, upon the poles of the
true Eclipticke, making his revolution in 25816 Egyptian years, and depends
wholly upon the mean Equinox.

2. In this sphere are imagined also an Aequinoctiall and an Ecliptic line:
and the Ecliptic line of this Heaven is always in the same plane with the
Ecliptic of the 9 and 10 Heavens, and swarueth not from the true Ecliptic at
all. But the Aequinoctiall points of this sphere do move from the true
Equinoxes, sometimes forward, and sometimes times backward, even as the mean
Equinox of the ninth sphere moves.

3. This sphere is apparent to the eye, by reason of the multitude of stars
which are therein: the moving of all which stars, and all other the inferior
lights, is accounted or reckoned from the first star of the Rams horn, as
from a visible beginning, although the same be unstable, by reason of the
changeable moving of the Precession of the mean Vernall Equinox.

4. The Precession of the Equinox is a portion of the true Ecliptic,
comprehended betwixt two great circles, whereof the one passes through the
first star of the Rams horn, and the other through the Equinox; which if it
be the true Equinox, then the arch of the Eclipticke, comprehended betwixt the
two said circles, is called the true Precession: but if it pass through the
mean Equinox, then it is called the mean Precession of the Vernall Equinox.

As for example, suppose in this figure the line K G to be the true Eclipticke,
and I F to be the Aequinoctiall of the first moouable, crossing one another in
the point A, which represents the true Equinox, unto which point when the
Sun comes, it is Equinox throughout all the world: and suppose M to be the
first star of the Rams horn, through which a right perpendicular line passes,
signifying a great circle drawn through the first star of the Rams horn,
and also through the poles of the true Eclipticke: and suppose L H to be
another great circle drawn through the true Aequinoctiall point A, and through
the poles of the true Eclipticke, so shall M A be the true Precession of the
Vernall Equinox. In like manner suppose the line D E to be another great
circle, passing through the point E, signifying the mean Equinox, and also
through the poles of the true Eclipticke, so as the arch of the true
Eclipticke, which is comprehended betwixt M and E, is the mean Precession of
the vernall Equinox. And this mean Precession is readily found by the 14
Cannon, as the 8 Precept teaches, and the title thereof in the said 14 Cannon,
is Praecessionis Aequinoctiorum. But the true Precession is to be found by
help of the Prosthapheresis, which was defined in the third definition of the
third chapter.

And although that there be many other circles both great and little, which the
Astronomers use, as the circles of Positions, Azimuths, and many others, yet
will I only speak of such circles, arches, and points in the Heaven as are
belonging to our present purpose (because I have spoken of the others in my
sphere) showing what is the longitude, latitude, and declination of any star or
point in this Heaven.

5. The longitude of any star is an arch of the Eclipticke, comprehended
betwixt the true Vernall Equinox, and the circle of latitude of the said star
or point.

6. The circle of latitude is a great circle passing through the poles of the
true Eclipticke and the center of the star. Of which circle, that part which
is betwixt the center of the star and the true Eclipticke, is called the
latitude of the star.

7. The circle of declination is a great circle, passi^g through the poles of
the world, and through the center of any star or other point in the
firmament: and that part of this circle which is contained betwixt the said
star and the true Aequinoctiall line, is called the declination of the star.

CHAP. V.
Of the seventh Heaven, that is, the heaven of Saturn.
1. THe seventh Heaven is situated next under the eight Heaven or Sphere, and
moves from West to East, and is only proper to Saturn, which is the highest
Planet: whose orbs and motions thereof, this figure here following does
plainly show.

The first figure belonging to the Theorique of Saturn, together with the
description thereof.
In this figure, consisting of certain circles and right lines, you see that
the three outermost great circles drawn upon the p^int A, signifying the center
of the world, do enclose two w^^^te several spaces, and in each space are set
down the caracters of the 12 signs: of which two spaces, the outermost
represents the Eclipticke both of the 10 and 9 Heaven, the beginning of which
Ecliptic is marked on the right hand with the letter D, signifying the true
Vernall Equinox: and the next space under that represents the Eclipticke of
the eight Heaven, whose beginning is marked with a little star, ^ignifying
the first star of the Rams horn.

2. And the two black orbs do represent the deferents of the Auge, which
Auge is marked with the letter I, and the opposite Auge with the letter R, which
deferents do move regularly, and do make their revolution in 35333 Egyptian
years: and betwixt the two balcke orbs is another white orb, signifying the
orb Excentrique, drawn upon his own center, marked with the letter B, in the
midst of which broad white circle is another circle described by the center
of the Epicicle, marked with the letter E, upon which point E is drawn a
little circle, signifying the Epicicle it self, which carries the body of the
Planet, in the circumference whereof is a little star, representing the body
of Saturn. You see also that there is another circle which crosses the
foresaid middle circle of the Excentrique in two points opposite, drawn upon
his own center, marked with C, and is called the circle Equant. The motions of
which circles, and also the significations of the right lines and arches in
this figure contained, are by help of the letters hereafter declared: for the
right line which is drawn from the point A unto the point I, and so forth to
the Eclipticke, is called the line of Auge: and the point or degree of the
Eclipticke, into which the line of the Auge falls, is called the place of the
Auge, which for example sake suppose to be in the first point of Gemini, marked
with the letter F. And the arch comprehended betwixt the point F and the first
star of the Rams horn, signified by the little star set down on the right
hand in the true Eclipticke is called the mean motion of the Auge. And the
right line A B is called the excentricitie of the Excentrique, containing in
length 3 degrees, i25^ and the right line A C is the excentricitie of the
circle Equant, containing in length 6 degrees, i50^

3. The Auge is that point in the superficies of the Excentrique which is
furthest distant from the center of the world, marked with the letter 1. But
the opposite Auge is that point in the superficies of the said Excentrique,
which is nearest unto the center of the world, marked with the letter R.

4. The place of each point is showed by a right line drawn through the center
of the world and also through the Auge of the Excentrique unto the Zodiake of
the eight Heaven, marked with the caracters of the twelve signs, and the line
so drawn, is called the line of Auge.

5. The mean motion of the Auge is an arch of the Eclipticke, proceeding from
the first star of the Rams horn unto the place of the Auge, and is found in
such order as is showed in the eight Precept, by help of the 13 and 14 Cannons
in that Colume, whose title is Apogaea Saturni.

6. But the true motion of the Auge is an arch of the Eclipticke, beginning at
the true Vernall Equinox, and ending at the place of the Auge: the manner how
to find the same, is showed in the 33 Precept.

7. The orb Excentrique, is an orb of one equal thickness, compassing the
center of the world, in which Excentrique the Epicicle is always carried, and
makes his revolution in 29 Egyptian years, 183 days, and almost 5 hours,
the Diurnall motion thereof is i2^ ii0^ iii21^ iiii16^ almost.

8. The center of the Excentrique, marked with B, is a point in the middle of
the Excentrique, from which all right lines that are drawn unto the concauitie
of the Excentrique, are equal.

9. The distance betwixt which center and the center of the world is called the
excentricitie of the Excentrique: and the distance betwixt the two said
centres, that is, of the world and of the Excentrique, is 3 degrees, i25^

10. The circle Equant is a circle described upon the point C in the plane of
the Excentrique, in regard of the center whereof, the motion as well of the
Excentrique as of the Epicicle, is regular and equal. And this circle is
sometimes called the circle of equality, sometimes the Equator, and other
times the Excentricall Equator, the distance of the center whereof is from the
center of the Excentrique 3 degree, i25^ and from the center of the world 6
degrees, i50^ and this distance from the center of the world is called the
Excentricitie of the circle Equant.

11. The Epicicle is a little orb, whose center is marked with the letter E,
which the Excentrique carries about, which Epicicle notwithstanding has his
proper motion, for the higher part thereof has his moving according to the
succession of the signs, and the lower part contrary to the succession of the
signs. The daily motion of the Epic^cle about his own center, is i57^ ii7^
iii44^ and makes one ent^e revolution in 378 days, 21 hours, i36^

12. But because that the accounting of the motions by the circle Equant is
troublesome, therefore the Astronomers do use to reckon the fame upon the
Eclipticke, by imposing a line to be drawn from the center of the world unto
the Eclipticke, in such sort, as the same may be parallel unto the line before
drawn: as in the foresaid figure, the line A G being parallel unto the line C
E, is called the line o^ the mean moving of the Epicicle or of the Planet.

13. The mean Anomalia of the Excentrique is an arch of the Ecliptic,
beginning at the line of the Auge, and so proceeding according to the
succession of the signs, until at end at the line of the mean moving, as in
the foresaid figure the line A F is the line of the Auge, and A G is the line
of the mean moving. Now the arch of the Eclipticke, which is comprehended
betwixt the two lines, A F, and A G, that is to say, the arch F G is called the
mean Anomalia of the Excentrique, and of some it is called the mean or equal
center.

14. But if the said arch be reckoned from the first star of the Rams horn,
unto the line of the mean moving, marked with A G, then the said arch is
called the equ^ll motion of longitude, which you may find by the Tables at any
time, supposed by the 13 and 14 Cannons in the Colume, whose title is
Longitudinis Saturni, in such order as is showed in the eight Precept.

The equal or mean moving of the longitude of Saturn, is daily i2^ ii0^
iii27^ iiii18^ and the yearly motion thereof is 12 degrees, i12^ ii46^ iii4^
and the whole revolution is in 29 Egyptian years, 174 days, 4 hours, i58^
ii24^ for in that time it returns to the first star of the Rams horn.

15. The line of the true moving of the Epicicle is a right line drawn from
the center of the world, passing through the center of the Epicicle unto the
Eclipticke, as in the foresaid figure the right line A E L is called the line
of the true motion of the Epicicle.

16. The true or coequated Anomalia of the Excentrique (which is called by the
Alphonsines the true center) is an arch of the Eclipticke, beginning at the
place of the Auge of the Excentrique, and ends at the true place of the
center of the Epicicle, as in the foresaid Figure the arch F L is the true
Anomalia of the Excentrique.

17. The true motion of the longitude of the Epicicle is an arch of the
Eclipticke, beginning at the first star of the Rams horn, and ends at the
true place of the center of the Epicicle, as in the foresaid figure, the arch
from the Rams horn, marked with a little star in the Eclipticke of the eight
sphere, to L, is called the true moving of the longitude of the Epicicle.

18. The Prosthapheresis or Equacion of the center, is the difference betwixt
the mean Anomalia and the coequated Anomalia of the Excentrique, or the
difference betwixt the equal moving and the true moving of longitude. As the
arch L G is called the equacion of the center, and this equacion is never
greater than 6 degrees, i30^ ii30^ and is always greatest when the equal
moving of the center of the Epicicle from the Auge of the Excentrique, is 11
Sex. 33 degrees, whether the same be reckoned according to the succession of
the signs, or contrary to the succession of the signs: and from thence it
decreaseth until the line of the said mean moving comes into the line of
the opposite Auge. The finding of which Equacion is taught in the 34 Precept,
by help of the 19 Cannon in the Colume, whose title is Eccentrici, and is to
be added or subtracted according as the words Subtrahe and Add at the head or
foot of the said Colume, do show.

19. The two points in which the Prosthapheresis of the Excentrique is
greatest, are called the mean longitude of the Excentrique: and these two
points are showed by a right line perpendicularly drawn upon the line of Auge,
and passing through the middle space of the distance betwixt the center of the
world and the center of the Excentrique, as in the former figure, in which the
point A signifies the center of the world, and the point B the center of the
Excentrique. Now if the space B A be divided into two equal parts, as in the
point Q, and through the same point Q a right line be drawn, crossing the line
A F with right angles, and is produced as well toward the right hand as
toward the left, unto the two points of the circumference of the Excentrique,
marked with the two letters T and V, the said two points T and V are called the
mean longitudes of the Excentrique: in which mean longitudes the center of
the Epicicle is, when the equal motion of Saturnes longitude is 93 degrees or
267 degrees.

20. The mean Auge of the Epicicle is a point in the circumference of the
Epicicle, which is furthest distant from the center of the circle Equant: and
this point is found by drawing a right line from the center of the circle
Equant unto the circumference of the Epicicle, through the center of the said
Epicicle, as in the former figure the right line C E being produced unto the
circumference of the Epicicle, shows the mean Auge of the Epicicle to be in
the point H.

21. The true Auge of the Epicicle is a point in the circumference of the
Epicicle, which is furthest distant from the center of the world, and is found
by drawing a right line from the center of the world unto the center of the
Epicicle, and produced unto the circumference thereof, as the right line A E
being produced unto the circumference of the Epicicle, meets with the same
circumference in the point K, which is therefore called the true Auge of the
Epicicle.

22. The Touch point is a point in the circumference of the Epicicle, which is
furthest distant from the center of the Excentrique, and is determined by a
right line drawn from the center of the Excentrique unto the center of the
Epicicle, and so produced unto the circumference of the Epicicle: as if the
line B E be produced unto the circumference of the Epicicle, viz. unto the
point N, the said point N is called the Touch point of the Epicicle.

23. The Anomalia of commutation is an arch of the Epicicle, beginning at the
mean Auge of the Epicicle, and ending at the place of the Planet in the
Epicicle: and this arch is always reckoned, according as the Planet moves. As
the arch H * of the Epicicle is called the Anomalia of commutation, and is
otherwise called of some the mean Anomalia of the orb or Epicicle, and of
others the mean argument: the finding of the Anomalia of Commutation is taught
in the 8 Precept, by help of the 13 and 14 Cannons in his proper Collum, whose
title is Anomalia comutationis Satura^.

24. The coequated Anomalia of Commutation is an arch of the Epicicle,
beginning at the true Auge of the Epicicle, and ending at the place of the
Planet in his Epicicle. As the arch K N H is called the coequated Anomalia of
Commutation: which some call the true Anomalia of the Orb, and others call it
the true Argument.

25. The Prosthapheresis or equacion of the center in the Epicicle, is an arch
of the Epicicle, which is comprehended betwixt the mean and true Auge of the
Epicicle: as in the former figure the point K is the true Auge, and the point H
is the mean Auge of the Epicicle, the distance betwixt which two Auges is the
arch K N H, and that is the equacion of the center in the Epicicle: and this
equacion is always equal unto the equacion of the center, before defined in
the 18 definition of this chapter: Only this rule is generally to be observed,
that if the Prosthapheresis were added in the coequating of the Anomalia of the
Excentrique, the same Prosthapheresis must be subtracted in the coequating of
the Anomalia of Commutation: and so again if it be subtracted in the former,
then it must be added in the latter.

26. The line of the true motion of the Planet is a right line drawn from the
center of the world unto the Eclipticke, through the center of the Planet. As
in the former figure the right line A * S is called the line of the true motion
of the Planet.

27. The true motion it self of the Planet is an arch of the Eclipticke,
comprehended betwixt the true Vernall Equinox and the line of the true motion.
As in the foresaid figure the arch D S is called the true motion of the Planet.

28. The equacion of the Argument, which Copernicus calls the Parallax of the
orb, and others call the same the Prosthapheresis of the Epicicle, is an arch
of the Eclipticke, comprehended betwixt the line of the true motion of the
Epicicle, and the line of the true motion of the Planet, as in the former
figure the arch S L is the equacion of the argument. This equacion is found by
help of the coequated Anomalia of Commutation, in such order as is showed in
the 34 Precept, and in the 19 Cannon in the Colume, whose title is Paralaxis
Orbis. The greatest equacion that Saturn can have, when the Epicicle is in the
Auge of his Excentrique, and the Planet is distant from the Auge of the
Epicicle 96 degrees, is 5 degrees, i55^ ii33^ But the greatest equacion
belonging to him when the Epicicle is in the opposite Auge of the Excentrique,
and the Planet is distant from the Auge of the Epicicle almost 97 degrees, is 6
degrees, i38^ ii38^

29. The excess of the equacion of the Argument, which the Alphonsines call
the diversity of the diameter, is an arch of the Eclipticke, whereby the
equacion of the Epicicle being in the opposite Auge of the Excentrique,
exceeds the said equacion, when the Epicicle is in the Auge of his
Excentrique. As you shall more plainly perceive by this figure following.

In which figure, the middle point A signifies the center of the world, and B
the center of the Excentrique, and C the center of the Equant. The middle
circle marked with the letters E F G, signifies the Excentrique, in which are
placed three other little circles, signifying the Epicicles of Saturn, in
every of which circles the point H signifies the Auge of the Epicicle, and O
the true place of the Epicicle in the Eclipticke: and N signifies the place of
the star in his Epicicle, and L his true place in the Eclipticke: and the
arch O L the equacion of the argument, which equacion is least when the
Epicicle is in the Auge of the Excentrique, marked with the letter E: but the
said equacion is greater when the center of the Epicicle is in the point F, and
greatest of all when the said center is in the point G, that is, in the opposite
Auge of the Excentrique. Now if you take the arch of the Eclipticke O L, which
is the equacion of the Argument, when the Epicicle is in the Auge of his
Excentrique out of the arch O L (which is the equacion of the Argument) when
the Epicicle is in the opposite Auge, the remainer will be the arch P L, which
remaineris called the excess of the equacion of the Argument. The finding of
which excess is taught in the 34 Precept, by help of the 19 Cannon in the
Colume, whose title is Excessus.

30. The proportional minutes are the 60 parts of the excess, by help
whereof the equacions of the Epicicle, being not in the Auge, nor in the
opposite Auge of the Excentrique are equated or corrected. As in the former
figure the arch P L, which is the excess, is supposed to be divided into 60
equal parts, by help of which division the proportional minutes are found in
what place of the Excentrique soever the epicicle is placed. As suppose the
true place thereof to be in the point F, in which situation of the Epicicle,
the arch O L is the equacion of the Argument, which equacion is greater than it
was when the Epicicle was in the point E, and the difference betwixt these two
equacions is the arch I L. Now if you suppose the arch P L to be divided into
60 equal parts, look how many of those parts the arch I L does contain, so
many proportional minutes are belonging to the equacion of the argument of the
Epicicle, when the place of the said Epicicle is in the point F. The finding of
these proportional minutes is taught in the 34 Precept, and are set down in
the 19 Cannon in the Colume, whose title is Scrupula Proportionalia.

31. The absolute equacion is an arch of the Eclipticke, which is compounded of
the equacion of the Argument, and the excess answerable unto the proportional
minutes. And this absolute equacion is either added or subtracted unto the true
moving of the Epicicle, and the sum of such addition or the remainer of the
subtraction will show the true distance of the Planet from the first star of
the Rams horn: whereunto if you add the true Precession of the Equinox, the
sum of that addition will show the true longitude of the Planet.

CHAP. VI.
Of the sixth Heaven, or the Heaven of Jupiter.
THe sixth Heaven, which is of Jupiter, consists of like orbs as does the
Heaven of Saturn, and therefore the demonstrations belonging to this Heaven,
do not differ from those which were set down in the heaven of Saturn, but
only in the time of their motions and in the quantity of some arches: for the
deferents of the Auge and opposite Auge in the heaven of Jupiter do make their
revolution in 109756 Egyptian years. And the Excentrique of this Heaven
makes his revolution in 11 Egyptian years, 318 days, and one hour almost.
And the excentricitie of the Excentrique of Jupiter is 2 degrees, i45^ and the
excentricitie of the circle Equant is 5 degrees, i30^ The Epicicle of this
Heaven makes his revolution in 398 days, 21 hours, i13^ ii15^ iii^^ and the
daily motion thereof is i54^ ii9^ iii4^ The greatest equacion of the center
which belongs unto Jupiter, is 5 degrees, i13^ ii59^ and that is when the
center of the Epicicle is distant from the true Auge of the Excentrique 93
degrees, whether it be according or contrary to the succession of the signs.
And the greatest equacion of the Argument, when the center of the Epicicle is
in the Auge of the Excentrique, is 10 degrees, i30^ ii9^ and then the distance
of the Planet from the true Auge of his Epicicle, is 100 degrees, i30 almost.
And the greatest equacion of the said Argument, when the Epicicle is in the
opposite Auge of the Excentrique, is 11 degrees, i31^ ii2^ and then the Planet
is distant from the true Auge of the Epicicle 102 degrees almost.

The equal or mean moving of Jupiters longitude from the first star of the
Rams horn, is daily i4^ ii59^ iii8^ and the yearly motion thereof is 30
degrees, i19^ ii4^ iii6^ and makes one entire revolution in 11 Egyptian
years, 214 days, 21 hours, i16^ ii24^

The rest of the lines and arches belonging to this Planet, are defined in the
former fifth Chapter: and the finding of all such things as are needful for
that purpose are set down in the said fifth Chapter, differing nothing from the
manner which was therein showed, except it be in the number of the Cannon,
which for Saturn was the 19, and for this Planet it is the 20 Cannon.

CHAP. VII.
Of the fifth Heaven, or Heaven of Mars.
THe fifth Heaven belonging to Mars, has like number of orbs, as has the
Heaven of Saturn, and the said orbs are placed even as they were in Saturn.
And therefore I shall not need to make any particular relation of the orbs or
lines of this sphere, but to refer you to the fifth Chapter, showing only here
the difference of the motions. The deferents of the Auge in the Heaven of Mars
do make their revolution in 45088 Egyptian years, so as their daily motion
is iii4^ iiii43^ and their yearly motion is ii28^ iii44^ iiii37^

The Excentrique of this Heaven makes his revolution in one year, and 322
days almost, so as his daily motion is i31^ ii26^ iii26^ iiii15^ and the
yearly motion thereof is 191 degrees, i15^ ii49^ iii44^ iiii3^

The Epicicle of this Heaven makes his revolution in 2 years, 49 days, 19
hours, i43^ and the daily motion thereof is i27^ ii41^ iii40^ and his yearly
motion is 168 degrees, i2^ ii30^ iii42^

The greatest equacion of the center belonging unto Mars, is 11 degrees, i5^
ii59^ and that is when the center of his Epicicle is distant from the true Auge
of the Excentrique 95 degrees and i30^ be it according or contrary to the
succession of the signs.

The greatest equacion of the argument, when the center of the Epicicle is in
the Auge of the Excentrique, is 36 degrees, i54^ ii18^ and then the distance of
the Planet from the true Auge of his epicicle is 127 degrees almost.

And the greatest equacion of the Argument, when the center of the Epicicle is
in the opposite Auge of his Excentrique, is 46 degrees, i38^ ii4^ and that is
when the Planet is distant from the Auge of the Epicicle 137 degrees.

The mean moving of the longitude of Mars is every day i31^ ii26^ iii31^ and
the yearly motion thereof is 191 i16^ ii18^ iii29^ and makes one entire
revolution in one year, 321 days, 23 hours, i32^

All other lines and arches belonging to Mars are defined in the fifth Chapter:
and the Cannon serving for the finding of them and their places, is the 21
Cannon in number.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the fourth Heaven, or Heaven of the Sun.
THe next Heaven under that of Mars, is the Heaven of the Sun, and has his
proper and peculiar motion from West to East.

This Heaven consists of five orbs: whereof two are called the deferents of
the mean Auge of the Suns Excentrique, the other two orbs are called the
deferents of the true Auge of his Excentrique, or the orbs of the Anomalia of
the true Auge and of the excentricitie of the Sun. The fifth Orb is called
the deferent of the body of the Sun. All which you may evidently see in the
figure following.

The first figure belonging to the Theorique of the Sun.
IN which figure, the outermost broad circle, in which are set the caracters of
the 12 signs, signifies the Eclipticke of the eight Heaven, the center
whereof is marked with the letter A, which signifies the center of the world.
Next unto this Eclipticke is one of the deferents of the mean Auge signified
by the outermost black orb, the center of whose unequal superficies is the
point A, and the center of his concaue superficies is the point B, the other
deferent of the said mean Auge is the lesser broad black circle, the center
of whose unequal superficies is the point B, and the center of his concaue
superficies is the point A. And betwixt the black orbs are two shaddowed
orbs, which are the deferents of the Suns Excentrique: and the unequal
superficies of the outermost of these two shaddowed orbs, as also the concaue
superficies of the lower of them have for their center the point B, and the
concaue superficies of the higher and unequal superficies of the lower have the
point C for their center. Betwixt which two orbs is the Excentrique of the
Sun, which Excentrique is signified by the broad white circle: in the middle
of which white circle is drawn a circle, in which the center of the Sun is
continually moved: and the center of the Excentrique is marked with the letter
C, which point is called the moouable center of the Excentrique, by whose
motion is described the little circle in the middle of the figure, the center
of which circle is the point B.

1. The deferents of the mean Auge of the Sun are two orbs of unequal
thickness, being in some respect concentricall with the Eclipticke, and in
another respect excentricall: for the unequal superficies of the higher, and the
concaue superficies of the lower have for their center the center of the world,
marked with A: but the concaue superficies of the higher, and unequal
superficies of the lower have a center differing from the center of the world:
and these two orbs have their proper and peculiar motion from West to East
upon the axes and poles of the true Eclipticke, and their Diurnall motion is
iii^ iiii12^ and their yearly motion is ii25^ iii33^ iiii12^ and do make one
entire revolution in 50717 Egyptian years: and these two orbs do only serve
to carry the mean Auge of the Excentrique.

2. The mean Auge of the Excentrique is that point in the deferent of the
Excentrique, which is furthest distant from the center of the world. As for
example, the point G in the former figure signifies the mean Auge of the
Excentrique.

3. And this point is always determined in the Zodiake by a right line, drawn
from the center of the world through the center of the little circle, marked
with B, unto the Eclipticke line, and the line so drawn, is called the line of
the mean Auge, as the line A B G, which is called the line of the mean Auge.

4. But the motion of the mean Auge is an arch of the Eclipticke, beginning at
the first star of the Rams horn, and ending at the line of the mean Auge,
as in the said figure the arch * G is the motion of the mean Auge: but if the
said arch begin at the Aequinoctiall, whether the same be mean or true, then
is the said motion called the motion of the mean Equinox, extending from the
mean Equinox or from the true Equinox unto the foresaid line of the mean Auge,
the finding of every of which motions is showed in the 16 Precept.

5. The deferents of the Excentrique, which sometimes are called the orbs of
the Anomalia of the excentricitie, are the two shaddowed orbs which do carry
the orb Excentrique. And these two orbs have their proper motion also from
East to West, making their revolution once in 3434 Egyptian years, and 10
days, and their daily motion is ii1^ iii2^ iiii2^ and their yearly motion is
i6^ ii17^ iii24^ iiii9^ And those deferents are moved upon the center of the
little circle (which center is marked with the letter B, and is distant from
the center of the world 2 degrees, i1^ such degrees as the length of the
semidiameter of the Excentrique contains 60 degrees) and their proper
axletree is parallel unto the axletree of the Eclipticke, and passes through
the center of the said little circle, as the next figure following shows. And
the, motion of these orbs does begin at the line of the mean Auge before
defined in the third definition of this chapter. And it is called the Anomalia
or Argument of the Auge, and of the excentricitie of the Sun. By the motion
of which Orbs the center of the Excentrique is imagined to describe a little
circle above the center of the world, whereby the excentricitie of the Sun
changes every day.

6. The excentricitie of the Sun is the distance betwixt the center of the
world and the center of the Suns Excentrique: and this is threefold, greatest,
least, or mean.

7. The greatest excentricitie of the Sun is when the center of the
Excentrique is in the Auge of the little circle, viz. in the point C, and the
quantity of this greatest excentricitie, is 2 degrees, i3^ ii7^ such like
degrees as the semidiameter of the Excentrique contains 60 degrees, or the
quantity of the said greatest excentricitie is 41700, when the semidiameter of
the Excentrique is 1000000.

8. The least excentricitie is when the center of the Excentrique is in the
opposite Auge of the little circle, and then the distance betwixt the center of
the earth and the center of the Excentrique, is 1 degree, i55^ ii53^ supposing
the semidiameter of the Excentrique to be divided into 60 equal parts, but if
the said semidiameter be divided into 1000000, then the said least
excentricitie will be 32190.

9. The mean excentricitie is when the center of the Excentrique is in the
middle distance betwixt the Auge and opposite Auge of the little circle, and
then the said excentricitie is 0 degrees, i34. ii14. such parts as the
semidiameter of the Excentrique contains 60. But if the said semidiameter be
supposed to be divided into 1000000 parts, then the said mean excentricitie is
9510. And the semidiameter of that little circle contains 0 degrees, i17^.
ii7^

10. The Anomalia of the Auge and excentricitie, which is also called the
center of the Sun, is an arch in the concaue superficies of the outermost
deferent of the mean Auge, which arch is comprehended betwixt the line of the
mean Auge, and a right line drawn from the center of the little circle through
the mouable center of the Excentrique unto the concave supe^ficies of the said
outermost orb. Or thus, the center of the Sun is an arch of the little circle,
beginning at the Auge of said little circle, and ending at the mouable center
of the Excentrique. As for example.

The second figure belonging to the Theorique of the Sun.
In this figure suppose the point A to be the center of the world, and B the
center of the concave superficies of the outermost of the two deferents of the
mean Auge, and C the center of the Excentrique, whose place was sometimes in
the point P, but now is gone from thence unto C, so is A G the line of the
mean Auge, and A P is the greatest excentricitie, and A O the least
excentricitie, and P O is the difference betwixt the greatest and least
excentricitie, the half whereof is B O, and A B is the quantity of the mean
excentricitie, and the place of the center of the Excentrique is in the point
C, and the arch G F is the Anomalia or Argument of the Auge and of the
excentricitie in the concaue superficies of the highest deferent of the mean
Auge, and the arch P C of the little circle is the Anomalia of the Auge and
excentricitie: and the right line B C F is the line which shows the mean
Auge of the orbs of the Anomalia of the Auge, in respect of their center.

11. The mean Auge of the orbs of the Anomalia of the excentricitie, is that
point in the concave superficies of the highest deferent of the Excentrique,
which is furthest distant from the center of the little circle, and is pointed
out by a right line drawn from the center of the said little circle, through
the mouable center of the Excentrique. As in this second figure, in which the
point B is the center of the little circle, and C is the center of the
Excentrique, through which point C if you draw a right line from A unto the
concauitie of the highest deferent of the Excentrique, as unto the point E, the
said point E is the mean Auge of the orbs of the Anomalia of the
excentricitie. Now if you add the daily moving of this mean Auge, which is
ii1^ iii2^ iiii2^ (as was said in the fifth definition of this Chapter) unto the
daily moving of the mean Auge of the excentricitie, which is iii4^ iiii12^
(as was said in the first definition of this Chapter) the sum of that
addition will be ii1^ iii6^ iiii14^ and this is the daily distance betwixt the
two mean Auges, viz. that of the excentricitie, and this of the orbs of the
Anomalia of the excentricitie.

12. The orb Excentrique is an orb in the Theorique of the Sun, in which
the body of the Sun is continually carried about. This orb is placed betwixt
the two orbs, which are the deferents of the Excentrique, and moves from
West to East upon his own moouable center (which center is mouable, by reason
of the moving of the two orbs, which are the deferents of the Excentrique)
and the axletree which is also mouable according to the motion of the center of
the Excentrique in the circumference of the said little circle. And the daily
motion of this orb from the mean Auge of the orbs of the Anomalia of the
excentricitie is i59^ ii9^ iii^3^ iiii24^ and makes his entire revolution in
365 days, 3 hours, i36^ ii25^ which motion is reckoned from the mean Auge of
the orbs of the Anomalia of the excentricitie. For the Sun returns to the
said point or mean Auge in 365 days, 3 hours, i36^ ii2^

13. The line of the true place of the Sun is a right line drawn from the
center of the world through the center of the Sun unto the Eclipticke: and
the point in the Eclipticke in which the said line ends, is the true place of
the Sun. As in the former second figure, suppose the center of the Sun to
be in the point M of the Excentrique, and having drawn a line from A to M, and
so forth unto the Eclipticke in the point R, the said line A R is called the
line of the true place of the Sun, and the point R is said to be the true
place of the Sun in the Eclipticke.

14. The yearly Anomalia of the Sun, which is also called the mean Argument
of the Sun, is an arch of the Excentrique, which is comprehended betwixt the
line of the mean Auge of the Excentrique, and the line of the true place of
the Sun. As in the foresaid second figure the arch L M is called the yearly
Anomalia of the Sun.

Or thus, The yearly Anomalia of the Sun is the excess or difference,
whereby the daily motion of the Sun from the mean Auge of the orbs of the
Anomalia of the excentricitie, exceeds the daily distance betwixt the mean
Auge of the Excentrique, and the mean Auge of the orbs of the Anomalia: and
this Anomalia is found by subtracting the daily distance of the said two Auges,
which is ii1^ iii6^ iiii14^ (as was showed in the 11 definition of this
Chapter) out of i59^ ii9^ iii13^ iiii24^ which is the daily motion of the
Excentrique from the mean Auge of the orbs of the Anomalia of the
excentricitie (as was showed before in the 12 definition:) the remainer of
which subtraction will be i59^ ii8^ iii7^ iiii10^ And although that this
Anomalia does belong properly unto the Excentrique: yet notwithstanding the
said Anomalia is also supposed to be in the Eclipticke, by imagining a line to
be drawn from the center of the world unto the Eclipticke, in such order as
that the said line may be parallel unto another line which is drawn from the
center of the Excentrique unto the place or center of the Sun: and the line so
drawn, may be called the line of the Imaginary motion of the Sun. As in the
foresaid second figure let a right line be drawn from C to M, then unto the
same line draw another parallel right line from the center A, and produce the
same unto the Eclipticke in the point N; so shall the arch of the Eclipticke,
which is comprehended betwixt the points E and N, be the yearly Anomalia or
mean Argument of the Sun in the Zodiake. The finding of which Anomalia for
any time appointed, is taught in the 8 Precept, by help of the 13 and 14
Cannons in that Collum, whose title is Anomalia annua Solis.

15. The true Auge of the Excentrique is that point in the Excentrique which is
furthest distant from the center of the world. And this true Auge is pointed or
showed by a right line drawn from the center of the world through the moouable
center of the Excentrique unto the Eclipticke, and the point in the Eclipticke,
in which the said right line does end, is the place of the true Auge of the
Excentrique in the Eclipticke: and the said right line is called the line of
the true Auge of the Excentrique: as in the foresaid second figure the point A
signifying the center of the world, and the point C the center of the
Excentrique, in the superficies of which Excentrique the point D is furthest
distant from the center A, and therefore the point D is the true Auge of the
Excentrique: and the right line A C D is called the line of the true Auge of
the Excentrique: and the point K in the Eclipticke, in which the said line
ends, is the place of the true Auge in the Eclipticke, the finding whereof is
taught in the 16 Precept.

16. The motion of the true Auge of the Excentrique is an arch of the
Eclipticke, beginning at some principal point in the Eclipticke, and ending at
the line of the true Auge of the Excentrique: which principal point if it be
the first star of the Rams horn, then is the said motion called the moving
of the true Auge from the first star of Aries: and if the said motion or arch
does begin at the true Equinox, then is the said motion called the moving of
the true Auge from the true Equinox.

17. The equacion of the center is an arch of the Eclipticke, which is
comprehended betwixt the mean Auge of the outer black orbs, and the true
Auge of the Excentrique, as in the foresaid second figure of this Chapter, the
arch K G in the Eclipticke is called the equacion of the center: and this
equacion never exceeds 7 degrees, i23^ ii36^ the manner of the finding of
which equacion is showed in the 15 Precept, by help of the 17 Cannon in that
Colume, whose title is Centri.

18. The true Argument of the Sun, which is also called the equated yearly
Anomalia, is an arch of the Ecliptic, which is contained betwixt the line of
the true Auge of the Excentrique, and the line of the Imaginary motion of the
Sun. As in the foresaid second figure the line A K is the line of the true
Auge of the Excentrique, and the place of the said true Auge in the Eclipticke
is the point K. Likewise the line A N is the line of the Imaginary motion of
the Sun. Now the arch of the Eclipticke, which is contained betwixt the 2
points K and N, is called the true Argument or equated Argument of the Sun.
For the difference betwixt the mean and true Arguments of the Sun, is also
the difference which is betwixt the mean and true Auge of the Excentrique,
which difference is called the equacion of the center before defined in the 17
definition of this Chapter. The manner of equating the Argument, is taught in
the 15 Precept.

19. The equal simple moving of the Sun is an arch of the Ecliptic,
beginning at the first star of the Rams horn, and ending at the line of the
Imaginary motion (which line we call hereafter the line of the mean moving
of the Sun) as in the foresaid second figure of this Chapter, the arch * N is
the equal simple moving of the Sun: The quantity of which simple moving
is i59^ ii8^ iii1^ iiii22^ every day, and according to this motion the Sun
makes one entire revolution in 365 days, 6 hours, i9^ ii39^

20. The equal compound moving of the Sun is an arch of the Eclipticke,
beginning at the mean vernall Equinox, and ending at the line of the mean
moving of the Sun. Whereby it appears, that if the mean Precession of the
Equinox be added unto the equal simple motion of the Sun, the sum of that
addition will be the compound motion of the Sun. And the daily compound motion
is i^^ ii8^ iii19^ iiii13^ whereby the Sun according to the equal compound
motion makes his revolution in 365 days, 5 hours, i49^ ii16^ The manner of
finding of these two equal motions of the Sun, that is to say, the simple and
compound moving, is taught in the 8 Precept, by help of the 13 and 14 Cannons.

21. The true motion of the Sun is an arch of the Eclipticke, beginning at
the first star of the Rams horn, and ending at the true place of the Sun:
and then is the said true motion called the true moving of the Sun under the 8
sphere. But sometimes the said arch of true motion is supposed to begin at the
true Vernall Equinox, and then it is called the true motion of the Sun under
the first mouable.

22. The proportional minutes are the 60 parts whereby the equacions of the
Argument do increase or decrease, according as the excentricitie of the Sun
increases or decreaseth. The finding of which proportional minutes is taught
in the fifteenth Precept, and are set down in the seventeenth Cannon in the
Collum, whose title is Scrupula Proportionalia.

23. The equacion of the Argument or yearly Prosthapheresis is an arch of the
Eclipticke, which is comprehended betwixt the line of the mean moving and the
line of the true moving of the Sun. And this equacion of the Argument is
nothing, when the Sun is either in the Auge or in the opposite Auge of the
Excentrique, and is always greatest in the mean longitudes of the Sun:
which mean longitudes are pointed out in the circumference of the Excentrique,
by a right line drawn perpendicularly upon the line of the true Auge through
the center of the world. As in the foresaid second figure of this Chapter, the
line A D is the line of the true Auge of the Excentrique, which another line
crosses with right angles in the point A, which perpendicular line is the line
T V, and being produced unto the Excentrique, shows the points T and V to be
the points of mean longitudes. And the greatest equacion of the Argument that
can be, which is when the center of the Excentrique is in the Auge of the
little circle, is two degrees, i23^ ii24^ and that is when the Sun is distant
from the true Auge or from the Auge of the Excentrique 93 degrees. But when the
center of the Excentrique is in the opposite Auge of the said little circle,
then is the greatest equacion of the Argument no more but 1 degree, i50^ ii41^
and that is when the distance of the Sun from the true Auge, is 92 degrees.
And this equacion is called in the tables, The equacion of the orb: the
finding whereof is taught in the 15 Precept, by help of the 17 Cannon, in the
Collum whose title is Orbis.

24. The true argument of the Sun, is the distance of the Sun from the true
Auge of his Excentrique.

25. The excess or diversity of the diameter, is an arch of the Eclipticke,
whereby the equacion of the argument (the center of the Excentrique being in
the Auge of the little circle) exceeds the equacion of the argument, when the
center of the Excentrique is in the opposite Auge of the little circle. The true
argument of the Sun being of one self quantity in each position of the
center of the Excentrique in the circumference of the little circle. For the
equacions of the argument do decrease continually, so long as the center of
the Excentrique is descending from the Auge of the little circle, until it
come to the opposite Auge of the said little circle, and from thence do begin
again to increase, until the center of the Excentrique returns again unto
the Auge of the little circle. The finding of which Excess is taught in the 15
Precept, and is set down in the 17 Cannon in that Colume, whose title is
Excessus.

26. The coequated and true equacion, which is otherwise called the absolute
equacion of the orb, is an arch compounded of the true equacion of the
argument, and of the excess, proportionable unto the proportional minutes.

CHAP. IX.
Of the third Heaven, or Heaven of Venus.
THe next Heaven under that of the Sun, is the Heaven of Venus, which has
his proper moving from West to East.

This Heaven has four orbs, as the Heaven of the three higher Planets have,
that is to say, two, which are called the deferents of the two Auges, then the
Orb Excentrique, or the deferent of the Epicicle, and the Epicicle it self,
in the circumference whereof the Planet is always carried. And because I have
defined the said orbs in the fifth Chapter, I think them needless to be here
again repeated: and therefore I refer you to that Chapter: For the Orbs of
Venus do not differ from the Orbs of Saturn in shape and position, but only
in the quantity of their motions.

The deferents of the Auge and opposite Auge in the Heaven of Venus do continue
without any motion, and the place of her Auge, which is in the Eclipticke of
the eight Heaven, is always 48 degrees, i21^ reckoning from the first star
of the Rams horn: and the opposite Auge is always 3 Sex. 48 degrees, i21^ from
the first star of the Rams horn, accounting the said distance according to
the succession of the signs. The Excentrique of Venus moves according to the
succession of the signs upon his proper center, which is differing from the
center of the world, and the poles and axletree of this Orb are moouable,
sometimes approaching near unto the poles of the Eclipticke, and at other times
are further off. Howbeit this Excentrique makes one entire revolution,
beginning at the first star of the Rams horn in 365 days, 6 hours, i9^
ii39^ so as the moving of this orb is equal unto the simple equal moving of
the Sun, before defined in the 19 definition of the 8 Chapter. And therefore
the line of the mean moving of the center of Venus her Epicicle, is always
in the same place of the Zodiake, in which the line of the mean moving of the
Sun is: so as in seeking for the mean moving of Venus her longitude, you are
to find the simple equal moving of the Sun in such order as the eight
Precept teaches: from which if you subtract 48 degrees, i21^ the remainer will
show the mean Anomalia of the Excentrique, or mean center, before defined in
the 13 definition of the 7 Chapter. Which if you subtract out of the true
motion of the longitude of the Epicicle (which is defined in the 17 definition
of the 7 Chapter) the remainer will be the true center or the equated Anomalia
of the Excentrique, which is defined in the 16 definition of the 7 Chapter.

The Epicicle of Venus has also his proper motion in the Excentrique, whereby
it swarueth from the plane of the Excentrique.

The semidiameter of the Epicicle is 43 degrees, i10^ such like degrees, as the
semidiameter of the Excentrique contains 60 degrees. And because that the
line of the mean moving of her center is all one with the line of the mean
moving of the Sun, it may easily appear, that the star or Planet will be
twice conjoined with the Sun in one revolution of her Epicicle, that is to
say, once in the Auge, and once in the opposite Auge of the Epicicle. But if she
be neither in the Auge nor in the opposite Auge of the Epicicle, then in her
ascending from the opposite Auge of her Epicicle unto the Auge thereof she goes
before the Sun, and is our morning star, called of the Latins Lucifer. But
in descending from the Auge of her Epicicle unto the opposite Auge thereof, she
goes after the Sun, and is our evening star, called of the Latins Hesperus.

The daily moving of the Anomalia of Commutation (which was defined in the 23
definition of the 7 chapter) is i16^ ii59^ iii28^ and the yearly motion
thereof is 3 Sex. 45 degrees, i1^ ii45^ iii21^ and makes one entire revolution
in one year 218 days, 21 hours, 15 minutes.

The greatest equacion of her Epicicle is 45 degrees, i10^ ii20^ if the center
of the Epicicle be in the Auge of her Excentrique, and that the Planet be
distant from the Auge of the Epicicle any way 2 Sex. 15 degrees, i5^ but if the
center of the Epicicle be in the opposite Auge of the Excentrique, and that the
Planet be distant 2 Sex. 17 degrees from the Auge of the Epicicle, then is the
greatest equacion of the argument of Venus 46 degrees, i51^ ii29^ What other
points, lines, and arches are needful to be known for the calculating of her
motion at any time, are set down before in the 7 Chapter, unto which I refer
you, only the finding of the equacions belonging unto this Planet, must be
sought for in the 22 Cannon, in such order as is taught in the 34 Precept. And
thus I end with Venus.

CHAP. X.
Of the second Heaven, or Heaven of Mercury.
NExt under the Heaven of Venus is the Heaven of Mercury, which consists of
six orbs, that is to say, 2 deferents of the Auge of the circle Equant, two
deferents of the Auge of the Anomalia of the Excentrique, the fifth orb is the
Excentrique, and the sixth is the Epicicle.

The five first orbs are in all respects like unto the five orbs of the Sun,
whereof we spoke in the 8 Chapter. And the sixth orb, which is the Epicicle,
is like unto the Epicicle in the other Planets whereof we spoke in the fifth
Chapter. Notwithstanding I think it not amiss for your better understanding to
set down the said orbs in this figure here next following.

The first figure belonging to the Theorique of Mercury.
IN this figure the two outermost circles, in which are set the caracters of
the twelve signs, do signify the two Ecliptickes, one of the first mouable,
the other the Eclipticke of the eight Heaven. The two broad and black circles
do signify the two deferents of the Auge of the circle Equant, and the two
shaddowed circles do signify the deferents of the Auge of the Excentrique, and
betwixt them is a broad white circle, which represents the Excentrique: in
the midst whereof is the circumference of a circle, which the center of the
Epicicle is imagined to describe. And another circumference is also drawn in
the said Excentrique, which cutteth the former circumference in the two points
I and G, and this circumference signifies the circle Equant. Again, in the
Excentrique is another little circle, representing the Epicicle, the center
whereof is the point H, and in the circumference thereof is a little star,
which signifies the Planet of Mercury. The point in the middle of ^^is
Figure, which is marked with the letter A, signifies the center of the world,
and C is the center of the Excentrique, and B is the center of a little circle,
in the circumference whereof the center C always moves about the center B,
and D is the center of the circle Equant.

The motion of the two deferents of the Auge of the Equant is like unto the
motion of the deferents of the mean Auge of the Sun, for it is equal and
regular upon the center of the world according to the succession of the signs,
that is to say, from West to East upon their own proper poles, which are
equally distant from the poles of the Eclipticke: and the daily motion of these
orbs is iii9^ iiii31^ and their yearly motion is ii57^ iii50^ iiii38^ and so
do make one entire revolution in 22700 Egyptian years.

The excentricitie, that is to say, the distance of the center of the circle
Equant from the center of the world, is 3 degrees, such degrees as the
semidiameter of the said circle Equant contains 60 degrees. The line A B N
signifies the line of the Auge of the circle Equant: and this line is drawn
through the center of the world, and also through the center of the little
circle, marked with B, even as the line of the mean Auge of the Sun is wont
to be drawn, as was said in the third definition of the eight Chapter. And the
place of the Auge of the said circle Equant is marked with the letter N, like
as the point M is the place of the opposite Auge of the said circle Equant. And
the arch of the eight Eclipticke, marked with the first star of the Rams
horn, and with the letters M N, is the motion of the Auge of the Equant under
the eight sphere. But the arch D M N is the motion of the said Auge under the
first mouable or from the true Equinoctial point, marked in the said
Eclipticke of the first mouable with the letter D.

The deferents of the Excentrique do move regularly about the center of the
little circle, contrary to the succession of the signs, as the orbs of the
Anomalia of the Auge of the Sun do move namely upon their proper poles and
axletree, and do make their revolution in 365 days, 6 hours, i33^ ii8^ and
their daily motion is i59^ ii8^ iii^ iiii52^ And the center of the little
circle is distant from the center of the world 6 degrees, and from the center
of the Equant 3 degrees, such degrees I mean as the semidiameter of the Equant
contains 60 degrees. By means of which motion, the excentricitie of the
Planet changes every day, and is greatest when the center of the Excentrique
is in the Auge of the little circle, and the said excentricitie is least when
the center of the said Excentrique is in the opposite Auge of the said little
circle, and the said excentricitie is mean when the center of the center of
the Excentrique is in the middle point betwixt the Auge and opposite Auge of the
said little circle. All which things were showed in the 7, 8, and 9 definitions
of the 8 Chapter.

The Excentrique has his proper motion upon his own poles, which are also
moouable, and the motion thereof is according to the succession of the signs,
which motion although it be irregular and unequal in respect of the center of
the world, yet is the same regular and equal in respect of the center of the
circle Equant: and the daily motion is i59^ ii8^ iii1^ iiii52^ and makes one
entire revolution in 365 days, 6 hours, i33^ ii8^ And this motion is found by
subtracting the daily motion of the deferents of the Auge of the Equant (which
is iii9^ iiii31^) out of the daily motion of the longitude of Mercury, which
is i59^ ii8^ iii11^ iiii22^ for so the remainer will be i59^ ii8^ iii1^ iiii52^
which sum is the daily motion of the Excentrique, counting from the line of
the Auge of the Equant. And you have to note, that the motion of the longitude
of Mercury is equal unto the simple equal moving of the Sun, so as when
you are to find out the equal longitude of Mercury, you have to seek in the
Prutenical tables the equal simple moving of the Sun for the time given: and
as for the moving of the Anomalia of the Excentrique, you are taught how to
find the same at any time by the 8 Precept, by help of the 13 and 14 Cannons,
in the Collum, whose title is Apogei Mercurij.

As for the true Auge of the Excentrique, the same is found as was showed, in
the 15 definition of the 8 Chap.

The Epicicle of Mercury has his proper motion upon his mouable axletree, and
the daily motion thereof is 3 degrees, i6^ ii24^ iii14^ iiii5^ v36^ and makes
one entire revolution in 115 days, 21 hours, i3^ ii26^ iii54^ and the
semidiameter of the Epicicle is 22 degrees, i30^ such degrees as the
semidiameter of the Excentrique contains 60, like as was said before of
Venus: For since the motion of his longitude is always equal unto the equal
simple moving of the Sun, it cannot be but that this Planet must be always
near unto the Sun; sometimes going before the same, and then it may be seen
in the morning before the Sun rises; and sometimes it follows the Sun, and
then it may be seen in the evening.

Lastly, the greatest equacion of the Argument of Mercury, when the center of
his Epicicle is in the Auge of his Excentrique (the Planet being then distant
from the Auge of the Epicicle 109 degrees) is 19 degrees, i3^ ii6^ But if he be
distant 114 degrees from the Auge of his Epicicle, and that the center of the
Epicicle be in the opposite Auge of the Excentrique, then is the greatest
equacion of his argument 23 degrees, i^1^ ii35^

Now, as for the points, lines, and arches belonging to the calculating of the
Motions of Mercury, because they do not differ from those which we have
showed in the 5 Chapter, I therefore refer you to that Chapter: and as for
the particular equacions, you shall find them set down in the 23 Cannon of the
Prutenicall Tables.

CHAP. XI.
Of the first Heaven, or Heaven of the Moon.
THe last or lowest Heaven is the Heaven of the Moon, and it consists of
four orbs, whereof the first is called the orb or circle of Nodes, or the
deferent of the head and tail of the Dragon.

The next orb is called the deferent of the Epicicles.

The third orb is called the first Epicicle.

And the fourth is the second Epicicle.

All which orbs are set down in this figure following.

The first figure belonging to the Theorique of the Moon.
You shall find the two Epicicles of the Moon more plainly set down in the
third figure here following.

IN the former figure, the two outermost circles do signify the two
Eclipticks, as in the Heaven of Mercury. Next unto them is another white
circle, in which are set the caracters of the head and tail of the Dragon,
signifying the deferent of the Nodes, and in the middle thereof is the
circumference of a circle, in which the two Nodes do continually move. Next
unto that is a great broad and black orb, signifying the deferent of the
Epicicles: in which orb is a shadowed circle, which represents the first
Epicicle, whose center is marked with the letter E: and upon the perpendicular
line C B are placed two other little circles, one above, and another beneath
the center E, both whose centres are marked with the letter F, and these two
little circles being white within, do signify the second Epicicles. And in
the circumference of either of them is set the caracter of the Moon. The point
A signifies the center of the world, the point B signifies the Auge of the
first Epicicle, and the point C is the opposite Auge of the said first Epicicle.

1. The deferent of the Nodes is an orb in the Theorique of the Moon, in
which the Nodes do continually move, marked in the former figure with the head
and tail of the Dragon, describing the middle circle of the said orb. This
orb is concentricall, that is, has one self center with the Zodiake: and the
motion of this orb is regular and equal in respect of the center of the
earth, upon the axletree and poles of the Zodiake, contrary to the succession
of the signs, and the daily motion thereof is i3^ ii10^ iii47^ and in one
year moves 19 degrees, i10^ ii3^ iii44^ and so makes one entire revolution
in 18 Egyptian years, 223 days, 6 hours, i12^ and by the violence or
strength of his motion, he carries the other orbs round about with him.

2. The deferent of the Epicicles is the foresaid black Orb in the Theorique
of the Moon, in which the Epicicles of the Moon are carried continually
about. And this black orb has his own proper motion, which is according to
the succession of the signs, and is regular in respect of the center of the
world, marked with the letter A, and moves upon his own axletree, which
cutteth the axletree of the Eclipticke in the point A, the center of the world,
and the poles thereof are always no more but five degrees from the Eclipticke:
whereby it happens, that the plane of this Orb cutteth the plane of the
Eclipticke in two points, which are called the Nodes, or the head and tail of
the Dragon. For the understanding whereof I have set down this other figure
next following.

The second figure belonging to the Theorique of the Moon.
IN which figure the circle F C E K signifies the plane of the Eclipticke, and
the center thereof is marked with the point A: and the circle F B E I
signifies the plane of the deferent of the Epicicle, in the circumference
whereof is the center of the first Epicicle, marked with the letter L; and in
the circumference thereof is the center of the second Epicicle, marked with the
letter M, and in the circumference thereof is the character of the Moon: and
the center of the deferent of the Epicicle, is the same which the Eclipticke
has, that is to say, the center A; and this circle crosses the Eclipticke in
two opposite points, that is to say, in the point F and E, called the Nodes, the
one of which is called the head of the Dragon, marked with this caracter (...),
and the other is called the tail of the Dragon, marked with this caracter
(...). Unto either of which two Nodes when the Moon comes, then she is in the
Eclipticke, and in her moving from either of the said two Nodes she goes
further and further from the Eclipticke, until she come to one of the 2 limits
of her latitude either North or South.

3. Whereof her North limit is marked in this figure with the letter B, and her
South limit with the letter l, either of which limits is never more distant
from the Ecliptic than five degrees, but from the Nodes each limit is distant
90 degrees.

4. And hereby you may gather, that the two Nodes are nothing else but two
points, in which the plane of the deferent of the Epicicles does cross the
plane of the Eclipticke. And the one of these Nodes is called the ascending
Node or head of the Dragon, and the other is called the descending Node or the
tail of the Dragon.

5. The head of the Dragon is that Node, unto which when the Moon comes, she
begins to go Northward from the Eclipticke: and that Node is marked with
this caracter (...).

6. The tail of the Dragon is that Node, unto which when the Moon comes,
she begins to go Southward from the Ecliptic, which Node is marked with
this caracter (...).

7. The line of the mean or true moving of the Nodes is a line drawn from the
center of the world unto any of the said Nodes: as in the former figure the
line A F signifies the line of the moving of the head of the Dragon, and the
line A E signifies the line of the moving of the tail of the Dragon.

8. The mean moving of the Nodes is an arch of the Eclipticke, beginning at
the first star of the Rams home or at the first true Vernall Equinox, and
ends at the line of the moving of the Node, so as the said arch be reckoned
contrary to the succession of the signs.

9. The true moving of the Nodes is an arch of the Eclipticke, beginning at
the first star of the Rams horn, if the same be reckoned in the Eclipticke of
the eight Heaven, or at the true Vernall Equinox, if the same be reckoned in
the Eclipticke of the first mouable, and ending at the line of the moving of
the Node, so as the said arch be numbered according to the succession of the
signs.

10. The line of the mean moving of the Moon is a line drawn from the center
of the world through the center of the first Epicicle, and so forth unto the
Eclipticke. As for example, in the first figure the right line A E B is the
line of the mean moving of the Moon.

11. The place of the center of the first Epicicle in the Eclipticke, is that
point in which the line of the mean moving of the Moon falls in the
Eclipticke. As in the said first figure the point B in the Eclipticke is the
place of the center of the first Epicicle.

12. The mean simple moving of the Moons longitude, is an arch of the
Eclipticke, beginning at the first star of the Rams horn, and ending at the
place of the center of the first Epicicle. As in the said first figure the arch
* H K is called the mean, equal, or simple moving of the Moons longitude: and
the daily moving of this simple longitude is 13 degrees, i10^ ii34^ iii53^ and
according unto this motion the Moon makes her revolution in 27 days, 7
hours, i43^ ii7^ for in this time she returns unto the first star of the
Rams horn, and this is called the Periodicall month. As in the first figure
the arch * H K is the equal simple moving of the longitude of the Moon.

13. But if the said motion does begin at the mean place of the Sun, that
is, at the line of the mean moving of the Sun, then is it called the equal
or mean longitude of the Moon from the Sun, and then the daily motion is 12
degrees i11^ ii26^ iii41^ and according unto this, the Moon makes her
revolution in 29 days, 12 hours, i44^ ii3^ and the time of this revolution is
called the Synodicall month. So as if you subtract the equal simple moving
of the Sun out of the equal simple moving of the Moons longitude, the
remainer will show the mean longitude of the Moon from the Sun. As in the
said first figure suppose the arch * H to be the equal simple moving of the
Sun, and the arch * H K to be the equal simple moving of the Moons
longitude. Now if you subtract * H out of * H K, the remainer will be H K, and
that is the mean longitude of the Moon from the Sun. And the finding of
this at any time given, is taught in the 8 Precept, by help of the 13 and 14
Cannons, in the Collume whose title is Longitudo media a Sole.

14. And again, sometimes the mean moving of the center of the first
Epicicle or of the Moon, is accounted to begin at the North limit, and then is
it called by Ptolomey and Copernicus the mean motion of the latitude of the
Moon; because that after the same be corrected, it shows the true latitude
of the Moon: and the finding of this motion at any time is to be found in such
order as is showed in the 8 Precept, by help of the 13 and 14 Cannons in the
Colume, whose title is Latitudinis Lunae.

15. But Alphonsus and his followers make the beginning of the said motion to
be at the head of the Dragon, and is called by them the Argument of the
latitude of the Moon, and the daily motion of the Moons latitude is 13
degrees, i1^ ii45^ iii^9^ and according unto this motion she makes her
revolution in 27 days, 5 hours, i5^ ii36^ And the Argument of the Moons
latitude is to be sound at any time given, by adding of 90 degrees unto the
mean motion of her latitude: the manner of the finding whereof was showed in
the 14 definition of this Chapter.

16. And you have to note, that according to the motion of the deferent of the
Epicicle, the center of the Epicicle is imagined to describe a circle in the
middle of the said deferent: which circle is called the circle of the moving of
the center; and this circle is signified in the first figure by the white
circle in the middle of the black deferent of the Epicicle, described by the
center of the first Epicicle.

17. The first Epicicle is an orb in the Theorique of the Moon, which
continually carries about the second Epicicle of the Moon. This orb has his
own proper motion about his own poles and axletree, which axletree is
perpendicular unto the plane of the deferent of the Epicicle, and is parallel
unto the said axletree of the said deferent: whereby it comes to pass, that
the plane of this first Epicicle is always in the plane of his deferent. And
the motion of this Epicicle is contrary to the succession of the signs, and
the daily motion thereof is 13 degrees, i3^ ii53^ iii56^ and makes one entire
revolution in 27 days and 13 hours almost: and the semidiameter of this
Epicicle is 6 degrees, i35^ whereof the semidiameter of the moving of his
center contains 60.

18. The Auge of the first Epicicle is a point in the superficies thereof,
which is furthest distant from the center of the earth. And the opposite Auge is
that point which is nearest unto the center of the earth. And the Auge and
opposite Auge is determined by a right line drawn from the center of the earth
unto the circumference of the said first Epicicle, through the center of the
same. As in the first figure the point B is the Auge of the first Epicicle, and
the point C the opposite Auge thereof.

19. The mean Anomalia of the Epicicle, which is otherwise called the mean
Argument, is an arch of the first Epicicle, containing the distance betwixt the
center of the second Epicicle, and the Auge of the first Epicicle. And this is
determined by a right line drawn from the center of the first Epicicle unto
the center of the second Epicicle, as this figure next following shows.

The third figure belonging to the Theorique of the Moon.
IN which figure, the outermost circle represents the Eclipticke, and the
lesser circle within that is a circle which the center of the first Epicicle is
imagined to describe. The semidiameter whereof is the line A E, and the point E
signifies the center of the first Epicicle, whose semidiameter is the line E
B, and the point B is the Auge, and the point C the opposite Auge thereof: the
point F signifies the center of the second Epicicle, and the arch B F is the
mean Anomalia of the Moon: and this is called Anomalia motus in the
Prutenicall tables, the finding whereof is taught in the 8 Precept by help of
the 13 and 14 Cannons, in the Colume, whose title is Anomalia Lunae.

20. The first Epicicle is imagined to be divided into two parts, whereof the
one part is called the higher or upper part, and the other is called the lower
part of the Epicicle. And these two parts are showed by two right lines, drawn
from the center of the world, marked with A, so as they touch the said first
Epicicle on both sides. As in this present figure the two lines, A L and A M
are drawn from the center A, and do touch the first Epicicle in the points L
and M: and that part of the Epicicle, which is above the points L and M, marked
with the letters L B F M, is the higher part, but the other part, viz. L C M,
is the lower part of the Epicicle.

21. And the two points L and M are the Touch-points of the first Epicicle.

22. The second Epicicle is an Orb in the Theorique of the Moon, in the
circumference whereof the body of the Moon is always carried about.

The plane of this Epicicle is always in the plane of the first, and the
axletree thereof is perpendicular unto the plane of the first Epicicle, and
therefore the axletrees of the two Epicicles and of the deferent of the first
Epicicle, are paralels one to another.

And the moving of this second Epicicle is contrary unto the moving of the
first Epicicle: and the motion hereof begins at the Auge of the second
Epicicle.

23. The Auge of the second Epicicle is that point in the circumference of the
said second Epicicle, which is nearest unto the center of the first Epicicle:
and the opposite Auge thereof is furthest from the center of the said Epicicle:
for these Auges have respect to the center of the first Epicicle, and not to
the center of the earth.

24. The Anomalia of the Excentrique, which some call the center of the Moon,
is an arch of the second Epicicle, beginning at the Auge of the said second
Epicicle, and ending at the body of the Moon. As in the third figure of this
Chapter the point R signifies the Auge of the second Epicicle, and the place
of the Moon is signified by her proper caracter in the circumference thereof,
and the arch of the said little circle, contained betwixt R and the caracter of
the Moon, is called the Anomalia of the Excentrique, or center of the Moon.
And this Anomalia is called in the Prutenicall Tables Longitudo Duplicata, or
the double longitude of the Moon from the Sun: and the simple longitude was
defined before in the 13 definition of this Chapter.

And it is called the doubled longitude, because that the motion of the Moon
in the second Epicicle is double unto the motion of the center of the first
Epicicle, from the line of the mean moving of the Sun. For according unto
this motion the Moon makes her revolution in 14 days, 18 hours, i22^ ii1^
and her daily motion is 24 degrees, i22^ ii53^ iii23^ and is found in the
Prutenicall tables, by doubling the mean longitude of the Moon from the Sun.

25. The line of the true Anomalia of the Moon is a right line drawn from the
center of the first Epicicle unto the body of the Moon. As in the third figure
of this Chapter the right line E G, and the caracter of the Moon is called the
line of the true Anomalia, because it is drawn from the center of the first
Epicicle, which is marked with the letter E, unto the body of the Moon, marked
with the caracter of the Moon.

26. The true Anomalia of the Moon, which the Alphonsines do call the true
Argument, is an arch of the first Epicicle, contained betwixt the Auge of the
said first Epicicle, and the line of the true Anomalia. As in the said third
figure the arch B G is called the true or equated Anomalia, or the true
Argument of the Moon.

27. The equacion of the center, which in the Prutenicall tables is called the
equacion of the second Epicicle, is an arch of the first Epicicle, whereby the
true and mean Anomalias do differ the one from the other. As in the said third
figure the arch B G is the true Argument of Moon, and the arch B F is the mean
Anomalia or Argument of the Moon, or of the Epicicle, defined in the 19
definition of this Chapter: the difference betwixt these two arches, is the
little arch G F, and this difference, is called the Prosthapheresis of the
center. The finding whereof by the Prutenicall tables, is taught in the 24
Precept, by help of the 18 Cannon, in that Collum whose title is Secundi
Epicycli. And this equacion is to be added or subtracted from the mean
Anomalia, as is showed in the said 24 Precept, to the end that the true
Argument or Anomalia may be had. And the greatest equacion that can be, is 12
degrees, i26^ ii57^ which then happens, when the Moon is in either of the
Touch-points of the second Epicicle: which Touch-points are determined by two
right lines drawn from the center of the first Epicicle: and touching the
circumference of the second Epicicle, on each side thereof.

28. The line of the true motion of the Moon is a right line drawn from the
center of the world, through the body of the Moon unto the Ecliptic, and the
point in the Eclipticke, where that line ends, is the true place of the
Moon: as in the third figure the line A G T signifies the line of her true
moving, and the point T is the true place of the Moon.

29. The true or apparent motion of the Moon is an arch of the Eclipticke,
beginning at some known place of the Eclipticke, and ending a^ the true place
of the Moon: which arch does begin either at the first star of the Rams
horn, or at the Vernall Equinox, either mean or true, or else at the line of
the mean place of the Sun. As in the said third figure the arch * T is the
apparent or true moving of the Moon from the first star of the Rams horn.

30. The equacion of the first Epicicle is an arch of the Eclipticke, contained
betwixt the line of the mean moving of the Moon, and the line of her true
moving. As for example, in the third figure of this Chapter the line A V is the
line of the mean moving of the Moon, and the line A T is the line of her true
moving, and the arch of the Eclipticke, contained betwixt these two lines, that
is to say, the arch T V, is called the equacion of the first Epicicle, or the
equacion of the Argument. And the finding of this equacion at any time given,
is taught in the 24 Precept, by help of the 18 Cannon, in the Collum, whose
title is Primi Epicycli. But because this equacion does vary, and is sometimes
greater and sometimes lesser, therefore the absolute and perfect equacion is to
be found by the proportional minutes, and the excess, which were defined
before in the 29 definition of the fifth Chapter, and therefore I need not here
again to define the same, but only to tell you, that the proportional minutes
are to be found in the 18 Cannon, in the Collum, whose title is Scrupula
Proportionalia: and the excess is to be found in the said 18 Cannon, in the
Colume, whose title is Excessus.

Here ends my Extract of Maginus his Theoriques: And if this my labor shall
content you, then look shortly for the use of the Prutenicall Tables.
THE MAKING, DESCRIPTION, AND USE, OF TWO MOST INGENIOVS AND necessary
Instruments for Seamen, to find out thereby the latitude of any place upon the
Sea or Land, in the darkest night that is, without the help of Sun, Moon,
or Star.

First invented by my good friend, Master Doctor Gilbert, a most excellent
Philosopher, and one of the ordinary Physicians to her Majesty: and now here
plainly set down in our mother tongue by Master Blundeuile.

LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip. 1602.

THE MAKING, DEscription, and use, of two most Ingenious and necessary
Instruments for Seamen, to find out thereby the latitude of any place upon the
Sea or Land, in the darkest night that is, without the help of Sun, Moon,
or Star.
OF which two Instruments, the one serves to find out the declination of the
Needle under any Horizon, which declination being once had, then the other
Instrument shows the latitude of that place, having such declination. But
because the Instrument of Latitude consists of two parts, that is to say, of
an immoouable part, which I call the Matter, having therein a Quadrant,
containing the 90 degrees of Latitude, and also a Spirall line: and the other
part is moouable, containing a Quadrant, divided into 90 degrees, which are the
degrees of declination, and also an Index, with a Fiduciall line, showing the
Latitude: I mind first here to set down the making of the Instrument of
Latitude, because it requires a number of circles, to find out thereby the
Spirall line, contained in the Matter of the said instrument of Latitude, the
order whereof is here plainly set down, as well by this figure demonstratiue,
hereto annexed, as by this my description of the same.

The Figure.

FIrst draw a circle upon a piece of smooth pastbord, so great, as the whole
diameter thereof may contain in length at the least seven or eight inches, and
mark the center of that circle with the letter C: and by drawing two cross
diameters, marked with the letters I F and K E, passing through the said
center, and crossing one another in the same with right angles, you shall
thereby divide the whole circle into four Quadrants or quarters. And remember,
that of the two cross diameters, the perpendicular, marked with I F, must be
produced in such sufficient length, as may serve to such purpose as is
hereafter showed, as from I to H, so as this perpendicular line is marked with
four letters, that is, F C I H, and the other cross or overthwart diameter is
marked with three letters, viz. K C E. That done, divide the nether quarter of
the said circle on the right hand, marked with the letters F E, into 90
degrees, proceeding from five to five, till you come to 90, marking the same
Quadrant with the letters F C E, beginning to account from F to E, which is the
arch of the said Quadrant, which I will call from henceforth the inner
Quadrant, by help whereof you have to divide as well the middle Quadrant,
marked with L N, as the outwardmost Quadrant, marked with M H, as the Figure
shows. And the two last Quadrants do contain each of them 19 circular lines
of division, making 18 spaces, every space containing five degrees, and are to
be drawn in such order as follows.

First, you have to draw a right line parallel to C E* beginning at F, and so
proceeding forward toward your right hand in some sufficient length, for the
longer, the better to serve your purpose. Then take with your Compass the
distance betwixt C and F, and apply that distance to the said right parallel
line, by putting the one foot of your Compass in F, and the other at the end of
that distance, marking that point with the letter L: then by setting the firm
foot of your Compass in C, and by extending the other foot to L, draw a portion
of a circle somewhat more than a Quadrant, toward your left hand, and mark the
end of that arch with the letter N, which arch is to be divided into 90 equal
parts or degrees, by help of 19 circular lines of division, to be drawn as
follows.

First set the firm foot of your Compass in F, and with the other foot,
extended to the center C, draw a circle from C to L, and that shall be the
first circle of division, showing that the point L is the first point from
whence you have to account the 90 degrees of the middle Quadrant, proceeding
upward by five and five, until you come to 90.

Then to draw the rest of the circles of division, belonging to the said middle
Quadrant, you have no more to do but to remove the firm foot of your Compass
to every fifth degree of the first and inner Quadrant, and always to extend the
other foot to the center C, so shall you justly divide the arch of the middle
Quadrant into 90 degrees. Now to draw the arch of the outwardmost Quadrant,
marked with M H, you must do thus. First take with your Compass the distance
betwixt the letter L and the center C, and apply that distance to the quarter
of the first whole circle on the left hand, marked with the letters F K, which
you shall find to be all one, then by setting the one foot of your Compass in F,
and by extending the other foot to the end of that distance upon the right
parallel line before drawn, and marked with the letters F L, mark that point
or end of distance with the letter M, as you see in the foresaid Figure. Then
set the firm foot of your Compass in the center C, and by extending the other
foot to the point M, draw a portion of a circle somewhat more than a Quadrant,
toward your left hand, and mark the end thereof with the letter H, which
shall be the arch of the outwardmost Quadrant, and must be divided into 90
equal parts or degrees, by help of 19 circles of division to be drawn as
follows.

First, by setting the firm foot of your Compass in F, and the other in K, draw
a circle from K to M, from which point you must begin to account the 90 degrees
of that arch, and so to proceed toward your left hand from 5 to 5 until you
come to 90, which division is to be made by remoouing the firm foot of your
Compass to every fifth point of division, contained in the arch of the first
inner Quadrant, marked with the letters F E, extending always the other
mouable foot to the letter K, and so to draw all the circles of division
belonging to the outwardmost Quadrant? That done, you have to draw the Spirall
line, which cannot be rightly done, until you have divided every one of the
circles of division, belonging to the outwardmost Quadrant, each one into 90
parts or degrees, beginning your account at every fifth degree of the arch of
the same outwardmost Quadrant, and so to proceed from 5 to 5, until you come
to the letter K, whereas the 90 degree of every such circle ends.

How to draw the Spirall line.
You see that in the foresaid Figure the Spirall line begins at the point L,
and ends at the center of the first whole circle, marked with C, as the first
circle of division, belonging to the middle Quadrant, drawn from C to L, does
plainly show.

But because the said Spirall line is to be drawn so as it may contain 18
several portions, you have to draw the first portion thereof thus. First
divide the second circular line of division, belonging to the outwardmost
Quadrant, into 90 equal parts or degrees, proceeding from the fifth point of
the said second line of division unto K, whereas is set down the 90 degree,
serving to all the 19 circles of division belonging to the said outwardmost
Quadrant: which is to be done, by dividing the said second line first into
three equal parts, and every one of those parts again into three. Then last of
all every one of them into two parts, every part whereof shall contain five
degrees. And after this manner is to be divided every one of the 19 lines of
division belonging to the said outwardmost Quadrant. That done, take with your
Compass the first fifth part of that second circle, being so divided, and there
make a prick: at which prick, lay the one end of your Ruler, and lay the other
end thereof at the first fifth degree of the inner Quadrant, and so draw a dead
right line, which will cut the second line of division belonging to the middle
Quadrant, and there make a prick, from which prick to the letter L you have
to draw the first portion of the Spirall line. Now to draw the second portion
of the said Spirall line, you must resort to the third circular line of
division, belonging to the outwardmost Quadrant: and having divided that line
into 90 equal parts or degrees, as you did before the second line, and taken
thereof with your Compass ten degrees, there make a prick, to which prick
lay the one end of your Ruler, and the other end to the tenth degree of the
inner Quadrant, and draw a dead right line, which will cut the third circular
line, serving to the middle Quadrant, and there make the second prick, from
which prick you have to draw the second portion of the Spirall line, so as it
may join with the first portion. Then to draw the third portion of the Spirall
line, you must proceed to the fourth circular line of division, belonging to
the outwardmost Quadrant, and divide that into 90 degrees, as you did before,
whereof you must take 15 degrees, and there make a prick, to which prick you
must lay the one end of your ruler, and the other end to the 15 degree of the
inner Quadrant, and having drawn a right dead line, you shall find that it
will cut the fourth circular line belonging to the middle Quadrant, and there
make a prick, from which prick you have to draw the third portion of the
Spirall line, so as it may join to the end of the second portion thereof. Now
to find out the rest of the 18 portions of the Spirall line, you must observe
the self same order of working, which you did before in finding out the first
three portions.

Thus having plainly described unto you the making of the immouable part or
Matter of the said Instrument, I will now show you how to make the moouable
part: which, as I said before, is none other thing but a Quadrant, having an
Index, with a Fiduciall line, answerable in all respects to the first inner
Quadrant, differing only in letters. For whereas the inner Quadrant is marked
with the letters F C E, this for difference sake, and for the right placing the
same upon the Matter, is marked with the letters A B G. For when you come to use
this Instrument, you must place the angle A of the moouable Quadrant upon the
center C of the inner Quadrant, there to be fastened with a pin, so as the
moouable Quadrant may turn round about upon the Matter.

And because this Instrument is not available, without the help of the other
Instrument of Declination, I have therefore here set down the shape of that
Instrument of Declination, together with a plain description thereof, and then
I will show the use of both the said Instruments.

The description of the said Instrument.
THe outward broad hoope or circle of this Instrument would be of fine Latton
or Brass, containing in breadth about an inch and a half, and in thickness
almost a quarter of an inch, and the whole diameter thereof would be about five
inches, and in the very midst of the inside of the broad circle is traced a
middle circle, which is divided into four quarters, every quarter containing
90 degrees, whereof no more are graven with numerall figures, but the two
nether quarters, the one on the right hand, and the other on the left hand,
and the 90 degree is placed at the nether end, whereas both those quarters do
meet. And at the upper end of the broad circle is to be placed a ringle to
hold the Instrument thereby, when you would use the same. Now overthwart the
said broad circle are fastened in the very midst of the two outsides thereof,
two thin plates of Latton, signifying the Horizon, bearing in breadth about a
quarter of an inch. The one plate on the one side of the broad circle, and the
other plate on the other side of the said circle, standing right and just one
against another: of which two plates, each one is bored in the very midst on
the inside with a little hole, so as into those two holes may be put an
axletree of iron, which axletree must be biggest in the very midst, to the
intent that the Needle being wrought into the axletree, may hang just in the
midst of the said axletree; which Needle would be smaller at the one end than
at the other, for the smallest and sharpest end thereof being touched with a
perfect stone, does always show the Magneticall declination of the place,
whereas you make your trial. And the Needle it self would be in length almost
equal to the whole diameter of the broad circle, yet so, as it may easily play
and turn up and down, without touching the same. These parts being fitly and
artificially set together, you have to cover the two outsides of the
Instrument, each of them with a round and clear glass, that through them you
may always see upon what degree the sharp point of the Needle falls, after
it remains steadie without moving: which glasses, serving to keep the Needle
from wind and dust, would be so fastened to the outwardmost edge of the broad
circle, as they may stand sure, and not fall away.

The use of the said two Instruments.
FIrst to find out by this Instrument the declination of the Needle under the
Horizon upon the land, you must resort into a place void of wind: or if you
would try it upon the Sea, I think it best to go to that place or coubbard
of the ship, wherein the Mariners Compass is wont to stand, and there steadily
to hold the Instrument, hanging upon your right or left thombe, so as it may
hang right North and South, according as the Mariners Compass does direct you,
or else by help of some little Dial, whose Needle is touched with a perfect
stone, and when you see that the Needle stands still, mark well upon what
degree in the middle line of the broad circle it falls, for that shall be
the degree of Declination for that place. And having found the degree of
Declination, take into your hand the Instrument of Latitude, made of Brass or
Pastbord, in such form as you see set down on the right hand of the first
figure demonstratiue: which Instrument of Latitude consists (as I have said
before) of two parts, the one vnmoouable, called the Matter, and the other
mouable. In the Matter is described a Quadrant, divided into 90 degrees, which
are the degrees of Latitude, and also the Spirall line. And the moouable part
contains a just Quadrant, divided also into 90 degrees, which are the degrees
of Declination, together with his Index, having a Fiduciall line to show the
latitude: and this moouable part, when you come to use it, must be placed upon
the Matter, so as the angle A of the moouable part must be fastened with a pin
upon the center or angle of the Matter, marked with the letter C, in such sort
as the moouable Quadrant may turn round about upon the Matter. That done, seek
out in the arch of the mouable Quadrant, the degree of Declination, before
found by the instrument of Declination; and lay that degree just upon the
Spirall line, described in the Matter, and holding it fast there with your
thombe, look at that very instant upon what degree of latitude the Index with
his Fiduciall line falls, for that shall be the latitude of that place.

As for example, M. Doctor Gilbert having found by the Instrument of
Declination, as he wrote to me, the declination at London to be 72 degrees:
then by applying the same to the Instrument of Latitude, in such order as is
before taught, he found the latitude of London to be 51 degrees, 32 minutes.
And I proving the same at mine own house at Newton Flotman, not distant above
four miles Southward from Norwich, I found the declination of the Needle to
be 73 degrees and a little more, and thereby I found our latitude here to be
52 degrees or thereabout.

Both these Instruments I received not long since from my dear friend M.
Doctor Gilbert, for the which I most heartely thank him, the invention of
which Instruments deserves more worthy commendation and praise, than I am
able any way to yield, hoping that all Seamen will be as thankful to him as
I am in heart and good will, for whose profit there was never invented from the
beginning of the world two such noble and necessary Instruments as these are,
and therefore worthy to be esteemed of all men accordingly.

By help of the said Instrument of Declination, you may also readily find out
the variation of any Mariners Compass in North-Easting or North-Westing, if you
place the Instrument within such a standerd as Robert Norman does set down by
figure in his book called, The new Attractiue: which point, Master Borrough
would have to be called the Respective point, and not the Attractiue. But M.
Doctor Gilbert in his book De Magnete, proves by diverse good demonstrations
that it ought most properly to be called the point of Coition, or the point
Coitiue, and neither Respective nor Attractiue. The manner how to use the said
Instrument, in seeking to know the variation of the Mariners Compass in any
latitude, is the selfsame which Robert Norman and Master Borrough do set
down in the foresaid book, whereunto I do refer you, and so bid you well
to fare.

FINIS.
A short Appendix annexed to the former Treatise by Edward Wright, at the
motion of the right Worshipful M. Doctor Gilbert.
BEcause the making and using of the foresaid Instrument, for finding the
latitude by the declination of the Magneticall Needle, will be too troublesome
for the most part of Seamen, being notwithstanding a thing most worthy to be
put in daily practice, especially by such as undertake long voyages: it was
thought meet by my worshipful friend M. Doctor Gilbert, that (according to M.
Blundeuiles earnest request) this Table following should be hereunto adioined;
which M. Henry Brigs (professor of Geometry in Gresham College at London)
calculated and made out of the doctrine and tables of Triangles, according to
the Geometrical grounds and reason of this Instrument, appearing in the 7 and
8 Chapter of M. Doctor Gilberts fifth book of the Loadstone. By help of which
Table, the Magneticall declination being given, the height of the Pole may most
easily be found, after this manner.

With the Instrument of Declination before described, find out what the
Magneticall declination is at the place where you are: Then look that
Magneticall declination in the second Collume of this Table, and in the same
line immediately toward the left hand, you shall find the height of the Pole at
the same place, unless there besome variation of the declination, which must
be found out by particular ob^eruation in every place.

The Table follows on the next Page. First Col^^^. Second Col^^^. First
Col^^^. Second Col^^^. First Col^^^. Second Col^^^. Height of the Pole.
Magnetical declination. Height of the Pole. Magnetical declination. Height of
the Pole. Magneticall declination. Degrees. Degrees. M^n. Degrees. Degrees Min.
Degrees. Degr. Mi^. 1 2 11 31 52 27 61 79 29 2 4 20 32 53 41 62 ^0 4 3 6 27 33
54 53 63 80 38 4 8 31 34 56 4 64 81 11 5 10 34 35 57 13 65 81 43 6 12 34 36 58
21 66 82 13 7 14 32 37 59 28 67 82 43 8 16 28 38 60 33 68 83 12 9 18 22 39 61
37 69 83 40 10 20 14 40 62 39 70 84 7 11 22 4 41 63 40 71 84 32 12 23 52 42 64
39 72 84 57 13 25 38 43 65 38 73 85 21 14 27 22 44 66 35 74 85 44 15 29 4 45 67
30 75 86 7 16 30 45 46 68 24 76 86 28 17 32 24 47 69 17 77 86 48 18 34 0 48 70
9 78 87 8 19 35 36 49 70 59 79 87 26 20 37 9 50 71 48 80 87 44 21 38 41 51 72
36 81 88 1 22 40 11 52 73 23 82 88 17 23 41 39 53 74 8 83 88 33 24 43 6 54 74
52 84 88 47 25 44 30 55 75 35 85 89 1 26 45 54 56 76 17 86 89 14 27 47 15 57 76
57 87 89 27 28 48 36 58 77 37 88 89 39 29 49 54 59 78 15 89 89 50 30 51 11 60
78 ^3 90 90 0


