Here be Certain Questyons of King Bocthus of the manners / tokyns / and
condycions of man / with the answers made to the same by the Philosopher
Sydrac.

^
divinely inspired colloquy

depiction of the philosopher Sidrak Sydrac.


depiction of King Bokkus The^ King.


The King asked by what manners / tokyns / and fassyon might a man know the
manners and condycyons of good folks and of evil. Sydrac. Answered.
BY the Grace and wit that god has given us, we shall show you shortly the
manner, by the which ye may well know the condycions of folks, when yese and be
hold them by some tokens yt they shall have in them, for it is a thing
verytable and trewly proved, for there are manners and condycions in folks. As
the grain is within the fruit, that no man may well take it away but he bruise
the fruit and break it, and even so it is of dyuer Folks.

The king asked what betokens it of a man that is white skynned and
frekened. Sydrac. Answered.
He that is white skynned and the most part frekened and gray iyen, it
betokens a man to be shamefast and of good faith. And every man ought to keep
him fro the sight of him that is all frekenes. And if he have a large forehed,
and a little chyn and great iowes, and the body all frekened, and much and
thycke here on his heed, haunc not to much his company, nor meddle but little
with him, for and thou do he will grieve the.

The King asked what token is it when a man has the here of his heed soft.
Sydrac. Answered.
A man that has soft here on his heed, it betokens, that his brain is
cold, and by reason they ought to be curtoyes and of little understanding.

The King asked what betokens it of a man that has much here on his breast
and on his belly. Sydrac. Answered.
They that have much here on their breast, and on they bellyes, it betokens
that they that is so / should be of diverse and wild manners, and of little
understanding, and should love well to do men wrong.

The King asked what betokens when a man has much here on his brows.
Sydrac. Answered.
He that has much here on his brows, by reason should be boystous in his
deeds and langage, and he that has them small and long to the temples should
be dysdaygnous, and he that has the^ small egal black, and long, he should be
wroth full, and of great understanding. And he that has but little here on his
brows by reason should be light and pesyble.

The King ashed what tokens is there or men's iyen. Sydrac. Answered.
The iyen of Men has tokens that lie not, by a man's iyen a man may se the
pleasour and the good will or the evil will that a man owes another, he yt
has the iyen great and graye without any spots by reason should be
slowthfull, anuyous and dysdeynous. And he that has his iyen mediat neither to
great nor to small and not is graye but between both, he is aperte and dylygent
and of good understanding and loves troth. And he that has the iyen redein
his lokynge, By reason he should be bold and a great medler, and if he have
about the appull of the iyen yelow spots, it is the worst toke^ that may be
of all the tokens of the iyen. And when ye se a man that beholds and looks
often on you, boldelye look on him also again. And if ne be shamefaste and
blenche his sight from you, and he appears as a man that laugheth, and not by
his good will, and his iyen waxes full of water that ye may se the tears of
his iyen, that man loves and doughteth you. And if any man look on you and you
on him and he look steadfastly and boldly on you and blencheth not, nor is not a
dread nor a shamed to look on you, that man has envy at you, and neither
doughteth nor loves you. And be well ware and trust him not, and keep you
well from all evil auentured creatures, as if ye would keep you from your
deedlye Enemies.

The King asked how should a man know, another by the tokens of his nose
Sydrac. Answered.
He that has the nose little and small he loves strife and debates and he that
has the nose long till the mouth he by reason should be manlye. And he that
has his nose snatted and great / he should be coueitous. And he that has
large noose thrylles should be wrath full and full of ire. And he that has the
nose great, and most greatest in the mids, by reason should be a great liar
And he that has the no emedyat, neither to great nor to small, nor to long
nor to short, and his nose thrylles not large, he by reason should be wise and
of good understanding.

The King asked what tokens should a man have by another man's forheed.
Sydrat. Answers.
He that has the forheed large and not fulle of ryuell nor long rays, he is
dysceyuable and loves guyles and barrattes, and also he is enuyous. And he
that has the forheed not to large but medyatly between two, by reason should
be true, loving, wise, and well doctryned.

The King asked what token is there of a man's lyppes. Sydrac. Answered.
He that has great lyppes is is rude, and should be of hard understanding,
and he that has them mediat neither to great nor to small, he should by
reason be right temperate in his wits and deeds.

The King asked what token is there of a man's mouth. Sydrac. Answered.
He that has the mouth reasoble large, by reason should be man lie. And he yt
has a little straight mouth by reason should have but little faith, and as
little wit.

The King asked, what token is there to know a man by his teth. Sydrac.
Answered.
He that has the teth wellioyned and thick set together by reason he should
be mouable in his courage, and no man may be sure of him.

The King asked by what token shall a man know another by his vysage. Sydrac.
Answered.
When a man's vysage is great and full, by reason he should be of rude nature,
and he that has the vysage scryte and lene and yelowe brown, by reason he
should be slye and cunning of all things that he medleth withal.

The King asked what token is there to know a man by his ears. Sydrac.
Answered.
When a man has great ears it betokens rudeness and boystuousnes. And he
that the ears passing little should by reason be a fool and wrathful.

The King asked what token is there to know a man by his voice and speech.
Sydrac. Answered.
He that has the voice and speech great and Round he should be manly. And who
so ever has the voice temperat / neither to great nor to small he should be of
great knowledge and true. And he that has the voice passing small, he should
be hastye and a liar. And he that has the voice passing great he should be of
evil manners and of condycions slyght. And he that has the voice fair and
clear, he is of great understanding and of great courage.

The King asked what betokens it when a man has a long neck. Sydrac.
Answered.
He that has the neck long and small, by reason he should be full of folly,
noise and cowardyse. And he that has a little heed should be a fool. And he
yt has a great heed should be rude and a great eater.

The King asked what tokeken is there of a man's Belie. Sydrac. Answered.
He that has a great Belie out of me sure, he should be rude, and by reason a
cowarde and not wise. And he that has a small belie and well brested, he
should be well wytted and of true counsel.

The King asked what token is there of a man's Chynne and of his shulders.
Sydrac. Answered.
He that has the chynnelarge, and his shulders large he should be manly,
mighty and not of great wit. And he that has the chyn and the back well
furnysshed, he should be fyers and wrathful. And he that has the Chynne
streyghte and egall, it is a showing of goodness. And he yt has hye shulders
is of evil will and dysdaygnous.

The King asked what token is there to know a man by his arms. Sydrac.
Answered.
He that has long arms that come to his knees, by reason he should have a
free heart and a noble. And he that has his arms passing short, by reason
should be a cowarde and lone noise and debates.

The King asked what token is there to know a man by his hands. Sydrac.
Answered.
He that has long hands and fyngers, by reason should do well all crafts
and betrewe. And he that has the palm of his hand soft should be wise and
of good understanding. And he that has the hands passynges short and the
fyngers short, he should not be very wise.

The King asked what token is there to know a man by his feet. Sydrac.
Answered.
He that has his feet short and great, should have little understanding and
not wise. And he that has his feet small about the ancle, he should be a
cowarde. And he that has great feet and his legs great in the mids / he
should be bygge of body / but he should be rude and boystous.

The Kynke asked, what tokens have ye of them that be gelded. Sydrac. Answered.
He that is Gelded by man's hand, he should be very wrothfull and false. And
he that has neither stones nor berde, he is an evil sayer and a liar. And if
he be frekened also, he is enuyous and of evil will, and loves both to say
evil and do evil.

The King asked what token is there of the pases and g^ynge of a man. Sydrac.
Answered.
He that has large pases and slow he is auenturous in all things, and yet he
ought to think on that, that is to come, and puruey to keep him self. And he
that has his pase hasty and thycke he is wrathful and of evil will.

The King asked which be the best tokens to know a man by in all things.
Sydrac. Answered.
He that has his skin whytete and soft, and that he be not to hye nor to
low, nor to great nor to small, and well melled with white and red, and his iyen
between black and gray, and that his heed be not to great nor to small, the
neck fair and straight and not to long, and that he have not to much
flesh on his chynne, nor on his thyes without forth, and that his voice and
speech be clear, and the shulders fair straight and large, and the paumes of
his hands soft, the fyngers long and small and that he be of few words,
and that he laughed not to much nor to often, and that he have a gladsome
lokynge / and light cheryd, and that he be not to Coueytouse of other men's
goods, and not to asking nor to wernynge. And this is the best figure of man
that ever God made. And such mannered and fygured men ought Kings and Lords
to have with them in their company, for Lords has more need of men, then men
have of Lords, for Lords may not be without men, and men may be without
Lords. And therefore a King ought to trauayl^ about the Land to draw such
men about him. But he ought not to be to greatly meued in Judgment to judge
any man for any token or sign that he has on him, but he ought to assemble
one and other, and deuyde the one from the other, and take the best and leave
those that be not virtuous nor of good conditions as ferforth as it may be
known, for of this shall come great profit and great goodness, and good
adventure.

Finis.
Thus ends the manners / tokens / and condycions of man. And hereafter
follows the propertyes of a good Horse.
The Propertyes of a good Horse.
depiction of Pegasus and Bellerophon

A Good Horse should have.xv. propertyes and conditions. That is to wete, three
of a Man, three of a Woman, three of a Fox, three of an Hare, and three of an
Ass. Of a man bold proud and hardye. Of a woman fair brested* fair of
here, and easy to lepe upon.

Of a Fox, a fair tail short eres, with a good trotte. Of an hare a great
eye, a dry heed, and well rennynge. Of an Ass a bygge chyn, a flat leg, and
a good houe. Well trauayled women nor well travailed horse, were never good.
Arise erly. Serve God deuoutlye. And the world besely. Do thy work wisely.
Give thine alms secretly. Go by thy way sadly. Answer the people demurely.
Go to thy meat appetytely. Sit thereat dyscretly. Of thy tongue be not to
lyberally. Arise therfro temperatlye. Go to thy supper soberly. And to thy bed
merrily. Be i^ thine Inn Iocundly. Please thy love duly. And sleep surely.

Mark well these four things.
There ben four things pryncypallye to be drad of every wise man. The (...)
^urse of our holy father the ^^pe. The second is the Indygnacion of a prince.
(Quia indignatio regis vel principie more est.) The third is the favor or the
will of a Judge. The fourth is slander and the mutacion of a comynaltie.

who that makes in Chrystmas a dog to his larder. And in march a sow to his
gardener. And in May a fool of a wise man's counsel. He shall never have good
larder, fair gardyne, nor yet well kept counsel.

Far from thy kinsme^ cast the, wrath not thy neighbors next the, In a good
corn country threst the. And sit down Robyn and rest the.

There be four things full hard for to know which way that they will draw.
The first is the ways of a y^^^^ ^an. The second is the course of a vessel
in the sea. The third of an adder or of a serpent spre^t. The fourth of a
foul sitting on any thing. Two wives in one house,
Two cattes and one mouse
Two dogs and one bone,
Shall never accord in one.
Who that manneth with his kyn And closes his croft with cheritres Shall have many
hegges brokyn And also full little good seruyes.

Finis.
Imprynted by me Robert Wyer: Dwelling at the Sign of S. John^ Euangelyst /
in S. Martyns Parysshe beside Charynge Cross.

ROBERT merchant's mark WIRE.


