Bohemiae Regnum Electiuum. THAT IS, A PLAIN AND TRVE RELATION OF the
proceeding of the STATES of BOHEMIA, from the first foundation of that
Province, by Free Election of Princes and Kings unto FERDINAND the eighteenth
King of the house of Austria.

WHEREIN IS EVIDENTLY MANIfested, that the first Princes were Elected, and no
true and simple Hereditary Succession esta blished, nor practiced in all that
time, containing about 900. years; Taken out of impartial and Classicque
Authors.

ESDRAS 1.4.37.38. All other things perish in their unrighteousness: But
Truth, it endures, and is always strong, it lives and conquereth for
evermore.

MDCXX.

A PLAIN AND TRVE RELATION OF the proceeding of the States of BOHEMIA.
THE Triumph that I heard sung aloud of the strength and solidnesse of
argument, in a little Information sent abroad almost in the dark, to beguile
the friends thereof; Maintaining the Kingdom of Bohemia to be successiue, and
by consequence rightly descended to the house of Austria, at first, so far
prejudiced me, as to think so much confidence and boldness was supported
with great probability of truth: And I confess that little pile, as it stands
compacted and involued, has in it self a fair show, until it be taken in
pieces, and searched at the Corner Stones. Desire of mine own satisfaction,
first made me curious to look into the best Records of Story of that Country,
I found the Authors such, as without exception, for their quality, judgment,
and means to know the truth, no dispaffionate man could refuse. They do
relate barely what was done and practiced, without fore-thinking to decide a
question, which in their times could not be foreseen, and was the least part
of their design; and therefore, their witness, as vn-concerned therein, is of
more authority. When I had informed my self, I learned of Saint Paul, to
settle my Brethren, who for want of my leisure, could not intend such a
perplexed search; and might, for zeal and love of truth, be miscarried with
that which was first propounded to them for truth. I do not intend to answer
the Informato^ from point to point; but to warn you, that he has taken
advantages, and forcibly drawn into his purpose, fragments and pieces, the
whole whereof would be too heavy for his foundation: and as his stuff is, so
are his uses and applications wrested and made crooked, not one grown Timber
among them. I have therefore undertaken, in a plain Narration, to show the
first Election of the Princes of Bohemia, and the continuance and practice of
Free Election unto Ferdinand of Austria: 34. from Bre^t^l. ^2.
That not one in all that series of so many Princes and Kings did succeed in
right of Inheritance simply; nor did dare so to claim an admittance to that
Scepter. In which discourse I desire you to consider, not so much the efficacy
of every proof of Election singly (which notwithstanding is an irrefragable
evidence) as the whole file, and thread, purpose and practice of the States and
free people of that Kingdom: for power and affection may sometimes obscure and
slacken the stiffnesse; but yet in every age and change, more or less, the
right has broken forth and stood for it self. I have not thought it fit to
trouble you with latter times, in which the house of Austria has been
preferred, and have claimed a succession of right, from a succession of Love,
and so have lost their best title. It is evident in all Elective kingdoms,
that the Son of the Father has been chosen; for he was already set upon
the stage, and was borne Candidatus: So was it often practiced in the Empire,
without prejudice to the right of Election, in any family, when there was just
cause to change. As Galba noted of Augustus, Ille in Domo successorem quae
siuit, ego in Republica. Tac. hist. lib. 1.
But if that Elective succession be pretended; and an answer here expected I
say, it is out of my purpose, who wade only in the History of former ages, and
it is more proper for them to satisfy, who can search the Archiues and Records
of their own Acts: but for a general answer, we propound, that we dare join
issue even in these, and be judged by the Registers of the public assemblies
upon every Election, and by the Defesall and Reuersall letters given by those
Princes of Austria, their own Acts, acknowledging the free Election and good
will of the States of Bohemia, sine vlla alia obligatione.

To lay our own foundation sure and conspicuous, I first present this
definition of a Kingdom successiue; That the Crown, and all the Rights of
Regality, do de Iure descend unto the next Prince or Princess of the blood
Royal in right Line; And that it is as great an Interruption of succession
that a younger House be preferred, as that a Stranger; and that the States and
people have no right to put by or refuse the next in blood upon any pretense:
and these rules establish and limit a Kingdom successiue. But that this Canon
has never taken place, nor been practiced by the Bohemians, I show in these
five Conclusions.

1. That the first Princes of Bohemia were Elected, and the form of their
Election recorded.

2. That the practice of Election has continued so, that the Younger Brethren
have been preferred before the Elder, the Uncle before the Nephew, son to
the elder brother: the Cosen of the younger House, before Cosen of the elder:
the Husband of the younger sister, before the Husband of the elder.

3. Mere stangers before daughters and sisters of the last Kings, and before
any of the Blood.

4. The power and practice of deposition or reiection in case of misgouernment,
or want of due Form in Election.

5. That almost all the Kings that have immediately succeeded their Fathers,
have been Elected and Crowned during the Fathers life, or chosen Marquesses of
Morauia (a step to the Crown) by the authority of the Father in possession, or
for his merit and memory dead: so that no such succession has been pure de
Iure, but aided and grounded upon other rights then of succession. All which
examples and Rules do diametrally oppugn and overthrow the pretense of
Hereditary Succession, and consequently prove (for there) is not one Prince
without the reach of one of these Rules) Bohemiae Regnum esse Electinum.

Crocus after Zechius, who settled his Colonies in Bohemia, was made there Judge
by the people for his virtue; Geor. Barthold. Boh pia page 11.
Crocus vir Iustus, and magnae apud Bohemos, tunc temporis opinionis and
authoritatis, princeps dilectus est: vir hic fuit Iudiciorum in deliberatione
discretus, Cosm. Prag. Chron. page 4.
ad quem, tam de proprijs tribubus, quam ex totius prouinciae plebtbus, velut
apes ad alueria, ita omnes ad dirimenda conuolabant Iudicia.

Crocus had three daughters, Kari eldest, Tethka second, Lubossa third and
youngest. Cosm. Prag. page 4.5 6.
This last for her wise dome was by the people chosen a Princess, or Judge;
There fell out a controversy between two Bohemians about the limits of their
ground, which Lubossa ended by sentence; The party displeased and condemned,
being enraged, renounced the Judgment, disdaining it from that sex; and
thereby took occasion to demand a man to govern. Lubossa was unwilling to let
go the Reins, and first threatens what and how violent the dominion of man
would prove, Geor. Birtbold. page 11.
after disswades by force of many arguments; Ad haec vulgus confuso exult at
clamore, omnes vno ore Ducem sibi poscunt dari, which when she could not avoid,
she cunningly propounds a free Election, by letting loose an horse that should
stay before a man eating at an Iron table, which was agreed unto; and then she
says, Ite demum, vt quem vos cras eligatis in Dominum, ego assumam mihi in
maritum. This horse stood still before Primislaus, who was eating his dinner
upon his plough share, and so he is chosen; The first form of Election. Cosm.
Prag. p. 6.
and the form of Election recorded to be by salutation of all the people;
they all all cry out, Domina nostra Lubosso, and plebs vniuersa mandant vt cito
venias etc. te Ducem te Iudicem, te Rectorem, te Protectorem te solum nobis in
Dominum eligimus; Here are three Elections in the first foundation, and one
Reiection of Lubossa confirmed, and the form recorded.

To wade deeper into the first times, is vnnessary; only one observation of
Cosma Pragensis, Page 20. and Dubrau li. 7. page 54. an. 1002.
that Vlricus the eighteenth Prince, who had no issue by lawful marriage, saw
by chance at a Well a handsome maid washing, named Bo^^na, upon whom he cast
affection, and begat a son called Breceslaus: Vlricus had put out his brother
I^ron^irs eyes, yet he took his Nephew, before whom he was in right of
blood, and presented him adsedem principalem, and situt semper in electione
ducis faciunt, etc. which proves he was Elected, and the continuation of
Election declared in those words, sicut semper in Electione.

To proceed to times better known, and to an estate better settled, and to
look downward from Brecislaus the 22th Prince, or as Cosma Prag: the ninteenth
of Bohemia, we shall find no succession from Father to Son, nor from Brother
to Brother regular, but the fittest to govern, or the best beloved, ever
chosen by the Bohemians. Brecislaus had five sons, Spitigneus 1: Vratislaus
2: Conradus 3: Otho 4: Iaromirus 5. Spitigneus the eldest succeeded, but by
Election upon recommendation of his Father. Cosm. Prag. page 30. an. 1055
Post Brecislai obitum filium eius primogenitum, nomine Spignen, omnes Bohemiae
gentes, magni and parui, communi Consilio, and voluntate pari elegunt sibi in
Ducem, cantantes kyrieleizon. After his death, Vratislaus his brother was
chosen, page 33.
omnibus Boemis fauentibus: He had also six sons; Breceslaus 1: Boleslaus 2:
Boriuorius 3: Vladislaus 4: Sobieslaus 5: Henricus Bishop of Olmunts 6: All
these should have succeeded the Father in rule of succession, but Conradus the
Uncle was chosen Duke; He had two sons, Vdalricus, or as Cosma Prag: calls
him, Oalricus and Leopoldus, or Lutoldus: Now, in true succession, one of these
must succeed the Father Conrad: but now the Bohemians return to Brecislaus
their Cousin German, and eldest son to Vratislaus; and yet they return not to
him as in right, Dubran. p. 78.
Nam diu ambigebant ordines, number Brecislaum ab exilio adregnum paternum
reuecarent, an domi aliquem ex fratribus eius qui regnaret: After the death of
Brecislaus. they again skippe his three sons, Vladislaus, Henricus, and
Theobaldus, who should succeed, and also the next elder brother, and Boriuerius
the younger is chosen: Now Vdalricus, Cosm. Prag. page 54.55.
or Oalritus the first son of Conrad, thinks himself wronged to be twice
neglected in the Election; and complains to the Emperor at Ratisbon,
sollicits him, by prayers, by friends, by money, to help him to the kingdom
possessed by his Cozen Borinoy. Dubran. page 84: Ibid.
The Emperor takes his money, and lends him some succors, Sed hac condition,
vt liberum sit Bohemis, aut Vdalricu, at Boriuorium, habere Principem; vtrum
videlicet borum magis idoneum habilemque approbauerint: But when it came to a
declaration, to what end he would use these aids, to claim the kingdom by
right, he dares not, but enterprets himself, Dat sibi Dncatus insignia and
vexillum, (which were due to him by blood, had he been the youngest of the
family) Sed in Ducem elegendi obtentum ponit in arbitrio Bo^horum: But the
Bohemians refuse his claim made by his Ambassadors, and adhere to their first
Election of Boriuoy, and defeat Oalricus and all his pretenses in battle.
Boriuoy had a son called Iaromirus, who should have succeeded, had that right
taken place: but Suatopulcus gets in by favor, and by the relapse of the
people deposes Boriuoy: This man was Cozen German to Boriuoy, of a younger
house, the son of Oath, the fourth son of Brecislaus the two and twentieth.
This Suatopulcus was not long after rejected, and Borinoy again receined: And
he again the second time deposed and thrust out, and Suatopulcus restored;
and so continued Prince to his death. He had a son called Henry, baptized by
the Emperor, Cosm. Prag. page 57.
and brought up by him; yet he being slain in the Camp, Othoniger his
brother was Elected Prince. The Emperor coming to see and lament the dead body
of Suatopulcus, and to appease the people, who it seems feared lest he would
obtrude upon them a Successor against their will, Page 60.
adstantibus immensis Boemis concessit, vt quemcunque voluissent, suorum ex
filijs principum sibi in Ducem cligerent. There was the Son of Suatopulcus
alive, (for any thing appears) many of the grandchildren of Vratislaus the
first King, and four and twentieth Prince, before Otho in the right of
Succession, yet Weseck of Morauia intercedes that he may be chosen Duke; him
also Henry the Emperor favors, before the son and his own God-sonne, and
the people being most Morauians approve the Election, and presently in the
Camp admit him for their Prince, crying Kyrieleyzon, and in four days
brought him to Prage, Dubrau. page 90.
at which Dubrauius says, the Bohemians took offense. Questi s^nt de
electione in Castris facta, contra Maiorum Instituta, moremque veterem: And
Cosma Pragensis says, he was refused as he was, ^
Quod quia sine consensu Boemorum and Episcopi, efficere conabantur, frustratur
eorum temeritus, and Sacramenta olim exhibita in medio consilio recitantur: And
Vladislaus the brother of Boreuoy was Elected, vt Iura Principatus, Iure
adoptata, Cosm. Prag. page 60.
(that is by lawful Election) omnibus ascentientibus obtineret. This
Vladislaus was younger brother to Boreuoy long since deposed, and now he
complains; and Otho the brother of Suatopulcos renewes a pretense: First,
Boreuoy treates by his Ambassadors, to persuade his younger Brother to resign;
Responsom huic a Vladislao huiusmodi retulit, non esse rem priuatam quam
Boriuorius peteret, Dubrau. p. 91.
sed ad vniversi populi suffragium illam pertinere; proin haud ab vno fratre,
sed ab omnibus ordinibus principatum esse ambiendum: The Bohemians adhere
truly to their own Election, overthrew Otho in Battle, Cosm. Prag. page 62.
and after Vladislaus by the Emperors delivery gets Boreuoy into his power,
and all his friends: He dies, and Sobieslaus his youngest brother is chosen.
Otho niger again pretends, quia aetate prior esset, but is rejected.
Sobieslaus had four sons, Vladislaus the first, Dubrau. p. 9^.
Sobieslaus the second, Vdalricus the third, Wenceslaus the fourth. These
should have succeeded the Father if succession had prevailed, but Vladislaus
his Nephew, the son of his Brother Vladislaus (even by the favor of
Sobieslaus his Uncle against his own Children, and by the Emperors help) was
designed Prince of Bohemia, and by the Emperor crowned the second King: But the
Bohemians, because he was younger in years then Conrad his Cozen Germane the
son of Leopold, son of Otho. And because his Election was not formal,
Dubrau. p. 10^.
ac Caesaris potius quam Boemorum Principem quando non in Bohemia sed in curia
Caesaris Princeps sit creatus, Throno deijciunt, and in locum eius Conradum
substituunt: But the Emperor Frederick favoring Vladislaus, restored him by
force, and his son Frederick succeeded, but was after also expulsed, and
Vdalricus the third son of Sobieslaus the 30th Prince chosen, his elder
brethren being neglected; He was Cozen German half removed from Frederick;
He dying, his next elder brother Sobieslaus succeeded, and now Frederick had
again gotten possession, and was again expulled: After which Conradus the
son of Leopold forenamed, was a new declared Prince of Bohemia, suffragijs
primorum or dinum: Dubrau. P. 126.
Frederick was again restored, and Conrad expulsed, and then Frederick
dying, though he had four brethren alive, Albert, Suatopulk, Premislans, and
Vladislaus, which should all have taken place in true succession. Conradus was
in his absence declared Prince ab ordinibus Bohemia; Dubrau. p. 130.
After his death, Venceslans the son of Otho niger, younger brother to
Suatopulcus his Cozen, but preferred before many nearer the Succession, was
Elected Prince. Him Primislaus expulsed, but fearing his return, he quitted
Prage; And Wenceslaus in his return died, leaving a Son called Spitigneus
vacant principali sede, Henricus (the second Son of Brecislaus the six and
twentieth Bishop of Prage) diem comitiorum habendorum Praga indicit, Dubrau. P.
132.
candida tumque in illo principatus pro spitigenio pupillo agit: Boemi parumper
deliberantes, ipsum Henricum vnanimi assensu, magnaque voce, Principem Boemiae
pronuntiant: Here also was a succession interrupted by the free Election, not
only Spitigneus the son of the last Wenceslaus rejected because a child,
but Henry preferred before all the Sons of Vladislaus the second King of
Bohemia: Henry not long after falls sick, and assembles all the Nobility,
declaring unto them his desire to resign the Principality of Bohemia, Dubr. u
p. 134.
Datque ill is potestatem eligendi Principis quemcunque voluerint: but the
Bohemians hoping on his recovery would not proceed to a new Election, and so he
remained Prince to his death. Being dead, de successione in comitijs ab
ordinibus variatum; Dubrau. p. 135.
at last they Elected Vladislaus, younger brother to Primislaus, once before in
possession, and fifth son of Vladislaus the second King: two elder Brethren at
least alive: He resigned in five months to Primislaus his brother, who was
Elected Prince, Dubr. Genealog. Page 139.
being of the second venture, by the Landgraues daughter, and his elder brethren
and their children, for any thing appears, being refused: And this Pri^^slaus
was crowned the third King of Bohemia, by the Emperor Philip at Mentz, de
omnium quae aderant sententia, Anno 1199.

Thus it is evident from Bretislaus the 22. to this Primislaus Ottocarus the
thirtieth, in which are seventeen changes, no kind of succession has taken
place, but that the younger brother that been preferred before the elder, the
uncle before the Nephew, the younger house before the elder, and many Princes
deposed for misgouernment, or want of form in true election.

After Primislaus, four Kings are pretended to succeed to Wenceslaus the
seventh King: But Primislaus causes his son Wenceslaus to be crowned in his
lifetime, and Dubrauius notes it, page 139.
that he was careful of his own house, Exin rebus suis domi intentas,
Venceslaum silium, etiamsi puerum, regem coronat, which he needed not have
done, had he Ius successionis, and was easy for him to do, being in
possession. When he died, his friends concealed it, and his son Ottocarus
entered with an army, and so was admitted. Idem 157.
Propter frequentiam comitatus, qui eum ex Austria Styria, Morauia
comitabantur; ita plerisque metuendus quia armatus vener at; He was Marquess
of Morauia, established in his Fathers life time, and because he was not then
admitted to the Crown by Election, it seems he entered armed, which he needed
not do to his Inheritance: He was slain in the battle of Laua, and his son
Venceslaus, a Child was admitted in his Infancy in honor of the Father, ex
consensu omnium Ordinum, Idem 16^.
cura fouendi illius ad Marchionem Brandeburgum: The Marquess abuses the
trust, and carries him away: At 15. years of age, he is restored to the
Bohemians for a sum of money, not till now, was he chosen King, which I
infer out of Dubranius: Idem 169.
Inter catera ab omnibus acclamantum est, Aduenisti tandem desiderabilis, quem
tam diu ex pectabamus, Ottogari o inclytaproles, (which insinuates the love of
the father) nihil videlicet tum Otthogari nomine clarius, nihil ad conciliandum
omnium ordinem fauorem efficacius: which implies the Election by the States,
although the reason be rendered why they chose him, for love of the father, yet
still their favor was the formal part of his admission.

Wenceslaus the 7. The stories mention not the manner his Admission.
King succeeded the Father, and in him ended the ancient Race of their Princes;
in all these, no succession of right established. He had 3. sisters, Judith
eldest, Anne and Elizabeth; the first married to Rupertus of Nassau the
Emperors son; the second to Henry of Carinthia, the third yet a maid. Dubrau p.
179.
The States assemble in the Bishop of Prages house, ad ius comitioru^: summaque
contentione de Rege eligendo certant, alijs perigrinu^ regem penitus
aspernantibus, alijs inter Rodulphum Caesaris Alberti filiu^, and Henricum ex
Carinthia qui praesens aderat, variantibus: as yet no mention make of any right
in the daughters: Tobias Bechinus, who favored the strangers, sons of Albert
to cross the adverse party who would not accept them, says, Quando non alium
Regem quam Boemum creare libet, Regiaque progenies in Boemia plane deficiat
reuert amur ad Pagum stadium, vnde Primislaus ex rustico, priamus in Boemia
factus est Princeps atque indidem, nos quoque Regem nobis adciscamus: Yet that
was not his desire, but only to divert the Election, which utterly overthrows
the pretended Contract with the house of Austria; for he being of that party,
should have pleaded it, if he had known it, or had thought it of force, and
not have returned to an original Election, which fully annihilated the
Contract, but it seems Tobias knew nothing of it: And so he also reiects the
sisters, for that was his end, esteeming them no heirs, though they were ex
progeny Regia, and concluded they might lawfully elect a stranger in blood.
This motion was rejected, not that they might elect a stranger, but because the
other side understood his craft, that he would obtrude a German, hateful to
the Bohemians: and so he was commanded without further Prefaces, to nominate
one in a fair Election: He as Chamberlayne of Boheme, prefers first Rodolph,
and then his brother Frederick, sons of Albert, Quo audito, Crussina
Lychtemburgus, Quousque tandem, inquit, nobis ingeres tuos Germanos Regum
nostrorum parricidas, nec plura locutus, stringit gladium, and Thobiam
transfodit: The next day, the two sisters, Anna married to Carinthia, Elizabeth
a maid come into the Court, not as heirs, or ant ve sui haberi rationem, ne
velut alienae a Regno praetereantur. And Henry the Husband of Anne was chosen
King, but he could not hold it; for the Emperor stood for his Son, not by a
Contract, but as preuayling in Election, and upon that only grounds his Title
to place him by force, Caefare alacriter, instante, ne filius s^ns, qui priores
parts in suffragijs tulerat, posteriores in Regno acquirendo ferret. He enters
Bohemia with an Army, Henry of Carinthia, and his wife give way, and so he
fortifies the election of Rodolph, and Crowns him, a mere stranger in blood
or other title, but the Election pretended. Rodolph dies, Dubrauius reekons
Fredoricke as elected, other do not.
and Henry of Carinthia returns with his Wife; In which interim, the Emperor
endeavors the Election of Frederick his second son, but is slain before he
could effect it, and then these were received with great Joy; After three or
four years the Bohemians grew weary of Henry's government, and sent
Ambassadors to Henry of Luxenburgh then Emperor, to send his son John to
marry Elizabeth the younger sister to Anne, and Wenceslaus the seventh, and that
they would elect him King. The Emperor accepts it, and married John at Spire:
The Bohemians deposed Henry for ill government, as Bartoldus notes, Geor.
Barthold. page 24.
Hunc Boemi sibi Regem deligunt, sed quia male administrauit, miserune ad
Caesarem, Henricum sextum, Legatos suos: So was John of Luxenburgh Elected, a
stranger also in blood; for he could pretend no right by his wife in
Succession, Anne the elder sister living. Concerning the contract made between
Boheme and Austria, the elder stories speak nothing of it. Albert of Austria
declared not the pretense, Dubrau. p. 180.
but strengthens the Election of his own sons by making a faction by marriage
of Elizabeth the widow of Venceslaus. And Hieronimo Canini in his history of
the Election of the Roman Kings, Hieron. Canini. page 211.
cites, that such an accord was made, That for want of heirs in either House,
the other should succeed; but withal notes, Encore que le Royaume soyt a
l'Election des Barons, and des seigneurs du pays: which being clearly
confessed, an accord made between them for their own advantage, to the
prejudice of the freedom of Bohemia could not be available, nor was ever
confirmed by practice in succession.

John of Luxenburgh is chosen, and is a great Prince, he begins indeed to seek
to establish the Kingdom in his Line, and in his lifetime practices to
exchange it with Lewis Duke of Bauare, which it is like he affected, to leave
them to the fortune of Election, which is a taeite confession of the right in
the States to Elect: when it was revealed to the Bohemians, they took it in so
ill part, that he should by a secret practice infringe their liberty, or seem
to have right, to obtrude a King upon them at his choice, that they almost
revolted against him, and would not be reconciled, until a copy of the treaty
was showed, that he did nothing, but with reservation of the consent of the
States to confirm it. The words of Dubrauiu^ are considerable. Dubrau. p. 193.
Sed long omnium maximu^ odiu^ sibi ab omnibus or dinibus conflauit, inchoata
cu^ Lodonico permutatione, qua regnu^ pro Bauariae principatu commutare voluit,
At Boemi in deteriorem partem interpretati funt, quasi illos Rex vendere
Germanis, and prodcre cuperet: Ergo omnes in vnum conspirant, vt pereant potius
quam non perdant illos, qui ad exitium Patriae little immineant: At que haec
turba mayor visa, quam vt pacart vel ipso rege praesente potuerit, and nisi
pacata esset, spes de retinendo ei regno decollabat: So that this fear of
John, confesses a forfeiture, and a power to depose him, and then he procures
the Emperor to come in person to the Confines of Bohemia, where at the town of
Luticium the Emperor thus excuses the King. Illic in maxima Bohemorum
frequentia, Regem illorum de tam graui suspitione, qualem de illo haberent,
testimonio suo expurgat; pactionemque illis, quam cum Rege inire caeperat,
scriptum ostendit, in qua diserte aperteque appositum erat, ita illa^ ratam and
firmam fore si communi Bohemorum assensu confirmata fuerit. So jealous were
they then of their right, that nothing could appease them, but the sight of his
own agnition of the validity of their consent in transferring the kingdom:
John caused his son Charles, Dubrau. P. 201.
to be admitted Marquess of Morauia in his life time, an half election, as
in the Empire the King of Romans, and a step to the kingdom; And indeed he was
so favored of the Bohemians for his valor, wit, and skill in tongues, that
his admittance was easily procured; yea he was so favored of the Bohemians,
Idem 202.
that his Father suspected and feared him: Soon after he was chosen King of
the Romans at Bon, and now it was not easy for the Bohemians to refuse him if
they would, for he prevailed in universal love: Charles in his life labored
all he could to settle the Kingdom in his issue, and to that end in confirming
the privileges of Frederick the Emperor, inserts a Clause of exposition to
his own advantage, which cannot extend beyond the Text: But 8. years after,
establishing the succession of all the Electors, he expects expressly the
Kingdom of Bohemia, and the free Election of the States, Onuphirus Aure.
Bulla. p. 431.
not when the heirs royal should fail (as they pretend) but when the Crown
shall be vacant, quemcunque voluerunt, as is notorious in Bulla aurea; His
son Venceslaus was admitted, but he governed ill, and left the kingdom in
trouble by the Hussites and Zisca. After 12 years, Sigismund his brother enters
by force, Dubrau. p. 243.
the kingdom weakened and torn in pieces by civil dissension, and takes the
Crown: and having only one daughter Elizabeth married to Albert of Austria,
Geor. Barthold. page 29. AEn. Syl. p. 54
Sigismund on his death-bedde conuocates the States, takes care for the
election, and presents Albert his son in Law: Albertum Austriae Ducem generum
suum esse and virtute praestantem, and gener is nobilitate sublimem cum se non
minus amare quam filium, successorem itaque suum nominare, rogare supremam
voluntatem suam exequantur: beatum id regnum fore, vbi Albertus imperauer it,
Here are reasons of conuenience, of Nobility, of Virtue, and he nominates a
Successor to their choice, which he could not do, nor they refuse, if
Elizabeth his daughter should succeed in right; and so Albert is chosen, a
stranger in blood. Dubrau. p. 266.
Albert has 3. children, Ladislaus Pastunus was admitted King, but he was a
Child, and therefore the States offered the Kingdom to Albert of Bauaria, he
refuses it upon Conditions of Religion, That he would not be bound to admit
the Chalice in the Sacrament, which was required, not considering at all the
right of Ladislaus: Ibid.
Then they offer it to Frederick the Emperor as Tutor; but among the
Ambassadors, Ptasco, no friend to Albertus father of Ladislaus, persuades the
Emperor to make himself King of Bohemia, as the first of the house of Austria:
but he refuses both the ones Counsel, and the general offer of Tutorship,
and recommits it wholly to the Bohemians, as having best understanding and
interest in their own affairs. In this Interraigne, Podiebradius consults of
calling home Ladislaus, now in the hands of Frederick, for it seems either he
bredd him, Dubrau. p. 271:
or was retired to him: and after deliberation, concludes to receive him upon
conditions; and at his entrance they give him the oath, Ibid. 272.
Quo praestito capita deinde libertatum ab omnibus ordinibus missa exhibet,
etc. He dies without Issue, and leaves two sisters, Anne the Eldest, married
to William Duke of Saxe, Elizabeth to Cassimer King of Poland. Ladislaus
finding himself stricken with Death, calls Podiebradius, and foreseeing in the
affections of the Bohemians who should be Elected, Georg. Bartold, page 30.
never thinks of his sisters as in any right, nor once mentions them, but mihi
moriendum est, Regnum in tua manuerit, Duo te peto, vti prouinciales just
regas etc. alterum, vt qui me secuti sunt ex Austria, caeterisque prouincijs in
Patriam suam inuiolatos remittas. Podiebradius modestly seems to decline it,
excuses and hopes the King shall recover, never, for a Complement, once
mentions any heir, sister, or kindred of the King, which he could not in
manners do, nor with safety omit, if they had had right, and the King who
should maintain their Interest yet alive: But Ladislaus sets his eyes only
upon Podiebrad, Promitte quod cupio, nam me mori certum est: Ladislaus eyes,
and Podibradius being Governor, calls the Assembly for Election: The French
King stands a mere stranger in blood, and his Ambassadors come to Prage; but
because they were unwilling to admit a stranger, they resolved to finish the
Election, before the French had audience. The manner of the Election is
recorded by Dubrauius, especially; Locus eligendo Regi in domo Praetoria
veteris vrbis constitutus, where, after first solemnly going to the Church,
Rokickzanus makes an Oration to persuade them not to look upon any Stranger
nor Germane: Among themselves, he first propounds the Governor Podiebradius,
whose Arms had defended their Liberties; or if they disliked him, and thought
no Bohemian eminent enough, nor worthy of so high advancement, he counsels a
new way of government, utterly to relinquish a Monarchy: Aut hunc Regem esse
nominandum aut si nemo inter Boemos tanto fastigio dignus censeatur, Haebreo
more duodecim Iudicis assumendos, qui Populum Boemum aequo Iure gubernarent.
Hinc in Praetorium itum, and tam foris, quam intus prius acclamantum quam
decretu^, VIVAT REX GEORGIUS: Here is a solemn Election, on, and therein a
proposition to change the gouernemen into Aristocracy, and lastly a stranger in
blood to the Crown of Bohemia Elected, the daughters and sisters of the two
last Kings not once in question: And George held the Crown of Bohemia to his
death, and this Election and Coronation of George was confirmed by Calixtus the
Pope, which no Aussrian dare say he would have done in injury of the true
heir or their House. George Podiebrad had three sons, Idem 281.
two lived at his death, yet in his last meditations he durst not once cast
his eyes upon any of them; His words are, Idem 289.
Nollem autem, quantum in me situm est, libenter committere (which implies he
had no interest in designing an heir, but by way of Counsel) vt post obitum
meum, ipsum Regnum in aliquod diserimen adduceretur propter dubium regni
successorem, proin scire aueo, quidn^ in hac causa agere, quemue Regem vobis
legare destinaneritis; Respondentibus nullam ipso Rege su perstite successoris
faciendam esse mentionem (perhaps to prevent the prejudice, jealous to preserve
their right entire) instabat auidus, donec ab ill it extorqueret, non adme dum
sibi gratam sententiam, qua se dicerent sentire, apud Polonos Regem esse
quaerendum, cum quibus and linguae and moribus non multum dissentirent. They
express their reasons for likeness of manners, and language, without any
mentioning a right by the second daughter of Albert, which they could not do
without injury to Anne the Elder sister married to Saxe.

Podebradius with this answer was dismayed, for though he durst not express it,
he had strong hopes and designs for his own sons; but knowing the right of
free Election, and having discovered their affections; in the little pause he
had of life, never sought to alter the Inclination of the Bohemians, but
provided only to leave his sons rich, and possessing them with the
mooueables of the Kingdom, commanded them to retire to the Castle of
Podiebrad. A solemn Parliament is held for the Election, Matthias King of
Hungary stands, and is ready to threaten with an Army, and has a party in
Bohemia, therefore they remove the Session, ad montes Cuthenses, data omnibus
fide publica, vt quisque ad illa libere veniret and rediret, summaque cum
liberate suffragia perageret. Three great men in Bohemia declare for Matthias,
Dubrau. P. 290.
contentissima suffragatione, sed mayor numerus Vladislaum Cassimiri Poloniae
Regis filium, etiamnum adolescentem nullarumque partium factionibus per aetatem
infectum, Regem possebant, numeroque praenaluerunt: Matthias stirs, enters
with an Army, and molesteth Frederick the Emperor in Austria and Styria, and
partly thereby, partly by promise of money, procures an Investiture, Although
he had formerly granted it to Vladislaus the son of Cassimere of Poland, yet
the Bohemians maintain their Election, and repulse Matthias, here is no
reason of blood, but fitness, in respect of partiality, mentioned in the
Election: And if reason of blood could then have been urged, Anne, or William
of Saxe, or their Issue must have preceded, and by Consequence, now the Elector
of Brandeburgh.

Lodouicus his son succeeded, but was admitted and Crowned at three years of
age, by his Fathers means, and then living, Nulla mora interposita ad Regnum
Bohemiae Lodouicum inaugurandum curauit. Dubrau. p. 302.
Lodouicus is drowned in the Danuby in the Rowt given by the Turks, and leaves
his only sister Anne married to Ferdinand, son of Maximilian the Emperor,
who, as Dubrauius says, could not be prevented by slight, Ibid.
nor wit, nor Arms, Dextra prorsus manus and tenaci excepit gubernacula regni.

In all these times there is no Succession established, but free Election, or
another reason of Succession then right. Princes chosen of the younger line,
rejecting the Elder, and the right line, and some few seizures by force,
Princes deposed for misgouernment, and for want of due form in the Election:
Strangers in blood Elected, and all pretended succession, advanced by the
Father living, or for his sake dead; and this concludes no succession, because
present greatness has gotten an advantage, Primus dominandi spes in arduo,
vbi sis ingressus, addesse studia, and mixistros. Tac. Annal. li. 4.


Ferdinand has gotten possession, but accepts it by right of Election, as is
confessed, Nulla facta mentione Iuris quod Annae competebat, Informator. page 7.
and gives Defeasall Letters, Quod ex nulla obligatione sed ex libera and bona
voluntate eum Boemi eligerint against which the Austrians now urge a
resumption of those letters, and a new declaration of the right of Anne: for
the truth of which, there is no record in it own proper time and place, and
that which is, is crept into the Margen, from which most corruptions into
Classique Authors have been derived. But admit it were true, there is no
stronger Argument against the Succession; For thereby Ferdinand does confess a
practice and stretch of his authority for his advantage against a former
confessed right. The acceptance of the Election without the right of Anne, was
safer for him then to come in by her right, because so he was established in
his own title, which might have failed by the death of his wife, singly
depending on her, and Kingdoms successiue are not held in courtesy; But after
ninteene years, having a settled posterity by Anne, it was then for his
advantage in prejudice of the liberty of the States, to disclayme the Election,
and to claim by his wife for his childrens interest, who should not then
hazard a new Election, but succeed. And this reason caused the former Kings of
Boheme to procure their sons crowned when they could, and some as appears,
could not. This practice discredits the whole claim, and is founded upon
Ferdinand interessed against Ferdinand freely elected.

As far as mine Authors have led me, in mine own purpose, which was to show
a continual claim and practice in the States of Bohemia to Elect their
Princes and Kings, I have (perhaps with too much breuity) delivered the same
truth I found recorded, and I doubt not it will be clear enough to all well
affected men, that my propositions are made evident in sundry example, and so
my Conclusion will stand, Bohemiae Regnum Electinum; but because I professed at
first, that the Informator had mis-vsed his stuff to serve his own ends, and
to beguile the simplicity of our minds, I stand bound not so to accuse him,
without showing in some particulars, which way he has made that which was
straight crooked. The truth I have delivered, as a Rule, will do it; but
until I have also demonstrated his crookedness, mine own may lie under the
same suspicion; where therefore his Uses seem to cross my Narration, I will
endeavor to show the fallacy or peruercenesse; Informator. page 1.
Desiring you to observe that the Informator seems to insinuate, that this
claim of Free Election is fortified by Testimonies only of six Ages, which
indeed were weak, although true, in respect of so many changes; but we say,
that from the first peopling to this age, we have Right and Practice on our
part without Interruption. First he denies even that continuance of six ages,
by example of John of Luxenburgh, who as he pretends, had right to the Kingdom
by marriage of his wife Elizabeth, heir of the Crown. I will not confute him
with any other reason then his own. His next words are; Inform. page 2.
Indeed Henry of Carinthia married the elder sister Anne, by which he took the
Inheritance of the Kingdom: How then could John have Right by the younger
sister? but he tells us Henry was deposed by the Emperor, (we say by the
people, and that they called in John) but he tells not, who gave the Emperor
power to depose a King in Boheme: ye; he shows the fault, because he rebelled
against the Emperor: And this Rebellion was, because Henry entered the
Kingdom in his Wifes right, without demanding an Investiture; If it were the
right of John, husband to the younger sister (as the Informator will have it)
how is it Rebellion in the Elder to claim or defend that right? or what fault
is it in them to take their own? if any had a right of suecession, and should
refuse, for other quarrels to demand the Investiture, or the Emperor to grant
it, can this vitiate the right, and make them no heirs? A right so limited is
a miserable Wardship; and although the Emperors reserved that honor of
Inuestiture, because they gave the title of King, yet they gave not the right
of being Prince, or being heir: so that Henry could not for this cause be so a
Rebel, as to be expelled from all Sovereignty; and if not, then John could as
yet have no right by Elizabeth: But admit it be so, that Henry rebelled, could
be forfeit the right of his Wife? Or can successiue kingdoms be forfeited
for want of Ceremony? Nothing is more absurd. But what consideration of their
rights had the Emperor Albert of Austria, that thrust both out, to place his
sons Rodolph and Frederick.

To unfold all these Contradictions, we must return to the truth of Story;
These
neither of his sisters had, nor claimed right: But the Bohemians (always
respective to the descendents of their Kings) first Elected the husband of Anne
the eldest, and after rejecting him for misgouernment, called in John of
Luxenburgh; And though they gave him Elizabeth to be his Wife, they plainly
chose him for their King.

Next he tells us, Ibid.
Wenceslaus the son of Charles, at three years of age was Crowned King by
his Fathers Command, absque vlla requisitione statuum: That negative is not
proved, and I ask no more Inference against it, and that which it concludes,
quod Iure successionis, then his own words, his Father commanded it, which if
you make gentler, and say (as the truth is) he desired it we are agreed; for
to command it, if he had right, was unnecessary, to entreat and procure it, not
so, having no right.

I omit his boldness contrary to good authority, Idem page 3.
to auerre that Albert of Austria claymed the kingdom in right of Elizabeth,
when it is evident, that Sigismund at his death presented him to the States, by
vehement words of recommendation; and the imputation cast upon the Ashes of
Podiebrad (whom indeed he hates, for against his Election stands no exception)
and descend to the only claim, that the daughters were true heirs; to prove
which he auerrs, that Cassimir of Poland pretended right to the Kingdom at the
Election of Podiebrad, which is utterly false; and that Podiebrad prevailed by
a faction of a few, against the more powerful of the States, which is in it
self absurd, and brands Pope Calixtus his approbation; for never was any King
chosen with more universal applause. But admit all that true, the Conclusion to
be proved is, That the Kingdom did descend in right to a Daughter; and so
after Podiebrad, the son of Cassimir was admitted; to use his own words, The
kingdom did return to the ordinary succession, de Iure, was it ordinary that
the younger did succeed? Was not Anne married to the Duke of Saxe, the Elder,
and heir, if there were a right of Succession? Was Anne deposed by any
Emperor, or any Decree against her? if not, what claim had the son of
Elizabeth against his Aunt and her issue? And how, by the right and vigor of
their privileges did the kingdom appertain to the younger in blood? But we
see these daughters Titles pieced up to confirm the claim of Ferdinand by
Anne the sister of Ladislaus, which he at his own Election durst not trust
unto.

Lastly, he preferres to us the Letters or Bulls of Frederick, Charles,
Ferdinand, and Vladisl^us, to entaile the Kingdom to the Princes of the blood,
but none of these to the next in blood, which forms a succession, but at
large, that any of the blood may be chosen, and to that of greatest force,
which seems exclusive (when none of the blood shall remain) the words
following are, or by any other means when the Crown shall be void, which
must needs be by death of any in possession: But we say that in the golden Bull
of Charles, he not only excepts his Kingdom of Bohemia, and the right of the
States to choose their King whomsoever they will, Onaph. Aurea Bulla 431.
in any vacancy, but also confirms that right so, that no Constitution, Regal
nor Imperial, Aurea Bulla page 481.
shall be of force against it; and this, in words direct and vehement. So that
whatsoever could follow for the advantage of any particular House, could not
prejudice an Ancient and Fundamental Right of a whole Kingdom, and the
practice hereof is the safest and best Interpretor. I have presented the Truth
naked and simply; If it do any man service, I am glad; if not, I am glad that I
have learned it for my self.

FINIS.

