THE SIX BOOKS OF A COMMONWEAL.

Written by I. BODIN a famous Lawyer, and a man of great Experience in matters
of State.

Out of the French and Latin Copies, done into English, by RICHARD KNOLLES.

LONDON Impensis G. Bishop. 1606.

Rex and Lex.



A SVMMARIE TABLE OF ALL THE CHAPTERS CONTAINED IN THE SIX BOOKS OF I. BODIN.
The Contents of the first Book.
WHat the principal end is of a well ordered Commonweal. Chap. 1 Of a
Family, and what difference there is between a Family and a Commonweal.
Chap. 2. Of the power of an Husband over his Wife, as also of the mutual
duties betwixt them: and whether it be expedient to renew the law of
Diuorcement or not. Chap. 3. Of the power of a Father, and whether it be meet
for the Father to have power of life and death over his children, as had the
ancient Romans. Chap. 4. Of the power of a Lord or Master over his Slaves,
and whether Slaves are to be suffered in a well ordered Commonweal. Chap. 5.
What a Citisen is, and how much Citisens differ from Citisens, and how much
from strangers: what also is to be understood by the name of a Town, a City,
and of a Commonweal. Chap. 6. Of them that are under protection, and the
difference betwixt Allies, Strangers, and Subjects. Chap. 7. Of Sovereignty.
Chap. 8. Of a Prince tributarie or feudatarie: and whether he be a Sovereign
Prince: and of the prerogative of honor amongst Sovereign Princes. Chap. 9.
Of the marks of Sovereignty. Chap. 10
The Contents of the second Book.
OF all sorts of Commonweales in general, and whether there be any mo than
three. Chap. 1. Of a Lordly Monarchy, or of the sole government of one. Chap.
2. Of a Royal Monarchy. Chap. 3. Of a Tyrannical Monarchy. Chap. 4. Whether
it be lawful to lay violent hand upon a Tyrant; and after his death to
disanull all his acts, decrees, and laws. Chap. 5. Of an Aristocratie. Chap.
6. Of a Popular Estate. Chap. 7.
The Contents of the third Book.
OF a Senate, or Council of Estate, and also of the power thereof. Chap. 1. Of
the Officers and Commissioners in a Commonweal. Chap. 2. Of Magistrates. Chap.
3. Of the obedience that the Magistrate owes unto the Laws and Sovereign
Prince. Chap. 4 Of the power and authority of a Magistrate over particular and
private men, and of his office and duty. Chap. 5. Of the mutual duties of
Magistrates among themselves, and of the power that one of them has over
another. Chap. 6. Of Corporations, and Colleges, Estates and Communities, and
what profits or inconveniences ensue thereof unto the Commonweal. Chap. 7. Of
the orders and degrees of Citisens. Chap. 8.
The Contents of the fourth Book.
Of the rising, increasing, flourishing estate, declining, and ruin of
Commonweales. Chap. 1. Whether there be any mean to know the chaunges and
ruins, which are to chance unto Commonweales. Chap. 2. That it is a most
dangerous thing at one and the self same time to change the Form, Laws,
and Customs of a Commonweal. Chap. 3. Whether it be better in a Commonweal
to have the Magistrates changeable, or else perpetual. Chap. 4. Whether the
unity and concord of Magistrates amongst themselves be good and wholesome for
the Commonweal, or not. Chap. 5. Whether it be convenient or expedient for the
Majesty of a Sovereign Prince to judge his subjects himself, or to be much
conversant with them. Chap. 6. Whether a Prince in civil factions ought to
join himself to one of the parties, and whether a good subject ought to be
constrained to take part with the one or the other faction: with the means to
remedy seditions. Chap. 7.
The Contents of the fifth Book.
WHat order and course is to be taken, to apply the form of a Commonweal to
the diversity of men's humors, and the means how to discover the nature and
disposition of the people. Chap. 1. The means to prevent the changes of
Commonweales, which happen through the great riches of some, and exceeding
poverty of of others Chap. 2. Whether the goods of men condemned should be
applied unto the common treasure, or to the church, or else left unto the
heirs. Chap. 3. Of reward and punishment. Chap. 4 Whether it be more
convenient to train up the subjects in arms, and to fortify their towns or
not. Chap. 5. Of the surety of alliances and treaties betwixt Princes and
Commonweales, and of the laws of arms. Chap. 6.
The Contents of the Sixth Book.
OF Censuring or Reformation, and whether it be expedient to inroll and number
the subjects, and to force them to make a declaration, or give a certificat of
their private estates. Chap. 1. Of Treasure. Chap. 2 Of Coins, and the means
how to prevent that they be not altered. Chap 3. A Comparison of the three
lawful Commonweales, that is, a Popular Estate, an Aristocraticall, and a
Royal, and that a Royal Monarchy is the best. Chap. 4. That a well ordered
Commonweal depends not either of lot, either of choice, and much less of
women; but by descent to be derived from a most honorable stock: and that it
ought to be given but to one alone, without partition. Chap. 5. Of the three
kinds of Justice, Distributive, Commutatiue, and Harmonicall: and what
proportion they have unto an Estate Royal, Aristocratique, and Popular. Chap.
6.
FINIS.
THE FIRST BOOK OF A COMMONWEAL.
CHAP. I What the principal end is of a well ordered Commonweal.
A Commonweal is a lawful government of many families, The definition of a
Commonweal.
and of that which unto them in common belongs, with a puissant sovereignty.
This definition omitted by them which have written of a Commonweal, we have
placed That a common weal ought to be a lawful government.
whether question be of the public faith for the more safety to be given;
accordingly paid, there is no wrong done: for that the laws of Arms ought
neither A notable example of favor, extended unto an offender, submitting
himself unto his Prince.
have examples enough, but none more memorable than that of Augustus the
Emperor, who caused it to be proclaimed by the sound of the Trumpet, that he
would give ten Sestertiees unto him which should bring unto him Coracotas, the
ring leader of the thieves and outlawes in Spain: which thing Coracotas
understanding, of his own Augustus caused to be paid unto him, and so received
him into his favor, to the intent that men should not think, that he would
take from him his life, to deceive him of the reward promised; or yet violate
the public faith and security with him, who of himself offered himself unto
the trial of justice: albeit he might have justly proceeded against the
fellon, and so have executed him. But he that should use such common right
toward pirates and robbers, as is to be used against just enemies, Pirates and
rob bers are not to have the favor of just enemies.
should open a dangerous gap to all vagabonds, to join themselves unto robbers
and thieves; and assure their capital actions and confederacy, under the
veil of justice. Not for that it is impossible to make a good Prince of a
robber, or a good King of a Demetrius the pirat by way of reproach said to
Alexander the great, The notable answer of Demetrius ^pirat, unto Alexander
the great.
That he had learned of his father no other occupation than piracie, neither
from him received any other inheritance than two small frigots* whereas he
which blamed him of piracie, roamed about nevertheless, and with two great
armies robbed the world without controlment, albeit that he had left him by his
father the great and flourishing kingdom of Macedon. Which frank speech so
moved Alexander, not to the revenge of the just reproach given him, but unto
commiseration, with a certain remorse of Demetrius, and made him general over
one of his legions. And not to go further for examples, in our age Solomon the
great Sultan of the Turks, with great rewards allured unto him Hariadenus
Aenobarbus, Dragut Reis, and Occhial, three of the most famous pirates of our
memory; whom he made his Admirals, and great commanders at Sea; by their
strength to confirm his own power, and to keep under the other pirates, then
roaming all about the seas, and so to assure his traffic. How arch pirates may
in some sort be favored.
Truly by such allurements to draw arch pirates into good order, is, and shall be
always commendable: not only to the end, not to make such people through
despair to invade the State of other princes, but also by their means to
ruinate and bring to Bargulus and Vitriatus, the arch pirates) yet for all that
they ought not to be of right called societies and amities, or partnerships;
but conspiracies, robberies, and pillages: neither is that their equal parting
of the spoil, to be termed a lawful division, but a mere robbery: for that
the principal point wherein consists the true mark and cognizance of amity
in them wants, that is to wit, right government, according to the laws of
nature. And that is it, for which the ancient writers have called Common
weals, Societies of men assembled to live well and happily together. Which as
it may serve for a description of a City, so can it not stand for a true
definition The ancient definition of a Commonweal^ defective.
of a Commonweal, as having in the one part thereof too much, and in the other
too little: three principal things especially to be required in every
Commonwealth, wanting in this description, that is to say, the family, the
sovereignty, and those things which are common to a City, or commonweal:
joining hereunto also, that this word, Happily, as they understand it, is not
necessary: for otherwise virtue should have no prize, if the favorable wind
of prosperity still blew not in the poope thereof, which a good man will never
consent unto. For a Commonweal may be right well governed, and yet
nevertheless afflicted with poverty, forsaken of friends, besieged by
enemies, and overwhelmed with many calamities: unto which estate Cicero
himself confesses him to have seen the Commonweal of Marseils in Province
to have fallen, Caius Caesar triumphed upon: which he says to have been the
best ordered and most accomplished that ever was in the world, without
exception. And so contrariwise it should come to pass, that a City, or
Commonweal, fruitful by situation, abounding in riches, flourishing, and well
stored with people, reverenced of friends, feared of enemies, invincible in
arms, strong in fortification, proud in buildings, triumphant in glory, should
therefore be rightly governed, albeit, that it were surcharged with all
villainies, and grounded in all manner of vices. And yet nevertheless most
certain it is, that virtue has not a more capital enemy, than such a
perpetual success as they call most happy; which to join together with
honesty, is no less difficulty, than to combine things by nature most
contrary. Wherefore since that we Plato, and Sir Thomas More ^
Chauncelor of England, vainly imagined: but so near as we possibly can
precisely to follow the best laws and rules of the most flourishing cities and
Commonweals. In which doing, a man is not be justly blamed, although he fully
attain not unto the end he aims at, no more than the good Pilot, by force
of tempest driven out of his course; or the skillful Physician overcome with
the force of the malady, are the less esteemed: provided, that the one has
yet in the cure well governed his sick patient; and the other in his course,
his ship.

Now if the greatest felicity and happiness of one citisen, and of a whole
City, The chief fellcitie of one citise^* and of a City or common weal all
one; and wherein it consists.
be all one and the self same, and the chief good of both consists in those
virtues which are proper unto the mind, and are only conversant in
contemplation (as they which in wisdom are said to have far excelled the
rest, have with great agreement affirmed) it must needs follow also, those
citisens and people to enjoy true felicity, which exercising themselves in the
sweet knowledge of things natural, humane, and divine, refer all the fruits
of their contemplation unto the almighty God, and great Prince of nature. If
we then confess this to be the principal end of the most blessed and happy
life of every one in particular, we conclude, that this is the felicity and
end also of a Commonweal. But for as much as men of affairs, and Princes, are
not in Aristotle sometimes following Aristotle blamed
the vulgar opinion, seems doubtful in setting down the chief good thing,
and not well to agree in opinion with himself; as thinking it necessary unto
virtuous actions to join also wealth and power: yet when he reasons more
subtly thereof, placing Marcus Varro to say, That the felicity of man
consists in a mixture of action and contemplation together: whereof this may
seem to have been the reason, For that as of one simple thing, the felicity
is simple; so of things double or compound, the felicity is also double and
compound. For the goodness of the body consists in the health, strength,
agilitie, comeliness, and beauty thereof: but the goodness of the mind, that
is to say, of that faculty or power which is the true bond of the body and
understanding together, consists in the due obedience of our desires unto
reason, that is to say, in the action of moral virtues: whereas the chief
goodness and felicity of the understanding and mind it self, consists in the
intellectual virtues, destitute and bare of all other things, happy; and that
not every one in particular viz. That those things be first provided Things
requisite for the first beginning of a growing commonweal.
for, without which people can in no wise live; and then after that, such other
things as wherewith men live the more commodiously and better, as medicines to
cure diseases, A notable discourse of the course that men hold for the
attaining of felicity.
and better by education instructed, abhors the company of loose and wicked
men, sorteth himself with the good, and seeks after their friendship: and
afterward when he feels himself clean and free from those perturbations and
passions which trouble and molest the mind; and has not set his whole hope
upon his vain pelf, he at great ease beholds the chaunges and chances of
the world, the vnstaidnesse and diversity of men's manners, their diverse ages,
and conditions; some in the height of power and sovereignty; others in the
bottom of calamity and woe: he then studiously beholds the mutations,
risings, and downfals of Commonweals; and wisely joins things tongue be
expressed, or by any mind of man conceived: yet so much as in him is he

If therefore we judge such a man wise and happy, as has not gotten store of
common wealth and pelf, but the knowledge and understanding of most excellent
things, and remote from the rude capacity of the vulgar people: how much more
happy ought we to judge a commonweal, abounding with a multitude of such
citisens, although A small commo^weale may yet be happy.
it contented with strait bounds, contemn the proud wealth and pleasures of
Aristotle, according Plato, and also accounting it Aristotle blamed.
a shame to depart from the opinion by himself once received and set down;
for as much as he at the first had put the blessed life in action; he afterward
with great ambiguitie of words, has placed the chief felicity of man, in the
action of the mind, which is nothing else but contemplation: to the intent he
might not seem to have put the Marcus Varro, who deemed man his chief good to
be mixed, of action and contemplation; might (in mine opinion) have more aptly
and better said man's life to have need of both; yet the chief good and
felicity thereof to consist in contemplation: which the Academicks called the
sweet, and the Hebrews the precious death; for that

But as in this fabric of the world (which we may call the true image of a
perfect and A notable comparison.
most absolute commonweal) the Moon, as the soul of the world, coming
nearer A man is called the little world.
force of contemplation ravished out of the body, and in some sort as it were
united unto the great GOD.
Sun of understanding, the life of the whole world, wonderfully lightened with
divine virtue, with that celestial force maruelously strengthens the body,
with all the natural powers thereof. Yet if the same, become too careful of
the body, or too much drowned in the sensual pleasures thereof, shall forsake
this divine Sun; it shall befall it even as it does unto the Moon, which
shunning the sight of the Sun, and masked with the the shadow of the earth,
loses her brightness and light, by Genesis cap. 2. Deuteronomy. Exodus cap. 20.
as the holy day of repose and rest, to the intent we should employ the same in
contemplation of his works, in meditation of his law, and giving of him
praises. And thus much concerning the principal end and chief good of every
man in particular, as also of all men in general, and of every well ordered
commonweal: the nearer unto which end they approach, by so much they are the
more happy. For as we see in particular A fit comparion.
men, many degrees of worldly calamity or bliss, according to the diverse ends

The Lacedaemonians are reported to have always been valiant and courageous
Plato, Plutarch in the lives of Lysander, Agesilaus, and Lycurgus.
men; but in the rest of their actions iniust and perfidious, if question once
were of the common good: for that their education, their laws, customs, and
manners, had no other scope or end than to make their people courageous to
undertake all dangers, and painful to endure all manner of labor and toil;
contemning all such pleasures and delights, as commonly effeminate the minds of
men, and weaken their strength, referring Dionis Halicar. li. pri.
true justice, whereunto, as to a mark they addressed all their actions.
Wherefore we must so much as in us lies endeavor our selves to find the means
to attain or at least wise to come so near as we possibly can, unto that
felicity we have before spoken of, and to that definition of a Commonweal by
us before set down. Wherefore prosecuting every part of the said definition,
let us first speak of a Family.

CHAP. II.
A Family is the right government of many subjects or persons The definition
of a family.
under the obedience of one and the same head of the family; and of such things
as are unto them proper. The second part of the definition of a Commonweal by
us set down, concerns a Family, which is the true seminary and beginning
of every Commonweal, as also a principal member thereof. So that Aristotle
following Xenophon, seems to me without any probable cause, to have divided
the Oeconomicall government from the Political, and a City from a Family:
which can no otherwise be done, than if we should pull the members from the
body; or go about to build a City without houses. Or by the same reason he
should have set down by it self a treatise of Colleges, and Corporations;
which being neither families nor cities, are yet parts of a Commonweal. Whereas
we see the Lawyers, and law makers (whom we ought as guides to follow in
reasoning of a Commonweal) to have in the same treatise comprehended the laws
and ordinances of a commonweal, corporations, colleges, and families; howbeit
that they have otherwise taken the Oeconomicall government than did Aristotle;
who defines Aristotle and Xenophon. Wherefore as a family well and wisely
ordered, is the true image of a City, and the domestical government, The good
government of a family the true model for the government of a Common weal.
in sort like unto the sovereignty in a Commonweal: so also is the manner of
the government of an house or family, the true model for the government of a
Commonweal. And as whilst every particular member of the body does his
duty, we live in good and perfect health; so also where every family is kept
in order, the whole city it behooves us first to have an especial regard and
care for the good ordering

We said a Commonweal to be a lawful government of many families, and of
such things as unto them in common belongs, with a puissant sovereignty. By
the word, Many, you may not in this case understand two, as for most part we
do; for seeing that the law requires at the least three persons to make a
College, we according to the Lawyers opinion account three persons also,
besides the master of the house, necessary to make a family; be they
children, or slaves, or men enfranchised, or free borne men which have
voluntarily submitted themselves unto the master of the house or family, who
makes up the fourth, and is yet nevertheless a member of the family. But for
as much as ^milies, Colleges, Companies, Cities, and Commonweals, yea, and No
perfect family without a wife.
it comes to pass, there must be five persons at least to make up an whole
and entire family. If therefore there must needs be three persons, and no
fewer, to make a How many persons be requisite to make up an whole and entire
family, and how many families make a City.
College, and as many to make a family, beside the master of the household and
his wife; we for the same reason say three families and no fewer to be
necessary for the making of a City, or Commonweal, which should be three
times five, for three perfect families. Whereupon (in mine opinion) the
ancient writers have called fifteen a people, as says Appuleius, referring
the number of fifteen unto three entire families. Solomon King of the Hebrews;
and six hundred children, as had Hermotimus king of the Justin. lib. 4.
Parthians by his multitude of wives; or five hundred slaves, as had Crassus;
if they be all under the command of one and the same head of the family,
they are neither to be called a people nor a city, but by the name of a family
only: Yea although he have many children, or servants married, having
themselves children also; provided always, that they be under the authority
of one head, whom the law calls father of the family, although he yet cry
in his cradle. And for this cause the Hebrews, who always show the propriety
of things by their names, have called a family (...), not for that a family
contains a thousand persons, as says one Rabbin, but of the word (...),
Famulis. But what should let (may some man say) three Colleges, or many other
particular assemblies without a family to make a City, or Common weal, if
they be governed by one sovereign command? Truly it makes a good show, and
yet for all that is it no Commonweal: for that no College, nor body
politic can long stand without a family, but must of it self perish and
come to naught.

Now the law says, that the people never dies, but a thousand year hence to
be the same that it was before* although the use and profit of any thing
granted unto a common weal be after an hundred year extinguished, and again
reunited unto the propriety, Theseus his ship, which although it were an
hundred times changed, by putting in of new plancks, yet still retained the old
name. But as a ship, if the keele (which strongly bears up the prow, the
poup, the ribs, and tacklings) be taken away, is no longer a ship, but an evil
favored houp of wood: even so a Commonweal without a soueraintie of power,
which unites in one body all the members and families of the same is no more a
common weal, neither can by any means long endure. And not It is not the
greatness of the number that makes the Commo^weale, but the union of the people
under one sovereign command.
to depart from our similitude: as a ship may be quite broken up, or altogether
consumed with fire; so may also the people be into diverse places dispersed, or
else be utterly destroyed, the City or state yet standing whole; for it is
neither the walls, neither the persons, that makes the city, but the union of
the people under the same sovereignty of government, albeit that there be in
all but three families. For as an Emot is as well to be called a living
creature, as an Elephant: so the lawful government of three families, with a
sovereignty of power makes as well a common weal, as a great signiorie. So
Rhaguse one of the least signeuries in all Europe, is no less a common weal,
than are those of the Turks, the Tartars, or Spaniards, whose Empires are
bounded with the same bounds that the course of the Sun is. And as a little
family shut up in a small Ulysses, whose kingdom was contained within the
rock of Ithaca, is of Homer as well called a King, as Agamemnon: for a great
kingdom (as says Cassiodorus) is no other thing than a great Commonweal,
under the government of one chief sovereign: wherefore if of three families,
one of the chief of the families has sovereign power over the other two, or
two of them together over the third, or all three jointly and at once exercise
power and authority over the people of the three families; it shall as well be
called a Commonweal, as if it in it self comprehended an infinite multitude
of citisens. And by this means it may chance, that one family Sometimes one*
family may be greater than some Common weal.
may sometimes be greater and better peopled then a common weal: as was well
said of the family of Aemilius Tubero, who was head of a family of sixteen of
his own children, all married, whom he had all under his power, together with
their children and servants, dwelling in the same house with him. And on the
contrary part, the greatest Plut. in Emili. The greatest and best peopled city
no more a common weal than the least.
City or Monarchy, and the best peopled that is upon the face of the earth,
is no more a common weal or city, than the least. Albeit that Aristotle
says, the city of Babylon (whose circuit in a square form was so great, that
it could scarce on foot be gone about in three days) was to be called rather
a nation, than a common weal, which ought not, as he says, to have more than
ten thousand citisens in it at the most: as if it were any absurdity to call
an infinite number of nations, and dwelling in diverse The multitude of people
no binderance to the unity of a common weal* so that they be under one
sovereign command.
deserve the name of a Commonweal, which at the foundation thereof had not
above 3000 citisens; but in the time of Tiberius the Emperor, had cessed in it
fifteen millions, besides an hundred and ten thousand others dispersed almost
throughout the world: not accounting the slaves, the number of whom was ten
times greater: and yet in this number were not comprised they of the Provinces
subject unto the Empire of Rome, neither the confederat cities, or free
nations, who had their Commonweals in sovereignty divided from the Roman
Empire. Which sovereignty of government is the true foundation and hinge
whereupon the state of a city turns: whereof all the magistrates, France.
kingdom, nor of greater revenue: or else that the Commonweal has many large
provinces and countries, as Ester. cap. 1
had the Persians, which Herodotus, (...). in Arta^.
is reported to have had an hundred twenty seven provinces from the uttermost
part of India, unto the sea of Hellespontus: or as is now also the commonweal
of the Aethiopians, wherein are fifty provinces, which Pau. Iouius Negus.

But beside that sovereignty of government thus by us set down, as the strong
foundation of the whole Commonweal; many other things besides are of citisens
to be had in common among themselves, as their markets, their churches, their
walks, Many things common unto citisens among themselves.
ways, laws, decrees, judgments, voices, customs, theaters, walls, public
buildings, common pastures, lands, and treasure; and in brief, rewards,
punishments, suits, and contracts: all which I say are common unto all the
citisens together, or by use and profit: or public for every man to use, or
both together. That is also a great community No commonweal where nothing is
common
which has in it nothing at all public or common. Although it may so be, that
the greatest part of their lands be common unto the citisens in general, and
the least part unto every one of them in particular: as by the law of Romulus,
called Agraria, all the lands of Rome, at that time containing eighteen
thousand acres, was divided * into Dionisius H^ly carnasseus lib. 2.
three equal parts, whereof the first part was assigned for the maintaining of
the sacrifices; the second for the defraying of the necessary charges of the
common weal; and the third was equally divided among the citisens; who being
in number but three thousand, had to every one of them allotted two acres:
which equal partage long time Cincinnatus the Dictator himself 260 years after
had no more but two acres of land, which he with his own hands husbanded. But
howsoever lands may be divided, it cannot possibly be, that all things should
be common amongst citisens; which unto Plato seemed so notable a thing, and so
much Plato his opinion for the community of all things in a commonweal,
refuted.
to be wished for, as that in his Commonweal he would have all men's wives and
children common also: for so he deemed it would come to pass that these two
words, Mine and Thine, should never more be heard amongst his citisens, being
in his opinion the cause of all the discord and evils in a Commonweal. But he
understood not that by making all things thus common, a Commonweal must needs
perish: for nothing can be public, where nothing is private: neither can it be
imagined there to be Plato himself (in all other things most excellent) after
he had seen the notable inconveniences and absurdities which such a confused
community of all things drew after it, wisely of himself departed from that
so absurd an opinion, and easily suffered that Commonweal which he had
attributed unto Socrates to be abolished; that so he might more moderatly
defend his own. But some will say, that the Massagets

Wherefore as a Commonweal is a lawful government of many families, and of
those things which unto them in common belongs, with a puissant sovereignty:
so is a Family the right government of many subjects or persons, and of such
things as are unto them proper, under the rule and command of one and the same
head of the family. For in that especially consists the difference betwixt a
Commonweal and a Family: The chief difference betwixt a Family and a
Commonweal.
for that the master of a family has the government of domestical things,
and Sleidan.
common, excepting their wives (of whom they might have many) and their
apparel, thinking thereby the better to maintain mutual love and concord
among them: in which their account they found themselves far deceived. For
they which admit this community of all things, are so far from this good
agreement of citisens among themselves, which they hope thus to maintain, as
that thereby the mutual love betwixt man and wife, the tender care of parents
toward their children, and their dutifulness again toward them, and in
brief the mutual love of neighbors and kinsmen among themselves, is quite
extinquished; all the kind bond of blood and kindred (than which none stronger
can be imagined for the friendship Things common smally regarded
private and particular profit thereout of. Besides that, the nature of love and
friendship is such, that the more common it is, or unto more divided, the less
force it is of: not unlike to great rivers, which carry great vessels, but
being divided into small branches, serves neither so keep back the enemy,
neither for burden: in which manner love also embeseled. As in like case the
laws oftentimes forbids a man to procure, to alienat, Particular families
may have also their particular laws: and how.
laws be common to al, it is not inconvenient, but that families may have
their certain particular statutes for themselves and their successors, made by
the ancient heads of their families, and confirmed unto them by their
sovereign Princes. As we have example in the most honorable nation of the
Saxons, amongst whom are many families, which use certain their own private
laws, quite differing both from the laws of the Empire, and from the common
laws and customs of Saxony. And betwixt the dukes of Bauaria, and the
Counties Palatines there are also their particular laws, as Anno 1370. and
1431.
confirmed unto them by the Emperor Charles the fourth, and Sigismund. In like
manner it was decreed betwixt the houses of Austria, and Bohemia, that for lack
of heirs male, the one of them should succeed into the inheritance of the
other, as we see it is now come to pass. And not to go further than this
France.
Realm, I have seen a charter of the house of Laual granted by the Guy de
Laual; or of Guionne, if she be an inheritrix, and the arms plain. In like
manner in the houses of Baume, Albret, and Rhodez, the daughters by the
ancient laws of their ancestors, were excluded both in direct and
collateral line from inheriting, so long as there were any males in what
degree soever; deriuing as it were into their families, the law Salique, usual
unto the Princes of Sauoy. Such laws of families, which the Latins had also,
and called them Ius familiare, were made The great benefit which oftentimes
comes unto a Commonweal, by certain private laws and customs granted unto
some great and honorable houses and families.
of the Empire after long civil war, wisely renewed the ancient laws of
great houses and families, as having well perceived that by that mean the
Empire was to be preferued from ruin, and the state of Almaigne from a
general destruction. Which for all that, is not to take place in other obscure
and particular base families, to the intent that the public laws, so much as
is possible, should be unto all men common and the self question was of the
successions of Laual, of the County of Dreux, and of Montmorency, Camillus
complained with Liuie, Liuitie lib. 5
What (says he) if the sacred rites of families may not in time of war be
intermitted, pleases it you that the public sacrifices and Roman gods should
even in time of peace be forsaken? For it was a law of the twelve tables
conceived in these words, Sacred private Rites, firm be they for ever: which M.
Tullius translated into his laws. And thus much in general, concerning the
similitude

CHAP. III. Of the power of an Husband over his Wife, as also of the mutual
duties betwixt them: and whether it be expedient to renew the law of
diuorcement or not.
ALL assemblies of men lawfully joined together, whether they be Families,
Colleges, Universities, or Commonweals, are kept together and preserved by the
mutual duties of commanding The division of power and command.
public or private: The power public, is either free from law, as is theirs
which hold the chiefest place of sovereignty; or else restrained by law, as is
the power of the Magistrates, who although they command over private men, are
yet themselves subject unto the commands and laws of others their superiors.
The power private, consists either in the heads of families, or in
corporations, or colleges, where all by a general consent, or the greater
part, commands over the rest. But the domestical Domestical power of four
sorts.
power is of four sorts: viz. The power of the Husband over his Wife, the
power of the Father over his children, the power of the Lord over his slaves,
and the power of the head of a Family over his mercenarie servants. And for as
much as the right and lawful government of every Commonweal, Corporation,
College, Society, and Family depends of the due knowledge of commanding
and obeying; let us now speak of every part of commanding in such order as is
by us before set down. For natural liberty is such, as for a man next unto
God not to be subject to any man living, neither to suffer the command of any
other than of himself; that is to say, of Reason, which is always conformable
unto the will of God. This natural commandment The first and greatest
command is the command of Reason over our affections, and so over our selves.
of Reason over our affections and desires, is the first, the greatest and most
ancient that Genesis cap. 2.
established, as we see in the speech which God had both unto her that was the
first Genesis cap. 3
mother of us all; as also against him who first defiled himself with his
brothers Genesis cap. 4
. For that command which he had before given the Husband and his Wife, is two
ways to be understood; first literally for the power the Husband has over his
Wife, and then morally for the command the soul has over the body, and
reason over affection. For that reasonable part of understanding, is in man as
the Husband; and Affection, as the Woman: For before God had created Eua, it
was said of Adam, Male and female created he them Genesis cap. 1.
. Wherefore the woman in holy writ is oftentimes taken for affection: but never
more than with Solomon, who so lived as a man unto women most kind; but so
writ, as if he had been unto them a sworn enemy, whereas he thought nothing
less, all that his speech being to be understood of man's unreasonable
desires, as well declares the wise and grave Rabbin Maymon Rabbi Maymon. lib.
x. nemore.
. A man has no power over his Concubine, or her that is but unto him betrothed.
if the concubine be frank and free: which all nations have of good right
rejected, and as it were by secret consent abrogated, as a thing dishonest and
of evil example. Neither does this power that the Husband nath over his Wife
extend unto her that is but betrothed, upon whom the betrothed man may not lay
his hand; which has ever been lawful unto the Husband, both by the Civil and
Canon law: yea if the betrothed How the Husband sometimes hash not of right
power over his Wife, and why.
of man and wife (which we have spoken of) the Wife is in the power of her
Husband, except he be a slave, or the son of the master of the Family, who
have no authority over their wives, and much less over their children; which
although their married father were manumised, should yet fall into the power of
their grandfather. The reason whereof is, for that a Family should have but
one head, one master, and one Lord: whereas otherwise if it should have many
heads, their commands would be contrary, one forbidding what another
commands, to the continual disturbance of the whole family. And therefore
the woman by condition free, marrying her self unto the master of the
families son, is in the power of her father in law, as is also the Homer) to
the end that he may be a law unto his family: and repugnant also unto the law
of God, which commands the Wife to forsake father * Numeri. 3.
worthily abrogated, and especially with us: for that the custom generally
exempteth the married woman out of the power of her father; as was likewise in
the Lacedemonian Commonweal, as Plutarch writes, where the married woman
says thus; When I was a daughter I did the command of my father, but since
that I am married, it is my Husband to whom I owe mine obeisance: for
otherwise the wife might tread under foot the commandment of her Husband, and
acquit her self when she saw good under the guard of her father. Now the
interpretors of this Roman law have used many cautions to avoid the absurdities
and inconveniences following, if the The wife by all the laws of God and man
bound to obey her husband.
the wife ought to be obedient unto her husband, and not to refuse his
commands not repugnant unto honesty. One Italian Doctor there is of opinion,
That the wife is not in the power of her husband: but for that of his assertion
so singular and absurd, he has brought neither reason nor authority, there
has been none so fond to follow the same. For it is certain by the law of
Romulus, that the husband had not only the command of his wife, but also
power of life and death over her, in four cases, without Four ^ ^seswherin a
man by Romulus his-law had power of life and death over his wife.
any form of judicial process against her: that is to wit, for Adultery,
for suborning of a child, for counterfeiting of false keys, and for drinking
of wine. Howbeit the rigor Tiberius the Emperor; for that the husband putting
away his wife for adultery, or himself attainted * Tacitus lib. 2
with the same crime, the offense remained unpunished, not without the great
reproach of their kindred, who in ancient time (after the manner of the
Romans) punished the adulterous women with death, or with exile. And albeit
that the power of the husband over his wife was much diminished, yet
nevertheless by the oration Liui. lib. 33.
which Marcus Cato the Censor made unto the people in defense of the law Oppia
(which took from women their habilliments of colors, and forbad them to
wear above Cato the Censor flourished about 550 years after the laws of
Romulus: and 200 years after, Vlpian the Lawyer writes, That Tutors and
Gouerners were wont to be given to women and orphans; but when they were
married, that then they were in the hand of the man, that is to say in the
power of the husband. And if any should say That he divided the title of
persons that are in the power of others, from them that are in the power of
others; it follows not thereof that wives were in the power of their
husbands, but was by him so done, to show the difference of power the husband
has Hand, signifies oftentimes power and authority? the Hebrews, Greeks, and
Latins, having always so used it, as when they say, The hand of the King*
and, To come into the hand of the enemy. And Festus Pompeius, speaking of the
husband bringing home his wife, uses the word Mancipare, a word proper unto
slaves: which word we yet use in many our customs and laws, where question is
of the emancipating of women. But to make it plain, this power of husbands
over their wives to have been common unto all people, we will by two or three
examples declare the same. Olorus King of Thracia compelled the Dacians
overcome by their Justin. lib. 32.
enemies, to serve their wives, in token of extreme servitude, and of the
greatest reproach that he could devise to do them. We read also that by the
laws of the Lombards the woman was in the same subjection that the ancient
Romans were, and that the husbands had all power of life and death over their
wives* which they yet used in the time of Baldus, not yet 260. years ago* And
not to seek farther, what people had ever so great power over their wives as
had our ancestors? The French men (says Lib. 6. Belli Gallici.
Gaesar) have power of life and death over their wives and children, in like
manner as over their slaves: and being never so little suspected to have
wrought their husbands death, are to be tortured by their own kinsmen, and
being found guilty are by them to be cruelly executed, without any further
authority from the Magistrate. But for That it was lawful for a man to kill
his wife for drinking of wine
drinking of wine it was much more manifest that it was cause sufficient by the
Roman laws for the husband to put his wife to death; wherein all the Dion.
Halic. lib. 2. Plin. li. 14 cap. 13. Vaser. de instit. antiq.
ancient writers agree; which was not only the custom of the Romans, but also
(as Theophrastus writes) of the ancient inhabitants of Marseiles^ in
Prouinde, and the Milesians, who used the same law against their w^es that had
drunk wine* judging that the disordered desires of the woman subject to wine,
would also make her drunk, and so afterward Cicero de not. lib. 3. and de
Repub. lib. 1. Ps^. in Problem. Romans cap. 6. Arnob. lib. 2. aduersus gentes.
Tertul in Apolog. cap* 6. Gellius lib. 10 cap. 23. and Alcimus Siculus apud
Athenae^um.
an adultresse* We also find that the power given unto the husband by the law
of R^mulus, To put his wife to death for adulter^e, without the authority of
the Magistrar* was common to all Greece, as well as to the Romans* For the law
of Iulia which gave leave only unto the father to kill his daughter together
with the adulterer, being taken Augustus the Emperor above seven hundred
years after the law of Romulus: And yet by the same law it was permitted unto
certain persons to do the same that the father might, against their adulterous
wives: a right small punishment being appointed for the husband* who besides
the persons in the law excepted, had killed the adulterours taken in the fact.
But the public punishment of adultery derogateth nothing from the power of
the husband* in other The punishment of wives* (...) adulier^.
sorts of corrections over his wife, not extending unto death* which is unto
husbands forbidden. After that Theodora the Empress having got the maisterie
over Justinian the Emperor her husband, a blockish and unlearned Prince* when
she had made all the laws she could for the advantage of women against their
husbands* she amongst (...) which seems but a thing ^idiculous, considering
that the note of (...) cannot take any honor from her which has already lost
the same, and is altogether de famed* (...) that upon the matter she^ re^
altogether vnpunishe^, and that for such a crime as the law of God Leuit. ^0.
Daniel 12. Deu. 24*
punishe^h with the most ^igorous death that then was* (that is to say with
stoning) and which the ancient Egyptians punished a^ (...) with cutting off
the ^ose of the woman, and the man's priuities. But in other crimes which more
concerned the husband (...) the public state; and deser^ed not death power is
by the consent^ all men (...) Iusti^an taken away* and a ^tie dec^eed against
them that had given the cause of the separation* which were especially grounded
upon (...); and poi^ning attempted* but not having taken effect. Yet
notwithstanding the decree of Justinian, it is by our custom permitted unto
the wife wronged or evil entreated by her husband, to require separation. And
yet (...) all that is no action of injury to be suffered betwixt the husband
and the wife (as some No action of injury to be ad^tted betwixt a man and his
wife, and why.
would have it) and that for the honor and dignity of marriage; which the law
has had in so great regard, that it permits not the husband, or any third
man to have an action of ^elonie against the wife, although she have embeseled
or purloyned all her The ha^red betwixt man and wife of all others most deadly.
husbands moueables. But as no love is greater than that of marriage, (as says
Artem^dorus) so is the hatred of all others most deadly, if it once take root
betwixt man and wife; as was well declared by Leo Ambassador from them of
Bizance unto the Athenians, whom when they in a great assembly had laughed to
scorn for his small stature, Why (said he) do you laugh at me a dwarf, seeing
my wife is much less than my self, and scarce so high as my knee; who
pleased, although we lie in a very little bed, yet falling out the one with
the other, the great City of Constantinople is too Diuorcement by the law of
God allowed.
common to all people, and yet at this present is used in Afric, and in all
the east) gave leave to the husband to put away his wife, if she pleased him
not, with charge that he might never take her again, and yet might well marry
another; which was a mean to keep the insolent wives in subjection, as also
to repress the anger of the wayward husbands; for what woman (except she were
an arrant whore) would be so desirous of a man, as to marry an husband that
without any just or probable cause had Whether in diuorcement it be better to
ex*
and also well prove the same before the Judge: For in so doing, the honor of
the one or of both the parties is hazarded* which should not so be if neither
of them were enforced pressethe cause thereof, or (...) to have the same
concealed.
to prove the cause of the divorce unto the Judge. As did in ancient time the
Hebrews, and yet do at this present also, as we see in their Pandects, where is
described the lawful act of diuorcement, and the bil of diuorcement which Rabi
Ieiel of Paris gave unto In the year of Christ 1240.
5018. Another example thereof is also extant in the Epitome of the Hebrew
Pandects* collected by the Lawyer Moses de Maymon in Chaldea, where the Judge
of the place having seen the special procuratio^, and the act of him that had
put away his wife in the presence of three witnesses, adioyneth thereunto these
words, That he did purely and simply divorce her, and without any cause
showing, giving them both leave to marry whom they should see good. In which
doing the woman was not dishonored, but might with safe reputation marry with
another ^ortable to her own quality. And albeit that the Athenians admitted
no diuorcement, except the cause were first proved before the Judges, yet
seemed it to all good men to be a thing of great daunge^: insomuch that Plut.
in Alci.
Alcibiades fearing the public scandal took his wife openly complaining
before the Judges, and carried her away home upon his shoulders. More
indifferently dealt the ancient Romans, in joining no cause at all unto the
bill of diuorcement: as is to be seen when Paulus Aemilius put away his wife,
whom he confessed to be very wise, * Plut. in Aemi.
honest; and nobly descended; and by whom he had also many fair children: but
when his wives friends complaining unto him, would needs know of him the cause
of the divorce, he showed them his shoo* which was very handsomely and well
made; and yet said he, none of you but my self feels where this shoo
wringeth me* But what if the cause seem not sufficient unto the Judge? or be
not well proved? is it therefore Diuorcement necessary.
fear, and perpetual discord, hereof ensue adulteries, and oftentimes
murders and poysonings, for the most part to men unknown; as it was
discovered in Rome, before the law of diuorcement (first made by Spurius
Caruilius, about 500. years after the foundation of the city) a woman being
apprehended and convicted for poisoning her husband, accused other her
companions in the fact, who afterward by mutual accusations appeached seventy
others of the same crime for poisoning their husbands, who were all therefore
executed: which how much the more is it to be feared where diuorcements
Anastasius also suffered diuorcement, by consent of both parties, to be made
without any penalty or punishment: which was by Justinian the Emperor, or
rather Theodora his wife forbidden. Now of that which we have already said,
every man as I suppose, may of himself judge which is most expedient for a
Commonweal.

But what change or variety of laws soever in such diversity of Commonweals,
there was never law or custom that exempted the wife from the obeisance, and
not Euripides: so beseems it not the husband under the shadow of this power,
to make a slave of his wife. And whereas Marcus Varro Wives to be corrected
rather with words then with stripes.
is of opinion that slaves ought rather to be corrected with words than with
stripes; much more ought the wife to be, whom both God and man's law does call
his housefellow. So Homer bringing in Jupiter reproving his wife Juno, and
seeing her rebellions, uses great threats, but proceeds unto no further
extremities. And Cato commonly Plut. in Laconicis.
Ladies and Mistresses: which the Romans did also, not the private men only, but
even Arist. lib. 2. Politic.
their Emperors themselves, in the declination of their Empire; who at length
together with their domestical government lost also their public
sovereignty. Albeit that Tranquillus in Claudio.
such women as take pleasure in commanding their effeminat husbands, are like
unto them that had rather to guide the blind, than to follow the wise and
clear sighted.

Now the law of God, and the holy tongue, which has named all things according
The authority and power of the husband ^uer his wife.
to the true nature and propriety thereof, calls the husband Bahal* that is
to say, Lord and master; to show that unto him belongs the sovereignty to
command. The laws also of all nations, to abate the pride of women, and to
make men know that they ought to excel their wives in wisdom and virtue,
have ordained that the honor and glory of the wife should depend of her
husband, as of the Sun: in such sort that if the husband be noble, he
enobleth his base wife; but if the wife being nobly borne marry a man of base
degree, she loses her nobility, albeit that of ancient time there have
been many and yet are, which take their nobility and gentry from their Naires
have scarce at any time their own children inheritors of their kingdom or
goods* but the children of noble women although they be bastards: yet for all
that the interpretors of the law hold* that it ought not so to be done either
by custom or decrees; for the general agreement of almost all people to the
contrary, as Herodotus has long ago written. And therefore it is most right
that the wife should follow the

CHAP. IIII. Of the power of a Father, and whether it be meet for the Father to
have power of life
THe right government of the Father and the children, consists in the good
use of the power which God (himself* the Father of nature) has given to the
Father over his own children: or the law over them whom any man adopteth for
children unto himself: and in the obedience, love, and reverence of the
children toward their Fathers. This word Power, is common unto all such as
have power to command over others; either publicly or privately. So the Prince
(says Seneca) has power over his subjects, the Magistrate over private men* the
Father over his children, the Master over his scholars, the Captain over his
soldiers, and the Lord over The power of the Father over his children is the
only natural power.
his slaves. But of all these the right and power to command, is not by nature
given to any beside the Father, who is the true Image of the great and
Almighty God the Father of all things, as says Proclus the Academick. Plato
also having first in certain chapters set down laws concerning the honor of
God* says them to be as a Preface to the reverence which the child owes unto
the Father, unto whom next unto God he is beholden for his life, and for
whatsoever thing else he has in this world. And as the Father is by nature
bound to nourish his children according to his ability* and to instruct them
in all civility and virtue: so the children also when they are once grown up
are bound, but with a much more straiter bond, to love, reverence, serve, and
nourish The duty of parents toward their children: and their great duty
again toward them.
their Father, and in all things to show themselves dutiful and obedient unto
them, and by all means to hide and cover their infirmities and imperfections,
if they see any in them, and never to spare their lives and goods to save the
life of them by whom they themselves took breath. The which bond, albeit it
be sealed with the seal of nature, and engrafted in every one of our minds,
and carries with it a ready execution: yet so it is nevertheless, that to
show the greatness thereof there can be no greater argument, than the first
commandment of the second table, which alone of all the Exodus 22. Deuteronomy. 5.
ten Commandments propounds a reward unto children which honor their
parents: although no reward be unto him due that does but his duty: and so
much the less, for that there is no more religious a decree in all the laws
both of God and Gen 27. 28.
Valor. Max. lib. 2.
of the contentions and strife of the sons among themselves, for the getting
and foregaining their Fathers blessing; as they which feared more their curse
than death: As young Torquatus who cast off by his Father, slew himself for
sorrow. And that is it why Plato says, that above all things we must have care
of the cursings and blessings that the Fathers give unto their children: for
that there is no prayer that God does more readily hear, than that of the
Father toward his children. If children then be so straightly bound to obey and
reverence their parents? what punishment then deserve they that are unto them
disobedient, irreuerent, or injurious? what punishment can be Pompeia, a
punishment be appointed rather new and strange, than fit for such a crime. And
albeit that we have seen one in our memory (who had caused his Father to be
slain) torn with hot iron tongs, afterward broken upon the wheel, and so at
last (being yet alive) burnt: yet was there no man which did not more abhor
the wickedness of his villainy, than the horror of his punishment, and which
said not that he had deserved more than he had yet suffered. Also the wise
Solon; when he had made laws for the Athenians, being asked why he had
appointed no punishment against Seruia, which condemns Adrian the Emperor
had understood, said, That so to kill was not the part of a Father, but of a
thief or murtheret: for that the greatest profit of punishment is, that it be
exemplarie unto all. Another part of the law of God Leui. 20*
wills, Deu. 17. Exo. 21
That the child which reuileth his Father or mother should die the death: the
examination Parents how unwilling to have their children publicly punished.
and of the mother toward their children, that they would never (if they
might) permit the Judges to determine of the life of their children, although
they had been of them mortally wounded. As not long ago it happened with us,
that a Father having received a deadly wound of his son, whom he would have
lightly corrected; and fearing least his son apprehended by the magistrate
should die for it, ceased not even to his last gasp to cry out unto his son,
by speedy flight to save his life: whom for all that being afterward taken,
and confessing the fact, the Judges condemned to be hanged from an high beam
for a time by the feet, with a great stone about his neck, Good justice done
upon a disobedient child.
out against the rigor of the laws and severity of the Judges, protesting
that she did pardon him, and that she had not of him received any injury at
all. And Seneca speaking

All this that I have said, and the examples of fresh memory by me produced,
serve That parents should have power of life and death over their children.
to show that it is needful in a well ordered Commonweal, to restore unto
parents the power of life and death over their children, which by the law of
God and nature is given them, the most ancient law that ever was common unto
the Persians, unto the people of the upper Asia, as also unto the Romans, the
Hebrews, the Celtes, and in use in all the West Indies, until they were
conquered by the Spaniards: otherwise we Justinian the Emperor deceives us
in saying that no people had such power over their children as had the Romans:
For we have the law of God, which ought to be holy and inuiolat among all
people; we have the testimonies of Deuteronomy. 21.
the Histories both Greek and Latin, whereby it is sufficiently to be
understood, the Hebrews, Celtes, and Persians to have had the same power over
their children that the Romans had. The French men (says Caesar) Caesar lib.
6. Comment.
have power of life and death over their wives and children, as well as over
their slaves. And although that by the law of Romulus power was given unto the
husband, for four causes only to kill his wife: yet nevertheless by the same
law, full power was given unto the Father to dispose of the of the Indies. And
yet at this present amongst the Moscouits and Tartars (whom the Cassius threw
his son Anotable example of a fathers severity against his son, being a
great officer.
headlong out of the Consistory, publishing the law Agraria (for the division
of lands) in the behoof of the people, and afterward by his own private
judgment put him to death, the magistrates, Sergeants, and people standing
thereat astonished, and not daring to withstand his fatherly authority, although
they would with all their power have had that Valor. Maxi* lib. 4.
Pomponius the Tribune of the people, had for diverse causes accused Torquatus
unto the people, and amongst other things had charged him that he too much
oppressed his son with country labor: so it fell out that the son
himself going unto the Tribune, and finding him in bed, setting his dagger
unto his throat, caused him to swear to desist from further prosecuting of the
accusation against his father. So the Tribune coming again into the
Consistory least he might seem to use collusion with Torquatus, whom he had
before accused, Jupiter, who had only attempted in offensive manner, but to
touch the Dion. Halycar. lib. 7. and Liuius lib. 3.
most holy Tribunes body. For they were of opinion that domestical justice
and power of fathers, were the most sure and firm foundation of laws, honor,
virtue, piety, wherewith a Commonweal ought to flourish. Neither was it
marvel if in the Roman Commonwealth we see such rare examples of reverend
duty of children toward their The rare piety of a daughter toward her father.
spoken of; and another such there is, as that Painters even unto these times
use therewith to embellish their Tables: that is to wit, of the daughter which
secretly gave suck unto her father condemned to be pined to death (which never
suffers the healthful man to live past the seventh day) which act of piety
the Jailer having perceived, gave the magistrates to understand thereof; which
by them reported unto the people, not only obtained her fathers pardon, but
also found such grace as that in the self same place in perpetual remembrance
of the fact, they built a Temple dedicated unto Piety. Yea the very
unreasonable beasts have a natural feeling of this kind duty, and are seen
to feed their parents now grown weak with age: but especially the Storke,
Leuit 11. job. 38.
(which names things according to their secret proprieties) calls Chasida,
that is to say, dutiful and charitable; for so much as she nourishes her
father and mother in their age. And albeit that the father be in duty bound to
instruct his children in all virtues, but especially in the fear of God: yet
if he shall forget his duty, are not the children therefore excused of
theirs: albeit that Solon the lawmaker contrary unto reason, has by his laws
acquitted the son from the nourishing of his father, if he have taught him no
trade or occupation whereby to get his living. But the right instruction of
children (than which nothing can be devised more profitable or better in a
Commonweal) depends of that fatherly power which I have before

But impossible it is that the foundation of a Commonweal being evil laid,
(that is The power of fathers over their children much profitable to the
Commonweal: and the want thereof much hurtful.
to say, the bringing up of children and families) any thing that is firm and
sure should be thereupon built. Besides that, the contention, strife, and
discord, which we daily see amongst brethren and sisters, were easily appeased
and extinguished whilst the father yet lived, their marriages not taking from
him this power over them: and albeit that he had set at liberty them that were
married, and departed out of his house, to keep house by themselves, (which they
easily did not) yet nevertheless the remembrance of the reverend duty they
ought unto their parents for ever remained fast imprinted in the hearts and
minds of the children. Wherefore should we then marvel the magistrate to be
troubled with so many suits, and those for most part betwixt the husband and
the wife, betwixt brethren and sisters; yea and that more, is betwixt parents
and their children? How the power of life and death over their children was in
Rome first taken from their parents.
the power of life and death from parents, proceed from the ambition of the
Magistrates, who seeking to increase their jurisdiction, and by little and
little drawing unto them the deciding of all matters, extinguished all
domestical powers: which happened especially after the death of Augustus
Caesar; at which time we read the magistrates to have been almost always
occupied in punishing of such as had murdered their parents. Seneca, who
directing his speech unto Nero, says, We have seen more murderers of their
parents executed in five years of thy father, than were ever in all ages
accused since the foundation of Rome. Now to him that will look nearer into
the matter, it is no doubt, but that if one or two that have murdered their
fathers have been executed, ten others have escaped man's punishment; the health
and life of parents being subject to a thousand dangers, except their children
either by the fear of God, or the goodness of their own nature, be kept
within the bounds of their duty; neither ought it seem strange unto any man,
that Nero made no conscience to kill his mother, neither repented him to have
killed her, for that it was a thing common: the cause whereof Seneca gives
not, which was, for that the father to chastise his son Quintus Fuluius the
Senator in the time of Cicero, of his own authority put to death his son,
for taking part in the conspiracy of Cateline. And in the time of Augustus,
Tatius the Senator being about to proceed against his son in a capital
crime, requested Augustus home to his house, who being come thither, took not
upon him the place of a Judge (as says Seneca) but of a private man, as come
only to give counsel. We see also that by the law Pompeia, made against
parricides, all they which are next of kin are bound to the penalty of the
law, except the father. Yet it sufficiently appears, that in the time of
Vlpian and Paul the Lawyers, the power that fathers Alexander Seuerus. And yet
is there no express law to be found which has taken from parents the power of
life and death, before the time of Constantine the great: neither did that law
of Constantine directly in express terms abrogat the old laws: Dioclesian
the Emperor but a little before Constantine having decreed that the Judge
ought to give such sentence against the son as the father was willing unto.
Now it is manifest by the law, that a positive law cannot be Note.
abrogated by any custom, be it never so old; except it be repealed by a
contrary law, carrying express derogation with it: otherwise being in force
and ready to be again put in use: insomuch that it was necessary that
certain laws of the xij. tables by long custom out of use, yet for all that
should by a new law be abrogated: which was done at the motion of Aebutius, in
whose time the fathers power of life and death, yet kept their children with in
the compass of their duty. But when the children in the time of Constantine
had by the sufferance of their fathers by little and little shaken off that
power and authority of their fathers, they obtained also of the same Emperor,
That of their mothers inheritance their fathers should have but the use and
profit, and they themselves the propriety, which their fathers might not
alienate. And afterward Theodosius the younger, That the propriety of all
manner of goods in general howsoever they came by them, should belong unto the
sons, the use and profit thereof only being left unto the fathers; so that
they could not alienat the propriety, neither in any sort dispose thereof: yea
and with us not only the use and profit of such goods, but not so much as the
bare use is left unto the father, which has so puffed up the hearts of the
children, as that they oftentimes command their parents, by necessity
constrained to obey them, or to die for hunger.

Justinian also would not that children should be set at liberty by their
parents without How parents were wont to emancipat their children.
their own consent, that is to say, without some bounty which the father
ought to give unto his son: when as yet for all that in old time emancipation
or setting at liberty, Romulus to nourish his son, but until he be seven
years old. And although Lawyers go farther, nevertheless to make it plain
that parents are not Whether parents be bound to nourish their children: and
how long.
their parents for their food, but by the leave of the magistrate by humble
request before obtained. Besides all these indignities, Justinian has exempted
all Senators, Bishops, and Consuls from the power of their fathers: as in like
case them also which enter into houses of Religion. And in countries also where
we use Statute laws, besides those we have spoken of, they have also exempted
out of their fathers powers them that are married, or have been out of their
fathers houses by the space of ten years: which has caused the Italian
Lawyers to write that the French men are not in the power of their fathers: as
in truth there remains nothing thereof, but the imaginary shadow, when as
the father authoriseth his children unto lawful acts, as to redeem Philip of
Valois set at liberty his son John, to give unto him the duchy of
Normandy: yet such his emancipation served to no purpose, no more than those
which were ordinarily made; seeing that neither the giver, neither he to whom
the thing was given, neither the thing it self given, were subject unto the
Roman civil law: nor that the fathers (in countries governed by customs) had
any thing to do with the goods of their children.

But the fathers thus dispoiled of their power, and of the goods got by their
children, Whether the son may resist his father offering him viole^cei or for
any cause kill his father. Soldiers in ancient times were beaten with vines.
it is yet by many demanded, If the son may of right defend himself, or
withstand his father, offering him violence? Neither have there wanted some
which were of opinion, That the son might of right so do: as if in that there
were no difference whether the father or any other should offer him violence.
But if it be so that the souldior which had only broken the vine trunchion of
his Captain, beating him by right or wrong, was by the law of arms to be put
to death: then what punishment deserves the son which lays hand upon his
father? Yea some have passed further, and written that the son might kill his
father, if he were an enemy unto the Commonweal. Plin. lib. 12.
But in mine opinion that is not unlawful only for any man to do, but
impiety also for any man so to write: for these men in so doing propound not
only pardon unto A strange exam ple of a most unnatural son.
believe: as that a banished man of Venice, having brought to Venice his own
fathers head, who was banished as well as himself, demanded and obtained also
in reward of his so exectable a murder, the honors and rewards by the
Venetian laws due; viz. His return into his country, his goods, his
children, and the liberties of the city, before taken from him. But happily it
had been better that the city of Venice had been swallowed up with the sea,
than to have given a reward unto so great and detestable Henry the second the
French king, took in good part the excuse of Maximilian king of Bohemia in the
year 1557, in that he had refused to give safe conduct unto the duke of
Wittemberg, ambassador for the French; confessing that it was indeed against
the law of nations, but that yet nevertheless he durst do no other for
disobeying of his father. Now if it be lawful to violat the laws of nations
rather than to disobey our father in so small a matter; what just excuse can
there be, or reason given for the killing of ones father? Wherefore I thus
resolve, That there can be no just cause for which a man may lawfully lay
violent hand upon his father. And albeit that such killing of ones father be in
it self a foul fact, yet fowler is the reward thereof; but of all other
things most foul and pernicious it is to allow reward for the same, Sampetre
Corse was slain by his own cousin german; for which he had given him in
reward ten thousand crowns, which the Senate and people of Genua had caused to
be levied for him. But how much better were it to follow the example of Cicero,
who thought it better as it were in silence to pass over the self same
questions moved by the two ancient Philosophers Antiochus and Antipater, as a
place too slipperie and dangerous. Joining hereunto also, that the law of the
Romans it self forbids any reward to be propounded unto banished men for
the killing of thieves: howbeit that Adrian the Emperor would have him
pardoned that had killed a thief. Wherefore I thus conclude, That princes and
law makers should measure the power and authority of parents, according to the
law of God; whether they be their lawful, or natural children, or both
together; so that they be not conceived in incest, for such the laws both of
God and man have always had in detestation.

Now if some shall object it to be a thing dangerous, least some furious or
prodigal Objections against the power of fathers over their children.
fathers should abuse the goods or lives of their children, under color of
their fatherly power: to him I answer, that the laws have for such men
provided guardians, and taken from them that power over another man,
considering that they have not power over themselves. And if the father be not
senseless or mad, he will never without Pompeia subject to the pain of
parricides: for why? the law presumes that he would not without good and just
cause so do; and has privately given power unto him to kill the adulterer and
his daughter found in the fact together. All most certain and undoubted
arguments, whereby it is to be understood, would abrogat al laws for some few
absurdities ensuing of them, should not leave one Cato the greater wisely
reasoned. In brief (I say) that the natural love of fathers and mothers toward
their children, is impossible and incompatible with so great cruekie, as is the
unjust killing of their children: and that the greatest torment that a father
can endute, is, to have either by right or wrong killed his son. As in fact
it chanced in our memory, in the country of Aniou, that a father desiring to
chastise his son, whom running from him he could not overtake, having by
chance without any such purpose slain him with a blow upon the head, with an
hard clod of earth which he threw after him, forthwith for grief hung
himself, although no man knew any thing thereof. Which things the ancient
Egyptian law giuers well understanding, appointed no other punishment against
him that had wrongfully or without cause Fabius Gurges gave us well to
understand, who being Consul, and seeing his father a private man mounted on
horseback coming toward him, Brutus his two sons, and after him L.
Torquatus the Consul, who having caused his son to triumph in his camp for
vanquishing his enemy in combat, presently after caused his head to be struck
off, for that he had fought with him contrary to his commandment and
contrary to the law of arms. There is yet one objection concerning the
childrens goods, which if they should be in the full disposition of the
fathers, they might Plu. in Lycurg.
it was lawful for every man to bequeath his goods as he pleased* (when as
before, the liberty of making of Wills was by long custom taken away)
alleging that the pride and insolency of children against their parents was
so by the fear of disinheriting to be restrained. But if any man shall account
it better for inheritances to be conferred by the appointment of the laws than
by Testament, I will not strive with him therefore, seeing it is by the law of
God Numer. 23.
set down that children should not by Deuteronomy. 21.
which gives unto the father the power of life and death over his children.

We have before said* fathers to have had that power of life and death over
them Adoptiue children as well in the power of their adoptiue fathers, as were
the children begot in lawful matrimony.
also whom they had adopted: in like manner as they had over them whom they
had in lawful matrimony begotten: and although the laws of adoption were by
the new laws of Justinian almost abrogated; yet I think no man doubts but
that the law of adoption was of so ancient right, and so common also almost
unto all people, as that it deserves to be again called into use. We see the
most ancient people to have had Jacob himself to have adopted Ephraim and
Manasses Genesis cap. vl^.
his nephews, (albeit he had twelve children yet living, who had diverse others
also) and gave them part of the land which he had by force of arms conquered.
Which to have hene before also in use with the Egyptians, is manifest by
Moses, whom the kings daughter* Exodus 1.
adopted for her own. We see also Theseus to have been solemnly adopted by
Aegeus king of Athens, who made him his successor in the State, albeit that he
was but his base son: After which time all the Athenians which had base
children by Athenian women, were constrained to adopt them, and to cause them
to be registered as their lawful children, and to leave them their part and
portion of their goods as they did unto the rest of their children. For why?
they accounted Jacob the Patriarch made like reckoning of those which he had
by his wives, and of those which he had by his handmaids: although that Sara
had driven out of his fathers house the child begotten by the handmaid, * least
he should have had part in the lawful inheritance. And Diodorus Lib. 2. cap. 3
also writes, The children of the Egyptians begotten of their bondwomen, to
have had as great prerogative as the rest that were begot in lawful marriage.
For why? it was lawful for them to have as many wives as they would; as it was
also unto the Persians and all the people of Asta^ and Tacitus) had every one
Tacit. lib. de moribus Germanorum.
of them but one wife. Thus having confirmed the matter by course of history,
it follows by consequence all the children of one and the same father to have
been in his power, were they adoptiue or not. But the Romans of ancient time
made no more account of their base children than of mere strangers* neither
were they compelled to adopt them, as were the Athenians, neither to bequeath
them any thing by their will, neither had they any power over them. Which
severity of the laws was yet moderated in the reign of Theodosius and
Arcadius. And afterward it was ordained by the Emperor Zeno, that such base
children should be accounted for legitimat, by the marriage of their father
afterward ensuing with their mother. And that more is Anastasius Justinius, and
after him Justinian abrogated that decree, and shut the gate against bastards,
to the end that every man should desire to have lawful wives and children;
and that ancient houses, and the rights of successions and inheritances should
not be altered and troubled by the adoption of bastards: the rights of
adoption nevertheless yet still remaining, which had been received to supply
the defect of nature; and whereof the ancient Romans had had so great esteem,
as that the adoptiue fathers had the same power of life and death over their
adoptiue children, that they had over their own: which was the true cause that
women could not adopt children before the Dioclesian, considering that they
themselves were in the perpetual power of their parents, husbands, or near
kinsmen: as also in Greece it was not lawful for them to adopt, as writes the
Orator Isaeus. So then the right of adoptions, ennobled by the Romans (and
especially after that they had extended the frontiers of their Empire more than
ever before) other people also had it so much the more in regard: the Goths,
(I say) the Germans, the French, the Saliens; as we see in the laws of the
Ripuaires, where they use the word Adfatinir for adopter: holding their
adoptiue children in the same degree that they did their own natural and
lawful children, in the right of their succession into their inheritance: For
by the ancient custom of the Romans they were both indifferently called unto
their fathers inheritances as his Cassiodorus, that Theodoric king of the
Goths, adopted the king of the Herules: and that Luitpr and king of the
Lombards adopted the son of Charles prince of France, by cutting his hair,
although he had sons of his own in lawful marriage begotten: as did in
ancient time Micipsa king of the Numidians, adopting Iugurtha his base son,
albeit he had two lawful children of his own, and leaving his kingdom
equally divided amongst them three: when as yet the first and chief cause of
adoptions was to supply the defect of nature; that he to whom nature had
altogether denied children, or at leastwise male children, might by the
authority of the law have that defect supplied. As Scipio Africanus having no
more children but Cornelia the mother of the Gracchi, adopted the son of
Paulus Aemilius, afterward Africanus the younger, whom he left the inheritor
not of his name only, but of his goods also. And so also Caefar the Dictator,
having no children of his four wives, more than Iulia, which was married to
Pompeius, adopted Octauius his sisters son, whom by his will he made heir of
three parts, with charge that he should bear his name; whereby his own
fathers name was taken away, and he known by the name of his adoptiue father.
And he again having no children but Iulia (whom he called the Impostume of
his house) adopted Caius and Lucius his sisters sons bought at home of their
father Agrippa, according to the ancient manner: who afterward dead also
without issue, he adopted Tiberius, who adopted Caligula: so did Claudius adopt
Nero, unto whom Galba succeeding without children, Tranquil in Galba.
adopted Piso before Aurelianus Vopiscus in Aureliano.
the Emperor; as would Justinian the Emperor have adopted Cosroe king of
Persia, which he refused; supposing (though yet falsely) the way unto the Empire
to be by that mean shut up. Procopius.
We read also that the Emperor Nerua for lack of children adopted Traian; and
he Adrian; who afterward adopted Antoninus Pius; and not contented to have
adopted so good a man, charged him also whilst he yet lived, to adopt Aelius
Verus, and Marcus Aurelius, surnamed the Philosopher, to the intent the Empire
should not want the most virtuous Emperors that ever were. But this last
having begot Commodus heir apparent to the Empire, (but the most vicious man
that might be) was about to have adopted another more worthy of the Empire,
had he Claudius the Emperor was evil spoken of, for being persuaded by the
inticement of Agrippina his second wife, he had adopted Nero her son, having
sons and one daughter by his former bed, who were afterward slain by Nero.
But to leave strangers which are infinite, and to come to our own domestical
examples: Jews duke of Aniou and brother to king Charles, was for want of
heir adopted by Ioane (who of her incontinencie was in reproach called Lupa)
who in the right of that adoption left unto him the kingdom of Naples, having
rejected her nephew Alphonsus king of Aragon, whom she had before Martinus. V.
Pope adopted. Afterward also Rene of Aniou, Jews his nephew, was adopted by
Ioane the younger queen of Naples for want of children. And at the same time as
it were, that is to say, in the year 1408, Henry duke of Pomeran was adopted by
Margaret D'wolmar queen of Denmark, Sweden, and Norway, to succeed her in the
same kingdoms. And not long after, Henry the fifth king of England was adopted,
not by Charles the sixth then distracted of his wits, but by his wife: who by
her new son in law, caused Charles her own son to be denounced incapable of
the Crown, albeit that he were a right wise and virtuous Prince. But Justinian
the Emperor willing to remedy such abuses, ordained that adoptiue children
should nevertheless not fail to enjoy the inheritance of their own natural
or lawful fathers; for that their adoptiue Scipio Africanus the Great, in his
time complained in the Oration which he had unto the people of his Censureship:
as also after the publication of the law Iulia Pappia, which gave great
priueledges unto them which had children: they which had none adopted some (to
have the benefit of the lawas, to be capable of some Magistracy or office) and
in short time after they had once gained that they sought for, cast off those
their adoptiue children again, so abusing the law. As contrariwise Clodius
being a noble man borne, caused himself to be adopted by a man of base
condition, that so discharged of his Nobility, he might be made Tribune of
the * people; but having got that office, caused himself presently to Cicero
pro domo.
be set at liberty by his adoptiue father: Which the Senate understanding,
decreed that Son added unto the laws, testaments, or other lawful acts was
to be extended unto

CHAP. V.
THe third part of the government of a Family depends of the power of the
Lord oues his Slaves, and of the Master over his servants; and in their
mutual duties one toward another. For the Whereof a Family took name.
very name of a Family, came of Famulus and Famulatio, for that it had in it a
great number of Slaves: and so of the greatest part of them that are in
subjection in the Family, men call all the whole household a Family; or else
for that there was no greater means to gather wealth than by slaves Famuli,
the auntients not without cause have called this multitude of Slaves and
servants a Family. And Seneca willing to show of what moderation a Master
ought to be toward his Slaves, says our ancestors to have called the head of a
Family, Father of the Family, and not Lord. And for that the whole world is
full of Slaves, excepting certain countries in Europe (which since also by
little and little receive them) it is needful here to reason of the power of
Lords and Masters over their Slaves, and of the profits and disprofits which
may redound unto a Commonweal, if slavery should again be called into use: a
question of great moment not for Families and societies only, but for all
Commonweals also in general.

Now every Slave is either natural, that is to wit, begotten of a woman Slave,
or The division of Slaves.
to punishment) or one which has for money departed with his liberty, or has
played away his liberty, as did in ancient time the Almans: or else such an
one as has voluntarily vowed himself to be a perpetual Slave unto another
man; as was the manner of the Hebrews. The prisoner in war was Slave unto
the vanquisher, who was not bound to put him to his ransom, if it were not
otherwise agreed upon; as it was in ancient time in Greece, that the Barbarian
prisoner taken in war, might be put to the chain, and kept as a Slave; but
as for the Greek, that he should be set at liberty in paying for himself a
pound of gold. The like law almost was made amongst the Polonians, Cromer in
hist. Polon. and in statutis Pol.
where it was decreed by the States, That all enemies taken prisoners in just A
cruel law against debtors.
pay: yet for all that so it was, that if he had one creditour, he could not
take from him his life, and much less his liberty, a thing much dearer than
life. For the father might Petilian Tribune of the people, taken away, and a
decree made, That from that time forward the debtor should no more be adjudged
unto his creditor, or divided in pieces among his creditours, neither by them
for his debt be detained; yet reserving unto the creditor power to ceise upon
his goods, or by other way of justice to come by his debt, so as he saw he
might by reason: which Dioclesian, who caused the same law afterward to be
published upon pain of death.

And thus much concerning all sorts of slaves: for as for them which are taken
by thieves or pirates, or by false titles are sold for slaves, they continue
nevertheless free, and in terms of right may do all lawful acts. As for
other domestical servants, which for wages or without wages do their service,
they cannot by contract or agreement Domestical servants cannot make themselves
slaves by any contract that they make with their macters.
whatsoever, do any thing prejudicial to their liberty: neither in receiving
any legacy upon condition be it never so little servile: neither can the slave
himself when he is manumised, promise unto his lord that has set him at
liberty, any thing prejudicial unto his liberty, other than the services
ordinary and agreeable unto all such as are enfranchised. Prentises of England
by covenant, for a time slaves.
of the places, enfranchise their servants, and give them power to wear their
caps; which was the ancient mark of a slave newly enfranchised, to cover his
shaven head until his hair were grown: which gave occasion unto Brutus after
that Caesar was slain, to cause certain money to be coined * with the
impression of a cap upon it; as having set Plutar in vita Caesaris.
at liberty the people of Rome. And after the death of Nero, the common people
went up and down the streets with caps upon their heads, in sign of their
liberty. And Eumenes after the death of Mithridates, coming to Rome, and with
his cap on his head entering the Senate, acknowledged himself to hold his
liberty by the people of Rome. Now albeit that domestical servants be not
slaves, and that they may do such acts of liberty as free men may, be it in
judgment or out of judgment; yet are they not as simple mercinarie men which
labor for their days wages, over whom Mercinarie laborers no slaves
he that has hired them has neither power nor command, nor any manner of
correction, as the master has over his domestical servants, who owe service,
honor, and obedience unto their masters, so long as they are in his house, and
may with moderat discretion chastise and correct them. For domestical servants
ought to reverence their master, and do them all honest service and duties:
whereof, for that they

But as concerning Slaves, there are two great difficulties, not yet resolved
upon: the Two notable questions concerning slavery.
one, Whether slavery be natural and profitable to a Commonweal, or
contrary unto nature, and unprofitable? the other, What power the lord of
right ought to have over his slave. Concerning the first point, Aristotle is of
opinion that the servitude Slavery in the opinion of Aristo tle, a thing
natural, but not so in the judgment of the Lawyers.
of slaves is of right natural: and to prove the same, We see (says he) some
naturally made to serve and obey, and others to command and govern. But
Lawyers, who measure the law not by the discourses or decrees of Philosophers,
but according to the common sense and capacity of the people, hold servitude
to be directly contrary unto nature, is of no long continuance: and if you
would force it against nature, yet will Reasons to prove that servitude or
slavery is profitable unto a Commonweal: as also agreeable unto nature.
it of it self again return unto the natural course thereof; as is plainly
seen in all natural things. But servitude seems to have taken the beginning
thereof immediately after the general deluge; and even so soon as any form of
a Commonweal was to be seen, and so has always ever since continued: and
although servitude in these latter times was left off, for about three or four
hundred years, yet is it now again approved, by the great agreement and
consent of almost all nations; yea the people of the West Indies, which are
three times greater than all Europe, who never heard speech of the laws of God
or man, have always been full of slaves; neither has there been any
Commonweal in the world, which has not had slaves in it: yea the holiest men
that ever lived have used them: yea and that more is, in every Commonweal
Justinian in so saying. Now if it were contrary unto nature, that one man
should have power of life and death over another, there should be neither
kingdoms nor seignories,

These arguments have some good show to prove that servitude is natural,
profitable, How servitude i^ agreeable unto nature: and how not.
and honest, but it may well be answered. I confess that servitude is well
agreeing unto nature, when a strong man, rich and ignorant, yields his
obedience and service unto a wise, discreet and feeble poor man: but for wise
men to serve fools, men of understanding to serve the ignorant, and the good to
serve the bad; what can be more contrary unto nature? except a man should
think it reasonable for a wise counselor to be ouertuled by his foolish
Prince; or a sober and temperat servant to be governed The former reason^
answered: and slavery proved not to be a thing agreeable unto nature:
unjust wars to have saved the lives of their prisoners whom they might have
killed, it is the charity of thieves and pirates, who brag themselves to have
given life unto them whom they have not deprived of life. For oftentimes it
comes to pass in unjust wars, (as are for most part those that are made by
the mighty) that good men are most miserably and shamefully enforced to serve
the wicked. And if the vanquished have wrongfully and without cause (as
thieves) made war, why then put they them not to death? why take they not of
them exemplarie punishment? why take they them then unto mercy, seeing that
they are thieves. As for that which is said, That Tiberius the Emperor: for
long time before, the * Caes. lib. 6. Belli Gallici.
Amorits and Ammonits used to sacrifice their children: neither was it a
solemnity among the Barbarians only, as generally among the Scythes (as
Plutarch writes) but Achilles (as Homer reports) sacrificed unto his dead
friend Patroclus with the slaughtar of men Plut. in Themist. and Artax.
Themistocles also in the Persian war, sacrificed three men; as did the
Persian king at the same time twelve: neither could Jupiter Licius (as is
reported) be otherwise appeased but by the slaughter of man, led by the
ambiguitie of an old Oracle, and of the Greek word (...), which without accent
signifies either Light, or a Man. M. Tullius detesteth our ancestors, for
that they sacrificed with man's blood: but that he spoke as an Orator, and as
best served his cause: for M. Varro attributes it to all the people of Italy:
as also the manner of vowing in the sacred spring time to have been, that
whatsoever man or beast was that year first borne should be sacrificed. A man
might also bring for example Iud. 11.
Iephte general of the army of the Israelites, who is reported to have
sacrificed his daughter unto almighty God, much about the same time that
Agamemnon king of the Greeks sacrificed his daughter Iphigenia Euripides.
(whereof some well learned men have made Tragedies) although that he
sacrificed nothing unto God but the virginity of his daughter; as the Hebrew
text plainly declares; and as Rabbi Leui, and the other Hebrew interpetors all
agree. How beit other people did the like with great piety and devotion: which
proves well that we must not measure the law of nature by men's actions, be
they never so old and inueterat: neither thereof conclude, that the servile
estate of slaves is of right natural: as also much less to attribute it to
charity, or to courtesy, that the Vespasian, a Roman soldier having found
gold in the entrails of a Jew that was slain, made his companions therewith
acquainted, who forthwith cut the throats of their prisoners, to see if they
had also swallowed any of their crowns; so that in a moment there were slain
Ieseph* in bello Iudaico.
above twenty thousand of those Jews. O fair example of charity toward
captives! But say some, they are Cato the Censor (reputed the best and wisest
man of his time) after that he had drawn all the service and profit he could
from his slaves, even until they were grown crooked with age, so that he
could wring nothing more from them, set them then to sale to such as would give
most for them, to draw yet from them the very price of their blood which yet
remained in them, least he should be enforced to nourish them for naught, now
grown impotent with age, or else be feign to kill them, or to set them at
liberty; in such sort that the poor slaves in recompense of all their service
made, were drawn to the gallows by their new masters: not yet so happy as
Pallas her mule in Athens, which grown old went about whither she

What should I rehearse the execrable and profuse filthiness of both sexes,
which The miserable estate and condition of slauer.
the poor slaves heretofore were and yet are enforced to endure and suffer?
But as for cruelty showed upon them, it is incredible that we read, and that a
man might speak of, if but the thousand part thereof were written: for Authors
would thereof say nothing, Colum. lib. 1
chains (as yet they do in Barbary,) and to lie in dungeons, the ladders
being drawn up from them, as they yet do in all the East* for fear they should
be lost, or that they should set fire on the house, or otherwise kill their
masters. Now as for every light offense of the slave, except he were of great
price, it was so rigorously punished, as that to have broken a glass was unto
him death: as for example, the Emperor Augustus being at supper in the house
of Vedius Pollio, it chanced one of the slaves to break a glass; who having
done no other fault but that (as says Lib. tertio de fra.
Seneca) was forthwith drawn unto a pond of Lampreis, which were fed with man's
flesh: whereat the poor slave Agustus, entreating him, not for his life, but
that he might not after he was put to death be eaten up of those fishes, for
he found himself worthy of death for the glass he had broken: but the
common opinion was, that the soul of the drowned never passed over into the
Vir. 6. Aeneid
Elysian fields; or else that it died together with the body: as Synesius writ
of his companions sailing to Alexandria, who in a tempest suddenly risen,
seeing the outrageous violence of the Sea, drew their swords to cut their own
throats, so to give way unto the soul, which they thought otherwise to be in
danger to be drowned together with the body: so much the poor slave feared
to be eaten up of the fishes. But Augustus moved with compassion (as says
Seneca) pardoned the slave, causing all the rest of the glasses to be broken,
and the pond to be Dion the Historiographer, reporting the same history,
says that Augustus could not obtain pardon of Pollio for his slave, neither
to have commanded the pond of Lampries to have been filled up, than which
nothing was more precious amongst the Remans: which for all that seems to
have been more probable, seeing that Seneca confesses Augustus to have been
therewith contented, neither to have been therefore angry with his friend
Pollio. And to show that this was no new matter more than two hundred years
before, Plut. in* vita Titi Flaminii.
Quintus Flaminius a Senator of Rome, caused one of his slaves to be slain,
for no other cause but to gratify and please his Bardache, which said that he
had never seen a man slain. Now if it chanced the master to be Pedanius
great Praetor of Rome* when question was made of putting to death al his slaves,
following (as says Tacitus) the ancient custom, the common people being for
* Lib. 14.
the most part men enfranchised, fell in mutiny, for that they knew well the
murderer was but one, and yet nevertheless there must be put to death 400 of
his slaves, all innocent of the fact: nevertheless the matter being debated in
the Senate, it was there resolved, That the ancient custom should be kept, and
so accordingly all the slaves were put to death. Her pass the murdering of
slaves, enforced to kill one another in the lists, or to be torn with wild
beasts, so to give pleasure unto the people, and to breed in them a Petronia
had forbidden slaves without cause to be cast unto the wild beasts: yet was it
never observed, no more than the edict of the emperor Nero, who was the first
that appointed commissioners to hear the complaints * Seen. lib. 3. de Benefic.
of slaves: and after him the emperor Adrian ordained that inquisition should
be made against such as had maliciously without cause slain their slaves: how
beit that long time before they were culpable as murderers, by the law
Cornelia: but that was holden in no regard, and all that the poor slaves could
do to save themselves from the fury of their masters, was to fly unto the
images of the gods, or of the emperors. For neither the temple of Diana in
Rome, which king Seruius (himself the son of a slave) had appointed as a
sanctuary for slaves; neither the image of Romulus, which Theseus at Athens;
neither the image of Ptolemee at Cyrene; neither the temple of * Plu. in These.
Diana at Ephesus, could defend the slaves from the fury of their angry lords
and masters. Howbeit that by the law of the Ephesians the slave which without
just cause had fled unto the temple of Diana, was again restored unto his
master, being before sworn not therefore to entreat him evil: but if the
cause of his flight were just, then was he taken from his master and made
servant to Diana: except women, who might not enter into her temple. But
Tiberius of all other tyrants that ever were, the most crafty in his old age,
appointed his image for a sanctuary, propounding capital punishment unto all
such as should by violence draw any slave from the same; to the intent that by
that Seneca writes, a certain Senator fearing to be bewraied of his slave,
craved pardon of Tiberius for that he had but been about to touch his chamber
pot with a ring upon his finger, wherein the image of Tiberius was engraven. In
such sort, that the images of the emperors, but especially of tyrants were as
snares to entangle the magistrates in, who oftentimes secretly murdered their
slaves, for having recourse unto the images, so soon as they were returned
thence. But the law of God had therefore much better provided, appointing
every man's house for a sanctuary unto the slave flying from his master,
forbidding to restore him again unto his master whilst he was yet in
choler. For all masters are not of like discretion to Plato, which said to his
slave, That he would sharply have corrected him, but that he was angry:
whereas the Germans (as Tacitus says) never punish their servants or children
but in their rage, and that as if they were their enemies. Thus we see the
lives of masters not well assured against their slaves; and the lives of slaves
much less against their masters. For who could assure himself of his life, or
of his goods in the time of the tyranny of Sylla, who had proposed thirty
Sesterties unto free men, and unto bond men liberty, as a reward if they should
discover their masters, or bring in the head of any one of them that were by
him proscribed? In which fear the citisens were, until that threescore
thousand of them being slain, and so the state in a manner again Sylla the
head of his lord and master, whom Sylla for so doing according to his promise
set at liberty, but by and by after caused him to be cast headlong from the
rock Tarpeia. At such time also as persecution grew hot against the
Christians, there was no Christian master but was in danger of his life, or
else glad to set at liberty his slaves. But the fear of persecution once
ceasing, the lords and masters themselves became tyrants over their slaves.

So the state of Families and Commonweals is always in danger of trouble and
ruin, To great a multitude of slaves dangerous in a Commonweal.
by the conspiracy of slaves combining themselves together: all Histories
being full of servile rebellions and wars. And albeit that the Romans were
right great and mighty, yet so it was that they could not let the slaves to
rise against the state in all the Spartacus, who in set battle overthrew three
armies of the Romans. For it is most certain, that in every country
whatsoever, there was at least ten slaves for one free man: as it is easy to
judge by the musters taken in Athens, where for twenty thousand citisens were
found ten thousand strangers, and four hundred thousand slaves. And Italy
(victorious over all nations) had many more, as a man may perceive by the
Oration of Cassius the Senator, whereby he persuaded the Senate for the
confirming of Sylla his decree: We have at home (said he) whole nations of
slaves much differing among themselves in manners, fashions, language, and
religion. And namely M. Crassus alone had five hundred slaves, who daily
brought in unto him the profit of their gainful arts and trades; besides them
whom he employed in his ordinary and domestical service. Milo also in one
day set at liberty 300 slaves, least they should have been put to torture to
depose concerning the death of Clodius Tribune of the people. And that
multitude of slaves was it for which the Roman Senate, desirous to put a
difference in the habit of slaves, to the intent to have them known from free
men: one of the grauest Senators dissuaded the same, showing the danger like
to ensue thereof, if the slaves should begin to enter into the number of
themselves; for that so they might easily dispatch themselves of their
masters, for the easiness of their rising into rebellion, and the difference
of their habits. Unto which danger Afric and some Stigmatic; who at any time
being manumised, could for all that never enjoy the full fruit of their
liberty or the priuelege of citisens: marking the rest upon their arms. And
this was it for which the Lacedaemonians seeing their slaves to multiply
exceedingly above the citisens (for the hope their masters gave them of
liberty which could get most children, and for the profit every man drew out
of them in particular) made a decree that three thousand of them such as had
the most able bodies should be taken up for the wars: whom so pressed out,
they forthwith caused to be all in one night slain,

Now this fear that Cities and Commonweals had of their slaves, was the cause
Why slaves were not suffered to bear arms.
that they never durst suffer them to bear arms, or to be enrolled in their
musters, and that upon pain of death: and if by necessity they were
constrained to take their slaves, they at the same time freely set them at
liberty. As did Scipio Africanus the Greater, who after the great overthrow of
Cannas manumised 300 of his slaves, al able bodies. Howbeit that Florus
writes, That arms were giuento 8000 slaves; which we also read to have been
done in the confederat war. But Cleomenes king of Lacedemonia finding M.
Antonius, consisting of fifty thousand men, there was but 4500 free men, as we
read in Justin: yet had they no cause to rebel, being of their masters so well
entreated. But as for other people they were so mistrustfull of their slaves,
as that sometimes Augustus, who at one time set at liberty twenty thousand to
serve him in his galleys. And for fear they had* least they should conspire
together against the state, to keep them always busied in other mechanical
arts, Lycurgus amongst the Lacedaemonians, and Numa Pompilius in Rome, forbad
their own citisens to use any manual occupation. And yet they could not so
well provide, but that ever there was some one or other desperate man, who
propounding liberty unto slaves, still robbed the State. As Viriatus the
Pirat, who made himself king of Portugal: Cinna, Spartacus, Tacfarinas, *
Appian. in bellis ciuilib. * Ios. in bello Iudaico.
and Simon the son of Gerson, captain of the Jews, who all of base companions
made themselves great lords, by giving liberty unto the slaves that followed
them. And the Augustus and M. Antonius, was not to be seen but fugitive slaves
still on the one side or the other: in such sort, as that after the discomfiture
of Sex. Pompeius, there were found thirty thousand slaves which had taken part
with him, whom Augustus caused to be apprehended through his dominions, and by
a prefixed day to be again restored unto their masters, commanding the rest
to be hanged that had no masters to lay claim unto them; as we read in
Appian. And in truth the power of the Arabians grew by no other means. For as
soon as Homar one of Mahomets licutenants, had begun to raise war in Arabia,
and promised liberty unto the slaves that should follow him, he drew such a
number after him, that in few years they made themselves lords of all the
East. The fame of which liberty, and Charlemaigne, and of Jews the godly; as
is to be seen by their Edicts then made against the conspiracy of slaves.
And after that also Lothaire the son of Jews, having lost two battles
against his brethren, called the slaves unto his aid with promise of liberty:
who afterward gave the overthrow unto their masters in the year 852. When
suddenly this fire took such hold in Germany, where the slaves having taken up
arms, so troubled the state of the German princes and cities, that Jews king
of the Almans was constrained to raise all his forces to subdue them.

And this was the cause that the Christian princes by little and little
released their The cause why Christian princes by little and little released
their slaves.
servitude, and enfranchised their slaves, reserving only unto themselves
certain services, and the ancient right of succession, if their enfranchised
slaves should chance to die without issue: a custom yet in use in all the
lower Germany; as in many places in France, and England also. For as yet many
remembrances of bondage remain in the Christian Commonweal: as is to be seen
in the laws of the Lombards and Ripuaires whereby slaves could not have their
just liberty, or alienat their goods, until they had been twice manumised:
and oftentimes the lord or master joined unto the act of infranchisment, That
it was done for the health of his soul. For they which first laid the
foundation of the Christian Commonweal, had nothing in more regard, than to
Paulinus bishop of Nolo, after he had sold all his goods to redeem Christian
slaves, at last (which a man would wonder at) sold himself also unto the
Vandales for his brethren. And hereof came the manumission of slaves made in
churches before the bishops. Whereof, in the reign of Constantine the Great,
ensued such a multitude of poor and needy men, who had nothing but their
liberty to live upon (of whom the most part would do nothing, and the rest
could do nothing) as that cities were with nothing more charged than with them.
Hereof, began the almes-houses, and The beginning of a^mes houses and hospital^.
hospitals, for the relief of little children, of the aged, of the sick, and
of them that could not labor, to be erected and endowed by the Christian
princes, at the requests of the bishops. Hereof S. Basil in his sermons
complains, that the cries and gronings of the poor and weak were in the
Churches confounded and mingled with the songs and prayers of the Priests. Much
about which time Julian the Apostata in despite of the Christians Nicephorus.
exhorted the Pagan bishops by the example of the Christians to the building
and endowing of almes-houses and hospitals for the relief of their poor. And
for that poor men set at liberty, did oftentimes lay forth their children to
be brought up of the charity and liberality of the Christians: Gratian made
a law, That the children so exposed and left unto the world, should be slaves
unto them that had Valens the Emperor by an Edict gave power to every man to
take up the vagrant and idle persons, and to cause them to serve them as
slaves; forbidding also and that upon pain of death, any to go into the woods
or deserts there to live as Her^ts; of whom he caused a great number which had
contrary to his Edict so gone out, to be executed; to the intent to cut off
idleness, and to draw every man unto labor. But after that Idolatry began
to decay, and the Christian religion to increase, the multitude of slaves began
also to diminish; and yet much more after the publishing of the law of Mahomet,
who set at liberty all them of his religion. To the imitation of whom, the
Christians also so frankly set at liberty their slaves, as that all servitude
and slavery seemed in that age to have William king of Sicilie, and Frederick
the second Emperor; as also by the decrees of the bishops of Rome, Alexander
(I say) the third, Urban the third, and Innocentius the third, concerning the
marriages of slaves, which the Lawyers call Contabernia, or keeping of company
together: which Alexander was chosen Pope in the year 1158, Urban in the year
1185, and Innocentius in the year 1188. Whereby it is evident, the Christian
Common* weal to have been clear of slaves since the year 1250, or there
about. For Bartholus A time wherein there were no (...) in the Christian
Commonweal.
who flourished in the year 1300, writes that there were no slaves in his
time; and Nicholas the Sicilian, otherwise called the Abbot of Panormo had
learned of Bartholus, he thought it a thing well worth the noting.
Nevertheless we read in the History of Polonia, that every prisoner taken in
good war, was then and long time after slave unto him that had taken him, if
the king would not pay two Florins for his head, as I have before said: and yet
at this present the subjects bound unto the soil whereon they were borne,
which they call Kmetos, are in the power of their lords, who may at their
pleasure kill them, and not be called into question therefore: and if so be
that they kill another man's subject, then are they Jews Hutin, who came to the
crown in the year 1313 (the self same time that Bartholus lived) set at
liberty all slaves for money* to defray the charges of his wars; When slaves
ceased in France
that is, as I take it, to be understood of manumised men, which we call
Mort-maines, whom we even yet at this present see to be set at liberty by the
kings royal letters patents, from that bond of servitude whereby they are
prohibited to marry a wife, or to alienat their goods out of the territories
of their Patron. So also we are to understand Charles the fifth the French king,
wherein in cities every 70 families, in country villages every hundred
families, and every 200 heads of slaves, were be charged with a man at arms;
which they should not have done if they had been in the possession of another
man, and accounted as another man's goods. So it is also to be understood that
is written of Humbert Dauphin, who at the same time by one edict enfranchised
all the slaves of Dauphine, and commanded the same to be enrolled in the
public acts and laws of the country. The same courtesy used Theobald county
d'Blois toward his slaves, in the year 1245. To this also belongs that
which we read of Sugerius abbot of the covent of S. Dionyse, who set at
liberty his manumised slaves, so that they changed their dwelling. And also
the ancient decree of the Parliament of Paris, Charles the seventh also
coming to the crown in the year 1430 enfranchised diverse persons of servile
condition. And in our memory king Henry the second by his letters pattents
enfranchised them of Burbonnois, in the year 1549. By whose example also the
duke of Sauoy did the like in all his countries, in the year 1561. All which
we see done in the great favor of liberty. Whereas otherwise the Prince, of
his own lawful power could not enfranchise another man's slave, and much less
the magistrate, what intercession soever the people should make: neither could
he so much as give unto him that was by another man enfranchised, so much as
leave to wear a ring of gold, without the consent of his patron. For Commodus
the Emperor Tertullian, that the patrons had in a manner got that power unto
themselves, * Tertul. in de resurrection.
giving unto their enfranchised slaves a ring of gold and a white gown, in
stead of iron gives and whips, causing them so attired to sit down at the
table with them, and to bear their name. And at last Justinian himself by a
general edict restored all viz. France.
this realm he must of necessity obtain the prince his letters patents,
which have always used to restore unto manumised men and of servile condition,
the state of free borne men, and to blot out all the stain of their old
slavery; which letters were wont to be both requested and obtained without
the leave of the patron: who for all that may lay hands upon such goods of his
enfranchised slave as were got before he was set at liberty wheresoever they
be; as not long since was adjudged by the court of Paris: as for such things as
they get afterward they may Charles the fifth by a law which he made commanded
then all to be free. But in France, although there be some remembrance of old
servitude, yet is it not lawful there to make any slave, or to buy any of
others: Insomuch that the slaves of strangers so soon as they set their foot
within France become Slaves by coming into France become free.
frank and free; as was by an old decree of the court of Paris determined
against Theodosius the Great, wherein he had granted, That slaves so soon as
they came into Tholouze should be free. The merchant alleging for himself
that he had truly bought his slave in Spain, and so was afterward come to
Tholouze, from thence to go home to Genua, and so not to be bound to the laws
of France. In the end he requested Theodosius, seem not to have been so,
seeing that Narbona a true Colonie of the Romans, and the most ancient that
was in France, Lectore, Nysmes, Vienne, Lions, Arles, Romans, and many others,
which were also Roman Collonies, no nor Rome itself the very seat of the
Empire, had not any such privilege.

But now here might a man say, If it be so that the Mahometans have
enfranchised all the slaves of their religion, which has course in all Asia,
and almost in all Afric, Now it comes to paste tha^ ^es (...) be so many
(...) in the world.
with a good part of Europe also; and the Christians have semblably done the
like (as we have before showed:) how comes it to pass that yet the world is
so full of slaves and slavery? For the Jews may not by their laws have any
slave of their own nation, neither by the laws of the Christians may they have
any Christian. Truly all in that swerue from the law of God: For the law of
God forbids any slave to be made by the order of the Israelites amongst
themselves, except that any of them * Exodus 2^.
bored through to a post with an aule: truly it adiudgeth the debtors unto
Deuteronomy. ^5.
the creditors, and suffers the Jews to be sold for poverty: yet the same
law commands them at the seventh year to be set at liberty. And although a
man have enthraled himself, and suffered himself to be thrust through the
ear with an aule, insomuch that he be bound to perpetual servitude: yet
nevertheless all the interpretors of the law affirm, That in the year of
Iubiley he shall again recover his liberty, except he had rather again serve
than become free. But such bondslaues as were borne of those kind of slaves
which had of their own accord given themselves into bondage, they were in the
fiftith year to be set free: at which time the law by Leuit. 2^. Herom. 32.
Number. 13.
the sound of Julian the Emperor writes none to have been better. You see
(says he) how willingly the Syrians serve other nations: and contrariwise what
a love of liberty is in the people of the Celtes. But the Jews when they had
bought any strange bond*slaues of the Christians, or of the Pagans, they
instructed them in their own religion, and so circumcised them: which thing
Traian by a special law forbad: and albeit that they had yielded unto their
lords or masters religion, yet nevertheless they enforced them Exodus 12.
Numer. 49.
the law it was provided, that such strangers as being circumcised had
received the law of God, should enjoy the same privileges and benefits that
the natural citise^s did. The same law (says it) shall be unto the stranger and
the citisen. That is it that God by the Prophet Jeremy Hier. 34.
complains of, Slaves not to be set at liberty according to the law: and
therefore a most heavy bondage to hang over the masters heads from their
enemies. Hereupon also Philip the French king drove the Jews out of his
kingdom, confi^cating their goods, for that contrary unto the law they
circumcised Christians, and took them unto themselves into bondage for slaves.
The like deceit we see the Mahometans to use, whose manner is to circumcise and
to instruct in their religion such Christians as they have taken in war, or
bought of pirates, Charles the fifth had by a general edict made in the year
1540 set at liberty all the slaves of the West Indies, nevertheless a
sedition there rising through the covetousness and insolency of Gonsales
Pizzare governor of that province revolted from Charles: whose power when
Lagasca had discomfited, and for public example had caused him to be beheaded
together with the chief men of that rebellion, he according to the edict, set
at liberty all the slaves; yet with condition, that they should still serve
their patrons. And yet for all that it could not be brought to pass, but that
Lagasca returning into Spain, these late enfranchised men fell again into
their slavery: and especially for the profit which their lords and masters
were*in hope to have by the selling of them: to the imitation of the Portugals,
who first called in again Servitude, now for many worlds of years buried in
forgetfulness in Europe; and are in The Portugals the first that called in
slavery again into Europe.
short time like enough to disperse the same over all Europe, as it is now
already begun in Italy. For now a good while ago Africa and Asia, and the
Eastern part of Europ also have accustomed to nourish and bring up in every
city, stocks of slaves, in like manner as if they were beasts, and of them to
make a great merchandise and gain. For within this hundred year the Tartars (a
kind of Scythian people) in great number with fire and sword entering into the
borders of Moscouia, Lituania, and Polonia, carried away with them three
hundred thousand Christians into captivity. And not long ago even in our
memory, Sinan Bassa having taken the Ifle of Gozo near unto Malta, led away
with him 6300 Christians, and all the inhabitants of Tripolis in Barbary,
which he sold in Graecia. So that it is not to be marvelled that the captain
of the No man noble among the Turks but for his valor or his virtue.
their stock; so that the farther a man is from virtue, so much the farther
he is (with them) from nobility.

Wherefore seeing it is proved by the examples of so many worlds of years, so
many inconveniences of rebellions, servile wars, conspiracies euersions and
chaunges to have happened unto Commonweals by slaves; so many murders,
cruelties, and detestable villainies to have been committed upon the persons of
slaves by their lords and masters: who can doubt to affirm it to be a thing
most pernicious and dangerous to have brought them into a Commonweal; or
having cast them off, to receive them again? Now if any man shall say, That
the rigor of the laws may by forbidding, and severe punishment moderat the
cruelty of masters over their slaves: Reasons for the bringing in again of
slavery answered.
of God, which has so wisely provided as to forbid to chastise slaves with
whips (which the Roman laws permitted) and wills the slave to be
enfranchised, if his master shall break any lim of him? which law Constantine
the Emperor afterward approved. But who shall prosecute the suite against the
lord for the death of the slave? who shall hear the complaint? who shall exact
due punishment therefore? shall he that has nothing to do therewith?
considering that tyrants hold it for a rule in policy, That one cannot be too
severe unto his subjects, so to keep them low and obedient. But the Spaniards
(some will say) entreat their slaves courteously, teach them, and bring them
up, yea and that much more kindly than they do their hired seruans: and they
again since there are so few men one like unto another and contrariwise the
variety and So many slaves, so many enemies in a man's house, shows right
well what friendship, faith and loyalty a man may look for of his slaves. Of
a thousand examples of antiquity I will recite but one, which happened in the
time of Julius Pontanu^, who reports, That a slave seeing An horrible example
of the cruelty of a faithless slave.
his lord absent, barred the gates, and having shamefully abused his mistress,
bound her, took his masters three children, and so going up to the highest
place of the house, seeing his master coming home, first cast down unto him
upon the pauement one of his children, and after that another: the woeful
father all dismayed, and fearing least he should throw down the third
likewise, with prayers and tears besought the slave to Reasons for the
maintaining of slavery in a Commonweal.
bills: and that by that means might be driven away such a multitude of rogues
and naughty doers, which eat up whole towns, and as drones suck the honey
from the bees: join also unto this, that of such idle mates, thieves and
pirates furnish themselves; besides that, famine and evil provision for the
poor, draw into towns all populer diseases; for the poor we must nourish and
not kill, although it be in a sort to kill them, to refuse to nourish them (as
says S. Ambrose.) These reasons bear some show of truth. The same reasons
answered.
For as concerning debtors, if they be not able to pay, God his law commands
them to be adjudged to their creditors for seven years, but yet not into
perpetual bondage* howbeit that the law of the twelve tables, practiced in all
the West Indies, and in the greatest part of Afric, will that they remain
still prisoners unto the creditors, until Spartacus the fensor, who at one
time assembled out of the very bowels of Italy three score thousand slaves;
when as at the same time above fourscore thousand pirates with nine hundred
sail of ships were rouing over all the Mediterannean, and had with so great
forces taken 400 cities upon the sea coast; as that the Roman Empire was both
by land and sea as it were beset with thieves and robbers. But the wise law
giver is not he that drives robbers out of the Commonwealth, but he that
suffers them not therein to enter: which may easily be done without that
direful slavery, so dreadful unto states and cities; by erecting in every
town and city public houses for poor children, where they may learn diverse
trades and occupations, Charles the Emperor did at Peru: for that so they
having nothing to live upon, nor occupation to gain by, and delighted with the
sweetness of idleness and liberty, would take no pains: in such sort that
the most part of them died for hunger: but the best way is, by little and
little to enfranchise them, having before their enfranchisement taught them
some occupation whereby to relieve themselves. Now if some shall say, That no
man is a good master, but he that has before been a good servant: I say that
to be an opinion evil The old saying, That no man can be a good master, but he
which has before been a good (...), refuted.
grounded, although it be right ancient: for there is nothing that does more
discourage and overthrow, (and if I may so say) a bastardise a good and noble
mind, than servitude; or that does more abate the natural majesty of good
natures to command over others, than to have been once a slave. Solomon also
the master of wisdom says in his Proverbs, That there is nothing more
intolerable, than when a slave is become a master, or a handmaid a mistress:
which he refers not only unto a more mystical sense; as when our intemperat
desires bear rule over our reason: but unto him also which so dainly passes
from one extremity to another; as from servitude to command. But if it be
true that reason and the law of God is always and every where to take place,
and that it was not shut up only within the bounds of Palestine: why should
Papinian (the great lawyer) rejected, but afterward by him again received;
but being joined unto enfranchisments; is accounted as if it were not written
at all. And thus much concerning the power of a master over his slave, and
whether slaves are to be suffered in a well ordered Commonweal. But now that we
have sufficiently, and yet also as briefly as was unto us possible, entreated
of a Family, and of all the parts thereof, which is the foundation

CHAP. VI. What a Citisen is, and how much Citisens differ from Citisens, and
how much from strangers: what also is to be understood by the name of a Town,
a City, and of a Commonweal.
WHat we have before said concerning a whole Family, and every part thereof,
contains in it the beginning of all Commonweals. And as foundations can of
themselves stand without the form of an house, before of Families, of that
concerns them all in general, he then loaseth the title of master, A free
The definition of a Citisen.
subject holding of the sovereignty of another man. For before there was
either City or citisen, or any form of a Commonweal amongst men, every
master of a family was a master in his own house, having power of life and
death over his wife and children: but after that force, violence, ambition,
covetousness, and desire of revenge had armed one against another, the issues
of wars and combats giving victory unto the one side, made the other to
become unto them slaves: and amongst them that overcame, he that was chosen
chief and captain, under whose conduct and leading they Lord and Servant, of
Prince and Subject, before unknown unto the world, were first brought into
use. Yea Reason, and the very light of nature, leads us to believe very That
violence and oppression gave the beginning unto Commonweals.
force and violence to have given course and beginning unto Commonweals. And
albeit Thucydides, Plutarch, Caesar, and also by the laws of Solon, That the
first men that bare rule, had no greater honor and virtue, than to kill,
massacre and rob men, or to bring them in slavery. These be the words of
Plutarch. Yet have we more also the witness of the sacred history, where it is
said, that Nimroth the nephew of Cham, was the first that by force and violence
brought men into his subjection, establishing his kingdom in the country* of
Assyria: and for this cause they called him the Mighty hunter, which the
Hebrews interpret to be a thief and robb^. Which thing also Philo the Jew, and
Josephus by their testimonies confirm, viz. (...) by his wealth and power to
have first exercised Demosthenes, Aristotle, and Cicero, to have mistaken That
kings were not first chosen for their justice and virtue.
themselves, in following the error of Herodotus, who says, That the first
kings were chosen for their justice and virtue; and have hereof feigned unto us
I wot not what heroical and golden worlds: an opinion by me by most certain
arguments and testimonies elsewhere refelled; seeing that the first Cities and
Commonweals, long before the time of Abraham were full of slaves: as also not
long ago the Western islands did swarm with them at such time as the
Spaniards subdued them: a thing that could not possibly be, but by extreme
violent forcing the free laws of nature. And it is not yet past seventy
years that the people of Gaoga in Afric had never felt or heard of any king
or lord whatsoever, until that one amongst them a travel or Leo of Afric.
This was the beginning of the kings of Gaoga, which in short time greatly
increased.

And thus much concerning the beginning of Commonweals, which may serve to
manifest the definition of a Citisen, by us before set down, to be true, which
is no other thing to say, but A free subject holding of the soueraignitie of
another man. A free subject A Citisen must be a free subject.
I say, for albeit that a slave be much more subject unto the command of the
highest authority than a free man; yet so it is, that al people have always
with their common consent agreed, That a slave is no Citisen, and in questions
of right is accounted no Slaves not to be accounted Citisens.
body; which cannot truly be said of men's wives and children, who are free
from all servitude and bondage; albeit that their rights and liberties, and the
power to dispose of their own goods, be from them in some sort cut off by the
domestical power: in sort that a man may say, that every Citisen is a
subject, some small part of his liberty Cicero has noted out of the law of
the twelve tables; * Cice. officiorum. lib. 1.
The mildness of the word (says he) mitigating the hardness of the thing:
and they were called enemies which had conspired against the state. And it may
well be also that those whom we yet by a common word call Hotes, or Hosts,
were in ancient time Acursius) but strangers, be they another man's subjects,
or themselves sovereigns in their own country.

Now amongst them whom we said to be subjects unto public empires and
sovereign power; some are natural, some are naturallised; and of them which
are natural The division of subjects.
some are free borne, some are slaves, and these slaves being set at liberty,
in an instant become Citisens, whereas stranger slaves be not so. Yet true it
is that the enfranchised slaves in Greece were not admitted to be Citisens,
although that they were Demosthenes the Orator, which he made unto the people
after the great overthrow at Cherronaea, That all the inhabitants of Athens, as
well the enfranchised as others, might be accounted Citisens; was rejected and
denied, for fear least the enfranchised men (of whom there was a great
multitude) should become lords of their estate, and with the number of voices
exclude the natural Citisens from all honors and promotions; which the
greatest number still carried away: which thing the Romans at the first not
regarding, had almost before they were aware fallen into the power of the
enfranchised men, had not Fabius Maximus in good time foreseen the matter, and
thrust the multitude of the enfranchised men, before dispersed amongst all the
tribes, into four tribes apart by Fabius the Censor, he took the surname of
Maximus (or of the Greatest:) in which doing he amended the errors of Appius
the Censor* Why Fabius was called Maximus.
who had dispersed the enfranchised and naturallised Citisens (the issue of
slaves and strangers) amongst all the tribes of the free borne men: yet
afterward (notwithstanding Fabius) it was granted unto the Citisens
enfranchised, that they might enroll one of their sons being five years
old or more in the tribe or line of their patron: But when those four tribes
of the enfranchised Citisens seemed yet too puissant and strong, it was
decreed, That there should by lot one tribe be drawn out, wherein all the
enfranchised Citisens should give their voices. And this was the state of the
enfranchised Citisens, until the civil war betwixt Marius and Sylla, at
which time the people at the motion of Pub. Sulpitius made a law, That the
enfranchised Citisens should from that time forward be again divided amongst
all the tribes, which was the first and principal cause of the ruin of that
Commonweal. Wherefore as of slaves some are borne, some are made; so also of
Citisens some are made, some are The natural citisen.
ancient time (and yet at this present also in diverse Commonweals) to be a
Citisen it was needful to have both father and mother Citisens, as in Greece,
otherwise they called them Bastards, or Mungrels, which were but Citisens on
the one side, and could not themselves neither their children be partakers of
the greatest benefits or offices in the Commonweal, which they called
Archontes, as says Demosthenes in his Oration against Neaera, albeit that many
(as Themistocles himself) were thereinto secretly entered. But in the time of
Pericles five thousand of them were sold slaves, who had born * Plut. in Peri.
the countenance of Citisens. And Pericles himself having lost his children
that were The naturalised citisen.
For the citisen of honor only, who for his merits toward the Commonweal,
or of The citisen of honor properly no citisen.
special favor has obtained the right and privilege of a citisen, cannot of
right be called a citisen, for that he has not put himself under the power
of of another command.

Wherefore of many citisens, be they naturals, or naturallised, or else slaves
enfranchised (which are the three means that the law gives to become a
citisen by) is made a Commonweal, when they are governed by the puissant
sovereignty of one or many rulers: albeit that they differ among themselves in
laws, language, customs, religions, and diversity of nations. But if all the
citisens be governed by the selfsame laws and customs, it is not only one
Commonweal, but also one very city, albeit that The enclosure of walls make
not a city, but the government of the citisens under the self same laws:
although they dwell in ^uers towns or provinces dispersed.
the citisens be divided in many villages, towns, or provinces. For the
enclosure of walls make not a city, (as many have written) no more than the
walls of an house make a family, which may consist of many slaves or children,
although they be far distant one from another, or in diverse countries,
provided that they be all subject unto the command of one head of the
family: So say we of a City, which may have many towns and villages, which
use the same customs and fashions, as are the Bailiwicks, or Stewardships of
this realm: And so the Commonweal may have many cities and provinces which
may have diverse customs, and yet are nevertheless subject unto the * viz.
France.
command of their sovereign lords, and unto their edicts and ordinances. And
it may The difference betwixt a citisen and a burgess.
certain other priueledges, which are not common also unto the burgesses. I
have said the natural subject, for that the subject naturallised although he
dwell in the town, and enjoy the right of a burgess, is yet called in many
places a burgess: and the

And thus much briefly concerning the difference of subjects, citisens,
burgesses, and strangers; as also concerning a Commonweal, a City, and a
Town. But for as much as there is neither Greek nor Latin, nor any other
writer that I have seen, which have used these definitions, it is needful by
laws and by examples to make plain that which I have before said, being
otherwise of it self obscure. For we oftentimes Aristotle has defined *
Arist. Politic. lib. 3. cap. 6.
unto us; A city to be a multitude of citisens, having all things needful for
them to live well and happily withal: making no difference between a
Commonweal and a city: saying also, That it is not a city if all the
citisens dwell not in one and the self same Julius Caesar in his Commentaries
well declares, saying, That every city of the Heluetians had four villages,
or cantons. Where it appears that the word City, is a word of right or
jurisdiction, which signifies not one place or region, as the word Town, or
City; which the Latins call Vrbem of Vrbo, that is to say of aratio, or
plowing: for that as Varro says, the compass and circuit of cities was marked
out with the plough. It is also certain in question of right, That he which
has carried out of the city, that which was by the law forbidden to be carried
out, and has carried the same into another city or town of the same
province; is neither to be said to have carried the thing out of the city,
neither to have offended against the law. Yea the doctors go farther, saying,
That he has Ciuitas for a town, a city, or the right of citisens, for that
the general which is the city, comprehends in it the particular, which is
the town: yet so it is, that they abused not the word (...), as we see that
Cicero has well kept the propriety both of the one and of the other: for the
word * Cice ad A^ticum. lib. 4.
(...) signifies properly a town, whereof came the word astuti, which with the
Greeks signifies as much as does with the Latins Vrbani, for that the
inhabitants of towns Ciuilis, which we call civil, was not of the ancient
Latins received for Vrbanas, that is to say courteous, or after the manner of
the city. And least any man should think them to be rashly confounded, and to
be but a question of words, and not of matter: it may be that a town may be
well built and walled, and that more is well stored also with people, and
furnished with plenty of all things nececessarie to live withal, and yet for
all that be no city, if it have not laws and magistrates for to establish
therein a right government (as we have said in the first chapter) but is more
truly to be called an Anarchie than a city. And so contrariwise it may be,
that a town may be in all points accomplished and have the right of a city,
and of an university, Traian the emperor writing to Pliny the younger,
Proconsul of Asia, denies the city of the Bithynians to have the right of a
Commonweal, in being preferred before other private That the citisens, and not
the walls or buildings of a city, make a city.
may be without a city, and a city without a town, and neither the one nor
the other of necessity a Commonweal: and that more is, one and the same city
may still be kept in the whole and entire state of a city, the walls thereof
being laid flat with the ground, or it quite abandoned by the citisens; as did
the Athenians at the coming of the Persian king, unto whom they left their
town, putting all themselves upon the sea, after they had put their wives and
children in safety amongst the Trezenians; following therein the counsel of
the Oracle, which had answered them, That their city Themistocles
interpreted, That the city (which consists in the lawful body of citisens)
could not be saved but by ships. In like manner it happened also unto the
inhabitants of Megalopolis, who understanding of the coming of Cleomenes king
of Lacedemonia, all voyded their town, which for all that was no less a town
than before; yet was it then neither city nor Commonweal: in sort that a man
might say, That the city was gone out of the town. So spoke Pompey the Great,
after he had drawn out of Rome two hundred Senators, and the better part of
the citisens, and so leaving the town unto Caesar, said thus, Non est in
parietibus respublica, The Commonweal is not in the walls. But forasmuch as it
had in it two sorts of partakers, and that the citisens divided into two parts
things was long ago unto the Carthaginensians. For at such time as question was
The Carthaginensian ambassadors deceived for not well understanding what a
city in ^uth is.
was given unto Scipio Africanus the younger, To go in all have with a fleet to
Carthage, and with fire and sword to destroy the town, saving the citisens and
all other things else that they could carry out of the town. Scipio ariuing
in Afric with his Censorinus his lieutenant to Carthage, who after he had
received the promised hostages together with the Carthaginensian ships,
commanded all the people of Carthage to depart out of the town, yet with free
leave to carry out with them what they would, and to build them a city
further off from the sea, or elsewhere to their best liking. With this strait
command of the lieutenant the Carthaginensians astonished, appealed unto the
faith of the Senate, and of the people of Rome, saying, That they had promised
them that their city should not be rased: to whom it was answered, That the
faith given unto them by the Senate should in all points be kept; but yet that
the city was not tied unto the place, neither unto the walls of Carthage. So
the poor inhabitants were constrained to depart and abandon the town unto the
fire, which was Modestinus writes, That Carthage was no more a city after it
was rased, and that the use and profit left unto the city, was in this case
extinct above an hundred years before: but he was in the same error wherein
the ambassadors of the Carthaginensians were, unto whom all their rights,
prerogatives, and priueledges were reserved. The like error was committed in
the agreement made betwixt the Cantons of Berne and Friburg, in the year 1505,
wherein it was agreed, That the amity and alliance betwixt those two unto them
by diverse kings; and the university the body of all the burgesses of Paris
Julian, governor of the West empire, who made his ordinary residence in
Paris; the rest of the city that now is being then in gardens and arable land.

But the fault is much more, to say, That he is not a citisen, which is not
partaker of the offices of government, of giving of voices in the consultations
of the people, whether Aristotle his definition of a Citisen impugned.
it be in matters of judgment, or affairs of the state. This is the
definition of a citisen, Aristotle has left unto us by writing, which he
afterward correcting himself, * Lib. 3. cap. 1. and cap. 4. Polit. * Topi. lib.
6. * Pol. li. 3. ca. 1
says it not to have place put in the popular state only. Now he in another
place himself confesses that definition not to be good which is not general.
Small appearance also is there in that he says in another place, The noble to
be more a citisen than the base, and the inhabitant of the town rather than
the plain country peasant; and that as for the young citisens, they as yet but
grow as nouices, whilst the elder citisens decay; and that they of the middle
age are the entire citisens, and the other but in part. Now the nature of a
definition never receives division; neitheir contains in it any thing more
or less than is in the thing defined. And yet nevertheless that description
of a citisen that Aristotle has given unto us, is defective and lame, not
being aptly to be Aristotle, we must needs confess, that the greater part of
the natural burgesses of Athens, were in their own Commonweales strangers,
until the time of Pericles. And as for that which he says, The noble to be
always more citisens than the base and unnoble, is untrue, not only in the
popular estate of the Athenians, but also in the popular Commonweals of the
Swissers, and namely in Strasbourg, where the nobles (in the quality of
nobles) have no part in the offices of state and government.

Wherefore it is better and more truly said of Plutarch, That they are to be
called Who indeed be citisens.
citisens that enjoy the rights and priueledges of a city. Which is to be
understood according to the condition and quality of every one; the nobles as
nobles, the commonets as commoners; the women and children in like case,
according unto the age, sex, condition, and deserts of every one of them. For
should the members of man's body complain of their estate? Should the foot say
to the eye, Why am not I set aloft in the highest place of the body? or is the
foot therefore not to be accounted amongst the members of the body? Now if
Aristotle's definition of a citisen should take place, how many seditions, how
many civil wars, what slaughters of citisens would arise Agrippae reconciled
the people unto the Senators. For Romulus the founder of the city of Rome,
excluded the people from the great offices of command, from the offices of
priesthood, and from the augureships; commanding the same to be bestowed upon
such only as were descended from them whom he himself had chosen into the
Senate, or else from them whom he had afterward joined unto them. And this new
Cateline descended of the ancient family of the Sergians in Rome, and so a
natural Roman, by way of disgrace objected to M. Tullius Cicero, That he was
but a new vpstart of Arpinas. And that was the cause that many municipiall
towns chose rather to use the Roman laws than their own, to become true
citisens of Rome, until the time of Tiberius the emperor, who utterly took away
the very shadow of the popular liberty which Augustus the emperor had yet
left; having removed the popular assemblies from the people unto the Senate: at
which time the municipiall towns of Italy refused the priueledges of the
city of Rome, whereat the emperor Adrian marvelled (as says Aul. Gellius)
but without cause, for that they seeing the popular honors and offices to be
all in one man's bestowing, they thought it now better to use their own laws
than others.

Thus we see two sorts of citisens differing in priueledges, that is to wit,
the Roman The diverse sorts of citisens in Rome.
citisen, and the municipiall or country citisen. Now the third sort were the
Latins, who had at the beginning threescore towns, but were afterward
augmented with twelve Latin Colonies, who after long wars made peace with
the Romans upon condition, That they should live after their own manners and
customs, and yet should be made citisens of Rome, whosoever of them should
remove his dwelling into the city, having yet left behind him some lawful
issue at home in the country. Yet when many of them fraudulently abused this
agreement, and gave their children unto the citisens of Rome in adoption, or
under the color of servitude, to the intent that by them forthwith again set
at liberty, they might in a moment enjoy the liberties and priueleges of the
city; order was taken by the law Claudia, confirmed by a decree of the Boethius
writes, The Romans sent into the Latin Colonies, to have lost the liberties of
the city: as also that which Titus Liuius says, The Roman Colonies sent to
Puteoli and Salerne by the decree of the Senate, to have been no more citisens:
which is not further to be understood or extended, but to their right for
giving of voices, by that means now taken from them. So were they of Reims, of
Langres, of Saintonges, of Bourges, of Meaux, and of Autun, free people of
France, allies of the Romans, and citisens also, but without voice (as says
Tacitus) before that it was permitted Lucan.) Now it is not to be doubted, but
that that the Roman Colonies were true and natural citisens of Rome, drawn out
of the Roman blood, using the same laws, magistrates, and customs; the true
marks of a true citisen. But the further that these Colonies were distant from
the city of Rome, the less they felt of the glory and brightness of the
sun, and of the honors and offices which were divided among the citisens and
The cause of the confederat war in Italle against the Romans.
to be admitted to sue for the honors and honorable offices in the city;
thereof rise the confederats war in all Italy against the Romans, which
never took end until that after much harm on both sides both done and
received, the liberty of the Iulia granted unto Plu. in Syl^
all Italians, some few only excepted. For the cities of Italy were called
some Colonies, some Allies, some of them of the Latins, and some of the
Italian jurisdiction, and all of them different. And that is it for which Titus
Liuius says, I am inde morem Romany Colendi socios, ex quibus alios in *
Liui. lib. 26.
ciuitatem, at que aequum ius accepissent: alios in ea fortuna haberent, vt
socij esse quam ciues mallent. viz. Now since that time the manner of the
Romans was to honor their fellows, of whom some they took into the city,
and into like freedom with themselves: othersome they had in that estate, as
that they had rather to have them their fellows, than citisens with them. And
hereof proceeded that speech of Tiberius the emperor, in the Oration which he
had in the Senate, which is yet seen engraven Quidergo? Number Italicus Senator
prouinciali potior est? What then? Is an Italian Senator better than the
provincial Senator? As if he would have said them both to have been Senators
alike. And yet the same emperor excluded the Frenchmen which had obtained the
freedom of the city of Rome, from suing for the honors or offices thereof.
Whereby is better to be understood that which Pliny writes, Spain to have in
it 470 towns; that is to wit, 12 Colonies: 3 of citisens of Rome, 47 of them
which had the freedom of the Latins: 4 of Allies, 6 of them that were
enfranchised, and 260 tributaries. And albeit that the Latins were so straightly
allied unto the Romans, as that they seemed to be very citisens; yet
nevertheless that they were not so, it is to be well gathered by that saying
of Cicero: Nihil acerbius Latinos far solitos esse, quam id, quod perraro
accidit, a Consulibus iuberi ex vrbe exire. viz. The Latins used to take
nothing more heavily, than that which but very seldom times happened, To be
commanded by the Consuls to void the city: for as for other strangers we
read, them to have oftentimes been driven out of the city. In brief, such was
the variety of priueledges and prerogatives amongst them which were contained
within the Roman empire, besides their confederat and free people, as that
almost no one thing was so proper unto the Roman citisens in general, as that
the magistrates and governors might not proceed in judgment against them in
matters concerning No one privilege more common unto the Roman citisens in
general, than that the magistrate might not proceed against them in cases
concerning life or liberty, without the peoples leave.
their life and liberty, without the peoples leave. Which prerogative was by
the tribunitiall law Iunia granted to all the citisens of Rome, after that the
people had Valerian Consul laws, at diverse times made by the Consuls Publius,
Marcus, and Lucius, of the honorable family of the Valerians: and last of all
by the Tribunitiall law Sempronia, and Portia, where to meet with the
proceedings of the magistrates and governors, who encroached upon the
jurisdiction of the people, and proceeded oftentimes against the people,
without yielding thereunto, there was the penalty of treason annexed unto the
law; for that those laws were oftentimes broken by the magistrates. And at such
time as Cicero was about to have commanded the Roman citisens privy to the
conspiracy of Cateline to be strangled in prison: Caesar Portia and other
laws were provided, whereby for men condemned banishment was appointed. Which
law Cicero having transgressed, was therefore not only driven into exile, but
also proscribed, his goods confiscated, his house (esteemed to be worth fifty
thousand crowns) burnt, and a temple built in the plot thereof, which the
people at the motion of Clodius their Tribune, commanded to be consecrated to
Liberty: wherewith the magistrates terrified, durst not but from that time
forward with less severity proceed against the Roman citisens, yea even after
Pliny the younger, Proconsull of Asia, writing to Traian the emperor,
concerning the assemblies made by the Christians in the night, to the disquiet
of his jurisdiction: I have (says he) many in prison, amongst whom there are
certain citisens of Rome, whom I have put apart for to send them unto Rome.
And S. Paul at such time as he was drawn into question, as a seditious person,
and a troubler of the common quiet; so soon as he perceived that Felix the
governor would proceed to the trial of his cause, he required to be sent unto
the emperor; saying, That he was a citisen of Rome, for that his father being
of the tribe of Benjamin, and borne at Tharsis in Caramania, had obtained the
right of a Roman citisen: Which so soon as the governor understood, he
surceased to proceed Caesar. Whereas otherwise if he had not been a citisen of
Rome, the governor would have proceeded in the matter, seeing the country of
Palestine was before brought into the form of a province. As in like case
Pontius Pilat, governor of the same country, was constrained to condemn
Christ Jesus as a tributarie subject of his province, whom for all that he
seemed to have been willing to have delivered out of the hands of his enemies,
and from all punishment, if he could well in so doing have avoided high
treason, which the people threatened him with: Which the governor fearing,
least he should seem to have any thing therein offended, sent the whole
process of the matter unto Tiberius the emperor Tertullian.) For if the
municipiall magistrates of the Jews had had sovereign power and jurisdiction,
they would not have sent him back again unto the governor, crying That he had
deserved the death, but that they had not the power to proceed thereunto
against him. For the municipiall magistrates of provinces had not any
jurisdiction, more than to commit the offenders into safe keeping, for fear of
the present danger, and to receive cautions, or to give possession, and
sometimes to appoint tutors unto poor orphans: but in criminal causes, had no
power or authority, neither over the citisen of Rome, neither over the
stranger or provincial subject, or over others that were enfranchised; but
only over their flaues, whom they might at the uttermost but with stripes
correct. For as for the jurisdiction given to them that Valentinian three
hundred and fifty years after. Whereby it is to be gathered, all power and
authority for the execution of justice to have been given to the Roman
governors, and their lieutenants in their provinces, and taken from the rest.
For they but deceive us, which think the Jews priests, for the quality of
their priesthood to have made conscience to condemn to death our Savior
Christ Jesus, as if by their religion they had been hindered so to do; and
hereupon have concluded, That churchmen ought not to give judgment that
carried with it the execution of blood: which proceeded of the ignorance of
fantiquitie: For it is evident that before the land of Palestine was brought
into

Wherefore this was the greatest and chiefest privilege proper to the citisens
of The greatest and chiefest priuelege proper unto the citisens of Rome.
Rome, That they could not by the magistrates be punished either with death or
exile, but that they might still from them appeal; which liberty all the
citisens of Rome enjoyed. The other Roman subjects which had not this
privilege, were not called citisens: yet thereof it follows not, that to
speak properly they were not indeed citisens, and according to the true
signification of a citisen: for they must needs be citisens, Augustus was so
jealous of these priueledges, that he would never give the right of a Roman
citisen unto French men, for any request that his wife Liuia could make unto
him; yet for all that, not refusing to ease them from paying of tributes:
neither liked he well of it, that his uncle Caesar had together and at once
given the freedom of the city, unto that legion which he had raised of
Frenchmen, and in general to all the inhabitants of Nouocome: and blamed also
M. Antonius, for that he had for money sold the freedom of the city unto the
Sicilians. Nevertheless the succeeding princes kept not with so great devotion
the rights and priueledges of the Roman citisens. Antonius Pius by a general
edict gave the freedom of the city of Rome unto Plut. in Alexandro.
Alexander the Great, who called the whole world but one city, and his camp
the chief fortress thereof. But Antoninus contented himself with the Roman
world. And albeit that the city, or rather the grant of the immunities of the
city seemed so to be communicated unto all, yet were the priueledges of
citisens diverse, some always enjoying more than others; as is to be seen not
only in the Commentaries and answers of the great lawyers, which flourished
after Antoninus The greatness of the priueleges and immunities which a man
enjoys, makes him never a whit the more therefore a citisen.
Pius, but also in the edicts of other princes. For Seuerus more than fifty
years after Antoninus was the first that gave the privilege to them of
Alexandria, that they should make a citisen, then verily strangers and allies
were to be called citisens, Jews the eleventh, Honorable citisens.
and so afterward unto the rest of the French kings. So Artaxerxes king of
Persia, gave the freedom of the city unto Pelopidas (and all his posterity)
entreating of alliance with him. So the Athenians made free of their city
Euagor as king of Cyprus, Dionysius the tyrant of Sicilie, and Antigonus and
Demetrius kings of Asia. Yea that more is, the Athenians gave unto all them of
the Rhodes the freedom of their city: and the Rhodians with like courtesy
upon the agreement of the league, made all the Liuie: which league was called,
The treatise of Comburgeosie. What manner of league that was made betwixt the
Valesians, and the five little Cantons in the year 1528; and betwixt the
Cantons of Berne and them of Friburg, in the year 1505; and again betwixt
them of Geneua and them of Berne in the year 1558: the force of which leagues
was such, as that there should be a mutual communication betwixt them both of
their city and amity: and in case that any of the confederats forsaking his
own city, had rather to go unto the city of his fellows and confederats,
he should presently become a citisen and subject of the other city, without
any new choice or special letters of his naturalisation or enfranchising. But
the freedom of any city given for honor sake unto any, binds no Hercules,
or Alexander the Great, when they were made honorable citisens of the
Corinthians, subject or bound unto their commands; in such sort as that the
right of a free citisen was unto them but as a title of honor. Wherefore
seeing it impossible for one and the same person to be a citisen, a stranger,
and an allie; it may well be said that the priueleges make not a citisen, but
the mutual obligation of the sovereign to the subject, to whom for the faith
and obeisance he receives, he owes justice, counsel, aid, and protection,
which is not due unto strangers.

But some may say, How can it then be, that the allies of the Romans, and
other people governing their estate, were citisens of Rome (as those of
Marseilles and of Austun?) Or what is that which M. Tullius cries out: O the
notable laws, and of our ancestors by divine inspiration made and set down,
even from the beginning of the Roman name, That none of us can be the citisen
of more than one city: (for dissimilitude of cities must also needs have
diversities of laws) nor that any citisen can against his will be thrust out,
or against his will be detained in the city. For these are the surest
foundations of our liberty, Every man to be master both of keeping and of
leaving of his right and liberty in the city. And yet he the same man, before
had said it to be a thing granted unto all other people, that every man might
be a citisen of many

But first to that which he writes concerning the Athenians; that law of
Solons was long before abolished, which admitted not a stranger to the
freedom of a citisen of Athens, except he were banished out of his own
country: at which law Plutarch Solon, to the end (as it is like) That no man
should enjoy the immunitie and priueleges of a citisen of Athens, and that
popular prerogative which the people had, except he were bound unto the
command and laws of the Athenians. But he which is against his will detained
under the command of a strange city, has without doubt lost the right of
his own city: which can in no wise be applied unto those kings whom we have
before spoken of, or yet to the Rhodians which had ordained the freedom of the
Athenians. Wherefore this is it, as I suppose, that M. Tullius meant (for why,
he well agrees not with himself) That he which was indeed a true citisen of
Rome, that is to say, which was bound unto the Senate and the laws of the
people of Rome, could not Pomponius Atticus borne in the city of Rome, being a
Roman citisen, and of the honorable order of the knights, who for his love
toward the Athenians, was thereof called Atticus (and unto whom three of the
Roman emperors referred the beginning of their descent) refused the freedom
of the city of Athens offered him by the Athenians; least (as says Cornelius
Nepos) he should have lost the freedom of the city of Rome: which is true in
regard of the true subjects and citisens; but not in the citisens of honor,
which are not indeed subjects: neither in respect of them which are citisens of
diverse cities, under the power of one and the same prince, a thing lawful unto
all even by the Roman law. For although one may be the slave or vassal of many
masters or lords, yet can no man be the subject of Stanislaus Rasdrazetoski
sent to the c^nstable of France, bearing date the 17 of August 1553.
Nevertheless there are many people upon the frontiers, which have set
themselves at liberty, during the quarrels of princes, as it is come to pass
in the low country of Liege, of Lorraine, and of Burgundy: where there are
more than twelve subjects of the French king, or of the empire, or of Spain,
who have taken upon them the sovereignty. Amongst whom Charles the fist
reckoned the duke of Bouillon, whom he called his vassal: and for that he was
his prisoner in the year 1556, at the treaty made for the deliverance of
prisoners, he demanded an hundred thousand pound for ransom; for that he
called himself a sovereign prince. such enterprises, the English and the
Scots had of ancient time agreed, That the Henry the second the French king,
as was by him provided. But where the sovereign lords are good friends, as the
Swissers of the country of Lugan, and the other territories which belong in
common to all the lords of the league, whither they send their officers every
Canton by turn: there the subjects are not reputed to be the subjects of
Edward the first gave the freedom of citisens unto all the inhabitants of base
Britain; that is to be understood for them to enjoy the liberties, exemptions
and freedoms, that they of the country enjoyed. So say we also of the Bernois,
and the inhabitants of Geneua, who call themselves by their treaties of
alliance, Equal, and by their letters Combourgeses. For as for that which
Cicero says, That the citisens of Rome might A citisen of Rome might at his
pleasure give up his freedom.
at their pleasure leave their freedom of citisens, to become citisens of
another city: nothing was unto them therein more lawful, than that was in
like case unto all other people lawful also: and that especially in a popular
estate, where every citisen is in a manner partaker of the majesty of the
state, and do not easily admit strangers unto the freedom of citisens. As in
Athens, where to make a stranger free of their city, Not citisens only but
even strangers also in some places prohibited to depart.
of the soil, or intemperature of the air are forsaken by the inhabitants;
not only the citisens, but even the strangers also are oftentimes by the
princes of such places prohibited to depart, as in Moscouia, Tartaria, and
Aethiopia; and that so much the more, if they perceive the stranger to be
ingenious and of a good spirit, whom they detain by good deserts, or else by
force, if he would depart: in stead whereof he must buy it dear, or right
well deserve of the Commonweal, that shall get his freedom of a citisen
amongst the Venetians or Ragusians, or such other free states. And although
that by the Roman law every man might give up his freedom; and that in Spain
it is Cice. in orat* pro Corn Bal.
Cicero: Ne quis faederatorum a populo Romano ciuis reciperetur, nisi is
populus fundus factus esset; id est auctor. viz. That none of the confederats*
should of the people of Rome be received for a citisen, except Cornelius Balbus
was a citisen of a confederat city, and therefore could not contrary to the
league, by Pompeius be made a citisen of Rome without the consent of the
confederats. The same Cicero writes also in the leagues of the French with the
Romans to have been excepted, That none of them should of the Romans be
received for a citisen. The same laws we yet at this present use. For although
that the Swissers are with us joined in a most strait bond of amity and
friendship: yet nevertheless is the same clause conceived in that league, which
was with them made in the year 1520. And again at such time as the five
lesser Cantons of the Swissers made a league of alliance and amity amongst
themselves, it was excepted The subject may not depart out of his country
without the leave of his prince.
in the country, their land and goods remaining as before. And besides these
leagues, there is no prince which has not taken the like order. So that
oftentimes the subject dare not so much as to depart out of the country
without leave, as in England, Scotland, Denmark, and Sweden, the noble men
dare not to go out of their country without leave of the prince, except they
would therefore loose their goods: which is also observed in the realm of
Naples, by the custom of the country. As also it was forbidden by the
emperor Augustus to all Senators to go out of Italy without his leave, which
was always right straightly looked unto. And by the ordinances of Spain Hanno
their great captain had first discovered the islands of the Hesperides. And by
the The Canaries.
decrees of Milan, it is not lawful for any subject to receive the freedom of
any other city; or to enter into alliance or league with any other princes or
Commonweales, without the express leave of the Senate of Milan. And that more
is, we see oftentimes that it is not permitted unto the subject, so much as to
change his dwelling place, albeit that he depart not out of the seignorie and
obeisance of his sovereign prince: as in the duchy of Milan, the subject
coming to dwell in the city of Milan, or within a certain circuit of Milan,
must first have leave so to do; and also pay unto his prince Philip the fair,
John, Charles the fifth, and Charles the seventh. Howbeit that the decree of
Philip the long would, That the Provost or bailiefe of the place, assisted with
three burgesses, should receive into the freedom of their city, whosoever of
the kings subjects as would, provided, That within a year and a day he should
in the same city into which he removed,

And albeit that it be lawful for every subject to change the place of his
dwelling, yet is it lawful for no man to forsake his native country; and much
less for them Not lawful for any man to forsake his native country.
which are enrolled and tied to the soil, whom we call Mort-maines, who of
ancient time might not change their dwelling place without special leave.
And so generally a man may say in terms of right, That the freedom of a
citisen is not lost, neither the power of a prince over his subject, for
changing of the place or country; no more than the vassal can exempt
himself from the faith and obedience he owes unto his lord; or the lord
without just cause refuse to protect and defend his vassal, without the
consent of one to the other, the bond betwixt them being mutual and
reciprocal. But if the one or the other have given their express or secret
consent; or that the subject forsaking his prince, has yielded himself unto
the protection of another prince, by the sufferance of the first, without
contradiction, he is no more bound unto Why princes oftentimes by large gifts
and priueleges draw into their countries ingenious strangers.
into their countries ingenious strangers; whether it be so to weaken their
neighbor princes, or for the better instruction of their own people, or so to
increase their wealth and power, or else for their immortal fame and glory
which they hope to get in making the towns and cities by them built, more
renowned with the multitude of citisens and plenty of all things. So Theseus
by proposing the liberty of the city to all strangers, made the city of
Athens most famous of all the cities of Greece. So Alexander the Great by
granting of great priueleges, least the city by him built at the mouth of the
river Nilus (which he after his own name called Alexandria) the greatest, and
best traded Jews the eleventh gave the priueleges of the city of Bordeaux to
all strangers whether they were friends or enemies (except the English) so
that they dwelt within the town. So Frauncis the Great, founder of the city
by him built at the mouth of the river Sequana, which they call The Port of
Grace, proponing immunitie from all tributes, to all them that should dwell
therein, in short time made it a most populos city. Neither should the city
of London abound with so great wealth, nor such a multitude of citisens, had
not Richard king of England proposed unto strangers all the immunities
granted unto the citisens: so that they had dwelt ten years in the city:
which space of time for the obtaining of the liberty of the city, most part
of the Swissers and Germans, indifferently propounded to al strangers: To have
dwelt long in another princes country makes him never a whit the more the
strange princes subject.
stranger do not demand the citisens right and freedom, and be thereinto
also received: for it may be that the stranger would not for any thing
change his prince, that both he which gives, and he to whom it is given
agree, the one in giving and the Brutus and Scaeuola betwixt themselves. For
when the Consul yielded to the Samnites, returning to Rome was come into the
Senate, the Tribune of the people compelled him to go out of the Senate: howbeit
in fine the Senate by decree declared, That he had not lost the right of a
citisen of of his own country, and yet will not there dwell, he loses the
right he there pretends: Jews the xij. the French king thrust out from the
right of free citisens all strangers, who had obtained of him letters of their
naturalising, and were retired out of his realm home. For by our customs he
that will get the freedom of a citisen, must obtain the princes letters to
that purpose, and having obtained them, pay his fine unto masters of the
receipt.

These reasons show not only the difference that is betwixt a citisen and him
that is none, but also of citisens amongst themselves; and that if we follow
the variety of priueleges to judge of the definition of a citisen, there shall
be five hundred thousand of definitions of citisens, for the infinite
diversity of the prerogatives that citisens Better sometimes to be a stranger
than a natural citisen.
the same city to be a stranger, then a citisen, especially in such cities as
are oppressed with the cruelty and insolency of Tyrants. As in Florence many
citisens requested Cosmus the new duke to be reputed and esteemed as
strangers, by reason of the liberty of strangers, and thraldom of the
citisens, which they obtained not: and yet he allured fifty strangers to sue
for the freedom of the city, putting them in hope of the great offices and
commands: whereby it was brought to pass, that from those fifty citisens so
made, he extorted fifty thousand crowns, confirmed the authority of the new
citisens gotten by deceit, and thereby brake the power of the conspirators
against him. So in ancient time the Venetians empouerished and brought low by
The true difference betuixt a citisen and a stranger.
of the free subject toward his sovereign prince, and the tuition, justice,
and defense of the prince toward the subject, which makes the citisen: which
is the essential difference of a citisen from a stranger, as for other
differences they are casual and accidentarie; as to have part in all or
certain offices or benefices; from which the stranger is debarred as it were
in every Commonweal. As for offices it is clear. And although the Bishops of
Rome have of long time attempted to give all benefices Sixtus Bishop of Rome,
That beuefices should not be bestowed upon strangers. And so in Boulongne la
Grace, where the Pope is sovereign lord, the offices and benefices are not
given but to the natural inhabitants and subjects. The like whereof is done
also in all the seignorie of Venice. But the Swissers have far otherwise
proceeded than by way of agreement, who by a law made in the year 1520,
decreed the Popes Bulls and Mandats, whereby he had not doubted to give
benefices unto strangers, to be publicly torn, and they that used them to
be cast in prison. And by the laws of the Polonians Casimire the Great, unto
the reign of Sigismundus Augustus, strangers were kept far from all
benefices; which thing also the Germans by covenants, of late wrested from the
Popes: in which covenants they of Mets were also comprised, and so justly by
their letters complained unto Charles the ix the French king, those covenants
to be broken by the craft of the Bishops of Rome.

Another privilege there is also granted more unto citisens than to
strangers, in that they are exempted from many charges and payments, which the
stranger is constrained to bear: as in ancient time in Athens the strangers
paid a certain special tribute for the right of their dwelling place, which
they called (...): whereas the citisens The greatest privilege that a natural
citisen had in auntiens time above a stranger.
goods, according to the customs; or leave his nearest kinsmen his heirs;
whereas the stranger could do neither the one nor the other, but his goods
fell unto the lord of the place where he died. Which is no new law in France,
as the Italians complain, but a thing common also unto the kingdom of Naples,
of Sicilie, and all the East, where the Grand Signior is not only heir unto
the strangers, but also to his Timariots, for their immouables; and to his
other subjects for the tenth. As in ancient time in Athens, the common
treasure received the sixth part of the inheritance of strangers, and al their
slaves borne in the city: whereas in Rome the rigor was much Diodorus says,
The Egyptians and Romans to have suffered the heirs of strangers to succeed
them: he spoke therein like a stranger himself without regard; for it is most
certain, that it was no way permitted for a stranger to dispose of his goods,
neither to receive any thing by the testament of a citisen of Rome, the common
treasure carrying away the succession: whereof our laws are full. Which we may
also judge by the oration of Cicero, who to show that Archias was a citisen of
Rome, says amongst other things, That he had by his testament disposed of his
goods. And himself in his own cause to give men to understand that the decree
of banishment made against him at the suit of Clodius the Tribune, was of none
effect: What Roman Demosthenes, to prove that Euxithenes was a citisen of
Athens: Have not his next of kin (says he) recovered the inheritance of
their father that suruiued? And like as in France, and in England, particular
lords take unto them the inheritance of strangers which die within their
jurisdiction: so the Romans also after the manner of their ancestors, took
unto them the heredetarie goods of strangers, whom they had received into
their protection, being left at Rome, which they called, The right of
application. And that is it for which they said in Rome, That the right to make
a will and testament was only granted to a citisen of Rome. Whereby it is
plain that Frederick the second had derogated from the same by his edict,
which was but evil kept: For he gave leave to all strangers dying within the
compass of his empire, by their testament to dispose of their goods; or if
they dyed intestat, to leave their next of kin their heirs. But the force of
that law is even in Germany it self nothing, and much less in Italy, where
strangers are much worse dealt withal than in France. For by our customs it
is permitted unto the stranger to get in this * realm all the goods viz.
France.
mouable and immouable that he can, and them whilst he yet lives, to sell,
give, exchange, or dispose of by contracts made with men yet living, according
to his own Strangers in many places hardly del^ withal.
strangers to get any immouables in propriety, as in the duchy of Ferrara it
is a formal custom. And that more is, by the custom of Perouze, it is
forbidden to transfer unto a stranger not only the propriety, but even the
possession of any immouable. And by the custom of Milan it is not permitted
unto the stranger, so much Charles the fifth, all strangers are embarred from
the succession of the subjects of Milan. By the custom of Venice also it is
lawful to bind a citisen to a stranger, yet by that bond are not the heirs
bound, more Modo haeredes sint Regnicolae, the judges have so interpreted it of
strangers dwelling in France, who are preferred before them that are nearer
of kin dwelling out of the realm, in the succession of the naturalised
stranger: for otherwise it is requisite to make the strangers children to
succeed, for that they were borne in France, and of a free citisen, or natural
subject. But the children of strangers borne in France, enjoy their fathers
inheritance, not by will (which is not lawful for strangers to make) but as
from him dying intestat, if their mother be a free woman Jews the younger, and
more Charles the eight: which a few years ago were sent to king Charles the
ninth (by Danezay the French ambassador, unto the king of Denmark) to be by
him renewed. And yet this privilege granted unto those merchants, extends
not unto other strange merchants, which have obtained the right of citisens, as
has been adjudged by the privy counsel. Of which so many and so great
priueleges, by our kings granted unto strangers, our merchants could obtain
none in all Graecia, Asia, or Africa. For in our time when as Crozile a rich
merchant of Tours, diing, had left behind him almost two hundred thousand
crowns, nothing thereof came unto his nearest kindred, all the same being by
the Turkish emperor given unto Abraham

There is yet another difference (besides those we have already spoke of)
betwixt citisens and strangers; for that citisens by the ancient law Paetilia
and Iulia, may forsake Other differences betwixt a citisen and a stranger.
their goods, leaving them in satisfaction unto their creditors, which the
stranger may not do: for otherwise it should be lawful for strangers, for
their advantage to suck the blood and juice of the subjects, and afterward to
pay them with papers, although there be not fewer of these bankrups than of
them that forsake their goods. This also a citisen differs from a stranger,
that the stranger in every place before he can plead in action, either real
or personal, must put in caution for the payment of that which shall be
adjudged. Which caution our citisens, except they have before Frederick the
second, sent back unto the states of the empire, those which demanded the
right of reprisall against the subjects of the Lycurgus seems to have
forbidden the Lacedaemonians Plu. in Lycurg.
his subjects without leave to depart out of his kingdom, or to have the use
of gold or silver; as the East Indians of China forbid their subjects upon
pain of death from receiving of strangers: so to meet with the enterprises
that the stranger might make against another man's estate. Wherefore Cicero
well foresaw not what harms hang (as it were) over our heads from strangers,
when as he writ, They do evil which forbid strangers their cities, and cast
them out, as with our ancestors Penuu^, and of Papius: For by such strangers,
who for the most part are banished men, the good manners of the natural
subjects are corrupted. But if war be proclaimed against the prince, the
stranger may be detained as an enemy, according to the law of arms: whereas
otherwise he might not be stayed, if he had not otherwise bound himself by
contract, or by some offense by him committed.

Now if the stranger shall against the will, or without the consent of his
own prince* submit himself unto the power of another prince, and be of him
also received A stranger submitting himself unto the power of another prince,
is yet the subject of his natural prince.
for his subject; yet has his own prince still for ever power over him, and
authority to lay hands upon him as upon his fugitive servant; yea although he
come as an ambassador sent from his new prince. For so the emperor Theodosius
the Great pronounced Danus the tyrant to be a rebel unto his majesty, and
cast in prison his ambassadors, being subject to his power. So the emperor
Charles the fifth did the like against the ambassadors of the duke of Millan
his subject, whom he detained prisoner, at such time as he understood the duke
his master to have entered into league with the other princes, and to have
proclaimed war against him. And howbeit that the news thereof being come into
France, Granuellan, Charles his ambassador, was by the kings commandment
there likewise imprisoned, yet was he forthwith again delivered, so soon as
it was understood that the ambassadors and heralds of France, England, and
Venice, were with safe conduct sent out of Spai^e. Neither seems Charles in
so doing Rincon and Fregosi^s the French ambassadors toward the Turk, was,
That the one of them was a Spaniard, a natural subject of the emperors, and
the other a Genoway under his protection, both sent in the service of his
enemy; the bruit being given out, that they went to raise new wars against
him: how beit that the emperor would not avouch the murder, but promised to
do justice upon them that had done the same, if they should fall into his
power. But do the subject what he can, yet can he not exempt himself from the
power of his natural sovereign, No subject can exempt himself from the po^er
of his natural prince.
albeit that he become a sovereign prince in another man's country: no more
than Philip Barbarius a slave, who being for his virtue become Praetor of Rome,
being pursued and challenged by his master, was yet glad to agree with him for
his liberty. For in that the lawyers all agree, That the subject in what place
soever he be become sovereign, may by his prince be called home. As not long
since Elizabeth queen of England called home again unto her the earl of
Lineux, together with his son, who but a little before had married the queen of
Scots; for not obeying of which her command, she confiscated their goods, for
that contrary to the custom of that realm, they had without leave departed
out of England, and married contrary to the queens commandment. For the
subject wheresoever he be, is bound to the laws of his prince Neu Castle.
of Requests at Paris: the lords of Berne revoked the cause, for that judgment
was to be given by them, of lands contained within the precinct of their
country. See here the principal differences of subjects and citisens, from
strangers; leaving the particular differences of every country, which are in
number infinite. As for the differences of subjects amongst themselves* there
are in many places no fewer, or happily more than* betwixt the subjects and the
strangers (whereof we have much spoken before) as not only of the difference
of the nobility among themselves, but of the difference betwixt the nobility
and the vulgar people also. But particularly to prosecute how much the vulgar

Now to make the matter short, it may be that of right among citisens, some be
exempted from all charges, taxes, and imposts, whereunto others are subject:
whereof we have infinite examples in our laws. As also the society is good
and auailable, The division of citisens or subjects into three estates* ^ thing
observed in all Commonweal.
where some of the associats have part in the profit, and yet bear no part of
the loss. And that is it for which we see the division of citisens or subjects
into three estates, that is to say* the Spirituality, the Nobility, and
Commonaltie, which is observed almost in all Europe. And beside this so
general a division, there be other more special Diodorus. Also the aun^ent
law giver Hippodamus, divided the citisens into soldiers, handie crafts men,
and laborers; and has without cause been blamed by Aristotle; as we read in
the Fragments of his ordinances. And albe* * Lib. a. Polit.
it that Plato enforced himself to make all the citisens of his Commonwealth
equal in all rights and prerogariues; yet so it is, that he divided them into
three states; that is to wit, into Governors, Soldiers, and Laborers: which
is to show that there was never

CHAP. VII. Of them that are under protection, and the difference betwixt
Allies, Strangers, and Subjects.
WE have now already told what difference there is betwixt Subjects, Citisens,
and Strangers: let us now also speak of Allies, and first of them Protection.
under the obeisance of one sovereign prince or seignorie; as we have said*
That the prince is bound by force of arms, and of his laws, to maintain his
subjects in surety of their persons, their goods, and families: for which the
Subjects by a recipro^all obligation owe unto their prince, faith, subjection,
obeisance, aid, and succor. This is the first and the strongest protection
that is. For the protection of masters toward their slaves, of patrons
toward their enfranchised, of lords toward their vassals, is much How in
(...) of peace prin^ are said to be on^ of them in the (...) protection of
(...) another.
in amity and friendship joined together: the word of Protection is special,
importing not any subjection of him that is in protection, neither command of
the protecture toward his adherents, but only an honorable and reverent
respect of the adherents toward their protector, who has taken upon him their
defense and protection, without any other impeachment of the majesty of the
adherents over whom the Protector To protect others is a thing most honorable.
sovereign prince, the master, the lord, the patron, draw unto themselves
great profit and obedience, for the defense of their subjects, their slaves,
their enfranchised, and vassals: but the Protector is to content himself with
the honor and acknowledgement of his adherent, seeing that of all duties of
courtesy, none is greater, than as every man stands in most need of help,
so to give him the greatest relief^; neither of so great kindness to accept
any other reward than thanks: for if he covenant for any thing farther, he
loses the name of a Protector. For as he which lends unto anoman Romulus,
founder of the city of Rome, setting in order the state of his subjects, to
keep them all at peace and unity among themselves, assigned unto every one of
the hundred gentlemen, or Senators If the Patron deceive his Client let him be
accursed. Yet Plutarch writes, The clients to have given money to the
bestowing of their patrons daughters: which I remember not to have been
elsewhere written; for in so doing they should have cosened their clients: but
it may be that he mistook clients, for men enfranchised; who albeit that they
be both called clients or adherents, yet is the bond of the enfranchised How
whole cities sometimes put themselves into the protection of some one
honorable house of the Roman Senators.
the protection of the Senators. For so the house of the Marcelles had in their
protection the city of Syracusa, the Antonies had likewise the city of
Boulongne la Grass: and so others afterward took upon them the protection
and defense of others also. Auoison, or Auouerie to have taken* beginning. But
the enfranchised clients differ much from the free borne clients, albeit Great
difference betwixt the free borne clients and the clients enfranchised.
that they be both called clients, for the likeness that is betwixt the one
and the other) but especially in this, that the enfranchised clients may from
their liberty be again reduced into slavery, if they shall be proved to have
been ungrateful unto their patrons whereas the free borne clients cannot so
be. The enfranchised clients are constrained

And although there be so many things common to the free borne clients, with
the vassals or adherents, as that they are almost accounted for one, yet is
there great difference betwixt them. For the vassal is bound with all
fidelity to honor and reverence The difference betwixt the free borne client
and the vassal. This right is of the Latins called Ius-commissi: and of the
French Droit de comise.
his lord, to help him being in danger, and to do him all the kindness
possible: and if so be that he shall deceive his lord, disgrace him,
perfidiously abjure him, or give him the lie: he by and by loses therefore
his fee, which escheateth unto his lord by the right which the lord has
against his vassal in such case: whereas from the undutiful or unkind client,
or adherent, nothing can at all be taken. Moreover if the vassal has without
any exception given his faith unto his lord, or acknowledge no man greater than
him; whether he be sworn or not, he is bound unto the subjection and command
of him the same his lord and prince: whereof he cannot be said to be
discharged, albeit that he never so much renounce his fee: whereas the client
or adherent stands not in these terms, being in nothing subject to his
aduocat or protector. The vassal Vassalage but new: protection most ancient.
vassal age seems in a manner to be but new, and before the coming of the
Lombards into Italy unknown: whereas the law of protection is most ancient
and before the time of Romulus, who borrowed it of the Greeks: for it was long
before used in Thessalie, Egypt, Asia, and Sclauonia, as we read in ancient
writers: that so the weaker might be the safer from the violence or injury of
the more mighty. The vassal also receives inheritance and fees of his lord,
from whose fealty and obesance Cesars Commentaries interpret them whom he
calls Soldurios et deuotos, to be vassals, seeing that he has made no
mention of their fee, without which they cannot so be, joining thereunto also,
that they were indeed true and natural subjects: for that their lives, their
goods, and their persons, were consecrated unto their lord: which is the true
mark of subjection, which the vassals owe only unto their sovereign prince,
not in the quality of vassals, but in the quality of natural subjects, who
ought to run the same fortune with their

All which things tend to this purpose, that it may plainly be perceived, what
and The difference betwixt patronage, vassallage, and protection.
how much difference there is betwixt the rights of patronage, vassallage, and
protection, which we see to be of many for the likeness among themselves
confounded. For the vassal and the adherent owe their fidelity unto their
lord and protector; and the one of them are reciprocally bound unto the other,
albeit that the lord be not bound by express word to give his oath of
fidelity to his vassal, as the protector ought to his client or adherent, and
so solemnly to keep all the treaties of protection. The lord and the vassell
also ought to deliver solemn letters of their mutual obliging of themselves
whereof we are to entreat: it seems that the sovereign prince or people,
which has What protection be^ixt gre^ princes is.
betwixt great princes, is nothing else but the confederation and alliance of
two princes, or sovereign lords, wherein the one acknowledges the other for
superior; whom he binds himself to observe and reverence, and into whose
protection he is received, so to be the safer from the injury of some other
more mighty: also when the subject of a prince retireth himself into the
territory of another prince, he is likewise in his protection; in such sort,
as that if he be pursued after by the enemy, and taken Charles the fist, in the
year 1555, when question was made of the imperial prisoners that the French had
taken in the county of Guynes, which was then in the subjection of the
English; it was maintained by the Chancellor of England, That they could not be
detained as prisoners, being taken in the territory and protection of the
English: howbeit that the contrary might be said: for albeit it was not
permitted to pursue or take prey in another man's territory, yet it is lawful
having raised it in his own territory, to pursue it into another man's ground:
which yet suffers this exception, If the lord Gray, governor of Calais and
Guines, who coming in the time of the pursuit, was said to have taken the
flying Spaniards into his protection, although that they were carried away by
the French. Now in this case the word Protection, is not taken in proper
signification; for there is no protection, if there be no conuention: and the
strange prince cannot take another princes subject into his protection without
the consent of his own prince, as we shall hereafter declare.

But yet before let us determine the propounded question, Whether a sovereign
Whether a sovereign prince submitting himself unto the protection of ano there
prince, loses thereby his own sovereignty, and so becomes the other princes
subject.
prince submitting himself unto another sovereign prince, loses the right of
his own sovereignty; and whether he become subject to the other? For it
seems that he is Comiter maiestatem conseruare (that is to say, courteously to
preserve the majesty of the greater) imports no other thing, but that
betwixt the princes allied, the one is greater and more honorable than the
other; and that the lesser allies should in all modesty respect the greater. So
that it evidently appears, that protection imports not subjection,
Protection imports not subjection.
but the superiority and prerogative of honor. And the more clearly to
understand this point, and the nature of treaties and alliances, we may say
that all treaties amongst princes are made either with friends, enemies, or
newters. The treaties betwixt enemies, Alliance equal* or unequal* Unequal
of two sorts.
the other to be superior in the treaty of alliance; which is in two sorts,
that is to wit, when the one acknowledges the other to be his superior for
honor, and yet is not in his protection: or else the one receives the other
into protection, and both the one and the other is bound to pay a certain
pention, or to give certain succors; or else owe neither pention nor succors.
As for allies by alliance equal, which the Latins Aequo foedere, the quality
is understood, when the one is in nothing superior Alliance equal.
unto the other in the treaty: and that the one has nothing above the other
for their prerogative of honor, albeit that the one must do or give more or
less than the other for the aid that the one owes unto the other. And in this
sort of treaty, they have always entreated of amity, traffic, and
hospitality, to harbor the one with the other, and to traffic together with
all kind of merchandise, or some certain kinds only, and at the charge of
certain imposts agreed upon by the treaties. And both the one and the other
alliance is of two sorts, that is to wit, defensive only, or defensive
Alliance defensive only, or both defensive and offensive.
and offensive; and yet may be both the one and the other, without exception of
person, or with the exception of certain princes: and the most strait alliance
is that which is Edward the fourth, being driven out of the realm of England,
That the king could not give him aid, for that the alliances of France and
England were made with the kings, and the realms, in such sort that king
Edward chased out of his realm, the league continued with the realm and the
king that therein reigned: the effect of which words with such a king, his
countries, territories, and seignories: which words are as it were in all
treaties expressed. But these treaties ought also to be published in
sovereign courts or parliaments, and ratified by the estates, by the consent
of the Attorney general, as was decreed in the treaty made betwixt king Jews
the eleventh, and Maximilian the arch duke, in the year 1482. The third sort
of alliance is that of neutralitie, which is neither defensive nor offensive,
which may be betwixt the subjects of two Alliance of neutralitie.
princes being enemies; as those of the Franche-countie have alliance of
neutralitie with the house of France, and are assured in time of war: in
which alliance was also comprised the country of Bassigny, by the decree of
Bade in the year 1555, in confirming with the king the renouation of the
neutralitie for the Franch-countie. And all

And thus much for the general division of all the treaties which are made
betwixt princes, under the which are comprehended all the particular alliances.
For as for the division of the Roman ambassadors, at the enterparle of peace
betwixt them and Antiochus the great, it is very short. Liuie says, Tria sunt
Genera foederum, vnum cum bello victis dicer entur leges: alterum cum pares
bello aequo foedere in pacem and amicitiam venirent: tertium cum qui hosts
nunquam fuerunt in amicitiam foedere co^unt, qui neque dicunt neque accipiun^
leges. There are (says he) three kinds of leagues or confederations; one, when
as laws and conditions are appointed to them that be in battle overcome:
another when men in war equal come together in like league into peace and
friendship: the third, when as they which never were enemies, by league join
in amity, who neither give nor take laws. All the others, which are neither
subjects nor allies, are either coallies, or enemies, or newters without
alliance or hostility, who all generally, if they be not subjects (be they
allies, coallies, enemies, or newters) are strangers. The coallies are the
allies of our allies, which are not for all that our allies, no Coallies (...)
they be. Coallies always comprised in the league of their allies.
more than the companion of our associat is ou^ companion; who yet
nevertheless either in general or special terms, are always in all
leagues comprised. As the lords Frances the first of that name, and the
Swissers, in quality of coallies. But in the year 1550 they were allies unto
the house of France, and comprised in the treaty of alliance renewed betwixt
king Henry and the Swissers, in quality of allies by alliance equal, in like
degree and pension with the Swissers, that is to wit 3000 pound, for every
league or confederacy, to take away the partiality that was betwixt the one
and the others. For although the Swissers were allied with the league of the
Grises, by alliance equal by the treaty made betwixt the Grisons and the
seven little Cantons, in the year 1498: so it was yet nevertheless that they
constrained the lords of the leagues of the Grises to

But as those alliances which are defensive and offensive toward and against
all persons N^ alliance (...) unsure or weak, than the simple alliance of
commerce and ^raffick.
without exception, are of all others the straitest and strongest: so also
there is no alliance more unsure or weaker, than the simple alliance of
commerce and traffic which may be even betwixt enemies: which although it may
seem to be grounded upon the law of nations, yet we see it oftentimes to be
forbidden by princes in their own countries, least their subjects should
riotously abuse the store of things brought in, or be pinched with the want of
things carried our. And for this cause princes have in alliance defensive with
the Millanois, or at leastwise to have had them excepted Pomponius writes unto
Quintus Mutius: For (says he) if we have neither friendship nor hospitality,
nor league of amity with any nation, these truly are not enemies: yet what
thing soever of ours falls into their hands becomes theirs; insomuch that a
free man borne of ours, by them taken, becomes their slave; and so likewise
it is, if any thing come from them to us: thus much he. But this law we now use
not, for regard of that courtesy which ought to be betwixt man Who indeed are
to be accounted enemies.
and man. But by the name of enemies we understand them unto whom we, or they

But in every alliance, league, confederation, or conuention whatsoever, it
behooves In all alliance^ the soueraigneti^ i^ still unto all Princes, and
people to be reserved safe and untouched.
that the laws of majesty be unto every prince or people reserved safe and
untouched: for otherwise the one should fall into the power and mercy of the
other; as the weaker viz* from the riuage of Hellesponrus unto the remotest
parts of India; and that the city of Thebes was enclosed but in strait walls,
and the country of Beotia; yet for all that were they both in the league of
their alliance equal. Now where we said, that in alliance of protection, the
protector has Jews the eleventh the French king with the Swissers, who did
him that honor above the duke of Sauoy, who was before the chief: For always
the sovereign prince be he never so little, in alliance equal, is master in
his own house, and holds the first place above all other princes coming
into his country: but if the protector himself come, he is the first both in
sitting and all other honors.

But here might one say, Why should allies in league defensive and offensive
against all without exception, using the same customs, the same laws, the
same state, the same diets, be reputed strangers one to another? We have
hereof example of the Swissers, who are allied amongst themselves, with such
alliance as I have said, since Alliance makes not but that men may still be
one of them strangers unto another, and not of the same Ci^ie or Commonweal.
other. We have also hereof example of the Latins, and the Romans, who were
allies in league defensive and offensive, used the same customs, the same
arms, the same language, and had the same friends and enemies: Whereupon the
Latins maintained, that it was and ought to be one and the self same
Commonweal; and therefore by their ambassadors demanded to have their part in
the estate and offices of Rome, as had the Romans themselves. S^ societ^s (said
they) equatio iuris est, si socialis exercitus illis est quo duplicent vires
suas; cur non omnia aequantur? cur non alter ab Latinis Consuldatur? Vbi pars
virium, ibi and imperij pars est. And immediately after, Vnum populum, vnam
rempublicam fieri aequum est. Tum Consul Romanus. Audi Jupiter haec scelera:
peregrinos Consules, and peregrinum Senatum in tuo templo, etc. If society
(said they) be an equality of right, if they have their allies army, whereby
they double their strength: why then are not all things made equal? why is not
one of the Consuls chosen of the Latins? where part of the strength is, there
should also part of the government be. And immediately after, It is but right
that there should be but one people and one Commonweal. Then said the Roman
Consul, Hear o Jupiter these villainies, strange Consuls, and a strange
Senate in thy temple, etc. So he calls them strangers which were allied unto
the Romans with the strongest alliance that was Festus teaches us the
Municipes (or enfranchised men) not to have been citisens: whose words we have
thought good here to set down: Municip^um id genus hominum dicitur, qui cum
Romam venissent, neque ciues Romani essent, participes tamen fuerunt omnium
rerum ad munus fungendum vna cum Romany ciuibus, praeterquam de suffragio
ferendo aut magistratu capiendo: sicut fuerunt Fundani, Formiani, Cumani,
Acerrani, Lanuuini, Tusculani, qui post aliquot annos ciues Romani effecti
sunt. Al^o modo id genus hominum dicitur, quorum ciuitas vniuersain ciuitatem
Romanam venit, vt Aricini, Cerites, Anagnini. Tertio definiuntur ij qui ad
ciuitatem Romanam it a venerunt, vt Municipia essent suae cuiusque ciuitatis
coloniae, vt Tiburtes, Praenestini, Pisani, Arpinates, Nolani, Bononienses,
Placentini, Sutrini, Lucenses. That kind of men (says he) is called
Municipials, who coming to Rome and being no citisens, were yet partakers of
all things together with the Roman citisens, except in giving of voices, and
bearing of offices; as were the Fundani, the Formiani, the Cumani, the
Acerrani, the Lanuuini, and the Tusculani, who after certain years were made
citisens of Rome. And otherwise that sort of men is so called also, whose whole
city came into the city of Rome; as the Aricini, the Cerites, and the
Anagnini. And thirdly they who so came unto the city of Rome, as that the
Colonies of every city were accounted Municipials; as were the Tiburts, the
Praenestini, the Pisani, the Arpinates, the Nolani, the Bononienses, the
Placentini, Sutrini, and Lucenses.

Now many I see to be in the same error, as that the Swissers for like reason
are all That the Can^ of the Swissers are not one, but diverse Commonweales.
but one Commonweal: and yet it is most certain that they be thirteen
Commonweals, holding nothing one of another, but every one of them having the
sovereignty thereof divided from the rest. In former time their country was
but one member of the German empire, governed by the emperors deputy. The
first that rebelled were the inhabitants of Schwits, Vri, and Vnderuald, who
treated of alliance both defensive and offensive, in the month of December, in
the year 1315: whereof the first article The beginning of the Swissers revols
from the Empire, and the first establishing of their Commonweales.
was, That none of them should more admit the command of any prince, or endure
any sovereign prince over him. And afterward in the year 1332 alliance was
made of four Cantons, which were called the four towns of the wood, viz.
Vri, Schwits, in the year 1528, with whom beside the ancient treaty, a
particular treaty was made Geneua the las^ that entered into league with the
Swissers, under the protection of the Bernois.
All these allies, confederats, and coallies, made two and twenty
Commonweales, with the abbat of St. Gal a sovereign prince; all separated in
sovereignty, and every one of them having their magistrates apart, their state
apart, their bursse, their demaine and territory apart. In brief, their
armies, their cry, their name, their money, their seal, their assemblies,
their jurisdiction, their ordinances in every estate divided. Frauncis the
first, the French king, by them chosen arbitrator in this matter. They of Basil
also, when in the year 1560 they had lent fifty thousand crowns unto the
French king, they took the Canton of Soleure to themselves in caution* but
having by the common aid of all the Cantons taken in the bailiwike of Lugan,
with certain other lands beyond the mountains; every Canton by turn one
after another, sent thither their magistrates and governors,

But unto many it may seem, that they altogether make but one estate,
considering that, that which is decreed in their diets in common, binds
every one of the Cantons, The Cantons of the Swissers divided among themselves
for religion.
and the lesser part of them all: as the seven Cantons Catholic gave well to
understand unto the four Cantons Protestants, at the diet holden in September,
in the year 1554, insomuch that the common country situat beyond the
mountains, divided in religion, and governed by the magistrates that every
Canton sends thither by turn; it chanced that the seven Cantons Catholic
caused them of the common country to bind themselves not to change the
religion Catholic: and so following the same obligation would afterward have
proceeded against them of the religion None of the cantons may make alliance
with any prince, wishout the whole consent of the rest of the cantons
consent of the rest. As the cantons protestants having made alliance with
Philip the Landgraue of Hessen, and the seignorie of Strasburg, in the year
1532, were by the rest of their allies enforced again to depart from the same.
As in like case the cantons catholic were compelled to renounce their new
alliance made with the house of Austria. And albeit that the five cantons
catholic Lucerne, Vri, Schwits, Vnderuald, and Zug, had made alliance with
Pope Pius the fourth, for the defense of their religion; yet could they not
with any rewards (were they never so great) be enduced to renew the same with
his successors. But when treaty was had, for alliance to be made betwixt
Frauncis the first, the French king, and the Swissers, nothing more let the
same, than the opposition of the cantons protestants; who before instructed in
the new religion, and persuaded by the earnest sermons of Zuinglius their
preacher, who affirmed it to be unlawful for them to serve strange princes in
their wars, prevailed so much, that his followers and country men would no
other wise make alliance with the king, but by the way of peace and friendship
only. But the leagues renewed with Henry the second, they of Basil and
Schaffuse, with the catholic cities, joined themselves unto the French, not in
league of friendship only, but in giving of their aid also: when as for all
that, they of Zutic and Berne, in the year 1554, forbad their subjects upon
pain of death to serve the French king in his wars. And the same year the
governors of the The same opinion we may have of the alliance contracted
betwixt the Romans Myrios: by whom the Lacedaemonians were condemned to the
seignorie of Thebes,

Here might one say, That all Greece was but one Commonweal, considering the
power of the Amphictioniques: and yet nevertheless there were almost as many
diverse Philip king of Macedon (being himself none of the league) took
hereupon occasion to denounce the sacred war unto the Phocenses, and to
ruinat their state: and in recompense thereof obtained the place and priueleges
The alliance of the ancient Commonweals of Gaul.
of Caesar, where he says, That Vercingentorix chosen their general, caused
all the states of Gaul to be assembled. And albeit that the lords of Autun, of
Chartres, of Gergoye in Auuergne, and of Beauuois, held nothing one of them of
another; and that the seignorie of Bourges was in the protection of Autun; and
those of Viarron in the protection of Bruges, and so consequently the other
towns in like sort: yet so it was, that all the princes and seignories passed
their differences by the decrees and judgments of the Druydes; unto whose
censure if they refused to obey, they were

But it may also happen, that to become but one estate, one Commonweal, and
one seignorie, when the partners of one league do agree in the same
sovereignty: a thing not easy to be judged; if a man look not near into it.
As the league of the Achaeans was not at the first but of three cities, divided
in estate, assemblies, and sovereignty; allies The league of ^e Achaeans.
by alliance equal, both defensive and offensive: who having the same enemies
and the same friends, yet at the beginning kept every one of them unto
themselves the majesty of their own city. But being troubled with continual
wars, and enforced to hold their often assemblies, they by little and little
became so straightly united together, that in fine they became but one
Commonwealth composed of many: and in tract of time drew unto their estate all
the towns and cities of Achaia and Morea, they all retaining still the first
name of the Achaeans. As it happened unto them of the league, whom Whereof the
Swissers took their name.
they call Swissers; for that the canton of Schwits, the least of all the rest,
was the first that revolted, after that they had slain their governor. And as
the Achaians were called the correctors of tirants; so also the Swissers (to
their great praise) carried this title Aratus, who procured it to be decreed by
the estates, That every year one chief general should be chosen to command
in their wars, and to govern their estates: and he was prince of the
Achaians, that is to say, the first that called together their assemblies. And
whereas before every city sent their ambassadors and deputies with
instructions unto the assembly of the Achaians (as the Swissers use to do)
there to give their voices deliberatiue: Aratus brought to pass, that the
assembly of the ambassadors and deputies Polybius. The kings of Macedon
entered also into this league; yea the two Philips, Antigonus, and Demetrius,
were chosen chief captains of the Achaians, holding nevertheless their
realm separated apart from the seignorie of the Achaians. And the Romans
knowing well that they could not possibly conquer Greece, the league of the
Achaeans standing whole, gave commandment unto Gallus their Proconsull, by
all means possible to do what he might to break the same; which he not in
vain attempted. For diverse cities complaining unto the states, that under
color of a league and alliance equal, they had taken from them the managing
of their estate and sovereignty; Aratus obtained commission from the states to
inform against these rebels: after which the cities before revolted, put
themselves into the protection of the Romans; yet with prouiso, that their
estate and sovereignty should remain unto them still. But when the power of
the Romans seemed unto the rest of the Achaeans invincible, they for the
safeguard of their liberty, entered into amity with the Romans also; yet with
condition, That the Lacedaemonians, whom the Romans had in a manner drawn from
the state of the Achaeans, should from thenceforth be under the protection The
league of the Aetolians.
Achaeans, composed of three cities, who had also their estate, assemblies, and
sovereignty The league of the Lycians.
like we may say of the three and twenty cities of Lycia, which established
one Aristocraticall Commonweal, like unto that of the Achaeans; saving that
the deputies of the greater cities had in their general assemblies three
deliberatiue voices, the meaner citisens two, and the rest but one; as says
Strabo: and moreover out of the estates they chose a captain general, whom
they called the Lyciarque, and so the other magistats and judges of all the
cities also. Other alliances also and leagues there were of the thirteen The
league of the 13. Cities of Ionia. The 12. Cities of Tuscanie: and the 47.
Cities of the Latins.
cities of Ionia, of the twelve cities of Tuscanie, and of the forty seven
cities of the Latins, strongly made by alliance equal, both defensive and
offensive, holding their assemblies of their states every year, and choosing
also sometimes (but not ever) a chief captain or general, especially in time
of war: and yet nevertheless the sovereignty of every city continued in
the estate of it self, as does the Swissers. For albeit that the city of Rome
was entered into league with the Latins, and that Seruius Tullius, and Tarquin
the proud king of Rome, had been chosen chief captains of the league of the
Latins; yet so it is nevertheless, that every city kept still the
assemblies and sovereignty thereof: and yet the kings of Rome lost nothing
thereby of their majesty. Now it seems at the first show, that such leagues
of cities were like unto those Antigonus, and Philip the second; and the league
of the Aetolians made choice of Attalus king of Asia, as says Lib. 27.
Liuie; and likewise the Latins, of the kings of Rome, and other their
neighbor princes* so also the electors have oftentimes chosen strange
princes, as Henry of Lutzemburg, Alphonsus Charles the fifth, kings of Castile;
who although they were sovereigns in their own realms, were yet
nevertheless subjects to the empires, as captains A General chosen by many
Cities or States in League together, makes not them that have so chosen him
ever a what the more one Commonweal.
in chief. For as a captain in chief, being not sovereign to them that have
chosen him, makes not them of the league to be one Commonweal: so also he
changes in nothing the estate and union of the Commonweal whereunto he is
called. So Philip Valois the French king, was chosen general of the
ecclesiastical forces, as we see in that league which was made betwixt Philip
Valois, and Henry count Palatine, who was afterward of the Germans chosen
emperor. And not long since Adolphus uncle to the king of Denmark, was chosen
chief captain of the league of the Hauns cities. Ferdinand sent his
ambassadors unto the Swissers, to the end they should not receive Grombach,
nor the conspiratours his adherents, banished out of the empire: which thing,
when the emperor seemed by his letters rather to command than to request; the
Swissers Morlet Musa ambassador for the French king unto the Swissers,
certified the king, How that the governor of Milan (as having such charge from
the emperor) had forbidden the cardinal of Syon to enter into league with the
French king, for that he was a prince of the empire: of which his command the
cardinal made no great account, but without regard of his prohibition made
alliance with the French king; from whom he received twelve hundred pounds
pention yearly. True it is, that in all the leagues of the Swissers with foreign
princes, the empire is always excepted, if there be not thereof express The
Swissers in all their leagues with foreign Princes ^till exceps the Empire
mention made. And for that cause Guiche the kings ambassador to the Swissers
had thereof express charge (as I have seen by the instructions that were
given Sigismund caused the Swissers to take up arms against Frederick of
Austria, to the prejudice of the alliance made with the house of Austria:
presupposing that the empire was superior unto the Swissers, and that in all
treaties of alliance, the right of the superior is still to be excepted,
although there be thereof no express mention made. Which is certain, for as
much as concerns the laws of majesty; but the Swissers confess not that
the emperor has any superiority over them, and much less the emperor,
subject to the states of the empire. It is also true, that by the treaty made
betwixt the eight ancient cantons, there is an express clause, whereby the
cantons of Zurich, Ferdinand, then holding a diet of the states of the empire,
at Ausburg. And by the treaties of alliance made betwixt the sacred empire and
the cities of the cantons, it is expressly articulated, That they should not
give any aid unto any strange prince, to make war upon the territory of the
empire; as I have learned by a copy of the letters of the emperor Charles the
fifth, written to the lords of the cantons; whereby he complains, That their
subjects joined with the forces of the French king, had entered upon the
territories of the empire, contrary to the express tenor of the alliance
that they had with the empire. And not long after, he by other letters
demands of the lords of the cantons to punish their subjects, who had invaded
the territories belonging to the house of Austria, contrary to the hereditarie
alliance made betwixt the princes of the house of Austria and the Swissers, in
the year of Grace 1467, and renewed in the year 1501, in which league, the Sea
of Rome, the Pope, and the empire, are excepted: and a yearly pention set
down, of two hundred florins to be yeately paid unto every canton. Austria;
and not for the right of any pre-eminence, or superiority that the empire has
over them. Which is also yet more expressly verified by the treaty of alliance,
renewed betwixt the French king and the lords of the cantons, in June 1549, out
of which are excluded all such as are not subject to the Swissers, nor use not
the German tongue. And that is it for which Charles the fifth, the emperor,
labored by all means to make Austria: which the Swissers ^latly refused to
grant in the year 1555. The same we may judge of the cities of the Grisons,
rent from the German empire, who sufficiently declared themselves to be in
nothing bound unto the edicts of the empire, or of the emperor; in that they
would not accept even of a German prince by the emperor appointed to be their
bishop: but the 3 cities of the Grisons, being at variance among themselves,
about the choice of their bishop* the Swissers by the authority of the league,
taking upon them to be arbitrators of all controversies arising betwixt the
confederat cities, without any regard had to the provision of the pope, or
confirmation

Now seeing that our reasoning is of leagues, and of laws of arms, question
might Not lawful for subjects to entreat of any particular league or alliance
among themselves, or with foreign princes, without the leave or consent of their
own sovereigns.
be made, Whether it be lawful for subjects to entreat of any particular
league or alliance among themselves, or with other foreign princes, without the
leave or consent of their own sovereigns? Such alliances, and especially with
strangers princes have used to embarre, for the evil consequences that might
ensue thereon: and namely the king Catholic by express edicts has forbidden
all his subjects so to do. And at such time as Jews of France, duke of
Orleance (he which was slain at Paris) was charge with Henry duke of
Lancaster. Yet for all that the princes of the empire think it lawful for
them so to do: and for their own safety to enter into league of alliance,
both among themselves, and with other foreign princes, so that it be done
without the prejudice of the German empire. For whatsoever leagues are by them
otherwise made, are void and of none effect. But when the empire is excepted,
the emperor himself is not therefore excepted, as has oftentimes but never
more plainly been understood, than in the league which many of the German
princes made with Henry the second, the French king, at Chambort, for the
defense of the German empire, against the emperor Charles the fifth, in the
year 1552. Henry for their superior, promising courteously to reverence his
majesty; and so by their common consent made him general of their wars,
calling him The Protector of Princes, and of the liberty of the empire. And
in the year 1559 the like alliance both defensive and offensive was made
betwixt the king of Sweden, the marquis Assemberg, the duke of Brunsuich, the
duke of Cleue, the prince of Orange, the county Aiguemont, and diverse other
imperial towns on the one part, and the king of Denmark, the duke of
Saxony, the Landgraue of Hesse, the duke of Holste, the duke of Bauyere, the
town of Nuremberg, the bishops of Wirciburg, and Bamberg the town of Lubec,
and diverse other, with Sigismund Augustus king of Polonia, on the other part.
Yea the emperor Charles the fifth himself made particular alliance with the
duke of Bauaria, and other the catholic princes, to choose his brother
Ferdinand king of Romans. And a little after also the league of Franconia was
made betwixt the house of Austria, the duke of Bauaria, the three bishops of
Franconia, the archbishop of Salisburg, and the cities of Nuremberg and
Ausberg. And Ferdinand also king of the Romans, for the catholic religion sake
made a particular league with the bishop of Salisburg against the protestants,
in the year 1556. We have seen also the league which was called The league
of Sueuia, to have made alliance offensive and defensive for 40 years, without
excepting any thing sa^e the empire. And the like league also betwixt the Sea
towns, which they call Adolph uncle to the king of Denmark, who was not any
way subject to the empire. Yet in all these leagues was ever excepted the
majesty of the German empire. Yea that more is, the nobility of Denmark
entered into a league defensive with Sigismund Augustus king of Polonia, and the
town A foul and rebellious league of subjects against their prince.
of Luec, against the king of Denmark himself: greater treason than which
none could have been devised, if the king of Denmark had the highest power
over his people, and were an absolute sovereign: of which matter, and of all
the law of arms we will in due place reason: but first it behooves us to
speak of majesty, or Sovereignty.

CHAP. VIII. Of Sovereignty.
Majesty or Sovereignty is the most high, absolute, and perpetual The
definition of Majesty or Sovereignty.
power over the citisens and subjects in a Commonweal: which the Latins call
Maiestatem, the Greeks (...), and (...), and (...); the Italians Segnoria, and
the Hebrews (...), that is to say, The greatest power to command. For
majesty (as Festus says) is so called of mightiness. That Sovereignty
consists in a perpetual power.
have said that this power ought to be perpetual, for that it may be, that
that absolute power over the subjects may be given to one or many, for a short
or certain time, which expired, they are no more than subjects themselves: so
that whilst they are in And that is it for which the law says, That the
governor of a country, or lieutenant Optima Lege) so that from them it was
not lawful to appeal* and upon whose creation all offices were suspended;
until such time as that the Tribunes were ordained as keepers of the peoples
liberty, who continued in their charge notwithstanding the creation of the
Dictator, who had free power to oppose themselves against him; so that if
appeal were made from the Dictatour, the Tribunes might assemble the people,
appointing the parties to bring forth the causes of their appeal, and the
Dictator to stay his judgment; as when Papirius Cursor the Dictator, condemned
Fabius Max the first, to death; and Fabius Max the second had in like manner
condemned M^nutius, Liuie, Then the father of Fabius said, I call * Liui. lib 7.
upon the Tribunes, and appeal unto the people, which can do more than thy
Dictatorship* The dictator of Rome, neither sovereign prince nor magistrate.
whereunto king Tullus Hostilius gave place. Whereby it appears that the
Dictator was neither sovereign prince, nor magistrate, as many have supposed;
neither had any thing more than a simple commission for the making of wa^e* the
repressing of sedition, the reforming of the state* on instituting of new
officers. So that Sovereignty is not limited either in power, charge, or time
certain. And namely the ten commissioners established for the reforming of
customs and laws; albeit than they had absolute (...) having vanquished the
enemy, forth with discharged himself of the Dictatorship, which he had not
had but fifteen days, Seruilius in eight days, Mamercus in one day. And the
Dictator was also named, not by the Senate, or the people, neither by the
magistrates, or request made unto the people; nor by any laws which were always
necessary to the creating of officers, but by an interrex, or a king created
for a time, borne of honorable blood: for why, it was not enough for him to
Sylla was by the law Valeria made Dictator for threescore years: I will
answer as Cicero did, That it was neither Dictatorship nor law, but a most
cruel tyranny; whereof for all that he discharged himself the fourth year
after he was made Dictator, when as he with the blood of the citisens had
quenched the flames of the civil wars; having yet still in the mean time
reserved unto the Tribunes their free power to oppose themselves against his
authority. And although Caesar forty years after had invaded the perpetual
Dictatorship together with the liberty of the people, yet left he unto the
Tribunes of the people, their power to oppose themselves against his
proceedings: but when as before, Pompeius being Consul, the very name of the
Dictatorship was Caesar, contrary to the law of Pompeius, had procured
himself by the law Seruia, to be created Dictator, he was by the conspiracy
of the Senators slain in the midst of the Senate. But let us grant an
absolute power without appeal or controlement, to be granted by the people to
one or many to manage their estate and entire government: shall we therefore
say him or them to Who is to be called an absolute sovereign.
have the state of Sovereignty, when as he only is to be called absolute
sovereign, who next unto God acknowledges none greaterthan himself? wherefore
I say no sovereignty to be in them, but in the people, of whom they have a
borrowed power, or power for a certain time, which once expired; they are
bound to yield up their authority. Neither is the people to be thought to have
deprived it self of the power

But what if such absolute power as we have spoken of, be given to one or more
for nine or ten years? as in ancient time in Athens the people made one of
the citisens The great Archon of Athens no sovereign.
their sovereign, whom they called Archon. I say nevertheless that he was
no The Amymones sovereign magistrates, and ^es not simple sovereigns.
all for their doings* For to the Cnidiens every year chose (...) of their
cirisens, whom they called Amymones, that is to say, Men without imputation,
with such sovereignty of power, as that they might not be called to account for
any thing that they had done, neither during the (...) of their charge, nor
after that the same was expired: I say yet for althat, that the sovereignty of
the state was not in them* seeing that they were bound at the years end to
restore again unto the people, the authority they were put in trust

The same we may say of the Regents of France, created for the infancy,
fury, or The Regents of France*
absence of the king, whether the edicts, mandats, and letters pattents, be
signed and sealed with the sign and seal of the Regents, and in their name
(as they did before the Charles the fifth the French king) or else that it be
done in the name of the king, and the mandats sealed with his seal: for in
that there is little or no difference at all: seeing that whatsoever is done by
the attorney, the lord allowing the same, may well be thought to be done by the
lord himself. Now the Regent is the true protector of the king and of his
kingdom: for so the good county Theobald called himself Procuratorem regni
Francorum, that is to say, Protector of the kingdom of France. So when a
prince gives absolute power to a Regent, or to a Senate, in his presence, or in
his absence, to govern in his name; albeit that the edicts or letters of
command go in his or their name, yet is it always the king that speaks or
commands. So we see The Senate of Millan, or Naples, what power it has in
the absence of the king of Spain.
that the Senate of Milan or Naples, in the absence of the king of Spain has
absolute Charles the fifth in these words. Senatus Mediolanensis potestatem
habeat constitutiones principis confirmandi, infirmandi, tollendi, dispensandi,
contra statuta, habilitationes, prerogationes, restitutiones faciendi, etc. A
Senatu ne prouocari possit, etc. Et quicquid faciet, parem vim habeat vt si a
principe factum ac decretum esset: Non tamen possit delictorum veniam tribuere,
aut liter as salui conductus reis criminum dare. That is to say, The Senate of
Milan has power to confirm the constitutions of the prince, as also to
infirm the same, to disanull them, to dispense with them contrary to the
statutes, to make enablements, prerogatives, and restitutions, etc. No appeal
shall be made from the Senate, etc. And whatsoever it shall do, shall have like
force as if it were done or

But suppose that such great power be given to a kings lieutenant, or the
governor Princes, lieutenants or governors of coun tries for term of life,
yes no sovereigns.
of a country for term of his life, is not that a sovereign and perpetual
power? For otherwise if we should interpret that only to be a perpetual power
which shall never have end, there should be at all no sovereignty, but in the
Aristocraticall and Henry duke of Aniou.
that which was of late years granted to Henry of France, duke of Aniou, by
king Charles the ninth his brother, for it was most great and perpetual,
without any exception So long as it shall stand with our good pleasure, joined
unto it in his letters patents: which well declares a power but during
pleasure. Which power of lieutenancie (as of all other magistracies) cease in
the presence of the prince.

But what shall we then say of him to whom the people have given absolute power
How the people may create a sovereign Monarch.
so long as he lives? in this case we must distinguish: If such absolute power
be given him purely and simply without the name of a magistrate, governor, or
lieutenant, or other form of deputation; it is certain that such an one is,
and may call himself a Sovereign Monarch: for so the people has voluntarily
disseised and dispoyled it self of The regal, or royal law.
Cum populus ei and in eum omnem potestatem contulit: when as the people
conferred unto him, and on him all their power. But if the people shall give
all their power unto any one so long as he lives, by the name of a magistrate,
lieutenant, or governor, or only to discharge themselves of the exercise of
their power: in this case he is not to be accounted any sovereign, but a
plain officer, or leiutenant, regent, governor, or John of France, led
prisoner into England, after his return thence, solemnly ratified all the acts
of Charles the Dolphin, his eldest son, made regent in his absence, to
strengthen and confirm the same, so far as should be convenient and
needful. Be it then that a man either by commission, or institution, or by
delegation, for a certain Hector Boet. in hist. Scot.
stronger than election. As by an ancient law amongst the Scots, the entire
government of the kingdom was committed unto him that was nearest of blood
unto the king in his minority, or under the age of xxv years, yet with charge
that all things should be done in the kings name: which law was long ago
abrogated, for the danger might grow unto the young king, by his nigh kinsmen
affecting the kingdom: for which, Caesar thought it lawful for a man to
become villainous.

Now let us prosecute the other part of our propounded definition, and show
what these words, Absolute power, signify. For we said that unto Majesty, or
Sovereignty Unto sovereignty belongs absolute power, and what that absolute
power is.
belongs an absolute power, not subject to any law. For the people or the
lords of a Commonweal, may purely and simply give the sovereign and
perpetual power to any one, to dispose of the goods and lives, and of all the
state at his pleasure: and so afterward to leave it to whom he list: like as
the proprietarie or owner may purely and simply give his own goods, without
any other cause to be expressed, than of his own mere bounty; which is
indeed the true donation, which no more receives condition, being once
accomplished and perfected: as for the other donations, which carry with The
form of choosing the great king of Tartarie.
of one of the kinsmen of the dead king, which they think best of (provided
that he be either his son or his nephew) and having placed him in a throne of
gold, the bishop (after a solemn song sung according to the manner of their
ancestors) turning his speech unto the king, in the name of the people, says
thus, We pray thee, and charge Look up unto heaven and acknowledge almighty
God, the king of the whole world: and behold also this table whereon thou
sit below: if thou rule well, thou shall have althings according to thy
hearts desire; but if thou forget thy duty and calling, thou shall be cast
headlong down from thy high seat, and dispotled of thy regal power and
wealth, be brought so low, as that thou shall not have so much as this board
left thee to sit upon. This said, he is lifted up on high, and by all the
people proclaimed king of the Tartars. This so great a power given by the
people unto the king, may well be called absolute and sovereign, for that it
has no condition annexed thereunto, other than is by the law of God and nature
commanded.

The same or like form of inuesting we may also see to have been sometimes
used in The form of inuesting the duke of Carinthia.
realms and principalities, descending by succession. But the like is not to
that of Carinthia, where yet at this present near unto the city of St. Vitus,
in a meddow is to be seen a marble stone, whereunto a country pesant unto
whom that office of right belonged, Who is that (says he) that comes
marching so proudly? whereunto the people answer, That it is their prince:
then demands he, Is he a just judge? seeks he the good of his country?
is he free borne? is he worthy of that honor? and withal religious? He is,
says the people, and so shall hereafter be. Then the peasant giving the duke a
Anno. 133^.
time the duke of Carinthia was the emperors greatest Huntsman: but since that
the empire fell into the house of Austria, whereunto that dukedom belonged,
both the name of the Great Huntsman, and the old manner of inuesting the duke
grew out of use, and the duchies

As for those things which are reported concerning the inuesting of the king of
Arragon, The manner of crowning of the kings of Arragon.
they are long since grown out of use; but this we have heard them to have
wont to be done: The great magistrate of Arragon, whom they call the Chief
Justice, thus said unto the king: We which are unto thee in virtue nothing
inferior, and in power greater than thy self, create thee our king; yet with
this condition, that one amongst us shall still have more power and command
than thy self. Wherein he is deceived that so writes, the king to have been
then chosen of the people; a thing that never was there done. For Sanctius the
Great by force of arms drove the Moors out Peter Belluga, who most exactly
writ of the kingdom of Arragon, denies the people to have any right in
choosing the king; but when the line of the king utterly saileth. That were also
a new and more absurd thing, that the king of Arragon should have less power
than the states of Arragon, seeing that the same author Belluga says, That the
states might not assemble themselves without the kings express commandment;
neither being assembled, might depart without leave given them from the king.
That were also more absurd and ridiculous, that such speech should be used by
the magistrate, unto him that was now crowned, sacred, and received a king by
right Martin Didato the greatest magistrate, to have been placed in that office
by the queen of Aragon, in the absence of Alphonsus her husband, king of
Arragon and Sicilia; and also by her again discharged of the same office. And
albeit that by sufference of the king, that great magistrate or justice of
Arragon, determines of the process and controversies betwixt the king and his
people: as it is also in England sometime by the high court of Parliament, and
sometime by the magistrate, whom they call the Lord Chief Justice of England,
and by all the judges of this viz. France.
realm, and in all places: yet nevertheless so it is, that the great justice
of Arragon, and all the estates remain in full subjection to the king, who is
no ways bound Oldard, speaking of the kings of France and Spain, Who have
(says he) absolute power. Yet true it is, that none of these doctors tell us,
what absolute power is. For if we shall say, that he only has absolute
power, which is subject unto no law; there should then be no sovereign prince
in the world, seeing that all princes of the earth are subject unto the laws
of God, of nature, and of nations.

So to the contrary it may be, that some one subject may be dispensed withal,
and That a subject may be dispensed withal from all the laws and customs of
his Commonweal, yet be neither prince nor sovereign.
absolved from all the laws, ordinances, and customs of his Commonweal, and
commandment of the magistrate; and yet be neither prince, nor sovereign.
Example Pompey the great, who was dispensed withal from the laws for five
years, by express decree of the people, published at the request of of
Gabinius the Tribune, at such time as extraordinary power was given him to
make war against the pirates: neither is it any new thing or strange thing to
dispense with a subject for his obedience to the laws, seeing that the Senate
sometimes so dispensed without the consent of the people: until the law
Cornelia published at the request of a Tribune, whereby it was ordained, That
no person should be exempted out of the power of the laws, nor dispensed
withal by the Senate, if he had not at the least the consent of two hundred
Senators. For by the law of the twelve tables, it was forbidden upon pain of
death Augustus, who although he was the prince of the people of Rome, that is
to say, the chief in that Commonweal, yet faigning himself to be inferior
to the people in general, he oftentimes propounded questions unto the people,
as if the people, and not Augustus, should make the laws: and at the choosing
of magistrates, would shake the citisens by the hands, that so he might commend
them that stood for the offices unto the people. But it behooves him that is a
sovereign not to Tiberius wisely meaning in these words, reasoned in the Senate
concerning the right of sovereignty, saying that The reason of his doings were
no otherwise to be manifested, than in that it was to be given A sovereign
prince is not bound to give a reason of his doings.
to none: whose office it is to give laws unto his subjects, to abrogat laws
unprofitable, and in their stead to establish other: which he cannot do that
is himself subject unto laws, or to others which have command over him. And
that is it for which the law says, That the prince is acquitted from the power
of the laws: and this word the Law, in the Latin imports the commandment
of him which has the sovereignty. We also see that unto all edicts and
decrees there is annexed this clause, Notwithstanding all edicts and ordinances
whereunto we have derogated, and do derogat by these presents: a clause which
has always been joined unto the ancient laws, were the law published by the
present prince, or by his predecessors. For it is certain, that That the
laws, letters pattents, priueleges, grants of princes have no force, but
during the life of the princes that granted them.
the laws, ordinances, letters pattents, priueleges, and grants of princes,
have no force, but during their life, if they be not rati^by the express
consent, or at least by sufferance of the prince following, who had knowledge
there of, and especially of the priueleges. As when Bartolus was sent
ambassador unto Charles the fourth, the German emperor, for the confirmation
of the priueleges of the city of Perouze, he obtained the same, yet with
condition, That they should so long have force, until they were revoked by the
succeeding emperors: unto whom for all that, no prejudice could have been
done, although that clause had not been put to: which was the cause that
Michael Del Hospital chauncelour of France, constantly refused, yea even at
the request of the queen, to seal the privileges by Charles the ix. granted
unto St. Maur des Fossez, for that they carried with them a perpetual
enfranchisment and immunitie from taxes, which is contrary to the nature of
personal priueledges, and tended to the diminishing of the power of his
successors, and could not be given unto corporations or colleges, which live
for ever, but for the life of the prince that granted them only, although the
word (perpetual) were thereunto adjoined. Which for all that if they were
granted unto corporations or colleges, by a popular or Aristocraticall state,
must needs be for ever, or at leastwise so long as that popular or
Aristocraticall state should continue. And for this cause Tiberius the
emperor, successor to Augustus, viz. France.
realm, that at the coming of new kings, colleges and corporations require to
have their priueleges, power, and jurisdiction confirmed; yea the very
parliaments and sovereign courts, as well as other particular officers.

If then the sovereign prince be exempted from the laws of his predecessors,
much less should he be bound unto the laws and ordinances he makes himself:
for a man may well receive a law from another man, but impossible it is in
nature for to give A sovereign prince is not subject unto the laws and
ordinances that he himself makes
a law unto himself, no more than it is to command a man's self in a matter
depending of his own will: For as the law says, Nulla obligatio consistere
potest, quae a voluntate promittentis statum capit, There can be no obligation,
which takes state from the mere will of him that promises the same: which is
a necessary reason to prove evidently that a king or sovereign prince cannot
be subject to his own laws. And as the Pope can never bind his own hands (as
the Canonists say;) so neither can a sovereign prince bind his own hands,
albeit that he would. We see also in the end of all edicts and laws, these
words, Quia sic nobis placuit, Because it has so pleased us: to give us to
understand, that the laws of a sovereign prince, although they be grounded
upon good and lively reasons, depend nevertheless upon nothing but his mere
All princes and people are subject unto the laws of God and nature.
of the world are unto them subject: neither is it in their power to impugn
them, if will not be guilty of high treason to the divine majesty, making
warte against God; under the greatness of whom all monarchs of the world
ought to bear the yoke, and to bow their heads in all fear and reverence.
Wherefore in that we said the sovereign power in a Commonweal to be free
from all laws, concerns nothing the laws of God and nature. For amongst the
Popes, Innocentius Quartus.
he that of all others best knew the laws of majesty or sovereignty, and
had almost brought under him the power of all the Christian emperors and
princes, said him to be indeed a sovereign that was able to derogat from the
ordinary right (which is as I understand it, from the laws of his

But further question maybe, Whether a prince be a subject to the laws of his
Whether ^ prince be subiict unto the laws of his country that he has sworn
to keep, or not.
country, that he has sworn to keep, or not? wherein we must distinguish.
If the prince swear unto himself, That he will keep his law: he is no more
bound to his law, than by the oath made unto himself: For the subjects
themselves are not any way bound by oath, which they make in their mutual
conuentions, if the covenants be such as from which they may by law shrink,
although they be both honest and reasonable. But if a sovereign prince promise
by oath to keep the laws which he or his predecessors have made, he is bound
to keep them, if the prince unto whom he has so given his word have therein
any intrest; yea although he have not sworn at bound, but not so unto other
laws: and yet nevertheless they confess that the prince The word of a prince
ought to be as an Oracle.
have the law kept. For the word of a prince ought to be as an Oracle; which
loses his dignity, if his subjects have so evil an opinion of him, as not
to believe him except he swear; or else to be so covetous, as not to regard
his promise except therefore he receive money. And yet nevertheless the maxim
of right still stands in force, That the sovereign prince may derogat unto
the laws that he has promised and sworn to keep, if the equity thereof
ceased, and that of himself without consent The reason of the law ceasing, the
law it self ought also to cease.
of his subjects: yet true it is, that a general obscure or doubtful
derogation, in this case Alphonsus, for that he for gain had altered and
changed the money of Arragon, to the great prejudice of the subjects, and
merchants strangers, contrary to the promise made by James the first, king of
Arragon, in the year 1265, in the month of August, and confirmed by king
Peter, in the year 1336, who swore unto the estates never to change the
money; in recompense whereof the people had

We must not then confound the laws and the contracts of sovereign princes,
for Sovereign prin ces no^ bound unto their laws* may yet by their contracts
bind themselves unto their subjects.
that the law depends of the will and pleasure of him that has the
sovereignty, who may bind all his subjects, but cannot bind himself: but the
contract betwixt the prince and his subjects is mutual, which reciprocally
binds both parties, so that the one party Whether Sovereign princes well
advised, ought to bind themselves by oath to keep the laws of their
predecessors.
will never take oath to keep the laws of their predecessors; for otherwise
they are not sovereigns. But then might some man say, Why does the German
emperor, who has a pre-eminence above all other Christian kings, before he be
crowned swear betwixt the hands of the archbishop of Cullen, to keep the laws
of the empire, the golden Bull, to establish justice, to revenge the pope, to
keep the catholic faith, to Charles the fifth bound himself when he was
crowned, cardinal Caietan is said to have sent unto the pope, whose legate he
then was in Germany. Whereunto I answer, that the emperor is subject unto
the states of the empire; neither takes upon him the sovereignty over the
princes electours, nor over the estates; as we shall in due place declare. And
if a man say, That the kings of the Epirots in ancient time swore, that they
should reign well and orderly according to the laws and customs of the
country, and the subjects also on their part swore to defend and maintain
their king, according to the laws and customs of their country: I say yet
notwithstanding Iuliani ad Erigium Regem Anno 1058 Henrico Regnante 32 iiij.
Calend. Iunij. Ego Philippus Deo propiciante mox futurus Rex The oath of Phi
lip the first, son to Henry the first, king of France, at the time of his
Coronation.
Francorum, in die ordinationis meae promitto coram Deo and sanctis eius, quod
vnicuique de nobis commissis canonicum priuilegium, and debitam legem atque
iustitiam conseruabo, and defensionem adi^uante Domino quantum potero exhibebo:
sicut Rex in suo regno vnicuique Episcopo and Ecclesiae sibi commisse per
rectum exhibere debet: populo quoque nobis credito, me dispensationem legum in
suo iure consistentem, nostra auctoritate concessurum. viz. The book of Julian
Erigius, Anno 1058, in the xxxij. year of the reign of Henry the first, the
fourth of the calends of June. I Philip, by the grace of God forthwith to
become king of France, on the day of my inuesting, do promise before God and
his Saints, that I will keep canonical privilege, with due administration of
law and justice, to every one committed to our charge: and by the help of God
to the uttermost of my power defend them, in such manner as a king in his
kingdom ought of right to give unto every bishop and church committed unto
him: and by our authority to grant unto the people committed unto us, the
execution of the laws remaining in force. I Philip the first: but I have seen
another in a little ancient book in the Abbay of S. Allier in Auergne, in
these words; Ie iure au nom de Deiu tout puissant, and promets de gouuerner
bien et deuement les subjects commis en ma guard, and fair de tout mon pouuoir
judgment, justice, et misericorde: I swear by the name of the Almighty God,
and promise well and duly to govern my subjects committed to my charge: and
with all my power to do them judgment, justice, and mercy. Which seems to
have been taken from the prophet Hieremie, where he says, I am the great
eternal Chap. 9.
God, which do judgment, justice, and mercy; and in which things I take
singular pleasure. Which forms of oaths show plainly unto the eye, that the
oaths contained in the Sacre Du Roy, are much changed and altered from the
ancient form. But both in the one and the other oath, a man may see that
there is not any bond for the sovereign prince to keep the laws, more than
so far as right and justice requires. Neither is it to be found that the
ancient kings of the Hebrews took any oath: no not they which were anointed
by Samuel, Helias and others. But some take a more precise oath, such as is the
oath of Henry the 3 king of France, and of Polonia. Ego Henricus Rex Poloniae,
etc. Iuro Deo omnipotenti, quod omnia iura, libertates, priuilegia publica and
priuata iuri communi non contraria, Ecclesijs, The ancient Hebrew kings not
sworn when they were anointed by the Prophet^.
principibus, Baronibus, nobilibus, ciuibus, incolis, per meos praedecessores
Reges, and quoscumque principes Dominos, Regni Poloniae just concessa, and
quae in interregno decreta sunt seruabo, iusque omnibus incolis more maiorum
reddam. Ac si quidem (quod absit) Sacramentum meum violauero nullam nobis
incolae Regni obedientiam praestare tenebuntur, etc. sic Deus adiuuet. viz. I
Henry king of Polonia, etc. Swear unto almighty God, that I will keep all
the laws, liberties, public and private priueleges, not contrary to the
common law, justly granted unto churches, princes, barrons, noble men*
citisens, or inhabitants, by the kings my predecessors, or whatsoever other
princes, lords of the kingdom of Polonia: as also all such things as were
decreed in the time of the vacancie of the kingdom: and that I will administer
justice unto all the inhabitants of this kingdom, after the manner of our
auneestours: And if I shall violat this mine

But touching the laws which concern the state of the realm, and the
establishing thereof; forasmuch as they are annexed and united to the crown,
the prince cannot derogat Laws royal which concern the state of the realm
not to be^ infringed by a soueraign prince.
from them, such as is the law Salique: and albeit that he so do, the successor
may always disanull that which has been done unto the prejudice of the laws
royal; upon which the sovereign majesty is stayed and grounded. Yet might
one say, That Henry the 5, king of England and France, marying Katherine of
France, sister to Charles the 7, John duke of Burgoigne, which was by sound of
trumpet pronounced at the marble table in the presence of the princes. But as
for general and particular laws and customs, which concern not the
establishing of the state of the realm, but the right of men in Parliaments
impair not, but most of all show the majesty and greatness of a soueraign
prince
may not do the contrary to that they demand, if natural reason and justice
so require. And in that the greatness and majesty of a true sovereign
prince, is to be known; when the estates of all the people assembled
together, in all humility present their requests and supplications to their
prince., without having any power in any thing to command or determine, or to
give voice, but that that which it pleases the king to like or dislike of, to
command or forbid, is holden for law, for an edict and ordinance. Wherein they
which have written of the duty of magistrates, and other such like books,
Charles the eight, the French king, being then but about xiiij. years old, held
a parliament at Tours, although the power of the parliament was never before
The parlements of France.
no^ after so great as in those times, yet Relli, then speaker for the people,
turning himself unto the king, thus begins his oration, which is yet in
print extant. Most* high, most mighty, and most Christian king, our natural
and only lord, we your humble and obedient subjects, etc. Which are come
hither by your command, in all humility reverence and subjection present our
selves before you, etc. And have given me in charge from all this noble
assembly, to declare unto you the good will and hearty desire they have with a
most firm resolution and purpose to serve, obey, and aid you in all your
affairs, commandments and pleasures. In brief, all that his oration and
speech is nothing else but a declaration of all their good wills toward the
king, and of their humble obedience and loialtie. The like speech almost we see
was also used in the parliament at Orleans* unto king Charles the ninth, when
he was yet but scarce eleven years old. Neither are the parliaments of Spain
otherwise holden, but that even a greater obedience and a Philip, in the year
1552, when he was yet scarce full xxv* years old. The aunswers also of the
king of Spain unto the The parliament of Spain.
requests and humble supplications of his people, are given in these words, We
will; or else, We decree and ordain; and such other like aunsweres, importing
the refusal or consent of the prince: yea the subsidy that the subjects pay
unto the king of Spain, they call service. Whereby it appears them to be
deceived, which say that the kings of Arragon cannot derogat from the
priueledges of the states, by reason of the priueleges given them by king
James, in the year 1260, and confirmed in the year 1320. For as the
priueleges was of no force after the death of the king, without the
confirmation The parliaments of England.
1566, when the estates by a common consent had resolved (as they gave the
queen to understand) not to entreat of any thing, until she had first
appointed who should succeed he^ in the crown: She gave them no other
answer, But that they were not to make her grave before she were dead. All
whose resolutions were to no purpose without Dale, the English ambassador, an
honorable gentleman D. Dale.
and a man of good understanding, who yet assured me, that the king received or
rejected the law as seemed best unto himself: and stuck not to dispose thereof
at his pleasure, and contrary to the will of the estates: as we see Henry the
eight to have always used his sovereign power, and with his only word to
have disanulled the decrees of parliament* albeit that the kings of England are
not otherwise crowned, but that they must swear inuiolatly to keep the laws
and customs of the land: which how that oath is to be understood, I refer
you to that which we have before reported. But here might some object and say*
That the estates of England suffer not any extraordinary charges and subsidies
to be laid upon them, if it be not first agreed upon and consented Edward the
first, king of England, wherewith the people as with a buckler has been
oftentimes seen to defend it self against the prince. Whereunto mine answer
is, That other kings have in this point no more power than the kings of
England: for that it is not in the power of any prince in the world, at his
pleasure to raise taxes upon the people, no more than to take another man's
goods from him; as Philip Commines wisely showed in the parliament holden at
Tours, as weread in his Comentaries: and yet nevertheless if the necessity of
the Commonweal be such as cannot stay for the calling of a parliament, in that
case the prince ought not to expect the assembly of the states, neither the
consent of the people; of whose good foresiight and wisdom, next Henry the
first (as we read in Polidore) have as it were always accustomed every third
year to demand of the people an extraordinary subsidy, which is for the
most part granted. As in the parliament holden in April, in the year 1570,
the queen of England by the consent of the estates, drew from them five
hundred thousand crowns (as the like whereof is sometime also used to be done
in Spain) from which manner of tribute she had now many years before
abstained. Now here might some object also, That the estates of England have
power to condemn, Polydor. in hist. Anglor^.
as king Henry the sixth was condemned by the estates, to be kept prisoner in
the

But yet there remains another difficulty to resolve upon, concerning the
aforesaid estates of England, who seemed to have power to command, resolve,
and decide of the affairs of state. For queen Marie having assembled them for
the passing of the articles of agreement concerning the mar^iage with king
Philip: after many disputes and difficulties proposed, in fine, the conclusion
of the treaty was made the second day of April in the year 1554, in form of
a decree conceived in the name of the estates, in these words: The articles
aforesaid, and that which depends thereof, seen and considered of, by the
estates assembled in parliament, holden at the palace of Westminster, it has
been said, That concerning the disposition and collation of all benefices and
offices, they are reserved unto the queen; as also of all the fruits, profits,
to none effect. I have willingly set down the ratification at large, to show
that the

So we see the principal point of sovereign majesty, and absolute power, to
consist The principal point of sovereignty.
principally in giving laws unto the subjects in general, without their
consent. And not to speak of strange countries, we have oftentimes seen in
this realm of France Laws in France altered by the prince, without the
assembling or consent of the (...).
certain general customs abolished by the edicts of our kings, without the
assembling or consent of the estates: when the injustice of the same is
plainly to be seen; as the custom of this realm, commonly used in every
place, concerning the succession of mothers unto the goods of their children,
has been changed without assembling of the estates, either in general or
particular. Which changing of customs is no new thing, for since the time of
Philip the fair, the custom general in this realm, which suffered not him
that was overthrown in suit, to be condemned in charges also, was Charles the
sixth, without calling together of the estates. For it behooves that the
sovereign prince should have the laws in his power, to change and amend
them, according as the case shall require; as says the lawyer Sextus Cecilius:
even as the master pilot ought to have the helm always in his hand, at
discretion to turn it as the wether or occsion requires: for otherwise the
ship might oftentimes perish before he could take advice of them whom he did
carry. Which is a thing necessary, not only unto a sovereign prince, but
sometimes unto a magistrate also, the necessity of the Commonweal so
requiring, as we have said of Pompee, and of the Decemuiri. And Augustus after
he had overthrown Marcus Antonius at Actium, was by the Senate absolved from
the power of the laws, albeit that he as then was but chief of the
Commonweal, and no sovereign prince, as we shall in due place declare. And
after that Vespatian the emperor was also exempted from the power of the
laws, not by the Senate only, but only by the express law of the people as
many think, and as yet it is to be found engraven in marble in Rome: which the
lawyer calls the law Royal, howbeit that it has no great probability, that
the people which long time before had lost al their power, should give it to
him that was stronger than themselves.

Now if it be profitable that the sovereign prince, for the good government of
an Saturnius the Tribune of the people, that so he might the more straightly
bind the Senators to the laws by him made: which Dio Nicaeus writes to have
been afterward done in all laws. But it is one thing to bind all together, and
to bind every one in particular: for so all the citisens particularly swore to
the observation of the laws, but not all together; for that every one of them
in particular was bound unto the power of them all in general. But an oath
could not be given by them all: for why, the people in general is a certain
universal body, in power and nature An oath cannot be made but by the lesser
to the greater.
made but by the lesser to the greater, but in a popular estate nothing can be
greater than the whole body of the people themselves. But in a monarchy it is
otherwise, where every one in particular, and all the people in general, and
(as it were) in one body, must swear to the observation of the laws, and
their faithful allegiance to one sovereign monarch; who next unto God (of
whom he holds his scepter and power) is bound to no man. For an oath
carries always with it reverence unto whom, or in whose name it is made, as
still given unto a superior: and therefore the vassal gives his oath unto
his lord, but receives none from him again, although that they be mutually
bound the one of them unto the other.

But if it be so, that a sovereign prince next under God, is not by oath bound
unto any, why did Traian the emperor standing upright, before the Consul
sitting, solemnly swear to the keeping of the laws? That seems to have
been so done by him for two causes, the one, for that having gotten the
Consulship, together with his principality, he swore as the Consuls did at
their entrance into their Consulship; as also all the new magistrates did the
first of January, after they had sacrificed in the Capitol: The other reason
was, for that the Roman emperors at the first had not any sovereign power,
but were only called princes, that is to say, the chief men in the
Commonweal; which for me of a Commonweal, is called a principality, and not
a monarchy: A principality no Monarch.
but a principality is called a certain form of an Aristocratie, wherein one
is in honor Caligula the cruel tyrant, The Roman emperors for most part
tyrants.
who having bid certain forten kings and allies of the people of Rome to
supper, and question there at the table arising about their honor and
greatness; he to stay their strife, rapt out this verse, taken out of Homers
Iliades;

(...).

Good it is not to be ruled by many,
One king, one lord, if there be any.
And it missed but a little (as says Suetonius) but that he had even then
changed Sueton. in Caligula.
his principality into a monarchy, and set a crown upon his own head. For
in a principality the prince or chief magistrate, who is above the rest, is
yet no sovereign; as we shall hereafter show in the Commonweals of the
Venetians, and of the Germans. And albeit that many of the Roman emperors, had
taken upon them the sovereignty, and by diverse sleights wrested from the
people their liberty; yet nevertheless it was no Why Traian and some other
good princes have sworn to observe and keep the laws.
marvel if Traian, one of the best princes that ever lived in the world, swore
(as is aforesaid) Pliny the younger, who in a pannegiricall oration, set forth
the praises of that most worthy prince, speaking of the oath of Traian, cries
out in this sort, A great novelty (says he) and never before heard of, he
swears by whom we swear. And after that in the declination of the empire,
Theodoric desirous to gain the favor of the Senate and people of Rome,
followed the example of Traian, as we read in Cassiodore, Ecce Traiani nostri
clarum seculis reparamus exemplum; jurat vobis per quem iuratis, Behold (says
he) we renew the example of our Traian, famous through Frederick, in the month
of August, in the year 1559, until that he had solemnly sworn that he should
not put any noble man to death, or confiscat his goods, until he were judged
by the Senate; and that all noble men should have jurisdiction and power of life
and death over their subjects, without appeal; and that the king should have
no part in their fines or confiscation of their goods; and also that the king
should not give any office without consent Frederick this man's grandfather, at
such time as he made war against Christierne king of Denmark (who was driven
out of his kingdom, and after long banishment returning, at length died in
prison, wherein he had lived twenty five years) and was afterward confirmed
by Christierne father of Frederick, who took the same oath. And to the end he
should not violat, or break the same, the nobility to that purpose treated a
league with the town of Lubec, and Sigismundus Augustus king of Polonia, who
also himself seems not to have much more power over his own subjects than
has the king of Denmark over his.

But of two things the one must be: that is to wit, the prince that swears to
keep Two great inconveniences ensu ing unto sovereign princes by swearing to
observe the laws.
the laws of his country, must either not have the sovereignty; or else
become a perjured man, if he shall abrogat but one law, contrary unto his
oath: whereas it is not only profitable that a sovereign prince should
sometimes abrogat some such laws, but also necessary for him to alter or
correct them, as the infinite variety of places, times, and persons shall
require. Or if we shall say the prince to be still a sovereign, and yet
nevertheless with such condition, as that he can make no law without the
advice of his counsel or people; he must also be dispensed with by his
subjects, for the oath that he has made for the inuiolat observation of the
laws; and the subjects again which are Examples to prove that laws once made
and established, may not by them that have the sovereignty be again changed.
we will by examples make manifest that before said. We read it thrice
repeated in Dan. that by the customs of the Medes and Persians, the laws by
their kings made, were immutable and irreuocable; and albeit that the king of
the Medes would have exempted the Prophet Daniel, from the punishment of death,
which by the edict which he had Daniel was accordingly condemned unto the
beasts, and so cast unto the hungry lions. If then the greatest monarch upon
earth could not derogat from the laws by himself made; the grounds of
majesty and sovereignty by us before laid, must needs fail: and that not
only in a monarchy, but in a popular state also: as was that of Athens,
whereof Thucydides speaking, shows that the war of Peloponesus The laws of
the Athenians to be changed.
began for a law made by the Athenians, whereby the Megariens were forbidden to
come into the port of Athens; wherein the Megariens complained unto their
allies Pericles then in greatest grace and authority with the people,
answered the ambassodours, That by the express laws of their ancestors,
the laws once made and confirmed by the people, and so hanged up upon the
common pillar, might never be taken away. Which if it were so* the people was
bound not to their own laws only, but even to the laws of their
predecessors also. And that more is, Theodosius the emperor would not that
the laws by himself made, should be of any force, except they were confirmed
by the general decree of the whole Senate. In like manner also by the decree of
Jews the eleventh, the French king, Polydore.
ancient custom received, that laws concerning the state of the Commonweal
should take no place, except they were authorized by the Estates assembled in
the high

These reasons, although they seem probable, yet are they not sufficient to
prove the rule concerning Soueraignetie, before by us set down, not to be
true: For, as for The former reasons answered.
that which was objected concerning the law of the Medes, and authority of the
king in abrogating of the laws; it is manifest that it was false, and by the
courtiers his enemies devised against the life of Daniel: who grieuing to see a
man for his wisdom and royal descent honorable, and yet a stranger, to be in
greater grace and favor with the king than themselves, and exalted in their
country in degree next unto the king, made that false allegation of the
strength of their laws against him, with whose accusation the king deceived,
or else to prove if Daniels God could save him from death, caused Daniels
enemies to be devoured of the same lions: wherein the end well showed, the
king to have been above the laws of his country. In like sort Darius Memnon
at the request of a young Jewish lady revoked Ahashuerosh Hester.
the decree whereby he had appointed all the nation of the Jews to be utterly
rooted out. As for that which Pericles answered unto the ambassadors of the
Lacedaemonians, he therein respected not so much the truth, as the show thereof,
that so taking occasion of war, which he sought after, he might frustrate the
accusations of his adversaries, and danger of the law, as Timaeus and
Theopompus have truly written, and Plutarch has not denied. And that was it
for which he said to the Lacedemonian Pericles therein abused the Lacedemonian
ambassadors, it is manifest by the oration of Demosthenes against Leptines, who
had preferred a request unto the people, to the end that by a perpetual and
irreuocable edict it might from that time forward be forbidden upon pain of
death, to present any request unto Demosthenes hardly withstood Leptines, and
so wrought the matter, that his request was received, having manifestly showed
the people by consenting to this law, to be dispoiled not only of the
prerogative that it had to grant exemptions and priueledges to such as should
well deserve of them, but also of the power to abrogat laws by them made, if
the necessity of the Commonweal should so require. They had also a popular
action, concerning the breaking of laws, which was commenced against them that
would have the people to pass any edict contrary to the laws before
received; as one may see in all the orations of Demosthenes: but yet that never
let, but that the Pericles himself, and another time in favor of Cleomides
and Demosthenes, who by di^ers judgments of the people, had been every one of
them condemned in a fine of Plut* in Peri.
thirty thousand crowns. They say also in this realm of France, the fine
once being paid, be it right or be it wrong, is never Demetri. Demost.
again to be restored: and yet we see oftentimes the contrary, and the same
to be again recovered. It is then a formalitie which is and has always
been in every Edicto perpetuo and irreuocabili sancimus, etc. By a perpetual
and irreuocable decree we ordain. And with us in the beginning The clause of
perpetuity why annexed unto laws, and yet n^ laws perpetual.
of every law, Vniuersis praesentibus and futuris: which words are added to the
eternal memory of posterity, least the law should by any be infringed. And
the more to show the difference of the laws, such as be made for perpetuity,
are with us sealed with green wax, and strings of green and purple silk:
whereas unto the temporary Edicts are put neither strings of silk, nor green
wax, but yellow only. And yet for all this, there is no law which is
perpetual, no more than were those of the Greeks and Romans, who in making
their laws, commonly used to join thereunto this Vt nec per Senatum, nec per
populum, lex infirmari possit: That the law might not either by the Senate or
the people be weakened: which words if they imported a perpetuity, why did
the people almost in the same moment that it had established a law, again
abrogate the same. Concerning which matter, Cicero writing unto his friend
Atticus: Thou know (says he) the Tribune Claudius to have decreed that his
law should hardly, or not at all, by the Senate or the people be infringed. But
it is sufficiently known that regard was never had unto this clause: Vt nec
per Senatum nec per populum lex infirmari possit: for otherwise (says he) one
should never see law repealed, seeing that there is no law which carries not
this clause with it: from which men yet do ordinarily derogate. Thus much he.
Which is yet more plainly to be understood out of the Oration Fabius Ambustus
against the intercession of the Tribunes of the people, who maintained, that
the people could not choose both the Consuls of the nobility, for that by a law
before made it was ordained, That one of the Consuls should be still chosen out
of the people: Fabius alleged the law of the twelve Tables in these words,
Quod postremum iussit populus id ratum esto, What the people shall last decree,
let that stand for good.

So we see the Medes, the Persians, the Greeks, the Latins, to have used the
same form and cautions, for the establishing of their edicts and laws, that
our kings do: who unto the laws by them made, oftentimes join this clause:
Without that therefrom can by us, or our successors be derogated. Or else,
without regard having unto any derogation, which from this present we have
declared to be of none effect. And yet no man can so make a law unto himself,
but that he may depart therefrom, as we have before said. Wherefore the
repeales and derogations of the former edicts and laws, are almost alwaie
subject unto the latter edicts and derogations. And therefore Solon did wisely,
who would not bind the Athenians to keep his laws for ever, but contented
himself to have them kept for an hundred years: and yet nevertheless he yet
living, * Plut. in Sol.
and present, suffered (though against his will) the greatest part of them to
be changed.

But that publication or approbation of laws in the assembly of the Estates or
parliament, is with us of great power and importance for the keeping of the
laws; not Theodosius, which The sovereign prince more of courtesy than of
neces^itie bound to observe the laws.
Baldus enterpreted not to be a thing so much of necessity, as of courtesy:
as that is also a speech well beseeming sovereign majesty, for a prince to
profess himself bound unto the laws of himself that reigns. And certainly
there is nothing better, or more beseeming a prince, than by his deeds and life
to confirm those laws which he himself has made: for that is of greatest
force, for the honor and obedience of the subjects toward their prince: as
contrariwise nothing is more dangerous for the Leuius est, and vanius, sua
decreta tollere quam aliorum, It is more lightness and vanity Liuius lib. 3.
to take away a man's own decrees, than the decrees of other men. But it is one
thing for a man so to do willingly and of his own accord, and another thing
to be bound by bond or oath so to do it.

But what if a prince by law forbid to kill or to steal, is he not bound to
obey his All princes bound and subject unto the laws of God and nature, and to
their own just conuentions.
own laws? I say that this law is not his, but the law of God and nature,
whereunto all princes are more straightly bound than their subjects: in such sort
as that they cannot be from the same exempted, either by the Senate, or the
people, but that they must be Solomon himself a king, has most truly
written. Whereunto well agrees that saying of Marcus Aurelius, who for his
desire of knowledge, was called the Philosopher: The magistrates are judges over
private men, princes judge the magistrates, and God the princes. This is the
opinion of 2 great princes, esteemed of all other the wisest; unto whom we will
join the third, Antigonus king of Asia, who hearing a flatterer say, that al
things were lawful for kings: Yea, said he, forbarbarous kings and tyrants.
The first that used this kind of flatrerie, was Anaxarchus toward Alexander
the Great, whom he made to believe, That the goddess Justice, was still at
the right hand of Jupiter, to show that Seneca say to the contrary, Caesaricum
omnia licent, propter hoc minus licet, When all things are unto Caesar lawful,
even for that are they less lawful. And therefore they that generally say,
that princes are not subject unto laws, nor to their own conuentions, if they
except not the laws of God and nature, and the just contracts and conuentions
made with them, they do great wrong both unto God and nature, in that they make
not the special exemption to appear; as men say in matters of priueleges. So
Dionisius the tyrant of Sicilie, said to his mother, That he could dispense Si
quid ius non esset E. E. L. N. R. eius ea lege nihilem rogaretur, that is to
say, That if any thing were therein contained that was not just and reasonable,
they by that law requested nothing. But of all others they are most absurd,
which say, That a

There rests yet another objection, by them objected which with more reason
An objection that princes are bound to the civil laws.
examine matters. If princes (say they) be bound unto the lawss of nature, that
is to say, of upright reason: and that civil laws be (in all things)
agreeable unto right and reason, it must needs thereof follow, that the prince
is also bound unto the civil laws. And Pacutius unto Theodosius the emperor,
Tantum tibi licet quantum per leges licebit, So much is lawful for thee to do,
as thou may by law do. For the plainer aunswering of which doubt, we must
thus distinguish: That The answer, declaring to what laws a prince is bound,
and to what laws not.
the laws of a sovereign prince, whereof question is made, concern either
that which is public, or private, or common to both: and generally when
question is, it is either of that which is profitable and not honest, or of
that which is honest and not profitable, or is both profitable and honest; or
else of that which is neither of both. And that I call honest, which is agreeing
unto the equity of nature; unto which natural equity it is manifest all
princes to be bound, seeing that which nature teaches, is altogether
comprehended in the law of nature, whereunto every prince is bound to obey:
neither Aristides the just, to whom Themistocles was commanded to communicate
his device, answered, That the counsel of Themistocles was profitable to the
Commonweal; but yet in his strangers, in letting them have part of such good
things as it has pleased God to

But so sometimes things fall out, as that the law may be good, just, and
reasonable, A law may be good, just, and reasonable, and yet the prince no way
subject or bound thereunto.
and yet the prince to be no way subject or bound thereunto: as if he should
forbid all his subjects, except his guard and garrison soldiers, upon pain of
death to carry weapon, so to take away the fears of murders and seditions; he
in this case ought not to be subject to his own law, but to the contrary, to
be well armed for the defense of the good, and punishment of the evil. The
same we may say of other edicts and laws

Out of this resolution we may draw another rule of estate, that is to wit,
that the sovereign That a soue* prince is bound to his own contracts, as well
as other men be.
prince is bound unto the contracts by him made, be it with his subject, or
with a stranger: for seeing he is the warrant to his subjects of the mutual
conuentions and obligations that they have one of them against another: of how
much more reason is he the debtor of justice in his own fact, and so bound to
keep the faith and Charles the ix, in the month of March, in the year 1563,
That his majesty alone could not break the contract made betwixt him and the
clergy, without the consent of the clergy; and that for this reason, For that
he was himself the debtor of justice, and so bound to give every man his
right. Which puts me in remembrance of a resolution concerning the upright
dealing of princes, worthy to be engraven in letters of gold, in their lodgings
and palaces; which is, That it ought to be accounted amongst things which by
chance seldom happen, if a prince fail of his promise; A notable saying.
and that it is not otherwise to be presumed. For that of his promise there is
a double bond; the one for the natural equity thereof: for what can be more
agreeing unto A sovereign prince less in justice to be respected or relieved,
than his subjects, when question is of his promise.
them; as also for that there is no more detestable crime in a prince, than to
be false of his oath and promise. And that is it for which the sovereign
prince ought always in justice to be less respected or relieved than his
subjects, when question is of his promise. For if a prince have once bestowed
an honor or an office upon a man, it is deemed, that he may not without just
cause take it again away from him; but a particular subject may: and so it is
ordinarily judged. And whereas by the law the patron That ^ soue* reign prince
is bound to his own civil covenants.
who dare to deny a prince to be more straightly bound even unto such civil
covenants, and promises, than are the private subjects themselves? yea and that
in so strait a manner as that he cannot with all the absolute power he has
derogat from the same? For so almost all the learned lawyers are of opinion and
accord. And what marvel? seeing God himself is bound unto his promises. For so
he plainly protests with the prophet Hieremie, Call together unto me (says
he) all the people of the earth, that they may judge betwixt me and my people,
if there be any thing that I ought to have done, which I have not done. Let us
noth therefore call into question those things whereof many doctors have
doubted. As whether a prince be bound unto the covenants which he has made
with his subjects? whereat we need not to marvel, seeing that out of the same
fountain is Philip of Valois, by two testaments which he made in the year
1347, and 1350, (which are in the treasury of France Augustus the emperor
thought it not good for himself in like case to use the like liberty in his
Commonweal, but being willing to give unto his wife Liuia, that which he could
not by reason of the law Voconia, he requested to be dispensed with all from
that law by the Senate (although that it was not needful for him so to have
done, considering that he was long time before in all other Philip the second,
the French king, That he was not bound unto the customs of the civil law, at
such time as they which were next of kindred would have redeemed of him the
county of Guynes: howbeit that many both think and write, the prince to be
bound to that law: for that they think that law to be common to all nations,
and not proper to any city: and yet then the which law the Romans themselves
(in some cases) thought nothing more unreasonable. But our ancestors What
account was made of the Roman civil laws in France.
would not have even their subjects bound unto the Roman laws; as we see in
the ancient records, that Philip the fair, erecting the parliament of Paris
and Monpellier declared, That they should not be bound unto the Roman laws. And
in the erection of Universities, the kings have always declared, That their
purpose was to have the civil and canon laws in them publicly professed and
taught, to make use thereof at their discretion, but not that the subjects
should be any way bound thereunto, least they should seem to derogat from the
laws of their own country by advancing the laws of strangers. And for the
same cause Alaricus king of the Goths, forbad upon pain of death, any man to
allege the Roman laws contrary to his decrees and ordinances. Which M.
Charles du Moulin (my companion, and ornament of all lawyers) mistaking,
Alaricus decreed or done, but that which every wise prince would of good right
have decreed and done: for subjects will so long both remember, and hope for
the government of strangers, as they are governed by their laws. The like
edict there is of king Charles the fair, and an old decree of the court of
Paris, whereby we are expressly forbidden to allege the laws of the Romans,
against the laws and customs of our ancestors. Yea the kings of Spain also
have upon capital pain forbidden any man to allege the Roman laws, in
confirmation of their own laws, (as Oldrad writes.) And albeit that there
were nothing in the laws and customs of their country which differed from
the Roman laws, yet such is the The Roman laws forbidden to be ^aught in
Spain.
Spaniards did too much offend, Stephen king of Spain forbad the Roman laws
to be at all taught in Spain* as Polycrates writes: which was more straightly
provided for by king Alphonsus the tenth, who commanded the magistrates and
judges to come unto the prince himself, as often as there was nothing written
in the laws of their country concerning the matter in question. Wherein
Baldus is mistaken, when he writes Frederike Barbarussa the emperor, caused
the books of the Roman laws to be published and taught: the greatest part
whereof have yet no place in Italy, and much less in Germany. But there is
much difference betwixt a right, and a law: for a right still without command
respects nothing but that which is good and upright; but a law imports a
commandment. For the law is nothing else but the commandment of a
sovereign, using of his sovereign power. Wherefore then as Neither pope nor
emperor exempted from the law of nature.
unto the law of nature; which is the law whereunto (says Pindarus) all kings
and princes are subject. From which we are not to excepteither the pope or the
emperor (as some pernicious flatterers do) saying, That those two viz. the
pope and the emperor, may of right without cause take unto themselves the
goods of their subjects. A dangerous opinion, and not to be taught to princes.
Which opinion the Canonists themselves, the interpretors of the popes law
detest, as contrary to the law of God: whereunto for all that they join this
evil limitation, in saying, That they may yet do it of their most high and
absolute power and authority, Innocent the iiij himself, most skillful in both
the laws, says that most high and absolute power, to be able but to derogat
from the ordinary law* whereas they would have such absolute and sovereign
power to extend to the abrogating of the laws of God and nature. For what is
more religiously by Gods laws forbidden, than to rob and spoil other men of
their goods? what thing do we read more often repeated, than to keep our hands
from other men's things? yea we are by the most holy Decalogue commanded, not
so much as That a prince^ power ought always to be measured with the foot of
justice.
a prince can do any thing which is not agreeing with honesty; seeing that his
power ought always to be measured with the foot of justice. For so said Pliny
the younger unto Traian the emperor, Vt enim foelicitatis est posse quantum
velis: sic magnitudinis velle quantum possis, As it is (says he) in thy
happiness to be able to do what thou will; so beseems it thy greatness, to
will what thou may. Whereof may be gathered, that a prince can do nothing
that is foul or unjust. It is also evil done, to say, that a sovereign
prince has power by violence to take away another man's goods, Private men's
losses by princes sometimes to be sufferd, for the greater benef^ of the
Commonweal.
which is his, without just cause, whether it be by buying, by exchange, by
confiscation, by league with friends, or peace made with enemies, if it cannot
otherwise be concluded than by private men's loss; whose goods princes
oftentimes permit the enemies to enjoy, for the general welfare of the
subjects and of the Commonweal: howbeit that many be not of this opinion, but
would that every man should keep his own; public profit: and this law does
all people use, that in conclusions of peace, not only Jews the xj the French
king, prisoner unto Charles earl of Burgundy, it was in one article provided,
That Seigneur de Torci should not execute the sentence of the The law of
forgetfulness necessary for the ending of civil wars, and composing of
controversies betwixt princes.
court of Paris against the lord of Saneuses. And therefore is Thrasibulus (and
that not unworthily) commended, that having overthrown and driven thirty
tyrants out of Caesar was s^aine in the Senate, at the treaty made betwixt the
conspirators on the one side, and Caesar's partakers on the other. Yet is it by
all means to be enduoured, that men's harms received, should be recompensed
with other men's profits, and so as near as may be every man to have his own,
which if it cannot be done without tumult and civil wars, we must defend the
possessors of other men's things, although they hold them wrongfully, until the
right honors may be satisfied out of the common treasure: or if the common
treasure be exhausted, to borrow money to content them. As did Aratus, who
Ptolemaeus Philadelphus, he returned into his country, and pri^ing the land,
so wrought the matter, that some made choice to Saving always our own right:
and the right of other men: Which clause added unto the inuestiture of the
duchy of Milan, which Maximilian the emperor made to king Jews the xij, was
the occasion of new wars, for the right which the Sforces pretended to the
duchy, which the emperor could not nor would not give away. And this clause
although it be left out, is yet supposed to be still put in: for that even the
emperor would he never so feign, can no otherwise give All to be the princes,
is to be understood concerning power and sovereignty, How it is to be
understood, All to be the princes.
the propriety and possession of every man's things yet reserved to himself.
For so says Seneca, Ad reges potestas omnium pertinet, ad singulos proprietas,
Unto kings belongs the power of all things, and unto particular men the
propriety. And a little after, Omnia rex imperio possidet singuli dominio, The
king in power possesses all The king in some cases less privileged than the
subject.
things: and private men as owners. And for this cause our kings by the laws
and decrees of Court, are bound to void their hands of such lands as are fallen
unto them by way of confiscation (if they be not simply and without mean
holden of the crown) Charles the seventh, wherein he was condemned to suffer a
wood of his to be cut down which he had near unto the city of Paris, for
the public use in general, and the use of every one of the citisens in
particular: and that more was, the price thereof was set down for him in the
decree, whereunto a private subject could hardly have been driven. Then was it
plainly to be seen how much a king differed from a tyrant: for when this
Charles the vij had driven the English forces out of the heart of France, and
easily taken the city Philip Maria, duke of Milan, having oppressed the
Commonweal with taxes and tributes, embarred also his ports and rivers, in
such sort as that none of the citisens without his leave could pass or travel
thereby, but that first they must therefore pay money.

Thus we have hitherto showed in what sort a sovereign is subject unto the
laws Whether a sovereign prince be bound to the promises or conuentions of
the kings his predecessors or not.
and conuentions by him made with his subjects: Now it rests for us to see
whether he be subject unto the contracts and promises of the kings his
predecessors; and whether Ptolemee king of Cyrene, Nicomedes king of Bithynia,
Attalus king of Asia, and Eumenes king of Pergame, by their wills appointed the
people of Rome to inherit their kingdoms. But what if a kingdom be by will
given unto the next of kin? as Henry the eight by his will left the kingdom
of England to his son Edward the sixth: and substituted unto him his sister
Mary, and unto her Elizabeth her sister, who all successively enjoyed the
kingdom. In this case we must distinguish, whether the appointed heir will
accept the state in the quality of an heir by testament appointed; or
renouncing the succession of the testator, demands the crown by virtue of
the custom and law of his country. For in the former case the successor is
bound unto all the hereditary obligations and actions of his predecessors, as
if he were a private inheritour: but in the second case, he is not bound unto
the dome of his predecessor, albeit that his predecessor were thereto sworn.
For neither the oath nor the obligation of the dead predecessor, binds the
successor in the law, more than so far as the obligation made by the
testatour tends to the good of the Commonweal, and so far he is bound. And
therefore king Jews the xij, when he Charles the eight, answered, That he was
none of Charles his heir. So of late king Francis the second, to like effect
writ his letters unto the lords of the Swissers, demanding of him his fathers
debts, the copy whereof taken out of the records, bearing date the xix of
January 1559, I have here set down as follows, viz. Although that we be not
bound to pay the debts of our most honorable The letters of the French king
unto the Swissers
Lord, and dead father: for that we have not taken upon us this crown by right
of inheritance as his heir, but by the royal law and custom generally
observed even from the first institution thereof, which binds us not, but
only to the observing of such confederations and treaties, passed and made by
the kings our predecessors, with other foreign princes and Commonweales, for the
good and profit of this crown. Nevertheless desiring to discharge the credit
and conscience of the said our dead lord and father, we are resolved to
discharge his lawful debts, etc. Only this requesting you, to moderat the
interest, in such sort as you have used, according to the laws and customs of
your country, and that no greater be of us exacted. Which his request the
Swissers by their common decree approved, so that whereas before they had taken
of our people so deep intrest, as every sixth year came almost to as much as
the principal, (which is twice so much as they do in France) they brought it
down to a third part, which comes to so much as the principal but in twenty
years. But that our kings were not bound unto the bonds of their
predecessors, the court of Paris determined, viz. In the year 1256. Wherefore
they are greatly deceived, which receive as from an oracle the formal and
conceived words of Stay you here (says he) and the kingdom which you have
before until now holden by succession from your father, now from henceforth
hold as the true heir thereof, put into your hands by the power of almighty
God, and by the just delivery thereof, which we the bishops and other the
servants of God here presently make unto you. An honest speech if it were true.
But I think no man doubts, but that the king even before his consecration
enjoys both the possession and propriety of the kingdom, not by inheritance
or his fathers right, and much less by the bounty of Anno. 1463
a decree of the French men, That no man should think the power of the king to
depend of the pleasure of the bishops: not for that the Senate ever doubted of
the power of the king before his coronation; but that those vain quirkes of
the bishops might be utterly refelled. For it is an old proverb with us, That
the king The king never dies.
does never die, but that so soon as he is dead, the next male of his stock
is seized of the kingdom, and in possession thereof before he be crowned,
which is not conferred unto him by succession of his father, but by virtue of
the law of the land; least the succession of the kingdom should be uncertain,
then which nothing can be more dangerous viz. The king not to be bound unto
the covenants and agreements of the former kings his predecessors: their
opinion being rejected, which say, That a sovereign prince is to be thrust out
of his kingdom, if he perform not the testament of the former prince his
predecessor: without putting the difference of princely successions, by us
before put, but utterly confounding the succession of princes.

But what needs (might some man say) this distinction in succession of
princes? seeing that all princes are bound and subject unto the laws of
nations, whereof contracts and testaments do depend. Which is not so if we
speak of all contracts and testaments

CHAP. IX.
THis question deserves a special Chapter by it self, for that it has no
community with the ancient marks of Sovereignty, which were before the
right of Fees, used in all Europe and Asia, and yet more in Turkey than in any
place of the world: where the Timariots hold not the Fees they have to serve in
the wars, but so long as pleases the king of the Turks, who gives them no
longer but for term of their lives: which have them with condition, that in
time of war the Timariots Timar, which is to say in their language, the Use
and profit, derived as I suppose of the Greek word (...); and the word Timar
signifying with them the honorable use and profit, which is the true nature of
Fee, to be free from all tribute or base charges. And for this cause the
vassal in the ancient law of the Lombards, is called Leude, which is to say,
frank and free: Aldius and Alda, affranchised, from whence the words Alaudium
and Laudimia are derived, signifying the honorable rewards wont to be given
to the lord of the fee, taking the oath of fealty of his vassal. But having
thus much said for the explanation of these words, let us proceed

We have said here before, him to be an absolute sovereign, who next unto
almighty God, is subject unto none: neither holds any thing next unto God,
but of his own sword: For if he be enforced to serve any man, or to obey any
man's command (be it by his own good liking, or against his will) or if he
hold of another man, he loses the title of majesty, and is no more a
sovereign, as says a certain Poet:

Esse sat est seruum, iam nolo These Vicarij were slaves commanded.
vicarius esse:
Qui Rex est, Regem Maxim non habeat.
To be a slave it is enough, I will not serve a slave:
Who is a king, friend Maximus, no other king must have.
If they then which hold in fealty and homage have no majesty or
sovereignty, there should be but few sovereign princes to be found. And if
were grant that they which hold in fealty and homage, or that are
tributaries, be sovereigns, we must by the same reason confess, the vassal
and his lord, the master and the servant, to be equal in greatness, power, and
authority. And yet the doctors of the law hold that the dukes of Milan,
Mantua, Ferrara, and Sauoy, yea even and some Counties also are sovereigns:
The county of A^ti.
which altogether differ from those things which we have before said of the
right of majesty and sovereignty. Wherefore it is requisite for us more
exquisitly to

We said before in the Chapter of Patronage (which we otherwise call
Protection) that princes which are in protection, if they have no other
subjection, hold yet their majesty and sovereignty, although they have enred
into inequal alliance, whereby they are bound to acknowledge their protectors
in all honor. But there is great difference betwixt them which are in simple
protection only, and them which hold in fealty and homage. For the client, or
he which is the simple protection of another The difference betwixt him which
is only in the simple protection of another prince, and him that owes unto
him fealty and homage.
prince only, acknowledges his patron his superior, in the league of their
confederation, but no further than the dignity of the person and place
requires: but the vassal, or he which holds in fealty and homage, is glad
not only to acknowledge his lord for his superior, but is enforced also in
humble wise to give unto him his faith and duty, or else to forgo his fee. When
I say fealty and homage, I mean the oath of fidelity, the submission, the
service, and duty of the vassal, which he is by the tenor of his fee bound
to give unto his lord.

Which that it may be the better understood, we will make nine degrees of
inferiors, Nine degrees of subjection of inferiors toward their superiors.
in respect of their superiors: beside him who next unto almighty God,
acknowledges none superior unto himself. The first sort, is of such princes
as are in the The difference of a vassal, or a liege man from a natural
subject.
himself, by yielding up his fee: but the natural subject, which holds in fee,
in farm, or fee simple, or be it that he hold nothing at all that he can call
his own, yet can he not by any means without the consent of his prince
exempt himself from the personal obligation wherewith he is unto him bound,
as we have before declared. The simple M, Charles du Molin has both thought
and writ) but the subject whatsoever is always and in all places bound to give
his oath, and so often as it shall please his sovereign prince to require it: yea
although he were a bishop without any temporalitie at all. As for the liege
man, it is not requisite that he should be subject unto the lord of whom he
holds: for it may be, that he may be a sovereign prince, holding some
seignorie of another prince in liege, fealty and homage: it may also be, that
he may be the natural subject of one prince, and liege man to another, by
reason of his

We find that the kings of England have given their liege faith and homage unto
the kings of France for all the countries which they hold on this side the
sea, except the counties of Oye and Guynes: And yet nevertheless they held the
kingdoms of England and Ireland in sovereignty without acknowledgement of any
other prince whatsoever. But after in the year 1212 they made themselves
vassals unto the Pope Ine king of England, in the year 740, and augmented by
Etelpe, which they called S. Peter's pence. For it is found, that John king of
England, by the consent of all the counties, barrons and lords of the land,
made himself vassal unto the pope and church of Rome, and vowed to hold the
realms of England and Ireland of him in fealty and homage, with the charge to
pay the yearly rent and reuenew of a thousand marks for ever, upon Michaelmas
day, beside the Peter pence, which I have spoken of: and gave his faith and
homage unto the legate of pope Innocent the third, in the year 1213, in the
presence of his chauncelor, the archbishop of Canterbury, four bishops, six
counties, and many other great lords. Sir Thomas More, chauncelour of England,
was the first that maintained the contrary: yet so it is, that in the same
time, and until that king Henry the eight revolted from the pope, in the
year 1534, the yearly reuenew and tribute was always paid. But that is
worth the noting, that the act of fealty and homage, given unto pope Innocent
the the third, imports that John then king of England, humbly requested
forgiveness of his sins of the popes legate. Whereby it is plain, that
patronage of the bishop of Rome to have been by him sought for, to extenuat the
horrible murder which he had cruelly committed upon the person of young Arthure
his brothers son, duke of Britain, and lawful successor to the crown of
England; least otherwise he should have been therefore excommunicated by the
pope. Whereas Philip Augustus, king of France, for the same cause had
confiscated the duchies of Normandy, Guyenne, Aniou, Touraine, le Maine, and
all the countries whereunto he pretended any right, on this side the sea: which
the kings of England held by fealty and liege homage of the king of France;
and yet had the chief sovereignty The king^ of Scots vassals to the English.
over the realms of England, Ireland, and Scotland. For first Constantine king
of the Scots, with the rest of the nobility of that country, did fealty and
homage to Adelstan king of England; and after that Baliol king of Scots did
fealty and homage also to the M. Danzai, ambassador for the king in Denmark.
Howbeit the kings of Scotland which reigned after Baliol, renounced their
homage unto the English, neither acknowledging them for their superiors, or
yet to be unto them vassals. And albeit that David king of Scots did what he
could with his subjects to consent that the kingdom of Scotland might be
holden Edward the third his brother in law, and him, it was agreed, that he
should be set at liberty, without any more obtained from his estates but that
he should live in amity and friendship with him. As for the realm of Ireland,
it is not long since it received the English government, excepting yet the
earl of Argueil, who seemed always to keep the state of sovereignty.

So might we say also of the king of Denmark, who is a sovereign prince in
part The kings of Denmark in ancient time vassals unto the German empire.
of the kingdom of Norway, without acknowledging any prince for his superior
whatsoever; and yet holds part of the duchy of Holsatia of the emperor in
fealty and homage: in which sort he in ancient time held the country of
Denmark, which Canutus duke of Denmark yielded fealty and homage unto the
emperor Lothaire, and afterward to the emperor Frederike the fifth: who first
of all sent unto Peter duke of Denmark the sword and the crown, and honored
him with royal dignity; yet with condition, That he should for ever yield
unto the emperor fealty and homage: howbeit that his posterity afterward
revolted from the empire. And yet nevertheless these whom I have named,
being no subjects, neither acknowledging the greatness of any prince, but in
respect of the fees A fee is not to be given up but simply and without fraud.
that they hold of other princes, are acquitted of their fealty homage and
service, by giving up their fee without fraud. I say without fraud, for that it
is not lawful for the vassal to forsake his lord and patron at his need,
although he would renounce his fee: albeit John de Montfort, and Peter, dukes
of Britaigne would never yield their fealty unto the French kings without
exception, as their liege men for the dukedom of Britaigne: about which matter
the chauncelors of France and Britaigne were twice at debate before the kings,
Charles the fifth, and Charles the sixth. And albeit that these two kings caused
two acts to be produced, concerning the fealty and homage done by the dukes of
Britaigne, to Philip the victorious and Jews the eight: yet for all that, the
dukes would not do their homage as liege men, but were received doing their
simple homage only. True it is, that the liege homage yielded to Jews the
eight, was not but for the life of him that did it, as appeared Arthure, was
not pure and simple, but only conditional; as to be restored by Philip the
victorious, unto the territories and segnories from which he was embarred;
which he did not. Now such is the force and nature of true and lawful acts, as
not to admit any time or condition, and the act of fealty and homage of all
other acts the least. But the end of the controversy was, that the simple oath
of John and Peter should be taken, least they should seem to be the liege
vassals of the French: although both those dukes ought of right to have been
deprived of the fee of the dukedom of Britaigne, for that they had renounced
the French king their lawful patron. Neither is The ancient countie^ of
Britaigne, vassals to the kings of France.
there any doubt, but that in truth the ancient counties of Britaigne were
true subjects Gregory bishop of Tours) and being revolted, were subdued by
Charlemaigne, and afterward by Jews the devout, to whom they did homage, and
yielded all obeisance with hostages; as a man may see in the histories of
Floard and Girald, whom some call Vitald, the nephew of Charlemaigne. And
again for another rebellion against Charles the Bauld, in the year 1359, they
were accused unto the estates, of treason, and so condemned and executed: which
could not have taken place but against the natural subject, for treason
against his sovereign prince. And after that Herispo county of Britaigne,
doing his fealty, and with a great sum of money given appeased Charles the
Bauld: as had also before him duke Iudicael pleased Dagobert. Neither is it
true, or Clodoueus, who had bounded the kingdom of France with the Pyrenei
Mountains, both the seas, and the river of Rheine; or Charlemaigne that had in
many places vanquished infinite numbers of the barbarous nations, and had
subdued Spain, Italy, Hungary, Germany, the Saxons, them of Pomerland, the
Polonians, and Russians, and had extended his empire even as fair as Scithia,
would have received the dukes of Britaigne, even in the bowels of France, as
companions of the French empire. And admit that by the favor of any the French
kings, they obtained respite of homage, that could not be prejudicial unto the
kings their successors, and much less unto the crown of France. And that
more is, in the treaties betwixt the kings of France, and the first dukes of
Normandy, it is expressly set down, That the Peter de Dreux prince of the
blood, surnamed Maucler, had acquitted the sovereignty of Britaigne unto the
kings of France, seeing that he was vassal and natural subject unto the
king: and yet nevertheless, in yielding the homage, Roialties reserved unto
the dukes of Britaigne, notwithstanding their homage due unto the French king.
benefit of confiscations even in cases of high treason, the regal rights in
churches, and feofments of trust. By which arguments not only probable, but
also necessary, I am persuaded to write the dukedom of Britaigne, now even
from the times of the first kings of France, to have been a province of the
kingdom of France, although Argentraeus otherwise think. Yet is it worth the
noting that John Montfort and his successors, although they went about to have
rent the dukedom of Britaigne from the kingdom of France, yet as counties of
Montfort and Virtus to have always yielded their fealty unto the French
kings, without exception, as we read in the records, although

There is then great difference betwixt him which holds simply in fealty and
homage (being himself no sovereign, nor subject unto him which is lord of the
fee) and him which is sovereign of a country, and yet vassal to some other
lord for some fee; as of him which is in protection only, or which is
tributarie unto a prince, having sovereignty over his subjects, or which is
himself a natural subject. Wherefore The prince that holds of another, is
himself no absolute Sovereign.
we conclude, that there is none but he an absolute sovereign, which holds
nothing of another man; considering that the vassal for any fee whatsoever it
be, be he Pope or Emperor, owes personal service by reason of the fee which
he holds. For albeit Service, in all matter of fees, and customs, is not
prejudicial unto the natural liberty of the vassal; yet so it is, that it
imports a certain right, duty, honor and reverence that the vassal owes
unto the lord of the fee: which is not indeed a servitude real, but is annexed
and inseparable from the person of the vassal, who cannot be therefrom freed,
but by quitting his fee: provided yet, that he be no natural subject of the
lords of the fee, from whom he cannot discharge himself by renouncing his fee.

Now when I say, that homage and personal service is inseparable from the
vassal; Homage a personal service, and not to be performed by a deputy.
that is so true, as that the vassal cannot acquit himself thereof by his
deputy or attorney, as was permitted by the ancient laws of fees; which in
this point is abrogated Jews Sfortia, governor of Lombardie, sent his Agent
into France, to king Charles the eight, to have obtained of him that his
nephew the duke of Milan might by him be received to do his homage by his
deputy for the duchy of Genes: whereunto the king would not condescend. And
when question was made of taking of fealty and homage of the marquis of
Salusse, the court of Paris decreed, That his deputy should be admitted in his
name, if the king so thought it good; for that the marquis pretended himself
to be sick: yet with that condition, that so soon as he was able he should
come and do it himself in person. The same has also been often times judged in
such like cases. But contrariwise the lord of the fee Jews the xj, who by
Philip Commines his ambassador received fealty and homage of the mother of
young Galeas duke of Milan, for the duchy of Genes, the duke her son being
under age, and paying fifty thousand ducats for relief. And for the same
cause in the treaty made betwixt Jews the eleventh, and Maximilian archduke
of Austria, in the year 1482, in the 56 article it was expressly set down,
That the subjects on both parts should be received to do their homage by their
atturneies, which otherwise Philip the fair the French king, and Henry king
of England, in the year 1303, That the king of England should himself in
persom come to do his fealty and homage without exception, if he were not
otherwise let by sickness without deceit: in which case he should send his
eldest son to do the fealty in his stead. And by another treaty Philip
Valois, and king Edward the third, it was also said, That the king of England
should in person come to do his fealty and homage, if he were not without
fraud by sickness let; which ceasing, he should then also come. And by the
treaty of peace, made in the year 1259, betwixt Jews the ninth the French
king, and Henry the second, king of England, it is expressly declared, That the
king of England should in person himself yield his fealty and liege homage
unto the French king. Which liege homage (as they term it) is of that force,
as that the person of no prince, pope, or emperor, is therein excepted. Now
the form of the homage declared by the treaty, in the year 1331, betwixt
Philip Valois the French king, and Edward the third, is this: The king of
England having his hands joined, and put The form of the homage made by the
kings of England unto the kings of France.
betwixt the hands of the French king, the Chauncel or of France for the
French king, shall thus say unto the king of England, Thou shall become a liege
man to the king of France, who here is, as duke of Guyenne, and peer of
France, county of Poitou, and Monstrueil, and shall promise to bear unto him
faith and loyalty: Whereunto the king of England shall say, I consent
thereunto: Then the king of France shall receive the king of England into his
fealty with a kiss. But the oath of Charles the king of Navarre was more
religious, when he yielded his fealty unto Charles the fifth, the French king,
in the year 1370: for that he was not only the French kings vassal, but his
subject also, unto whom he promised his faith and loialtie toward and
against all men, which could live or die: albeit that he was then sovereign
king of Navarre, and pretended John de Montfort, Arthure the second, and Peter
the second, dukes of Britaigne, is like, excepting the word Liege man. But for
vassals which be also subjects, the form of fealty is more religious and
precise, for that they are bound with a double bond, whereas the foreign vassals
are not so. For the king of England, Edward the third being come to Amiens to
do his homage unto the king of France, refused to join his hands betwixt the
hands of the king, and so returned into his kingdom, where it was six months
debated betwixt the French kings commissioners, and the assembly of the
estares, about the resolution for the form of the homage: in fine, king Edward
thought it better to follow the prescript form, than to loose so many Philip
the Victorious, the French king, in the year 1209. Yet some use another
custom.

Shall we then say, a Vassal (that is to say another man's man) although he at
home Homage a base and servile thing, and therefore detested of honorable
princes.
enjoy a kingdom, to have a sovereign majesty and power? Shall we call him
that is bound to do most vile services, (and to use the words of fealty) him
that serves another man, shall we call him, I say, a sovereign prince? And
that is it for which many* honorable princes had rather to loose and forgo
right great seignories, and their Lewis the eleventh, ten times so much as his
principality was worth, which stood him in more than he received profit
thereby: And for the same cause Edward the third, king of England, in the first
article of the treaty of Bretigni expressly excepted, that all royalties should
be given unto himself in those countries which he had by inheritance in
France; least he should for them have been enforced to have yielded fealty
and homage unto the French kings. Neither for any other cause did Stephen,
Vayuod of Valachia, revolt from the kings of Polonia, but for that the king of
Polonia had caused his tent to be cast wide open at the same very instant that
the Calisthenes the nephew of Aristotle chose rather to loose his life, than
after the Persian guise, in humble and devout manner upon his knees to honor
Alexander the Great: albeit that Alexander courteously took them up with a
kiss that so honored him. Which was also an usual thing with the Roman
emperors, when they gave unto the kings that were in their protection, their
scepters and diademes. For so Tiridates king of Armenia being come to Rome,
humbled himself upon his knee before the emperor Nero, whom Nero taking by
the hand, lift him up, kissed him, and taking his turbant from off Adherball
king of Numidia termed himself nothing but the steward of the people of Rome.
And Eumenes king of Pergame after the discomfiture and death of Mithridates
king of Pontus The wearing of a cap was in ancient time the mark of them that
were but lately made free, to cover their heads that were shaven when they were
slaves.
came to Rome, and with a cap upon his head (in token of his late recovered
liberty) thanked the people of Rome for the same. But Prusias king of Bithynia
as often as he went into the Senate, commonly kissed the threshold of the gate,
calling himself Solomon the Turkish king was about to have restored John king
of Hungary into his kingdom in the year 1555, with condition to have holden
the same of him in fealty and homage, without other subjection (as he by a
Chiaus his ambassador, certified Sigismundus Augustus king of Polonia) if king
Ferdinand, who pretended the kingdom Sanislaus Rosdrazeroski, a Polonian,
written to Anne Mommorancie constable of France the same year 1555. And for
this cause Francis the French king to hinder that Charlet of Austria should not
be chosen emperor, declared unto the princes, Electors of the Empire, that
the majesty of the Empire should be much debased, if they should of his
vassal make their head and Emperor: wherewith the emperor not a little
moved, and afterward at the battle of Pa^ie having taken him prisoner, would
never consent unto his deliverance, until he had quite discharged the Low
countries from the fealty and homage wherein they were before

But it seems that it is not enough to say, that Charles of Austria was
vassal unto the crown of France, but that he was thereunto a liegeman also;
and not only a Charles the fifth a natural subject of these French Kings*
liegeman, but even the French kings natural subject; as borne and brought up
in Flanders, then a province of the French kingdom: although many think the
city of Gaunt the native place of Charles, and the cities upon the sea coast
to have been excepted. For the earls of Flaunders were always accounted peers
of France, even from the first beginning of that kingdom: and the sovereign
roialties thereof, always before reserved unto the same, but especially at
the solemn treaty of Arras betwixt Charles the seventh and Philip the second
duke of Burgundy. Also Charles the fifth being chosen Francis the French king,
that he might levy of his subjects the subsidy granted him at Arras, in the
year 1520; whereunto the kings answer was, That he would therein do what he
might, without diminishing in any thing the right of his crown: as I have
seen by the instructions given to M. De la Roche-Gaucourt at such time as he
was sent ambassador into Spain. Although that greater causes might have been
alleged, which might have stayed German princes from the election of Charles
the fifth. For Charles of Austria was as then Charles the fifth vassal and
liegeman unto the pope and the Church of Rome.
not only the vassal, liegeman, and natural subject to the king of France,
but also a liegeman unto the pope and the church of Rome, for all the
countries, lands, and seignories that he then held, except that which he held
of the crown of France, or of the Arnold the last of that name, county of
Burgundy, gave it with the other countries to the emperor Conrade the second,
in the year 1205, and after that, the emperor Charles the fourth gave it to
Charles the sixth, the Dolphin, by fealty and homage, as appears by the
inuestiture thereof in the treasure of France, the copy whereof we have out
of the records. But at such time as he professed The kingdom^ of Naples and
Sicilie holden of the pope.
himself to be the liegeman of the bishop of Rome, in his fealty given for
the kingdom of Naples, he then promised by his oath, not to take upon him
either the charge of the German empire, if he were chosen emperor by the
German princes; either of the dukedom of Milan; and with these conditions gave
his fealty and homage vnthe Urban the fifth, therein invested Charles of France
brother unto king Jews. And in the inuestiture of that kingdom, made by
Innocent the fourth, unto Edmond the son of Henry king of England, in the
year 1255, the copy whereof we have written out of the Vatican records, are
these words, Ego Henricus, Dei gratia Rex Angliae, nomine Edmundi filij nostri
Regis Siciliae, plenum and ligeum vassallagium facio ecclesiae Romana. viz. I
Henry, by the grace of God king of England, in the name of Edmund our son,
king of Sicilie, yield full and liege homage unto the church of Rome, etc. And
in the act of fealty and liege homage given Robert king of Sicilie, in the
1338, he by oath promised never to receive the imperial crown, neither the
dukedom of Milan, nor any seignorie whatsoever in Tuscanie, upon pain of the
loss of all such right as he might pretend unto the kingdoms of Naples and
Sicilie. The like is also found given by Charles king of Naples, in the year
1295: and by queen Ione in the year 1348, as I have read in the register of
the Vatican. And for this only cause pope Julius the second refused to inuest
Ferdinand king of Arragon, Charles the fifth the emperors grandfather by the
mothers side, in the kingdom of Naples, but upon the conditions I have
aforesaid: and a yearly rent of eight thousand ounces of gold, or of four
score thousand crowns, which the The ounce is worth ten crowns
kings of Naples were bound to pay every year, and a white ambling gelding,
beside the aid expressed in the inuesture, with reservation of the county of
Beneuent. Which their obligation was of such consequence unto the popes, that
so soon as they denounced war unto any, the kings of Naples were straight
ways in arms for the defense of the Church of Rome. So Alphonsus king of
Naples, at the denuntiation of pope Sextus, made war upon the state of
Florence, for that they had hanged the Cardinal of Pisa, the popes Legate a
latere in his pontificalibus. And in our time pope Paulus the third by his
Ambassador Alexander Farnesius, summoned the emperor Charles the fifth, being
then with a great army in France, to make peace with the French king, so with
their united forces to make war upon the Protestant princes, as was Charles,
wherewith he was like to have subdued most part of Europe, had he not been
let by the arms and power of the French. And albeit that in the year 1528,
by the treaty made betwixt pope Clement the vij and his Cardinals, besieged in
the castle S. Angelo on the one side, and the emperor Charles the fifth on the
other, it was set down, That the kings of Naples should for ever be acquitted
of the yearly rent of 8000* ounces of gold, and of all the arearages, which
amounted unto great sums: yet so it was, that all the rest of the points of
the ancient inuestiture, still stood in their former force and virtue. But
ever since, the German emperors have well known, and the pope better, (seeing
Rome sacked, and himself put to ransom of 400000 ducats, after he had
released the fairest rights of S. Peter's demaine) what danger it was to make
choice of the vassal of a sovereign prince, and the natural subject of
another, to be head of the Empire: For with the forces of Germany he brought
down the pope, and with the popes power he ruinated the princes of Germany.
And albeit that by the imperial title he held the duchies of Pius Quintus the
pope angry with Ferdinand the emperor for not recei^ing of him the imperial
crown.
this 300 years pretended that the emperor may not take upon him the empire,
but having before of them received the imperial crown; as pope Pius the fifth
by his Legates sharply rebuked the emperor Ferdinand, for that he had not of
him received the imperial crown, which his brother Charles had not before
doubted so to receive; and had by excommunication compelled him so to do, had
he not by the entreaty of king Philip his kinsman, and of the French king,
otherwise appeased.

But heresome man will say, How could it be that the emperor Charles the fifth,
should The same man cannot be liegeman to diverse princ^.
be liegeman unto the pope, the French king, and the empire? seeing that no man
can be liegeman unto many lords, although he have many fees holden of them all
separatly: For his faith and aid is due to one alone, and him the first and
chiefest, without exception of any man living. And in case he be the vassal of
many coheires for one and the same fee, he is liegeman unto them all together,
but not to any of them separatly, considering that his fealty cannot be
divided; neither can he do his liege homage unto one of them without exception,
for the concurrence of the rest: yet truer it is, his fealty to be due unto
one only of his patrons, whom he shall make choice of, if that his patrons
cannot agree, or else to them altogether; and that law we now use. For the

I here understand the liege homage properly as it is to be understood in the
laws of Fees; for that our ancestors have abused this word Liege, in all
their ancient treaties of alliance and oaths that they made: I remember that
I have seen 48 treaties of alliance, which our kings Philip the v, and Charles
the v. vj. vij. and Jews the xj, made with the three electors on this side the
Rhine, and diverse other the princes of the empire, wherein they by oath sworn
betwixt the hands of the kings deputies, solemnly Ego deuenio vassallus ligius
Caroli Regis Francorum, pro ratione quinquaginta millium scutorum auri, ante
festum D. Rhemigij mihi soluendorum, etc. viz. I become liege vassal of
Charles the French king, for the sum of fifty thousand crowns of gold, to
be paid unto me before the feast of S. Rhemigius, etc. This oath bore date in
June, in the year 1401. Yea, even betwixt kings themselves leagues were
oftentimes conceived in such words, as that the one of them professed himself
to be the others vassal. As in the league made betwixt Philip of Valois the
French king, and Alphonsus king of Castile, in the year 1336, it is said, That
they should give and receive fealty and homage the one of the other: which
proceeding but of the ignorance of their ambassadors, is now better
understood, as but an abuse of the words Vassal and Liege: the oaths also of
the kings pentioners,

Wherefore again to return from whence we have a little digressed. I say
then, The vasia^ ought first to serve his most ancient Lord
that the emperor Charles the fifth could not yield his liege fealty and homage
unto the pope without exception, considering that he was liege man, peer, and
natural subject unto the French king, and that the service and homage is
inseparable from the person. And admit he were not the kings subject, but his
liege man, or not his liege man but his vassal only; yet so it is, that in
terms of right the liege homage is due unto the most ancient, and that the
vassal ought to serve his most ancient Lord. But if the lords be equal, and
yet at variance amongst themselves for the service, he owes aid neither to
the one nor to the other: For that in matter of services or servitude, the

But most certain it is, that the natural subject ought always to preferte
his natural lord above all, if he be present; as him to whom he is first
bound, and from whom Jews the eleventh, and of Philip the second, duke of
Burgundy, made for the order of France, the xiij article, and for the order
of the golden Fleece, the ix article, it is set down, That the knights of what
prince soever it be, ought to aid their natural lord, whose liege men they
are, and the country wherein they were borne, against him that shall make war
upon them, without any blemish to their honor; provided that their natural
lord be there in person, and not otherwise, and that they signify so much unto
the chief of the order whereof they are knights. Whereby it appears that the
emperor Charles the fifth could not give his faith unto the electors of the
empire, but with reservation of his fealty unto the French king, and afterward
unto the Pope. For beside the kingdom Peter king of Arragon is set down in
these words, Ego Petrus Dei gratia Rex Arragonum, Comes Barcinonae, Dominus The
act of the oath of the king of Arragon give to the pope.
Montispessulani, cupiens praeter Deum, principali beati Petri, and Apostolicae
sedis protectione mu^ri, tibi reuerendissime pater, and Domine sum Pontifex
Innoce^ti, and pro te, sacrosanctae Romanae Ecclesiae, and Apostolicae sedi,
offero regnum meum: illudque tibi pro remedio animae meae primogenitorum meorum
constituo censuale, vt annuatim de Camera Regis ducenta quinquaginta
Massimitinae Apostolicae sedi reddantur: and ego ac successores mei,
specialiter and fideles and obnoxi teneamur: hac autem lege perpetua seruandum
forum decerno, quia spero and confido, quod tu and successores tui, quali
beati, Petri manibus in regem duxeris solemniter coronandum. Actum Romae anno
Christi 1204. In English thus: I Peter by the grace of God king of Arragon,
County of Barcelona, Lord of Montpelier, desiring next unto God to be
strengthened with the principal protection of blessed S. Peter and the
Apostolical See; do offer unto thee most reverent father and high Lord, Pope
Innocent, and for thee unto the most holy Church of Rome, and to the
Apostolical See, my kingdom; and the same for the health of my soul and of
my predecessors, I make unto thee tributarie, so that out of the kings chamber
shall be yearly paid unto the Apostolical See, two hundred and fifty
Massimitines, and that I and my successors shall be especially bound to be
(unto you) faithful and subject; and by Peter, to be solemnly crowned king.
Enacted at Rome in the year of Christ 1204. So that kingdom of Arragon was by
the Arragonian kings offered unto the Bishops of Rome, least they should for
their enormities and murders have been well beaten. But the kingdoms of
Sardinia and Corsica, was by the popes given unto the kings of Arragon (as the
popes guise is bountiful to give that is none of their own) for which
kingdom the Emperor was also liege man unto the Pope, as I have scene by the
inuestiture thereof made unto Peter the third, king of Arragon, in this sort,
Pontifex Max de fratrum suorum ascensus, The inuestiture of the kingdoms of
Sardinia and Corsica granted by the pope.
dat in feudum regnum Sardiniae and Corsicae, proprietate^ ecclesi^ Romanae
etc. Per capam Auream te praesentialiter inuestimus, etc. Ita tamen quod tu and
successores tui, praestabitis homagium ligium, vassallagium plenum, and
fidelitatis iuramentum, etc. Et centu^ equites armatos, and vno equo ad arma,
and duobus equitaturis adminus per que^libet, and quintagentis peditibus terrae
vestrae de Arragonia, cum gagijs per trimestre, a die quo intrabu^t terra^
Ecclesiae, etc. Et in super censum duoru^ milliu^ marcaru^ argenti bonorum, and
legaliu^ strelingoru^: vbicunque fuerit Romanus Pontifex in festo* beatorus
Petri and Pauli, annis singulis, sub poena excommunicationis post quatuor
menses, etc. and post tertium terminum non solueris, tu haeredesque tui, a
dicto regno Sardiniae and Corsicae cadetis ex toto, and regnum ad Romanam
ecklesiam reuertetur. viz. The great bishop by the assent of his brethren,
does Peter and Paul, every year, upon pain of excommunication after four
months, etc. and if after the third time thou shall not pay it, thou and thy
James king of Aragon, did also like homage at Valence, betwixt the hands of the
popes legate, in the year 1353, with reservation unto the pope of appeals,
put in by the clergy, and abolishing of the laws and customs brought in by
the kings of that country. I find also that Ferdinand, and after him
Alphonsus, kings of Aragon, did the like fealty and homage in the year 1455.
And in the public records of the court of Rome, are to be seen the names of
the vassal kings set down in this order: the kings of Naples, Sicilia,
Aragon, Sardinia, Jerusalem, England, Ireland, and Hungary. And this is the
old description of such princes as 380 years ago, yielded their The kingdom of
Portugal holden of the pope.
by the valor of Henry of Benonia, taken from the Moors, the kings thereof
made themselves vassalls unto the bishop of Rome, and paid the yearly tribute
of two thousand ducats into the bishop of Rome his treasure. And therefore
Innocent the fourth, bishop of Rome, by his letters admonished the princes of
the kingdom of Portugal, to appoint overseers to their prodigal king, who
should also take upon them the government of the kingdom. And as for the
Islands of the Canaries, Nigaries, The islands of the Canaries* holden of the
pope.
and the Gorgonides; the emperor holds them also of the pope. We also read,
that Jews king of Spain, did fealty and homage unto the pope, in the year
1343, with charge to pay yearly into the chamber of Rome, four hundred
florines of the Alexander the sixth, dividing the new world betwixt the kings
of Castile and Portugal, expressly kept unto himself the inheritance, the
jurisdiction and soueraignetie thereof, by consent of the two kings; who from
that time made themselves his vassalls, of all the purchases and conquests by
them already gained, and that they should from that time forward, gain or
make, as the Spaniards themselves have written. In like manner pope Julius the
second, gave unto Ferdinand king of Spain, Charles the fifth, his grandfather
by the mothers side, the kingdoms of Granado and Navarre; when he had driven
the Moors out of the one, and Peter D'Albret out of the other, upon condition
to hold them by fealty and homage of the Charles the fifth, the emperor
pretended right unto the kingdom of Navarre, by reason of the donation to him
made by German D'Foix, second wife unto king Ferdinande: yet so it was, that
his ambassadors and deputies, when they came to the conference, seeing that
their donation to want sure foundation, doubted not to pretend the popes
interdictions, as the surest stay of their most unjust rapines. And the cause
of the interdiction was, for that Peter Albret, king of Navarre, would not at
the command of pope Julius the second, break faith and friendship with Jews
the xij, the French king, who was first called father of his country, when as
he was king Jews his liege vassal, and no way bound unto the pope. So that
there remained The majesty of Charles the fifth impugned by this French author.
no kingdom, no not any little territory or piece of ground, which Charles
the emperor held not by fealty and homage, or whereof he could call himself
a sovereign. For as for the Islands of Maiorca and Minorca, they were long
time before reunited unto the kingdom of Aragon, after that they were taken
from the heirs of James the Fortunate. And in the Low Countries, he had
nothing which was not of necessity holden of the crown of France, or of the
empire. And albeit that our princes have by diverse leagues, granted the
principality of Flanders and Artoise unto Charles the emperor, yet remains
there a country in Burgundy, which they call the county of Charrolois, the
propriety whereof belongs unto the king of Spain, but the soueraignetie
thereof unto the French king, and is by the king of Spain holden in fealty:
Title pretended by the French unto the kingdom of Castile.
the kingdom of Castile, no man doubts (which has but looked into the
Spanish affairs) but that the kingdom of Castile by inheritance, descended
unto king Jews the ix. of France, in the right of Blanch his mother: yea, and
the nobility of Castile by solemn acts, which are yet extant in the records
of France, invited king Jews to have taken upon him his mothers kingdom.
Howbeit I doubt not, but that the Spaniards will reply, that Blanch, the
daughter of Jews the ix. married the king of Castile, upon condition that all
such right unto the kingdom, as might have fallen unto her father, should now
be given unto his son in law: which thing Jews could not do unto the
prejudice of his successors; without the consent of the states: joining
thereunto Charles the fifth and Henry king of Castile, then driven out of his
kingdom, whereby I have seen, that Henry promised as well for himself, as
for his successors, to become vassal, and to hold his kingdom of Castile, of
the kings of France: for that by the means of the king of France, he was
again restored into his kingdom. Seeing then that the kingdom of Castile is
hereditarie descending unto the heirs Henry are bound unto his deeds and
promises. True it is, that the promise of Henry had not power to prejudice his
successors, neither the estates of Castile, without the consent of whom, the
treaty was made, if the realm of Castile had not been hereditarie. But of
the kingdom of France, it is otherwise to be thought and determined. And
therefore it was by the wise resolved, that Phillip the Fair, the French king,
could not make Arthur duke of Britain, vassal unto the king of England,
without the dukes consent; except he would by the same right, give up his
kingdom of France unto the king of England, which he could by no sovereign
power do, without the consent of the estates of France. For otherwise, his
yielding of it up, should be to none effect or purpose, no more then that of
king John The author happily is in this partial, or (...) mistaken.
consent of the states, yielded unto the king of England, all the right and
title he had in the kingdom of France: which was again disanulled by the
treaty of Chartres, whereby the king of England refused that right given unto
him by such yielding up. The same is to be thought of the league of Tricasse,
wherein Charles the sixth, without the consent of the states, yielded the
kingdom of France unto Henry the fi^t, king of England. And therefore pope
Martine could by no request of the English, be persuaded to ratify that
league, but called Charles the seventh, son to Charles the sixth, by the name
of the French king: for that the kingdom of France is neither deuolued

But cannot the imperial title (may some man happily say) make him a sovereign
which is another man's vassal? As the prince or the people making a slave a
magistrate seems thereby to have also enfranchised him; whereof there is no
doubt, if he be the princes or the peoples slave; for otherwise it is not
lawful either for the prince, or for the people, to dispose of another man's
servant: so neither have the German princes any power over other men's citisens
or subjects, such as was Charles the fifth. Join hereunto The emperor n^
absolute sovereign.
to also, that the imperial title of the emperor carries with it no
sovereignty: albeit that the emperor writing unto the princes of the empire,
use these words, We command you, etc. You shall do this, etc. which other
princes do not toward their own subjects: yea and that more is, that the
princes electors carry the titles of Butlers, Esquiers, and Tasters to the
emperor, yet the sovereignty of the empire rests not in the person of the
emperor, but in the assembly of the states of the empire, who are able to
give law unto the emperor, and to every prince of the empire in particular,
in such sort as that the emperor has not power to make any particular edict,
neither peace nor war, neither to charge the subjects of the empire so much
as with one impost, nor to call or dismiss the diets of the empire, without
the consent of the princes. And Maximilian the first, at the diet of Constance,
holden in the year 1507, said unto the estates (the popes legate then urging
that the imperial crown was both to be requested and received of the pope,)
That to take the imperial crown of the pope was but a needless ceremony,
serving to no purpose; considering that the imperial authority and power
depended of the estates of the empire: which in due place we will more
particularly declare.

Whereby a man may easily judge, that there are few or none absolute sovereign
No prince in Italy which holds not of the pope, or of the empire.
princes. For the Venetian Commonweal excepted, there are no princes or
Commonweals in Italy, which hold not of the empire, the pope, or the crown of
France: which concerning the kingdom of Sicilie and Naples, we have already
declared. As The duke of Milan.
inuesture, and thereto pays relief: for which the emperor Maximilian the
first, in less than xv, or xvj years space, drue thence unto himself, above
three hundred thousand pounds: For king Jews the twelfth at one time paid
therefore an hundred thousand pounds: and the Sforces had it no better cheap.
For they which are now called dukes of Milan, in the remembrance of our
ancestors, that is to say about an hundred and fifty years ago, were called
but lieutenants, and the city it self but the ordinary chamber of the
empire. And so namely John Galeace the second, and Barnabas his brother, in the
inuestiture which they had from the emperor Charles the fourth, are simply
called lieutenants of the empire. And Galeace the first being accused for
charging Actius being by the emperor Jews of Bauyere put into his fathers
place, for the sum of an hundred thousand crowns, obtained of him the first
title of a prince, in the year 1338. And after that, Galeace the third, father
in law to Jews duke of Orleans, paid unto the emperor Frederick the third,
an hundred thousand florines, for the honor and title of a duke, in the year
one thousand three hundred ninety seven.

So say we also of the duke of Mantua, who acknowledges himself to hold of
the The duke of Mantua.
German empire, and to be also a prince thereof.

As for the duke of Ferrara he confesses even at this present to hold part of
his seignorie, The duke of Ferrara.
even Ferrara it self, of the pope, and therefore pays a yearly rent or fee
into the popes coffers. For not long ago, viz. in the year 1372, the marquis
of Este was by pope Gregory first established his lieutenant in the city of
Ferrara, reserving unto the church fealty and homage, jurisdiction and
sovereignty; with condition also, that he should yearly pay ten thousand
florens of gold into the chamber of S. Peter, and to find an hundred men at
arms paid for three months, for the defense of the Church of Rome, so often
as need should require, as I have learned out of the Vatican records. And as
for Rhegium and Modene, he acknowledges him to hold them of the empire: Julius
the second maintained them to be the Church fees, and in that quarrel made
wars upon the Ferrariens and the French king, who gave them aid: as also to
have the entire revenue of the fee, being before diminished by pope Alexander
the sixth, in marrying his base daughter Lucrece unto the duke Alphonsus. And
true it is, that the French kings long since took upon them the defense and
patronage of the prince of Ferrara, since the time that Borsus, first duke of
Ferrara, acknowledged himself liege vassal unto Charles the sixth, and
therefore it was unto him permitted, that those dukes of Ferrara might bear the
arms of France, the public acts whereof yet remain in the records of
France.

As concerning the Florentines, they of long time have pretended liberty
against the The Florentine^
empire, for the payment of six thousand Florines unto the emperor Rodolphe.
As also do the Genowayes, who as they say, were by the same emperor
enfranchised. How The Genowayes.
be it that afterward they having received great harm from the Venetians,
gave themselves into protection unto king Charles the sixth, the French king:
and not long after unto the duke of Milan, who received them upon condition
that they should therefore do fealty and homage unto the French kings.

In like case they of Luca paid unto the emperor Henry the fifth, twelve
thousand Florines to be enfranchised; Sienna ten thousand; And Peter Gambecourt
paid twelve thousand unto the emperor Charles the fourth for the seignorie of
Pisa.

But these were not true alienations, nor exemptions from subjection; but
rather That a prince cannot alienat any thing of the public demaine but that
his successors may again resume the same.
of the empire. It was not also in the power of the emperors, neither of any
prince whatsoever, to alienat any thing of the public demaine, and much less
of the rights of the sovereign majesty, but that it was always in the power
of the successor to lay hand thereon again, as it is lawful for the lord to
lay hold upon his fugitive slave. As the emperor Maximilian, having thrust
his army into Italy, with the power of king Jews the xij, and having brought
a great fear upon all the cities of Italy, gave them well to understand: At
which time the Florentines sent their ambassadors unto him, to yield unto him
fealty and homage for their estate, and to obtain of him the confirmation of
their priueleges, which cost them forty thousand ducats. And albeit Cosmus
duke of Florence, by force of arms made himself lord of Sienna: yet so it
was, that he took the inuestiture thereof, and yielded therefore sealtie and
homage unto the king of Spain, as perpetual lieutenant of the empire. Which
is sufficient reason to show, that they of Sienna were not before enfranchised
or exempted from the empire; or if they were, why did then pope Julius the
second pay thirty thousand ducats to Maximilian the emperor, to redeem of
him the liberty of Sienna, to the intent to inuest therein (...).
the duke of Vrbin. And yet nevertheless all that let not, but that the
duke of Florence, which had conquered it by force of arms, was constrained to
take the inuestiture thereof of the king of Spain, and to pay therefore That
princes have not the propriety of the public demaine but only the bare use.
contenting themselves with the bare use, the rest belongs unto the
commonweal. And for that cause the Emperor Charles the fourth, granting the
confirmation of the privileges to them of Perouze, joined thereunto this
clause, Quoad vi^eret: So long as he should live. And yet for all that pope
Julius the second took that town from the Baillions, and put it under the
obeisance of the Church, from whence it was said to have been taken. And how
could the cities of Italy, or duke of Florence, have any absolute
sovereignty, seeing that for all differences and controversies concerning
their estates, frontiers, demaines, and tenures, they plead the same before the
emperor, or at least wise in the imperial chamber, where their causes are
decided, and they enforced Maximilian the second, in the year 1559: and that
they would receive the emperor as an arbitratour, and not as a judge or a
superior: yet so it was, that the emperor taking upon him the authority of a
judge, caused them before warned, to be summoned, and when that after many
peremptory edicts they made not their appearance, he pronounced sentence
against them, and by an herault at arms threatened to proscribe the territory
of Genes if they obeyed not his censure. Now most certain it is, that there is
none but the cities and towns which hold of the empire, that can be proscribed
by Genes threatened by Maximilian the Emperor.
the imperial proscription, whether it be by sentence of the emperor, or by
decree of the imperial chamber. For the imperial chamber could not have
proscribed Mind, Munster, Magdeburg, and others, had they not been contained
within the bounds and power of the German empire: much less could the emperor
have proscribed Genes, if it had not been within the power of the Germans. And
therefore when they of Genes had appealed from the interlocutorie sentence of
Maximilian unto the pope, they afterward renouncing their appeal, yielded to
the sentence, acknowledging the jurisdiction and sovereignty of the empire.
And so at length the emperor gave sentence for the marquis, acknowledging
himself to be a vassal unto the German empire, whom they of Genes would have
had to have been thiers. And since that the marquis D'la Forest, ambassador
for the king, dated at Vienna the xviij of July, in the year 1560: which
judgment the emperor gave after he had seen the opinions of the lawyers of
four universities. And not long after they were by another sentence of the
same emperors, given in the month of July, in the year one thousand five
hundred sixty four, condemned in a process which they had against Anthony
Flisque, by them banished, who overthrew them by an appeal made unto the
emperor.

Which things although they be so plain as that there ought thereof to be no
Frederick. And that the cities of Italy either had no right of soueraintie at
al, or else renounced the same, it is manifest by that league which was made in
the city of Constance; for in that league among such priueleges as are
confirmed unto the cities of Italy, the rights of sovereignty are expressly
excepted. And therefore Alexander Imolensis of all the lawyers of his time the
most skilful, says, A certain

Much less therefore may the imperial towns and cities contained within the
The imperial towns and cities subject unto appeals made unto the imperial
chamber
bounds of the German empire, pretend themselves to have any sovereignty,
albeit that we see certain of them to boast of a certain show of liberty,
which they of old received from the emperors; as Nuremberg from the emperor
Frederick the first; Isne from Otho the third; Egre from Jews of Bauyere: yea
and some of them there were, which not able longer to endure the hard bondage
of their lords, princes of the

Rescindere nunquam Dijs licet acta Deum. It is not lawful for the Gods the
acts of Gods t'vndoe. As for the Swissers Commonweals, we said before, them to
have been rent from the The Swissers Commonweal^ to be subject either to the
Empire or the king of France.
German empire, as oppressed with the tirannnie of their governors: and yet
they so honor and reverence the majesty of the German empire, as that they in
general requested Ferdinand, to have the liberty of their priueleges unto
them confirmed: which is a certain form of ancient fealty, and
acknowledgement that they hold their liberty of the empire. And albeit that
some there be on this side the Rhene, which vaunt themselves to have sovereign
power over their subjects, yet must they needs be the subjects and vassals
either of our kings, or of the German empire. For there is no man which knows
not (if he remember the antiquity of the French) that all the country of
Loraine, and the realm of Arles, after the death of the three children of
Lothaire were divided betwixt the emperor Charles the Bauld of France, and
Jews king of Germany his brother. As Vitald, Floard, and Lambert the best

And albeit that many think the duke of Loraine to be an absolute sovereign,
by The Duke of Loraine no absolute Sovereign, but vassal of the German empire.
reason of the Arms that he bears, being an armed arm, saying, as it should
seem, That he holds nothing but of the sword: yet nevertheless so it is,
that in his title he calls himself a prince of the empire; which is indeed
to acknowledge the imperial viz. scarce the sixth part of the ancient duchy
of Loraine (a province of the German empire) which contains all that country
which lies betwixt the river of the Maze and the Rhene. And therefore the
dukes of Brabant, and the German emperors, called themselves dukes of Loraine.
So the emperor Charles the fourth, in the league which he made with John the
French king, calls himself duke of Loraine. But this country which now is
called Loraine, is a part of the German empire and the duke himself a vassal
Stephen county of Boulongne, was in that dukedom invested by the emperor
Henry the first, and for that cause acknowledged himself a vassal of the
empire, in the year 1019. And Frederick of Loraine county of Vaudemont, duke
Charles being dead without heir male, before Sigismund the emperor and the
fathers assembled at Constance, claimed that dukedom of right to belong unto
him, as next of kin; for that it was an imperial fee, whereof Isabel duke
Charles his heir, who had married Renat duke of Aniou, was not (as he said)
capable: which Renat denied it not to be an imperial fee, but showed many such
imperial fees to have descended unto the daughters. And afterward the title
coming to be tried by the sword, Renat being overthrown and taken prisoner by
Frederick, could not be before delivered, until Yoland unto Anthony the son
of Frederick, with condition, that if Renat died without heirs male, the
duchy of Loraine should descend unto the heirs of Frederick, and so unto the
house of Vaudemont, as it is come to pass.

Now if so it be that the dukedom of Loraine be an imperial fee, comprehended
The duchy of Lor^ine deuolued unto the counties of Vaudemont.
within the bounds of the German empire: neither the lord of Lumes nor the
county of Aspremont, who are contained within the precinct of Loraine, can
challenge unto themselves any right of sovereignty, as they have done, seeing
that it is plain by the law, that he which has a limited territory, has but
the same right over every one of his subjects which are within the compass of
his territory, that he has over them all in general; except it appear, him
by some special privilege to be free and from the length abusing the long
possession of sovereignty, made of that their right, which The right
sou^raigntie and liberty not to be prescribed against.
right of liberty, can by the client or vassal be prescribed against: and
much less if it be withholden by concealment or by sufferance. In like sort
the country of Bearne, betwixt the confines of France and Navarre, which the
kings attorney general in the court of Paris maintained to be a province
holden of the crown of France, and disallowed of the plea of the kings
attorney of the parliament of Thoulouze, who had confessed it not to hold of
the crown, in the year 1505; which although it remain undecided, yet the
king of Navarre for all that by sufference holds it in sovereignty. In like
case the principality of Dombes was maintained by Lizet the kings attorney,

As for the dukes of Sauoy, the Italian doctors with one common error have
holden The Duchy of Sauoie to hold of the empire.
them to have absolute power and sovereignty, and to have so been judged by
the decree of the parliament of Sauoy: a thing altogether contrary unto the
office of a lieutenant and vassal. And also Osazque the first president of
Piemont writes, That the dukes of Sauoy have obtained this power of the
emperors, which they could not have as lieutenants of the empire; as Felinus
the best interpretor of the law has most truly written. For what can be more
contrary unto sovereign majesty, than to profess Henry the fi^t; and
afterward into a duchy by the emperor Sigismund. And evident it is the dukes
always heretofore, and not long since duke Charles restored unto his country,
to have yielded fealty and homage unto the emperor: and two years after,
viz. in the year 1561, to have sent special letters of attorney unto the
county D'Arques chief chamberlain to the emperor, to Ausburg, seemed not
unto him in sufficient good form, as I have seen by the letters of M. D'la
Forest, ambassador for the king unto the emperor. But an hard matter it was
to make such a form as should be unto him good; for that it seems that the
title or quality of a perpetual lieutenant, does prejudice not only unto
sovereignty, but also unto the quality of a feudatarie and proprietarie in
those lands which he holds of another man, if it be not by a doubtful or
improper kind of speech.

The dukes of Saxony and the counties Palatine are also perpetual lieutenants
of The dukes of Saxony and the county Palatine lieutenants of the empire.
the empire; but that is in the emperors absence, to do justice unto the
princes and imperial towns, yea even against the emperor himself, (as shall
in due place be declared) and to all them which are of their government: which
is a personal office, and not belonging unto lands; neither can he that takes
upon him the quality of a deputy, lieutenant, o^ governor, be feudatarie or
proprietarie of those seignories that he holds of him whose lieutenant he is.
And so the title of perpetual lieutenantship ought to have relation unto other
countries, without the terrritorie and demaines of his country of Sauoy: which
neither the Swissers, nor other princes of Italy and Germany could endure,
and much less the French king, who holds nothing of the empire, whereby he
might be iusticiable to the lieutenants of the empire. Join hereunto Charles
the fourth made Charles the sixth Dauphin of Viennois, Charles the fixed of
France by the emperor made perpetual lieutenant of the empire.
his perpetual lieutenant, the xiiij day of January, in the year 1378. And
for that he was but nine years old, he gave him the priuelege of his age, by a
most ample and gracious charter, whereunto hang seals of gold, which I have
read in the records of our kings. But withal made him perpetual lieutenant of
the kingdom of Arles, (excepting only the county of Sauoy) and that more is,
gave him power of life and death over the subjects of the empire; with power
also to confer honors, to impose and raise taxes, and from the same to exempt
whom he saw good, to receive appeals made unto the emperor, to make peace
and war, to give laws unto the subjects, and to disanull and abrogat the
same, and such other like. This lieutenancie was for all the Claudius mount)
and the rivers Araris and Rhodanus, unto the Alps, and the sea of Genes; all
which the imperials have always pretended to be holden of the empire. But the
earls of Province have long since exempted themselves from the German empire,
amongst whom was Raymund the last, one of whose daughters was married unto
Jews the ninth, the French king, and the other unto Charles duke of Aniou, by
which means the county of Prouence is come to the house of Aniou, and from
thence by the bounty of county Renat, unto the crown of France. Albeit that
Philip Valois The soneraignty of the kingdom of Arles bought of the emperor
by the French king.
the French king, had bought of the emperor Henry the fi^t, the sovereignty
of all the realm of Arles, without excepting either the county of Sauoy, or
the principality Jews duke of Burbon; either of the county of Prouence, which
was then in the house of Aniou; either of the frank county, which was given
to Philip the hardy, by the emperor Charles the fourth, in the year 1362,
being deuolued to the empire for want of heirs male. And the sale of
sovereignty of the said kingdom of Arles, was made for the sum of three
hundred thousand marks of silver, with promise to cause it to be ratified by
the princes of the empire, who afterward consented thereunto: of which their
confirmation the emperor gave John king of Bohemia surety, who sold also the
town of Luques unto the same king, for an hundred and fourscore thousand
florines of gold, in the year 1330. The contracts, ratifications, and
quittances, are yet in the treasury of France to be Charles the fourth gave
to Philip duke of Burgundy to be possessed in the imperial right, the issues
male of the counties failing. Whereby it is manifest the French kings to have
the right of sovereign majesty over all the people of

And at the same time as it were the emperor Jews of Bauatia made Edward the
Edward the third King of England made perpetual Lieutenant of the Empire
third, king of England his perpetual lieutenant; and by his letters pattents
gave him power to make laws, and to administer justice to all the subjects of
the empire: and that all the subjects of the empire should obey him, and in his
name to yield unto him fealty and homage: which was an occasion rather sought
for, than offered, for him to make war upon the French king, who then held
Cambray and the castles of Creueceur, and Payerne, members of the empire: for
that by the ancient leagues made betwixt the French kings and the emperors,
it was provided, That they should not one Edward by the imperial princes
allied with him, and then assembled in the town of Hale: which is a most
certain argument that the kings of France hold The Kingdom of France not to
hold any thing of the Empire.
nothing of the empire; neither that the emperors have any right in that
kingdom. Which is also expressly set down in the contract of purchase of
Philip Valois, which I have here before rehearsed, which bears this clause:
And the kings and realms of France shall continue in their priueleges,
enfranchisments, and liberties, that they have always holden against the
German empire, whereunto they are in nothing subject. Which was well given the
emperor Sigismund to understand, at such time as he of his imperial power
would have made the county of Sauoy duke, in the town of Lions* against
Charles the sixth, to cover two notable errors that had been before committed:
the one passing by sufferance, in that the emperor Sigismund being
magnifically received at Paris, and as beseemed the kings uncle, had place in a
royal seat in full parliament; and the other, that afterward he was suffered
to make Seneschal D' Beaucaire knight; although the court had in this last
point admonished the king, that unto him only it belonged to make knights in
his own kingdom; as it had twice before been solemnly judged by two decrees
against the counties of Flaunders and Neuers. Which I have Alciat, who has
maintained, that the Alciat and Bartholus taxed.
French king is subject to the empire; which is a wilful error or
ingratitude, considering the entertainment he had in France to teach and write
the truth: which I think not to have proceeded from him of ignorance, but in
favor of the emperor Charles the fifth, who drew him to Pauie, and there
doubled his salarie: or else to the imitation of Bartholus, author of that
error, who writ the same things of the French kings that Alciat did: at such
time forsooth as he was by the emperor Charles the fourth of a bastard not
only made legitimat, and by him ennobled, but power also given him to take the
benefit of age to him and his, which should profess to teach the laws, with
arms also answerable unto his dignity and honor: viz. a Lion Azure in a
field Argent. Antoninus Augustus, unto the law Rhodia; I am (says he) the lord
of the world, and law of the sea: which words seeing they were spoken but for
ostentation sake, and for the augmenting of his honor, less need to be
refuted; seeing that the Roman empire when it was at the greatest, (which was
in the time of The Germane Empire not now the tenth part of the Roman empire.
Traian the emperor) contained scarce the thirtieth part of the world, and
that the German empire is not now the tenth part of the Roman empire. And yet
the emperor Sigismund sick of that incurable disease of ambition, sought to
have brought every Great Duke (whereby he was called) although he had of
himself shaken off the servile yoke of the Tartars, least in so doing he
might seem to have attributed his power and sovereignty unto the Germans.

We see also that the German Emperors have sent the royal Crowns unto the
The kings of Polonia hold nothing of the empire.
Dukes of Polonia, before they were by the Pope suffered to bear the Royal
title; which they refused: and yet certain it is, that the Kings of Polonia
never held any The fruit that came of the strife betwixt the German emperor and
the pope for the soueraign tie of the Christian Commonweal.
emperors for the sovereignty and chief government of the Christian
Commonweal, Innocent the fourth, against the king of Portugal. And albe it
that pope Innocent said, That his meaning therein was not in any thing to
prejudice the regal power, in appointing such an ouerseer; yet did not his
sayings at all agree Urban the fifth also made no doubt, to make legitimate
Henry the bastard king of Castile, so to thrust out of his kingdom his brother
Peter, borne in lawful wedlock: who thereupon, by the power of the French,
was not only thrust out of his kingdom, but s^aine also by his bastard
brother. Some there have been also The immoderat and absurd pow er which some
attribute unto the pope.
which have passed further, saying that the pope has in power jurisdiction
over the emperor; but over all other kings and princes really and indeed:
excepting over the French king, whom the canonists themselves confess, indeed,
and ofright to acknowledge none greater than himself under God. Which Belluga
a Spanish doctor, and Oldrade the beauty of his time do also better declare,
saying that the French king neither in fact nor of right acknowledges any
prince of the world superior unto himself. Gelasius, who has written, That
the pope has power to dispoyle all kings and princes of their sovereignty and
power. And some others there be which have maintained, That appeals may be
made from all people and princes unto the pope, That there is none but the
emperor and the pope which can revoke their own decrees, and deptiue other
kings and princes of their sovereignty and rule; That there is no prince but
he, unto whom the pope has confirmed his principality: And that which of all
other is most absurd, that he of himself may give priueleges, exemptions, and
immunities unto another Clement V. P. M. doubted not to command the angels.
Yea some there be that have written, That so often as the pope shall put this
clause to his rescripts, De plenitudine potestatis, Of the fullness of our
power: so often does he therein derogat from the laws of all princes. And albeit
that some have holden also, That we must rest upon that that the pope says,
without farther enquire of the verity thereof; yet so it is nevertheless, that
Baldus has written, That a man may say unto him, Salua reuerentia vestra, By
your reuerences leave. And upon the maxim set down by the canonists, That the
pope can do all: the divines Claue non errante, The key not erring. And
forasmuch as it is every good subjects part to maintain the greatness and
majesty of their own princes, I will not enter into the disputes of Jacques de
Terranne the popes chamberlain, nor of Capito, nor of M. Charles du Moulin,
and others, who have oftentimes ouershot themselves either of set purpose, or
else pressed with violent passions, have unawares entered into matter of
religion, and so carried away either with love or hatred of the pope, have
filled their writings with raylings. Whereas I here speak not but of temporal
sovereignty, which is the subject that I entreat of, (whereof they speak not)
to the end it may be understood, who be absolute sovereign princes; and
whether the other princes be subject

For at the beginning, after that pope Gregory (he which first called himself
the servant The beginning of the popes greatness.
of the sernants of God) had obtained of Phocas emperor of Constantinople, the
prerogative over all the bishops; his successors after turning the spiritual
power into the temporal, by little and little still increased their power, in
so much that the princes as well for the fear they then had toward God, as for
the dignity of the prelacie, began to reverence them much more than in former
times; but much more after that the empire of the East began to decline, which
was after that the popes had by their interdictions forbidden the people of
Italy their obedience unto the Constantinopolitan emperors, or to pay them
any tribute; upon occasion taken, that Leo the emperor, Monomachus, or the
Image breaker, and also Thomas the emperor, had caused the images of Saints to
be cast down and broken: wherewith the people moved, and enraged with the
authority of the bishop of Rome, slew Thomas in the temple of Saint Sophia.
Wherefore the power of the Greek empire being weakened in the East, by the
incursions of the Barbarians; and the Greek emperors out of hope again to
recover Italy; the kings of Lombardie then also doing what they might to make
themselves lords of all Italy, and the popes also on their parts no less
desirous to have therein a share, and finding themselves too weak to make
their party good against the Lombard kings, upon this difference cast
themselves into the protection of the kings of France, who then were the
greatest Monarchs of Christendom; Pipin Grande The popes put themselves into
the protection of the French Kings, Pipin and Charlemaigne his son, the popes
great champion.
Mr. of France (a man of great wealth and power, who then disposed of all the
affairs of the realm) with a great army passing over the Alps, overthrew and
discomfited the power of the Lombards, and afterward going to Rome, was the
first that gave unto pope Zachary, part of the seignorie of Italy, who had
before crowned him king of France, forbidding the peers and people of France
to make choice of any other for their kings but of the house of Pipin, having
publicly pronounced king Childerike for his sottishness to be unable for the
government. Whereunto the people of France made so much the less resistance,
for that Pipin then had the nobility and the Pipin had before solemnly
promised, and given him letters pattents thereof, That if he should become
victorious over the Lombards, he should give unto the Church of Rome the
Exa^chat of Rauenna, which contained thirty cities, and the province of
Pentapole, which contained sixteen cities more: which he after the victory
performed, laying the keys of the said cities upon Saint Peter's altar: yet
reserving unto himself and his successors in the crown of France, the
sovereignty of both the provinces; and that more is, power also to choose the
popes. Whereunto the pope not only willingly granted, but almost persuaded
Pipin to take upon him the name of an emperor: which title none Pipin being
dead, the Lombards again took up arms, to the great disquiet of the popes,
who again had recourse unto the French kings, as unto a most sure sanctuary.
Whereupon Charles, Pipin his son (for his many and worthy victories surnamed
the Great) with a strong army passing the Alps, not only overthrew the king
of the Lombards, but even their kingdom also: and having surely established
the power of the Roman bishops, was by them called Emperor: and they again by
Charles so long as he lived, all chosen bishops of Rome. But after the death of
this Charlemaigne, they which were of great credit in Rome, caused themselves
to be chosen pope by the clergy, whether it were How the French Kings lost
the prerogatione they had in the choosing of the Pope.
for the distrust they had to obtain that dignity of the kings of France,
having no favor Jews the Gentle, wherewith the French kings busied, lost the
prerogative they had in choosing of the chief Bishop. Yet Guitard, a good
antiquarie, who lived in the same time writes, 3 popes successively to have
come into France to excuse themselves to Jews the Gentle, That they had been
by the clergy of Rome constrained to accept of the papal dignity, beseeching
him to confirm the same: which he either as a man not desirous of glory, or
else fearing to provoke the clergy (being then in great authority) did: of
which his error he afterward though to late full sore repented him; being by
the college of cardinals constrained to yield up his c^owne, and to make
himself

But after the death of this Jews the Gentle (who was emperor of France, of
Germany, and of the greater part of Italy, and Spain) the empire was divided
into three kingdoms, which the brethren Charles the Bauld, Lothaire, and
Jews, every one of them held in title of sovereignty, without acknowledging
any superiority of one another; and again, the kingdom of Lothaire was
divided amongst his children into three parts: unto one fell the kingdom of
Loraine, unto another the kingdom of Arles, Jews holding Germany, and Charles
the emperor, France. So their divided power began to decay, and the wealth of
the bishops of Rome greatly to increase: they now succeeding one another by way
of election, and in nothing acknowledging the majesty of the French kings, as
they ought to have done: which came to pass especially in the time of pope
Nicholas the first, When the pope began first to excommunicat Princes.
who better understood to manage matters of state than had his predecessors,
and was the first that used the rigor of excommunication against princes,
having excommunicated Lothaire the younger brother of Jews king of Italy. But
the children of Lothaire being afterward dead without issue, those three
kingdoms which I spoke of, viz. of Loraine, Arles, and Italy, were divided
betwixt their uncles, Charles and Jews. Wherefore Jews king of Germany
governed Italy, which fell unto his part, by his lieutenants and deputies;
whose power was not such asto withstand the popes, but that The increasing of
the popes power.
they still by little and little extended their power and government: which
especially happened at such time as Guiscard the Norman had subdued the kingdom
of Sicilie and Naples, taken from the Greeks and Moors; who to weaken the
power of the Germans, and to reign himself the more safely in Italy, joined
hands against them with the Bishops of Rome. But the posterity of Guiscard
being dead without heirs male, left the kingdom of Naples and Sicilie unto a
woman their heir; married unto the German emperor Frederick the second, who
going into Italy, there to confirm his Innocent the fourth, a man both for his
birth and learning famous; who driven out of Italy, and coming into France
(the popes surest sanctuary) and strengthened with the wealth and power of
Jews the ix, the French king (whether it were for reverence of him the pope so
solemnly by the cardinals chosen, or to weaken the power of the Germans)
excommunicated the emperor Frederick the second: who seeing himself thereby
become odious unto all men, and himself like to be forsaken even of his own
subjects, and great trobles arising also against him in Italy, fearfully
returned into Germany, having obtained absolution of pope Innocent, by yielding
up his authority and power for any more Manfred, who was also excommunicated
by pope Urban the fist: who not yet so contented, called in Charles of France,
duke of Aniou, brother to king Jews the ix, whom he invested in the aforesaid
two realms of Naples and Sicilie, reserving unto the Sea of Rome the county
of Beneuent; fealty, homage, jurisdiction, and sovereignty for the rest; with
a yearly and perpetual fee of eight thousand ounces of gold, as we have before
said. After which time the house of Arragon, which by right of kindred Why the
kings of Arragonmade themselves the popes vassals for the kingdoms of Naples
and Sicilie, and submitted also unto him the rest of their kingdoms.
succeeded the posterity of Manfred, being always at odds with the house of
Aniou, and so in continual wars for these kingdoms of Naples and Sicilie;
and seeing it not possible for them to recover them so long as the pope was
their enemy, they

As for the city of Rome, sometimes mistress of the world, they brought it
under How the city of Rome was brought under the popes obeisance.
their obeisance, having by little and little oppressed the liberty thereof,
no man gainsaying Charlemaigne having conquered Italy, expressly commanded
that it should remain in full liberty, with power left unto the inhabitants
to govern their estate, which the Roman bishops had also by their oaths
confirmed; as Augustine Onuphre the popes chamberlain writes, and as it well
appears by the Vatican records.

Now if there were any sovereign prince that were a tyrant, or an heretic, or
that The great daun, get princes were sometimes in by reason of the popes
excommunication.
had done any notorious crime, or not obeyed the popes command; he was by the
pope forthwith excommunicated: which was occasion enough to cause his subjects
to revolt from him, and to arm other princes against him which was so
excommunicated; John king of England, who made himself vassal to Innocent the
third, for the murder committed in the person of young Arthur duke of
Britain. And augmented also the feodall rent of England, for the murder
committed by the commandment of the king of England, in the person of Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury. As in like case it chanced for the murder
committed in the person of Stanislaus archbishop of Guesne, by the
commandment of the king: for which the pope excommunicated the king, and
took the royal title from the kings of Polonia; enioyning also their subjects
therefore (as some have written) to shave their heads behind, in such sort
Lucold duke of Polonia, who received the royal crown and title, of pope John
the xxij, upon condition to pay into the popes coffers a certain yearly
tribute, which is yet at this day paid for the lamp of Saint Peter, as we
Thomas Cramerus. Soveraigntie by the pope pretended unto the Kingdom of
Hungary.
read in their histories. And beside those kingdoms which we have spoke of,
viz. England, Arragon, Naples, Sicilie, Jerusalem, Polonia, Sardinia, Corsica,
and the Canaries, all feudataries or tributaries unto the popes, or else both
together; they have also Ladislaus the first, king of Hungary, promises his
obedience unto pope Benedict the xij, and acknowledges that he ought to
receive the crown at his hands. And by another act of Ladislaus the second,
king of Hungary, excommunicated for the disobedience by him committed against
the popes Legate; for to have his obsolution, he bound himself to pay yearly
into the popes chamber an hundred marks of silver; which obligation bears
date the year 1280. Yet in the same Vatican register, dated in the year 1308,
whereby it appears also, the barons of Hungary to have sharply opposed
themselves Stephen the first king of Hungary, to have received his crown of
the pope, and that they would not endure the pope to have any such prerogative
over them: and yet nevertheless they let not, but that the king by
themselves chosen, might if so pleased him cause himself to be crowned by the
pope. And in the end of that act are many decrees of the popes legate,
concerning the state of that kingdom, with prohibitions to the kings of
Hungary for alienating any the demaines of the crown: which may seem to have
been the cause that Andrew king of Hungary, was by Honorius the pope cited to
Rome, to show why he had alienated part of the public demaines. Innocentius
also the third expressly enjoined the king of Hungary to fulfill his dead
fathers vow; threatening if he should refuse so to do, to deprive Godfrey of
Buillon and his allies, it is manifest that he therefore professed himself to
be the popes vassal, and to hold it of him by fealty and homage: besides that
we find it comprised in the Catalogue of the feudatarie kings of the church of
Rome. And as concerning the Grand Masters of the honorable order of S. John
Jerusalem, which was composed of eight sundtie people The Grand Master of S.
John Hiersualem feudatarie both to the king of Spain and the pope.
of diverse language, they were always invested by the pope, and yet do fealty
and homage unto the popes for the sovereign power which they have over the
knights of their order: albeit that they did homage also unto the emperor
Charles the fist, for Tripolis in Barbary, before it fell into the hands of
the Turk: as now also they do at this present unto the king Catholic, for
the isle of Malta, which was upon that condition given them.

And as for the kingdom of Navarre, under the color of excommunication taken
The kingdom of Navarre holden of the pope.
from Peter Albret, we said before, that it is by the kings of Spain holden of
the popes of Rome by fealty and homage. And not many years ago pope Pius the
fifth would under the same color of religion, have taken also the rest that was
yet left, from Ione Charles the ix taken upon him to protect her, as being his
subject, vassal, and near kinswoman: which he gave all Christian princes to
understand, unto whose majesty the proscription of that most honorable queen
might well have seemed prejudicial.

For many were of opinion that the pope was absolute sovereign lord of all the
kingdoms of Christendom. And in our age, at such time as Henry the eight, king
of England, was revolted from the pope, the earl of Aisimund, an Irish man,
sent letters unto Henry the second the French king, (the copy whereof I have
taken out of the records) whereby he offered himself to become his subject, if
he should of the pope obtain Innocent the third. They have also pretended
themselves to have the sovereignty of Mirandula, and of the counties of
Concord, Rege, Modene, Parma, and Placence, for which the popes Julius the
second and third, both of them made great wars against the French king, when
as yet it was most manifest those cities to depend of the German empire. Of
Parma, and Placence there is no doubt; and the rest they confess Maud the
countess to have had by inheritance, holden by fealty of the emperors, which
she gave to the church of Rome.

Now if we grant the aforesaid cities might have been given unto the bishop
of The pope of right vassal unto the German empire for the cities he holds
thereof in fee.
Rome, and to have been indeed given, as the bishops themselves vaunt; they
must also Otho the emperor (but which Otho it is not said, when as there have
been four of that name) does give unto the church of Rome Pisaurum, Ancona,
Fossabrum, and Ausun. Other letters pattents also there is of the emperor Otho
the fourth, unto pope Innocent the third, conceived in these words, Ego Otho
quartus rex Romanorum semper Augustus, tibi domino meo papae Innocentio tertio,
tuisque successoribus ecclesiae Romanae, spondeo, polliceor, and iuro, quod
omnes possessiones Ecclesiae, etc. I Otho the fourth, king of the Romans,
always victorious, do auow, promise, and swear, to thee my lord pope Innocent
the third, and to thy successors of the church of Rome, that all the
possessions of the Church, etc. And that which follows after, contains a
most copious confirmation of all the lands and cities which then were in the
dominion or patrimony of the church of Rome, whether they were given by the
emperors themselves, or by any other lords or princes whatsoever: in the
number of which cities are these contained: Comitatus Perusiae, Reatae,
Saluiae, Interamnae, Campaniae, nee non Roman, Ferrariam, etc. Marchiam,
Anconitanam, terram Comitisse Matildis and quecunque sunt circa Rodicofanum
vsque Ceperanum, exerchatum Rauenne, Pentapolim cum alij terris, etc. The same
form of confirmation is in the Vatican records to be seen, both of Rodolph
the emperor, and Charles the fourth, bearing date the year 1289, and 1368,
importing that they also out of their abundance gave unto the pope and to the
church of Rome so much as should be needful, and all that which Henry the
fifth his grandfather had before given and confirmed unto the church, that so
all the occasions of discord which had before been betwixt the emperors and the
popes, might be altogether taken away. So that if these donations be good, the
popes are exempted from their fealty and homage due unto the emperors, by
reason of the fees

The same we may say of the election of the bishops of Rome, which the German
Right pretended by the German Emperors to the election of the pope.
emperors pretend of right to belong unto them. For the emperor Frederick the
second to have absolution from pope Innocent the fourth, caused to be delivered
unto Illum abusum abolere volentes, quem quidam praedecessorum vt electiones
libere fiant and c^nonice, We willing to abolish that abuse which some of our
predecessors were known to have exercised in the elections of prelates, grant
that those elections may be freely and canonically made. By which words he
seems to renounce not only the creation of the bishop of Rome, but all other
bishops also. Howbeit that in truth that right of choosing of the popes belonged
to the kings of France, and not unto the German princes, who have but usurped
Charlemaigne king of France, and by him left unto his successors the kings of
France, and not unto the kings of Germany: for so they were called in all the
ancient treaties and histories of Germany and France, and not emperors,
except those which were crowned by the popes. But after that the power of the
German kings was far spread in Italy, they then sought to usurp unto
themselves that right of choosing of the bishops of Rome: whether it were for
the increasing of their own wealth and power, or for to take away the ambition
and foul corruption then used in voices giving, and in their elections. For
the emperor Henry the third thrust out of his papacy Gregory the sixth,
chosen pope by the clergy, and set Clement the second in his place; and
afterward Popes chosen and placed by the Germane emperor.
compelled the clergy to swear, not from thenceforth to admit any into the
papacy, without the consent of the German emperors; as we have learned out of
the Vatican records. But Clement the second being dead, the college of
Cardinals sent ambassadors unto the emperor to appoint whom he thought good
to be pope, who appointed Pepon, afterward called Damasus the second; who
dead, the clergy again sent ambassadors unto the emperor, for the creating
of a new pope: who sent unto them Brunon, otherwise called Leo the ix: and
after him Victor the second. After whose death the clergy made choice of
Frederick, and after him of Alexander the second: which when the emperor Henry
the fourth understood, he sent them Cadol Alexander. After Alexander succeeded
Hildebrand, otherwise called Gregory the seventh, chosen also by the clergy,
who upon the grievous pain of excommunication, forbad all lay men to bestow
any Ecclesiastical livings or benefices upon any whomsoever: And also
excommunicated the emperor Henry the fourth, for disobeying his commandment
in creating of bishops in Germany. Wherewith the emperor moved, and with his
army passing over the Alps, chased this Gregory the seventh out of the
city, who had holden the papacy eleven years, and placed in his stead
Clement the third, who held that dignity seauenteene years, against four
popes successively chosen by the clergy. After whose death Henry the 5
Bourden pope; without regard of whom, the clergy nevertheless made choice of
Calistus the second a Burgundion, who drove out Bourdin, before nominated by
the emperor: and by a decree made at Worms, enforced Henry to swear never
more to take upon him to bestow any spiritual livings upon any: yet with
condition, that he might be in the assemblies of the Bishops assistant, if he
thought it so good. Which decree of the emperor Henry the fifth is yet extant
in the Vatican records, in these words, Pro salute animae meae dimitto Deo and
sanctis Apostolis Petro and Paulo, sanctaeque Ecclesiae Catholicae, omnem
inuestituram per annulum and baculum, and concedo in omnibus ecclesijs quae in
imperio meo sunt, Canonicam fieri electionem. For the health of my soul I
remit unto God and the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, and Jews of Bauaria
created Nicholas the fifth bishop of Rome: John the two and twentieth, a
Frenchman, then ^itting as pope at Auignion, who peremptorily citied the
emperor to appear before him and for default and contumacie, pronounced
sentence of excommunication against him: The emperor likewise on the contrary
side summoned the same pope John to come before him, saying the bishops of Rome
to be subject unto his edicts and commands, as emperor: and by sentence given
at Rome, where Nicholas the Antipape held his seat, deprived John of his
papacy. Which Nicholas afterward retiring himself John his mortal enemy at
Auignion, where he shut up in prison, for sorrow languished to death: and the
emperor excommunicated, and therefore detested of all men, was forsaken of his
subjects. And this was the eight emperor whom the bishop of Rome
excommunicated: The eight emperors excommunicated by the pope were these*
Frederick the first, Frederick the second, Philip, Conrade, Otho the fourth,
Jews of Bauaria* Henry the fourth, and Henry the fifth.
after whose fall the German emperors thought it not good afterward to
attempt any thing against the bishops of Rome. But to the contrary the
emperor Charles the fourth gave out his letters pattents, in the year 1355,
whereby he acknowledges unto pope Innocent the fifth, That although he were
chosen emperor by the princes, yet that he ought to take the confirmation of
his election, and the imperial crown of him the pope; beginning in these
words, Post pedum oscula beatorum, etc. Jews of Bauaria, until now.

There is also extant in the Vatican, the form of the coronation of the
emperors, Base services to be done by the emperor to the pope.
and by the emperor Charles the fourth approved; but no where more servile
services: where amongst other ceremonies, the emperor is as a subdeacon to
minister unto the pope whilst he is saying mass; and after divine service
done, to hold his stirrup whilst he mounteth to horse, and for a certain time
to lead his horse by the bridle: with diverse other ceremonies at large set
down in the Vatican records, which it is needless Charles the fifth, who being
come into Italy, with hope to have gone unto the* pope at Rome, being
advertised of his departure thence to Bononia, was Clement the s^uenth.
glad thither to follow him: that so the duty of an inferior prince toward
the majesty of his superior might the more plainly be perceived. But after
the death of Charles the fifth, Ferdinand the emperor could not obtain, that
the pope should in his absence ratify his election; but was oftentimes by the
pope threatened, That he would take such order for him, as that he should have
nothing to do with the affairs of the German Ferdinand to employ their whole
power for the defense of the ma^estie of the empire, against that the popes
enterprises; as I have learned by the letters of the kings ambassador, The
humble subscription Charles the fifth used in his letters to the pope.
dated at Vienna, in July 1559. And to show a greater submission of the
emperors unto the popes, the subscription of the emperors letters unto the
pope, is this, Ego manus ac pedes vestrae sanctitatis deosculor, viz. I kiss
the hands and feet of your Holiness. So used always the emperor Charles the
fifth to subscribe to his letters, when he writ unto pope Clement the seventh.
Which he did not upon a feigned courtesy, but indeed in The base submission of
the Duke of Venice and of Frederick the second unto the pope.
sort did that duke of Venice humble himself (who of the Venetians themselves
is called a dog) for that he with a rope about his neck, and creeping upon all
four like a beast, so craved pardon of pope Clement the 5. But nothing was
more base, than that Frederick the second* who to redeem his son out of
prison, lying prostrat upon the ground at the feet of pope Alexander the
fourth, suffered him to tread upon his head, if the histories be true. Whereby
it is well to be perceived, the majesty of the Emperors, The majesty of the
emperors greatly diminished by the pope
by the power (should I say) or by the outragiousnesse of the Bishops of Rome,
to have been so diminished, as that scarce the shadow of their ancient majesty
seems now to remain. They also say themselves to be greater than the
emperors, and that so much greater, as is the Sun greater than the Moon:
that is to say, six thousand six hundred forty and five times, if we will
believe Ptolomee and the Arabians. And that more is, they have always
pretended a right unto the empire: for the imperial John and Luchin, vicounts
of Milan, the imperial seat being empty in the year 1341, who are in the
records called vassals of the church of Rome, and not of the empire; and are
forbidden their odedience unto Jews of Bauaria the emperor, who was then
excommunicated, as we have before said. For which cause the Canonists have
maintained, that the emperor cannot give up his imperial dignity unto any,
but unto the pope: for which they yield this reason, That the emperors have
their sovereignty of men, and the popes of God: howbeit that both of them, as
all others also in general, are of right to attribute all their Charles the
fifth worn with years and sickness, resigned his imperial dignity into the
hands of the princes electors, and sent unto them his resignation by the prince
of Orange. But howsoever the Bishop of Rome pretended to have a sovereignty
over all Christian princes, not only in spiritual, but also in temporal
affairs; whether they got it by force of arms, or by the devotion and grant
of princes; or by long possession and prescription: yet could not our kings
even for any most short time endure the servitude of the bishop of Rome, nor be
moved with any their excommunications, which the popes used as firebrands to
the firing of the Christian Commonweales. For these the popes interdictions,
The French kings not afraid of the pops ex communication.
or excommunications, were wont with other nations, to draw the subjects from
Boniface the eight saw himself nothing to prevail by his excommunication, nor
that the people were to be drawn from the obedience of their king, after he
had publicly excommunicated Philip the Fair, he in like manner excommunicated
all the French nation, with all them which took Philip for a king. But Philip
having called together an assembly of his princes, and other his nobility,
and perceiving in his subjects in general a wonderful consent for the defense
of his state and sovereignty: he thereupon writ letters unto Boniface (which
are common in every man's hand) to reprove him of his folly: and shortly after
sent Nogaret Philip the Victorious, and his realm being interdicted by pope
Alexander the third, who would have brought him into his subjection: answered
him by letters, That he held nothing of the pope, nor yet of any prince in the
Benedict the third, and Julius the second, had used the like excommunication
against Charles the seventh, and Jews the twelfth (who was called the Father
of his country) that so as with firebrands they might inflame the people to
rebellion: yet failed they both of their hope; the obedience of the subjects
being in nothing diminished, but rather increased: the Bull of excommunication
which the popes legate brought into France, being by the decree of the
parliament of Paris openly torn in pieces, and the legate for his
presumptuousnesse cast in prison. And not long after John of Navarre, who
called himself county Palatine, when he had made certain public notaries in
France, and made legitimat certain of his bastards, by virtue of the
authority which he had (as he said) from the pope, he was therefore by a decree
of the parliament Clements the fifth, whereby he not only absolueth Philip the
Fair and his subjects from the interdiction of Boniface the eight, but also
declares the king and the realm to be exempted from the popes power. Pope
Alexander the fourth also gave this privilege unto the realm of France, That
it could not for any cause be interdicted* which was afterward by seven popes
successively confirmed, viz. by Gregory Clement the fourth, Urban the fifth, and
Benedict the twelft; whose bul^ yet remain in the records of France: which
yet seem unto me not to increase, but rather to diminish the majesty of our
kings, who were never in any thing beholden unto the popes. And that more is,
the court of parliament of Paris, has by many decrees declared that clause,
Auctoritate Apostolica, By the authority Apostolical: The clause, Auctoritate
Apostolica, usually put into the popes bulls or decrees, rejected in France.
usually inserted into the popes rescripts sent into France, to be void, mere
abusiue, and to no purpose: and therefore it behooves him, that would help
himself by any such the popes rescript, to protest in judgment, That he would
not any way take benefit of that clause. By all which things it is plainly to
be understood, not only the kings, but the kingdom of France also, to have
been always free from all the popes power John Durand himself a French
writer, says, That the French kings are subject unto the pope, so far as
concerns their oath, it needs no refuting; as by him written being bishop
of Mende, and at such time as under the color of oathe joined unto contracts,
the ecclesiastical judges drew unto themselves the hearing and determining of
all matters: which their iugling craft was both by the kings edicts, and the
decrees of the high courts of parliament, long since met withal, and taken
away. But if the French king shall in his own private name contract with the
pope, he may voluntarily and of his own accord bind himself unto the popes
jurisdiction, which we read to have been done by Philip Valois, at such time as
he borrowed the sum of three hundred and thirty thousand florines of gold,
of Clement the sixth, which is an ordinary clause in all obligations, in which
sort the pope himself might as well as a private man be bound also. But this
money the pope may seem also not to have lent without reward; but being
himself of the house of Turene, it may be thought that he for this sum so
lent, procured of the king the great priueleges which the counties of Turene
yet at this day enjoy. Yea but I know some to pretend, that the French kings
ought to receive their royal crown at the hands of the pope: for that king
Pipin so received it at Saint Denise in France, of pope Zachary: as though
one act in discontinued solemnities, and of so great consequence, could give a
right, or establish a perpetual law: which it cannot do in the getting of the
least discontinued service; but by the prescription of 100 years: albeit that
in truth the king Jews the Gentle, successor to Charlemaigne: which
confirmation Carolus Sigonius, a most skillful man in the antiquities of
Italy, writes himself to have seen and read. Wherefrom a man may draw two
most certain arguments; The one, That the donation was made by the
predecessors of Jews the Gentle: And the other that the sovereignty of the
seignories so given, was yet reserved: For otherwise there should not Jews his
confirmation; considering that king Pipin had by law of arms won those
territories from the emperors of Constantinople, and therefore might of right
both give them by himself so won, and also appoint laws unto them so by him
given. Albeit that the Constantinopolitan emperor sent ambassadors into France
unto Pepin, to have had him to have infringed and revoked the said donatio^:
which they could not of him obtain, but returned as they came; as is to be
seen in the histories of Floardus and Sigonius. And that more is, Augustinus
Onuphrius the popes chamberlain, who had diligently searched all the Vatican
records (speaking of the popes) confesses, that the exarchat of Rauenna,
Romandiola, the duchy of Vrbin, viz*. John, surnamed Digitorum, to have
written in letters of gold, the donation pretended to have been made by
Constantine: in the end whereof are these words, Quam fabulam longi temporis
mendacia finxit; which words I thought not good in any thing change: as being
much stronger arguments than those of La^. Valla, to convince the lies of
Augustine Egubin, who of purpose to deceive, has forged in Greek the donation
of Constantine, to give it the more credit; whose deceit is easy to be refuted
both by the manner of the style, and the knowledge of antiquity: and is
sufficiently refelled by Sigonius and Onuphrius both Italians. Which is also
well justified by the epistle of pope John, written in the Pipin, Charlemaigne,
and his successors: and by the ancient marble table, which is yet to be seen
at Rauenna, wherein are these words contained, Pipinus Pius primus
amplificaendae ecclesiae v^am aperuit, and exarchatum Rauennae cum ampliss. The
rest of the inscription time has defaced. And thus much concerning the
greatness and sovereignty of our kings.

I will not here touch the greatness and sovereignty of the Negus of
Aethiopia The princes se^ing the great Negus of Aethiopia no kings nor
soueraigns.
commonly called Prester John, whom Paeu. Iouius writes to have fifty
tributarie kings under him, or (to say better) governors of Provinces, which
yield unto him not only their ordinary tributes, but also their fealty and
homage, and that in greater humility, Francis Aluares a Portugal, who dwelt
six years in Aethiopia, and yet nevertheless they are called kings without
cause, because they be no absolute sovereigns, seeing that they be but
tributaries, yielding fealty and homage unto another man.

As for those princes which are no Christians, I have nothing to say, for the
small assurance The Mahomitaine princes by their law forbidden to call
themselus lords or soueraigns.
we have by the writings and reports of others, much differing among
themselves. Yet nevertheless so it is, that in one chapter of the Alcoron, it
is expressly for bidden all the Musulman (that is to say the right believing)
princes, to call themselves lords, except their Caliph or great bishop their
great prophet Muhamed his vicar. By means of which prohibition the Mohammedan
bishops have usurped absolute sovereignty Ioiada the high priest, having
consecrated Ioas king of Judah, set a crown upon his head. But the Musulman
princes think that chapter not to have been made by Muhamed their law giver,
but by their Caliphes, (who of many diverse corrupt Alcorans made but one, long
time after the death of Muhamed, defacing the rest, and for the augmenting of
their majesty, to have been into their Alcoran by them inserted. But at such
time as three of their great bishops had for the desire of sovereignty, at one
time taken upon them the name of the Diverse Mahomitaine kings tributaries unto
the king of portugal
which hold in fealty and homage of the king of Portugal, as the kings of
Calecut, of Malachie, of Cambar, and of Canor, whomethey have compelled so to
do, and to pay them tribute; having also subdued all the sea coast of Afrike,
and of the East Indies, and Barnagas governor of that coast, and the king of
Aethiopia his subject, cut the Portugals in pieces, and rased the fortresses
which they had begun to build, under the color of alliance and amity
contracted by Lopes ambassador for the king of Portugal, with the king of
Aethiopia, in the year 1519. And yet for all that certain it is, that the king
of Portugal was of ancient time feudatarie or vassal unto the king of
Castile, and the kingdom of Portugal a member Portugal of ancient time a
member of the kingdom of Castile.
of the kingdom of Castile: which for the greater part holden by force by the
Henry, brother to Godfrey of Buillon, in marriage with the base daughter of
Alphonsus king of Castile: from whom are descended all the kings of Portugal,
since this four hundred and fifty years, unto Henry the Cardinal, who last
reigned: having (of long) exempted themselves from the sovereignty of Castile,
and holding diverse kings their tributaries and feudataries, of whom Emanuel
was the greatest, and for his martial prowess amongst the rest most famous;
who vanquished the aforesaid kings, and caused them to pay him tribute. For
there are now no feudatarie kings in Asia, or Africa, which are not also
tributarie; howbeit in ancient time the kings of Persia, and the Romans,
having subdued kings unto their empire, for most part made them to become their
tributaries: as for such fealty and homage as is of Philip the second, king of
Macedon, being by the Romans overcome, they granted him peace upon condition,
that he should pay them into their common treasure, a certain yearly tribute;
which Perseus, Philip his son, afterward refusing to pay, drew upon himself
a great and heavy war, to his own utter destruction. And yet oftentimes such
tributarie kings had others tributarie unto themselves, who had also power of
life and death, and other royal soueraignties over their own subjects. So the
kingdom of David was contained within the bounds of Palestine, and yet he
enforced the neighbor kings to pay unto him tribute, his posterity
nevertheless not long after yielding tribute unto the Egyptians, and the
Assirians. So the kings of Slauonia, and the Commonweal of Carthage

Yet is there difference betwixt a tribute and a pention: for a pention is paid
in respect Difference betwixt a pention and a tribute.
of fealty, or in time of wars to receive aid against our enemies: but a
tribut is given, thereby to have peace; howbeit that he which receives such a
pention, commonly boasts of it, as of a tribute: as the kings of England
called the pention of fifty thousand crowns, which Jews the xj paid unto
them by the treaty of Piqueni, by the name of a tribute; until that Elizabeth
the daughter of Edward king of England was married unto Charles the eight, king
Jews his son. Howbeit that Philip Comines who not only kneeled before
himself, but stood before his ambassadors sitting: B^silius the first, who
called himself The Great Chamberlain of God, and The Moscoui^ an absolute
sovereign prince.
King of Moscouie: and so he which at this present reigns, in despite that
other princes term him but a duke, styles himself The Great Emperor: as in
truth he in power either excels, or is equal unto the greatest kings his
neighbors, excepting the kings of the Turks* albeit that the right of
sovereign majesty be not defined by the spatiousnesse of places, or the
greatness of countries, as if that might make a prince either The notable
saying of Eumenes to king Antigonus.
more or less sovereign: as Eumenes being overthrown, and having nothing
left him of his own more than the castle wherein he was besieged, yet when as
he was to treat of peace with Antigonus king of Asia (who as he was in power,
would also in honor have seemed to have been his superior) answered, That he
Plutar. in Eumene.
acknowledged no man greater than himself, so long as he had his sword in his
hand.

And yet among sovereign princes there is a certain prerogative of honor due
Degrees of honor among sovereign princes being equal.
unto the more ancient Monarchs and Commonweals, although they be in wealth
and power inferior unto them that be more new or of later time: as we see
amongst the xiij Cantons of the Swissers, who are all sovereigns,
acknowledging nether prince nor monarch in the world for their sovereign: the
Canton of Zurich in all their assemblies The order of the Cantons of the
Swissars.
has the prerogative of honor: For their deputy as a prince in the name of
all the rest of the Cantons, receives and dismisseth the ambassadors of other
kings and Commonweals; and unto him only it belongs to call a general
assembly of all the states of the Cantons, and again to dismiss the same;
albeit that the Canton of Berne be much greater and stronger: Next unto them of
Berne, are Lucerne, and Vri, albeit that they are defended neither with walls
nor ditches, no more than are the Schwits, and Vnderuald, which follow in order
unto them of Vri: then follow after them Zug, Glaris, Basil, Friburg, and
Soleurre. Now happily a man may say, That this is done according to the time that
every Canton entered into their alliance: which is not so; for by their
treaties it appears, that the first that entered in that confederation

Sometimes also the more ancient Monarchs and Commonweals lose their
prerogative of honor; as when they put themselves into the protection of
latter princes, Degrees of honor betwixt soueraign princes being in alliance
together.
or yield themselves tributaries: in which case it is most certain, that they
are always less than the other into whose protection they put themselves, or
unto whom they pay tribute. As it chanced almost to all kings and princes
which sought the protection of the Romans: whereas others which were come into
equal alliance with them, as the Hed^i, were in their leagues called their
confederats, their equals and brethren: and yet for all that, they in truth and
effect were inferior unto them in honor. And verily Augustus the emperor
showed himself wonderful ceremonious and difficult Q. Martius Philippus their
ambassador show himself therein curious: Who contending with Perseus king of
Macedon, which of them should come over the river upon the frontiers of Macedon,
unto the other: and Perseus for that he was a king, refusing to come over
Martius, or else Liuie omitted, which was forthat Philip the father of Perseus
had upon conditions, received peace of the Romans and also paid unto them
tribute; which his father Philips act, if he had disliked, he should not have
meddled with the kingdom: although that he was otherwise unworthy thereof, who
his father yet living, had aspired unto his inheritance: and being but borne of
a concubine, had slain his brother borne in lawful marriage. But after that
he Paulus Aemilius* had lost the hope of his kingdom* he writ letters unto
Aemilius, general of the Roman army, yet stiling himself a king: which his
letters the Roman general rejected, and would not vouchsafe to open them,
except he first renounced his royal dignity, which can only agree unto him
which has a sovereign power, subject to no other princes command.

And for the same cause Francis the first the French king declared unto
Cardinal Bibiene the popes legate, that the pope his master ought not to suffer
the emperor Charles the fifth to call himself king of Naples and of Sicilie,
seeing that he was but the Popes vassal. Whereof the legate gave advertisement
unto Julian Cardinal de Medices, who was afterward pope; to the end that that
title might have been rased, which Charles of France, of Carobert, and of
John. So many times ambassadors evil instructed in their masters affairs,
through ignorance commit therein many notable defaults. And by the same reason
we should take the royal title of a king from the king of Bohemia, who holds
his kingdom in fealty and homage of the empire; and not for that it is so
little, as many have written, that it is for that cause no kingdom, which were
to measure kings by the elne: but it is, for that the country of Bohemia was
by the emperor Frederick the first, for title of honor only erected a
kingdom, without prejudice unto the right or soueraignetie of the empire. But
to say truth, this title agrees unto none that is another man's vassal, nor
has nothing of his own in title of sovereignty. And it maybe, that for this
cause pope Pius the fourth gave not the royal title to The title of a king
belongs not unto an other man's vassal neither to him which holds nothing of
his own in sovereignty. The majesty of the emperor still impugned by this
French author* and the French kings too much exalted.
Cosmus duke of Florence, albeit that he would very gladly have so done:
whereof the emperor Maximilian the second, being by the French ambassador
advertised, not unfitly replied, Italia non habet regem nisi Caesarem: Italy
has no king but the emperor. Although that be to be understood of the majesty
of the German empire (whereof the Florentine state depends) and not of the
emperor, who is himself subject unto the estate of the empire: albeit that
all christian princes give him the prerogative of honor, Baldus (being himself
an Italian Lawyer and a subject of the empire) says well, That the French king
carries the crown of glory above all the kings, who have always given him
that Gregory's unto king Childebert, the beginning whereof is this: Quanto
caeteros homines regia maiestas antecellit, tanto caeterarum gentium regna,
regni vestri culmen excellit: by how much the royal Majesty excels other
men, by so much does the Majesty of your kingdom excel the kingdoms of
other nations. As in truth this prerogative is unto him due: for the Germane
emperors themselves cannot deny, but that the German empire was sometime a
province and member of the ancient kingdom of France, conquered by the
prowess of Charlemaigne king of France, and power of the French nation: but
afterward rent again from the same, being given in partition to Jews of
France, youngest son to Jews the Gentle, at such time as Charles the Bauld the
French Othons, by the grant of the Roman bishops having got the imperial
title, have by little and little through the ignorance of our ambassadors
usurped and taken unto themselves this prerogative of honor above the French
kings. As in like case the king of Spain not many years ago would have
prevented our kings ambassadors: but was at the request of M. Nouuaille,
ambassador for the French king, by a decree of the Venetian Senate embarred so
to do, in the year 1558: and so likewise afterward by a decree of the pope,
given by the consent of all the college of Cardinals: where the pope said with
a loud and clear voice, That the French kings had been always the ancient
protectours of the church of Rome, and that the fairest Contention at the
counsel of Trent betwixt the Spanish and French ambassadors about their places.
Wherein the pope also in some sort amended the error committed in the
council of Trent; where Mendoza the Spanish ambassador, preferring himself
and taking place before the French ambassador (which then was M. Lansac,
assisted with the M. M. of Ferrier and Faut) was to have bin compelled to have
departed from the council, or else to have kept the ancient order of
ambassadors, and so to have followed the French ambassadors: who withstanding
the Spanish ambassadors presumption, Henry the second the French king hearing
of, writ again to his ambassador, That prerogative of dignity to be of so
great moment and consequence, as that nothing therein was by him to be said or
done more than he had commission for. And Ferdinand the emperor not willing to
offend either the one or the other, thought it good to forbid them both from
coming together, either unto sermons or other public A good order for the
avoiding of conte^tion betwixt the ambassadors of great princes, for their
places*
assemblies. The Senate of Polonia troubled with the same difficulty, thought
it not good to prefer one ambassador before another, neither to prefer
them by turns, or yet to make them equal: but decreed of all ambassadors in
general, that as every of them first came into the frontiers of the kingdom
of Polonia, so should M. De Monluc bishop of Valence (who for his wisdom and
dexterity for mannaging of matters of estate, had been fifteen times
ambassador) having by great celeritie prevented the Spanish ambassador, had
also first audience; wherewith the Spanish ambassador offended, would as then
say nothing: as I have understood by M. de Nouuaille abbot of Belle-iste, a man
of great honor and virtue; who then was also ambassador into Polonia, as he
now is at Constantinople. But before the year 1558, never Christian prince
made question of the pre-eminence of the French ambassadors before them of
Spain: and namely the English men always preferred them before the Spaniard;
albeit that they had been ancient allies and friends unto the one, and enemies
unto the other. As after the Marie, in the chapter holden by the knights of the
most honorable order of the Garter, upon Saint Georges eve, in the year 1555,
concerning the conferring The French preferred before the Spanish.
of honors, it was decreed, That the French kings place should be above the
rest, next unto the prince on the right hand; where before was the place for
Spain, while king Philip was married unto the queen. And the next day after
being Saint Georges day, a day of great solemnity unto the knights of that
order, a seat was accordingly reserved for the French king, on the right hand
next unto the prince: and another on the left hand for the king of Spain, next
unto the emperors seat on the same side, being then empty. And afterward in
the time of Charles the ix, the queen of England caused to be sent unto him
the banner of France, of the same stuff and greatness that M. de Foix then his
ambassador there; and in the roll or Catalogue of these knights, which is
signed every year by the queen, the French kings name is ever the first,
next unto her own.

But to take away these difficulties and ielousies betwixt princes, about their
honors, which are otherwise inevitable and dangerous: it is declared in the
xiij article of the ordinances of king Jews the xj, touching the order of
knights, that they should be placed according to the time of their receiving
into the order, without prerogative of king or emperor. For every sovereign
prince who is neither tributarie, vassal, nor in the protection of another,
may as seems unto him best in his own country bestow the prerogatives of
honor upon whomsoever he pleases, and to reserve the Greatest among the most
Great Princes of the Christians: and styles himself The greatest of all
Princes, and the chief Sarrach or Prince of the Musulmans; that is to say,
Chief Prince of the right believing or faithful, which last prerogative of
honor the Christian princes themselves have given him by their letters: and as
for the first title it seems himself to have taken it from the ancient


emperors of Constantinople, who bare in their arms four B. which we call
Fusills, whereby thesewords are signified; (...), King of kings, reigning over
kings. Which was the title that the kings The arms of the ancient emperors of
Constantinople.
of Babylon in ancient time took upon them also, as we may see in Ezechiel,
who calls the great king Nabucodonosor (...) that is to say, King of kings;
for that all the kings of Asia were unto him tributaries: after which the kings
of Persia having overcome the kings of Asiria, as Esdras writes, used the same
title: and after them the Parthian kings also, as Dion writes, that Phraates
the king of Parthia called himself King of kings. But neither feudatarie kings
which hold all their territories of others; neither dukes, marquesses,
counties, or other like princes can of right use the title of sovereign
majesty, but only of his Highness, his Serenitie, or his Excellency, as we
have before

CHAP. X. Of the true marks of Sovereignty.
SEeing that nothing upon earth is greater or higher, next unto God, Sovereign
princes God his lieutenants upon earth.
than the majesty of kings and sovereign princes; for that they are in
Samuel, of whom the people of Israel had unadvisedly asked a king, It is not
thee (says God) but me whom they have despised.

Now to the end that one may know him that is such an one (that is to say a
Sovereign Samuel had denounced him king whom God had before chosen, and
consecrated him before the people, as if he had but come by chance; he is
reported to have writ a book of the power and Sovereignty of a king, which
the Hebrew priests have written to have been by their kings suppressed and
rent, that so they might more freely tyrannise over Phi. Malancthon in mine
opinion is deceived, who has How Samuel his speech unto the people concerning
the power of a king, by them demanded, is to be understood.
thought those things which Samuel spoke unto the people, concerning the
cruelty or insolency of tyrants, to belong unto the right of sovereign
majesty: Whereas he in that his Oration unto the people, would have reclaimed
them from the alteration and innovation of the state, and to have been better
advised. Will you (says he) know the custom of tyrants? It is to take away
the goods of their subjects, and to dispose of them at their pleasure; to take
the tenth of their labors, to ravish other men's wives, to take from them their
children to abuse them, or to make of them their slaves: For the word (...)
which he uses, signifies not lawful rights in that place, but men's customs
and manner of doing. For otherwise the good prince Samuel should in all his
speech Which of you (says he) is it amongst you that can accuse me of evil,
or say that I have taken of him either gold or silver, or other present
whatsoever? Whereunto all the people with great applause and acclamation gave
him this praise, That he had never done them wrong, nor taken any thing of any
person whomsoever. Should then this good prince being of so great integrity,
godliness, and justice, as he is reported to have been of, have pronounced the
cruelties, insolences, and adulteries of Tyrants, as laws of Sovereignty for
princes to imitate? And amongst the Greeks there are none, who have any thing
written concerning the laws of Sovereignty, Aristotle, Polybius, and
Dionysius Halicarnasseus, who have writ with so great brevity and obscurity*
as that they seem rather to have propounded the question, than to have
declared what was to be thought thereof, as not therein well resolved
themselves. For there are (says * Aristotle) three parts of a Commonweal, the
* Arist. li. 4. d^ Repub.
one to take advice and council, the other to establish magistrates and
officers, and every man in his charge, and the third to administer and execute
justice. Here (in mine opinion) or else no where he seems to speak of the
right of Sovereignty; for that a Commonweal can by no means receive that
division, as it were of the whole into parts, except the sovereign government
were also spoken of. Nether has Polyb. lib. 6* de militari ac domestica Romans
disciplina.
Polybius* also determinatly defined or set down the rights and marks of
Sovereignty: but in Power royal, of the Aristocraticall government, and the
Popular liberty: seeing (says he) that the people made laws and officers;
the Senate* disposed of the provinces and common treasure, received and
dismissed ambassadors, and had the mannaging of the greatest affairs; the
Consuls held the prerogative of honor, in royal form and quality, but
especially in wars, wherein they were all in all. Wherein it appears, that
he has touched the principal points of Sovereignty, seeing that they unto
whom he attributes the same, had the chief government of the Commonwealth.
But Dionysius * Dioys. Halycar lib. 4.
Halycarnasseus seems thereof to have written better, and more plainly than
the other. For he says, That king Seruius, to take away power from the Senate,
gave power Marcus* Valerius the Consul showed unto the people, that it ought to
* Lib. 7.
content it self, to have the power to make laws, to choose officers, to
receive appeals from all the magistrates, and so to leave the rest unto the
Senate. Since which time the lawyers have amplified these rights, and they of
later time, much more than they before them, in the treaties which the call The
rights of Regaltie, which they have filled with an infinite number of
particularities, such as are common unto dukes, counties, barons, bishops,
officers, and other subjects of sovereign princes: in such sort that they A
probable error.
even some counties also dukes subjects, being all or most part blinded with
this error; which has in it a great appearance of truth. For who is there
that would not deem him to be a sovereign, which gives laws unto his
subjects, which makes peace and war, which appoints all the officers and
magistrates of his country, which imposes tributes, and at his pleasure eases
whom he sees good: which has power of life and death, and in brief to
dispose of the whole Commonweal. All which they before rehearsed, have power
to do: and what more can a man desire in a Sovereign prince? For all these
are the marks of Sovereignty. And yet nevertheless we have The dukes of
Milan, Sauoy, Ferrara, and Florence* with such other like great princes no
soueraigns: and the reasons why
before showed that the dukes of Milan, of Sauoy, of Ferrara, of Florence, and
of Mantua, Galeace the first, vicount of Milan* was accused, attainted,
convinced, and condemned of treason by the Highness and Excellency, and style
themselves kings, to use the title of sovereign majesty, which they cannot
do, without reuolting from the empire; as did Galuagno vicount of Milan, who
therefore endured the grievous punishment of his rashness. We have also showed
that the cities of Lombardie were subject unto the empire. In brief we had
declared also the

The same opinion we have of the greatest magistrates, of kings Lieutenants
general, The greatest magistrates or lieutenants no soueraigns.
Governors, Regents, and Dictators; what power so ever they have, if they be
bound A fit comparison.
a crown; so sovereign majesty loses the greatness thereof, if any way
be opened to tread under foot any right thereof; as by communicating the same
with subjects. And for this cause in the exchange made betwixt king Charles the
fifth, and the king of Navarre, for the territories of Mante and Meullan, with
Montpellier, wherein the royal rights are articulated, they are said all wholly
and alone to belong unto the king. It is Baldus calls them Sacra Saerorum, of
Sacred things the most Sacred: and Cynus Indiuidua, things inseparable, or not
to be divided. And if it chance a sovereign prince to communicate them with
his subject, Sovereignty admits no companion or pertaker therein.
he shall make him of his servant, his companion in the empire: in which doing
he shall loose his sovereignty, and be no more a sovereign: for that he only
is a sovereign, which has none his superior or companion with himself in
the same kingdom. For as the great sovereign God, cannot make another God
equal unto himself, considering that he is of infinite power and greatness, and
that there cannot be two infinite Aristotle makes the third part of a
Commonweal, is not the true mark of sovereignty; for that it indifferently
agreeeth almost to all magistrates as well as to the prince: neither in like sort
to make or displace officers; for that the prince and the subject have both
this power; not only in appointing the officers servants at home, and in time
of war, but even of the officers, and magistrates themselves, which command
in peace or in war. For we read that Aristotle said a Commonweal to consist,
to be the true mark of Sovereignty.

As for that which Dionysius Halycarnasseus says of Marcus Valerius the
Consul, in the Oration which he made unto the people of Rome, for the
appeasing of the troubles then risen betwixt the Senate and them; That the
people ought to content themselves Law, without any other addition, signifies
The right command of him or them, which have sovereign power above others,
without exception of person: be it that such commandment concern the
subjects in general, or in particular: except him or them which have given the
law. Howbeit A law is the command of a Sovereign concerning all his What law
properly is.
subjects in general: or else concerning general things, as says Festus
Pompeius, as a privilege concerns some one, or some few: which law if it be
made by the privy council, or Senate of a Commonweal, it is called Senatus
consultum, as the privy council: The difference betwixt Senatus consultum,
and Plebiscitum, a decree of the Senate and of the people.
or decree of the senate. But if the vulgar people made any such command, it
was called Plebiscitum, that is to say, The command of the meniall people:
which after many seditions and sturs, betwixt the Nobility and the common
people, was in the end called a law. For the appeasing whereof all the people
in the assembly of the great estates, at the request of M. Horatius the
Consul made a law, that the Nobility and the Senate in general, and every
one of the people in particular, should be bound to Q. Hortentius and Pub.
Philo Dictators: From which time forward such the peoples decrees were no more
called Plebiscita, but simply laws, whether they concerned every man in
particular, or all men in general. As for the commandments of the
magistrates, they were not called laws, but only edicts. For an Edict (as M.
Varro defines it) is the command of a Magistrate; which his command bound
What an edict is.
none, but them which were of his own jurisdiction; provided always that such
his commands were not contrary unto the ordinances of the great magistrates, or
to the laws and commandments of his sovereign prince, and were no longer in
force than the magistrate pleased, or had charge. And for that all the
magistrates were annual in the Roman Commonweal, there edicts had not force
but for one year at the most. And therefore they which succeeded in the same
office, were either to allow or revoke the edicts, by their predecessors before
made: and if so be that they were against the laws, or for longer time than the
magistratie of him that made them, then were they to none effect: which when C.
Verres did, he was in these words accused by Cicero, Qui plurimum (inquit)
edicto tribuu^t, legem annuam appella^t, tu plus edicto complecteris, quam
lege, Augustus, having oppressed the liberty of the co^monweal, called himself
but Imperator (that is to say chief captain and Tribune of the people) he
called also his own decrees by the name of edicts: but such as the people made
at his request, he called them Leges Iuliae; which manner of speech the other
emperors after him used also; in such sort, that this word Edict, is by little
and little taken for a law, especially when it comes out of the mouth of him
which has a sovereign power; be it for one, or for all, be it an edict
perpetual or only prouisionall. Wherefore they abuse the words, which call
edicts which are proper unto magistrates by the name of laws: but in what sort
soever that it be, there are none but sovereign That the senate of Rome had no
power to make laws, but annual decrees only.
power to make laws, and that the more part of the greatest affairs of estate,
in peace or war, were in the power of the Roman Senate to determine of* But what
the authority of a Senate is, or ought to be in every Commonweal, we shall in
due place declare. But by the way to answer that that is objected, I say, that
the Senate of Rome, from the expulsion of the kings, until the time of the
emperors* had never power to make law, but only certain decrees and
ordinances: which were not in force past a year, wherewith for all that the
common people were not bound, and so much less the whole body and estate of
the people. Wherein many are deceived and especially Conan, who Dionysius
Halycarnasseus, who had diligently read the Commentaries of Marcus Varro,
writes, That the decrees of the Senate had not any force, if they were not by
the people confirmed: and albeit that they were so confirmed, yet if they were
not published in form of a law, they then had force but for one year. No more
than the city of Athens, where the decrees of the Senate were but annual, as
says Demosthenes in the Oration which he made against Aristocrates: and if it
were a matter of importance, it was referred unto A pretty quip of Anacharsis.
the people to dispose thereof as they thought good: which Anacharsis the
philosopher seeing merrily said, The wise and grave propound matters at Athens,
and fools and mad men resolve thereof. And so the Senate in Rome did but
consult, and the people Liuie often times says, Senatus decreuit, populus
tussit, The Senate has decreed, and the people commanded. Yet true it is, that
the magistrates, and namely the Tribunes, often times suffered the decrees of the
Senate, in a manner to have the force of laws, if the matter seemed not to
impare the power of the people, or to be prejudicial unto the majesty of the
estates in general. For so properly the ancient Romans said Cicero pro Ra^
birio Perduellionis r^o.
Imperium in magistratibus, auctoritatem in Senatu, potestatem in plebe,
maiestatem in populo inesse dicebant, Command to be in the magistrates,
authority in the senate, power in the meniall people, and majesty in the
people in general. For the word Majesty, is proper unto him which stirs
the helm of the sovereignty of a Commonweal. Majesty proper only unto a
sovereign prince.
And albeit that the law Iulia concerning majesty made by the people at the
request of Augustus, hold him guilty ( Laesaemaiestatis, or as we say) of
treason, which strikes a magistrate in the execution of his office: and that
sometime the Latin historiographers, yea and the lawyers themselves also give
the title of majesty unto the Consul and Praetor; as in saying, Maiestatem
consulis, maiestatem praetoris, The majesty of the Consul, the majesty of
the Praetor: yet is it but improperly spoken, neither by our laws is he guilty
laesae maiestatis, that has hurt a prince, a duke, a county, or a magistrate:
but he only that has violated the person of a sovereign prince. And so by
the laws of Sigismundus Augustus king of Polonia, made in the year 1588, it
is set down that the crime Laesae maiestatis, should take no place further
than his own laesa maiestas. And for this cause it seems that the dukes of
Saxony, of Bauaria, of Sauoy, of Loraine, Ferrara, Florence, and Mantua, put
not into their styles of honor, this word Majesty, contenting themselves with
the title of Highness: and the duke of Venice with the addition of The duke of
Venice no sovereign prince.
his Serenitie, who (to speak properly) is but a very prince, that is to say,
the first, for he is nothing else but the first of the gentlemen of Venice:
and has no more above the rest of the Senators, than the chief place and
dignity of the Commonweal in all their assemblies, wherein he sits as
chief; and the concluding voice into what corporation The order of the
Venetian Commonweal.
or college he come, if there be any question of voices. And as in Rome the
edicts of the magistrates bound every man in particular (so that they were not
contrary In consiglio Di Dieci: whereunto if the college of Sages be joined,
there is also commonly added, Con la Giunta, but if it be a decree of the
Senate, it is declared in these words, In Pregaidi: but if it be in the great
assembly of the gentlemen of Venice, these words are commonly adjoined
thereunto, In Consiglio Magiore. For in these three corporations or colleges,
are almost all things dispatched which belong unto their laws, their customs,
and Commonweal, except such Julian the lawyer gathered a great number of such
of these edicts of the former Pretors, as he thought best, and after that he
had interpreted them, and brought them Magistrates edicts confirmed by him or
them that have the sovereignty become laws*
into ninety books, he gave the same unto the emperor Adrian for a present;
who in recompense of so great a work, made him great Provost of the city of
Rome, and thereby made way for his nephew Didius Iulianus, afterward to aspire
unto the Roman empire. Adrian himself also persuaded the Senate, that not only
the edicts which Julian had gathered, but other his own writings should be
taken for laws, which he confirmed also by his authority, and yet
nevertheless still held the name of edicts, which has deceived many, who have
accounted those laws as Pretors edicts. So also Justinian the emperor, to the
example of Adrian, by decree commanded many things which the lawyers had after
Julian written unto the Pretors decrees (after they had been by him as he
thought good corrected) to be received for laws, the name Sancimus Iubemus, We
ordain and command; which are words proper unto sovereign majesty, as says
the Consul Posthumous, in the oration which he made unto the people, Nego
iniussu populi quicquam sanciri posse, quod populum teneat, I deny that any
thing can be Quod bonum, faustum, foelixque sit vobis ac Reipub. velitis,
Iubeatis, Will you, and command you, that which may be good, happy, and
fortunat, to you, and the Commonweal. And in the end of the law are still
these words, Si quis aduersus eafecerit, etc. If any man shall do against these
things, etc. Which they called Sanctio, that is to say an ordaining or
enacting, declaring the punishments or rewards due unto them that should keep
or break the law: which are special formalities and proper unto the majesty
of them which had the power to make the law; but never used by the Senate in
their decrees, nor by the magistrates in their edicts. Join hereunto

Wherefore let this be the first and chief mark of a sovereign prince, to
be of The first and chief mark of sovereignty.
power to give laws to all his subjects in general, and to every one of them
in particular, the chief men, so to give them the better grace, and to make
them to be the better received; Denis in France, of Philip the first, and of
Jews the Gross; whereunto the names and seals of the Queens Anne and
Adella, as also of Robert and Hugh are annexed: And namely in the twelft year
of the reign of Jews the Gross, and of Adella the sixth.

Now when I say that the first and chief mark of Sovereignty is for the
prince to It belongs only unto sovereign princes to grant privileges, and
what a privilege is.
be of power to give laws unto all his subjects in general, and to every one
of them in particular: these last words concern privileges, which only belong
unto sovereign princes to grant, and particularly to others, to whom they be
granted. A privilege I call a l^w made for one, or some few particular men:
whether it be for the profit or Cicero, Priuilegiam * Cicero pro dom^ sua et
post re^ ditum in Senaetu.
de meo capite latum est, A privilege was made concerning my life, he means
the law made against him by the common people at the motion and instigation of
Clodias the Tribune, (to have him called to account for certain citisens put
to death contrary to their appeal, about the conspiracy of Cateline) which
he in many places calls Lex Clodia, or a Law made by Clodius, whereof he
oftentimes most grievously complained, both in the Senate and before the people,
saying, That by the law of the xij Tables it was forbidden any privileges to be
granted, but Comitijs Centuriatis, that is to say, in the general assembly of
the whole body of the people. For so be the words of the law, Priuilegia nisi
comitijs centuriatis ne irroganto; qui secus faxit capital esto, Privileges
Tiberius the emperor made them all to know which had obtained any privileges
from the emperor Augustus, as Suetonius writes. But now if any shall object
unto me, the magistrates themselves to discharge men oftentimes Papinian the
lawyer, That we are not to consider what is done at Rome, but what ought indeed
to be there done. For by the tribunitiall law Cornelia, the Senate is forbidden
to discharge any Roman of the laws, except there were two hundred of the
Senators* present: which exemption from the laws seems also to have been
granted unto the Senate, by reason of the difficult assembling of the whole
people.

But some man may say, that not only the magistrates have power to make edicts
and laws, every one according to his authority and jurisdiction, but also
that particular men make customs, both general and particular. Which customs
have almost the force of laws, and yet depend not of the judgment or power of
the sovereign (...) difference betwixt the beginning of customs and laws:
and that both of them depend of the power of the soueraign prince.
by the common consent of all or most part; but the law comes forth in a
moment and takes strength of him which has power to command all: custom
creeps in sweetly and without force, whereas the law is commanded and
published with power, yea and oftentimes contrary to the good liking of the
subjects. For which cause Dion Chrysostom compares the law to a tyrant, and
custom to a king. Moreover the power of the law is much greater than the power
of custom: for customs are by laws abolished, but not laws by customs; it
being always in the authority

This then is the first and chiefest mark of Sovereignty, to be of power to
give laws That the power to make laws cannot be unto subjects communicated.
and command to all in general, and to every one in particular; which cannot
be Solon, and the Lacedaemonians to Lycurgus: yet were these laws neither the
laws of Solon nor Lycurgus, who were but as commissioners and procurators for
them which had given them that charge; but they were the laws of the
Athenians, and Lacedaemonians: neither had these laws had any force, had not
the people by their consent authorized the same. They indeed wrote those laws,
but the people commanded them; they composed them, but the people enacted
them. And almost always in a Popular or Aristocraticall state, the laws took
name of him which propounded or engrossed the same, who was nothing else but the
simple procurer Vlpian says, Duralex, sic tamen scripta est, An hard law What
power the magistrate has to interpret the law.
(says he) but so it is written: which if the judge shall presume under the
color of equity to break, he is by the law condemned of infamy. So ought
the law called Laetoria, (or rather Praetoria) to be understood, which Papinian
recites, without naming of the author. Whereby it is permitted unto the Great
Praetor of the city of Rome, to supply, to correct or amend the laws: which
must (as we said) be moderatly and in a measure

Under this same sovereignty of power for the giving and abrogating of the
law, are All the other marks of sovereignty contained under the first.
comprised all the other rights and marks of sovereignty: so that (to speak
properly) a man may say, that there is but this only mark of sovereign power,
considering that all other the rights thereof are contained in this, viz. to
have power to give laws unto all and every one of the subjects, and to
receive none from them. For to denounce war unto Other the marks of
Sovereignty
the enemy, or to make peace with him, although it seem to be a thing
different from the name of the law, yet is it manifest these things to be done
by the law, that is to say by the commandment of the sovereign power. So
also is it proper unto sovereign majesty, to receive the subjects appeals
from other, and the greatest magistrates, to place and displace the greatest
officers, charge or exempt the subjects from taxes and subsidies, to grant
pardons and dispensations against the rigor of the law, to have power of life
and death, to increase or diminish the valor and weight of the coin, to give
it title, name, and figure: to cause all subjects and liegemen to swear for
the keeping of their fidelity without exception, unto him to whom such oath
is due: which are the true marks of sovereignty, comprised under the power of
being able to give a

But forasmuch as the word Law, is too general a mark, it is the more
expedient particularly The second mark of Sovereignty.
to specify the rights of Sovereignty, comprised (as I have said) under that
sovereign law; as to denounce war, or treat of peace, one of the greatest
points of sovereign majesty: for that oftentimes it draws after it the
ruin, or assurance of a Commonweal; which is to be verified not only by the
law of the Romans, but of al other nations. And for that there was more danger
to be feared from war, than from peace, it was lawful for the common people
of Rome, to command peace, but if question were for making of war, it might
not be decreed, but in the greatest assembly of all the states together, until
such time as that the meniall people had also full power to make laws. And
therefore was it that war was decreed against Mithridates by the law Manilia,
against the pirates, by the law Gabinia, against Philip the second, Martia. And
for because Caesar had without command of the people made wars in France,
Cato Vticensis was of opinion in the Senate, that the army was to be called
home, and Caesar for his presumption deliueted unto the enemy. In like case
the estates of the people of Athens determined of war and peace. As a man may
see by the war by them decreed against the Megarians, against the Syracusians,
and against the kings of Macedon. I here but briefly set down certain
examples of two of the greatest and most famous popular Commonweales that ever
yet were: For in a regal state there is none (as I suppose) which doubt all
the power of peace and war to be in the king: insomuch as that for any man to
attempt even the privy counsel only: yea and sometimes by the advice of one
only captain also: The greatest danger in war.
for that nothing is more dangerous in war, than to have the secret policies
thereof revealed: which must needs be, if the people have therein to do. And
therefore we read in the Greek and Latin histories the designs and
enterprises of war to have been still managed by the wisdom and direction
of some one or other captain, or in case that the matter were of greater
importance and consequence, by the counsel of the Senate, without any more
speaking thereof unto the people, after it was once by the peoples command
denounced and proclaimed against this or that enemy. But if one should say,
war to have been oftentimes denounced by the advice of the Senate, without
the consent or command of the people: I confess it to have sometimes indeed
so happened and fallen out, but yet very seldom: and that the Senate in so
doing The Senate in Rome had no power to denounce war without the consent of
the people.
the people, and faithful keepers of their liberty, oftentimes interposed
themselves to cross the matter, as we see in Liuie, where he says:
Controuersia fuit vtrum populi iussu indiceretur bellum, an satis esset S. C.
peruicere Tribuni, vt Q. Consul de bello adpopulum ferret, omnes Centuriae
iussere. Controversy was (says he) whether war should be denounced by the
commandment of the people: or else that the decree of the Senate was
sufficient, but the Tribunes prevailed; so that Quintus the Consul propounded
the matter unto the people, which all the assembly of the people commanded.
Howbeit, that the Senate it self would not ordinarily denounce war, except the
people had before so decreed, As T. Liuius speaking of the second
Carthaginensian war, says, Latum inde adpopulum vellent iuberent, populo
Carthaginensi bellum indici: It was afterward Lib. 1* Dec. 3.
propounded unto the people, whether they willed and commanded war to be
denounced unto the people of Carthage. And in another place, Ex S. C. populi
iussu bellum Lib. 1. Dec. 2.
praenestinis indictu^. By a decree of the Senate, by commandment of the people
war was proclaimed against them of Praeneste. And again, Ex authoritate patrum
populus Palaepolitanis Lib. 8. Dec. 1*
bellum fieri iussit, The people following the authority of the Senate,
commanded Lib. 9. Dec. 1.
war to be made against them of Palaepolis. And afterward, Populus bellum
fieri Aequis iussit, The people commanded war to be made against the Aequi.
And at such time as war was to be undertaken against the Samnites, Patres
solemni Lib. 8. Dec. 1.
more indicto decreuerunt, vt ea de re adpopulum ferretur, The fathers after
the solemn Liuie in calling it the solemn manner, declares it to have been a
thing so used to be done. And so against the Herniques, * Populus hoc bellum
frequens iussit, The Lib. 5. Dec. 1.
people in great number commanded this war. And against the Vestines, *
Bellum ex authoritate patrum populus aduersus vestinos iussit, The people
following the authority of the Senators commanded war to be made against
the Vestines. The like manner of denouncing war was also amongst the
Tarentines, so long as their popular state endured. For so says Plutarch, Ex
authoritate Senatus populum Tarentinum Romany in ferri bellum iussisse, The
people of Tarentum following the authority of the Senate, to have commanded
war to be made against the Romans. And Liuie Casimire the great. True it is
that in Rome concerning peace the Senate oftentimes determined thereof without
the consent of the people; as we may see in all the treaties of peace betwixt
the Roman and the Latins: viz. in the tumult and uproar of Italy: least the
hard assembly of the people, and danger of delay, might have brought some
detriment unto the Commonweal. Yea sometimes the generals and great
commanders in the wars, of themselves determined of peace and war, without
the commandment of the No peace by the General concluded with the enemy
good without the confirmation of him or them that have the sovereignty.
people or Senate, especially if the wars were in some country a far off:
as we see in the second war of Carthage, the three Scipioes made all the
treaties of peace and alliance with the people and princes of Spain and
Affricke, without the advice of the Senate. Yet true it is, that the Senate, yea
and often times the people authorized their actions, and ratified their treaties,
after that they were made: and if they were in any thing Mancinus, who for
that the peace he had made with the Numantines, was rejected and not ratified
by the Senate and the people, was himself delivered unto the The Romans
oftentimes disclaymed the peace by their ge nerals made with their enemies
without the consent of the people.
enemy. And that is it which a certain Senator of Carthage, as Liuie
reports by way of exprobration objected unto the Roman ambassadors, saying,
Vos cum Luctatius Consul primo nobiscum fedus icit, quia neque authoritate
Patrun, nec populi iuss^ ictum erat, negastis vos eo teneri. Itaque aliud
foedus publico consilio ictum est. You at such time as Luctatius the Consul
first made peace with us; for that it was made without the authority of the
Senate, or commandment of the people, said you were not thereunto Manlius the
Proconsull of Asia says, Gallograecis bellum illatum, non ex Senatus
authoritate, non populi iussu: quod quis vnquam de sua sententia facere ausus
est? War was made upon the Gallogrekes, neither by the authority of the
Senate, nor the command of the people, which what man durst of himself ever
do? But this was Orator like spoken by the adversary against Manlius being
absent; for that it was sometime so done, we have by examples declared. Spurius
Posthumous the Consul, also being himself with his army shut up in the
Straits and rocks of the Appennin mountains, in danger with hunger to
perish, before he could have heard from the Senate or the people, what they
would have had him to have done; to deliver Posthumous the Consul himself, in
the assembly of the people said, Cum me seu turpi, seu necessaria sponsione
obstrinxi, qua tamen, quando iniussu populi facta est, non tene tur populus
Romanus, nec quicquam ex ea praeter Corpora nostrae debentur Samnitibus,
dedamur per faeciales nudi vinctique, Seeing that I have bound my self,
whether it be with a shameful or a necessary promise and agreement, wherewith
for all that the people of Rome is not bound, forasmuch as it was without their
commandment made, neither is there any thing thereby unto the people would
not confirm the agreement by them made; which had they done, no Hanniball had
sent eight thousand soldiers, there taken prisoners, to Rome, to redeem their
liberty with the ransom of a pound of gold for every head; and that the Senate
would not agree thereunto, but decreed, that they should either become the
enemies slaves, or die: the Consuls charged those soldiers, before the
appointed day to return unto the enemy; who all obeyed their command, but
one, who by a crafty wile sought to delude the oath, before by him given unto
the enemy for his return; whom the Senate for all that Hannibal. Or if it had
seemed too hard a thing unto the Senate, to have yielded the whole army being
sworn unto the Samnites, they would undoubtedly yet have confirmed those hard
conditions of peace by them agreed upon. As did Jews the xij, the French king,
in the treaty made at Dijon by the lord Trimouille with the Swissers, giving
them hostages of the chiefest men of his army, with condition that the Swissers
might put them to death, if the king should not ratify the agreement with them
made. As did the duke of Aniou unto the hostages which those which were
besieged in the castle of Eruall had given him: when he saw that Robert
Knolles, captain of the castle, being arrived within the castle, after the
agreement, would by no means suffer the castle to be surrendered, saying, That
the besieged

But some may say, that these rules take no place in Venice, where the Senate
does wholly discern and determine of peace and war, neither amongst the
customs of the Swissers and Grisons, which are popular estates. And in the
conversion of the Hard for the popular or Aristocraticall estats by the
multitude well to manage martial affairs: and why.
cannot if they would, well manage martial affairs, for the hard assembling
together of the people: and in case that the people might be at all times
assembled, yet were it a thing of great peril and danger, to have those
things which ought of all others to be most secret in a Commonweal, the
councels (I say) of peace and war, revealed and made known unto the Vulgar
people: which therefore were of necessity to be left unto For the kingdom of
Polonia, Denmark, Sweden, and Norway, as they are Sigismundus Augustus was
sealed with an hundred and three seals of the nobility of his country:
neither was there fewer in the act of the lawful creation of king Henry to be
king of Polonia.

The third mark of Sovereign majesty is to be of power to create and appoint
The third mark of sovereignty.
magistrates, than which no more certain sign can be, especially the
principal officers, Tublius Valerius made after the expulsion of the kings out
of Rome: that the magistrates should be chosen and appointed by the people.
Which self same law was published also by the Venetians, at such time as they
first assembled into the Gulf, for the establishing of their state, as
Contarenus writes: than which law there is none more religiously kept by the
Senate and the Venetian people. Yet much better is it kept in monarchies, where
all is governed by one, and where the greatest, the meaner, yea and the least
offices of all, as of Porters, Sergeants, Clerks, Trumpeters, Criers, which in
the Roman state were placed and displaced by the Roman magistrates are provided
for by order from the prince, even unto the meanest offices. I have said the
appointing of The lesser magistrates in a popular estate sometime created by the
greater* but not without power from them which had the sovereignty
for to make choice of the hundred and four magistrates of the Commonweal; as
they do also at Nuremberg, where the Censors which are chosen of the great
Council, chose the new Senators, and that done, give up their charge. The
Senate which is of xxvj, making choice of the eight Auntients: and afterward of
the xiij of the seven Burgamasters, and of the xij Judges for civil causes,
and five for criminal. Neither is this any new matter; but an old and ancient
fashion. For Aristotle writes, the people of Carthage to have used to choose
five men, who according to their discretion still made of the hundred and four
magistrates: which was also a thing ordinary Festus Pompeius says. And
sometime the dictators were for that purpose only made to supply the number of
the Senators. As Fabius Buteo named Dictator by the Consul Terentius,
following the decree of the Senate, made choice at one time of an hundred
seventy seven Senators, in stead of them that were dead. Howbeit that to
speak properly, a Senator is no magistrate, as we will show in the discourse
concerning the Senate. But howsoever that it was, whether it were the Consuls,
the Dictators, or Censors, that made choice of the Senators, and so supplied
the Selymus the first conquered, the great Edegnare, which was a Cunstable to
the Sultan, had power to place all the other officers: as had in ancient time
the Grand M. of the Palace in France. And it is not long ago but that the
chauncelour of France had power at his pleasure to bestow all offices which
had none, or but some little fees, viz. of some three or four crowns at the
most: which was revoked by king Francis the first. And albeit that always the
Charles the seventh, the very baylieffes and seneschals were placed by the
prince, who before were wont to be placed by the majors, whose lieutenants they
were. Sometime also it may be that magistrates, corporations, or colleges, have
power to nominat and choose the principal magistrates: as we read in the records
of the court of Paris, that by a law made in the year 1408, it was decreed
that the officers of the high court of parliament should be made by election;
and so thereupon commandment was given unto the chauncelour to go into
parliament for the election Jews the xj, in the year 1465. And after him in
the time of Charles the eight, not only the presidents, the kings counselors,
and aduocats, were made by election, but even the kings attorney general (who
is the only man of all the body of the court, which owes not oath but to the
king alone: albeit that the atturneyes of other parliaments, which he calls
substitutes, take their oath in the court) was chosen also by the suffrages of
the court: In the year 1496. But yet all their letters of provision and
confirmation of their elections into their offices, then were, and yet are,
always granted by the king* without whose confirmation their election was to
no purpose. Which may serve for answer to that which one might say, that
Arthure duke of Bretaigne, was chosen Cunstable Charles the sixth, was then
distraught of his wits, and that the seals of France had in them not the image
of the king, but of the queen only: yet nevertheless the said new constable
taking upon him the government of the kings sword, and of the French army,
being sworn to the keeping of the laws, at the same instant acknowledged
himself to hold his office and power in fealty and homage of the king: so
that all authority and power to command, may well seem to flow and be
derived from the fountain of the prince only.

Yet may some say that the Great Palatine of Hungary, who is the greatest
magistrate Great magistrates sometime chosen by the estats of the country, or
otherwise: but still approved and confirmed by the king.
of that kingdom, and the kings lieutenant general, is chosen by the estates
of the power for the choice of their kings (by the house of Austria) wrested
from them. It is Sigismundus Augustus, all the magistrates of every country,
were to be chosen by the particular states of every government; the majesty of
the kings, who also reigned by the good Cassiodorus, that Theodoricus king of
the Goths, gave his letters of confirmation unto the officers whom the Senate
had chosen; using these words in his letters directed unto the Senate, for one
whom they had made a Senator, Iudicium vestrum P. C. noster Comitatur *
Cassiodorus. lib. 1. Epist. 6.
assensus, Our consent, Reverent fathers, does accompany your judgment. Now
seeing that power to command over all the subjects of a Commonweal belongs
unto him that holds therein the sovereignty; it is good reason also that all
magistrates should acknowledge their authority to proceed from him.

But now let us speak of the fourth mark of Soueraignetie, that is to wit, of
the Last The fourth mark of sovereignty.
Appeal, which is and always has been one of the most principal rights of
soueraignetie. As a man may see after that the Romans had driven out their
kings: not only the last Appeal, but even all Appeals from the Magistrates,
were by the Law Valeria reserved unto the people. And for that the Consuls and
other Magistrates oftentimes gave small ear unto them that did appeal unto
them, the same Law was often times* renewed: and by the Tribunitiall law
Duillia the pain of death adjoined (...) lib. 1. and 7. and 10.
there unto, for him that should oppose himself against the same; which Law
Liuie calls the foundation of the popular liberty: albeit that it were evil
executed. The same Law was yet more straightly kept in Athens, where the last
Appeal was reserved unto the people, not only from the Magistrates of the
city, but even from the Magistrates Zenophon and Demosthenes do right well
declare. The same Law Contarenus writes to have been the first that was by the
Venetians made for the establishing of their Commonweal: viz. That all men
might freely appeal from the Magistrates, unto the Graund counsel of the
people. Nether was Francis Valori Duke of Florence for any other cause slain,
then for not having given way unto the Appeal, made from him unto the Great
counsel of the people, by three Florentines by him condemned to die, and so
notwithstanding their appeal by him executed. But some may say, that not only
this Duke at Florence, but at Rome the Dictators, and other Magistrates also
oftentimes put to death condemned citisens, notwithstanding their appeal made
unto the people, as is in many Rhegium being taken and brought to Rome, to be
whipped and afterward beheaded without regard of the appeals by them made unto
the people: or to the intercessions of the Tribunes exclaiming, the sacred
Laws concerning Appeals to be violated, and trodden under foot. Whereunto in
brief I answer, as did Papinian, That we ought not to rest our selves upon
that they do at Rome, but on that which ought to be there done. For it is
most certain, that a man might appeal from the Senate unto the people: and
that ordinarily the opposition or intercession of one of the Tribunes, stayed
the proceedings Adrian the emperor, for the edict of Caligula, whereby he gave
power to all magistrates to judge without appeal, took no place. And albeit
that Nero decreed, that they which without cause had appealed unto the Senate,
should be punished with like punishment, as if they had appealed unto his own
person: yet forbad he not men to appeal from the Senate unto himself, although
he had referred the appeals from all the magistrates unto the Senate. But this
answer seems directly contrary unto that we have before said. For if no
appeal were to be made from the Senate unto the emperor, but that the last
appeal was unto the Senate, then was not the last appeal the true mark of
sovereignty. Join Praefectum Praetorio, gave judgment without appeal,
receiving also the appeals of all the magistrates and governors of the empire,
as says Flauius Vopiscus: as in every Commonweal * Flauius Volpiscus in
Florian^.
we see certain courts and parliaments which gave judgment without appeal;
as the eight parliaments in France, the four courts in Spain, the imperial
chamber in Germany, the council at Naples; the forty at Venice, the Rota at
Rome, the Senate at Milan; and so the greater courts of other cities, who hear
and decide either all or most part of causes, both public and private, without
appeal: and in all the imperial towns, duchies, and counties, depending of
the empire, no appeal is to be made unto the imperial chamber, in criminal
causes once judged by the magistrates of the prince, A sovereign prince cannot
by any edict prohibit his subjects to appeal from his magistrates or to prefer
their humble requests unto himself.
make an edict, that none of his subjects should appeal from any of his
magistrates, or prefer any request unto himself against their judgments, as
the emperor Caligula was about to have done: yet nevertheless should it
always be lawful for the subjects to appeal, or to exhibit their requests
unto the prince: For that the prince cannot so bind his own hands, or make
such a law unto himself; either prohibit his grieved Michael del' Hospital,
that the commissioners appointed to proceed against the president of Allemand,
forbid him by a decree made against him, to come within twenty leagues of the
court, so to cut him off from the means to prefer his petitions; which the
king himself could not of right take from his subject, although it were in his
power to grant or reject his request being once made unto him known. We see
also, that in all graunts Charles the fifth, to John duke of Berrie, bearing
date the third of March, in the year 1374: wherein is also fealty and homage
comprised. For it is certain that the duchy of Berrie was then the portion
given unto the duke of Berry with the charge of rights royal, and reuersion to
the crown for want of heirs male: as I have learned by the letters of grant,
which are yet in the treasury of France. We see also the like declaration of
Philip Archduke of Austria, ( Charles Jews the twelft, and another of him the
same, in the year 1505: wherein he acknowledges and professes himself
ready to obey the decrees of the parliament of Paris, in regard of the
countries of Artois and Flaunders, and of other lands which he held of the
king; and not to forbid them of those countries to appeal unto the court at
Paris. And in the treaty of Arras, made betwixt* king Charles the seventh, and
Philip the second, duke of Burgondy, there is express reservation made of
fealty and homage, appeal and sovereignty, for those lands which he and his
ancestors held in fee of the crown of France. Neither did Charles the fifth
the French king take any other occasion to make war against the English men,
than for that their English magistrates and governors which had the government
of Aquitaine, under the Francis the first, discharging the duke of Loraine of
all fealty and homage, appeal and sovereignty, for the castle of Chasteler
upon the Maze in the year 1517. But when he suffered the same duke in
sovereign manner without appeal to govern in the duchy of Anthony then duke
of Loraine understanding, and after him Francis his son, by recognisance in
autentique manner declared, that their purpose was not in any thing to derogat
from the fealty and homage, appeal and sovereignty that they ought unto the
crown of France, by reason of the said duchy; and that they had not therein
used sovereign justice but by sufferance: which letters of recognisance are in
the public records to be seen, and were afterward exhibited unto the privy
council, in the year 1564, in the reign of Charles the ninth, who by all
means Charles then duke of Loraine, the sovereignty of the duchy of Bar: but
all in vain, forasmuch as the king can by no means alienat from himself, the
rights belonging unto his sovereignty, no not the high court of Paris
assenting thereunto, although the power and authority of that court may where
the king is, seem to be nothing; in the presence of whom all the power and
authority of all magistrates cease.

Wherefore the best and most expedient way, for the preservation of a state is,
never to give any mark or right of sovereignty unto a subject, and much less
unto a stranger: for that is one step and degree to mount unto his sovereign
majesty. And therefore No mark or right of sovereignty is by the prince to
be bestowed upon his subject or a stranger.
it was long doubted in the council, whether power and authority without
appeal, should be granted unto Francis duke of Alencon (who had made me
master of the requests and one of his council) in that his dukedom; as had
before been granted unto the ancient dukes there. And although he were the
kings best and most loving brother, yet one of the atturneyes general was so
bold as to say in full council, That it were better to bring in twelve courts
of parliament, than to suffer that, albeit that that jurisdiction was for a
short time granted, and extraordinary judges by the king appointed; with
reservation of appeals, in many cases and causes, as also with exception of
fealty and homage. Wherein our ancestors much offended, who with too much
facility (should I say, or necessity) granted the same jurisdiction unto the
dukes of Philip the Fair, and Philip the Long, who by their letters patents
sent unto the court of parliament in February 1306, and in October 1316,
declared that their meaning was not, that the duke of Britaigne or his
officers, should be called before them into the court; but in question of
sovereignty, or in case they should deny

The same we are to think of all the princes and cities of Germany, from
whom even in private judgments men may justly appeal unto the imperial
chamber, if the matter exceed the sum of 50 crowns, or if any controversy be
betwixt the cities and princes themselves. Whereby it is to be understood,
neither the German princes, nor cities to have in them the right of
sovereignty: For that it is a capital crime, even treason it self, to
appeal from a sovereign prince, except he appeal as did that Greek
(whosoever he was) who appealed from Philip king of Macedon evil advised, unto
himself being better advised. Whice manner of appeal Jews of Burbon, prince
of Conde used also from the interlocutorie sentence of Francis the second, the
French Baldus the great lawyer allows as good* and to be received. And well
it would beseem the majesty of sovereign princes to behold and follow the
example of that Macedonian king, who received the appeal; or if they would
needs that their decrees whatsoever should stand fast and irremouable, because
they would not seem unconstant or variable, that then they should do as did
the same king to Machetas, who of his own goods recompensed him, for that he
had unjustly condemned him in, without changing of his former decree and
judgment.

From this mark of Majesty, and benefit of supreme Appeal, depends also
the The fifth mark of sovereignty
power to grant grace and pardon unto the condemned, contrary to judgment
given, and to the rigor of the laws; be it for life, be it for goods, be it
for honor, or recalling from banishment: for it is not in the power of the
magistrates or judges, how great soever that they be, to grant the least of
these things unto the condemned person, or of themselves, to alter any thing of
the judgments by them once given. And albeit that the Proconsuls and
governors of provinces, had as much power in their jurisdiction, as had all
the magistrates of Rome together: yet so it was, that it was not lawful for
them so much as to restore him whom they had but for a time banished (as we
read in the letters of Pliny the younger, governor of Asia unto Traian the
emperor) Papirius Cursor, the dictator, may seem at the request of the people
to have given pardon to Fabius Max. collonell of the horsemen, for having given
battle contrary to his command, although he had slain xxv thousand of the
enemies: yet nevertheless in effect it was the people which gave the pardon:
albeit that they most instantly besought the dictator to pardon the fault:
Which they themselves might at the same time have done, but yet had rather to
request it of Papirius, than to take the guilty person from him against his
will. For Fabius understanding himself in his absence to be by the dictator
condemned, appealed unto the people: before whom Papirius Fabius: which a man
of his virtue and severity would not have done, if an appeal might not have
been made from the dictator, unto the people: and that in it was the power of
life and death. Sergius Galba the Orator also, in like judgment by Cato the
Censor, attainted of treason, took his refuge unto the people, who moved with
his tears, and embracing of his children, pardoned him. Whereupon Cato said,
That Galba had been well whipped, had he not taken himself unto his tears
and his children. The same power of life and death had also the people of
Athens, as appears by Demosthenes, and Alcibiades, who both condemned, were
afterward by the people pardoned, and again restored both unto their goods and
honor. And amongst the Venetians it is not lawful for any their Charles the
fifth, in the erection of the Senate at Milan, granted thereunto all the marks
of sovereignty, as unto his lieutenant and deputy in his absence, coming
very near unto absolute sovereignty: yet Sodorin, after the change of the
state. As for other kings they have still thought nothing more royal, than to
deliver the condemned from death: neither do they suffer the judges or
magistrates of other dukes and princes, to examine the letters granted by the
king for the restoring of the condemned: although that they examine the pardon
granted. And albeit that king Francis the first had given unto his Things
properly belonging unto the sovereignty of a prince can in no wise be imparted
unto a subject.
privilege, and restored the letters patents unto the king, before they were of
her requested. For indeed that prerogative could not of right be granted
unto the French Queen, neither any other the proper marks of Sovereignty.

And albeit that the Roman laws say that the empress is dispensed with from
all edicts and laws: yet that takes no place in this realm of France; yea
there is Charles the sixth, gave power to M. Arnald de Corbie, chauncelour of
France, by letters pattents, the xiij of March, in the year 1401, to grant
pardons unto the condemned, some of the great Council being present with him*
but that was at such time as the chauncelours were almighty, having all in
their own hands: and that king Charles the sixth was then not in the power of
himself but of others, by reason of his malady. Privileges wrongfully wrested
from kings cannot by any new confirmation be made good.


Now if any man shall object and say, That in ancient times the governors of
provinces gave pardons, as we yet may see by the custom of Henault, and of
Daulphinie: as also that the bishop of Ambrun, by autentique charters pretended
this power. Hereunto I answer, that such customs and privileges, wrongfully
wrested and exported from our kings, were of good right abrogated by an edict
of king Jews the twelft. And if such privileges be of no force: so may we also
say their confirmations to be of no more strength. For the confirmation is
never any thing worth, if the privilege be of it self naught. Now must it
needs be naught, for that it cannot be separated from the crown. For as we
have before said, that the privileges by princes even lawfully granted, cannot
stand good for ever: so the rightes of Sovereignty,

As for Governors, Deputies, Lieutenants general of Sovereign princes, it is
another reason; for that they have not that power by privilege, or by office,
but by commission, as the deputies or lieutenants of their princes. But in the
state of a well ordered Commonweal, this power of Sovereignty ought not to
be given to any, neither by commission, neither by title of office, except it
be for the establishing of a Regent in his government, for the great distance
of places; or for the captivity of Sovereign princes: or for that they are
furious; or else in their infancy* Jews the ninth, who for his tender years,
was by the estates of France committed to the tuition of his mother Blanch of
Castile; after that she had given certain princes for assurance that she
should not give the tuition of him to any other person. So the government of
the kingdom was committed unto Charles the fifth, as Regent during the
captivity of his father king John. And in the captivity of Francis the first,
Louise of Sauoy his mother, took upon her the protection of the kingdom
committed unto her by the king her son* with all the royalties thereof, in
the title of Regent. And the duke of Bedford Regent in France, king Charles
the sixth being there distraught of his wits.

But here may one say unto me, that notwithstanding the decree of Jews the
xij. The great privilege of the chapter of the church of (...) in granting
pardon unto the condemned^.
the chapter of the church of Roan pretends always to have privilege to
grant pardon in the favor of S. Roman: the day before whose feast, it
forbids all the judges, yea and the parliament of Roan it self, to execute
or put to death any one of such as then be condemned; (as I have seen it put
in practice being in commission for the Prince, for the general reformation of
Normandy) and for that the court notwithstanding the chapiters pardon, had
after the feast caused to be put to death one, which it had before the feast
condemned: the chapter thereof grievously complained unto the king; having to
friend one of the princes of the blood* the parliament sent also their deputies,
amongst whom Bigot the kings attorney was very earnest in Henry the third.
This privilege had great affinity with that which A great privilege granted
unto the Vestall Virgins and the Cardinals in Rome.
was given unto the Vestall virgins at Rome, which was to give pardon unto him
that was going to execution, if any one of the Vestal virgins by chance
happened to meet him, as says Plutarke in the life of Numa. The like custom
whereof is yet kept in Rome, for if a condemned man there meet a Cardinal, he
is thereby delivered from punishment. But I deem that to be most pernicious
in the privilege of S. Roman, that no man could enjoy the benefit thereof
which had but lightly offended: but he What is by the law of God death, ought
not by the prince to be in any wise pardoned.
a* live can pardon the punishment due unto the offense which is by the law of
God death, no more then he can dispense with the law of God, whereunto he is
himself subject. And if it be so, that the magistrate deserve capital
punishment, which dispenses You shall take him Deuteronomy 19. and 21.
(says the law) from my sacred altar, neither shall thou have pity on him,
but cause him to dye the death: and afterward I will stretch forth my great
mercies upon you. Nevertheless the Christian kings on that day which they
command to be most holy kept, as on Good Friday, use for most part to pardon
some one man or other, condemned of Why grievous offenses are to be severely
punished and not in any wise pardoned.
most horrible and notorious crime. Now pardons granted to such villains
draw after them plagues, famine, wars, and ruins of Commonweales; and that
is it for which the law of God says, That in punishing them that have deserved
to dye, they shall take away the cause from among the people: for of an hundred
villains there comes scarce two of them into the trial of justice: and of
those that come, the one half of them for want of proof and of witnesses
escape unpunished: and then if when they are proved princes grant unto them
pardon, what exemplarie punishment shall there be for offenses and villainies
committed in the Commonweal? And many offenders, when they cannot of their
own prince obtain grace and pardon, interpose Philip, presenting unto him a
request, to the end he should advertise his ambassador in France, no more in
the behalf of the French king, to request pardon of the king of Spain, for
the condemned men which had retired themselves out of Spain into France: for
that having obtained pardon, they many times slew the judges, who had before
condemned them. But of The most gracious and commendable pardon that a prince
can give.
all the graces and pardons that a prince can give, there is none more
commendable, than when he pardons the injury done against his own person:
and of all capital punishments none is more acceptable unto God, than that
which with most severity is executed, for the wrong done unto the majesty of
himself. But what then are we for

Now that which we have said concerning the grace and pardon granted by a
sovereign prince unto men condemned, is to the uttermost to be extended, even
unto the prejudice of the great lords, unto whom the confiscation of the
offenders lands or goods by law or custom belong, who are not to be received
to debate or impugn the pardon granted by the prince; as by decree of
parliament has been adjudged. Now many there be, which draw the grace of the
princes gracious restitutions unto private judgments: as when a man is for want
of council deceived or cosoned; or requesteth Charles the vij and Charles the
viij, it is expressly commanded unto the judges, in deciding of causes, not to
have any regard of the decrees of foreign courts, further than they should
with equity agree: which by this common clause unto all decrees in this realm
commonly annexed ( Si satis superque apparet, If it shall sufficiently, and
more than sufficiently appear) is declared. Which clause if it be not joined
unto the decree, the magistrate has but to understand of the Cicero craving
pardon of Caesar for Ligarius says, I have oftentimes pleaded with thee before
the judges, but I never said, for him whom I defended, Pardon him my lords, he
was deceived, he thought it not, if ever he do so again, etc. So children use
to say unto their parents, of whom they crave pardon: But before the judges we
say, That the crime is for evil will forged, the accusor is a slanderer, the
witnesses false and subborned. In which words he plainly showed* that Caesar
having sovereign power, had also the power of life and death, (and so to
grant pardon) which the judges had not.

Now as for liege fealty and homage, it appears, that it is one of the
greatest rights The sixth mark of sovereignty
of sovereignty; as we have before declared: in respect of him to whom it is
due, with out exception.

As for the right and power to coin money, it is of the same nature with the
law, The seventh mark of sovereignty.
and there is none but he which has power to make a law, which can appoint the
value, weight, and stamp of the coin: which is well to be understood by the
Greek and Latin word; for the Latin word Nummus* seems well to have been
de^iued of the Greek word (...). For nothing is in a Commonweal of greater
consequence next unto the law, than the value, weight, and stamp of the coin;
as we have in a spe* ciall treatise declared: and in every well ordered
Commonweal, none but the sovereign Constantine the emperor made a law, That
they which had coined false money should be punished as men guilty of high
treason: which law all princes have most straightly kept, taking unto themselves
the confiscations of false coins, excluding all others, which have any The
right and power to coin money the inseparable mark of soueraigntiec to be
granted unto subjects.
bishops of Meaux, Cahors, Agde, and Ambrun, the counties of S. Paul, of
March, Neuers, Blois, and others: yet for all that king Francis the first, by
a general edict took away all those privileges: which could not indeed be
granted: but being granted, were by the law made void: joining hereunto
also, that they were not to endure, but for the life of them that granted
them, as we have before showed in the nature of privileges: howbeit that this
mark and right of sovereignty ought not in any sort to be at all communicated
unto a subject. As it was well declared to Sigismundus Augustus, Lucius the
third, their country man; the emperor at his request granted that privilege.
Peter king of Arragon took hold of, to drive James king of Maiorque out of his
kingdom was, for having coined money; pretending that he had no right nor
power so to do. Which was also one of the occasions that Jews the xj took
hold of, to make war upon Francis duke of Britaigne, for that he had stamped
a coin of gold, contrary to the treaty made in the year 1465. And the
Romans when as they suffered money of Brass, and silver to be coined in all
their provinces, yet did they forbid any to be there coined of gold, reserving
that still unto themselves. Howbeit that John duke of Berry had privilege of
Charles the fifth, the French king, to coin money of both metals; who because
he would not any thing therein offend, caused pieces of gold to be coined
with the figure

Yet is it not to be omitted, that though the prince contrary unto the law,
shall give to any man power to stamp money, that the worth and valor thereof
still depends of the sovereign prince; in such sort, that they which so coin
the same, have no other profit thereby but the stamp only; where of princes
do wonderfully vaunt and glory. But of ancient time in the Roman Commonweal,
whilst it was a popular state, the Triumuiri Monetales, or masters of the
mint, coined the money with such a stamp or mark as they themselves thought
good, with their names and these letters thereuppon, III Viri, A. A. A. FF.
which Caulis baileiffe of the mountains interprets, Aere, Argento, Auro,
Flauo, Ferunto: but more truly thus, Trium viri, Auro, Argento, King Seruius
the first that coined money in Rome.
Aere, Flando, Feriundo. And truly Seruius king of the Romans was the first
that there stamped an heavy coin of brass, with the figure or impression of
an Ox upon it, to the imitation of Theseus king of Athens, who had coined
money with the Plutarch in Theseo.
same figure or mark, and the figure of an Owl. Whereby it appears the
Greek and Latin princes of old, not to have been touched with that vain
desire of glory, wherewith other princes were tormented: and wherafter the
kings of Asia and Affrike most greedily longed. The first that coined money in
Greece with his own image Philip of Macedon the first that coined money in
Greece with his own image thereon.
thereon, was Philip king of Macedon: which pieces of money were thereof called
Philippaei; Darius, by the name of Dariques. Whereof king Darius was so ielous
(as Herodotus writes) as that he caused Ariander governor of Egypt to be
beheaded, for having stamped the money with his own image. As for the same
cause also the emperor Commodus beheaded his minion Pecenninus. And also king
Jews the xij having left all the power and right of Sovereignty unto the
Genowayes, whom he had overcome, forbad them nevertheless to stamp their
money with any other mark or figure, than with his own image, in stead of the
form of a Gibbet, which they before gave, and yet give upon their money, as
the mark of justice.

Now if the power of coining money be one of the rights and marks of
Sovereignty; The eight mark of sovereignty.
then so is also the power to appoint measures and weights; although that by
the customs received there is none so petty a lord, which pretends not to
have this right. Whereby it comes to pass, that by the infinite variety of
weights and The great variety of waights and measures hurtful to a
commonweal.
measures, the Commonweal takes no small harm. Which was the cause that the
kings Philip the Fair, Philip the Long, and Jews the xj had resolved, that
there should be in this kingdom but one manner of weight and measure: and now
the commissioners appointed for that purpose, by comparing them together, had
made even all the measures and weights of this realm, and brought the matter
to good effect, had not king Jews by death been taken away, before it was
fully perfected: yet the book whereby the same might more easily be brought to
pass, is yet extant in the court of Polybius, that the same was well executed
in all the cities of Achaia, Lib. 3.
and Morea, where they had not but like money, like weights, like measures,
customs, laws, religion, officers, and government.

As for the right to impose taxes, or imposts upon the subjects, is as proper
unto sovereign The ninth mark of sovereignty.
majesty, as is the law it self: not for that a Commonweal cannot stand
without taxes and tallages, as the President the M. has well noted, that taxes
were not levied in this realm, but since the time of Saint Jews the king. But
if it must needs be that they must for the public necessity be levied or
taken away; it cannot be done Charles the ninth, by a general edict by him
made in the parliament at Orleans, expressly forbids them so to do without
leave: albeit that for the common necessity they be borne withal in so doing
without commission, so that they exceed not the sum of twenty five pounds.
And afterward the same edict was more straightly again renewed at Moulins, well
agreeing both Vicesima Manumissoru^, that is to say, the twentieth part of the
goods of them that were manumised; under color that it was to pay the army
withal: The Roman commonweal greatly relieved by the great riches by Paulus
Emilius brought to Rome, after the overthrow of king Perseus
the second Carthaginensian war, at such time as there was great want of
coin in the common treasury; there was by a law made a tax generally imposed
upon every man, which was by another contrary law again repealed, after the
return of Paulus Aemylius, who with the spoils of Perseus king of Macedon, so
filled the city, and every private man also with wealth, as that the people
was from that time discharged of all taxes and payments, until the Triumuirat
civil war, about an hundred years after, until that such new taxes and
tributes as by the power or covetousness of former tyrants had been imposed upon
the people, were by the good Herodianus.
emperor Pertinax again eased and taken away.

But here might some say, diverse particular lords here and there, to exact not
only customs, but tributes also, not only in France, where ( as Caesar has
most truly written) nothing is more contemptible than the vulgar people: but in
England and Germany, and much more straightly in Denmark, Polonia, and Norway:
which impositions and tributes, are confirmed and grown strong, both by long
prescription of time, and use of judgments: yea and that to be lawful, even
unto such as have neither sovereignty, nor any jurisdiction at all, the court
of Paris has adjudged. Whereunto I answer, that the thing having begun by
abuse, and by long continuance of time inueterat, has well some color of
prescription: but yet an abuse can never be so ouergrowne, but that the law
shall ever be of greater force than it; whereby the abuse is to

Now if Pompeius has denied, that the common high way can by any continuance
of time be prescribed upon: why then should these men think the rights of
customs and tributes, or of sovereign majesty to be prescribed against; and
yet the common high way belongs not unto the right of Sovereignty. Wherefore
it were better to there be, and how far they are to be exacted, shall in due
place be declared: let it now To lay an imposition upon salt, no mark of
sovereignty.


Now many there be that think also, that to have power to lay an imposition
upon salt, is a more proper mark of Sovereignty than the rest: and yet thereof
give no good reason. For almost in every Commonweal we see salt pits and mines
both to be, and always to have been in private men's possession, not only upon
the sea coasts toward the South (for toward the north it hardens not with
the Sun) but also in the mediterranean regions, wherein mines of salt, and
wels of salt water are found. As in Spain, in Italy, France, and the
country of Cracouia, is found salt in great abundance. Yea even at Rome we
read, some private men to have had salt mines. Yet true it is, that many
Lysimachus The kings which laid the first imposition upon salt.
king of Thrace, Ancus Martius king of Rome, Philip Valois king of France, who
were the first that exacted tribute upon salt, every one in his own kingdom.
And albeit that by the law Valeria the people of Rome were freed from such
customs and tributes, as had by their kings been brought in and imposed upon
them: yet Liuius the Censor thought no imposition in the Commonweal lighter or
fitter, than that which was laid upon salt; who thereof surnamed Liuius
Salinator, (or Liuius the Salter.) For why that imposition little or nothing
impaireth the right of private men: but that they still remain lords and owners
of their salt pits, as well as of their other mines, saving unto the Sovereign
prince his rights and customs.

But forasmuch as the sea it self cannot be proper unto any private man, the
rights How far of a soueraign prince may lay impositi ons upon the sea, from
his own coast.
thereof belonging unto such sovereign princes as dwell thereby, who may lay
impositions thereupon thirty leagues off from their own coast, if there be
no other sovereign prince nearer to let them, as it was adjudged for the duke
of Sauoy. Neither can any but a sovereign prince give them letters of safe
conduct; which the Italians call Guidage; nor yet of right take any wrack: as
is expressly provided for by the decree of the emperor Frederick the second. A
thing truly most barbarous, and not in ancient Wrackes by what small right
they belong to sovereign princes.
time of sovereign princes used, shamefully to suffer the relics of the
goods and fortunes of such as have by shipwreck miserably perished, and whom
we ought with some part of our own to relieve, being cast upon our coast, and
which ought with Henry the second, the French king, in the year 1556, that two
galleys which had suffered wrack upon the coast of Corcyca, were taken by
Jordan Vrsin, requesting to have the same gallie again restored: he was
answered by Anne Mommerance then constable of France, that wracks by the law
of all nations belonged unto such princes as ruled upon the coasts Andrew Doria
never so much as complained of the loss of two of his galleys, confiscated by
the prior of Capona the French Admyrall, for casting anchor only upon the
land without leave, which of ancient time men by the law of nations might right
lawfully do. And whereas by the Roman law it was lawful for any man to seize
upon things lost, or upon goods or lands vacant and forbidden: now it is
only lawful unto them which have the sovereign power, or some other
jurisdiction by law or custom confirmed unto them, to take unto themselves
things lost or forsaken, and that after a certain determinat time: which in a
thing moveable is defined to be forty days after the publication Jews the
xij the French king, having obtained the

As for the right of Marque, or of Reprisall, which sovereign princes have
proper To grant letters of Marque, or of reprisall now to belong only unto the
soueraign prince.
unto themselves from all others, it was not of ancient time proper unto a
sovereign prince; but permitted unto every man without leave, either of
magistrate or of prince to take reprisall, which the Latins called Clarigatio:
howbeit that the princes by little Charles the eight by an especial edict,
reserved that power unto himself, in the year 1485. It is also of our men
properly called a royalty or right of sovereignty, whereby the prince, a
bishop being dead, takes unto himself the profits of the bishopric, in the
mean time whilst another bishop is chosen by the chapter, or by the prince
himself appointed: and so being sworn, is put into possession thereof: but
forasmuch as that in all places is not

There be many other right small things, which are accounted proper unto
princes, Small things and yet proper only unto soueraign princes.
as things concerning their greater reputation and dignity, as in their
edicts, mandats, and commissions to use these words, Dei Gratia, by the grace
of God; which words Jews the xj, the French king, forbad the duke of
Britaigne to use in his life; although we read them to have been used almost in
all ancient leagues; and attributed not unto great princes and commanders
only, but even to the least magistrates and deputies also. The kings of
France have also reserved unto themselves the right to seal Jews the xj by
special privilege and letters patents granted as a great favor unto Renate
To seal with yealowe wax granted unto a great prince as a favor.
of Aniou, king of Naples and Sicilie, that in fealing he might use yellow
wax: with like privilege unto his heirs also, confirmed in parliament the 28
of June 1465. He which copied the Comentaries of Tillet, calls it white wax,
which I find our kings never to have used.

But much more it belongs unto the royalty of sovereign majesty, to be
able to To be able to chang the subjects language a mark of sovereignty.
compel the subjects to use the language and speech of him that rules over
them: which the Romans so commanded their subjects, that even yet at this day
they seem far and wide to reign over a great part of Europe. But the king
of the Hetruscians, Cato Censorius writes. But France for that it swarmed The
cause why the French tongue is so much confounded with latin.
as it were with citisens of Rome, did so confound the Latin tongue, with the
natural country speech, as that the ancient writers called our country men
Romans; yea the judgments and decrees of the higher court of parliament, viz.
of Paris were set down in Latin (which the presidents and governors were
commanded to do) until that Francis the first had given order that they
should use their own country language: as by like edict Edward the third
commanded the judges and magistrates of England, to give judgments in their
own country language, when as before they Philip king of Spain would gladly
have suppressed, yet could he by no means effect it.

Some amongst the marks of Sovereignty, have put also the power to judge and
A sovereign prince may according to his conscience discide matters beyond
either law, or custom.
decide matters, according to their conscience; a thing common to all judges,
if they be not by express law or custom prohibited so to do. And that is it
for which we oftentimes see in the edicts upon the articles committed to the
arbitratarie judgment of the judges, this clause added, Wherewith we have
charged our conscience. For if there be either custom or law to the contrary,
it then is not in the power of the judge, to Lycurgus: and also by the most
ancient laws of Florence, whereas a sovereign prince may do both, if he be
not by the law of God forbidden; whereunto we have before showed him to be
still subject.

As for the title of Majesty it self, it sufficiently appears, that it
only belongs to The title of majesty proper to sovereign princes.
him that is a sovereign prince: so that for him that has no sovereignty to
usurp the same, were a very absurd thing: but to arrogat unto himself the
addition of most excellent and sacred majesty, is much more absurd* the one
being a point of lightness, and Titles dew to God beseem not princes.
the other of impiety: for what more can we give unto the most mighty and
immortal God, if we take from him that which is proper unto himself? And
albeit that in Mansfeld, then prisoner in France: wherein there was six times
V. S. M. that is to say, Vestra, Sacra, Maiestas, or Your Sacred Majesty* an
addition proper unto God, apart from all worldly princes. As for other princes
which are not sovereigns some use the addition of His Highness, as the dukes
of Loraine, Sauoy, Mantua, Ferrara, and Florence: some of Excellency, as the
princes of the confines; or else of Serenitie,

I omit here many other meaner rights which Sovereign princes every one of
them pretend in their own countries, in number infinite, which yet are no marks
of soueraign Marks of sovereignty ought to be such as are proper to all
soueraign princes in general.
ty, such as ought to be proper to all sovereign princes in general, apart
from all other lords, iusticiaries, magistrates, and subjects, and which are of
their own nature incessible and not to be alienated from the sovereignty: nor
by any course of time to be prescribed. And if the sovereign prince shall give
or grant any lands or lordship of the public possessions, unto any, with
jurisdiction and power to use the same, in such sort as he himself might:
albeit that the royal rights properly belonging unto sovereignty, be not in
the charter or writings expressly excepted: yet are they always by the very
Soueraign rights cannot by the prince be alienated neither by any other be
prescribed against.
law it self thought to be excepted, which by an old decree of the counsel of
France was decreed not only for graunts made unto private men, but also for such
gifts or grants as were made unto the princes themselves descended of the
royal blood and family: which royal rights can by no tract of time
whatsoever, be prescribed against or usurped upon. For if public place, or
the public possessions of the Commonweal cannot be got by any prescription:
how much less then can the royalties proper unto sovereign majesty be
prescribed upon. But it is certain by the edicts and laws concerning the
public demaine, that it is not to be alienated, neither by any tract of time
to be gained. Which is no new thing: For it is two thousand years ago since
that Themistocles, making seizure of certain lands belonging unto the public
demaine, That mortal men could nothing prescribe against the immortal God:
neither could private men in any thing prescribe against the Commonweal. The
self same speech Cato the Censor used also in the Oration which he made unto
the people of Rome, for the reuniting of some part of the public demain,
usurped upon by certain private men. How then can a man prescribe upon the
rights and marks of Sovereignty? And that is it, for which in law he is
guilty of death, that in any sort uses the marks properly reserved unto the
majesty of a Sovereign prince. And thus much concerning the principal points
of Sovereign majesty, in as brief manner as I possibly could, having handled
this matter more at large in my book De Imperio. And

Finis Lib. Primi.
THE SECOND BOOK OF
CHAP. I. Of all sorts of Commonweales in general, and whether there be any
more then three.
FOrasmuch as we have before sufficiently spoken of Sovereignty, most absurd,
and so by consequent the opinion whereof such an absurdity arises, is That
there are but three sorts of commonweales viz: a Monarchy a Democratie: and an
Aristocratie.
one man alone has the sovereignty in a Commonweal, in such sort as we have
aforesaid. And a Democratie, or Popular estate, when all the people, or the
greater part thereof has in it the sovereign power and command, as in one
body. The Aristocratie is, when the lesser part of the people has the
Sovereignty, as in one body, and gives laws unto the rest of the people,
whether it be in general, or in particular: all which things are of themselves
more cleerer than the day. And true it is, that the writers of ancient time do
therein well agree, that there can be no less then three

Plato has unto these three well adjoined a fourth kind, that is to wit, where
some few of the better sort excelling the rest in virtue, have the
soueraignetie: which for all The diverse opinions of the ancient writers
concerning diverse sorts of commonweals.
that in proper terms, is nothing else but a pure Aristocratie: how be it, he
has not received the mixture of the aforesaid three states, for an other
diverse form of a Commonweal. Aristotle beside these three kinds of
Commonweales which we have spoken of: and the fourth also named by Plato,
sets down a fifth kind of Common weal, by confounding together the three
former states, and so makes five sorts of states or Commonweales. But Polybius
reckneth up seven sorts; three commendable: Dionysius Halycarnasseus, Marcus
Tullius, Thomas More, Gaspar Contarenus, Frauncis Machiauell, and many other
following Polybius, have as it were with one consent approved his opinion,
which in deed is most ancient, and took not beginning from Polybius, although
he would seem to be the author thereof, neither from Aristotle, but above
four hundred years before Aristotle. Herodotus (the father of antiquity)
writes, that fourth kind of a Commonweal, confused of the three other, to
have be^ commended of many, and yet for all that contenting himself with the
three former kinds, rejects the rest as imperfect: And were it not that I
were not only by probable arguments, but even by forcible reasons drawn from
that opinion of Polybius, Tullie, and the rest, I could easily have suffered
my self to have been overcome by the authority of so great and grave men. It
behooves us therefore by lively reasons to show them to have erred and been
deceived, which have brought in that fourth kind of Commonweal composed of the
mixture of the other three: which I trust the more plainly to bring to pass,
if I shall use the same examples in refelling of them, that they themselves
have before used. For they them selves have set down the Lacedemonian, Roman,
and Venetian Commonweales to have been compounded and sweetly mingled with the
three kind of states, that is to say, with the Monarchy, Aristocratie, and
Democratie. But when Plato said, the best kind of a Commonweal ^o be composed
of the mixture of a Monarchy and Democratie, he was therefore forthwith
Aristotle, saying, that of these two could no commendable state be made, and
that therefore it was better of all three estates to make a fourth: wherein
Aristotle reasons also against himself; for if he confess no good thing
possibly to be made of two extremes; what shall then be made of three
confounded amongst them selves? And for that this opinion for the making of a
fourth No fourth estate of a commonweal to be made of a confusion of a
Monarchy, a Democratie and an Aristocratie.
estate of the confusion of the rest, may move great troubles in Commonweales,
and therein work marvelous effects, it is requisite for us well to examine the
same: For when states of Commonweales are in them selves contrary, as a
Monarchy and a Democratie, they are by contrary laws and ordinances to be
governed. The Florentins P. Soderin, and Hierome Sauanarola, had translated the
soueraignetie or chief power of the Commonweal unto the people: thought it
best to keep the rout of the vulgar and common people from bearing of offices
and rule, and altogether from the affairs of state: that so the chief
managing of matters might be reserved unto the more ancient sort of the
citizins, and such as were of greater wealth and ability then the rest: who
yet had not power to dispose of all matters, but only of such things as were
the chiefest, viz. the making of laws, the creating of magistrates, and
disposing of the common treasure: reserving the rest unto the Senate and
magistrates,

But to confound the state of a monarkie, with the Popular or Aristocratical
estate, is a thing impossible, and in effect imcompatible, and such as cannot
be imagined. For i^ soueraignetie be of it self a thing indivisible, (as we
have before showed) how can it then at one and the same time be divided betwixt
one prince, the nobility, and the people in common? The first mark of
sovereign majesty is, to be of power to give laws, and to command over them
unto the subjects, and who should those subjects be that should yield their
obedience unto that law, if they should also have the power to make the laws?
who should he be that could give the law? being himself

And to prove that which we have said to be true, let us take the same
examples that Polybius, Contarenus, and the rest have left us; They say that
the state of the Lacedaemonians Herodotus, who brings the That the
Lacedemonian commonweal was meare aristocraticall, and not composed of the
confusion or mixture of the three sorts of commonweals.
Lacedemonian estate for an example of a most pure Aristocratie? what will they
also answer unto Theucidides, Xenophon, Aristotle, and Plutarche? who
speaking of the wars of Peloponnesus (which continued twenty years betwixt
the Popular and the Aristocratique Commonweals) say, that the whole drift of
the Athenians and their allies was to change the Aristocraties into
Democraties, as they did in Samos, Corfu, and all the other cities by them
subdued. Whereas contrariewise the Lacedaemonians Lysander; yea even in the
city of Athens it self, where after he had laid the walls even with the
ground, he took the soueraignetie from the people, and gave the same unto
thirty citizens, (who are therefore of the Athenians called the thirty
Tyrants) to rule and govern in such sort and manner as they did amongst the
Lacedaemonians, where so many, and no more had the government of the state. But
among the citizens of Samos, the Siaeyons, the Aeginits, the Mylesians, and
other cities of Ionia and the lesser Asia, they gave the soueraignetie unto
Ten principal men, with one chief Captain over them, for the managing of
the wars; calling hoame again such as had been banished

What will they also say to Maximus Tyrius, who reckning up the States which
held the pure Aristrocratie first of all names the Lacedaemonians, and after
them the Thessalians, the Pellenians, the Cretentians, and the Mantineans. We
must first convince these so many and so famous authors of untruth, before we
can thrust the Lacedaemonians from their Aristocratie: which writers living
almost in the same time wherein the Athenian and Lacedemonian Commonweales
flourished, and being Gasper Contareus, Nicholas Machiauel, Sir Thomas Moore.
The cause that induced Polybius and others to say that the Lacedemonian estat
was a state composed of the mixture of the three states and forms of a
commonweal. The history of a Lacoedemonian commonweal.
themselves Grecians, were like more certainly and truly to know these things,
than a Venetian Senator, a Florentine, or an English man.

What was it then that deceived Polybius, who was himself a Megalopolitan,
borne near unto the Lacedaemonians? Truly it was even the name of the
Lacedemonian kings. For Lycurgus having altered the state of the Commonweal,
and by the good will and consent of the kings themselves (who derived their
pedigree from Hercules) having translated the sovereignty unto the people,
left unto the kings, but the bare name and title only, and to be the generals
in wars. For why the regal power was now before already sore shaken and
weakened: after that Aristodemus king of Lacedemonia, had at once left his two
sons to reign together over the Lacedaemonians (to the imitation of the
Messenians, over whom Amphareus and Leucippus together reigned) who whilst
they would both be kings and command over all, could neither Lycurgus, being
descended also of the same stock with them, to overthrow their royal power,
leaving unto them and their house nothing else but the name and show of kings,
giving the rest unto the Senate and the people. But as in Athens and Rome, after
the kings were thence driven out, they yet left the name of a king unto a
certain priest, whom they called King of the Sacrifices, to do a certain
sacrifice, which the king himself only had in former time done: Which priest
for all that was himself subject unto the great bishop, and could not (as
Plutarch says) have any estate, or bear any office as the other priests
might: even so did Lycurgus unto Agis and Pausanias, the sovereignty still
resting with the people, in whose power it was to confirm or infirm the acts
and decrees of the Senate. Thucidides also himself rejects the opinion of
them which thought the kings each of them to have had two voices. But about an
hundred years after the popular state, ordained, was again changed by the
kings Polydorus and Theopompus; seeing it to be an hard matter to call the
people together, and a great deal harder to rule them by reason, Apollo to
that purpose: whereby the God (as they said) commanded that from thenceforth
the government of the Commonweal should be in the power of the Senate: and yet
to please the people so grieved to have left their power, they gave them leave
to draw out of themselves five judges, called Ephori, as Tribunes or patrons of
the people, who should examine the sayings, doings, and devises of the kings,
and by all means let them from the exercising of tyranny. And these Ephorie,
every ninth year once, upon some clear night gazing upon the firmament (as
Plutarch says) if they then saw any star, as it were, sparkle or Apollo had
so declared. In like manner the Phylactes or Gailor, every year had the king
of Cumes in prison, until the Senate had determined what should be done with
him. Now this state of the Lacedemonian Commonweal endured about five hundred
years, until the time of Cleomenes, who having slain the Ephori and the
Senators, and so oppressed the Commonweal, took upon himself the
sovereignty, and so held it until such time as he was overcome by Antigonus
king of Macedon; who having vanquished him, restored that Commonweal into the
state it was before: howbeit that twenty years after, being fallen again
into the power of Nabis the tyrant, who was afterward slain by Philopomenes,
that Commonweal was Gallus the Roman Proconsull taken from the Achaeans, and
by Roman emperors set at liberty. Thus in few words you may see the true
history of the the Lacedemonian Commonweal, for most part taken from
Xenophon, Thucidides, Liuy, and Polybius, whereof yet no man has more
curiously written than Plutarch, who out of the Lacedemonian acts and public
records, has corrected such things as of others have been but slightly or
falsely set down and reported: which has given occasion to many to be
deceived, and to think that state to have been mingled of the three diverse
kinds of Commonweales. Which is plainly to be gathered out of Liuie, where he
brings in Nabis the first tyrant of Lacedemonia, thus speaking to Titus
Flaminius, Noster legulator Lycurgus, non in paucorum manu Rempub^esse voluit,
quem vos Senatum appellatis, nec eminere vnum aut alterum ordinem in ciuitate,
sed per aequationem fortunae and dignitatis fore credidit, vt multi essent qui
propatria arma ferrent, Our lawgiuer Lycurgus (says he) would not the state of
our Commonweal to be in few men's hands, which you call the Senate, neither
would have any one or other order to excel the rest in our city; but by the
making equal of men's fortune and dignity, thought it would come to pass,
that there should be many which would bear arms for their country. Thus he
covers his tyrranny with the show of a popular state, when as then there was
no popular estate at all; yet in that he said most truly, that Lycurgus at the
beginning gave the sovereignty unto the people.

But let us see the rest. They also have put for example the Roman Commonweal,
which they said to have been mingled of the three kinds of Commonweales: For so
says Polybius (who was master to Africanus the Great) We see (says he) the
regal power in the Consuls, the Aristocratie in the Senate, and the Democratie
in the people. The Roman commonweal a meare popular state and not composed
of the three forms of commoweals.
Unto whom do plainly assent Dionysius Halycarnasseus, Cicero, Contarenus,
Sir Thomas More, and many others: which opinion for all that is neither
grounded upon truth not reason. For where is this Monarchy, that is to say,
the sovereign government of one man? which in the two Consuls cannot be
imagined. But sovereign majesty, if it were in the consuls could not possibly
be divided betwixt two, for the indivisible No sovereignty in the Roman
Consulls
any great officer, neither grant pardon, neither take a penny out of the
common treasure, neither so much as to whip a citisen, if it were not in time
of war, without leave of the people: which has been a power always given to
all governors of armies, whom we also may so call kings, and with greater
appearance than the Consuls, who had not power but the one of them after the
other, and that but for the space of one year only. The constable of France,
the chief Bassa of the Turks, the Bethudere in Aethiopia, the Edegnare in the
kingdom of Afrike, have ten times more power Drusus the Tribune, who by a
sergeant took Philip the Consul by the collar, and cast him in prison, for
that he had interrupted him, as he was speaking unto the people: and that he
might lawfully so do, shall hereafter be declared. The power of the Consuls
was to lead the armies, war being before denounced, to assemble the Senate, to
present the letters of the captains and allies unto the Senate, to give
audience unto ambassadors before the people or the Senate, to call together the
great estate, and to demand the advice of the people, about

Now as concerning the Senate, which they say to have had the form and power of
The small power of the Roman Senate: and that therein was no resemblance of an
Aristocratie
an Aristocratie, it was so far there from, as that there was never privy
council, which had not more authority: for it had no power to command either
particular men, or magistrates: yea the Senators might not assemble themselves,
except it so pleased the Consuls, or the Praetor in the absence of the Consuls:
insomuch that Caesar a popular any sergeant or like officer, which are the true
marks of them which have the power Seruilius Priscus with their request unto
the Tribunes in this sort, * Vos (inquit) Tribuni plebis Senatus appellat, vt
in tanto discrimine Reipublicae dictatorem Liuius lib. 4.
dicere, Consules pro vestra potestate cogatis: Tribuni pro collegio
pronunciant, placere Consules Senatui dicto audientes esse, aut in vinculase
duci iussuros, The Senate (says he) appealeth unto you the Tribunes of the
people, that in so great danger of the Commonweal, you for the great
authority you have, would compel the Consuls to nominat a Dictator: whereupon
the Tribunes pronounced for their whole society, that their pleasure was, that
the Consuls should be obedient unto the Senate, or else that they would command
them to prison. And in another * place the same author says, That Liuius lib.
27.
the Senate was of advise, that the Consul should present the request unto the
people, Consul negauit se populum rogaturum, Praetoremque rogare vetuit:
Tribuni plebis rogarunt, The Consul denied to request the people, and forbad
the Praetor also to request them, the Tribunes made the request. Whereby it
evidently appears, that the Senate could not so much as command the lesser
magistrates, the greater magistrates forbidding them. And as for that which
Polybius says, That the Senate had power to judge of cities and provinces, and
to take punishment of conspirators against the state: * Liuie Liuiu. lib. 26. ^
shows it to have been otherwise, as when question was made for the
chastising of the Hannibal, an ancient Senator said in full Senate, Per Senatum
agi de Campanis iniussu populi non video posse, I see not that any thing can by
the Senate be done concerning the Campanians without the commandment of the
people. And a little after, Rogatio ferator ad populum, qua Senatui potestas
fiat statuendi de Campanis, Let request be made unto the people, whereby power
may be given unto the Senate, to determine concerning the Campanians. And upon
the request to that purpose presented unto the people, the people gave them
commission, and commanded the Senate to proceed The people of Rome in their
assemblies did ^e in token of the^ sovereignty.
against them in this sort, Quod Senatus maxima pars censeat, qui assident id
volumus iubemusque, What the greatest part of the Senate shall agree upon, we
that here sit Polybius ^sse deceived, in saying, That the Senate at pleasure
disposed of the provinces and governments: whereas Liuie the best author of the
Roman antiquities, is of contrary opinion, writing thus, Qui^tus Fuluius
postulauit a Consule vt palam in Senatu diceret, permitteret ne Senatui vt de
prouincijs decerneret, staturusque eo esset quod censuisset, an ad populum
laturus: Scipio respondit se quode Republica esset facturum. Tum Fuluius a
vobis peto Tribuni plebis vt mihi auxilio sitis. Quintus Fuluius requested of
the Consul, that he should openly say in the Senate whether he gave leave or
not unto the Senate, to determine of the provinces, and whether he would stand
to that it should decree, or else would refer the matter unto the people:
Whereunto Scipio answered, That he would do that which should Fuluius, I
request you the Tribunes of the people to aid and help me. So that it plainly
appears, the Senate to have had no power at all, neither the decrees thereof
to have been of any force, without the consent of the Tribunes of the people:
and that the rest they had by the sufferance of the same people. Now he that
has nothing but by sufferance, has indeed nothing of his own, as we have
before said. Yea such decrees of the Senate, as were confirmed by the consent of
the Tribunes of the people, unto whom they were to be communicated, could not
yet be put in execution, except that either the Consuls did so command; or that
the Consuls refusing so to do, the Tribunes themselves propounded the same

The same opinion has Contarenus of the Venetian Commonweal, saying it to be
The Venetian estate a pure Aristocratie and not composed of the three forms of
commonweals
also mixed of the three forms of Commonweales, as were those of Rome and
Lacedemonia: For, says he, the royal power is in a sort in the duke of
Venice, the Aristocracie Ianot after him has most curiously brought to light
the true estate of the Venetian Commonweal; wherein he shows by most evident
testimonies, drawn out of the most ancient and true Venetian records, That
Contarenus in so saying was much deceived. He shows plainly, that not past
three hundred years ago, before the time of Sebastian Cyanee duke of Venice,
the Venetian estate was a pure monarchy. Howbeit that Contarenus writes it to
have been established in the state it now is eight hundred years: and Pau.
Manutius, says it to have so stood twelve hundred years: all which Ianot
proves out of the public records, and certain history to be untrue. But
howsoever that be, plain it is, at this day to be a pure Aristocracie: For by
the view of the city and the A view taken of the Citizens and gentlemen of
Venice.
citisens, which was taken about thirty years ago, were reckoned nine and
fifty thousand three hundred forty nine citizens, beside children under seven
years old, but of Gentlemen, in whom rests the sovereign power of that
state, betwixt four and five thousand young and old: yet had the church men and
gentlemen under five and twenty years old, nothing to do with the state, more
than to look on, neither had they access into the Grand Council, but by way
of request: the young gentlemen being so upon request received at the age of
thirty years, according as discretion was to be seen more in some one, than
in some others: and yet has it not been found this hundred year, that the
Grand Council assembled, to decide the great affairs of that state, has
exceeded the number of fifteen hundred, as is to be seen in the histories
Sabellicus, and of cardinal Bembus, the rest being absent. It is therefore the
least The sovereignty of the Venetian estate to be in the grand counsel.
part of the Venetians that have the sovereignty, and they also of certain
noble families, for all the gentlemen borne in Venice, are not received into
the Grand Council; but there are of one and the same stock, of the same race,
of the same name, whereof some are citisens, and come not into the council,
and the others come. I do not here set down the reason why, which every man
may see in Sabellicus. This great council as Contarenus says, has sovereign
power to make and repeal laws, to place or displace all officers, to receive
the last appeals, to determine of peace and war, and to give pardon unto the
condemned. Wherein Contarenus condemns himself: for The small authority and
power the Duke of Venice has.
other magistrates has no command at all, as not having power to condemn any
man before him, neither to stay or examine any man; which is the first mark of
command, given even unto the least magistrates, neither may he decide any cause
whether it be in Falerius the duke, for that he had without the consent of the
council married a stranger, was by the Decemuiri hanged. And beside him
Sabellicus reckons up twelve dukes more, either by the tumultuous people
slain, or otherwise put to death for abusing their The state of the German
empire and of the Swissers, Aristocraticall and not mixed.
more royal than has the duke of Venice: then the seven princes electors,
with the other princes, have the show of an Aristocracie, or of an Oligarchie:
and the ambassadors

And this opinion of the mixed state has so possessed the minds of men, that
many The estate of France a pure Monarchy and not mixed.
have both thought and w^it this monarchy of France (than which none can be
imagined more royal) to be mixed and composed of the three kinds of
Commonweals, and that the parliament of Paris has the form of an
Aristocracie, the three estates of a Democratie, and the king to represent the
state of a monarchy: which is an opinion not only absurd, but also capital.
For it is high treason to make the subject equal to the king in authority and
power, or to join them as companions in the sovereignty with him. And what
popular power appears, when the three states are assembled? or the parliament
called? or wherein is the sovereign majesty of a prince The power of a
soueraign prince in nothing dimi nished by his parliament, but rather much the
more thereby manifested.
humbles it self, requesteth and reuerenceth their king. So far is it from
that such an assembly in any thing diminishes the power of a sovereign
prince, as that thereby his majesty is the more increased and augmented. For
it cannot be exalted into a more high degree of honor, of power, and of
glory, than to see an infinite number of great lords and princes, and people
innumerable, of men of all sorts and quality, to The king says unto you. We
see also that the court of parliament, writing unto the king, keeps even yet
the ancient style, which is this in the superscription of their letters, To
our Sovereign Lord the King. The beginning of The form the courts of
parliament in France hold in writing to the king.
which letters is on this sort, Our Sovereign Lord in most humble wise, and so
much as in us is we recommend us to your good grace, And the subscription
placed as low as may be: Your most humble and obedient subjects and servants,
the men holding your court of Parliament. Which is not t^ th^anner of the lords
of an Aristocracies speech: neither of such as are companions in Sovereignty
with the king, but of true and humble subjects. And for that I have touched
this point before, I will now lightly pass it over. Aristotle most subtly
examining this opinion, for the mixture of states, truly calls the state
composed of an Aristocratic and a Democratie (...), that is to say a
Commonweal: but shows not how that may be done, neither gives thereof
example, as he usually does in others: but to the contrary confesses, that he
knew none such in his time; or yet had found any such before, albeit that he is
reported to have gathered an hundred Commonweales into one book, which book
is now lost. And forasmuch as Aristotle seldom or never reports Plato, but
to the contrary always disguiseth and obscureth them as the ancient
Academiques have right well noted; and namely where he rejects his
Commonweal; upon whose sayings many resting themselves have oftentimes
deceived both themselves and others. We not addicted to either, will in few
words set down the true opinion of Plato concerning his Commonweal, deserving
well to be known for the better understanding of the question we have in hand,
which some which never read the same, call a divine opinion: some others in the
mean time treading the same under foot, and railing thereat as fast.

Plato feigned unto himself only two Commonweales, whereof the first he
attributed to Socrates, who never thought (as says Xenophon) of that which
Plato makes Mine, and Thine, as the source and fountain of all evil, and
would have al goods, yea wives and children to be common. But seeing every man
to find fault therewith, he quietly left it, as if he had so writ more for
argument sake, than for that he so thought, or to have the same put in effect.
The second is his own, wherein he takes away the community of Plato his
commonweal a pure popular estate and not mixed.
goods, of women and children: as for the rest those Commonweales are both in
all things alike. For both in the one and the other, he would not have above
five thousand and forty citisens, a number by him chosen to have 59 entire
parts: in which Commonweales he also makes three estates or degrees of men:
viz. the Guardes, Soldiers, and Laborers: and after that divides the
citisens into three degrees, according Plato his Commonwealth is the most
popular that ever was, yea then that of his own country of Athens, which
Xenophon thought to have been the most popular state in the world. I omit the
726 laws set down by Plato, in the twelve books for the government of his
Commonweal: suffices it me to have showed Plato his imagined Commonweal not
to have been made of a mixture of an Aristocracie, and Democracie, as Aristotle
said, whose error Cicero, Contarenus, and others, one after another following,
led the rest that followed them into error also.

Let us therefore conclude, never any Commonwealth to have been made of an
Herodotus first most truly said amongst the Greeks, whom Tacitus amongst the
Latins imitating, says, Cunctas nationes and vrbes, populus, aut primores, aut
singuli regunt, The people, the nobility, or one alone, do rule all nations
and cities.

But some man will say, May there not be a Commonweal, wherein the people has
the power to create the magistrates, to dispose of the common reuenew, and power
of life and death; which are three marks of sovereignty, and the nobility to
have power to make laws, to dispose of peace and war, and of the impositions
and taxes; which That it is impossible to compose one commonweal of the mix
ture of the three forms of commonweals.
considering that the marks of sovereignty are indivisible. For the nobility
which should have the power to make the laws for all: (which is as much as to
say to command Christiern the great grandfather of Frederike which now
reigns, has almost made subject unto the laws. Christiern they thrust out
of his kingdom, and set up his cosen in his place, with condition that he
should neither make peace nor war, without the leave of the senate: nor that
he should have any power to condemn any gentleman to death; with many other
like articles, which I will in their place set down: which the kings since
that time have sworn to keep: which that they should not go against, Henry
was To divide the rights of sovereignty dangerous to all commonweals.
glad to take a German for his Chauncelour, and one Var^nnes a Norman for his
high Constable: and yet at length was by his nobility thrust out of his royal
seat, and by Herodotus has most briefly, but most truly written. For as
bodies by nature well framed, if they begin to change, with wonderful stink
and contagion annoy all that come near them, until they be quite altered,
and become new things; as when eggs are set upon, which before they were set,
and after they be hatched also have a good smell and taste, though in the very
alteration of them not so: so also Commonweales which change their state, the
sovereign right and power of them being divided, find no rest from civil
wars and

Yet might one say, that in the estate of the Romans the less part of the
people chosen out of the richer sort made the laws, and greatest officers;
namely the Consuls* the Praetors, the Censors, had both sovereign power of
life and death: and disposed of war, and that the greater sort of the people
made the lesser officers and magistrates, to wit, the Tribuns of the people; the
four and twenty military Tribunes; the two Aediles or Sherifes; the
Treasourers; the Scout, and mynt masters, and gave also all benefices vacant,
and more then that the greater part of the people judged of the great criminal
processes before Sylla, if it tended not to the natural or civil death of
been a popular state.

Yet for all that a man may say that it follows not hereof that there are not
but three sorts of Commonweals, although they cannot be amongst them selves
mixed: for it may be that of threescore thousand citizens in a city, forty
thousand may have the sovereignty, and twenty thousand be excluded: where,
for that the greater part bears the sway, it shall be a popular state: and
contrary wise if but an hundred of that multitude shall have the sovereignty,
it shall be an Aristocracie; for that the less part of the citizens gathered
together has the sovereign power: what then, if of the same number of
citizens five and twenty thousand shall hold the chief power? Truly, it may
be doubted whether such a state be an Aristocracie, although the less part of
the citizens enjoy the sovereignty, the rest being rejected: for why, it
differs much whether In what state soever the lesser number bears rule over
the grea ter it is to be accounted an Aristocratie.
citizens bear rule over the rest: for otherwise if the diversity of the
number should make the diversity of Commonweals, there should be of them a
million, yea an infinite of diverse kinds of Commonweals: for the number of them
which should have part in the state increasing or diminishing, should make an
infinite diversity, whereof no knowledge is to be had; suffiseth it the
sovereign power to be with the greater or What a principa litie is.
lesser part of the people, for the making of an Aristocracie or Democracie.
The rest

Yet one thing remains in the question we have in hand to be discussed, which
is that the Roman Commonweal under the emperor Augustus, and the other
emperors after him, unto the time of Flauius Vespatianus, was called a
principality, of which sort of Commonweal, neither Herodotus, neither any of
the Greek or Latin writers, except Tranquillus, seems to make any mention:
for he writes that the emperor Caligula, seeing diverse kings at his table to
enter into the terms of honor, and the antiquity of their houses among
themselves; with a loud voice brought forth that verse of Homer which
Agamemnon uses against Achilles, who would

(...).

An evil thing it is to be ruled by many:
one prince, and one king, where there is any.
And much it missed not but that he had even than taken upon him the imperial
crown, and changed the form of the Roman principality into a kingdom; and
thus much he. whereby it is to be understood the Roman state under Augustus
after the battle at Actium, to have been neither a Popular state, an
Aristocracie, nor a What a Principality is.
in which one chief commanded every man in particular, and it is but the
first in general: for this word ( Prince) to speak properly signifies no
other thing but him that is first. So the Jews complained Aristobulus the
first of the house of the Amoneans, to have changed the principality which
was Aristocratique, into two kingdoms, at such time as he took one crown to
himself, and sent an other to his brother. The like we find, that the
ancient cities of Tuscanie made alliance with Tarquinius Priscus king of the
Romans; upon condition that he should not have power over them of life and
death: neither to put garrisons into their towns, nor to Sed vt ciuitatum
principatus penes regem Romanum esset, but that the principality of their
cities only should be with the Roman king: for so says Florus. Now all those
cities were of a popular state. Wherefore Tarquinius was but the first and
chief in the assemblies of those cities, who might govern the multitude no
otherwise than does the emperor in the German empire, or the duke in Venice,
or Genua, who may most rightly be called princes, as in the same sense in
ancient time the chief magistrate among the Athenians, was called (...), or
prince: yet was that Commonweal of all other most popular.

But if there be two chief magistrates of like power, as in Rome; or three, as
in many Augustus by a crafty devise having made himself but great General of
the army (by the name of Imperator) and Tribune of the people for defense of
their profit, (from whom for all that he had taken their liberty) and as it
seemed almost enforced by the Senate, had taken upon him the charge of the
Commonweal for ten years, made that state in show and false semblant but a
principality, when as before he had placed in all the provinces forty
legions, and taken three for the safety of his person, and put sure garrisons
into all the castles and strong fortresses of the empire: so inuading the royal
power without a Scepter, without a Diadem, or a Crown; whose successors In
matter of state he that is master of the forces, is master of the men, of the*
laws, and of all the commonweal.
(excepting some few) some more, some less, exercised most cruel tyranny. For
Tiberius in the beginning of his reign, rise upon the Consuls, and meeting
them gave them way, (as says Tranquillus) but afterward oppressed the
Commonweal with most filthy servitude and slavery. But here is to be
considered what was in deed done, and was not made show of: for he that bears
greatest sway in the Commonweal, him men think to have the sovereignty: but
if question be made of the right, then are we to look not what is indeed done,
but what ought to be done. Wherefore it appears a principality to be nothing
else, but an Aristocratie, or a Democratie, having some one for chief or
principal above the rest, the sovereignty yet still remaining with the
nobility or the people.

CHAP. II. Of a Lordly Monarchy, or of the sole government of one.
WE have before said, that a Monarchy is a kind of Commonweal, wherein the
absolute sovereignty lies in the power of one only prince: which definition
we are now to explain. When we say of one, so the word Monarchy of it self
imports: For if we shall in the A true soueraig^ commands all others his
subjects, but is himself by none commanded.
government join two or more, no one of them shall have the sovereignty: for
that a sovereign is he which commands all others, Oligarchie, but is more
properly called a Duarchie, a kind of Aristocracie, which may be of continuance
and durable, so Romulus and Tatius, one of them king of the Romans, and the
other of the Sabines, after certain conflicts, making peace entered into
society together, upon condition, that both their people united together,
should dwell within the same walls, and by the name of Quirites by common
sovereignty be governed by both kings. But Romulus, who before by the
slaughter of his A very hard matter for two princes in one and the same
commonweal long to hold the sovereignty together.
brother Remus had rid himself of his fellow in the kingdom, could not long
endure the stranger to reign with him, but caused him to be slain, or at
leastwise held the murderer excused, being for the fact apprehended. Long time
after the Roman empire was converted from a Monarchy into a Binarchie: at such
time as Antoninus Pius left M. Aurelius, and Aelius Verus, emperors, and both
fellows in the same empire: Aelius in short time after died, and not without
the suspicion of poison. For it is, and always has been a thing most hard to
maintain the equal sovereignty of both together. And that which Lucan
writes,

Nulla fides regni socijs, omnis que potestas,
Impatiens consortis erit.
No sincere love is to be found in partners of the sovereign state,
And fellowship in power great, is always mixed with mortal hate.
Is especially to be understood of a Diumuirat, or sovereign government of two
together. Aristodemus left the kingdom to be governed wholly, and divided by
his two sons Froclus and Euristhenes both at once, they quickly fell at
odds, and had their state taken from them, by Lycurgus (being himself a
prince descended of the blood of Hercules) and the sovereignty by him given
unto the people. The like happened unto Amphareus and Leucippus, kings of the
Messians. But the Argiues least they should sal into the same troubles, to
avoid the plurality of kings, at such time as Atreus and Thyestes at once
seized upon their fathers kingdom, the people (I say) made choice of the
wiser, or as Lucian says of the more learned. And the princes of the blood of
Meronee and Charlemaigne, divided the kingdom amongst Clodoueus, of their
fathers one kingdom made four of equal power. And the three children of Jews
the Debonaire divided so many kingdoms amongst them. Neither do we read many
at once long to have holden a kingdom together undivided: for the indivisible
nature of sovereignty, and the fellowship of government, is always full of
dangers, where no one has the sovereignty, except when a strange prince
marries a queen, among such as are acquainted with women's government: where
commonly the pictures of the man and his wife, their names and arms are joined
together; as if the sovereignty belonged unto them both: as it chanced when
king Ferdinand married Isabel queen of Castile, Anthony of Burbon, Ioane
Philip king of Spain Marie the daughter of Henry king of England. Howbeit the
English men would not suffer him to have any part with her in the sovereignty,
or of the fruits or profis thereto belonging, but that the same should remain
wholly unto her self; albeit that they were contented that they should both
(for fashion sake) bear the name, and both the one and the other sign
charters, and commissions, but yet so, as that the sign of the queen might of
it self be sufficient, but that without hers the sign of king Philip should
be to no purpose. Which was also agreed upon with Ferdinand king of Arragon,
having married Isabel of Castile, I the king, and I the queen.
where all the commands were signed, Yo el Roy, and Yo la Reyna; and by the
secretary Pompee, Caesar, A commonweal better governed by three great
soueraigns then by two.
and Crassus lived, whom the people called the monster with three heads: for
so long they peaceably governed the Roman empire, which then depended of their
power. But so soon as Crassus was slain in Caldea, straight way the other two
fell in sunder, and so egerly made war the one of them upon the other, as
that to reconcile them was impossible, until that one of them had quite
overthrown the other, and made himself master of all. The like happened
after the death of Caesar, in the Triumuirat of Augustus, M. Antoninus, and
Lepidus, who having of one popular Commonweal, made three Monarchies; and
Lepidus unfit for government, had submitted his authority unto Augustus,
although Antoninus had married Augustus his sister, and that they two had
equally divided the empire betwixt them, and lived in countries

Now Monarchy is divided into three forms: for he that has the sovereignty,
is Three sorts of monarchies. Great difference betwixt the state, and the
government of the state of a commonweal.
either lord of all: or else a king, or a tyrant, which makes no diversity of
Common weals, but proceeds of the diversity of the governor in the
Monarchy: For there is great difference betwixt the state, and the government
of the state: a rule in policy the subjects indifferently: or else
Aristocratically, bestowing them upon the nobility or richer sort only; which
variety of government has deceived them which have made a mixture of
Commonweals, and so made more sorts thereof then three, without having regard
that the state of a Commonweal is different from the administration and
government of the same: But this point we will farther touch in place
convenient.

Wherefore a lawful or royal Monarchy is that where the subjects obey the
laws The three sorts of Monarchies aptly described.
of a Monarque, and the Monarque the laws of nature, the subjects inioying
their natural liberty, and propriety of their goods. The lordly Monarchy is
that where the prince is become lord of the goods and persons of his subjects,
by law of arms and lawful war; governing them as the master of a family
does his slaves. The tyrannical Tully called the rage of the furious and
turbulent people.

Now as concerning the lordly Monarchy, it is convenient for us first to
entreat The lordly Monarchy the first that was amongst men.
thereof, as of that which was first amongst men: for they are deciued which
following the opinion of Aristotle, suppose that golden kind of men (more
famous for the poets fables, then for that there were any such in deed) to have
made first choice of Assiria, under the power of Nemrod, whom the holy
scripture calls the great hunter; which is a common phrase of speech amongst
the Hebrews, by which word they signify a thief, or robber. For the ancient
writers, viz. Plato, Aristotle, and Xenophon, have put robbery among the kinds
of hunting, as we have elsewhere noted. For before the time of Nemrod no man is
found to have had power Nemrod the first Monarkie.
and rule one over an other, all men living in like liberty; he being the
first that took upon him the sovereignty, and that caused free borne men to
serve: whose name seems to have been given him according unto his quality,
for as much as Nemrod signifies a terrible lord. Soon after the world was
seen full of slaves, Sem one of Noe yet living. And in the whole course of the
Bible, the scripture speaking of the subjects of the kings of Assiria and
Aegipt, calls them always slaves: and not the holy scripture only, but the
Greeks also, who always in their writings term them selves free, and the
Barbarians slaves; meaning by the Barbarians the people of Asia and Aegipt. And
therefore the kings of Persia denouncing war, demanded the earth and the
waters, (as Plutache writes) to show that they were absolute Lords of all
that was in the land and sea contained. And that is it for which Xenophon in
his Cyropaedia writes, that it is a thing good and commondable among the
Medes, that the prince should be lord and owner of all things: And thereof came
the adoration which not only the subjects, but strangers also, yea and the
ambassadors Themistocles, whose name even then and long before was most famous,
would after the manner of the Greeks have spoken unto the Persian king,
Atabanus captain of the kings guard, kept him from coming unto him, neither
would suffer him to prefer any request unto him, until such time as he had
after the Persian manner adored him: but afterward when he was gone out of the
kings presence, he courteously spoke unto him, and in these words excused that
he had done; It is seemly O Themistocles, to follow the fashion of the
country wherein a man is: you Grecians make great reckning of your liberty
and equality of command; but we esteem Liuie writes, Barbaris pro legibus
semper dominorum imperia fuerunt. The command of their lords have been
always A lordly Monarchy, not to be accounted a tirannie and why.
unto the Barbarians for laws. Neither ought this lordly monarchy to be
accounted a tyranny: for it is not inconvenient, that a sovereign prince
having in good and lawful war vanquished his enemies, should make himself
lord of their goods and persons by the law of arms, governing them now his
subjects, as does the good householder his servants or slaves: as we see it a
thing received by the manner and custom of almost all nations. But the prince
which shall by unjust war, or other unlawful means make of freemen his
slaves, and possess himself of their goods, is Adrian the emperor was so
far, as that he would not that a slave a player, should enjoy his liberty,
which his master at the request of the people of Rome had given him in the
Theater, but left it to the discretion of his master, to be as he thought good
disposed of: As had Tiberius before, and after that Marcus Aurelius Adrian his
son in like case forbid the same: whatsoever consent the master had given at
the clamor of the people; reputing it rather forced than done of good will: to
the end that the full disposition should be in every man's power, of that which
unto him belonged. And now although at this present there be few princes which
have in their absolute power the bodies and goods of their subjects, although
we see many tyrants; yet are there many in Asia and Africa: The great Turk and
the Moscouite the only lordly Monarque in Europe
that is to say, servants, which we corruptly call slaves. But the Fmperour of
the Turks styleth himself Sultan, that is to say Lord: not so much for the
largenes of his possession, (seeing that the king of Spain has under his
dominion and rule, people for their cruelty barbarous, for their multitude
innumerable, in places infinite: which his kingdom is bounded with the same
countries, wherewith the course of the sun is bounded, being ten times
greater then the Turks empire) but is therefore called Lord of the Turks, for
that he is lord of their persons and goods; whom for all that he governs much
more courteously and freely, then does a good householder Augustus the emperor
himself, although he were in effect the greatest monarch in the world, yet so
it was that he so abhorred to be called Lord: neither had any that held of him
in fealty and homage.

Now if one say that there is no Monarque in Europe which pretends not all
the How the goods and lands of subjects belong unto the sovereign prince.
goods and lands of his subjects to belong unto him in right of direct
sovereignty, neither any man which confesses not to hold his goods of his
sovereign prince: yet I say that that suffices not that any man should
therefore of right be called lord of all, or a lordly Monarche: seeing that
every subject has the true propriety of his own things, and may thereof
dispose at his pleasure: although the prince for pomp and The Hunnes the first
that brough the lordly soueraignme^t of Monarks into Europ.
right, as not holden of him. The Hunns a Tartar-like nation come from the
farthest parts of Scythia, at such times as they with fire and sword destroyed
almost all Europe, first showed the example unto the Lombards and Almans,
German nations, and to the Frankes, the ancient inhabitants of France,
calling themselves Lords of all, and so accustomed these nations to lord it
over all: as that no man could hold a turfe of ground but by their leave. True
it is that the Romans having vanquished their enemies, most commonly sold them
for slaves, or else condemned them to lose the * Plutar in (...).
seventh part of their lands: which lands they straight ways gave unto their
Colonies Artaxerxes, had used to cause their great lords and magistrates to be
stripped stark naked before them and whipped as slaves: yet king Artaxerxes was
the first that ordained that they should in deed be stripped, but should not have
but their clothes and garments only beaten: and whereas their hair was wont
in dispite to be pulled off, he commanded the wool of their cappes only to
be so pulled. True it is that Francis Aluarez writes, that he The great Negus
of AEthiopia a lordly Monarque.
has seen in Aethiopia the great Chauncelour, and other great lords and
governors Odonacre king of the Herules, who almost at the same time invaded
Italy, that Attila did Germany; having brought Italy under his subjection,
took the third part of the territory from the subjects (the punishment of all
people by him vanquished,) but left their persons free, and themselves lords of
their goods, without any The beginning of tenants and fees, and what in
ancient time they were.
tenure, or yielding unto him of any fealty or homage. But after that the
Almans, Lombards, Frenchmen, Saxons, Burgundians, Goths, Ostrogothes,
Englishmen, and other Northren people had tasted the manners and customs of the
Hunnes, they began to make themselves Lords, not of the persons, but of all the
lands of them whom they had vanquished: and yet afterward reserving unto
themselves the most fruitful part thereof, left the rest unto the ancient
inhabitants, to be by them inioyed, yet as holden of them in fealty, with
paying of some small tribute if they should change the possession thereof:
which for this cause are called Seigneuries, or Lordships; to show that the
shadow of the ancient lordly Monarchy as yet remains, although greatly
diminished. For these fees and lordships were in ancient time nothing else but
benefits wills, or else dying intestate, leave them unto their children; and
that if there were no Frederick county of Vaudemont used against Renat of
Aniou king of Sicilie at the counsel of Constance, demanding of the Emperor
that he might be invested in the dukedom of Loraine, considering that it was
an imperial fee, and by consequent that Isabel wife to Renate was not thereof
capable: although she were the duke of Lorains daughter. Howbeit that Renate
the king of Sicilie, might by an other reason have defended himself, that is
to say, that in question of fees, and services, we are to follow the laws and
customs of the land that owes the service, and not of that whereunto the
service is due: now by the custom of Loraine the The marks of lordly
Monarchies more to be seen in the Northren countries then in any other parts
of Europ.
Lordly Monarchies, have continued in Germany, and toward the North more than
in the other parts of Europe. For albeit that William the Conqueror, having
conquered the realm of England, by force of arms, called himself not only
lord of that realm, but also caused it to be proclaimed, that the sovereignty
and propriety of al his subjects goods, mouable, and immouable unto him
belonged: yet nevertheless so it was, that he contented himself with the
direct sovereignty, fealty and homage: the Charles the fifth made himself the
lordly Monorque of Peru.
subjects still enjoying their liberty, and full property of their goods. But
the emperor Charles the fifth, after he had subdued the great country of Peru,
made himself Lordly Monarch thereof, causing all things to be holden of him,
excepting the slaves, Lagasca the lawyer, the emperors lieutenant in Peru (
Gonsulo Pizarra, and the rest of the authors of rebellion vanquished and
overthrown) by a perpetual bond to keep the inhabitants of that country,
within the compass of their duty, compelled them for ever to ask of the king
of Spain, the possession of their goods, their kinsmen being dead: except the
parents themselves yet living, had before procured the same to be granted for
their children in time to come: which was not to be obtained without a great
sum of money to be paid into the kings coffers: they of greater power in the
mean time All persons of what degree soever sorbidden by the Mahometain laws,
the great Caliph only excepted.
chapter of Mahomets, it is forbiden all persons of what degree or quality
soever to call themselves in any sort lords, except the Caliph, or great bishop
the successor of Mahomet, who at the first was the only Lordly Monarch or
lord of all, giving unto kings and princes their principalities and kingdoms,
during his pleasure, until that the Othoman princes, the Curdes, and the kings
of the higher part of Asia and Afrike, by little and little exempted themselves
out of their power (by reason of the division betwixt them and the
Anticaliphes) and so took unto themselves the kingdoms of those countries.

But yet here might some man doubt whether the lordly Monarchy be not a
Tyranny, A lordly monarkie no tyranny.
considering that it seems to be directly against the law of nature, which
reserueth unto every man his liberty, and the sovereignty over his own
goods. Whereunto I answer, that of ancient time it was indeed against the law
of nature to make free men slaves, and to possess himself of other men's
goods: but if the consent of all nations will, that that which is gotten by
just war should be the conquerours own, and that the vanquished should be
slaves unto the victorious, as a man cannot well say that a Monarchy so
established is tyrannical: seeing also we read that Jacob the Patriarch, by
his testament leaving unto his children certain lands that he had gotten,
said that it was his own, for that he had got it by force of arms. And that
Why the lordly monarchy is more durable then the royal monarchy.
and at this present that of Aethiopia (the most ancient Monarch of all Asia
and Afrike) whereunto are subject fifty kings as slaves, if we may believe
Pau. Iouius, who all are, and term themselves the slaves of the Grand Negus
of Aethiopia. And the reason why the Lordly Monarchy is more durable than the
royal, is for that it is more maiesticall, and that the subjects hold not
their lives, goods, and liberty, but of the sovereign prince, who has by
just war conquered them; which plucketh down the courage of subjects, so
that the slave acknowledging his condition, becomes humble, abject, and
having as they say a base and servile heart. Where to the contrary, men

CHAP. III. Of a Royal Monarchy.
A Royal Monarch or king, is he which placed in sovereignty yields A royal
Monarque.
himself as obedient unto the laws of nature as he desires his subjects to
be toward himself, leaving unto every man his natural liberty, and the
propriety of his own goods. I have put to these last words for the difference
of a Lordly Monarch, who may be a just and virtuous prince, and equally govern
his subjects, being himself yet nevertheless lord both of their persons The
difference betwixt a royal and a lordly Monarque.
and goods. And if it so chance the Lordly Monarch having justly conquered his
enemies country, to set them again at liberty, with the propriety of their
goods: of a lord he becomes a king, and changes the Lordly Monarchy, into
a Monarchy Royal. And that is it for which Pliny the younger says unto
Traian the emperor, Principis sedem obtines, ne sit Domino locus, Thou hold
the seat of a prince, Lord it not. This difference (betwixt a Royal Monarch
and a Lordly) was well noted by the ancient Persians, calling Cyrus the elder
(which overthrew the Monarchy of the Medes) by the name of a king: but
tearming Cambyses a lord, and Darius a merchant; for that Cyrus was a gentle
and courteous prince toward his subjects, but Came byses his son was haughty
and proud, and Darius too great an exactor and covetous. So it is also reported
Alexander the Great to have been advised by Aristotle, to bear himself
toward the Greeks as a father; but toward the Barbarians as a lord: which
his council Alexander nevertheless rejected, willing that the Greeks

We have moreover said in our definition, that the subjects ought to be
obedient unto the Royal Monarch, to show that in him alone lies the
sovereign majesty; and that the king ought to obey the laws of nature: that
is to say, to govern his subjects, and to guide his actions atcording unto
natural justice, whose luster was brighter than the light of the sun it
self. It is then the true mark of a Royal Monarchy, when the The true
marks of a royal Monarque.
prince shows himself as obedient unto the laws of nature, as he wishes
his subjects to be unto himself. Which it is not hard for him looking into the
duty of a good Pindarus, a queen reigning over both, it shall in the same
bonds unite the subjects among themselves, and together with their prince:
whereof shall grow a most sweet harmony, which may with wonderful pleasure and
felicity bless them both. This is that regal and lawful Monarchy of one,
Caesar brought into the form of a province, was by Augustus the emperor given
to young Iuba, who so of a slave became a king) or as the kingdom of Naples,
and Sicilie, given to Charles of France, and after to Jews, first duke of
Aniou, or left by testament, as in former times the kingdoms of Tunes, Fez,
and Marocco, and was also of late put in practice by Henry the eight king of
England, who by his will left that kingdom unto his son Edward the sixth, to
whom he substituted his sister Marie, and unto her Elizabeth, who was
afterward queen: or that the kingdom be got by fraud and deceir, so that he
Cecrops, Hieron, Gelon, and Pisistratus, who right wisely used their power, as
says Plutarch: and in our time Cosmus de Medices: or by chance, as the
kingdom of Persia, by the neying of an horse fell to Darius Histaspis one of
the seven Persian lords, it being so before agreed, after they had slain the
Mages, who had usurped the kingdom, that he whose horse first neyed, should
have the kingdom: or be it that the prince by force of arms, by right or
wrong conquer his kingdom, provided that he uprightly govern the same so by
him conquered; as Titus Liuius says of king Seruius, Neque enim praeter vim
quicquam adius regnt habebat. Neither had he any thing but force unto the right
of the kingdom; and yet he was a good king, as it oftentimes has been seen
of a robber and a thief, to have proved a virtuous prince; and of a Campson
chosen Sultan of Egypt by the Mamalukes: or for his justice and devotion, as
Numa in Rome: or for his age, as the ancient Arabians made choice of the eldest
amongst them for their king, as says Diodorus, and they of Taprobana, as says
Pliny: or for his strength and force, as Maximinus the Roman emperor, being of
such stature and strength, as that he seemed to have come of the race of
Giants: or for his feature and beauty, as was Heliogabalus, therefore chosen
emperor of the same Roman empire: or for his height and stature, as in
Aethiopia the kingdoms were still given to the tallest: or for that he could
drink most, as in Scythia, as Aristotle * Polit lib. 3.
if he never so little depart, he becomes a tyrant. Which his description is
not only Aristotle blamed.
without reason, but also dangerous: for that soucraigne power which he said
to be most proper unto a king, must so needs fall, if the king could nothing
command against the liking and good will of his subjects; but must to the
contrary be constrained to receive laws of them In brief it should be
lawful for the people to do all things; and the most just and best kings
should so be accounted for tyrants: neither were a king to be reputed of any
thing else, than as of a mean magistrate, unto whom power were to be given,
and again taken away at the peoples pleasure. Which are all things Aristotle
says, That they are barbarous people, where their kings come by succession.
When as yet his own king and scholar Alexander the Great, was one of them
which descended in right line from the blood of Hercules, and by right of
succession came to the kingdom of Macedon. The Lacedaemonians should be also
barbarous, who from the same stock of the Heraclides, had had their kings
about a thousand years. The people of Asia also, the Persians, and Egyptians,
should so all be barbarous: in whom not only rested, but from whom all
humanity, courtesy, learning, knowledge, and the whole source and fountain
of good laws and Commonweales have sprung: and so at last none but Aristotle
with some handful of Greeks should be free from barbarism. The opinion of
Aristotle concerning kings impugned. Arist. Polit. 3
a Commonweal, than to commit the election of kings unto the suffrages of the
people; as shall in due place be hereafter declared. Although Aristotle be in
that also deceived, where he says, That there be three sorts of kings; and yet
having in his discourse reckoned up four, in casting up of the account he
finds out a fifth. The first he calls Voluntary kings, as reigning by the
will and good liking of the people, such as were the kings of Heroique times,
whom he supposes to have been Captains, Judges, and Priests. The second he
says, are proper unto the barbarous nations, where kings come by succession.
The third are made by election. The fourth was proper to the Lacedaemonians,
whom he says to have been perpetual generals in their Pitacus king of
Corinth, and Timondas king of Nigropont: but to the contrary* Plutarch
writes, That the first princes had no other honor before their eyes, Plutar
i^ These.
than to force men, and to keep them in subjection as slaves: whereof the holy
scripture also certifieth us of the first Lordly Monarch Nemrod; leaving the
sovereignty to their children, in right of succession; as says Thucidides.
Which has also been Herodotus, Thucidides, Josephus, Berosus, Plutarch,
Xenophon, and other most ancient historiographers of the Hebrews, Greeks, and
Latins, sufficient to convince the opinion of Aristotle of untruth in those
things that he has writ concerning kings. Whereas also he comprehends the
Lacedemonian generals, under the name of kings: he is therein Aristotle
supposes, who calls them the perpetual generals of the wars: for as much
as that power and authority was communicated to their citisens also, as to
Lysander, Leonidas, Callicratides, Gilippus, whom the Lacedaemonians oppressed
with wars preferred before their kings. And albeit that Agesilaus was one of
their kings, yet so it was, that he durst not take upon him the charge of a
general, until the Seigneurie had so commanded; as Plutarch in his lives
reports. And when they were Democritus their general, whom they fined at
thirty thousand crowns, as we read in Pausanias. So the Ephori punished
their kings with banishment, imprisonment, and fines, yea and sometime wi^h
death, as we have before said. We must not therefore put these in the rank of
kings, no more than him which is a Lordly Monarch, lord of the persons and
goods of his subjects, who has his proper difference separated from a Monarch
Royal.

As for the third sort of kings, which he said was made by election, that can
make Darius the first: and so a seventh by donation, an eight by testament, The
difference of Monarques h^w it is to be gathered.
and a ninth by finnes and deceit, and a tenth by force: which were naught
else, but to make an infinite sort of kings, who all nevertheless are
comprehended under one kind. For the difference of Monarchs is not to be
gathered by the means of the coming to the state, but by the means of
governing of the estate. Which as we said is comprised in three kinds or sorts,
viz. the Lordly Monarchy, the Royal Monarchy, and the Tirannicall Monarchy.
But whereas Aristotle under the name of kings comprehends them also which
were wont for a short time to be chosen, to establish or reform Dionysius
Halicarnasseus writes, to have been in power and office like unto them whom
the Thessalians called Archos, the Lacedaemonians Cosmos, the Mitylenians
Aesymnetes, having like charge that the baily of Florence had at such time as
that Commonweal was governed by a popular government; that is to wit, the
Grand Council of the people made choice of eight or ten persons, best seen in
their affairs, to reestablish the state, and to put again in order that which
by process of time was fallen into disorder, either in their laws, or in
their customs, in their revenues, Aristotle call also kings; which should be
a thing very absurd; for as much as the quality of a magistrate, and much less
of a commissioner has nothing agreeing or common with the sovereign majesty
of a king. And albeit that Caesar in his Commentaries says, the inhabitants of
Autun to have every year chosen them a magistrate with royal power; that is
of them but improperly spoken: for why, it is manifest, that he which was a
magistrate could be no king. And that more is, the governors Alexander the
Great, although that after his death every one of them took upon him the
sovereignty in the country or province that he governed; yet it was a long
time before they durst style themselves by the name of kings. The first that
began was Antigonus, after the victory by him Antigonus the first of the
successors of Alexander that styled himself king.
obtained against Ptolomeus Lagus: after which he set a crown upon his head,
and used in his titles the name of (...), or king. And immediately after, the
Egyptians called Ptolomee king; as to their imitation did the Assyrians
Seleucus, and the Thracians Lysimachus also. And not to go further, the
ancient kings of Loraine and Burgundy, after that they had yielded fealty
and homage unto the German emperor, lost the name and sovereignty of kings,
and called themselves but dukes: for that now they Martial, Quirex est, regem
Maxim non habeat. For why, the name of a king is always maiesticall, and the
most honorable that a sovereign prince can have: and for that cause the
habit, the marks, the signs of kings, have been always particular, and
proper unto themselves; as the royal arms, the golden robes, the crown and
scepter, not to be communicated unto other men. And there was nothing that made
the majesty of the Roman kings so venerable, as the royal ornaments which
Tarquinius Priscus brought from the ancient kings of Hetruria, as we read in
the histories. And the Romans themselves, after they had driven out the proud
Tarquin their king, although they abhorred the very name of a king, and much
more the government, having changed the royal state into a popular: Gregory
the seventh, * Tacit^ lib 2. Appianu^, Liuius Val. Max.
we read that Demetrius was by the scepter, crown, and ensign established
king of Croatia and Sclauonia: of which things the bishops of Rome have
oftentimes been liberal (should I say) or prodigal? as well as the emperors:
yet had they no more so to do, then had the Greek emperor Anastasius, who
sent the Consulatie ornament and titles of Augustus unto Clodoueus king of
France, who (as Aymon says) received them in the city of Tours: or than
Justinian, who gave unto king Childebert the Frederike the emperor (first of
that name) sent unto Peter prince of Denmark, a sword and a crown, with the
title of a king, which was a title contrary to the effect, Tritemi^ cap. 17.
Rex Danorum Magnus se in potestatem Imperatoris tradidit, obsidesdedit,
iuramentum fecit, se successoresque suos, non nisi imperatoris and successorum
eius permissu regnum adepturos, The great king of the Danes has delivered
himself into the power of the emperor, has given hostages, taken his oath,
that he and his successors shall not but by the sufferance of the emperor and
his successors, take upon them that kingdom. Wherein he two ways offended,
first, for that allured with the ornaments sent him by the Austria also was by
the same emperor, and almost at the same time, honored with the same ornaments
and title, yet with condition that he should still remain in the perpetual
obeisance of the German Empire, wherein he then was, and ever had been: but
when he breaking his faith, had reuoulted from the empire, he was within twelve
years after spoiled both of his royal dignity and title. By like error
Henry the first king of England, son to William the Conqueror, whilst he
yet lived caused Henry his eldest son to be crowned king: for he straight
way after, would needs be equal with his father, and take upon him to manage
the greatest affairs of state; in such sort that great quarrels and
contentions arise betwixt the father and the son, even unto parts taking,
which had without doubt ruinated the state, had not the son been before by
death prevented. So also in this realm, when the family of the Capets had
usurped the kingdom, the better to confirm their wealth and power, not as yet
well grounded; lest the kingdom after the death of their kings should fall into
an Anarchie, they still caused* their sons (whilst they themselves yet
lived) to be crowned and proclaimed kings. So Hugh to assure this succession,
caused his son Robert to be crowned king: Robert, Henry: and he afterward
Philip; which manner of crowning of the sons, the fathers yet living, after
their estate and power better confirmed and established, was again left. And
so to do, unto me seems a thing Dangerous for soueraign princes to cause
their sons whilst they themselves yet live to be crowned king^ with them.
very dangerous, especially if the new crowned king be sick with the
ambitious desire of rule: for that the subjects more willingly behold the sun
rising then setting: except the king have many kingdoms, with great fluds,
most high mountains, or the deepest seas, one from an other divided, not
easily with the wings of aspiring ambition to be passed. So Seleucus king of
both Asiaes, graced his son Antiochus not only with the royal dignity, but
also placed him in the government of the kingdom of the higher Asia; which is
a thing may well be suffered where kings have used to be created Changuis first
of all the Tartar kings, chosen king by his subjects, caused Hoccata his eldest
son to be crowned king, himself yet living. And Gostanus king of Sweden
having usurped upon that state against the king of Denmark, caused his son
Henry to be also chosen king. And Frederik now king of Denmark, was chosen
king in the year 1556, two years before the death of his father: who not yet
so secured, but doubting least his uncles John and Adolphe after his death
should practice a new election, and so raise new stirs, requested the French
M. Danzai the French ambassador, and afterward by an ambassador of his own,
(sent directly for that purpose) to stand his friend, and to receive him into
his protection. So have done, and yet also do the kings of Marocco, Fez, and
Tunes. And in our memory Ferdinand of Austria yet living, caused Maximilian
his son to be chosen and crowned king of Hungary and Bohemia: as shortly
after Maximilian did the like for his son Ernestus; and so peoples voices by
little and little taken away are at length quite buried in oblivion. The like
was also attempted for the nominating of his successor by Sigismundus Augustus
king of Polonia, but was let so to do by the states of that kingdom,
although it seemed for the good of that Common Austria, as that there is but
little hope for the pulling of it out thence again. And thus much concerning a
royal Monarchy: now let us likewise speak of the third kind, which is a
Tyrannical Monarchy.

CHAP. IIII. Of a Tirannicall Monarchy.
A Tirannicall Monarchy is that where one man treading vndet A tirannicall
Monarchy.
foot the laws of God and nature, abuses his free borne subjects as his
slaves: and other men's goods as his own. This word Tyrant derived from the
Greeks was of the propriety thereof honorable, and in ancient time signified
no other thing then a Prince, which without the consent of the people, had by
force or fraud possessed himself of the state; and of a companion made
himself their master: whom they called a Tyrant, although he were The name of
a tirant in ancient time taken in good part: and how the same became odious.
a right wise and just prince. So Plato writing to Dionysius the Tyrant of
Syracusa by Plato to Dionysius the Tyrant greeting, and the answer was;
Dionysius the Tyrant to Plato health. And so the rest as well philosophers as
friends, honestly called them Tyrants which had by force or finenesse got the
sovereignty of their cities and states: in which name the Tyrants themselves
also gloried. And to show that the name of a Tyrant was as well given unto a
good and just prince, as to an evil and wicked, it appears evidently in
that, that Pittacus and Periander reckened among the seven Sages of Graece,
were called Tyrants, having taken unto themselves the state and government of
their countries. But for the mercy of their enemies, were constrained for the
safety of their lives and goods to have gardes of strangers about their
persons, and great garrisons in their fortresses and strong holds: and Dionysius
the elder which had oppressed Syracusa had always about him for the garding of
his person and the city ten thousand footmen, and as many horsemen; beside a
fleet of four hundred galleys still ready furnished with all things
necessary: and yet thought it not a strength sufficient to keep under those
few citizens that were left, whom he had utterly disarmed, and in most servile
Plutarque has given him the praise of a good prince, as one who in justice and
virtue exceeded many, who abusing the most honorable names of Kings, are
themselves polluted and defiled with all manner of vices. For we are not much to
rest upon the vain show of words and glorious titles; when as often times the
worst men arrogate unto them Ptolemeis kings of Egypt; of whom the one had put
to death his brother; the other his mother; and the third his father: the
subjects in derision called them A lover of his brother.
Philadelphe, A lover of his mother.
Philometor, and A lover of his father.
Philopator. Also the most reverend and holy names have become abominable, for
the wickedness of them that have most filthyly abused the same. The name
truly of a king is holy, yet was it for the pride of Tarquinius, and the
rauishment of Lucretia by his son, made hateful unto the Romans. And the
cruelty of Scylla in his Dictatorship made the Dictators odious. So the
immoderat ambition of Francis Valori made the Confalonniers of Florence
hateful unto

But it may be, that one and the same prince, whose dominion is large and wide,
may bear himself as a king unto his natural subjects: and as a lordly
monarch toward them, whom he has by just war subdued, and as a tyrant
toward the rest: or that in the same city he may tyrannise over the rich and
better sort of the citisens; and yet show himself courteous and gentle unto
the poor and baser sort. And amongst tyrants there are diverse sorts and
degrees of more or less: and as there is not so good a prince, which has not
some notable vice; so we see that there is none so cruel a tyrant, which is
not endued with some good virtue, or has not in him some thing to A soueraign
princes actions are not by his subjects to be rashly censured*
withal, rashly and foolishly to censure a prince, whose actions and
comportments we thoroughly know not; whereas we ought first wisely to weigh his
virtues and vices, his heroical or base and evil disposition: after the
manner of the Persians, who condemned no man to death (although convicted of
the crime whereof he was accused) except it first appeared by his former life,
whether his vices exceeded his virtues or not. For so Liuie did well, who
having diligently reckoned up Hannibal his virtues, and coming afterward unto
his vices, says, Has tot ac tantas virtutes ingentia vitia aequabant, These
his so many and great virtues, were counteruailed with great vices. Wherefore
least the good should be confused and so confounded with the bad; o^ The best
king.
common manner: neither do I seek after such an one as is accomplished with
all heroical virtues; or the rare paragon of justice, wisdom, and religion,
a man without all imputation: which in the fables of ancient worthies, were
propounded with more magnificence than truth, for princes to look upon and to
imitat; such as never was, nor ever shall be: but rather such an example of a
good and just king, as is indeed in the rank of princes to be found; and such
an one as is always ready to bestow his goods, Homer in two words called
(...), whose whole endeavor is to be indeed such an one as Codrus and Decius
are reported to have been, who advertised by the Oracle, that the victory over
their enemies depended of their death, without farther delay suddenly sacrificed
their lives: and Moses above all, whom Philo calls the most wise law giver;
a most just prince, who besought God, That he might rather die the everlasting
death of the wicked, and have his name blotted out of the book of life, than
that the people committed to his charge, should endure so great and grievous
punishment as it had deserved: by which prayers he appeased the wrath of God,
like a most good Augustus the great emperor is reported never to have heard any
title or addition, unto him more pleasing, at such time as M. Valerius Messala,
was by a decree of the Senate, and of the people of Rome, called Father of his
country. For why, the best prince nothing differs from the best father, as
Xenophon was wont most excellently to say.

Now the greatest difference betwixt a king and a tyrant is, for that a king
conformeth The greatest difference betwixt a king and a tyrant.
himself unto the laws of nature, which the tyrant at his pleasure treads
under foot: the one of them respects religion, justice, and faith; whereas
the other regards neither God, faith, nor law: the one of them refers all
his actions to the good of the Commonweal, and safety of his subjects;
whereas the other respects guard, nor garrison, but of his own people;
whereas the other for the defense of his

But what need we to use many examples to prove this to be true, being of it
self so Tirants slain by effeminate and weak persons.
manifest in every man's eye. And seeing that we find in histories tyranny to
have been Aristotle (not he of Stagira, but he that was surnamed the
Logitian) who slew a tyrant of Sicione. And Thebe, who slew her Tirants never
in safety.
husband Alexander, tyrant of the Pheraeans. And to think that tyrants might
by force warrant themselves, is but mere and vain error. For who were of
greater force than were the Roman emperors, who ordinarily had forty legions
at their command in their provinces, and three more in Italy, beside their
Praetorian bands, for the defense of their persons: and yet in no place in the
world were there so many princes slain; yea sometimes the captains of their
guards slew them even in their palaces, Cherea the tyrant, and the Mamalukes
eight Sultans of Egypt.

But he that would see the miserable ends of tyrants, let him but read the
lives of Plutar in Arat^ et Timoleone
Timoleon, and of Aratus, where he shall see the tyrants drawn out of the
nest of their tyranny, stripped stark naked, thieves beaten to death with
clubbes in the presence of Children, and the rest of the common people: and
after that their wines and children, their kinsfolks and familiar friends
most cruelly murdered and slain: and that more is the very image and statues
of them that were dead in their tyranny, accused, and publicly condemned,
delivered unto the common hangman to be as it were executed; their bones also
taken out of their graves, and cast into most lothsom

And albeit that tyrants whilst they lived, have not wanted their flattering
clawbacks, Tyrants always infamous and detested.
whom they with rewards enduced to write their unworthy praises; yet we
read, that after their death, such their histories, and panegiricall orations,
before written Tyrants still tormented with the fear of future in famy.
live they still feel the torment of the infamy to come, which they yet
living see shall Tiberius the emperor grievously complained, but Nero much
more, who wished that when he died, yea that whilst he yet breathed, all the
world might with fire be consumed. And for this cause Demetrius, surnamed
Poliorcetes, to gratify the Athenians undertook the war for the defense of
their rights and liberty, to the intent to be honored by their learned
writings; knowing well that the city of Athens was as it were the watch of the
whole world, which might in like sort make the glory of his noble acts to
shine throughout the world, as does a beacon set on fire upon the top of an
high tower: neither was he therein deceived: but so soon as he gave himself
over unto vices and villainies, there was never tyrant better (than he was by
them) washed; having his name most shamefully by them Nero, Commodus,
Caracalla, and such other tyrants. And sometime the whole people with one rage
and surie runs headlong upon the tyrant, as it did upon Phalaris,
Heliogabalus, Alcetes tyrant of the Epirots, and upon Andronicus emperor of
Constantinople, whom stripped and set upon a bare asses back, the people of
Constantinople caused to endure all the indignities and reproaches that were
possible, before they would give him leave to die. Yea and sometimes it
chances, that even they themselves are the occasion of the hastening Tyrants
oftentimes to hasten their own deaths in seekeing to eschu^ the same.
of their own death, as it is reported of Caracalla the emperor, who would
needs know of Iultus, his mothers Mathematician, whom he thought should succeed
him in the empire (for that is a common course amongst tyrants in their affairs
and doings, Macrinus was the man that should succeed him; which letters by
chance falling into the hands of Macrinus: he thereupon forthwith caused
Caracalla to be slain, for fear of the danger prepared for him by Caracalla.
So Commodus also, having hardly escaped the stabbe which a murtherous villain
was about with a dagger to have given him, (who in giving of the blow said,
That the Senate had sent him that) straight ways after made a roll of al them
whom he purposed to put to death: which roll by good hap coming into the hands
of Martia his concubine* and she therein finding her own name enrolled amongst
the rest, to avoid the

Now the state of a royal Monarchy is quite contrary unto a tyranny: for
the king The happy estate of a good Royal prince, in comparison of a Tyrant.
is so united with his subjects, that they are still willing to spend their
goods, their blood, and lives, for the defense of his estate, honor, and life;
and cease not after his death to write, sing, and publish his praises,
amplifying them also in what they can. As we see in Xenophon the lively
purtract of a great and virtuous prince, drawn under the person of Cyrus,
whose praises he has with wonderful eloquence set forth, to give eaxmple
Scipio Africanus, The worthy praise of Scipio Africanus.
who having always before his eyes and in his hands Xenophon his Cyropoediae,
and framing himself to the imitation thereof, profited so much, as that he in
virtue, honor, and prowess, surmounted all the kings and princes, not of his
own age only, but of former times also; in such sort, that certain pirates
enflamed with the report of his fame, and knowing that he was in his house in
the country far from any town, came and beset the same: against whom as he
was about to put himself with his people in readiness, and so to have stood
upon his guard: they perceiving the same, forthwith threw down their arms,
assuring him that they were not come thither, but only to see him, and to do
him honor, which they most humbly requested, that they Menander king of the
Bactrians, was for his virtue and justice so well beloved of his subjects, as
that after his death the cities were at great strife and debate amongst
themselves, which of them should have the honor of his sepulcher: neither could
the matter be appeased, until that at length it was agreed, that every one of
them should in the honor and memorial of him build a several tomb or
sepulcher. What tyrants malice also or dissimulation is so great, whom Pliny
his Panegyricall Traian the emperor, as that it seemed nothing more could
thereunto be added: he so concludes the period, That nothing greater or better
could be wished for unto the Commonweal, but that the immortal gods would
imitat the life of Traian. Which excessive amplification, although it savor of
impiety, yet who doubts but that it proceeded from the zeal of a most
famous man, toward his most excellent prince? for whose danger at his going
out, and welfare at his coming home, all the temples were filled; and who
himself in his solemn prayers, was thus wont to covenant with the gods, That
they should keep and preserve him, if they saw it to be for the good of the
Commonweal. What tyrant is so cruel, what show soever Agesilaus received, at
such time as he was fined by the Ephori, for having alone robbed the hearts and
gained the love of all the citisens unto him? What king is there, which wishes
not to have the surname of Aristides the Just? a title more divine and royal
than ever prince yet knew how to get: albeit that in stead thereof many have
caused themselves to be called Conquerors, Besiegers, Lightnings. Now on the
contrary part, when as we read of the most horrible cruelties of Phalaris,
Busiris, Nero, and Caligula, who is he which is not moved to a just indignation
against them? or hearing of their miserable and wretched ends, can contain
himself from rejoicing thereat?

Thus have we seen the most remarquable differences betwixt a king and a
Tyrant, which are not hard to be perceived betwixt the two extremes of a most
good king, and a most detestable Tyrant: but is not so easily to be deemed,
when the prince takes part of a good king, and some other part of a tyrant: so
as it were tempering the good with the bad. For so things often times fall out,
that for the variety of times, places, persons, Necessary severity not to be
accounted tirannie but to be in a sovereign prince much commended.
and other occasions presenting themselves, princes are constrained to do such
things, as may seem unto them tyrannical, and unto others commendable.
Wherefore let no man measure Tyranny by Severity, which is often times in a
prince most necessary: neither for his castles, gardes, and garrisons: neither
by the sovereignty of his commands, which are in deed more to be wished for,
then the sweet requests of tyrants: which draw after them an inevitable
violence. And that is it for which in law, he which has bound himself at the
request of a Tirant, is always again to be restored into his former estate,
wherein he was: whereas if he that shall so do at the commandment of a good
prince shall not by the law be relieved: neither are those murders,
proscriptions, banishments, incests, rauishments, and other such villainies
which happen in civil wars, in the changing or destruction of the states of
Commonweals, or the establishment of the same, to be called tyranies: for
that in such violent conversion and change of state, it cannot otherwise be.
As it fell out in the Roman Triumuirat, in the election of diverse Emperors,
and in our time Cosmus de Medices, first taking upon him the dukedom of
Florence. For he after the death of his kinsman Alexander Medices, slain by
the conspiracy of his enemies, took unto himself a strong guard of
strangers for the defense and safety of his own person: built castles and
strong holds: fortified the city with strong garrisons: imposed new tributes
and customs upon the subjects; which unto the common people, and men abusing
the popular liberty, seemed violent oppressions and tiranies: but unto the
wise men necessary and wholesome remedies: especially in such a sick city and
Commonweal, as with most desperate diseases and incurable ulcers was like
otherwise to have perished: as also against such unruly citizens, and inured to
all licentious liberty; who had a thousand times conspired against this new
Duke, reputed for one of the most wise and virtuous princes of his time: but of
them accounted a tyrant.

Now to the contrary it happens often that the state of a city or Commonweal
ruinated Severity in a prince more wholesome for the Commonweal th^n le^tie.
by the too much lenity and facility of one prince, is again relieved and
vpholden by the austeare severity of an other. It is sufficiently known how
terrible the tyranie of Domitian was unto the Senate, the nobility, and other
the great lords and governors of the Roman Empire; in so much that all his
laws and edicts were by their procurement after his death repealed: and yet
for all that was he even after his death also most highly by the general
consent of all the provinces commended: for that the Proconsuls with the other
magistrates and officers of the Commonweal, were never before more upright or
freer from corruption then they were in his time, for fear they had of his
severity, and him. But when Nerua who succeeeded him in the Empire, abhorring
Fronto the Consul with many more with most earnest desire, wished for that
cruelty and tyranie which they before had condemned in Domitian. Also when a
prince with most sharp severity as with a bridle, keeps in the minds and
licentious desires of a furious and headstrong people, as if it were an untamed
beast: such wholesome severity ought in no wise to be accounted or called
tiranie; but to the contrary Cicero calls such licentious liberty of the
unruly people mere tiranie.

It may be also that a prince may exercise tiranie against the great ones in
the state, as it always happens in the violent change of an Aristocratie into
a Monarchy, when Diverse causes inducing princes unto Tyranie.
as the new prince being in necessity and poor, and not knowing where to have
money, often times falls upon the rich, without regard of right or wrong: or
else infranchiseth the common people from the servitude of the nobility, and
the rich by that one and self same act to gain the goods and wealth of the
rich, and the favor of the poor. But of all tirants there is none less to be
detested than he which preieth upon the rich to ease the necessity of the
poor. Now they that praise the goodness, bounty, and courtesy of a prince,
without wisdom; are themselves unwise and ignorant in matters of state,
abusing therein both their praises and leisure: for as much as such simplicity
without wisdom is most dangerous and pernicious unto a king, and much more to
be feared than is the great severity of a cruel, covetous, and inaccessible
That of a crafty and subtle man is made a good king: which saying unto the
delicate A true Paradox.
ears of such as measure all things by false opinions rather than by sound
reasons, may seem right strange: for by the too much sufferance and
simplicity of too good a king, it comes to pass that flatterers,
extorcioners, and men of most wicked disposition, without respect, enjoy the
principal honors, offices, charges, benefits, and preferments of the
Commonwealth, spoiling the revenues of the state: whereby the poor people are
gnawne unto the very bones, and cruelly made slaves unto the great: in so much
as that in stead of one tirant, there is ten thousand. Out of which corruption
also of the magistrates, and too much courtesy of the king, proceed many Charles
surnamed the simple, and of some called Charles do nothing. It The happy
estate of France under king Francis the first, a wayward and hard Prince.
was seen also, great, rich, and flourishing, in arms, laws, and learning of
all sorts in the time of Francis the first: but especially some few years
before his death, when as he Sestertioes, that is to say, seauentie hundred
thousand french crowns, besides three months tribute which was now due:
neither was the Commonweal unto any then indebted, more than unto the
Swissers, and the Banque of Lions, whom he would not pay, so to keep them in
awe: at which time he had firm amity and peace also with all princes and
people: and the bounds of his kingdom extended even unto

But within twelve years after that Henry the second his son reigned (whose
bounty The lenity and immoderat bou^tie of king Henry the second, most
hurtful unto the kingdom of France.
was so great, as that the like was never in any prince of his time,) we saw
the state almost quite changed: for as he was sweet, gracious, and courteous,
so could he not deny any thing to any person; so that his fathers treasures
were in few months scattered, the great offices and places of command were
set to sale more than ever, the greatest spiritual preferments without respect
bestowed upon unworthy men, magistracies sold to them that would give most, and
so consequently to the most unworthy

But to hold this golden mean (some man will say) as it is hard for every man
to do: Pertinax, and the enraged youthfulness of Heliogabalus had brought the
Roman empire even unto the very point of utter ruin: when as the emperors
Seuerus of Afrike, and Alexander Seuerus of Syria, by a rude kind of severity
and imperial austeritie reestablished the same, in the former brightness and
majesty, That of an evil and subtle man is made How the paradoxe, That of an
evil and crafty man is made a good king, is to be understood.
a good king) to be understood: for otherwise the word evil, of the propriety
of it self signifies not so much severity, as the uttermost point, or the
extremity of impiety, which our ancestors called evil: so Charles king of
Navarre was called an evil king, than whom none was more wicked of his time.
We must not therefore judge a prince to be a tyrant for his severity and
rigor, so that he do nothing contrary to the laws of God and nature. But
forasmuch as this discourse has brought us on so far, let us see also whether
it be lawful for a good man to lay violent hand upon the person of a tyrant.

CHAP. V. Whether it be lawful to lay violent hand upon a tyrant; and after
his death to dis^null all his acts, decrees, and laws.
THe propriety of the word Tyrant, being not well known, has deceived Who is
properly a Tyrant and that he may lawfully be of any man slain.
many, and armed the subjects unto the destruction of their princes. We have
before said him properly to be called a Tyrant, who of his own authority
takes upon him the sovereignty, against viz. the honorable titles of
nobility and prowess, arms, statues, crowns, and in brief the goods of the
Tyrant also; as unto the true deliverer of his country, or as the Cretensians
use to say of his mother. Neither in this case make they any difference betwixt
a good and a virtuous prince; or a wicked man and a villain. For it is not
lawful for any man living, of himself to invade the sovereignty, and to make
himself master of his fellows, what color of virtue or justice soever they
pretend: and that more is, Whether a Tyrant may be lawfully slain before he be
lawfully tried and convicted*
the course of justice? For why, the law Valeria published at the request of
Pub. Valerius Publicola gives leave to every man to kill a Tyrant, and
afterward to try the cause of him so slain. Which law seems also not to
want good ground of reason: for Solon is quite contrary unto this, expressly
forbidding to proceed by way of fact, or to kill him that seeks to possess
himself of the sovereignty, but first to bring him unto his trial; which
seems more reasonable than the law Valeria: For that otherwise good and
innocent men might oftentimes be taken out of the way and slain by their
enemies, Solons law be referred unto him, who suspected of aspiring, has not
as yet possessed the castles or strong places, seduced the people, nor armed
himself with strong garrison: and the law Valeria unto him who has openly
declared himself a Tyrant, seized upon the castles and citadels, and
strengthened himself with garrisons. In the first case we find that Furius
Camillus the dictator, by way of justice proceeded against Marcus Manlius
Torquatus: and in the second case Brutus and Cassius even in the Senate and most
open assembly of the people, slew Caesar, thinking of nothing less. But Solon,
when as Pisistratus of a subject to aspire unto the sovereignty of the
Athenian state, against whom for all that they which slew the Tyrants at
Athens proceeded not by way of justice; whose children nevertheless Harmodius
and Aristogiton slew, contrary unto the law, by the private authority of Solon
only.

But here might many questions be made, as, Whether a Tyrant who by force or
Whether a Tyrant having aspired unto the sovereignty, and afterward confirmed
therein by the consent of the people in general, may yet lawfully be slay^*
fraud having oppressed the liberty of the people, and so aspired unto the
sovereignty, may be justly slain; having after his aspiring caused himself
to be so chosen or confirmed by the voices of the people in general? For why,
it seems that such a solemn Sylla caused himself to be confirmed dictator
for fourscore years, by the law Valeria, which he caused to be published,
having at the same time a strong and puissant army of his own within the
city: Lib. de* legibus.
Cicero said, That it was no law at all. And in like case Caesar, who Cosmus
Medices, who after the death of his kinsman Alexander having an army in the
city of Florens, caused the Senators to choose him duke of that city for ever:
about which election whilst they made some doubt, he so thundered with his
artillery before the palace, as that the Senate doubting otherwise of the
safety of themselves, and of the rest of the citisens, hasted the rather to
make choice of him. Howbeit if the children or posterity of a tyrant, shall
for long time, as by the space of an hundrd years, in continual possession
hold the sovereignty, possessed by their great grandfathers or ancestors,
and so by their just commands, govern the Commonweal; such a government ought
not now to be called a tyranny, for that in this case, Long prescription
serves in staed of a just title.
as in all other things, a prescription of so many years serves in stead of a
just title. And whereas it is said, that the rights of sovereignty cannot be
prescribed: that is to say, in less then an hundred years, and concerns
private men, who the Commonweal yet standing upright, seek to usurp the
sovereignty, but concerns not the general conversion or change of the
whole state of a Commonweal. We said that the possession of the posterity of
a tyrant ought to be of long continued without interuption or interpellation:
that is to say, that the subjects have not with any conspiracy rebellion, or
intercession, troubled the government of the tyrant, or of his posterity: for
thereby it is in a sort evident, and to be gathered, the subjects of their
own accord to have yielded unto his commands, and to have taken him for their
just prince. But Aquila the Tribune of the people did, who in sight of all the
people took off the crown that was set upon the head of Caesar's statue,
Caesar himself in vain fretting thereat; who afterward unto such grants of
honors and preferments as he gave unto his friends, would still add that, If
by Aquil^ his leave we may do it. And thus much concerning a Tyrant, whether
he be a good man or an evil, who without all right has aspired unto the
sovereignty of the Commonweal wherein he lives.

But the chief question of this our discourse, is to know, whether a
sovereign prince Whether a lawful soueraign prince tiranizing may of his
subjects be lawfully ^ayne or not.
come unto that high estate by election, or by lot, by rightful succession, or
by just war, or by the especial vocation of all-mightie God; forgetting his
duty, and become without measure cruel, covetous, and wicked, so perverting
the laws of God and man, and such an one as we commonly call a Tirant, may be
lawfully slain or not. And true it is that many interpretours, both of Gods
and man's laws, have said it to be lawful: many of them without distinction
joining these two incompatible words together, a King a Tyrant: which so
dangerous a doctrine has been the cause of the utter ruin and overthrow of
many most mighty empires, and kingdoms. But to discide this question well, it
behooves us to distinguish an absolute sovereign prince, from him which is not
so: and also subjects from strangers, according as we have before declared.
For it is great difference to say that a Tirant may lawfully be slain by a
prince a stranger; or by his own subject. For as of all noble acts, none is
more That a prince ty^anizing may by an other straung prince be lawfully slain.
honorable or glorious then by way of fact, to defend the honor, goods, and
lives of such as are unjustly oppressed by the power of the more mighty,
especially the gate of justice being shut against them: as did Moses seeing
his brother the Israelite beaten and wronged by the Egyptian, and no means to
have redress of his wrongs; so is it a most fair and magnificall thing for a
prince to take up arms to relieve a whole nation and people, unjustly
oppressed by the cruelty of a tirant: As did the great Hercules, who traueling
over a great part of the world with wonderful prowes and valor destroyed many
most horrible monsters, that is to say Tirants: and so delivered people Dio,
Timoleon, Aratus, Harmodius, Aristogiton, with other such like honorable
princes bearing the titles of chastisers and correctors of Tyrants. And for
that only cause Temir-Cutlu, whom our writers commonly call Tamerlan emperor
of the Tartars, denounced war unto Bajazet king of the Turks, who then
besieged Constantinople; saying that he was come to chastise his tiranie, and
to deliver the aflicted people; whom indeed he in a set battle vanquished in
the plains near unto Mount Stella: and having slain and put to ^light three
hundred thousand Turks, kept the tirant (taken prisoner) in chains in an iron
Cage until he dyed. Neither in this case is it material whether Nero: and in
the other against Maximinus: for that the Roman Emperors were at the first
nothing else but princes of the Common weal, that is to say the chief and
principal men, the sovereignty nevertheless still resting in the People and
the Senate: as I have before showed, that this Commonweal was then to have been
called a principality: although that Seneca speaking in the person of Nero his
scholar says: I am the only man amongst living men, elect and chosen to be
the Lieutenant of God on earth: I am the Arbitratour of life and death: I am
able at my pleasure to dispose of the state and quality of every man. True it
Falier, and also executed many others, without form or fashion of any lawful
process: forasmuch as Venice is an Aristocraticall principality, wherein the
Duke is but the first or chief man, sovereignty still remaining in the state
of the Venetian Gentlemen. As is likewise the Germain Empire, which is also
nothing else but an Aristocraticall principality, wherein the the Emperor is
head and chief, the power and majesty of the Empire belonging unto the States
thereof: who thrust out of the government Adolphus the emperor in the year
1296: and Wenceslaus in the year 1400, and that by way of justice, as having
jurisdiction and power over them. So also might we say of the state of the
Lacedaemonians, which was a pure Aristocratie, wherein were two kings, without
any sovereignty at all, being indeed nothing but Captains and Generals for
the managing of their wars: and for that cause were by the other magistrates
of the state, sometime for their faults condemned to pay their fine; as was
king Agesilaus: and sometime to death also as were Agis and Pausanias. Which
has also in our time happened unto the kings of Denmark and Sweden, whereof
some have been banished, and the others died in prison: for that the nobility
pretends them to be nothing but princes, and not Sovereigns, Caesar for this
cause oftentimes calls Regulos, that is to say little kings: being themselves
subjects, and iusticiable unto the Nobility, who had all the sovereignty:
causing them even to be put to death, if they had so deserved. And that is it
for which Amphiorix the captain general, whom they called the king of the
Liegeois said; Our commaundes (says he) are such, as that the people has no
less power over us, then we over the people: wherein he showed evidently that
he was no sovereign prince: howbeit that it was not possible for him to have
equal power with the people, as we have before showed. Wherefore these sorts
of princes, having no sovereignty,

But if the prince be an absolute Sovereign, as are the true Monarques of
France, That it is not lawful for the subjects either by the way of fact, or
justice to attempt any thing against the honor, life, or dignity of their
sovereign prince, be he never so evil or wicked.
of Spain, of England; Scotland, Turkey, Moschouie, Tartarie, Persia,
Aethiopia, India, and of almost all the kingdoms of Affricke, and Asia, where
the kings themselves have the sovereignty without all doubt or question; not
divided with their subjects: in this case it is not lawful for any one of the
subjects in particular, or all of them in general, to attempt any thing either
by way of fact, or of justice against the honor, life, or dignity Treason but
thought of punished with death.
thereof. As in proof it fell out with a gentleman of Normandy, who confessed
himself unto a Franciscan Friar, to have had a purpose in himself to have
slain Francis the first, the French king: of which evil purpose and intent he
repenting himself, received Caboche, drew his sword upon Henry the second,
Francis his son, as with a purpose to have slain him; but without effect or
hurt done, yet was he nevertheless condemned, and so put to death, without any
regard had unto his lunesie or frenzy; although That sovereign princes
whatsoever ^ught to be unto their subjects sacred and inuiolat.
tormented with the frantike furious passion it self. And least any man should
think themselves to have been the authors of these laws and decrees, so the
more straightly to provide for their own safety and honor, let us see the
laws and examples of holy Scripture. Nabugodonozor king of Assyria, with fire
and sword destroyed all the country of Palestine, besieged the city of
Jerusalem, took it, robbed and rased it down to the ground, burnt the
temple, and defiled the sauctuarie of God, slew the king, with the greatest
part of the people, carrying away the rest that remained into captivity into
Babylon; and yet not so contented, caused * the image of himself made in gold,
to be Dan. cap. ^.
set up in public place, commanding all men without exception to adore and
worship the same, upon pain of being burnt alive: and caused them that refused
so to do, to be cast into a burning furnace: and yet for all that the holy *
Prophets directing their Bar^e. 1. Hier. 29
letters unto their brethren the Jews, then in captivity at Babylon, will
them to pray unto God, for the good and happy life of Nabuchodonosor and his
children, and that they might so long rule and reign over them as the heavens
should endure. Yea even God himself doubted not to call Nabuchodonosor his
servant; saying, That he would Hier. 2^. Ezec. ^9
make him the most mighty prince of the world. And yet was there ever a more
detestable tyrant than he? who not contented to be himself worshipped, but
caused his image to be also adored, and that upon pain of being burnt quick.
And yet for all Ezechiel, enspired with the spirit of God, angry with Sedechia
king of Jerusalem, greatly to detest his perfidious dealing, disloyalty, and
rebellion against king Nabuchodonosor, whose vas^all he was, and as it were
rejoices him to have been most justly slain. We have also another more rare
example of Saul, who possessed with an evil spirit, caused the priests of the
lord to be without just cause slain, for that one of them had received David
flying from him, and did ofttimes what in his power was, to kill, or cause to
have been killed the same David, a most innocent prince, by whom he had got so
many victories over his enemies: at which time he fell twice himself into
David his hands; who blamed of his most valiant soldiers (over whom he then
commanded) for that he would not suffer his so mortal an enemy then in his
Saul was slain, and that a soldier thinking to do David a pleasure,
presented him with Saul his head: David forthwith caused the same soldier to
be slain, which had brought him the head, saiing, Go thou wicked, how durst
thou lay thine impure hands upon the Lords anointed? thou shall surely die
therefore: and afterward without all dissimulation mourned David was by Saul
persecuted to death, and yet wanted not power to have revenged himself, being
become stronger than the king by the aid of his enemies, unto whom he fled
even against his will: besides that he was the chosen of God, and anointed by
the hands of Samuel, to be king of the people, and had also married the kings
daughter: and yet for all that he abhorred to take upon him the title of a
king, and much more to attempt any thing against the life or honor of Saul, or
to rebel against him, but chose rather to banish himself out of the realm,
than in any sort to seek the kings destruction. So we also read, that the most
holy and best learned men that ever were amongst the Jews* whom they called
the Essei (that is to say, the true executors of the law of David a king and
prophet, led by the spirit of God, had always before his eyes the law of God,
which says, Thou shall not speak evil of thy prince, nor detract the
Magistrate. * Exodus 23. 28.
Neither is there any thing more common in all the holy Scripture, than the
forbidding not only to kill or attempt the life or honor of a prince, but
even for the very magistrates also, although (says the Scripture) they be
wicked and naught. If therefore he be guilty of treason against God and man,
which does but detract the magistracy; what punishment then can be sufficient
for him that shall attempt his life? For the law of God is in this case yet
more precise than are the laws of men: For the law Iulia holds but him
guilty of treason, which shall give council to kill the magistrate, whereas
the law of God expressly forbids in any sort to speak of the magistrate evil,
or in any wise to detract him. Wherefore to answer unto the vain and
frivolous objections and arguments of them which maintain the contrary, were
but idly to abuse both our time and learning. But as he which doubts whether
there be a God or nor, is not with arguments to be refuted, but with severe
punishments to be chastifed: so are they also which call into question a thing
so clear, and that by books publicly imprinted; that the subjects may take
up arms against their prince being a Tyrant, and take him out of the way
howsoever: howbeit that the most learned divines, and of best understanding,
are clear of opinion, that it is not lawful for a man not only to Iehu, who
was chosen of God, and by the prophet anointed king of Israel, with express
commandment utterly to root out all the house of king Achab. He before as a
subject had right patiently borne all his wickedness and outrages. Yea the
most cruel murders and torturing of the most holy prophets, and religious
men, the unworthy murders, banishments, and proscriptions of the subjects; as
also the most detestable witchcraft of queen Iesabel: yet for all that durst
he attempt nothing against his sovereign prince, until he had express
commandment from God, by the mouth of his prophet, whom God indeed so
assisted, Achab his children to be put to death, with many other princes of the
kings of Israel and of Judah, and all the idolatrous priests of Bahal, that is
to say of the Sun, after thas he had caused Iesabel the queen, to be cast
headlong down from an high tower, and left her body to be torn in pieces and
eaten up of dogs. But we are not to apply this especial commandment of
God, unto the conspiracies and rebellions of mutinous subjects against their
sovereign princes. And as for that which Calvin says, if there were at this
time magistrates appointed for the defense of the people, and to restrain the
insolency of kings, as were the Ephori in Lacedemonia, the Tribunes in Rome,
and the Demarches in Athens, that they ought to resist and impeach their
licentiousness The wars of the German princes against Charies the fi^t in
Germany in Luthers judgment not lawful. Sledan. lib. 4.
assure any thing. Howbeit that there is a notable difference betwixt the
attempting of the honor of his prince, and the withstanding of his tyranny;
betwizt killing his king, and the opposing of ones self against his cruelty.
We read also, that the Protestant princes of Germany, before they entered into
arms against Charles the emperor, demanded of Martin Luther if it were
lawful for them so to do or not; who frankly No cause (as says Cicero) can
be thought just or sufficient for us to take up arms against our country. And
yet it is most certain, that the sovereignty of the empire rests not in the
person of the emperor, (as we will in due place declare) but being chief of
the state, they could not lawfully take up arms against him, but by a general
consent of the state, or of the greater part of them, which was not done: then
much less is it lawful to take up atmes against a sovereign prince. I cannot
use a better Quia nulla tanta impiet as, nullum tantum scelus est, quod sit
parricidio vindicandum. For that (as says an ancient Orator) no impiety can
be so great, no offense so heinous, as to be revenged with the killing of ones
father. And yet Cicero reasoning upon the same question, says, our country to
be deerer unto us than our parents. Wherefore the prince whom you may justly
call the father of the What great inconuenie^cies should ensu^e if it were
lawful for subjects under the color of tyrants to kill their soueraign princes
it should be lawful for subjects to kill Tirants? how many good and innocent
princes should as Tirants perish, by the conspiracy of their subjects against
them? He that should of his subjects exact subsidies, should be then (as the
vulgar people account him) a Tirant: he that should rule and command contrary
to the good liking of the Aristotle in his Politiques says him to be) he that
should keep strong gardes and garrisons for the safety of his person, should
be a Tirant: he that should put to death traitors and conspirators against his
state should be also counted a Tirant. And in deed how should good princes be
assured of their lives, if under the color of tirannie they might be slain
of their subjects, by whom they ought to be defended? Not for that I would say
it not to be lawful for other Princes by force of arms to prosecute tiranie
(as I have before said) but for that it is not lawful for subjects so to do.
Howbeit that I am rather of Diogenes the Cinique his opinion, who one day
meeting with Dionysius the younger, then living in exile at Corinth, and
Dionysius) for having compassion on me. And think thou said Diogenes that I
thus say for any compassion I have of thee? mistake me not, for I speak it
rather in dispite of the life thou now leadest, to see such a vile slave as
thee, worthy to grow old, and die in the accursed state of tirannie, as did thy
father, thus to sport thy self in security, and quietly to pass thy time
among us. For can any hangman more cruelly torment a man condemned to torture,
than fear? Fear I say of death, of infamy, The miserable state and condition
of a Tyrant whilst he lives.
and of torture: these be the revenging furies which continually vex Tirants,
and with eternal terrors torment them both night and day: Then envy,
suspicion, Theophrastus) is the end of all miseries; and the repose of the
unfortunate, as says Caesar: neither the one nor the other being in that
point superstitious, as not persuaded of the immortality of the soul, or that
it longer lived than the body, or that there remained any farther pains for
the wicked after this life: so that to wish a Tirant slain as a punishment for
his deserts, is but to wish his good and rest.

But most Tirants have ordinarily near unto their own persons certain
Mynnions, The policy of some Tyrants to auert from themselves the peoples rage.
of whom they make great account and reckning: whom they use as spunges to
Tiberius, Seian; Nero, Tigillin; Dionyse the younger, Phyliste; and of late
Henry king of Sweden, George Preschon, whom we read to have been given as a
prey unto the furious people, and by them to have been rent and torn in
pieces. So the Emperor Anthonius Caracalla to please the people, put to death
all the flatterers who had before induced him to kill his brother. Neither did
Caligula in better sort entreat his claw-backs. And by these sleights have
Tyrants oftentimes well escaped the rage and fury of the people. But if the
conspiratours began their fury at Hiero the Tyrant, ensued the slaughter of
all his friends and kinsfolks, the rage of the people with unspeakable cruelty
bursting out, even to the dismembring of his sisters and cosens: his statues
were cast down, all his edicts revoked, not only those which were unjust and
unreasonable, but even those also which were right commendable and necessary;
to the intent that no memorial of Tyrants might remain: yet true it is, that
oftentimes their good decrees were still kept. And that is it for which Cicero
said, That there was nothing more common, than to approve the acts of a Tyrant,
and yet to place in heaven viz. Whether a good man ought to come unto the
counsel of a Tyrant consulting even of good and profitable matters? And yet
this question depends of the other: for if a man make conscience to be
assistant unto a Tyrant, consulting of good things, for fear least in so doing
he should seem to approve his tyranny: wherefore should he then approve the
good laws and decrees by him made? for that is also no less to ratify his
tyranny, and to give example to others, as well as to give council unto a
Tyrant, in good and commendable things. Except one should say, that tyranny
which yet is in the force and strength of it self, is shored and countenanced
by the That not only the good acts and decrees of Tyrants, but eue^ their evil
acts and decrees also are oftentimes of necessity after their death* to be
r^tained in a commonweal.
council of good and honest men, under the covert of some one or other good
and Thrasibulus after he had put to flight the thirty Tyrants of Athens: and
Aratus having slain Nicholas the Tyrant of Sicyone: and to the imitation of
them Cicero after the death of Caesar the dictator, persuaded the publication
of the laws of forgetfulness, to extinguish the desire of revenge: yet for
the most part ratifying the acts of those Tyrants, which they could not utterly
disanull, without the ruin of the whole Commonweal. Nero and Demetrian, to
have been revoked, and disanulled by the Senate, that concerns certain
perpetual edicts of theirs, which for that they had a perpetual inconvenience
annexed unto them, would if they had not been abrogated, have in time utterly
ruinated all that was now again set in order: as for their good and
commendable laws, they were not at all altered. For what time was more glorious
than Nero his first five years reign? what more fit or better for the well
ordering of a Commonweal? Insomuch that Traian himself a most excellent
prince, deemed no man to have been like unto Nero, for the well governing of a
Commonweal. Unto this the opinions of the lawyers agree, who hold the
successors The successors of Tyrants how far they are bound to that which
the Tyrants their predecessoures have promised.
of Tyrants to be bound unto all such things as the Tyrants their predecessors
Constantine the Great, by a law abrogated such things, as Licinius the Tyrant
had before unjustly decreed, but confirmed the rest. The like we read to have
been done by Theodosius the younger, and Arcadius the emperors, after the
death of the Tyrant Maximus, by this law, Quae Tyrannus contra ius rescripsit
non valere praecipimus: legitimis eius rescriptis non impugnandis, What the
Tyrant has against right decreed, we command to be of none effect; not
impugning his lawful decrees. And albeit that these two young emperors, to be
revenged of the Tyrant Maximus, had by a general edict revoked all the
prodigal gifts and preferments, which he lauishly had bestowed upon wicked
men, and of no desert in the Commonweal: and also disanulled his judgments
and fraud and deceit, which we read in Theodosius, his law, are added against
Tyrants Agents, and Brokers, who are especially to be laid hold upon, to the
end that others take not example by them, to build their houses, or enrich
themselves by the ruin or hurt of others, during the time that tyranie bears
sway; or that the Commonwealth is with civil wars divided. As it happened in
the state of Milan, rent in sunder by the Venetians, the French, the Swissers,
and the Spaniards, every one of them taking unto themselves so much thereof,
as they could by force and strength, as if it had been Sforces the rest: where
amongst others it fortuned Jason the famous lawyer, a fauourit of the
Spaniards, by fraudulent means to obtain the goods of Triuultius, a worthy
captain of the French part: but the Spaniards afterward driven out, and the
French returned, Jason was right well beaten with his own laws and decisions,
being by the captain Triuultius again thrust out of his unjust possession,
and that by his own doctrine. In which case yet the force of laws and decrees
ought Natural equity in all cases cannot in any law be comprised, but is often
times to be left unto the religious arbitreme^t of men expert in matters of
state.
not to be of so great force and power, as natural and upright equity it
self, which cannot be fully comprised in any laws, but is to be left unto the
religious arbitrament of them who know how to manage the affairs of state,
and wisely to balance the particular profit, with the counterpoise of the
public, according to the infinite variety of Charles the eight, when as after
the return of the Spaniards, they would have enforced the receivers to have
paid the money twice, natural reason (in this case) preferring the private
profit before the public. For the receivers

And in this, the princes much deceive themselves, which overthrow and make
void Murders even of evil and tyrannical princes, not to be rewarded, but
severely punished.
all the acts of Tyrants, their predecessors; and namely they which give
reward to them that have slain Tyrants, to make them a way unto the
sovereignty. For they Seuerus the emperor, who put to death all them which
had any part in the murder of the emperor Pertinax: which was the cause (as
says Herodian) that there was no man which durst attempt his life. So also
Vitelliu^ the emperor put to death all the murderers and conspirators against
Galba, who had presented requests signed with their own hands unto the
emperor Otho, to have had of him reward for their distoialtie. And Theophilus
emperor of Constantinople caused them all to be called together, who had made
his father emperor, after they had Leo the Armenian, as if he would have well
recompensed them for so great a good turn: who being come together with many
other, who though not partakers of the murder, were yet desirous to be
partakers of the reward; he caused them altogether to be slain. And that more
is, the emperor Domitian put to death Epaphroditus, Nero his manumised
servant, and secretary to the state, for having helped Nero to kill himself,
who most instantly requested him so to do, being thereby delivered from the
executioners hands, and crueil exemplarie death. And these things we read not
only Tyrants, but even good kings also to have done, not so much in regard of
their own safety, as of the dignity of them that were slain. As David did
unto him who in hope of reward brought him his father in laws head cut off,
but slain by his Alexander the Great caused cruelly to be put to death him
that had murdered king Darius, abhorring the subject which durst to lay hand
upon his king: although Alexander himself by lawful war sought after his
life and state, as being his lawful enemy. And yet in mine opinion the thing
that has most preserved the kings of France and their persons inuiolated, is
for that they have not used cruelty toward Lenity of soueraign princes
toward them of their own blood offending them; and so in their danger, or
otherwise their honorable prisoners: unto themselves both commendable and
profitable
them which were near unto them in blood, albeit that they were attainted;
convicted, yea and condemned as enemies to their prince, and guilty of
treason. As John the second, duke of Alencon, although he was twice for the
same cause condemned, as for that he had with the enemies conspired against
king Charles the seventh and the Commonweal, and the sentence of death
pronounced against him by the Chancelour, Philip Comines in his Commentaries
reports) in England either slain or executed by the bloody executioners
hands. Now the greatest safety of a sovereign prince, is to have their
subjects persuaded, that they ought to be holy and inuiolat; although it much
concern the Commonweal also, the kings stock to be most sacred, least the
princes of the blood being taken out of the way, the Commonweal fall also; or
else troubled with endless sedition, be rent in pieces, as we shall in due
place declare. I know well that some have blamed Seleucus, for not having put
to death Demetrius, surnamed the Besieger, one of the most valiant Hugh Capet,
for having kept in prison in the castle at Orleans, Charles the last of the
blood of king Charlemaigne: And Henry the first, king of England, for having
kept in prison until his death, his elder brother Robert, having before caused
his eyes to be put out: As also Christiern father to Frederike king of
Denmark, for having kept his cosen the king of Denmark thrust out of his
kingdom, five and twenty years prisoner, who as a private man there died in
prison, in the castle of Calembourg, being 77 years old: And John king of
Sweden, who keeps his elder brother Henry (rejected by the people) prisoner
ever since the year 1567, least he should trouble both him and the
Commonweal. But they have been, and yet are by this means more reverenced and
honored

But here some men will object, The keeping of such princes prisones, to be a
thing The keeping of great princes prisoners, dangerous.
full of peril and danger: which I confess, and was the only reason that
moved the pope to counsel Charles of France, to put to death Conradin his
prisoner, the son of Manfroy king of Naples. As with like cruelty had
Ptolomie, last king of Egypt caused Pompey the Great, after his flight unto
him from the battle of Pharsalia, to be slain; his counselors saying unto
him, That dead men bit not. And yet nevertheless neither could this Ptolomee
escape destruction: neither wanted there heirs enough of John duke of Burgundy,
rashly in the very time of judgment, confessing the murder of Jews his
kinsman, duke of Orleans; and yet to have easily escaped the danger, said,
That surely from thence foreward a man might have the blood of princes good
cheap, and in so saying said well. For the same John coming afterward under
safe conduct, was himself likewise served, and in cold blood

CHAP. VI. Of an Aristocratie.
AN Aristocratie is a form of Commonweal, wherein the less What an
Aristocratie is.
part of the citisens with sovereign power commands over all the rest; and
every citisen in particular. And in that it is contrary unto the estate
Popular, for that in the Aristocraticall state the lesser part of the citisens
command, and in the Popular state Three sorts of Aristocraties.
Aristocratie may be Lordly, lawful, or factious; which in ancient time the
called an Oligarchie; that is to say, a Seignorie of a very small number of
Lords. As were the thirty lords of Athens, overthrown by Thrasibulus, whom
they called the thirty Tyrants. Or the ten commissioners, commonly called the
Decemuiri, appointed to reform Impossible to establish an Aristocratie only of
good men.
in the good; defining it to be A government of good men. But we have before
declared, that in matters of state (to understand of what form every
Commonweal is) we must not have regard whether the governors thereof be
virtuous, or otherwise; but to the government thereof. It is also a difficult
matter, and almost impossible, to establish an Aristocratie composed only of
good men; for that cannot be done by lot, neither by election, the two usual
means: whereunto we may join the third, by lot wicked and of the bedlem
multitude: neither if they come unto their common assemblies, Lactantius
Firmianus merely iesteth at the seven Sages of Greece: If they were but wise
(says he) in their own judgments, then were they not wise: but in the
judgment of others, much less, who were not wise in judging no mo wise but
seven, and all the rest fools.

But some may say it should do well herein to imitate the ancient Romans, and
other Latins, in the choice that they by solemn oath made of the most valiant
and warlike man of all other for their General: who so chosen, should make
choice of a second for his Lieutenant most like himself: and he likewise of
the third: and the third of the fourth; and so in order one valiant man of an
other, until the number of their Seruius Tullius had changed certain
Tyrants, into just Regalities, and were in hope also by little and little to
have brought the Oligarchies, and Democraties, into Aristocraties, as in some
places they had already done: yet nevertheless it so fell out, that the
popular men, and ringleaders of the people, seeing all power and authority,
under the color of virtue, to be taken out of their hands, entered into great
conspiracies, and so arming the people against the Pythagoreans, and the
desperate rout, against the better sort: (as easy it was for the stronger to
oppress the weaker) burnt them in their diet, and massacred almost all the
rest that escaped from the danger of the fire: which Whersoeuer the lesser
part of the people has the soueraignties there is one kind or other of an
Aristocratie.


Wherefore whether they be of the better sort, or of the worse; of the richer
sort, or of the poorer; of the nobler, or of the baser; of the more warlike, or
otherwise which hold the sovereignty, so that it be the lesser part of the
citizens or people, we call it by the name of an Aristocratie. This lesser part
of citizens or people we need not to define by any certain number: for that the
variety of numbers is infinite, and can by no man be comprehended. As admit
there be ten thousand citizens, of whom an hundred have the sovereignty; if in
their common assembly three score of them shall be of one The lesser part of
the people in an Aristocratie not to be defined by any certain number.
opinion for the making of a law: that law shall in general bind the other
forty which have part also in the sovereignty, but are the fewer in number,
together with the other means threescore four citizens, shall in the
aforesaid number of an hundred, be superiou The Aristocratical estate of the
Pharsalians.
Graece, and yet it had but twenty Governors. And the Lacedemonian
Commonweal, which carried away the prize of honor from all the others of the
East: albeit that it was most populous, yet for all that it had in it but
thirty Governors, chosen out of The estate of the Lacedaemonians.
the better sort, to continue in the government so long as they lived. The
Epidaurians says Plutarche had but an hundred and four score of the noblest
and welthiest of the citizens which had part in the sovereignty: out of which
number they chose the counselors of the state. The ancient Commonweal of
Marseilles in Prouence (which The ancient estate of them of Marseilles.
in the judgment of Cicero was the best ordered Commonweal that ever was in
the world) had in it six hundred citizens which held the sovereignty: out of
which number of six hundred were taken the Senators, and fifteen magistrates,
and of these fifteen Titus Flaminius the Consul established the towns and
cities of the Thessalians in form of an Aristocratie, making Senators and
Judges of the richer sort, and giving to them the sovereign power, whom it
concerned most, that their Commonweal should continue in rest and peace. Which
order Andrew Doria seems to have followed in The Aristocraticall estate of
Genua framed by Andrew Doria.
reforming the Commonweal of Genua, by him drawn from the obeisance of the
four thousand men, appointed for the strength and defense of the city: Over
which viz. a Praetor, who is always a stranger; with two Lieutenants his
assistants, the one for the receipt, the other for criminal causes: and five
other Ciuilians, judges for all private causes for two years, all strangers
also; whom, they call the Rota. Yet besides them, there are seven
extraordinary Judges chosen out of the Citizens, for the extraordinary
deciding of causes. Besides whom were also five Syndicques to receive
informations against the Duke, and the eight Governors, after that their
charge was expired, causing proclamation to be openly made, That if any man had
any complaint against them, for any wrong or injury received from them, he The
estate of Geneua
that Doria established an Aristocratie at Genua, they of Geneua also changed
their Pontifical monarchy into a Popular state, governed in manner of an
Aristocratie. And albeit that the Town long time before pretended, it self
not to be subject unto the laws either of the Duke of Sauoy or of the Pope,
but to be free from them both; yet the citizens thought it not best for them to
attempt any thing, until that discord about the Sovereignty was risen not
only betwixt the Duke and the bishop, but even betwixt the bishop and the
people also: at which time they took hold upon the occasion then presented
unto their desires for the changing both of their Religion and state. Wherefore

The Swissers except the Grisons, and the other five little cantons, have
almost the The state of the) Swissers.
same form of a Commonweal; as we see at Zurich the great Council of two
hundred, the Senate, and the privy Council established after the manner of
Geneua: or to Zunfft, every one of them composed of one, two or three
occupations: which are eleven at Schaffouse, twelve at Zurich, fifteen at
Basil; and in other places more or less, choose twelve persons of every
fraternity, for the great Council: and for the Senate they choose two, as at
Zurich; or three, as at Basil; of whom one is the chief of the fraternity.
So that the great Council at Zurich, consists of two hundredth, of 244 at
Basil, of 86 at Schaffuse. And of Senators at Zurich the number is fifty, at
Schaffuse twenty six, and at Basil sixty three. But they which are so chosen
Sole^re, where the fraternities and companies have no voices in the state,
neither power o^ authority to meet together, more then for matters concerning
their occupations and Schuldthessen, and the other magistrates. And particularly
the Auoyer, with the aforesaid sixteen, and the four captains chose the
Senate, which is of xxvj at Berne, and xviij at Lucerne: who have the power of
the state at Berne for a year. The four captains are also annual chosen by
the great Council; by which captains and the treasurors, all the judges are
^lected

Whereby it is well to be understood those estates of the Swissers to be
Aristocratique, The estate of the Swissers Aristocraticall, ^et temperated with
a certain mixtu^ of popularitie.
yet popularly tempered: for that the way is open for all the citisens of what
de gree soever unto all the officers and places of command, benefits and
charge in the Commonweal, if they be not men infamed, distracted of their
wits, or otherwise utterly ignorant of government. That is also belonging unto
popularitie, that almost all their magistrates are annual: which temperature of
the better or richer sort with the meaner or poorer, in being capable of the
honors of the Commonweal, makes the same much more firm and stable, than if
the honors and preferments were communicated but unto the Senators or richer
sort only; with whom the vulgar people is most commonly at odds: and that so
much the more amongst the Swissers, where the nobility (except some few) long
sithence destroyed and almost rooted ou^, the people Lysander, were by him
changed into Aristocraties of the most ancient families, in choosing out ten
or twenty, or at the most thirty, unto whom he committed The estate of the
Rhagusians.
(in ancient time called Epidaurians) having new built the city of Rhaguse,
near unto the ancient city of Epidaurus, utterly rased by the fury of the
Goths, and exempting themselus from the government of the Alhanois,
established among themselves an Aristocratike form of a Commonwealth, governed
by the most noble and ancient families; following therein almost the example
of the Venetians: yet still much more respective and careful of their
nobility, than are the Venetians. For a Venetian popular mixture. The city of
Luca also governed after the same fashion, admits The estate of (...) of
Luca.
only the ancient families to be partakers of the sovereignty of their
government, who are but few, albeit that about the year 1555 there were
numbered two and fifty thousand citisens, besides women. Out of the nobility
are created an hundred and twenty yearly Senators: out of whom are chosen
the ten Counselors of the privy Council, with the prince whom they call the
Gonfalonnier. And in these consists the sovereign state of this Commonweal.
Other officers there be also, as Censors, Pretors, and Receivers, of whom we
will in due place speak. Suffiseth it now for the present to have showed
diverse Aristocraticall estates, in respect of sovereignty, to the end by
diverse examples both of the ancient and new Commonweales, we may the better
understand the true nature of an Aristocratie.

And forasmuch as diverse men believe, and some of them of greatest knowledge of
Whether the German empire be a Monarchy, or a ^eere Aristocratie.
the Germans have by writing also published, the German empire to be a true
Monarchy: we will also speak of that estate, whereof although we have in
brief somewhat spoken before, yet here we will more at large thereof
discourse, and show the same to be an Aristocraticall estate. True it is, that
from the time of Charlemaigne unto the reign of Henry surnamed the Falconer,
it was a pure Monarchy by right of succession, continued in the royal blood
of the said Charlemaigne. But the descent of Charlemaigne, taking end in this
Henry the Falconer, the Monarchy by the voices of the princes being
translated from this Henry, has of long time continued by the right of
election: insomuch that the seven princes Electours, having by little and
lirtle withdrawn In whom the sovereignty of the German empire consistteth.
I have said) have the sovereign power privately over the emperor himself,
and over be of accord and agree in one, the decree whatsoever passes. And for
that the ecclesiastical Charles the fifth held at Ratisbon; neither being
thither sent for, would come. And like as the gentlemen of Venice, Luca, and
Rhaguse, until they be twenty years old enter not into the great council,
neither have any part in the sovereignty: even so likewise the children or
near kinsmen of the German princes, be they young, or be they old, have no
voices in the diet, if they be not qualified princes of the empire: which are a
certain number of Dukes, Marquesses, Counties, Lantgraues, Burgraues,
Margraues, Barons, Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbats. And albeit that the duke
of Loraine be a prince of the empire, Vaudemont, of the same stock and house
with him, as other like princes of the same rank and order, have neither
voices nor places in the assembly of the states and princes of the empire, but
are reckoned amongst the children of those princes. Howbeit yet many are of
opinion, the princes and imperial cities to have their sovereign states apart,
neither to be bound unto any other men's commands or laws, otherwise than as
friends and confederats; in such sort and manner, as the Swissers have their
cities and jurisdictions among themselves, one divided from another. But the
difference is to him that looks nearer thereinto, right great, every Canton
being sovereign in it self, and not subject unto the laws and commandments
of others; neither otherwise Adolphus and Venes^aus, with many others. Beside
that, the estates make ordinatie decrees and laws, which bind all the subjects
of the empire, as well in general, as in particular. And that more is, the ten
circles or circuits of the empire, hold their particular estates, and yet bring
their requests, complaints, and grieuances, unto the estates general, to
receive their commandments and resolutions, as laws. Moreover the princes
electours, the day after the The princes Electors hold their states of the
empire and not of the emperor.
coronation of the emperor, protest themselves to hold their states of the
empire, and not of the emperor, albeit that they do their homage betwixt the
emperors hands. In brief, all jurisdiction and sovereignty of all appeals
in civil causes, above twenty crowns by the ancient laws, and forty by
the new, appertain unto the imperial chamber, as to all the appeals of the
subjects of the empire: which chamber is composed of twenty four judges, and
one prince of the empire, chosen every year, according to the order of the
ten provinces or circuits. And if so be that any controversy arise betwixt any
of the princes, or the imperial cities themselves; whether it be for their
bounds, their lives, their honor or states, the deciding thereof belongs
unto the judges of the imperial court: except it please the whole states of the
empire to take unto Lib. 2. cap. 28.
of the empire, any prince, town, or corporation, to be so hardy, as to
prohibit or let The majesty of the empire not to rest in the emperor but in
the whole assembly of the estates of the empire.
themselves only: and yet in him rests not the majesty of the empire, but
in the whole assembly of the states. For other which hold the sovereign power
in Commonweales, do themselves creat princes, dukes, and earls, whereas the
emperor is himself by the other dukes and princes of the empire created. How
therefore can he being the self same man be both the sovereign and subject
of the empire, lord, and vassal, master, and yet constrained to be obedient
unto the estates? And not unto the estates only, but even unto the deputies
and lieutenants of the empire? Which unto Mommorancie the Connestable, bearing
date the twelft of May, in the year 1552: whereby he aduertiseth, that Henry
the second (then the French king) had just cause to complain unto the duke of
Saxony, and the county Palatine, lieutenant for the empire, to have justice
against the emperor Charles the fifth and his brother Ferdinand king of the
Romans, according to the golden bull, and decrees of the states: for that they
contrary unto the laws of the empire and customs of their ancestors, having
intercepted the kings letters directed unto the estates of the empire, had not
suffered the same to be unto them delivered, but also forbidden the archbishop
of Mets, chauncelour of the empire viz. Strausbourg, Lubec, and Ausbourg:
Neither is it lawful for the emperor to take so much as one penny out of the
common treasure, without the consent of the state. Al which most plainly show
them to be in an error, and much deceived, which call the German emperor a
Monarch; or which deem that Aristocraticall estate to be a Maximilian the
first, great grandfather to him which now reigns (albeit that he was
ambitious enough) yet in a discourse which he had with the states of the
empire concerning such matter, told them, That he thought it not needful to
take the imperial crown at the hands of the Bishop of Rome, neither to stand
upon such ceremonies, seeing that the sovereign power, as they knew, rested in
the states themselves. Neither is it lawful for the emperor of himself, or
at his pleasure to call together a diet of the empire, without some especial
and extraordinary urgent cause, neither to dissolve the same: but at the
breaking up of every diet, order is there taken for the diet to be holden the
as they gave Charles the fifth the emperor well to understand, in the year
1554: Maximilian the second, refusing in the year 1566, to have any diet then
according to his request holden. And if it fortune the emperor, or king of the
Romans, to come unto the frontiers of their territories, the princes every one
of them in their degree go to meet them, but yet in such sort, as if it were
but to meet a strange prince.

Now if one should say that the Emperor bears himself as a Judge, and
determiner How the emperor determines the quarrels and controversies betwixt
the princes, or the imperial town^ of the empire.
of all quarrels and controversies betwixt the Princes, or the imperial
Towns; True it is at the first motion, and when the parties are content to
accept thereof, and that also but as Lieutenant for the Empire: as in like case
the Duke of Saxony, and the County Palantine might also judge as the
Imperial Lieutenants: and yet for all this, Your sacred Majesty, and such
like, which cannot be applied but unto him which is himself a Sovereign: such
as slaves would scarce use toward Glorious flattering ^itles given to princes
never awhit increase their souer^ign ti^.
the greatest kings on earth: titles for fashion sake, foolishly or wickedly
(should I say) given by flatterers unto men, which are only fitting the most
mighty and immortal God. And yet do in deed no more increase the power of the
German Emperor, then of the King of the Romans: whom by such like prodigal
pomp and words, a man might also think to have the power of sovereign
Majesty; so that in that Empire George Helfustein Baron of Gondelphfingen,
pronouncing the speech of Ferdinand king of the Romans in the general
assembly of the States of the Empire in the year 1556, calls him their
Sovereign Lord.

But the greatest argument of Sovereignty is, that the Emperor gives the
fees of How the emperor bestowe^ the fees of the empire.
the Empire being void, unto whom he pleases, and inuesteth in them whom he
sees good: and that without the consent of the States. Whereunto I again
answer, that the express consent of the Estates is not necessary, and yet is
it not altogether done without their good liking, who nevertheless permit the
same; when as they might as well cut of this point, as they have done the other
marks of Sovereignty. And howbeit Marillac was of opinion, that the Emperor
had not this power: and therefore advertised king Henry, how that the Emperor
Charles the fifth had at Bruxels in the year 1551, invested Philip of Spain in
the Duchy of Millan without the consent of the States of the empire: yet can
he not find so much as any one inuestiture of any Imperial fee, in the
conferring whereof the express consent of the Estates was had. But certain it
is, that the Emperor bestows not these fees or inuestitures, but as in
quality of the Lieutenant of the empire: in such sort as he receives the
fealty and homage of the princes, for, and in the name of the empire. As in
like case Ferdinand the emperor without the consent of the estates of the
empire, received Granuellan sent unto him with special charge and deputation
from Philip king safe conduct which he gives unto ambassadors, heralts at
arms, and other strangers, The majesty of the German emperor by this
French author still empaired
whereunto the ordinary clause is adjoined in these words, Forasmuch as we
for our Imperial power may do all things: they show right well that the
Emperor was in ancient time a sovereign Monarchy; which he now is not: For
why then should the Electors and other princes of the Empire refuse to grant
unto the emperor, the diet which he requested of them in the year 1566? or
why then should both he and his officers be by them forbidden so much as to
touch the moneys by them raised for the maintenance of the wars. And to cut
it short, we need not but to look into the articles of the oath made by the
Emperors (by us before declared) to know yet more evidently, that the
sovereignty of the Empire is not any wise in the emperor, albeit that he
carry the crown, the scepter, and wear the other most precious and imperial
Most sacred Majesty, all in deed having the show of sovereign and royal
majesty, but yet not the thing it self. And yet to say the truth, a man
knows not how to do him so great honor as the majesty of the sacred empire,
whereof he is the head, deserves. But the manner A great policy in
Aristocratical estates to give unto him least power to whom they give most
honor.
of well governed Aristocratike states, is to grant unto him the least power
to whom they give the greatest honor: and sometimes also least honor unto
them that be of most power: as of all others the Venetians in the ordering and
government of their Commonweal best know how to use that matter. Seeing
therefore we have thus showed the Empire to be but an Aristocraticall estate,
we may well conclude, That

Now as the state of the Empire it self is entirely Aristocratique, so also
the great imperial towns and cities hold their estates in Aristocraticall
form: as Ausburg, Nuremberg, Worms, and others, which are almost all
Aristocraties; albeit that in truth some of them are more popular than others,
as is the city of Strasbourg. But The estate of Nuremberg Aristocraticall.
the greatest, most famous, and best ordered of all the imperial cities,
established in form of an Aristocratie; wherein of an infinite number of
citisens there are but xxviij. ancient families which have power over all the
rest of the subjects, which are within the jurisdiction of Nuremberg. Out of
these xxviij. families, they every year first make choice of two Censors, men
without any imputation; which done, all the rest of the magistrates are every
one of them displaced: then these Censors according to their own discretion
make choice of xxvj. Senators: who out of themselves choose xiij. persons, for
the managing of the secret affairs of that Commonweal: and out of the same
Senate also make choice of other xiij. Sheriffs also: beside the vij.
Bourgmasters, Mark at Venice, to the imitation of whom they of Nuremberg
seem in some sort to have been desirous to fashion their Commonweal. And
albeit that of the imperial towns some of them be freer than other; as are
those which be neither in subjection nor protection of other princes, namely
Nuremberg, Strasbourg, Lubec, Hambourg, Breme, Most of the I^periall cities of
Germany go^uerned in form^ o^ Aristocraties.
have exempted themselves from the power of their ancient lords. As in like
case the Swissers and Grisons, now divided Commonweals, but sometimes subjects
of the empire. And namely, the lords of the Canton of Fribourg, in the treaty
of Combourgeoisie, betwixt them and the lords of Berne, call the town of
Fribourg a member of the empire, albeit that they have their state therefrom
divided unto themselves in full Jews of Bauaria the emperor, bearing date the
year 1316. They also of Tietmarsh for the confidence they had reposed in the
strength and situation of their country, (placed in the frontiers of the
kingdom of Denmark) withdrew themselves from the German empire, and
established their Commonweal in form of an Aristocrati^, of eight and forty
of the better sort of them, who so long as they live have the sovereignty, and
when one of them is dead, still choosing another in his place. True it is, that
in the year 1559, Adolph duke of Holst did what he could to have subdued them,
pretending that Christiern his great grandfather had of the emperor Frederike
the third obtained the sovereignty over them of Tietmarsh, for having
dismembered themselves from the empire; as I have seen by the letters of
Master Danzai, ambassador for the king into Denmark.

Wherefore it is manifest not only the whole estate of the German empire,
but even the imperial cities, themselves also to be governed in manner and
form of pure Aristocraties. But here we must have regard in considering of
the Aristocratique estate that we confound not the princes and chief
magistrates of a Commonweal with kings: nor a counsel of the nobility with a
Senate: wherein Historiographers often times err and go astray, and that
specially when as in a Commonweal there of that they had done in time of their
government, yet were they not therefore sovereign Austinian, having won it
from the emperors of Constantinople; every year made choice of twelve
counselors of estate for the Senate: out of whom they chose four, who with
one sovereign prince or magistrate governed all the affairs of state: the
authority of which four for all that, was but for six months, the soueraign
magistrate yet still holding his place for two years: in which manner of
government they honorably maintained their estate, until that of late years
it was by the Grand Signior taken from the Genowayes, and so united unto

And thus much concerning the definition of an Aristocratie. Now as concerning
the profits and dangers incident unto an Aristocratique estate: and the manner
of the government thereof, we will in due place declare. It rests now to
answer unto that Four sorts of Aristocraties by Aristotle set down.
which Aristotle says concerning an Aristocratie, being altogether contrary
unto that which is by us before set down. There are ( P^lit lib. 4. Cap. ^.
says he) four sorts of Aristocraties: The first, where none but the richer
sort, and that to a certain revenue, have pan in the government of the
Seignorie: The second, where the estates and offices are given by lot unto them
which hold most wealth: The third, where the children succeed their fathers, in
the government of the Seignory: And the fourth, when they which take upon them
the state, use a lordlike power and command without law. And yet nevertheless
in the same book, and a little after, he makes five sorts of Commonweales,
viz. the Regal, the Popular, the government of a few, the government of the
nobility* and after these a fifth kind, composed of the other four: which (as
he says * Lib. 4. Cap. 7.
afterward) is no where to be found. But such a medley of Commonweales we
have before not only by probable but even by necessary reasons also, proved
to be impossible, and by nature altogether imcompatible: wherefore letting
that pass, let us now also show the diverse forms of Aristocraties by
Aristotle set down, to be no way considerable. First he no where defines
what an Aristocratie is: the very cause of his error. For what can be more
vain, than to say it to be an Aristocratie where the ritcher or the better
sort have only part in the government? Aristot. by the author impugned.
For it may be that of ten thousand citisens, six thousand of them having two
hundred crowns of yearly revenue, have all part in the Seignorie; and yet
nevertheless the state shall be a popular state, considering that the greater
part of the citisens have the soueraignitie: for otherwise there shall be no
popular Commonweal at all. The like might be said for the government of the
better sort also, who might chance to be the greater number of the citisens,
which should have part in the Seignorie: and yet according to the opinion of
Aristotle, it should also be an Aristocraticall estate, albe^ it that the
greater part of the people bear therein the sway. As for the government Hard
to judge who is a good man.
man's integrity and virtue, as it is an hard matter for any man to do, so has
it it also unto wisemen always seemed a thing most dangerous: Insomuch that
the wise and grave Cato being chosen out for the purpose, durst not give
sentence whether Q. Luctacius was a good man or not. But admit that in every
Commonweal the good are in number fewer than the bad; and yet have the
government of the common state: why for the same reason has not Aristotle made
one sort of Aristocraty, wherein the nobility hold the soueraignitie? seeing
that they are ever fewer in number then the base and vulgar Poli^. lib. 3. Cap.
5.
says they do in Ethiopia: and so consequently also an Aristocratie of the
fairest, of the strongest, of the valiantest, of the wisest, of the learned,
and of others with such like qualities of the body, or of the mind: as we
see to be incident Xenophon agrees: and yet for all that the greatest
honors, offices, and preferments were not their given, but unto the richest
before the time of Pericles. And in Rome which was also a popular state, before
the law Canuleia the greatest honors, priesthood, and preferments, were not
bestowed upon any of the common vulgar sort of people, but upon the most
ancient gentlemen Aristotle says) some few which take upon them the mannaging
of the state, use a Lordlike power and command over all without law, in manner
of a tiranie: we have before showed the difference betwixt a Monarchy royal,
Lordlike, and tirannical: the like difference whereof is also in the
Aristocraticall government: wherein the Lords may govern their subjects as
slaves, and dispose of their goods, as may the Lordly Monarke, without law and
yet without tiranising also: not unlike the good master of the family, who is
always Aristotle himself) A wise and ve^tuous king the greatest ornament and
stay of a Commonwe^
is to have a wise and virtuous king, knowing how to govern his people without
law: considering that the law oftentimes serves many but as a snare to
deceive and snarle men in: and is also of it self dumb and inexorable: as the
nobility of Rome complained at such time as the people would needs have
laws, and be governed by them, after that the kings were driven out, who
governed without law and gave judgment Terentius Arsa caused it to pass in
force of a law, that from that time forward the nobility, consulls, and
magistrates, should themselves as well as the people, be bound to all such
laws, as the Decemviri to that purpose appointed by Never worse government
then where the greatest multitude of laws w^.
and laws, which ^he tyrant Caligula of purpose, and to no purpose, caused to
be set down in so small letter, as that they could hardly be of any man red,
but with Linceus eyes, to the intent thereby to entangle the more through
ignorance transgressing the same: whose successor and uncle Claudius in one
day made twenty edicts: and yet for all that there was never greater tiranie
then then: neither worse or more vilanous No form of a commonweal worse then
a corrupt Aristocratie
shall be many: and that especially when the nobility shall bandie it self
against the people: as it often times chances; and as we read it to have in
ancient time fallen out, when as in many Aristocratique estates none was by
the nobility admitted into their number for the government of the state; but
that they must first swear, to be for ever enemies unto the people, and all
popular men: a course not so much tending to the destruction of the cominaltie
and people, as of the nobility and mighty men themselves: and so to the utter
subversion of all Aristocraties, as we shall in due place declare And thus
concerning the Aristocraticall estate: now let us likewise see what a popular

CHAP. VII. Of a Popular Estate.
A Popular estate is a form of Commonweal, wherein all or most What a popular
estate is.
part of the people together commands in soueraignetie over the rest
altogether, and over every one in particular. The Tiberius Gracchus the
factious Tribune of the people requested Marcus Octauius his companion and
fellow of himself to give up his office, before that the eighteen tribes had
given their voices for the deposing Tiberius propounding and urging the laws
for the division of lands: and for opposing himself against the profit of the
people. Also at such time as Lucius Rullus, the busy Tribune by request which
he presented unto the people, concerning the division of lands, desired that
the commissioners which had that charge, might be chosen by the greater part
of the seauenteene tribes of the people only: Cicero, then Consul took
thereupon occasion amongst the other things to cross the entertainment of his
request, and publication of the law, saying: that the Tribune in so doing went
about to deceive the other eightteene Tribes, that is to say the greater part
of the people of their voices, which the Consuls objection was the less to
have been regarded, and the more easily to have by the Tribune been answered,
Domitia it was provided that if by the death of any of the Augures, Preests or
Bishops any benefice fell void, they should assemble but 17 tribes of the
people for the nominating of him, whom they would have chosen Bishop: so that
he which was by nine of the tribes of the people nominated and allowed,

When I say the greater part of the people to have the soueraignitie in the
popular Great difference whether voices* be taken by Poll o^ by Tribes and
companies, in a popular Commonweal.
estate; that is so to be understood, when the voices are to be taken by Pole
as in Venice, in Rhaguse, in Genua, in Luca, and almost al Aristocratique
Commonweales: but if the voices be taken by tribes, parrishes, or companies
suffices it, of them to have the greater part, also albeit that there be in
them far the lesser part of citisens, as it has commonly chanced in ancient
popular Commonweales. In Athens the people was divided into ten principal
tribes, whereunto in favor of Demetrius, and Antigonus they joined two others,
of them called Antigonia and Demetria: and again the people was divided into
thirty six classes or companies. But such divisions according to Romulus at
first divided all the people in Rome The small number of the people of Rome,
and how they were divided in the time of Rom^lus, and how they were again
divided in the time of King Seruius* with the manner of their giving of voices.
which then was about 3000 into three tribes or parts: and after that every
part into ten companies, appointing over every one of them an head: how be it
the voices (as Liuy says) were then al given by poll. But by the ordinance of
king Seruius the people was again divided into six companies, according unto
every man's wealth and revenue: in such sort: as that the first company wherein
the richest were enrolled, had as much power as all the rest: if the centuries
of this first company were al of one accord and mind in giving of their
voices, that is to say fourscore centuries, which were but eight thousand
persons; for in that case the voices of the other five companies were never And
had this ordinance of king Seruius still remained in force after kings were
driven How the people of Rome wrested unto it self the sovereignty, and how
that state of an Aristocratie became a Democ^atie, or a mere popular state.
out, it had not been a popular state but an Aristocraticall, for that the
lesser part of the people had then therein the soueraignetie. But shortly after
the expulsion of the kings the common people seeing themselves oppressed by the
wealth and power of the greater, revolted thrice from the nobility, and held
their state apart: to the intent they might every one of them, as well the poor
as the rich, the base as the noble, have their voices alike; neither could they
be before quieted, until they had obtained power out of the body of
themselves to choose their Tribunes, the maintainers of their liberties: whereof
their Tribunitial assemblies began first to be holden. But for as much as the
nobility and richer sort dispersed among the tribes, caused the poorer and
meaner sort (for the most part their followers*) to give their voices at their
appointment and pleasure; Appius the Censor done, thereby to gratify the
vulgar people, and by that means to obtain How Fabius by great wisdom
overthrew the popular devise of Appius, and so obtained the name of Maximus.
of them what so he would: Fabius Maximus the Censor by great wisdom overthrew
all the grace that Appius had by cunning got, by thrusting all the enfranchised
men, and such as were of them descended, into four tribes by themselves: so to
preserve the ancient and freeborn citisens in the right of their voices. For
which only fact by him brought to pass without tumult or sedition, he
obtained the name of Maximus, or as we say, the Greatest. Which his order still
continued, until that about 300 Seruius Sulpitius Tribune of the people, would
needs have the enfranchised men again enrolled into the Tribes of their
masters by whom they were before manumised or set at liberty: but before
this his motion was brought to effect, he was himself slain: which for all
that in the time of the civil wars betwixt Marius Marius popular.
and Silla, was by Marius (having ceised upon the city) effected: so to make
the estate of the Commonweal more popular, and to weaken the authority of the
nobility and richer sort. Demosthenes after the victory of Philip king of
Macedon at Chaeronea attempted the like at Athens; by presenting a request unto
the people, That the enfranchised, and other the inhabitants of Athens, might
be enrolled in the number of Pericles, when as were found but thirteen
thousand citisens enroled, out of whom No Commonweal so popular as that all the
people gave therein voice, it being sufficient that the greater part of the
tribes still carried aw ay the matter.
also 5000 strangers, who had s^yly crept in for citisens, were sold for
slaves: and yet the multitude of the slaves was than ten times more than the
number of the citisens.

This which I have said, may well serve to answer that which might be
alleged, That there is not, neither happily ever was any so popular a
Commonweal, as wherein the subjects had all voices alike; or if they had, that
they could all meet together to make laws, create magistrates, and use the
other marks of sovereignty: a good part of them to the contrary being
ordinarily still absent, and so the less part making the law* Demosthenes. And
the Ostracisme (as Plutarch writes) took no place upon any man, except six
thousand citisens at the least agreed in one therein: which yet was the lesser
part of the people. The like whereof is also observed in the laws of the
Venetians, being of any great weight or importance; and namely in laws
concerning the execution of justice, whereunto this clause is adjoined, That
the great Council shall not in any thing derogat from the law established,
except there be at the least a thousand Venetian gentlemen there present; and
that of them, eight hundred all agree in one and the same opinion, for the
repealing of the law. Whereunto the Roman laws, concerning corporations and
colleges, seem also to have had regard; where two third parts of the
Collegiats, and of them also the most voices must agree, to give any law where
he which has been Aman the three years before, standing upright, and excusing
The cantons of the Swissers much ruled by their great men, but the Grisons not
so.
of the Grisons, and of the other Cantons of the Swissers: for that he which
can give unto his side, two or three of the principal officers, of any one
canton of the Swissers, who are ruled by certain great men bearing sway
amongst them, may assure himself Bellieure ambassador also, and a man of good
understanding in matters of state, having the same charge, gave the king to
understand, in the month of May 1555, how that the ambassador of Spain had
almost caused all the companies of the Grisons to revolt, insomuch that in
assembly of the Cade, there were more voices for Spain, than for France. And
after that how that they of the Comminaltie of Linguedine, having not received
the money promised them by the Spaniards, laid hand upon the Spanish
pentioners amongst

These examples of popular cities we have set down, that thereby the force and
nature of popular states and Commonweales might the better be understood:
Wherefore let us then conclude; That to be a popular State or Commonweal
wherein the greater part of the people have the sovereignty; whether their
voices be given by Aristotle his opinion concerning an Aristocratical or
popular Commonweal.
poll, by tribes, companies, parishes, or communities. And yet Aristotle
writes unto Aristotle to establish his own, rejects the common opinion of
all people: yea even of the Philosophers and law-giuers themselves: which
common received opinion has always been, is, and shall be mistress in matters
of state. And yet he had neither true nor probable reason to depart from the
common opinion: whereas thereof ensues a thousand intolerable and inevitable
absurdities. For so we might say that the faction of the Decemuiri or ten
commissioners, appointed for the correcting and amending of the evil laws and
customs of Rome, taking upon them the sovereignty, was a popular estate;
albeit that all histories call it an Oligarchie, although they in that barenes
of the Commonwealth were not chosen for their wealth, but for their wisdom
only. And to the contrary, when the people for the maintenance Aristotle,
calling the Commonweales of Appollonia, Thera, and Colophon popular states,
wherein a few ancient very poor families had the sovereignty over the rich.
Yea he passes on further and says, that if the greater part of the people
having the sovereignty, give To judge of an estate we are not to consider who
have the magistracies or offices but who they be in whom the sovereignty
rests.
the great offices and honors of their state unto the fairest or tallest of
their citisens, it

And these absurdities, and others also much greater then they, ensue hereof,
in that That the state of a commonweal may be of one sort, and yet the
government thereof of another and that quite contrary.
Aristotle has mistaken the manner and form of the government of a
Commonweal, for the sovereign state thereof. For as we have before said, the
state may be a pure royal Monarchy, and yet the government there of popular:
as namely if the prince give honors, offices, and preferments therein to the
poor, as well as to the Aristides the just, whereby all the citisens were
received into all the offices of the Commonweal, without respect of their
wealth, contrary to the law of Solon, whereby it was provided, that in
bestowing of honors and places of authority and command, regard also be had
unto men's ability and wealth. So likewise if the nobility only, or some few
of the richer sort should have the sovereignty in the state, and so exclude
all the rest of the people from the honorable labyrinth of errors, where into
we see Aristotle himself to have fallen: mistaking

Wherefore let us firmly set down and resolve that there are but three forms
of That the state of a Commonweal may be of one sort and the government of an
other, withour confusion of the states.
Commonweales, and no more, and those simple also, and without any confused
mixture one of them with an other; albeit that the government be sometimes
contrary to Sovereignty allwaies by nature of itself indivisible.
alone, or in the less part of all the people, or in the greater part thereof;
which are the three sorts of Commonweales by us set down. And as for that
which we have said, that the government may be more or less popular, may be
deemed so to be, by the Commonweales of the Swissers, where the mountain
Cantons of Vri, Schwits, Vnderuald, Zug, Glaris, and Apensel are so popular, as
that the sovereignty of the Commonweal The popularitie of the mountain (...).
rests only in them all, so that they be fourteen years old, in so much
that their chief magistracies and places of greatest command are sometime
given even to very Sadlers, and such other mechanical men: neither of the
aforesaid Cantons is The true nature of the people.
people is, to desire liberty without restraint of bit or bridle whatsoever:
and to have all men equal in wealth, in honor, in pains, and rewards;
without regard of nobility, wisdom, or virtue: and as Plutarch says wisely
to have all cast into lot, and even balance, without respect or favor of any
man, then if any valiant or honorable minded of the nobility or richer sort
shall by any means attempt to restrain the people so intemperatly abusing
their liberty; them straight ways they do what they can to kill or to banish,
and confiscating their goods, divided the same among the poorer sort, and that
the rather, if they be rich, or seem to aspire: Yea often times it happens,
that the The beginning* of the popular estate of the Swissars.
and that the nobility be by the force of the people overthrown. As it
happened at the establishing of the popular estate of the Swissars, after the
battle of Sempach, where almost all the nobility was slain, and the rest
which were left constrained to renounce their nobility; and yet nevertheless
were excluded from all honors and offices of charge in the Commonweal, except
at Zurich and Berne (which is in them the less to be marvelled at, for that
the nobility there, with great safety and without force of arms, made their
peace with the victorious common people, now before quite spent The ancient
Gretians and Italians in their popular liberty more insolent than were the
Swissars.
with civil wars.) Yet for all this insolency, did the Swissers more
moderatly use Morlet, the French kings ambassador, in the year 1550, That the
private and extraordinary pensions, which the greater men yearly received of
the king, might together with the public pension be equally divided amongst
them all: King Henry denied so to do, and said, He would rather restrain his
bounty, than suffer his private liberality to be so at their pleasure
confounded with the common. Yea that worse is, the insolent liberty of the
ancient Greek popular Commonweales, proceeded to that liberty (should I say)
or rather lewd madness, as to banish them that were more wise and discreet
than the rest for the mannaging of their affairs, as they did Damon, master
to Pericles: and not only wise and discreet, but even the most just and
virtuous also; as was Aristides in Athens, and Hermodorus at Why in popular
commonweales they oftentimes bannished the most wise and virtuous men.
subject* should so dazzle the eyes and minds of the rest of the common people,
that forgetting their liberty, they should choose rather to live in subjection
unto so wise and virtuous a man, than to rule themselves. Which thing they the
more feared, if unto his virtues and good parts were joined nobility, or
power, or experience in great matters; who with force joined thereunto, might
from the citisens either with their will, or against their will, extort their
liberty. Whereas the nobility and better sort, to the contrary make no
account or reckoning of the popular state: but think it good reason, that he
which has the most nobility, wealth, virtue, or knowledge, should be also The
inequality of the nobility and of the vulgar or commonpeople, not possible to
be brought to any good conformity in one and the same state.
sort of the common people. Since therefore the princes and nobility so much
differ from the common and base people, it is a thing impossible by any means
to make them together equal: or being made in honors and command, even to
reconcile the^ among themselves, together with the Commonweal: and so (as they
say) with one and the same brewing to moderat two so contrary humors. Albeit
that Solon vaunted, that if he had power to make laws, he would make them such
as should be most indifferent, Solon to mean of the equality in Geometrical
proportion; and the people of the proportion Arithmeticall: whereby it came to
pass, that both the states yielding unto him, gave him power for the making of
them laws, and establishing of their Commonweal. But these things, as also
what commodities or inconveniences attempted upon every Commonweal, shall in
their due places be more at large declared: suffices it now with what
brevity well might be, to have set down the descriptions and kinds of all
Commonweales, as also what is to every one of them proper, strange, or common
with others: and also who in every Commonweal has the power of Sovereign
majesty. Now let us prosecute every part and limme, viz. the Senate, the
magistrates, the officers, colleges, and corporation* and that in such order as
we have here rehearsed them.

Finis Lib. Secundi.
THE THIRD BOOK OF
CHAP. I. Of a Senate, or Council of Estate, and the power thereof.
A Senate is a lawful assembly of Counselors of Estate, to The definition of
a Senate.
give advise to them which have the sovereignty in every That a wise prince
needs not allwaies to be advised by his counsel. The wonderful secrecy of
Julius Caesar in all his affairs.
but of himself alone, as we read of Antigonus king of Asia, and of Jews the
eleventh Charles the fifth doubted not in that to imitat: as also of Caius
Julius Caesar among the Romans; who never spoke any thing unto others, of the
enterprises he had in hand: nor of his iourneies, no not so much as of the day
of battle; and yet performed great matters, albeit that he were beset with
many great and right puissant enemies: and was therefore the more redoubted,
for that his designs were so close and covert, as that they were still
executed before they enemy could perceive them: who still was by that mean
overtaken, and ere he were aware surprised. Besides that, the captains and
soldiers reposing themselves in the wisdom of such a prince or general,
were always in expectation, pressed, and ready even in a moment, to perform
whatsoever he should command, but with the holding up of

Now many have (and that in mine opinion) without cause doubted, Whether it
were better for the Commonweal to have a most wise and virtuous prince to
govern the same without council; or a dull and unfit man of himself for
government, but well provided of a grave and wise council? And truly unto the
wise neither the one nor the other seems any thing worth. But if the prince
be so wise as they suppose, as that he greatly needs not of council: yet the
greatest point for his advantage ^n Secrecy in a prince most needful.
laid open and so made known, serve no more but as mines discovered; causing
ofttimes the ruin and decay of most famous cities and states. And therefore
the wisest princes have still used to speak and talk most of such things as
they meant least. And as for an heavy headed and foolish prince, how should he
be well provided of a grave and wise council, since that the choice thereof
depends of his own will? and that in a prince there is no greater sign of
wisdom, than to know well how to make choice of wise men, whose council he
may use and follow.

But forasmuch as the brightness and beauty of wisdom is so rare amongst
men, Whether it be less dangerous unto a Commonweal to have a good prince
assisted with (...) counsel, or an evil prince directed by good counsel.
and that we must with all obedience reverence such princes as it shall please
God to Alexander. Wherefore we say, that a prince ought to follow the good
advise and council of his grave and wise counselors, not only in his more
great and weighty affairs, but even in his mean and least matters also
(albeit that in truth nothing can be mean or little, which concerns the
Commonweal) For there is nothing that The great benefit that a prince has by
following the good advise of his wise counsel, and the dangers to him ensuing
by the rejecting thereof:
gives greater credit and authority unto the laws and commandments of a
prince, a people, or state, or in any manner of Commonweal, than to cause them
to pass by the advice of a grave and wise Senate or Council: and the rather,
if it be doubtful whether Charles the fifth the French king, was wont best to
do: For having a purpose to drive out of his kingdom the Englishmen, who in
fealty held all the castles and towns in Aquitaine; and now provided of all
things, which he thought needful for the doing thereof, he received the
complaints of the Frenchmen of Aquitaine (the king of England his subjects)
against the English governors, directly contrary unto the treaty of
Bretignie: who for such appeals and complaints unto the king, had used them
evil. Upon which occasion, whether of purpose sought for, or by chance
offered, the king took hold: but yet would not undertake the war, without
the council Hiero king of Sicilie was together with all his kindred and friends
most cruelly slain, for that he so proudly and insolently contemned the
Senate, nor in any thing asked the advice thereof; by the advice whereof (his
grandfather having invaded the sovereignty) had before governed the state
fifty years and more. The same error committed Caesar, not only in the time
that he was Consul, but in his dictatorship also, never using the advice or
council of the Senate: The principal occasion that was taken for the killing
of him, being for that he vouchsafed not to rise unto the whole body of the
Senate (consisting of about a thousand Senators) coming at once unto him; too
arrogantly and indeed too foolishly done; not that Caesar was by nature or
disposition so proud, but Cornelius Balbus (his flattering claw-backe, and a
man of all other most inward with him) persuaded not so to do. For which
selfsame cause, also the Romans had long before slain their first king and
founder of their city, and driven out their last king the proud Tarquin: for
that both of them contemning the Senate, did all things on their own heads and
the latter of them seeking also quite to suppress the Senate, by putting of
the Senators to death: which thing was not dangerous only unto those princes
which we have now spoken of, but also unto Jews the eleventh the French king,
who in nothing asked the advice of his Counsel, but had thereby (as he
afterward confessed) brought himself within an inch of his utter ruin: for
which cause, he would not that his Charles the eight, should understand any
more but three words of Latin (and those, such as are razed out of the
history of Philip Comines,) to the end that mistrusting of his own wisdom,
he should rest himself upon the grave counsel of others, and so by their
advice to manage his affairs rather than by his own. For it is right Great
learning in a prince sometime dangerous.
certain, that great learning in princes is often times a thing no less
dangerous than a knife in a mad-mans hand, except he be by nature well given,
and more virtuously instructed and brought up. Neither is there any thing more
to be feared, than great learning accompanied with injustice, and armed with
power. There was never yet prince less learned (except in deeds of arms)
than Traian, neither any of greater knowledge than Nero; and yet for all that,
this man had never his peer for cruelty, nor the other

First we said the Senate to be a lawful assembly: which is to be understood
of the Senators from whom they have their lawful power.
power which is given them by the prince, or sovereignty in other states, to
assemble Lycurgus in the mean time to be commended, forbidding any
pourtraitures or pictures to be in the place where the Senate should consult, for
that the object of such things as we behold, often times distract the
fantasy, and transport reason else where, which ought wholly to be intentive
unto that which then is to be consulted of. We said moreover in the definition
of a Senate, That they should be Counselors for the estate: to put a difference
betwixt them and other counselors and magistrates of the Commonweal, who are
oftentimes called to give their advise Whereof a Senator took name: and that a
Senate ought to consist of men well stricken in years.
(...), which shows well that the Greeks and Latins composed their Senats of
seniors or aged men, whom our country men call Seigneurs, for the authority,
reverence, and dignity, which has always been given unto the auntients, as
unto the wiser sort, and men of greatest experience: upon that hope and opinion
that they which were elder than the rest, should also in wisdom exceed the
rest. For so it is Charles the great; Nulli per sacramentum fidelitas
permittatur, nisi nobis and vnicuique proprio seniori: Let credit be given to
no man upon his oath, but unto us and every proper elder: whereby he meant the
manumised men's patrons, rather than the Senators; as if honor and reverence
were due rather unto the elder, than the younger. Also by the custom of the
Athenians, when the people were assembled to give their advice, the huisher
with a loud voice called all them that were fifty years old together, to
consult of that which should be good and profitable for the Commonweal. And
not only the Greeks and Latins have given this prerogative unto the aged, to
give counsel unto the Commonweal, but also the Aegiptians, Deuteronomy. Cap. 1.
Assemble unto me (says he) seauentie of the most ancient of the people, wise
men, and fearing God. For albeit that a man might find a number of discreet,
wise, and virtuous young men, experimented also in the affairs of the
Commonweal (a thing for all that right difficult,) yet so it is that it should
yet be a thing right perilous to compose of them a Senate (which were rather to
be called an assembly of young men) for that their counsel should not be
received, either of the young or of the old: for that they of like age would
esteem themselves as wise as they, and the other themselves much wiser than
such young counselors. And in matters of state (if in any thing in the world)
opinion has no less, Youngmen by Solon forbidden to be admitted into the
Senate, seemed they never ^o wise.
thereof to be expected. And therefore Solon forbad any young man to be admitted
into the Senate seemed he never so wise; which the Graecians in their own
language have better set down than the Latins* (...). And Licurgus before
Plato himself, who appointed the Elders to be keepers of his Commonweal, has
excused from any longer bearing of charges in the Commonweal, or for any more
giving of counsel. It is also said in the holy Scripture, That God having
chosen seauentie Elders, powered upon them abundance of wisdom: for which
cause the Hebrews call their Senators, the Sages, or wise men. And Cicero
elegantly (as he does all things) calls the Senate the soul, the reason, and
understanding, of a The Senate the soul of the commonweal.
Commonweal; meaning thereby to conclude, that a Commonweal can no more
maintain it self without a Senate, than the body can it self without a
soul, or a man himself without reason: and that Senators should by long
experience and practice be able and ready, to hear, consider, and resolve of
the greatest affairs of the Common Politic wisdom ever to be joined with
fait^ and justice.
as if nothing could be more sacred than good counsel, and the Hebrews (...),
as who should say, the most sure foundation of all things, whereupon all fair
and commenda ble actions are built, and without which all things fall, and are
turned vpside down. When I say a wise counsel, my meaning is that politic
wisdom should be ever joined with faith and justice: for it is no less, and
I know not whether more dangerous,

An other sort of Senators there are also which are led neither with envy,
hatred, A Senator to (...) too much conceited of his own opinion, a thing
unto the Commonweal dangerous.
nor love of any man, but with an obstinate conceit and love of their own
opinions, from which they will not by any reason or persuasion suffer
themselves to be removed, and therefore come into the Senate armed with such a
force and multitude of arguments, as if they were even there to combat with
their enemies; least that they should seem to have erred in their discourses,
or lightly to have changed their opinions. And that worse is, such strong
conceited men, account it a great shame to them, Thomas Moore in the Vtopian
Commonweal by him devised, wisely set down, That nothing should be disputed
or reasoned upon, the same day it was propounded, but to be still reserved unto
the next assembly of the Senate* to the end, that he which had rashly and
unadvisedly delivered his opinion, should not afterward enforce himself to
maintain the same, rather than to yield to reason.

Wherefore it beseems a wise Senator, even in the entrance of the Senate, to
lay The duty of a wise Senator.
down all favor toward his friends, all hatred toward his enemies, and all
high conceit of himself; aiming at no other end, but to the advancement of
the glory of God, and the welfare of the Commonweal. Wherein the manner of
the Lacedaemonians was to be commended, who were so ready to defend whatsoever
was once decreed for the good of the Commonweal, as that they which had before
impugned the same, would now so conform themselves for the establishing
thereof, as that they would themselves refell what they had before to the
contrary commended: and all because it was not lawful for them to dispute of
the laws once established by the Senate: which manner of custom the Achaeans
and Florentine Commonweales, afterward Learning necessary for a Senator, but
upright integrity more.
for a Senate or Councellor, especially the knowledge of antiquity, and of the
estates of Commonweals: as also to be seen in the laws of his own country,
which he ought not to be altogether ignorant of, yet is a sound judgment
joined with faith justice, and integrity more necessary: by means whereof he
may easily persuade any thing without much eloquence. But above all things a
Senator must beware that he That a Councellor of estate ought not to be
pensionar to another prince.
suffer not himself to be corrupted with the bounty of foreign princes:
neither be beholden to any foreign lord or prince, for any thing that he
holds of him, whether it be by fealty and homage, by mutual obligation, or
by pention, which he receives: which although it be a thing most dangerous
in a Commonweal, and ought therefore Out of doors with the priests.
For a i Preti. And namely they banished Hermolaus Barbarus their ambassador
unto the pope; as they did not long ago cardinal Mule, their ambassador unto
him also, for that they had of him received the cardinals hat, without leave
from the Seigneurie. But I find, that in this realm there have been thirty
Cotignac the French ambassador into Turkey, was so bold as to presume to
marry a Greek gentlewoman, without making of the king at all acquainted
therewith. And not long after, another also at the instigation of Mhemet Bassa,
and the duke of Naxo, would likewise have Stephen Bathor (who now governs the
kingdom of Polonia) placed in his stead. All which, with other such like
enterprises, are dangerous in an estate, and therefore in a well ordered
Commonweal, in no wise to be suffered. And these unto me seem to be the
chief qualities and ornaments of a good Counselor of Estate.

But beside these, in many Commonweales nobility of birth is always in a
Senator required; as at Venice, Rhaguse, and Nuremberg: and amongst the
Polonians it was by Sigismundus Augustus, in the year 1550 by law provided,
That no man should Nobility of birth and also wealth to be in a Senator
required.
be chosen a Senator, except he were nobly descended, by the fathers side at
least, and had also borne arms. In other places choice was made of them by
their wealth, as at Genes, and in ancient time in Atheus by the laws of
Solon: and so almost in all other ancient Commonweales. And namely Augustus
the emperor, would not that a Roman Senator of his time should be less worth
than thirty thousand crowns, supplying of his own bounty what the wise
Senators being poorer wanted: not that it was so necessary unto their
Council, but that so they might have wherewith to maintain their estate,
aunswerable unto their calling: as also least the rest proud of their wealth,
should contemn the other which were poorer, as commonly it falls out in the
Aristocratique estate, where the Senator is chosen by his wealth. And by the
ancient viz. such as had been Consuls, Praetors, Aediles, or at least
Quaestors. And for that in the overthrow of Marius 90 Senators were slain;
Sylla created Dictator, to supply the order of the Senators, which he favored,
created twenty Quaestors, and Caesar forty, who at the same time should be
made Senators, with power also to give voices, which before was not lawful,
until they had by the Censors been nominated and registered. Which indeed is a
laudable custom, and in many well ordered Commonweals

But whereas we have before said, that Senators are to be chosen out of such as
have before borne some honorable place or office in the Commonweal: that
concerns not them which shamefully buy their offices, neither the Commonweal
wherein honors and offices are bought for money: for those virtues which we
said to be required Theodoricus, with Cassiodore, Admittendos in Senatum
examinare cogit solicitus honor Senatus, The careful care we have of the
honor of the Senate, causes us to examine such as are to be admitted into the
Senate.

As for the number of Senators it cannot be great, considering the perfection
requisite The number of Senators commonly ^oe in an Aristocratique or popular
Com monweale, than in a Monarchy.
in a Counselour of estate. True it is, that in popular and aristocratique
Commonweales, to avoid seditions, and to feed the enraged famine of the
ambitious, which have part in the soueraignetie: they are often times enforced to
augment the number of the Senators; as in Athens by Solons law, they by lot
every year made choice of four hundred Senators; whereunto it pleased them
afterward to add another hundred, that so fifty might by lot yearly be
drawn out of every one of the ten tribes: unto whom they joined also another
hundred, to make up the full number of 600. After that they had unto the ten
tribes joined two others, namely the tribes of Antigonus and Demetrius, albeit
that in the time of Pericles, there were not in the city Demonsthenes. For
which cause (as I have said) Plato in his popular Commonweal: by him set
down, appoints the Senate to consist of an hundred threescore and eight of
the better and wiser sort, which was the thirtith part of 5040 citisens the
full number of them, of whom he would have his Commonweal to stand. And in
like case, Romulus took the thirtith part of his subjects to make the first
Roman Senate of, choosing out of 3000, (the whole number that then was of the
citisens) an hundred, and them also by him chosen not by lot, but by
discretion, even of the nobler sort of his people: viz. such as whose
ancestors had never served as slaves. But afterward, the Sabins being
according to the league received into the city, he added unto the former
number another hundred; Brutus also put to an hundred more, which number of
three hundred Senators, so continued by the space of almost four hundred
years, without increasing or diminishing. But in the time of Cicero, it is
manifest that there were about five hundred, by that he writes four hundred
and fifteen Senators, to have given voices when Pub. Claudius, who was
afterward tribune, was brought in question for having polluted the sacrifices
of Bona Dea, by committing of adultery with Pompeia: at which time, when the
Senators were not constrained to be present in the Senate, no man can doubt,
but that many of them then dispersed into all the provinces of the Roman
empire, or otherwise busied with their own affairs, or let with age and
sickness, were then also absent. And after that, Caesar to have Lu. Licinius
the Barber, as says Acron. But Augustus (after the Commonweal again
pacified) seeing the danger of so great a number of Senators, brought them to
the number of six hundred, with purpose to have brought them also to the
ancient number of three hundred, which was not much more then the ten thousand
part of the whole number of the citisens, being then almost infinite.

Wherefore the number of Senators is not to be appointed, according to the Of
whom it is fittest to make choice for Senators in an Aristocratique or popular
Commonweal.
multitude of the people, neither to serve the ambitious desire of the
ignorant; and much less for the drawing of money from them, but only for the
respect of the virtue and wisdom of them which have deserved the place; or if
it be not possible otherwise to satisfy the ambition of them, which have part
and interest in the estate of popular and aristocratique Commonweales, but that
of necessity the gate of the Senate must be opened unto the multitude, that
it be yet so ordered, that none should therein have deliberatiue voices, but
such as had borne the greatest offices* and charges in the state: as in the
Cretensian popular Commonweal, all the citisens had free access and entrance
into the Senate, and there might frank and freely deliver their opinions, but
not with authority to determine any thing, that power being still reserved
unto them Achaeans, none but the general and the ten Dimiurgi, had power to
determine of such things as were in counsel propounded. Howbeit a wise
lawegiuer will never The danger of having many Senators.
go so far, if he may otherwise avoid the popular sedition: for beside the
manifest danger, which is for revealing of counsel communicated to so many
persons: it gives also occasion unto the factious for troubling of the state,
if they which have the power to determine and resolve upon matters, shall in
opinion differ from them which have but voices consultatiue; which indeed are
accounted as nothing: for preventing of which dangers, both the one and the
other, the ancient Greeks in their Commonweales still created a counsel
apart, of the grauest and wisest of their Senators (whom Augustus the emperor
never bring to pass, that the Senators should be present at the ordinary
Senate, which was holden the calends or ides of every month at the farthest;
albeit Ruscius Caepio the rather to inuit them to that their duty, by his
last will and testament left a certain sum of money to them that came into
the Senate. For it was requisite that there should be fifty Senators at the
least for the making of any decree, and oftentimes an hundred, or two hundred,
yea and sometimes four hundred, which was two third parts of six Senators; as
in corporations and colleges the manner is. Howbeit Augustus the emperor at
length taking away the necessity of so great a number, appointed two hundred
to be sufficient, being two thirds of three hundred; which was the lawful
number of the Senators appointed by Brutus. Moreover the Senate was not
ordinarily assembled but three times a month; and if it pleased not the
Consul (without whose commandment the Senate might not assemble it self) or
the greatest magistrate in the absence of the Consul, sometime an whole year
passed without calling together of the Senate: as Caesar did in his first
Consulship, having the Senate bent against him; and yet in the mean time by
prodigal bounty caused even what he would to be decreed by the people.
Whereas Solon had much better provided for the matter among the Athenians,
having beside the ordinary Senate of 400, every year to be changed, appointed
also a privy and perpetual The counsel of the Areopagi i^ Athens.
Council of the Areopagi, consisting of threescore of the wisest and grauest
sort of the citisens, men without reproach, who by all the degrees of honor
were risen to have Pericles to gain the favor of the common sort, had taken
away the authority from the Areopagits, and translated the same unto the
people: for shortly after, the state of that Commonweal sore shaken both with
foreign and domestical wars, began forthwith to decline and decay. We find
also, that the Aetolians, beside their great Council, which they called
Panaetolium, had also their privy Council chosen of the grauest and wisest
men amongst them; of whom Liuie speaking, says, Sanctius est apud Aetolos
consilium eorum quos apocloets appellant, There is among the Aetolians a more
sacred (or privy) Council, of them whom apocletos: and immediately after,
Arcanum hoc gentis Consilium, This is the secret * Select counselours.
Council of the nation: Whereas before he had said, Legibus Aetolorum
cauebatur, ne de pace belloue, nisi in Panaetolio and Pilaico Consilio
ageretur, It was provided by the laws of the Aetolians, that nothing should be
entreated of concerning peace or war, but in their Panaetolio, or Pilaican
Council. We read also, that the popular Commonweal of the Carthaginensians,
beside their Senate of four hundred Senators, had also a particular or privy
Council of thirty Senators, men of greatest experience The counsel (...) the
Carthaginensians.
in their public affairs and matters of state: Of whom Liuie thus says,
Carthaginenses xxx legatos seniorum principes adpacem petendam mittunt: id erat
sanctius apudeos Consilium, maximaque ad Senatum regendum vis, The
Carthaginensians (says he) send thirty ambassadors, the princes of their
elders to sue for peace: and that was the more sacred Council with them, and
the greater power for the ruling of the Senate: which manner of Council the
Romans wanted. And therefore Liuie wondereth (as at a right strange thing) that
the ambassadors of Greece and Asia, which came to Rome, could of so great a
number of Senators understand nothing of that which king Eumenes then plotted
in the full Senate, against Perseus king of Macedon, Eo silentio curia clausa
erat, The court (says he) was with such silence shut up: Whereby he
sufficiently shows, that in his time, as also long before that, nothing was
done or Papyrius Praetextatus might come into the Senate, and carry the news of
such things as were there done, unto their mothers. Augustus was the first,
Augustus the first in Rome who out of the whole body of the Senate made choice
of some few of the wiser sort, to be of his privy counsels
of the most important and secret affairs of state, but only to have their
advise concerning such things as were to be afterward propounded in the open
assembly of the Senate. Immediately after whose death, Tiberius the emperor
requested of the Senate, to have twenty Senators appointed him, with whom he
might (as he would have them to believe) consult of such things as the Senate
was further to be moved of. Whose example the wiser sort of the emperors
afterward followed; namely Galba, Traian, Adrian, Marcus Aurelius, and
Alexander Seuerus: of whom Lampridius speaking, He never (says he) made
decree without the advice of twenty lawyers, and diverse other of the Senators,
(men of great evidently and understanding in matters of state) even to Pallas
always to sit on the right hand of Jupiter, but not Jupiter on the right hand
of Pallas: to give us thereby to understand, That the Council ought always to
be present with the prince, but not the prince to be tied to the place where
the Council is resident: which were a thing not only not agreeable with the
majesty of a sovereign prince, but also impossible. And albeit that there be
many things in every Commonweal dispatched by the privy Council, wherewith
it is not needful either the people or the rest of the nobility to be made
acquainted: yet so it is, that in a Monarchy it is expedient and requisite that
the prince should himself understand The king understands not hereof. And
for this cause the Grand Signior of the Turks has always a lattise or grate,
opening into the Diuano, or chamber wherein his Council sits, to the intent
to keep his Bassaes and them of his council in awe; whilst they think him
their prince always to see them, and to observe their proceedings and doings.

But it may be (may some man say) that a Commonweal may be so little, and men
In small Commonweales the privy Counsel is not to be divided from the Senate.
of experience in it so few in number, as that not a Senate, but even such a
privy Council as we spoke of, cannot therein be made. In which case of so
strait a Commonweal, it Xenophon: establishing the same form of government in
Athens also, where they deputed thirty lords for the government of that state,
as they did in all the rest of the cities of Greece, except some little ones,
over whom Lysander placed ten Augustus the emperor (albeit that he surpassed
all the rest that came after him, both in wisdom, and happiness) beside the
Senate, which he had filled with 600 Senators, Maecenas and Agrippa* the only
men with whom Augustus the emperor resolved of his greatest affairs.
and the private council of twenty select men, had also another nearer and
more inward council of Maecenas and Agrippa, with whom he resolved of his
highest affairs, calling unto him none but them two after the victory of
Actium* to resolve with, Whether he should still hold, or discharge himself of
the empire. So Julius Caesar, had none but Q. Pedius, and Cornelius Balbus of
his most inward council, unto whom also he gave his manner of writing in
secret caracter, for them the better to understand his secrets thereby. So
Cassiodorus speaking of the secrets of princes, says, Arduum nimis est
principis meruisse secretum, Too high a thing it is (says he) to have deserved
to be of the princes priuitie. We see in like case, that the court of the
parliament of Paris, Diverse counsels at diverse times erected in France for
matters of state.
was the ancient Senate of the realm of France: but when it took pleasure in
deciding of civil controversies, nor could not well be removed from the
city; the Charles the seventh, was called the Great Council: which when it
was also entangled with deciding of extraordinary suits and controversies, by
the laws of Charles the eight, and much more by the laws of king Jews the
xij, who appointed a court of twenty judges; king Francis the elder removed
that Great Council from meddling with the secret affairs of state, having got
unto himself another council of certain select princes his friends: which of
the Latins is called; The Familiar Council, and of our country men, The
princes private Council. But Francis being dead, Henry his son got another
council also: which for that it consisted Henry the third, the son of
Henry ordained another Council, which for that it was only to consult of
matters concerning the state of the Commonweal, and not of suits and
controversies, was called the Council for the State. Beside these, it was
thought meet that there should also be a more secret or chamber Council,
wherein the king rising from his bed, should confirm or reject such things as
were by the Council decreed: there are princes letters opened, ambassadors
reported, and messages delivered. There is also apart another Council of the
Finances instituted by Henry the second, Charles the ninth, made in November,
in the year 1563, it is in the first article expressed, that so soon as the
king was up, all the princes and the council might come into the chamber, yet
was not that his decree therein observed or kept.

Which plurality and diversity of Councels in the kingdom of France, ought
Seven counsels in Spain.
not to seem strange, seeing that in Spain there be seven, beside the strict
and inward Council, which are always in diverse chambers near unto the king,
and yet within the compass of the same house or lodging; to the intent, that
the king going from one of them to the other, may the better be informed of his
affairs: as namely the council of Spain, the council of the Indies, the
council of Italy, and the council of the Low countries, the council for the
wars, the council for the order of Saint John, and the Inquisition. Now if
any man there be, that think the greatness of that kingdom (than which never
yet was any greater) to require so many councels: I deny it not, but yet so he
may see also in Venice, which has no very great territory, four councels,
beside the Senate and Great Council: viz. the council of the Sages for matters
at sea, the council of the Sages for matters at land, the council of the
Decemuiri, or ten men, Diverse counsels in Venice.
and the council of the Septemuiri, or seven men; where the duke makes the
seventh man, which they call the Seignorie, when it is joined with the council
of the ten men, and the three presidents of the forty, beside the Senate of
sixty; which with the magistrates may come to the number of six score. And what
then should let, but that where there be but few men worthy to be of council
for the state, but that the Senate may be made right little, and the privy
council less, and yet divided from the Senate also. The state of the
Rhagusians is but strait, and comprised almost within the same bounds,
wherewith the walls of the city are enclosed, and yet the Senate consists of
threescore. In the city of Nuremberg is a Senate of twenty six Senators, and a
privy council of The counsel^ of the Cantons of the Swistars.
Schwits is the least of all the Cantons, and yet for all that beside the Senate
of forty five persons, it has a privy council of seven, of whom the Aman
is chief. Which self same form of council is also kept in the canton of
Vti. As for the cantons of Zurich, Berne, Schafluse. Basil, Soleurre, Friburg,
and Lucerne, they have always beside the Great Council, a little council
also. The Great Council of Berne consists of two hundred Senators; and the
little of twenty six: At Lucerne of an hundred, and the little of twenty
eight: At Saint Gal also the Great Council is of sixty six, and the little of
twenty four: At Coire the Senate is of thirty, and the privy council of
fifteen. And without going so far, it is well known, that the state of The
counsel of Geneus.
Geneua is enclosed within the compass and circuit of a mile, yet for all that
beside the council of two hundred, it has a Senate of sixty; and after that a
privy council of twenty five. Neither is there any canton so little, (except
the three cantons of the Grisons, governed by the common popularitie) which
has not a privy council beside the Senate, wherein some have three, and some
have four. As in the canton of Bafill, where the secret affairs of state are
managed by two Bourgomasters, and two other chief men of their colleges, whom
they call Zunfft masters. And in like case at Berne the two Auoyers, and four
ensign bearers, have the ordering of all the secret business of their state;
as has the privy council in a Monarchy. And namely in the diets and
assemblies of the thirteen cantons, there is none but the privy council of A
privy counsel besides the Senate necessary in every Commonweal.
weal, to have at the least one privy council beside the Senate, since that
the ancient rulers of both the Greeks and Latins have so taught us, reason
so showed us, and experience therein confirmed us.

But there is a notable difference betwixt the Senate of a popular or
Aristocratique The manner of consultation in the Senate of a popular or
Aristocratique estate, and in the Senate of a Monarchy much different.
Commonweal, and the Senate of a Monarchy: for in them the diuises and
consultations are had in the secret or privy counsel; but the resolutions and
decrees are all made in the great Counsel, or in the assembly of the States,
or of the people, if the matter be such as is to be unto them published:
whereas in a Monarchy the manner The manner of the proceeding in their
consultations in matters of state, in Venice.
in Venice: where if any difficulty arise in the counsel of the sages, it is
commonly discided by ioining of the Decemuiri unto them, (and therefore unto
such decrees as are by them made are joined Con la Giunta) and if they cannot
so agree, but still rest Aristotle writes, was also the ancient custom of
the Carthaginensians, where if the Senate could not agree, the difference was
disputed, debated, and discided by the people.

Now all this differing of resolving and determining, proceeds from the
diversity of his secrets to so many persons, shall not come to the point of
his designs. By The policy of the Romain emperors to draw the Senate from
matters of state by busiyng it with other extraordinary causes.
this mean Tiberius the Emperor sought to keep the Senate busied in disciding
of great and extraordinary causes, to make it by little and little to forget
the understanding of matters of state. And after him Nero likewise ordained
that the Senate should have the hearing of Appeals which before were made unto
himself, and that the fine for the offense set down by the Senate should be as
great, as if he had heard the cause himself; By this mean making of a Senate
an ordinary court and jurisdiction of Judges: who in the time of freedom of
that popular Commonweal never used to judge, except ordinarily in
conspiracies, and other such like great offenses against the state: or that the
people which had the hearing of many causes, had committed the understanding
thereof unto the Senate. For which cause Cicero accusing Verres says in this
Quo confugient socij? quem implorabunt? ad Senatum deuenient, qui de Verre
supplicium sumat? non est vsitatum, non est Senatorium: Whither shall our
friends and allies fly? whom shall they ask help of? shall they come unto the
Senate, to take punishment of Verres? it is no thing in use, it appertains not
unto the Senate. Wherein many deceive themselves, which think that the Senate
judged, when they saw that the Senators were drawn by lot to judge of public
and criminal causes, sometimes by themselves, sometime with the knights, by
the law Liuia, and afterward with the knights and the Treasurours, by the law
Aurelia: for there is great difference betwixt the body of the Senate, and the
Senators taken in the quality of judges, and betwixt the privy Counsel, and
the counselors thereof coming into the sovereign courts Nero the Senate
never had so much as ordinary jurisdiction or The Senators of Rome as Senators
no judges, but when they were thereunto extraordinarily by commission
appointed.
power to judge of any matter; And namely Augustus would not that the Senate
should trouble it self, with the judging of the honor, or of the life of
Senators, albeit that he were thereunto importuned by his friend Moecenas. And
albeit that Tyberius the emperor often times sent unto them such causes, yet
was it but extraordinary and by way of commission; which Adrian the emperor
afterward caused to pass into the form of an ordinary jurisdiction. We see
in like case that Philip the fair, or as some others say Philip the long, to
discharge himself of the Court of parliament, and easily to take from it the
dealing with the affairs of state, made it an ordinary Court, giving it
jurisdiction, and a fitting place in Paris: which Court was in ancient time
the Senate Jews the young, (according to the truer opinion) to give counsel
unto the king; as we may see by the creation of County D' Mascon for a Peer,
by king Charles the fi^t, in the year 1359, where it is said that the king of
France ordained the twelve Peers, to give them their counsel and aid, and
termed it self, as yet it does at this present, (by way of prerogative of
honor) the Court of parliament (without any other addition) The court of Paris
sometime the ancient Senate of France by the king forbidden to deal with
matters of state.
as it is to be seen in the letters which it wrote unto the king: whereas the
other Courts of later time established, use their particular additions; As, The
Parliament of Toulouse, of Roan, of Bordeaux, of Dion, of Gratianople, and
Aquasexia. But in the Charles the ix, at such time time as the Court of Paris
liked not of the decree of the Senate, whereby the king in the Court of Roan was
by the voices of the princes declared sufficient for the government of the
kingdom without a Regent, according to the law of king Charles the first: the
king yet under age, advised the court, to meddle only with the desciding of
controversies, and the equal administration of justice: for that the king his
predecessors had for that only purpose appointed that Court, and there placed
them, and not to become his tutors, or protectors of the realm, or keepers of
his town of Paris: and therefore commanded such laws and edicts as he had
appointed to be proclaimed in the court of Paris, to be published: wherein if
any thing should be contained that seemed not to stand with right and reason,
he could Francis decreed in the year 1528. In like case the great Counsel
which was not almost employed but in affairs of state, in the reign of
Charles the seventh, and Charles the eight, was by little and little so filled
with suits, that Charles the viij. made it an ordinary court of seauenteene
counselors; whom Jews the xij. made up xx. beside the Chauncelour, who was
President thereof, (in such sort, that under king Francis there was but a
President in steed of a Chauncelour) who were not employed but in hearing of
extraordinary causes by way of commission, or remitting of the privy The
privy counsel of France almost brought into the form of an ordinary court
by hearing of private and particular causes
counsel, and ordinarily the appeals of the Provost of the household. We se
also the privy Counsel it self to be as it were brought into the form of an
ordinary court, Matters of state not without danger to be communicated unto
many.
of the state secret: or to know in such a multitude who it is that discovers
the same, nor to cast them out who are holden for suspect: Except by using the
custom of the ancient Athenians, by virtue whereof the Senators by a secret
judgment which Fabius Buteo made Dictator to supply the defect of the Senate,
at one time received in an 177 Senators. Whereas Lentulus and Gellius Censors
at one dash removed 64. Howbeit, it were more seemly and agreeing Senator^ or
coun selours of estate not easily to be admitted nor without great cause to be
again displaced. The ancient counsel of England in number few.
and unworthy, and afterward to cast them down again with eternal infamy
and dishonor, unto whom they had before given their helping hands: Besides
that it cannot always be done without danger and sedition, or the dishonor of
him that rules. It is four hundred year since that the Privy Counsel of
England, at the instance and ^ute of the Archbishop of Canterbury (then
Chauncelour) established, there were there into but fifteen persons then
chosen; neither has it ever since passed the number of twenty; and yet by
means of that little Counsel they have retained their state Jews the ix, and
Henry the first, king of England; which for the more assurance thereof was
sworn by the Prince and the xvij privy Counselors: viz. one Archbishop, one
Chauncelor, one Bishop, six Earls, and six other Lords, with the great
Treasurour, and a magistrate whom they call chief Justice of England. Now I
doubt not but that in every Commonweal, many by vain ambition, favor,
impudency, or corrupt briberie, in sort even against the Prince and peoples
will find means to enter into the sacred Senate; against which inconvenience
remedy might be well provided, if we would but use Solons law. For he would
have none to be admitted into the Senate of the Areopagits, but such as had

And thus much concerning the number of Counselors of estate: let us now also
breefly speak of them that are to propound matters in the Senate; and then of
such Who they be that ought to propound matters in the Senate or counsel.
things as are there also to be propounded. As touching the first, men of
ancient time have always had great regard unto the quality of them which
were to propound Titus Liuius speaking of the Achaeans affirms generally of
all the Greeks. But as for A notable custom of the Aetolians in propounding of
matters in their Senate.
the Aetolians, their custom was most notable, worthy to be of all men
regarded, being highly commended and approved by Philipemen general of the
Achaean league; which was, that the presiden^, or he which in full council
propounded any thing which seemed unto himself good, should therein have no
voice himself. A great The custom of Genes discommended.
where none but the duke alone has power to propound in the Senate that which
pleases himself. For beside the difficulty of speaking with the duke on
every side beset, and troubled with infinite affairs, and to lay before his
eyes a thousand diverse reasons for the debating of the matter in the council:
it is also dangerous to give so great authority to one person, that he may
open or keep secret to or from the Senate, whatsoever himself pleases; it
being not lawful for any man to propound any matter but himself. It is also
much perilous one citisen, who first delivers his opinion to be of The
laudable custom for the propounding of matters used in France.
of France, that it is permitted to all them which have access into the
council (although they therein have neither deliberatiue voice nor place)
every man to propound his own requests, and to advertise the council of that
which is profitable for the Commonweal; to the end it may be the better
provided for. And oftentimes their opinion is also thereof demanded, and then
afterward the advice of the counselors of the estate, which in council have
place and deliberatiue voice, in such sort and order, as that the great lords
deliver their opinions last; to the end, that the liberty of the lesser should
not be impaired by the authority of the greater princes or magistrates, and
especially Vidimus curtam elinguem, in * Plinius junior in pan^girico.
qua dicere quod velles periculosum: quod nolles miserum esset, We have seen
(says he) the court dombe, wherein to speak that thou would was
dangerous; and to say that thou would not, was a thing right miserable: For
that the emperor Dometian, (vnus solus censebat quod omnes sequerentur) alone
decreed what all men should follow: and commends Traian (quod eo rogante,
sententias libere dicere liceret, vinceretque sententia non prima, sed melior)
for that he propounding of matters, every man might freely speak his mind:
and that opinion prevailed not which was first, but best. By the custom of the
ancient Hebrews, the king refrained from coming into the Senate, least any
should be contrary unto him, or he to any; for so they writ in their
Commentaries.

It were also to be wished, that the Council should sit in the morning yet
fasting, for that is not to be holden for a council well disgested, which is
done after dinner, as The fiittest time for counselours to sit in council
says Philip de Commines, and especially in countries where the people are
subject unto wine. Solomon detesteth those princes, who when they ought in the
morning to feed their mind with religious contemplation of high and divine
matters, do with full feeding pamper the inordinat desire of their languishing
and broken lust, and with new nourishment kindle the fire of new desires: Which
he in three words declares, Woe (says he) unto princes which cate early. Which
is a thing so much the more to be detested, by how much many think it to be
the greatest bravery, to be well whitled with wine. For what can be more
beastly than was the old manner of the Germans, who never used to consult of
their greatest affairs but in midst of their cups persuaded so that every
one of them warm with wine, should discover the very secret of his heart, and
to be the What things are in the Senate or council of the state to be chiefly
consulted of.
sufficient cause for the judge to revoke them being so made. Now as concerning
such things as are to be consulted of in the Senate, they depend of such
occasions and affairs, as in course of time present themselves. The ancient
Romans first consulted of matters concerning their religion, as the mark and
end whereat all humane actions ought both to begin and end. There was never
also, says Polybius (he himself being an Atheist) a people more devout than
this: adioining thereunto moreover, That by means of religion they had
established unto themselves the greatest monarchy in the world. Then A good
rule by the ancient well observed in all their consultations for matters of
state.
hasty resolution. In which case, as in all things doubtful, the ancients had
a rule which suffered no great exception, which was, That we ought not to do,
neither to council any thing to be done, whereof we doubt whether it be just or
iniust, profitable or hurtful; or if the harm that may ensue be greater than
the profit that may come of the enterprise that is to be taken in hand: but if
the harm be evident, and the profit doubtful, or contrariwise, there is then
no deliberation to be had or doubt made which to choose. viz. That when question
is of matters of estate, things doubtful, or subject to the change of fortune,
Things doubtful or subject to fortune, in consultation of matters of state not
to be at al embrased.
are not at al to be embraced. And therefore the subtiller sort, cause the^ that
be more simple, to propound and persuade in council such things as seem unto
themselves doubtful; to the intent that so the blame may rest upon them, if
things fall out evil: and yet the honor redound unto themselves if it fall out
well. Howbeit nothing ought to be Nothing ought of right to be praised by the
events.
thought commendable and well done, which depends of the event. For it
behooves us by most certain arguments and reasons to show wherefore this or
that is to be done, to be more commended or blamed, than the good or evil end
of men's actions: and Thomas Moore, To propound the day before what was in the
Senate to be resolved on the day following; to the end that such deliberations
might the better be disgested: provided for all that, That question be not of
the particular interest of any of them which have voice in the council: for in
that case it is diuidere sententiam, and so to cause the Senators to pass and
repasse from one side to another. Into which difficulties the Venetians
falling, are oftentimes constrained to leave their secret voices given by lots,
and to give the same by word of mouth; which they use to do, when question is
of the life, fame, or fortune of any man, according to the manner of the ancient
Greeks and Romans; a thing which cannot by secret voices, by lot, without
injustice be done, for the infinite variety of cases which may present
themselves to be judged upon. Now as the Senate of a Commonweal is not bound to
the certain That the Sena^ ought not to intermedie with the jurisdiction of
the magistrate.
hearing and deciding of causes, so ought it not to trouble it self with
intermedling with the jurisdiction of the magistrates, except it be in the
controversies of the greatest Tiberius the emperor, in the beginning of his
reign protested in the Senate, That he would not alter any thing in the course
of justice, neither have to do with the jurisdiction of the ordinary
magistrates. And they which make a confusion of a Senate and privy council, do
greatly diminish the dignity and honor thereof, for that it ought to be
regarded as to confirm the princes actions, and wholly to attend the public
affairs: work enough to busy a senate, except it be when question is of the
life or honor of the greatest lords and princes, or of the punishment of
cities, or other such causes of like consequence and importance, as may well
deserve the assembly of the Senate; as in ancient time the Roman Liuius lib. 26
Liuie.

Yet rests the last point of our definition, that is to say, that the Senate
is established What power a Senate or counsel of stateis of right to have in a
well ordered Commonweal.
to give advise and council to them which have the sovereignty in every
Commonweal. To give advise (I say) and council; for that the Senate in a well
ordered Commonweal, ought not to have power to command, nor to direct out
their mandats, neither to put into execution their aduises and consultations,
but only to make report thereof unto them which have the sovereignty. Now if
a man should ask, Whether there be any Commonweal wherein the Senate has such
power? It is a question but of fact: but if demand were made, whether of right
it ought so to have or not? our

Now if any man think it strange or inconvenient for all other magistrates and
sovereign Why magistrates and soueraign courts have a greater commanding
power then has a Senate or counsel of state.
courts, to have power to command, in their own names to direct out their
commissions, and the Senate that judges of their authority and controversies,
to be deprived of this power: let him consider that unto such magistrates and
courts, power is By the king in his privy council: which can do nothing if
the king be not present or at leastwise confirm the acts of his council. But
we have before showed the power of all magistrates and corporations to cease,
and be suspended in the presence of the Endobalde, county of the Palace of
king Clotoire, who sitting in council with the Senate, was to report the
decrees thereof unto the king, to the end to have them by him either approved
or rejected.

But the doubt is greater, whether the Senate in a Popular or Aristocratique
estate Whether the Senate in a popular or Aristocratique estate ought to have
more power then in a Monarchy.
ought to have more power than in a Monarthie, or not? considering the great
difference there is betwixt one lord and many, or betwixt one prince the
sovereign commander of his people; and an infinite number of men; as in a
Popular estate. Besides that, we read also, that in the Roman Commonweal
(which is holden to have been one of the most flourishing and best ordered
that ever was) the Senate had power to dispose of the common treasure, and
public revenue (one of the greatest points of sovereignty) to appoint
lieutenants and governors of princes, to grant triumphs, and to dispose of
religion. And for this cause Tertullian says, That never any God was received
in Rome, without the decree of the Senate. And as for ambassadors of kings and
Thrasibulus was in Athens accused of treason, as was afterward also Androtian
by What power the Senate or counsel ought to have in a popular or Aristocratique
estate.
Demosthenes. Which order is even at this time better observed and kept at
Venice, than ever it was in Rome or Greece. And yet notwithstanding all this I
say, that the Senate of the Popular or Aristocratique estates ought not to have
but the advice and consultation of matters of state only, the power still
depending of them, which had the sovereignty. And as for that which is said of
the power of the Roman Senate, that That the Senate of Rome had no power to
command in matters of state.
the people of Rome might when it saw good confirm o^ repeal the decrees of
the Senate, which had no power to command, and much less to execute the
decrees thereof; Dionysius Halycarnassaeus has well noted, and Liuie himself
often times using this form of speech, Senatus decreuit, populus iussit, The
Senate decreed, and the people commanded. Wherein Festus Pompeius is deceived,
interpreting the word iussit, commanded, for decreuit, or decreed. So that it
belonged to the Senate to decree, and to the people to command. As when Liuie
speaking of the authority of Scipio Africanus, says, Nutus eius pro decretis
patrum, pro populi iussis esse, His beck was in stead of the Senators decrees,
and the peoples commands. And that the least Tribune of the people, Titus
Liuius: whereby it evidently appears, that the Senate could in nothing
command: and especial by the decree where it is said, That the Consul if he
should think it so good, should present the request unto the people, for the
making of a dictator: and if it pleased not the Consul, then the Praetor of
the city should take that charge upon him: who if he would therein do nothing,
that then one of the Tribunes should do it. The Consuls (says Liuie) would
therein do nothing, and forbad the Praetor also to obey the Senate: Now had the
Senate had so much power to command, as had the Consul, or one of the Tribunes
of the people, it would never have used such kind of speech; neither would the
Consul have forbidden If it should so seem unto them good; or if so it were
their pleasure. So the same man in another place says, Decreuerunt patres vt
Marcus Iunius Praetor vrbanus si ei videretur, Decemuiros agro Samniti,
Appuloque, quoad eius publicum erat metiendo, deuidendoque crearet, The
Senators decreed, that Marcus Iunius, Praetor of the city, if he should think
it so good, should appoint ten men for the measuring and dividing of so much of
the Samnite and Appulian land, as belonged to the Commonweal.

Now if any man should say that these words, Si ei videretur (if it should so
seem Liuie speaking of the punishment of the Campanians, says, That the
Consul Fuluius having red the decree of the Senate which carried these words:
Integram rem ad Senatum reijceret si ei videretur: interpretatum esse, quid
magis e Republica duceret, aestimationem sibi permissam: That he should, if he
thought it so good, refer the whole matter unto the Senate: to have so
interpreted the decree, as if the matter had been committed to his discretion,
to deem what he should think best and most expedient therein to do for the
Commonweal: at which time question was of the lives and goods of all the
Campanians, part of whom the Consul of himself without farther authority
from the Senate caused to be put to death, and the rest to be sold by the drume.
But that The dignity of the great magistrates in the Roman Commonweal
greater then the dignity* of the Senate.
if they therein comprehended the Magistrates also, they still placed them in
order before the Senate; as is manifest by the inscription of their letters, in
this sort; Cn. Plancus Imp. Cos. desig. S. P. D. Coss. Pret. Tribb. pleb.
Senatui, Populo, plebique Romano: Cn. Plancus General, Consul elect, unto the
Consuls, Pretors, Tribunes of the people, the Senate, People, and Comminaltie of
Rome sends greeting. Wherefore Cicero does but orator like taunt Vatinius,
when he says, Art not thou a most certain murderer of thy country? thou
leftest not unto the Senate, that which never man took from it; that Legates
should be appointed by the authority of that order. And he in * Liuie ^ib. 28.
when as he speaks of Triumphs, saying, It was never before by the people
determined of triumphs, the estimation and bestowing of that honor having
always been with the Senate: no not the kings themselves to have impaired the
majesty of that order: he speaks (I say) but like an orator: for that there
was nothing which might not be taken from the Senate, the magistrate propounding
a request to the contratie unto the people: as we have by examples before
declared. But how soever the Senate for the maintenance of the authority
thereof made decrees, yet could it not command or put in execution any of
those things that were by it decreed: neither had it so much as any Lictors or
Sergeants, the true marks of them which have power to Caesar, took their
refuge to that ancient decree of the Senate, which was commonly made but in the
dangerous times of the Commonweal, viz. Videant Consules ac caeteri
Magistratus ne quid detrimenti capiat Respublica: Let the Consuls and other
magistrates foresee that the Commonweal take no harm: with which decree of the
Senate (says Caesar) the Consuls armed, suddenly raised their power and took up
arms against Caesar: by which words it appears, authority to have The great
power in the Tribunes of Rome.
of the people once opposed himself against the decree of the Senate, not only
the authority of the Senate, but of the Consuls and other magistrates also
ceased. And for that cause there were ordinarily some of the Tribunes at the
gate of the Senate, (before that the law Atinia gave them entrance into the
Senate house) unto whom the decrees of the Senate were brought and showed, for
them to confirm by writing over them this letter T, or reject by putting
thereunto this word Veto, that is to say, I forbid it. So that the Senate did
nothing but by sufferance of the people, or of the Tribunes, who were as it
were espials of the Senate, and keepers of the liberty of the people, having
always free power to take exception to whatsoever was decreed, if the people
by express Tiberius Graccus Tribune of the people, giving leave unto the Senate
for that year to dispose of the Consularie provinces, with express
prohibition unto the Tribunes for the opposing of themselves, for that time
only. For after that time the people often times gave the provinces and
governments, without the advice or authority of the Senate. Now to say that the
Senate had the disposing of the common treasure, true it is, but that was but
upon sufferance, and so long as it pleased the people; as we may see by the law
Sempronia, whereby the people decreed that the soldiers should be apparelled
of the charge of the common treasure. And he that has no power but by

But here again a man may say, that if the Senate in body or lawful assembly
had What an authority was among the Romans.
no power to command, there was then no difference betwixt the decrees of the
Senate, and that which they call The authority: for so it was that if there
were less then four hundred Senators, by the decree of Augustus, (who were
afterward brought to the number of fifty) that they agreed upon, was called an
Authority, but not a Decree Dionysius Halicarnasseus has well written; and
not perpetual as Conan supposes.

But how then (might some man say) did the Senate cause three hundred soldiers
citisens of Rome, which remained of the Legion that had sacked Rhegium in
Sicilie where they were left in garrison, to be led away, and being stripped and
beaten, to be all afterward beheaded before the people, without any regard had
unto the opposition of the Tribunes, or appeals of the condemned, most
miserably crying out, the sacred laws to be therein broken and trodden under
foot. But herein question was of military discipline, which in that respect
has nothing common with domestical laws and Martial discipline respects
not the common or domestical laws.
customs. Beside that it was done but by the advice of the Senate, the
execution thereof attempted to infringe the sovereignty of the people, or to
break the laws, as often times Caius Cornelius Tribune of the people, made a
request unto the people, that the Senate from that time forward, should not
decree any thing against the liberty of the people, and the majesty thereof:
it sufficiently declares the Senate often times before contrary unto the law, to
have usurped the rights of sovereignty: howbeit therein is not to be respected
what was done, but what of right ought to have been done. Howbeit it is
manifest, that the Senate in the latter times thereof had power to make laws:
but then it had left off to be a Senate, and was then become rather an ordinary
court of judges. And yet the magistrates themselves, as the Praetors, the
Aediles, yea and the famous lawyers also made a great part of the Roman law,
albeit that they had no power

But whereas we said, It was not lawful without the priuitie of the Senate, to
propound any request unto people, that indeed was so provided by the law
Popilia and Hortensia: yet was it lawful always without the priuitie of the
Senate, to propound Populi ac Plebis Romanae, (the People and Comminaltie of
Rome) and especially the Greeks, and such as ignorant of the Roman antiquity,
interpret the Greek writers.

That is also worth the noting, that albeit that the request which the
magistrates were about to propound unto the people, were disliked of the Senate,
yet might they nevertheless lawfully move the same unto the people, after they
had once made the Senate acquainted therewith. The same may serve also for an
answer to that which Josephus Moses forbad the king to deny any thing
concerning the public, without the advice of the Senate, and the high priest
(howbeit that this article is not to be found in all the law) yet thereof it
follows not, that the king was thereby of necessity bound to follow their
advise. For albeit that the Roman emperors term themselves the principal
Senators, or chief of their council; yet Why the Romain emperors sometime
called the Senators their companions, or good lords.
such additions in nothing diminished their majesty. Yea albeit that they
called the Senators their companions, or good lords and masters; as did
Tiberius, who in the beginning of his reign called the Senators,
Indulgentissimos dominos, His most loving Lords, as we read in Tacitus. But how
much princes gave unto the Senate, and the Senate Pliny the younger does in two
words (as it were) declare; where he thus speaks of a certain decree of the
Senate, Voluntati tamen principis sui, cui in nulla re fas putaret repugnare, in
hac quoque re obsequi, but to obey the will of their prince, whereunto they
thought it not lawful in any thing to resist, even so in this this thing also
to show themselves obedient.

And further also, the Senators or Counselors of the estate, to speak
properly are no where accounted either as officers or commissioners: neither in
Viz France. Senators neither officers nor commissioners.
this realm are they by any law, or edict, or charter of the kings made
counselors, but only by a short brief without any seal, signed with the
kings hand, expressing in few words, that the king during his pleasure gives
them place and deliberatiue voice in his council. But

Now if any man ask, Why a Senate in a well ordered Commonweal, should not For
what reason a Senate in a well ordered Commonweal should not have also power to
command.
have also power to command? The principal reason is, for that if it should
have power to command also what it had in council decreed, the sovereignty
should rest only in the council: and so the counselors of the estate, in
stead of counselors should there of become masters, having the mannaging of
the affairs, and power to dispose of all at their pleasure; a thing impossible
to be done, without the impairing, or to say better the utter subversion of all
sovereignty and majesty: which is so high and so sacred, as That the Senato^
counsel of estate ought to be perpetual, and not every year changed: with
the dangers that ensue of such yearly change
as also to aspire higher. Howbeit I am not of opinion so to have the
councillors of estate changed and rechanged; but rather to have them
perpetual, as they were of ancient time at Rome, Lacedemonia and Pharsalia,
and yet are in Polonia and Geneua. For the yearly changing which they made in
Athens, and yet make in Venice, Rhagusium, Luques, Genes, Nuremberg, and diverse
other towns of Germany, does not only greatly obscure the glory of the
Senate, which ought to shine as the sun, but also draws after it the
inevitable danger of disclosing and publishing of the secrets of Peter Soderin
their Gonfalonier (and a chief man in the reforming of their estate) decreed,
That all the Senate of fourscore, should from six months to six months be
removed; excepting such as had before been Gonfaloniers or chief officers in
the Commonweal, whom they appointed perpetual Senators, of purpose to
instruct the other new Senators in the affairs of state. The same order they
of Genes are feign also to take in their mutable common Senate, wherein such as
have been dukes and Syndics are perpetual Senators. Wherein the Rhagusians are
better provided of their Senate than are the Venetians, whose example they seem
to have followed in the Solon did; who in the Popular estate of the Athenians
by him framed, appointed a mutable* Senate of four hundred citisens every year
to be changed: but withal he made a perpetual privy Council of the
Areopagits, to the intent, that that mutable Senate, and yearly change of all
the other magistrates might thereupon rest, as upon a most firm and sure stay.
And thus having

CHAP. II. Of the Officers and Commissioners in a Commonweal.
AS in the whole body of the law concerning Commonweales, are contained many
things right fruitful and commodious: so also amongst the rest, the reasoning
and discourse concerning public persons, has always been thought most
profitable: and albeit What an Officer is? what a Commissioner is?
charge by law limited unto him. A Commissioner is a public person, but with
an extraordinary charge limited unto him, without law, by virtue of
commissionely. Which definitions so by us set down that they may become more
plain, it shall not be amiss to make a division of public persons, even from
the first beginning of them. And first I call them public persons, who are to
attend upon the public affairs: A public person who? Two sorts of public
persons.
of whom there are two sorts, one which has power to command, whom they
call Magistrates: and another sort which has no such commanding power, but is
only to understand or to put in execution the commandments of the others;
and are yet all public persons also. Howbeit for all that, all public persons
are not Officers, or Commissioners; as Archbishops, Bishops, and Ministers, are
public persons, and beneficed men rather than Officers: which we must not
mingle together, considering that the one sort is established for matters
divine, and the other for worldly affairs, which ought not to be confounded.
Joining hereunto also, that the establishing of them which are employed in
divine matters, depends not of the politic edicts or laws, as the Officers
do. Let us then see the definitions by us set down, whether

Aristotle says, That a Magistrate is he that has a deliberatiue voice in the
Senate, Aristotle his definition of a Magistrate impugned.
and in judgment, with power also to command. He also calls the magistrate
(...) which is not proper but to them which are of power to command, and
agrees not unto officers that serve, as Vshers, Sergeants, Trumpetors, Scribes
and Notaries, whom he puts into the rank of Magistrates, and yet have no
power to command: so that this definition is in that respect too short.
Besides that, it is a thing more absurd, that he should not be a Magistrate,
which has no entrance into the privy council, neither yet deliberatiue
voice, nor power to judge: for if it were so, there should be but few
magistrates in all Commonweales, considering that there are so few conncellors
of the privy council in well ordered Commonweales, and among them not one
which has

And as for the lawyers, there be but few of them which have touched this
string: The lawiers definitions of magistrates censured.
and namely doctor Iouean confesses, That it always seemed unto him an hard
thing, rightly to define a Magistrate. And indeed in the definition of a
Magistrate by him made he is deceived: For he says, That a Magistrate is he to
whom the prince has given any charge* in which sense and sort all
Commissioners should be magistrates. But D. Cuiacius* beside the definition of
Aristotle, promises to bring three others: A Magistrate (says he) is a public
person, who has pre-eminence in doing of justice; or he which sits in
seat of justice; or else he which has jurisdiction and public judgment:
Aristotle. Which is directly against the Maxims of all Philosophy, and
contrary to the principles of Logike, that one should give more than one
definition to one thing: and is also impossible by nature. But if any say, That
many descriptious may be given of one and the same thing, for that the
accidents are many which are in one thing: true it is, but an hundred
descriptions cannot declare and make manifest the substance or nature of a
thing: Which in the Art of reasoning is a great fault: but in the knowledge of
the law much greater, and especially in the matter of Magistrates and officers,
which is the entrance of the law, where the lawyers begin. For the principal
mark The principal mark whereby a magistrate is known.
whereby a Magistrate is known, which is, To have power to command; is in
these Lentulus the Great Bishop, made relation unto the Senate, of the decrees
of the college of Bishops, and the law Clodia, concerning the consecration The
ancient bishops in Rom^ no magistrates* and why.
of Ciceroes house, thus he began his speech, Pontifices religionis sunt
iudices, legis Senatus, The Bishops (said he) are judges of religion, and the
Senate of law. So do the Cadies, or Mahometane Bishops in the East; and yet for
all that they are no magistrates, considering that they had or have no power to
command, nor to call men before them, to imprison them, or to put their own
judgments in execution: neither quaestores parricidij, had (as at this present
Commissioners appointed by the prince have) power to hear the cause, to sit in
justice, to judge, to command, to compel, and yet for all that were no
magistrates. Which being so, none of the aforesaid definitions can be good.
Besides that there is another fault in them, for not having distinguished the
magistrates Carolus Sigonius, who seems more curiously to have searched into
the definition of a Magistrate, is yet therein many ways also deceived: For he
calls all them magistrates which have any public charge of worldly affairs,
without making of any difference between officers and commissioners, or
betwixt the magistrates and other officers, which have also public charge;
besides that he gives power to al magistrates, to judge, to command, and to
put in execution, even unto the Aruspises. Howbeit as a definition ought not to
extend farther, or less way, than does the thing that is defined: so

Now in the definition by our selves proposed, we first said, all officers
(whither they The difference be twixt magistrates and private men, as also
betwixt magistrates and commissioners.
were magistrates, or magistrates servants) to be public persons: who in that
differ from private men: for that private men have nothing to do with the
affairs of the Common weal. We said also the Magistrates to have an ordinary
charge, whereby to differ from Commissioners, who have also public charge,
but yet extraordinary, according to the occasions in the occurents of time
presented: such as were in ancient time the Dictators, criminal Quaestors,
and other judges extraordinarily by the people of Rome appointed, at the motion
and request of the Magistrates. And last of all we Offices not to be erected,
but by express edict, or law.
said, their ordinary charge to be to them by law limited and bounded: for
the erection of their public ordinary charges, erected by the name of
offices, which otherwise should be no offices, if there were not for them an
express edict or law. A thing always observed in the ancient Commonweales
both of the Greeks and Latins; and now also better than ever: and to this end
Princes cause their edicts to be published, in their sovereign and inferior
courts: and in this realm of France, the charters of offices newly erected
are sealed with green wax, with labels of green and red silk, and this
style, viz. To all men present and to come, with a continuance perpetual:
whereas the letters pattents of commissions, are sealed with yellow wax, with a
labell of plain parchment, without any perpetuity. And albeit that all
Corporations and Colleges Offices to be perpetual although that the officers
oftentimes change.
that is to be understood of the perpetuity of the offices, which continue for
ever after they be once by edict erected, (what time soever it be that is
prescribed unto the officers themselves,) until that by contrary edicts or
laws the same offices be again put Laws never awhit the stronger for being
written
whose office is perpetual, albeit that their command last but for one day.
But howsoever it be that offices be erected with ordinary and public charge,
it must still be Lycurgus forbad to be written, and were for that cause called
Rhetes: for so he was persuaded that they should the rather remain inuiolat
and of long continuance, if they were once writ in the hearts of his citisens,
and not in tables, in their minds, and not in books. The Athenians in like
case had a certain form of presenting their requests unto the people, which
if the people received, it then passed into the force of a law: which they used
to ingraue in brass, and Antigonus and Demetrius, the law for the erection of
them was published unto the people: which was also done in the erection of all
other offices as is to be seen in Thucydides, Plutarch, and Demosthenes. Al
offices in Rome erected by one or other express law.
The like is to be said of the Roman magistrates: for the Consuls were created
by the law Iunia: and the Tribunes of the people by the law Duillia: and when
question was for the creating of one of the Consuls out of the people, it was
done by the law Licinia. And afterward the Praetor for the administration of
justice in the city was made by the law Sextia. And the four Praetors for
public criminal causes, (beside Justinian it appears where every magistrate
has his particular Edict.

We have put also into our definition of an Officer, that he must have an
ordinary An officer always has an ordinary charge, and in that he differs
from ^ commissioner whose charge is always extraordinary.
charge, for that the commands of the people of Rome granted by commissions
and extraordinary charges were as well called by the name of Laws, as were
those that were made for ordinary offices: the charge, the time, and place
being still limited by commission: as a man may see by the commissions granted
unto the Dictators, Pompee for five years, therein to end the Pirates war:
with command over all the coasts and haven towns of the Mediterranean Sea,
all granted unto him by the law Gabinia. As also by commission given him for
the war against king Mithridates, granted by the law Manilia. But forasmuch
as these were not but extraordinary charges, a man could not call them
offices, which are still ordinary and perpetual. And for because those wars
were in short time to be ended, it was not meet therefore to create a new
magistrate, whose office and charge should be perpetual, but only
extraordinarily to commit the care of that war unto Catulus: to the intent
that Pompee in that time might end the war, and not longer to protract it to
be so always in employment: Or if the war were sooner ended, that then his
commission should end also. And all such extraordinary charges we call by the
name of Commission. The Dictatorship was also a charge given by commission, and
not an ordinary power: for why, the Dictator was not but extraordinarily and
without law nominated by the Interrex or Consul, some great matter so
requiring: and for that all offices ceased the Dictator being created, his
commission was limited but unto six months at the most, and if he had sooner
dispatched the business for which he was appointed Dictator, his commission
then also expired, and his authority ceased; as we have by many examples
before declared. And as a man Liui^ lib. ^.
Aemilius Mamercus, who chosen Dictator, and the same day having dispatched the
business for which he was chosen, the very next day following gave up his
charge: showing therein how little he liked of long rule or authority. Howbeit
such is the nature and power of all Commissions, as that according to the
pleasure of Commissions to depend of the pleasure of him or them that have the
sovereignty in the state.
him that has the sovereignty, they may be either revoked or proroged. And
albeit that commissions in Popular and Aristocratique Commonweales are almost
still li mitted unto a certain time: yet in a Monarchy that extraordinary
and permissiue charge is tied to no time at all: for why, in Popular and
Aristocratique estates and governments, the greater the charge is given by
commission, the more need it is to The greater the charge is that is given by
com mission the shorter time it ought to endure.
minds to take unto themselves the government, and so to oppress the liberty
of the state. And therefore the dictatorship was but for six months, neither
was that power ever longer proroged to any man in that free Commonweal, except
to Furius Camillus. For at such time as the people of Rome had extraordinarily
created the Decemuiri with a yearly and sovereign power, for the reforming of
their old laws and customs, and the making of new and more commodious for the
state: their commission Large and long commissions dangerous to the state.
which should not have passed, a year being expired, was again by the people
for another year proroged, with absolute and sovereign power: and all other
magistrates suspended during the time of their commission; until that out of the
best laws of other John was taken prisoner by the Englishmen: For then Charles
the fifth having gotten of his father the government of the kingdom, appointed
fifty commissioners for the reforming of the Commonweal, with power to
examine the doings and abuses of all the other magistrates, from whom as then
all power was taken. At which time the Commonweal

But the better and the more easily to understand the difference betwixt an
office and The difference betwixt an office and a commission.
a commission, a man may in some sort say, that an office is a thing borrowed,
which the owner cannot demand again before the time it was lent for be
expired: but a commission is a thing which one has but by sufference, end as
it were by leave, which the owner may again demand when he sees good. And
that is it for which Tacitus merrily speaking of the reign of Galba, which
continued but three months, says, Praecarium seni imperium, and breui
transiturum, The old man's empire was but by sufference old deeree of parliament
yet extant in the records of the court of Paris, against the purseuants

I stand longer upon this point, which although it may seem easy unto men of
experience, yet unto others it may seem strange: yea two of the greatest
orators of their time, namely Demosthenes and Aeschines grounded the state of
their orations and pleas upon this point. For when Ctesiphon had presented a
request unto the people, That it would please them, that Demosthenes for his
good deserts toward the Commonweal (and namely for having most strongly
fortified the walls and castles of the city of Aeschines Demosthenes his
greatest enemy, opposed himself against the entertainment of the request,
alleging for the cause thereof, That by the law no man was to be rewarded,
except he had first given an account unto the people of his office well
discharged, as all magistrates were bound to do. Demosthenes for that it
concerned his own honor and reputation, taking the matter in hand, made of
all others a most excellent oration for Ctesiphon, or more truly to say, for
the crown he would have had, alleging, That the law spoke not but of
Magistrates; and that charge of repairing and fortifying of the walls and other
fortresses, was no magistracy or office, but only a simple commission; and
therefore in his vulgar tongue says, (...). To fortify is no magistracy but
a certain charg and ministry.
Which the Latins properly called Curatio, which is to say a Commission.
Whereby it appears, that public charge, for repairing of the walls, not to
have been an ordinary matter, but extraordinary, for that there is not still
need for to repair them. Neither ought it to seem strange, if Demosthenes
well knew to distinguish and put a difference betwixt a commission and an
office (as having been of long time exercised in the public affairs, and as
it were in the midst of the Commonweal) both which Aristotle altogether
confounded. The one of them also having always managed the affairs of state;
and the other as says Laertius, never intermedling therein. And that is it for
which Nicholaus Grouchius, and Carolus Sigonius, for not having understood the
difference betwixt an office and a commission, have so much troubled

In the laws of Charlemaigne Commissioners were called missi, a mittendo; which
signifies sent; which the Germans call by an old word Skaken: whereof they
called the court of judges, which were extraordinarily sent into the provinces
(and were indeed nothing else but Commissioners) Scacarium. But here perhaps
may some man say, That the Commissioners of the castle of Paris, and judges of
the court of Requests of the Palace, are also officers: which being so, how
could it then be, that an office and a commission should not be also all one?
Whereunto I answer, That of ancient time Commissioners turned into judges, and
yet still known by the name of commissioners
those judges were but simple commissioners, with authority and power during
pleawho yet afterward for the common good and profit were made perpetual
officers, with an ordinary and perpetual charge and power committed unto them
them: their old and former name of commissioners, yet by abuse or for the honor
of that court still remaining: whereby those judges of the court of Requests,
are yet called the Commissioners of the Parliament; as judges appointed, and
again to be revoked at the pleasure of the prince. Which judges of the court
of Requests (for all that) cannot now be revoked by the king himself, except
they first be by capital judgment condemned, or willingly of themselves
resign their places: for so it was by the law Jews the eleventh provided. Not
for that commission is incompatible with an office, most part of compassions
being not directed but unto magistrates or officers: but for that an officer in
the quality of an officer, cannot be also a commissioner, for the self same
charge limited unto him by his office. For such commissions as they call
Excitatiues, extraordinarily directed unto officers for matters concerning the
reviving the jurisdiction, or authority of their offices, are not properly
commissions, if the time or the place be not by the commission altered; as to
judge according to the latter proceedings, and to leave the former: for after
that the time and order appointed by the law, is altered by the authority of
the prince or magistrate, it is to be now determined by commission. Now the
difference herein which the lawyers hold, is nota^le, as* That if any officer
Extraordinary commissions extenuating the authority of the magistrate odiou^.
manifest, extraordinary commissions extenuating the power and authority of
magistrates or officers to be odious, or at leastwise less gracious, if they
be not for the reforming and amending of the abuses and corruption of the
officers. As they do in Venice, from five years to five years: And every
year in Genes, where the Sindies are afterward Commissioners, to hear the
abuses committed by the magistrates and officers (which in ancient time in
Athens was given to certain ordinary magistrates) as also at Rome by the law
Bebia* when as before Quaestors or judges were by commission appointed by the
people. That extraordinary hearing of causes of the judges by commission, was
also gracious; which Vespasian the emperor appointed for the hearing Charles
the ninth, having directed his letters patents, in the year 1570, for the
general reformation of the waters and forests of Normandy, which drew after
it question of the fairest of his demaine; from the hearing whereof the
precedent and counselors of the parliament of Roan were forbidden: Which
interiection although they left nothing unattempted to have let, yet so it
was, that in fine they agreed thereunto, after that I had again

But briefly, and yet more plainly and plentifully to make plain all sorts of
Commissioners, whether they be for the government of provinces, or for the
wars; or Diverse sorts of commissioners, and from whom they have their
commissions.
for the administration of justice, or for the kings receipts and treasure, or
other things concerning the state. We say, that the commissions come still from
the sovereign prince, or from the magistrates, or from commissioners deputed by
the sovereign

This division extends to all Commissioners, in what form of Commonweal
soever it be. As is to be seen in the state of the Romans, where the mannaging
of the wars, and government of the countries and provinces newly conquered,
at the first belonged unto the ordinary magistrates and officers, viz. the
Consuls, Praetors, and Quaestors, yea even a good way from the city, whilst
that the Roman empire was yet The gouernour^ of the provinces in the Roman
empire nothing but commissioners
contained within the bounds of Italy: But after that the bounds thereof were
extended Potestates, yet for all that they governed the provinces in stead of
Consuls, Praetors, and Quaestors: they were also called Proconsuls,
Propraetors, Proquaestors, that is to say, Commissioners, or Lieutenant sent in
stead of Consuls, Praetors, or Quaestors: As is in Liuie to be seen, who
speaking of Philo the first Proconsull says, Actum cum Tribunis Plebis est, ad
populum ferrent vt cum Philo Consulatu abijsset, pro consule rem gereret, The
tribunes of the people were dealt with, that they would move it unto the
people, that when Philo was out of his consulship he might rule as proconsul.
But after that C^mparare inter se, and sortiri: Except the charge and
commission were of such consequence and importance (by reason of some great
war already risen, or like to arise in the province) as deserved to have
some valiant and great captain without lot thereunto by the Senate appointed:
Where if any partaking or factions chanced to arise about the matter, the
people at the request of the Tribunes appointed one thereunto by commission. As
it did Scipio Africanus, to whom the people gave commission for the mannaging
of the wars in Spain and Affrike, and by that means drew Hannibal Paulus
Aemylius, to make war against Perseus king of Macedon. And so also to the
great captain Pompey against the pirates, by the law Gabinia, and against king
Mithridates, by the law Manilia: all they which the year before had borne
office, being rejected, the people naming whom they pleased and best liked.
Howbeit that this was no usual matter, but right seldom times done: For
ordinarily the Consuls, Praetors, and Quaestors discharged, and so going our of
their offices in the cities, cast lots for the provinces, if they could not
otherwise agree for the government of them among themselves: The cause of the
civil war betwixt ^illa and Marius.
and for that the charge of the war against Mithridates by lot fell unto Cor.
Sylla, Marius by the working of Pub. Sulpitius, one of the Tribunes by him
suborned, caused it to be by the people taken from him; and by extraordinary
commission given unto himself: which was the cause of the most cruel and
bloody civil war that ever was in Rome. So also was the province
extraordinarily appointed unto Cato Vticensis, against Ptolomee king of Cyprus;
which by him undertaken, Clodius boasted, That he had plucked out Catoes tongue,
which had always before been at liberty to speak against extraordinary
powers and commissions. Sometime also if the horriblenesse of some enormious
fact required a more severe trial, the matter was propounded unto the people,
who put it over by commission unto the Senate; which out of the Lucius Tubullus
the Praetor, had with grievous extortion most filthily polluted the Tribunal
seat, and perverted justice; so that the people leaving the ordinary course,
and the magistrates to whom the hearing of the matter belonged, referred it
wholly unto the Senate by extraordinary commission: the Senate forthwith deputed
Cn. Scipio to judge and end the cause. So also when Tiberius the emperor by
commission appointed the Senate to enquire of the murders committed betwixt the
Nucerians and Neapolitans: the Senate deputed the Consuls to enquire thereof. Yea
sometime the senate without commission from the people, but as it were by mere
sovereignty appointed commissioners, if the case in question were committed in
Italy, Polybius: as it happened in a strange robbery and murder, whereof
Cicero speaks in his book De Claris Oratoribus; to the hearing whereof (he
says) the Senate deputed the Consuls. By which examples here before produced,
it appears Whether commisioners appointed by the prince, or people having
the sovereignty, may appoint their Deputies and so commit the matter to others.
that Commissioners appointed by the prince, or people having the sovereignty,
whether they be magistrates or private men, may appoint their deputies, and so
commit the matter to others, if it be not expressly forbidden them by their
commission so to do; or that question be of the estate it self in the
commission: as the ambassadors or Commissioners which are to entreat of peace,
or alliance, or other such like things cannot commit the same to others. As is
also to be said if question be of the life, ^ame, or Justinian the emperor
afterward ordained better by form of a perpetual edict, That Commissioners
appointed by the prince, should depute nothing of their commission to others
more than the instructions of the suit: neither thought he that sufficient, but
decreed also, that the Commissioners appointed by the prince should themselves
hear the appeal, and instructions of the suit. But to meet with all that is
to be met with, the most sure rule is to have all that is committed, particularly
in the commission, expressed,

And albeit that a man might make many questions concerning commissions
granted, as well by the sovereign prince, as by the magistrates, in time both
of peace and war: yet will I thereof touch but two or three, and those most
necessary to be understood of them which have the managing of the affairs of
state, whether it be in peace or war. Wherefore leaving the rest, and to be
brief: we say that the Diverse wai^ whereby commissioners cease.
commission cease by the death of him that granted the same, or by his
reuoking of the commission: or in case that the commissioner during the time of
the commission, obtain some office or preferment equal to him that granted
the commission: Whether the acts of a commissioner done after his commission
revoked, and yet before he had knowledge of the reuocation thereof, be good or
not?
declared by the princes letters or edicts, concerns as well them which are
ignorant of such reuocation of their authority and commission, as them which
know it. And albeit that the acts of a commissioner so revoked, done after the
reuocation of the commission, and yet before the knowledge of such a reuocation
to him given, hold for good but in regard of particular men, toward whom the
commissioner has executed his commission; and especially, if they have
voluntarily yielded unto the commissioner, knowing the commission to be
already revoked: and that toward others the acts of the commission after the
reuocation of the commission, are of none effect by the rigor of the law, yet
equity and reason binds them thereunto, until that the Celsus says, that
the acts of the governor of a province are good and available, if the
commissioner know not that his commission is called in. And although Pope
Innocent were of opinion, that it was otherwise to be judged, if question were
of life or honor, and was therein of many followed, yet he continued not in
that opinion. And albeit that he was a pope A good decree of Pope Innocent the
fourth.
and sovereign prince, and a man most skillful in both the laws, yet willed
he no greater authority to be given unto his writings than to other men's,
neither to rest thereon A die qua rescriptum Significabitur, From the day that
the rescript shall be notified: which clause if it be omitted, yet is it
always necessarily to be understood. And thus much concerning the express
reuocation of a commission.

So also a Commission takes end by the death of him that granted it, be he
Whether a commission always takes end by the death of him that granted it?
prince or magistrate; provided always, that the thing committed be yet whole
and entire: for otherwise the commissioner may continue that which he has
begun, so that it be done without fraud. But it is fraud in law, when a
Commissioner not advertised of his predecessor, although he died, the matter
yet whole and entire, and the

Now, that we have already said of Commissioners, has no place in officers,
for Whether the power of officers and together with the death of the prince?
that their power ends not together with the death of the prince, although it
be in some sort holden in sufferance, and as it were suspended until they
have letters from the new prince, or confirmation from him for the continuance
of their offices. And for this cause the parliament of Paris after the death of
king Jews the eleventh, decreed that the officers should continue in their
charge, as they had before done, until that they received command to the
contrary from the new king; following therein an ancient Charles the seventh,
otherwise decreed than had the parliament of Paris, viz. That all their
jurisdiction should cease, until they had received new commandment from the
new king; and yet that if any occurrents should chance wherein the authority
of the court should be requisite, that then the court should proceed by letters
and commissions, entitled The people holding the Parliament royal of
Toulouse, firmed with the seal of the court, without any mention making of the
king. But forasmuch as the king coming unto his kingdom by right of
succession, uses his majesty before he be consecrated; as it was judged by a
decree of the parliament of Paris, the nineteenth of April, in the year 1398
(contrary to the Offices by law established, are not but by contrary edicts
or laws to be put down.
which may still be revoked, or of a charge which cannot be recommaunded, but
is grounded upon a law, received, published, verified, and registered: in such
sort as that his office cannot be suppressed but by a contrary edict or law.
As when question was for the suppressing of the military Tribunes, (for the
discord betwixt the Senate and the people, before created with the power of the
Consuls) and in their steady to restore again the Consuls, it could not be done
until that by the law Licinia, that power of the Tribunes was again taken
away. And in our time when as the fifth and sixth president Charles the ninth, at
the request of the estates of Orleans, in the year 1560, all offices erected
after the death of king Francis his grandfather, were again suppressed. And
often times it happens, that one officer is by one law made; but more often,
that many are made at once: as when threescore sergeants were at once created
by one edict of king Francis the first; and the criminal judges at once
erected throughout the realm by an edict in the year 1527* when as before the

Yet there are other differences also betwixt an officer and a commissioner:
for that The power of an officer or magistrate larger, than the power of a
commission^.
the power of an officer besides that it is ordinary, it is also better
authorized, and larger than is a commissioners, and that is it for which the
Edicts and laws leave many things to the consciences and discretions of the
Magistrates: who indifferently apply and interpret the laws according to the
occurrents and exigence of the causes presented: Whereas viz. That if any thing
else be to be done, the Ambassador shall at his wisdom and discretion,
according to the change of places, times, and persons, have care thereof: much
like unto that clause whereof Aeschines the Orator speaks in the oration
which he made for the defense of his legation; where he says, that this
clause put into the the commission of Ambassadors, viz. full and entier power,
may not yet for all that give, acquit, or alienate any thing, or In matters of
state ^e that goes beyond his commission is worthily blamed, although that
things fall out ^er so well.
self to have well and duly executed his charge, which has done it better
than was to him enjoined, yet in public affairs of the estate it is not
always so: for the Soldier which has assailed the enemy, or the Captain
which has given battle contrary to the Generals command, are both worthy
of death, although they obtain the victory. For what could ever have more
honorably been done, or more worthy eternal praise, than was that which was
done by Fabius, collonell of the horsemen Papyrius Cursor the Dictator? who
with the loss but of an hundred men only, slew twenty thousand of the
enemies; and yet for that he contrary to the Dictators command had joined
battle with the enemy, he was brought in question of his head, neither had so
escaped, had not the Dictator (overcome by the earnest entreating of the
people) so rested contented. And therefore Caesar in like case speaking of one
of his captains called Syllanus, said him to have done well and wisely in not
giving of battle, although he were sure to have carried away the victory: for
that said he it is not the duty of a captain, to do any thing that is by his
General forbidden him. Yea so much it concerns not to do any thing that is
forbidden in matters of war, as that the Lieutenant general to an other man,
ought not to give the enemy battle, except Aiguemond was shrewdly shent of
the Spaniards, for giving battle unto the Mareshall de Terms (although he
therein took him prisoner and discomfited the French army) for that he had
hasarded the whole state of the low Countries, if he had lost the bartell. But
this latter point is to be understood of such as be Lieutenants, or subject to
the command of others, who by virtue, of their office have not power to
command. For an officer, as the Consul, or in his absence his Lieutenant; or
with us the Constable, the Marshall, or other General of the army, placed as
in title of office, to have full and absolute command over the army, and to
manage the war, may by virtue of his office, and without attending any other
special command, make war upon the Large^ commission^ to be given to
generals for the wars in popular commonweals than in Monarchies, and why?
kept, the generals thereof themselves doing almost all; which in a Monarchy
depend of the will and pleasure of one only prince: For why it is more easy
to know the pleasure of the prince, than of the people; of one man, than of
many thousands. As Liuie large commissions by the people given unto the
generals of their wars* as in the wars against the Hetrusceans, all power
was given unto Fabius, Omnium rerum arbitrium and a Senatu, and a populo, and a
collega, Fabio Consuli Commissum, The disposing of all things (says he) was
both of the Senate, and the people, and his fellow in office committed to
Fabius. And in another place, Initio liberum pacis at belli arbitrium
permissum* At the beginning the free disposing of peace and war was committed
unto him. And yet nevertheless they kept this difference betwixt them which
had the mannaging of their wars by virtue of their office, and them which did
the same by commission; as that the Consuls, Praetors, and others, having power
to make war by virtue of their office, might auow and justify their own
actions, Pompey having had commission for the mannaging of the war against
king Mithridate, passing farther made war also against diverse other nations
and people, at his pleasure bestowing the kingdoms, estates, and towns by him
conquered and won: and albeit that the people would infringe or revoke
nothing of that he had done, yet nevertheless after his triumph, he
oftentimes requested the Senate, that those his doings might by it be ratified:
and finding the Senate to make thereof difficulty, and to use therein long
delays; he to strengthen and back himself against his enemies, Caesar, so to
make themselves both of them the stronger. For albeit that he had a general
commission, and that in that case all was at his discretion: and therefore (as
some think) needed no ratification: yet is it not so, the general clauses of
commissions being always to be interpreted and ruled to the best good and
profit of the Commonweal* not in any thing giving power to do that is
hurtful unto the public state; which is not a thing lawful or permitted even
unto a private man to do, having a charge in general terms committed unto
him. Wherefore these words expressed in commissions, be they Governors,
Captains, Judges, or ambassadors (for things to be done) General clauses in
commissions for things to be done according to the description of the
commissioners how they are to be understood?
At their discretion according to their wisdom; or at their will and
pleasure: and others

But to the intent that the force of Commissions and offices may the better be
understood, it shall not be amiss to produce the examples of the ancient
Romans, and to compare their manner of speech in the making of them, with that
of ours. As in How the ancient Romans gave extraordinary power unto their
generals by commission.
that which Festus Pompeius says, Cum imperio esse dicebatur apud antiquos,
cui nomina* tim a populo dabatur imperium, He was said of the auntients to have
power, to whom by name power was by the people given: which is as much as to
say, by express commission, without appeal unto any other magistrate, unto
whom so authorized the law gave power to command: For that a magistracy or
office cannot be wishout power to command. So we see in Liuie, at such time as
Hannibal besieged Rome, Placuit* omnes qui Dictatores, Consules, Censoresue
fuissent cum imperio esse, donec recessisset hostis a muris, that is to say, A
decree was made (or commission given) that all such as had been Dictators,
Consuls, or Censors, should have power and authority to command, until the
enemy were departed from the walls. So Cicero speaking of Augustus Caesar
says, Demus imperium Caesari, sine quo res militar is geri no^ potest, Let us
give (says he) power and authority unto Caesar, without which military
affairs cannot be managed. For why, Octauianus yet but young, could by the law
neither bear office, nor lead the army, much less without power and
authority take upon him a generals charge: and therefore Cicero persuaded,
That the charge for the mannaging of the Cicero has much troubled both
Sigonius and Gruchius. For had Octauianus been either Consul or Praetor, Cicero
would not have used these words, for that he should then by law have had the
power and command of a magistrate.

Beside this, there was also a notable difference betwixt the manner of
propounding The manner of propounding of requests unto the people for the
creating of magistrates and commissioners in ancient time diverse.
the request for the creating of a magistrate, and of a Commissioner: For the
magistrate was usually created by virtue of the laws before made; the magistrate
thus asking the people, Quos vellent Consules fieri, Whom they would to be
made Consuls? and so of the other magistracies and offices being vacant. But
for commissions of command, they used these words, Vellent iuberent vt huic vel
illi imperium esset in hac vel illa prouincia, Scipio Africanus, who had
commission with power to command, although he were not yet of age to bear
office, or to be a magistrate. And Cicero speaking of all sorts of commissions
says, Omnes Potestates, Imperia, curationes, ab vniuerso populo proficisci
conuenit, It beseems al potestats, commands, and commissions, to come from
the body of the whole people. Where by the word Potestates, he understands
the governors of princes, who were properly so called. And by the word
Imperia, Captains, who had particular commission to manage the wars (howbeit
that the word Imperia, is understood also of the civil magistrates) with power
to command. By the word Curationes, is meant all other charges, Imperator,
signifies properly a general or chief captain, as Pliny speaking of
Pompey, Toties Imperator antequam miles, So often a general before he was a
souldior. But generally the word Curatio, imports all sorts of commissions;
as is easily to be gathered by this place of Cicero, Idem transfero in
magistratus, Curationes, Sacerdotia: The same I transfer into magistracies,
Commissions, and Priesthoods; which are the three sorts of public charges.
Vlpian the lawyer allo well distinguishes a magistrate from him whom he
calls Curator republicae, of whom he has made an express book: whom the
law calls by a Greek word (...); who had no power to condemn, nor to
appoint any fine, which was lawful

But it is to be noted, that al commissions pass into the nature of offices,
as often as that How commissions pass into the nature of offices.
is by law made an ordinary charge, which was before done by commission, as we
have by the examples of our own Commonweal before declared. And that which
was before given at the pleasure of the magistrates, becomes also an office,
if he that has the sovereignty does by law establish the same. As in ancient
time the Consuls, as it were by commission made choice of the six Colonels,
whom they called Tribunos militum, until that about 642 years after the
foundation of the city of Rome, it was by an express law (made at the request
of the Tribunes of the people) set down and decreed, That from that time
forward it should be an ordinary office, and the people Perseus, Licinius and
Cassius the Consuls, made a motion unto the people, That the Tribunes, or
Colonels of the soldiers, might for that year be chosen by the Consuls, as
indeed they were. So likewise in ancient time also, the Consuls, Praetors, and
other great magistrates made choice of their slaves and servants for their
vshers, secretaries, sargeants, Trumpetors, and such like; as they did also in
this realm, until the time of Philip the Fair, who was the first that took
this power from the bailiefs and seneschals, and yet leaving unto the lords
justices, power to establish sergeants and notaries

CHAP. III.
A Magistrate is a public officer, which has power to command What a
magistrate is.
in a Commonweal. And an Officer we said to be a kind of public person, who
has an ordinary charge by law appointed unto him. But a Commissioner we said
to be a public person also, with a public, but an extraordinary charge, at
the pleasure of the prince. Now orderly proceeding required that we should
before speak of Commissioners, then of officers; for that they were before any
lawyers or Officers established. For right certain it is, the The first
commonweales governed without laws.
first Commonweales were by sovereign power governed without law, the princes
word, beck, and will, serving in stead of all laws, who both in time of peace
and war, by commissions gave out charge to whom they pleased; and again at
their pleasure revoked the same, all depending of their full and absolute
power, being themselves not bound to any laws or customs at all. And that is
it for which Pomponius writes, the Roman Commonweal to have been at the first
governed by regal power, without use of any law. And Josephus the
historiographer, in his second book against Appian, desirous to show the most
honorable antiquity of the Hebrews, and of their laws, says, That Moses
of all others was the first that ever writ laws. And that in Moses the first
that ever writ laws.
five hundred years after, the word Law was never heard of. Alleging in
proof thereof, That Homer in so many books as were by him written, never uses
this word (...), or Law: a good argument that the first Commonweals used not
but Commissioners, considering that an officer cannot be established without an
express law (as we have said) to give him his ordinary charge, and limited to
a certain time: a thing seeming to diminish from the power of sovereignty.
For which cause kings and princes (ielous of their state and greatness) have
usually annexed unto all their letters pattents of office, an ancient clause
retaining the mark of lordly Monarchy, viz. That the officer should enjoy his
office so long as it stood with the princes pleasure. Whereby it appears the
officers power to depend of the princes power* rather than of order. And albeit
that this clause be to no purpose in the kingdom of France, for that by a law
Jews the eleventh established, ordinary offices and charges, by the prince
once lawfully bestowed, cannot from them on whom they are so bestowed be again
taken, except they have committed some criminal cause worthy of death; and
that in Spain, England, Denmark, Sweden, Germany, Polonia, and all Italy
the like order be observed: yet for all that, the Secretaries of estate never
forget the same: a great argument that all charges and offices were of ancient
time in the nature of commissions; which whither it be profitable unto
Commonweales or not, shall in due plaec be hereafter declared. But let us
before speak of the Magistrate which whaue before defined to be a common or
public officer with power to command.

Now there is no less difference amongst writers betwixt the officer and
magistrate, Al magistrates to be officers but not al officers to be magistrates.
then there is betwixt the officer and commissioner. For albeit that every
Magistrate be an officer, yet every officer is not a magistrate; but only they
be Magistrates which have power to command, which their greek names (...),
and (...) well declare; Al magistrates to have power to command.
as who should say Commanders, and the latin word Magistratus, which is
as much as to say masters and commanders. And for that the Dictator was he
which had the greatest power to command, the ancient writers called him
Magister populi, the word Dictator signifying a Commander; as who should say,
saying the word, and it was done: for that edicere is as much as to command,
which is prope^ unto Magistrates: for that edicts are the Magistrates commands.
Howbeit that many Mar. Varro to be his, say that the Dictator is so called,
quasi dictus ab interrege, as so called of the Interrex: But by the same reason
the Collonell of the horsemen might be also called a Dictator; for that he was
then also so appointed by the Dictator, as is to be seen through all the
history of Liuie, and should rather be called Dictatus, as a man appointed; in
the signification passive, than Dictator in the active. Wherefore Dionysius
Halycarnasseus Varro his domestical friend better says, the Dictator to have
been so called as an Edictator, that is to say, a sovereign commander, and
was therefore called Populi magister, or the Master of the people.

Now we have before declared the definition of a Magistrate by the younger
lawiers, Aristotle himself set down, to be in no wise to be allowed or
maintained: Aristotle by the author impugned.
who call none but him a Magistrate which has a deliberatiue voice in
judgment, and in the privy counsel, with power to command; and principally
says he to command: for in his sixth book de Republica, seeing the number of
officers to be infinite, whom he calls all (...), a name proper unto
Magistrates having command in the Common weal: he finds himself therein
much entangled, for that he sees others also besides them necessary for the
ornament and glory of the Commonweal: and then after them all the Magistrates
ministers, as Sargeants, Vshers, Secretaries, Notaries, all whom he calls by
the common name of Magistrates: even as he does them which have power to
command: and so passing on further, says, such ministers to (...) lib. 3.
Politia.
he makes question, whether that the Judges and Orators are to be called
Magistrates: whereunto he answers, that a man may say them to be no
magistrates, having no part of the command of the Commonweal; And therefore
Cato Vticensis chastising the Registers, Comptrollers, and Receivers, you ought
(says he) to remember your vocation, and that you are but ministers, and not
Magistrates, as Plutarke reports. As for Preachers and Orators whom he calls
(...), if so it be that they have no command or ordinary power, it is right
certain that they are no magistrates at all: but yet often times they are also
Magistrates, I mean such as in Popular Justinian the emperor to be good: which
is, that some of them be Magistrates, and some of them be not. We must therefore
now confess, that amongst them which have public viz. such as have power to
command) and some of them not, (as having no such commanding Which officer^
be also magistrates.
power) but serving only as the magistrates ministers: which division seems
unto us necessary for the avoiding of such business as might arise of a
division of it self imperfect. Wherefore we have said that such public
persons as have an ordinary charge limited unto them by laws, or by edicts,
without any command at all, to be simple officers, whom the Emperors of
latter times often times in their laws call officiales, being indeed but
ministers unto the magistrates. The ancient Doctors of the law have for most
part followed the opinion of Accursius, who set down neither any definition
nor distinction of Officers; nor of Commissioners, nor of Magistrates; viz. them
whom they called Illustres, the Spectabiles, the Clarissimos, and the
Perfestissimos, to whom he gives all command. All which are rather honorable
qualities and titles attributed unto the magistrates and Officers, according to
the conditions of their persons. Howbeit that in this division of them also
according to their titles and qualities, he has left out the Patricij, who
were of greater reputation and dignity than the rest: as also the Augustales,
who were superiors unto the Clarissimos: for why Justinian the emperor
appoints these degrees of honor, the Patricij, Illustres, Spectabiles,
Clarissimi, Acurs^ and Bartholus censured.
sieve Speciosi, and the Perfectissimi, all which honors and titles were given
as well unto private men as unto magistrates. But as for that which Bartholus
says, That there are Alexander Imolensis the greatest lawier of his time, has
touched much nearer the true definition of a Magistrate: in that he says, None
to be Magistrates but they which are ordinary judges; And yet is not this
enough: for why they are such magistrates Lentulus are judges of Religion, and
the Senate are judges of the law. So one may see neither the ancient nor late
writers to have handled this point, or yet so much as touched the difficulties
or differences of Officers, Magistrates, and Commissioners, as the matter well
deserved. And albeit that the true definitions of Magistrates, officers, and
commissioners Vlpian writes it to be lawful for all magistrates, excepting the
Duumuiri, by inflicting of judicial pains to defend their jurisdiction: which
extends not only unto the imposing of fines upon the offenders, but even to
the attaching of their goods and bodies, and casting of them into prison. And
yet it appears (may some say) that Vlpian having excepted these Duumuiri (who
were in like power that the Sherifes were in towns without any jurisdiction at
all) yet nevertheless accounts them in the number of Magistrates* and seems
also to say, these Duumuiri to have also had jurisdiction: For otherwise Liuie
often times to be seen: which was done by the law Icilia. For why the fine of
it self inflicted not any infamy upon the party so fined, but for the
public crimes sake: as the punishment of beating with staves impaired not any
man's reputation, but the cause wherefore he was so beaten. But if a fine

Now the least fine upon any man to be imposed, was one sheep; and the
greatest The ancient fynes that the Roman magistrates were to impose upon
offenders.
two oxen, or thirty sheep: which for that according to the diversity of the
cattle it made the penalty either lighter or heavier, and for that they could
hardly be brought Liuie writes of Fuluius, who for that he being Praetor and
general against the enemy, the Roman army was put to flight, and he the
Praetor reported to be the first that fled; the Tribunes of the people fined
him at thirty thousand pieces of brass, when as before the greatest fine was
but two oxen, or thirty sheep: howbeit that the fine was oftentimes forgiven,
for that the sentence of the people condemning a man unto a fine, carried
always with it the note of infamy.

And for that we are by way of discourse drawn thus far, we will here amend
an error in Aulus Gellius (about this matter) not as yet corrected. For he in
his Noctes Aulus Gellius amend^d*
Atticae, speaking hereof, writes, The greatest fine to have been of thirty
oxen, or two sheep; in stead of thirty sheep, or two oxen: and thereof
gathers, that as then there were more oxen than sheep in Italy, and that it
was thereof called Italy: the word (...) with the Greeks, and with Varro
signifying an ox. But Dionysius Halicarnasseus, Varro his domestical friend,
writes, That by the law Tarpeia, it was permitted to all magistrates, to impose
fines: and yet a measure thereof to have been by the law appointed, viz. That
the fine should not exceed two oxen, or thirty sheep at the most. In like
error offends Festus Pompeius, and in the same words with A. Gellius; so
that the one of them seems to have been deceived by the leading and
authority of the other. Both of them also writ, a sheep in ancient time to
have been called Ouis, in Boues for oxen, to be often times used in the feminine
gender: But it may be that they mistook Duos O^es, that is, Two Sheep, for
Duos Boues, which is, Two Oxen. And least any man should think me to attribute
more to Dionysius Halycarnasseus a Grecian, than to Au. Gellius, or to Festus,
both citisens of Rome, they themselves are of themselves refuted: For both of
them confess, the least fine to be imposed, to have been a fine of one sheep;
and the greatest, of thirty oxen, or two sheep: whereas (if they would have
agreed with themselves) they should have said, the least fine to have been of
one ox. Neither do we as yet see whom we may prefer in the searching out of
the Roman antiquities, before this Dionysius Halicarnasseus, excepting Varro,
whose domestical Varroes, as for that in them it is read, many things to be in
them spoken by contraries. But Au. Gellius writes, Varro in his one and
twentieth book Rerum Humanarum, to call Mulctam a Sabine word: but the latter
Grammarians to take it to be so called by the contrary: whereby it is clear
those books not to have been Varroes. Yet these things which we have written
concerning the estimation of the cartell exacted for a fine, are confirmed by
the authority of Demetrius Phalerius: For he writes, a dram of silver to
have been appointed by Solons Au* Gellius there is another more notable fault,
where he says, Mulctam, quae suprema dicitur, in singulos dies institutam
fuisse, The fine which is called the greatest, to have been imposed every day:
where the word dies, or days, is to be put out; for the meaning of the law
was, that the greater fine might be exactect of every citisen in particular,
if so be that many of them had in the same fault offended: for otherwise it had
not been lawful for the magistrate the same day to impose diverse fines, if many
had offended: Au. Gellius serve, Marco Terentio quando neque citatus respondit,
neque excusatus est, ego ei ouem mulctam dico, Forasmuch as Mar. Terentius,
being summoned, answered not, neither made his excuse, I set the fine of a
sheep upon him. Another error also there is in Festus, where he writes T.
Menenius Lanatus, and Sestius Capitolinus the Consuls, to have made the law
concerning fines: for it is a thing not heard of, laws to have been made by
the Consuls: and as for that law it was made in the year 297, after the
building of the city: in which year Sp. Tarpeius* and Au. Aterius were chosen
Consuls: but true it is, that about six years after The ancient manner of
fynes imposed upon offenders in Rome in Cartel, converted into fynes in money.
T: Menenius, and Pub. Sestius Capitolinus, being Consuls, made a request unto
the people, That the fine before imposed in cartell, might be converted into
money, valuing every sheep at ten Asses, and every ox at an hundred. But
whereas Dioxysius writes it to have been lawful only for the Consuls to
impose a fine, ought not to seem strange; for that at such time as the law was
made, there was neither Praetor nor Aedile in Rome, the first Praetor being
there made 386 years after the foundation of the city. And Cicero having as
he thought best, made laws for his Commonweal, which he to the imitation of
Plato had conceited, amongst the rest made one, whereby he gives unto all
magistrates jurisdiction and divination. But they which think the same to have
been the very Roman laws which we see in Cicero, are much deceived; as we
Cicero both good and profitable. And yet the magistrate that has jurisdiction
(to speak properly) whether it be that he have it in his own right, or from
others, has Power to command still annexed to jurisdiction.
also (says a certain lawyer) all such things as without which he cannot
exercise that his jurisdiction; that is to say, power to command: which is
still said to be annexed unto jurisdiction, and without which jurisdiction is
but vain and to no purpose. Whereof it follows, that the jurisdiction of the
ancient bishops, and of our bishops also, without power to command, was not
properly a jurisdiction, but only a simple hearing and understanding of
matters. For that which Lucullus the bishop said in the Senate, The bishops to
have been the judges of religion, and the Senate of the law, tends to
Recuperatores (or as we term them Delegates:) or for the understanding of that
is just and right, who more truly are arbitrators by law appointed, and not by
the agreement of the parties, and yet are often called judges. And therefore
we see the Vestall Virgins (in Liuie) which had polluted their vi^ginitie, to
have been always chastised and punished by the Praetors of the city, but
never by the bishops. And so when Publius Clodius was about to have committed
adultery with Pompeia Caesar's wife, in the temple of the goddess Bona Dea,
the full Senate had the determining of the matter, concerning Augustine,
Nicephorus, and Justinian do witness) had not so much as the least jurisdiction
of any matter, or the examination of the priests themselves: howbeit that
Justinian granted to them the examination of them that were of their own
order and calling. Neither would our ancestors have any part of commanding
power to be given unto bishops, and that the court of the parliament of Paris,
has oftentimes by the decrees and ordinances thereof witnessed. But why then
(might some man say) do we see consistories, prisons, examinations, and fines
to be permitted unto bishops? What other thing else do all these things
declare, but Philip the Fair, and king Jews his son, granted unto the
bishop of Paris power to apprehend and arrest men offending in his Diocese.
Howbeit I suppose those former things to belong rather to their vocation, than
to their power to command: for that the execution thereof belongs unto
magistrates: and yet such power of staying and apprehending granted to the
bishop of Paris was by a decree of the Senate forthwith again from him taken.
And although that not long since Henry the second had granted unto all
bishops the power to stay and apprehend men for heresy and impiety: yet
nevertheless was that law shortly after again abrogated. Yea the bishops
themselves do in their own decrees profess themselves to have no power for
the execution of any thing: yet is it with us permitted

And when as fines contrary unto the laws were by the Bishops upon men
imposed, the Parliament of Paris received every man's free appeal from them: yea
and afterward power was taken from them also, for calling of men before them;
which they call, A lively summoning or Citation. For there is an old decree yet
extant, whereby the Bishop of Paris was grievously fined, for that he had used
such calling of men before The authority of the bishop of Rome not to be
preferred before the authority of other princ^.
him. But when as the Bishops under the color of ministering of oaths, and of
the contempt of Religion, had with us drawn unto themselves the hearing almost
of all matters, (for Alexander Immolensis was of opinion, the power of
administering an oath Martin the fist Bishop of Rome; which decree is yet extant
in the public records. Yea the Spaniards truly, the most earnest defendours
of the Sea of Rome, would not that their Bishops should have to do with any
public or private judgments: except it were for Religion and Church matters,
of which opinion I see Felinus (a man skillful in both the laws, and a most
subtle interpretor of the Popes decrees) to have been. And albeit that
certain ambitious decrees do give unto the Bishop Innocentius the fourth, and
every other good expounder of the law, have long since rejected these decrees:
with all such others as have preferred the bishop of Rome before the Council
of other Bishops and Princes. And Bartholus himself when he had fearfully
written, The subjects not to be guilty of treason, which for the honor and
welfare of the Bishop of Rome had taken up arms against their prince; craved
pardon for that his error. Truly in mine opinion it were better and more
profitable also for the Commonweal, commanding power to be given unto Bishops
together with so great jurisdiction as they have: or else that their
jurisdiction, to be restrained unto the hearing of matters of religion only;
as we see the ancient Romans, the Swissers, was made unto the parliament of
Paris, where I remember it was long time doubted, Justinian would have to
extend farther by this law by him made. Si quis aduersus Clericos, Monachos,
Diaconos, Asceterias, actionem habeat Episcopus iudex esto: sententiam vero
episcoporum magistratus exequitor: If any Whether the ^uill magistrate be to put
the Bishops sentence into execution, before he understand of the equi^ thereof
or not?
the bishops command or not, before they have understood of the equity of the
sentence. Now if no appeal be made from the sentence, most are of opinion, That
it is without farther examination of the magistrate, to be put in execution:
but if appeal be made, that then inquiry is to be made of the equity of the
appeal, which yet some The positive laws of a kingdom not to be infringed by
the Popes authority.
of matters, and the magistrates the execution: for which cause the bishops have
neither sargeants nor pursiuants, the chief tokens and marks of authority and
magistracy.

But yet question might be made whether all magistrates have jurisdiction and
power to command or not? for that M. Messala the lawier, and M. Varro have
left in writing, That some magistrates had power to call men before them, and
also to lay hands upon them: othersome had power also only to lay hands upon
men: and The power of the Consuls a^ other the great magistrates in Rome.
Praetors, and Censors; and amongst the commissioners, the Dictator, and he
whom they called the Interrex; then also the Proconsuls, the Propraetors, and
in general all the Lieutenants and Governors of countries, had power to call
before them not only the private citisens particularly, but even the lesser
magistrates also: excepting the Tribunes of the people, whose bodies (for that
they were most sacred) it was not lawful to violate. Neither might these
aforesaid magistrates only summon and apprehend men, but it was lawful for
them also to punish and imprison them, and in brief to pluck down and raze
their houses and palaces, who refused to obey these magistrates commanding
them. But the Tribunes of the people had no power to call men before The (...)
the Tribun^ of the people in Rome.
them, yet had they authority to command any citisen to prison, yea even the
Consuls themselves. So L. Drusus Tribune of the people cast in prison Philip
the Consul, for that he had interrupted him as he was speaking unto the
people: which then by the law was death. Beside that it was also lawful for
them to oppose themselves not only against all the magistrates, and the whole
body of the Senate, but the opposition even of one of the Tribunes was of power
to stay all the proceeding of the ^est of the Tribunes his fellows in office:
On which great power they presuming and bearing themselves, doubted not
contrary unto the law to call men before them, and to take upon them
authority and jurisdiction. Which thing Labeo the lawier gave them well to
understand, Sempronius, seeing that the Censor Appius would not give up his
office, after that he had been eighteen months Censor, (according to the law
Aemylia, which had brought the term of five years before prefixed to the
Censor, unto the term of eighteen months) told him that he would thrust him
into prison, if he obeyed not that law (which he did by consent of six others
of the Tribunes his fellows in office*) but Appius having Tiberius Gracchus,
it was taken from Marcus octauius the Tribune, opposing himself against the
law Agraria, that it might not take place. And this is it for which a Tribune
of the people, speaking to the nobility said, Faxo ne i^uet vox ista VETO, qua
Collegas nostros concinnentes tam laeti auditis, I will make (said he) that
this word VETO shall not help, wherewith you so merry hear our fellows
Contemni iam Tribunos Plebis, quippe quae potestas iam suam ipsa vim frangit
intercedendo, non posse aequo aure agi, vbi imperium penes illos, penes se
auxilium tantum sit, nisi imperio communicato, nunquam Plebem in part pari
Reipublicae esse, The Tribunes of the people (he said) now to be contemned, as
whose power did now of it self break the strength of it self, by opposing of
it self against it self, that things could not be there indifferently ordered,
where the commanding power was with the nobility: and only the power of
giving help with the Tribunes. And that the people could never have like part
in the Commonweal, except the power to command were made common unto both. The
Tribunes complained the people to have no magistrates which had power to
command: the Vlpian speaking properly and as a lawyer, ^aith, That it is not
lawful without leave and commission from the magistrate, to call into judgment
the Consuls, Pretors, or Proconsuls, or generally any of them says he, Qui
imperium habent, and iubere possunt in carcerem duci, which have power and can
command men to be laid in prison. And so we conclude, that they which have
power to commit men to prison, although they have no jurisdiction, are in right
magistrates, as the Tribunes in Rome, the kings atturneyes in France, and the
three Auogadours at Venice. Neither do I in that agree with Plutarch, who says
in his Problems, That the M. Messala affirms. And less is it to the purpose,
that he alleges of Appius the Consul: of whom, contending with one of the
Tribunes in the assembly of the people, Liuie thus writes, Tribunus viatorem
mittit ad Consulem, Consul Lictorem ad Tribunum, priuatum esse clamitans, sine
imperio, sine magistratu, The Tribune sent a sergeant unto the Consul, and the
Consul sent a Lictor unto him again, crying out, That he was but a private man,
without power, without magistracy: For so the Consul said but to impair the
power of the Tribunes. Which for all that was so great, as that Licinius Stolo
one of the Tribunes, was so bold, as by force to constrain Manlius the Dictator
to depose himself of his Dictatorship. Another of them also committed both the
Consuls to prison, for that they would not at the request of the Tribunes
discharge ten soldiers from going to the wars. Yet true it is, that the
power of the ten Tribunes of the people was shut up and contained within the
walls of Rome. And therefore Mar. Fabius, and Luc. Valerius the Consuls,
seeing that they The power of the tribunes shut up within the walls of Rome.
could not levy their soldiers; for that the Tribunes opposed themselves
against them, commanded their chaires to be carried out of the city, and so
did there what they saw good. Yet oftentimes the Tribunes took upon them more
than belonged to their place, or than was by law permitted them, oftentimes
propounding their edicts and prohibitions. Whereof Liuie speaking says,
Communiter edicunt Tribuni ne quis Consulem faceret: si quis fecisset so id
suffragium non obseruaturos, The Tribunes generally forbad any man to give his
voice to the making of a Consul, but if any man so did, that they would have no
regard of any such voice given. Which was but an abuse, and presumption upon
the power of the people, to forbid them the free and entire choice of their
magistrates: over whom in general, albeit that no man could command, yet did
the Tribunes so do over every one of them in particular, although they could
by no right so do. Moreover they took upon them the administration of
justice, to all such as came unto them, as is if they had had power to call men
before them: as it is to be seen in Plutarch, where he says, That the
Tribunes administered justice in the place which was called Basilica Porta. And
Aesconius Paedianus Tribunos, Quaestores, Triumuiros* Capitales non in sellis
Curulibus sed in subsellijs iura dixisse, The Tribunes, the Questors, and
Triumuiri, judges of criminal causes, to have administered justice not in
Iuorie chaires, (as the manner of the great Roman magistrates was) but upon
their benches. And Appian also says, Liuius Drusus the Tribune, to have been
most diligent in the administration of justice, and doing of right to every
man. Pomponius also reckons the Tribunes of the people amongst the Consuls,
Pretors, and other magistrates which administered justice unto the citisens and
strangers in Rome. Wherefore Cicero says them to have been called Tribunes of
the people, for that they might examine the wrong done by the Pretors: which
what manner of examination should it have been, if they had wanted
jurisdiction? Yea they had Aediles aedituos, their deputies or Lieutenants;
which they could not have done, had they not had authority and jurisdiction:
For why, that authority thou thy self have not, thou can not give unto
another. Howbeit yet all this their presumption was but usurpation and abuse;
as Labeo the lawyer well showed them, who being sent for by them, would never
(as we said) come before them.

The same opinion we are to have of those officers or magistrates whom they
called The power of the (...).
Aedules Curules, who had neither power to call men before them, neither to
attache any man's body; and therefore neither had mase-bearer nor sergeant, (as
Marcus Varro Messalla have noted) and yet by the sufference of the Pretors
usurped a great part of their authority and jurisdiction. Which the Pretors of
the city oppressed with the multitude of causes easily suffered, at the first
committing unto them causes concerning the sale or alienating of things
mouable: who afterward took upon them to have to do with lands and things
immouable also: and after that drew unto them also the heating of courtisans
and common harlots causes, who might by no means set up that base and filthy
trade of life, but that they must first openly profess the same before the
Aediles, and that they would prostitute themselves. Which the auntients did, to
the intent that such women as reason could not keep within the bounds of
modesty, should yet for shame of such public profession (of so lewd a life
before the magistrate) Tiberius took order, that from thenceforth the
magistrates should proceed against them by way of justice: and at the same time
also to repress the presumption and encroaching of the Aediles and others, by
decree appointed unto what sum, and what causes, their authority was to
extend: which yet they had not by their ancient institution, and much less to
call particular men before them, or to commit them, although they had power to
call a general assembly of the common

As for the Questors, I see not that they ever had, or yet took upon them to
have The power of the Questors.
had any jurisdiction or power to commit men: for so Varro says, that they had
not: albeit that the year after their office expired, they had sometime the
government of some province bestowed upon them: as Gracchus the younger after
his Questorship had the government of Sardinia given unto him. From which time
they had as much and more power in the government of the provinces committed
unto them, than had all the magistrates in Rome: but that was not by way of
commission, as had all the rest of the governors of provinces.

As concerning Censors, Fr. Ottoman, and Carolus Sigonius (both of them most
skillful The power of the Censors.
antiquaries) say, That they had well as they writ, Potestatem, sed non
Imperium, (that is to say) power, but not command a thing altogether
impossible: for that the word Potestas (or power) in terms of law, or in the
person of a magistrate, imports always with it power to command. And namely
Vlpian, where he says, That the governor of a province had almost ample
jurisdiction and power of life and death; calls it properly by the name of
Potestas. And we oftentimes in antiquities read, the Censors Edicts, that is
to say, their commandments and laws. Varro also and Messala call the
Consuls, Censors, and Pretors, Maiores Magistratus (that is to say) greater
Officers; and the rest, Minores, or lesser. And says moreover, That it was not
in the power of the Pretors (who yet had both jurisdiction and command) to
assemble the army of Praetori exercitum vrbanum conuocare non licere: Consuli,
Censori, Interreg^, Dictatori licere, He said it not to be lawful for the
Praetor to call together the army of the city; but yet to be lawful for the
Consul, the Censor, the Interrex and the Dictator so to do. And at such time
as Hannibal besieged Rome, there was an edict made, That all such as had been
Dictators, Consuls, or Censors, should have a commanding power, until such
time as that the enemy had raised his siege. Placuit (says Liuie) omnes qui
antea Dictatores, Consules, Censoresue fuissent, cum imperio esse donec hostis
a muris discessisset. Which they would not have done if the Censors had not had
a commanding power, whilst they yet were in their office; especially seeing
that they which had been Pretors, had no such power given them. Besides Varro
puts in the number of the lesser magistrates) had power to command, why
should not then the Censors so have, whom he calls the Greater Magistrates?
Yea that more is, Plutarch gives more authority and power Plutarche noted.
unto the Censors, than to any other of the Roman magistrates: yet attribute I
no^ so much unto his writings, but that I see him being a Grecian, to be
oftentimes deceived in the antiquities of the Romans. Wherefore that is it
which has deceived many, that the Censors, although they had power, yet had
they no jurisdiction: albeit that Onophrius writ, That the Censors in some
cases, and for some crimes had power to condemn men: but what those cases or
crimes were, he shows not. For either Cicero said, The Censors judgment, no
farther to touch the party by them condemned, than to make him blush. And that
therefore, as all that the Censors judgment concerned only a man's name and
credit, so it was called an ignominy or discredit, but not an infamy. For
why, he says not, That the Censors touched any man's honor, to the intent to
note it with infamy, but rather with a certain ignominy, or kind of
disgrace, Ignominy is a kind of disgrace; but not the same that infamy is.
which many have rashly abused for infamy; howbeit that there is great
difference betwixt infamy and ignominy. Carolus Sigonius has therein erred
defining ignominy to be an infamy: and in the same place says, That there
are certain capital causes, which draw infamy with them, and yet without
crime, contrary to the principles of the law: Whereby we are taught, that he
which is by public judgment for any crime condemned, is thereby become
infamous: And that the soldier for his fault worthily by his captain
cassired, was thereby become ignominious, but not infamous, until that by the
Pretors express edict he were so declared. The ancient doctors of the law
have called Ignominy, the infamy of a fact done: Whereof Cassius the lawyer
says, That he thinks that a Senator put out of the Senate, can neither be
judge, nor Vlpian also uses, when as he says, Se putare ei quae in adulterio
depraehensa est and absoluta: notam obesse, That he did think, that unto her
that was taken in adultery and acquitted, yet the note thereof was a blemish.
For certain it is, that he which is by judgment acquitted, is safe from the
infamy of the law, but yet not from the ignominy of the fact. And Calistratus
says, That he did also think the honor and reputation of a man to be
impaired, Quando quis ordine mouet^r, when a man is put out of his place.
Festus Pompeius also sets down three sorts of military punishments, viz.
Deprehensa, castigatio, ignominia, Deprehensa, says he, is greater than
castigatio, and lester than ignominia; and above all these the law adds
infamy. Lentulus and Gellius the Censors at once displaced and thrust out of
the Senate, as also the four hundred knights, who by Valerius and That men may
be noated with ignominy and so disgraced, and yet not thereby become infamous.
Sempronius the Censors were cassired, and their horses and public wages taken
from them, had been also infamous. Yea that more is, all the people of Rome had
been noted with infamy, by the censure of Liuius Salinator, who rased and
noted all the tribes, and as Valerius Maximus says, Inter aerarios retulit,
put them all from their freedom, and made them to pay all duties as
strangers; For that they had by public sentence first condemned him, and
afterward made him Consul and Censor: only the Claudius Nero his companion in
the Censorship, who also requited him again with the like. Wherefore Cicero
speaking of the Censorship, thus says, pro Cl^*
Illud commune proponam, nunquam animaduersionibus Censorijs hanc ciuitatem ita
contentam, vt rebus iudicatis fuisse, I will (says he) set before you that
common matter, this city never to have been so contented with the Censors
animaduersions, as with judgments. And brings for example C. Geta a Senator,
who by the Censors thrust out of the Senate, was afterward himself made
Censor. And after that he adds, Quod si illud quoque iudicium putaretur, vt
caeteri turpi iudicio damnati in perpetuum omni honor ac dignitate
priu^rentur, sic hominibus ignominia notatis, neque ad honorem, neque in curiam
reditus esset: timoris enim causam non vitae poenam in illa potestate esse
voluerunt. Quare qui vobis in mentem venit haec appellare iudicia, quae a
populo Romano rescindi, ab iuratis iudicibus repudiari, a magistratibus
negligi, ab ijs qui eandem potestatem adepti sunt solent commutari? If that
(says he) should also be thought a judgment, as others with infamous
judgment condemned, they should for ever be deprived of all honor and
dignity: so unto men (by the Censors) noted with ignominy* should be no
means for them again to return unto their honor, o^ into the court: For
why, our ancestors would cause of fear, but not danger of life to be in the
Censors power. Wherefore how came it into your mind, to call these judgments,
which may by the people

There were also other magistrates in Rome, which had power to command, and
jurisdiction The power of the Triumuiri Capitals in Rome.
also in criminal causes, as those whom they called Triumuiri Capitales,
whose power and authority extended yet only unto strangers or slaves: except
perhaps such were the vnworthiuesse of the magistrates, and their corruption, or
offense so great, as that the other magistrates did willingly wink at the
proceeding of these Capital Triumuiri, and at the public punishment by them
taken upon such notorious offenders. These Triumuiri beside this had also the
putting in execution of all the capital judgments of the people, or of the
other magistrates.

Now by this discourse of the Roman magistrates and their power, it appears,
that No magistrate without power
length usurped both. Howbeit I deem not them to be called Magistrates, which
have no power; well they may enjoy some public honor or charge, but no
magistracy. For the true propriety of the word Magistrate, imports and
draws with it a power to command. And he that will have regard unto the
phrase and manner of speech of the ancient Latins, and especially of the
lawyers, shall find them to have called the offices with honest charges in the
Commonweal, by the word Honores, Honor (says Calistratus) est administratio
Reipublicae cum dignitate, Honor is a government of the Commonweal with
dignity or reputation: and those which beside their honor had Imperia. As in
Liuie we see the nobility to complain in this sort, Salios, ac Flamines sine
Imperijs as potestatibus relinqui, The Salij and Flamines to be left without
command, without power: understanding by the word Imperia, the great estates of
the city, whether it were by commission, or by office, such as had Mase
bearers and power to command allowed them. And by the word Potestates, meaning
the governors of provinces, whom Vlpian the lawyer in proper terms calls
also Potestates. Which also Alexander Seuerus the emperor meant, when he with
a loud voice says, Non patiar mercatores potestatum, I will not suffer the
buiers of the governments of provinces.

Now as a man may have a public charge without honor, as Criers, Sargeants,
Trumpetors, (which in ancient time were slaves, and of the magistrates family
without title of office) and especially the town clerks and notaries unto the
magistrates, or Commonweal, until the time of Valcntinian, who forbad slaves
any longer to have that charge. So a man may say also, That there are public
charges with honor, without power to command; as ambassadors and privy
counselors, secretaries of estate, and treasorours; the ancient Ediles and
Questors, and our Receivers. So also some other there be which have honorable
charge, having also the hearing of many causes, and yet without command: as
the ancient Roman Bishops, and our great Prelates. Others have honorable
charge, with power also to command, and The great diversity of magistrates in
their honor, power, and authoriue.
yet without jurisdiction: as the Tribunes of the people, the Censors, and our
Governors of countries, together with the kings Attorney. Some others there
be also which have ordinary, and honorable public charge, and power to
command with jurisdiction: and those are they, whom properly we call
Magistrates: such as were the two Consuls and Praetors; who were increased even
to the number of sixteen. As for the Dictators, Governors of provinces, and
those whom the Romans called Interreges: and Praefectos vrbi Latinarum feriarum
causa: they had more power and authority, then all the other magistrates we
have spoken of: yet were they not magistrates, but commissioners only, as we
have before showed: albeit that some called them by the common name of
Magistrates; but yet not they which knew how properly

There are also public charges, who have neither honor nor command, but
rather Certain publi^ charges dishonorable.
to the contrary draw after them a certain kind of dishonor: as the Hangmans
office; who after the charge committed unto him for the execution to death, was
by the Praetors edicts commanded still to lodge out of the city: a custom
yet observed in Toulouse, and in diverse other cities also. Other public
charges also there be, not much more honest, and yet nevertheless necessary
unto the Commonweal, and profitable unto them that have execution of the same:
to the end that the profit arising thereby, might in some sort cover the
dishonor thereof. And under this division are generally comprehended all
public persons placed in title of office, or in commissions, or in simple
dignity without power to command. And in like manner we might divide all
public officers and magistrates, according to the Three things especially to
be respected in the creating of Magistrates and officer^ in every Commonweal.


Wherefore in every Commonweal for the creating of magistrates and officers,
and such as are to be implo^ed in common charge, three things are chiefly to
be respected: First them that have the choice and creation of them: then of
what manner of persons choice is to be made: and thirdly in what manner and
form they are to be created viz. by open, or by secret suffrages. By lot
choice is made of one, or mo of the citisens to be magistrates, or out of all
sorts and degrees of the people, at a certain age, by the laws appointed. Now
as for choice to be made by election and lot mingled together, although it be a
thing not much used in ancient time, yet is it now at this present a a thing
most common in Aristocraticall estates, and especially in Genes and Venice. As

Aeschines the orator, dividing the offices and public charges of the
Athenians, has cut them much shorter, and more obscurely reckoned them up,
than was fit for so great Demosthenes, (altogether different from that of
Aeschines his adversary.) For he says them only to be magistrates, which
were by lot drawn in the temple of Theseus: or Varro, and Messala, is also too
short, who make but two sorts of magistrates in Rome, viz: the great and the
little. The great magistrates they called the Consuls, the Pretors, and Censors,
as chosen by the great estates: and the other they called the little, as chosen
by the common people; the ceremony of their soothsayers divination being more
solemn in the choice of the greater, than in the choice of the lesser. But
better it were to search and find out the essential divisions of magistrates,
and such as might serve in every Commonweal; as are those by us already set
down, concerning the charge of magistrates. We may also otherwise divide
magistrates into three sorts, in respect of their power. The first may be
called

CHAP. IIII. Of the obedience that the Magistrate owes unto the Laws
SEeing that the Magistrate next unto the Sovereign Prince, is the principal
person in the Commonweal, and upon whom they which have the sovereignty
discharge themselves, communicating unto him the authority, force, and power
to command: it is good reason before we pass further, briefly to touch what
obedience he owes unto his Sovereign Prince; which is the chief part of his
duty. Now in this the Prince and Magistrate, and both of them do most differ
from a private How much a prince differs from a magistrate, and both of them
from a private ^an.
man: for that the Prince sees no man in the state or Commonweal, whom he may
Magistracy or authority to declare what was in a man, having as it were upon
the stage in the Theater, and in the sight of all men, to perform the parts of
many persons. And so also may we say, A man to show what his office is: For if
he be such an one as he ought to be, he graceth his place: whereas if he be
otherwise, he debaseth not only the authority of his place and office; but
even of the majesty of the state and Commonweal. So Liuie speaking of Quintus
Flaminius, a man unworthy his high place, says of him, Non qui sibi honorem
adiecisset, sed indignitate sua vim ac ius Magistratui quem gerebat dempsisset,
That he had not (by his office) increased his honor; but by the unworthiness
of himself, impaired the

Now the better to know what obedience the Magistrate owes unto his Soueraign,
it is needful first to understand, what it is that a Sovereign Prince may of
right command The lawful commands of sovereign princes right diverse.
every Magistrate to do. For why, the lawful commands of Sovereign Princes
are right diverse, and unlike themselves. Some of them serving for perpetual
edicts or laws concerning all persons, of what condition or quality soever
they be; or but for certain persons, and for a certain time, by way of
provision: othersome contain some privilege or exemption contrary to the
edicts or laws, for some one only, or for some few of the subjects: or some
grant not contrary unto the law, or some reward for the good, or punishment
for the evil, or some office or commission; or else serve Iubemus, or we
command, be as well in the letters of justice, as in the letters of grace and
favor, as is to be seen in the laws and letters pattents of the Greek
emperors. Yet the letters of grace, or which proceed from the only power and
authority of the prince, are properly in Mandata Principum, or Princes
Commands, which we do call by the name of of instructions: For so the word
Mandat^ is taken in the law, where Justinian the emperor says, That

But leaving the subtilitie of words, let us go unto the matter, and examine
the force The power and force of certain clauses commonly set down in the
letters patents, and princes Mandats expounded.
of the clauses commonly set down in the letters patents and mandates of
princes. And first these words, Vniuersis praesentibus and futuris (To all men
present and to come) are joined only unto such letters patents as are to
endure for ever: (howbeit that no worldly thing can so for ever continue) but
not unto temporary edicts made by way of provision, nor to commissions, nor to
any other letters of provision. But this clause, Quantum satis est etc. (so
much as shall suffice) is of much greater importance, and ordinarily joined
unto letters which they call letters of jurisdiction or justice, Si paret etc.
(If it shall appear unto you etc.) In such The princes charters or letters of
justice no commaunde^ unto the magistrate to whom they are directed
sort that one may say of all sorts of charters or letters of justice, albeit
that they be granted by the prince, that they import not any command or
constraint whatsoever unto the magistrate to whom they are directed: But to the
contrary, that by our laws and customs it is most religiously provided, that
the magistrates or judges should unto such charters or letters have no further
respect, than in that they were agreeable with Quantum satis erit quod liqueat
(so much as may suffice for the manifesting of the matter) is the same which
was contained in the Praetors edicts, in this form, Si qua mihi iusta causa
videbitur, (if any just cause shall seem unto me.) True it is that the power
to correct, supply, and expound the laws, concerning the civil jurisdiction,
together with the restitution and relieuing of them which had been
circumuented, or deceived by the formalities of the laws, (a power before
given unto the Praetors by the virtue of their office) rests now (I know not
how) amongst the Nobile officium. Wherefore as offices are confounded, when as
the prince conuerteth unto himself such things as belong unto the magistrate*
even so also are the rights of sovereignty impaired, when as they are by the
magistrates usurped. Now as for the declaration, and correcting of the edicts
and laws, we have before said that it appettaineth and belongs unto them
which have the sovereignty: But as for restitutions against the extremity of
the law, and all that concerns letters of justice, it greatly appears not
that the sovereign princes have much troubled themselves therewith, but have
left them to the magistrates to be in their name decided. I except only certain
letters of justice, which pass under the great Scale, and whereunto the
aforesaid clause, If it shall be just, If it shall be agreeable unto equity
and truth, is inserted: which clause so much displeased a certain great
personage, holding one of the highest places of honor in this Realm, (who
understood not the force thereof) as that he would have raced out the same;
saying the majesty of the king to be thereby impaired* howbeit that he was
therein to be excused, as being a stranger, and not well seen in the laws
and customs of a strange country. But how could the majesty of kings be in
this respect empaired or diminished? seeing that the ancient kings of Aegipt
caused their magistrates solemnly to swear, A notable (...)
never to obey their commandments, in case they commanded them any thing
that was unjust: as we read in the sayings of the Aegiptian kings reported by
Plutarch. Whether the magistrate be bound to obey his princes unjust commands
or not?
equity nor truth of a matter, may refuse the unjust commands of his prince:
the doubt therein being the greater, if they shall be thereunto by the prince
more straightly urged, or expressly commanded: For sometime princes by their
particular and secret letters, use to request the magistrates; so with covert
requests accompanying their unjust commands: yea oftentimes in their letters
patents their requests are joined with their commands, because they would not
seem to wrest all things from them against their wills; but to request many
things of them: as when they say, We pray and command you, wherein the prince
seems as in nothing more to derogate from his sovereign Cato the Censor
says. Besides that, to command is a thing incompatible with request. It is
wisely said, (...), Princes requests to have the power of the most strait
command.
Tyrants requests to be commands: wherefore let us suppose nothing to be
more straightly commanded, than that which the prince seems by fyled speech or
entreaty to persuade. Wherefore to resolve this point, if the princes letters
give unto the magistrate neither the examination nor the hearing or disciding of
the Pharao and Agrippa:) or else to rob and spoil the poor people; as in
our time Albert Marquis of Brandeburg, who amongst other his notable cruelties,
set up sundry gibbets in all such towns and cities as he had taken in,
threatening his soldiers to hang them thereupon, if that contrary to his
command they should spare to rob and spoil the poor inhabitants: albeit
that he had neither true, nor yet any colorable cause, for his taking up of
arms against his departing from reason, and forgetting the duty of a prince,
breaks the laws of

We have before (as we suppose) sufficiently enough declared, what and how much
What commands of the prince, and how far the magistrate eught to execute the
same.
a prince may do by the right of his sovereignty, from whence many things may
be derived pertinent unto this question here in hand: for why it is not well to
be understood what obedience is by the magistrate due unto the sovereign
majesty, except the rights of Sovereignty be before well understood and fully
known. But here the question is, what commands of the prince, and how far
the magistrate ought to execute the same? for sometime dishonest and unjust
things are by princes commanded, which the evil magistrates themselves do
more willingly, and shamefully put in execution, than they were by the princes
commanded. As not long ago in the time of the Tiberius the emperor (a man of
incredible cruelty) sharply reproved the governor of Egypt for exacting more
of the subjects than he was commanded: saying, Tonderioues meas non cutem
detrahi volo, I would have my sheep shorn, but not flaine. If therefore the
commandment of the prince be not contrary unto the laws of God and nature,
the magistrate is to put it in execution, although it seem to differ from the
laws of other The (...) is no^to censure his princes command, being not
contrari^ unto the laws of God and nature.
of his prince, or to cross his proceedings concerning man's laws, from which
the Innocentius the fourth written, before he was Pope, That Magistrates ought
to put in execution the princes commands, albeit that they be unjust: which is
to be understood of civil justice and utility: but not if such commands be
contrary to the laws of nature. Which interpretation may serve also for the
right understanding of that which the lawyers say, That the prince may derogat
even from the law of nature. VVherin How it is to be understood that a prince
may derogate from the law of nature.
their meaning is, from the law of nations, and common constitutions of other
people: least any deceived by the obscurity of the words, or equivocation of
the law of nature, should thereby rashly presume to break the sacred laws of
God and nature.

Now if any man shall object and say, That the emperor Anastasius expressly
commanded, Charles the ninth was made, concerning the magistrates admonitions
unto their prince. So long before this Theodosius the Great, at the request of
Saint Ambrose the good bishop of Milan, made a law, whereby he willed, That the
execution of his letters pattents and commands, should be holden in suspense
thirty days after the signification thereof, when he had commanded any to be
more rigorously punished than the usual manner and custom was. The occasion of
the making of which law was, the execution of seven thousand Thessalians, put
to death by the commandment of this Theodosius, for that they had murdered
and slain certain of his Receivers and Magistrates. For which cause Saint
Ambrose excommunicated the emperor, neither would suffer Monitorie, the second
Iussorie, and the third Executorie; or as we say in English, Edicts of
admonition, of Command, and of Execution.

The same opinion we are to have, if the prince by his letters patents command
the How the Magistrate commanded by his prince to put in execution old penal
laws, now of themselves or through the negligence of the magistrates forgotten,
is to proceed in the execution thereof.
Magistrate to proceed to the execution of the penalty upon them that have
offended against such his edicts and laws, as by the antiquity of themselves,
or by the negligence of the Magistrates seem to have been quite forgotten and
abrogated. For why, the long sufferance of the prince, and conniuence of the
magistrates, in the sight and Nero, as of other ancient tyrants also. Whereas
the good emperor Traian to the contrary commanded Pliny governor of the
lesser Asia, of new to publish such edicts and laws as were any wise before
buried in oblivion, by the disobedience or error of his subjects, or the
sufferance of the magistrates: for that a common error is reputed for a law, if
the error be not against the law of nature, against which no error can
probably be pretended.

But some man may ask, Whether the magistrate owe obedience unto such his
princes commands, as shall unto him seem contrary unto the law of nature,
albeit that indeed they be not contrary thereunto? For the equity and reason
which we call The (...)-ture not (...) clear and (...) fest.
natural, is not always so clear and manifest, but that it finds
impugners. Yea oftentimes the greatest lawyers and philosophers are therein
entangled, and of quite contrary opinions, and the laws of people are therein
sometime so repugnant, as that some of them appoint reward, and some others
punishment for the self same fact, whereof books, laws, and histories are
full, all which to prosecute were a matter infinite. Whereunto I answer, that if
that which the auntients say may take place, a man never ought to do that
whereof he doubts, whether it be just or not; and much less ought he so to
do, if he be thereof certainly persuaded that the thing which the prince
commands, is of it self by nature unjust. But if question be of civil
justice only, the The magistrate bound in civil causes to put his princes
commands in execution, although they seem unto himself unjust or contrary
unto law.
magistrate ought in such case to verify and put in execution his princes
commands, although L. Metellus Numidicus was by a decree of the people
banished, for refusing to swear unto the laws published at the instance of
the factious Tribune Saturninus. So also after that the laws of Jews the
twelfth were published in the high court of the parliament of Paris: for that
many disliked of the same, the kings attorney general there made a request,
That they might be duly observed, and prohibition given for any man to call
them in doubt, and that upon pain of high treason; as is to be seen in the
records of the court. For why, it is lawful for Laws once established ought
not by prinat persons to be again called into dispute or question.
every man before the publishing of the law, to despute and reason of the
equity thereof: which to do after the publication thereof, is not lawful.
And so, before that, when Jews the eleventh had commanded certain unjust
decrees of his to be published in the court of the parliament at Paris: the
court refused to yield thereunto, for that they seemed unto every man unjust:
but the king nevertheless still urging his former requests, joined thereunto
grievous threats also; as that they should loose their heads that would not
yield thereunto. Which thing Lauacr^e, president of the parliament A notable
example.
understanding, accompanied with the rest of the judges of that honorable
court in their red robes, came unto the king, not to excuse the fault by him
and the rest committed, in refusing the kings unjust decrees, but to show the
reasons of their such refusal, and to request, That he with the rest might
rather be put to death, than enforced to give their consent to the publishing
of the propounded laws. The king beholding the gravity, the port, and
dignity of these persons, and almost abashed with the so constant called
before him* to raze out the clause, De expresso mandato (by express
commandment) How the words de expresso or expresissimo mandato are in
princes graunts, edicts or decrees to be understood,
yet preserved undefaced. Now these words, De expresso mandato, and De
expressissimo mandato, whereunto these words are also sometimes annexed, Multis
vicibus iterato (or oftentimes repeated) which are many times to be found in
the records of soueraign courts joined unto the publication of the princes
edicts and decrees, have this illation or meaning, that such edicts and
privileges (granted by the princes express commandment)

But yet farther question might be made, Whether a magistrate may be suffered
to Whether a magistrate be to be suffered to give up his place, rather than to
allow an edict or command of his prince which he for certain thinks to be
unjust, and contrary unto reason
give up his place, rather than he will allow an edict, a commission, or
commandment from his prince, which he for certain thinks to be unjust and
contrary unto natural reason, when as the equity of it is called in
question, and especially if the other magistrates and multitude of the people
shall hold it to be just, contrary to the others. For the force of justice,
and power of upright reason, is not perceived but of the fewer and wiser sort:
and a wise man being as it were the rule of reason, is of all others the
greatest enemy unto the multitude. Which if it be so, why should a wise man
be enforced to give his consent unto the multitude of mad magistrates. In which
case I say, that the magistrate is not to be suffered to give up his place, if
it please not his soueraign Jews the xij, there is one which imports, That
if the judges be of three or more opinions, those which were the fewer in number
should be constrained to conform and join themselves unto one of the greater
parties, for the concluding of the decrees. VVhereupon the court of Paris of
long time doubted, whether this law should be published or not: for that it
seemed a very hard and a most strange thing unto many, to force the conscience
of the judges contrary to their own opinions, and so enforce them to judge
contrary to that they ought, and that especially in such things as were
committed unto the wisdom and devotion of the judges, as are almost all both
public and private judgments. Yet nevertheless after the court had considered
of inconveniences which Pliny, of a judgment wherein one part of the judges
had condemned the guilty person unto death, another part had clearly and
fully acquitted him, and the third part had for a time banished him: in this
diversity of opinions, as well they which had before acquitted him, as they
which had condemned him to death, consented both to them which would have

And yet nevertheless since the law of Jews the xij. I find not that any
magistrate has given up his place, as fearing to be enforced to maintain or
yield to any opinion contrary unto his conscience: and especially since the
places of justice were given unto men for virtue, and not for reward and
favor. Neither has the law of Jews the xij. at any time constrained the
judges to judge contrary unto their conscience, but has rather silently given
them leave to give up their places; howbeit that it were more equity so to
constrain them, than to leave it unto their will and pleasure. For which cause
the kings Attourneyes general have oftentimes constrained the Judges to judge
Bartholomew President of one of the Chambers of Inquiry, seeing all the
counselors of his court of one and the same opinion in a suit, and directly
against the law: after he had assembled all the rest of the courts upon the
matter, he constrained them to change their opinions, and to judge according to
the law; And that justly also: for who enforced thee to seek for thine office?
or to accept of it being offered thee? and having taken it upon thee, (being
happily got either by suspending of voices, or by sure, or briberie,) and being
sworn, will thou now forswear the laws, which thou might before have red,
or at least wise ought to have red? will thou by thy false opinion of the
law and

Yet sometime it happens that such laws as of themselves seem unto every
man Wh^ the magistrate is to d^ in case the law^ otherwise* just, now upon some
soden occutrents (...) to be har^ and unjust.
most just, may upon some suddein occurent appear and prove to be most unjust.
In which case, whereas the wrong is in the fact presented plain and evident,
wise magistrates use to certify the king thereof, (as I remember it to have
most oftentimes been done in the parliament at Paris,) who imparting the matter
unto his Counsel, does as he sees cause derogate from the positive law; or
add some thing unto the same: (which our men call the exposition or
declaration of the law) a thing properly belonging

Now there is great difference whether question be of the laws already
established, or of those which yet are by the magistrate to be published. For
why, such as be already established, every man is bound to keep, and
especially the magistrates, who if they wittingly swerve therefrom, (beside the
penalty appointed by the law) are subject also unto the note of infamy, as
periurours and forsworn men. But as for such Edicts and Great care to be had
by the greater magistrates in the publication of laws.
laws as are not yet published, but are but as yet presented unto the
magistrates to be confirmed and published, of them it behooves the greater
magistrates (to whom the publication of laws especially appertains) well to
consider, and to show the reasons if they shall dislike of them unto the
prince, albeit that it concern but the particular interest of some one private
person; but much more, in case it concern the great harm Better it is for the
magistrate of himself to give way unto the law contrary unto the laws of God
and nature.
once respected. But much better it were for the Commonweal, and more
beseeming the dignity of the magistrate, of himself to give up his office (as
did the Chauncelour Philip the second, duke of Burgundy) than to give way unto
a law that is contrary unto the laws of God and nature, or that in every man's
judgment seems to be dishonest or unjust; howbeit the Duke seeing the
irremoueable constancy of his Chauncelour, ready to give up his office,
thought it better to revoke such his commands, than to want so stout and wise
a man. Which so constant resolutions of the magistrates, has oftentimes
preserved Princes from infamy, laws from decay, and Commonweales That a
princes faults which cannot be amended ought by all means to be of the
magistrate cou^red.
from destruction. But when such constancy cannot heal the diseases of the
Commonweal, or faults of sovereign princes; and that the prince commands
the magistrates, to have his actions excused unto his subjects; it is much
better for the magistrate to obey his command, and in so doing to cover and
bury the memory of a Papinian the great Governor of the empire, (and by
Seuerus the Emperor in his will appointed Tutor unto the young emperors
Anthonius Caracalla, and Geta his sons) who by Caracalla commanded to excuse
unto the Senate the murder by him committed upon the person of his brother Geta,
would therein do nothing, but cut him off with this sharp and short answer,
saying, That murders were more hardly excused, than committed: which was of
him more stoutly then wisely said. For Caracalla with this answer enraged,
and yet not satisfied with his brothers blood, in his rage commanded Papinian
also to be slain: and after the death of him so great a man, (as who alone
Papinian covered that he could not now amend, he had saved his own life, and
counterpeased the tyrannies and cruelties of the Emperor, who always before
had him in greatest honor and regard. Which fault in Papinian I have thought
good to note, for that many have Geta to death, he had then done both stoutly
and wisely in refusing so to do, and had had just cause rather to die than to
consent to that unnatural fact, for one brother to murder another. But Seneca
and his companion Burra (the governors of Nero) shall be for ever blamed, as
having no excuse to pretend for their most wicked counsel, persuading Nero to
kill his mother, who by chance had escaped drowning:

But what if the prince shall command any thing to be done, and that the same
thing A princes command being begun to be put in execution, whether it b^ by
the princes contrary command to (...) given over.
being begun to be put in execution, he changing his mind shall revoke his
former command; shall the magistrate in this case stay from proceeding any
further, or go on with that he has begun? Whereunto a man at the first sight
would say, That he ought to stay and to proceed no farther: following therein
the maxims of the law. Howbeit to answer rightly thereunto, the matter is by
distinction to be opened; that is to wit, that if the thing so begun may be
left off without the public harm, it is then so to be Great things by great
men undertaken, ought also to be by them performed, or else never taken in hand.
purpose Marcellus the Consul says, Multa magnis ducibus sicut non
aggredienda, ita semel aggressis non dimittenda. As many things are not of
great captains to be at all taken in hand: so being once by them undertaken,
are not by them to be again given over. And this in time of war. But if at
home the magistrate following the commandment to him given, has begun to
execute the condemned, or them that the prince has commanded to be put to
death, he ought forthwith to surcease from any further execution, if the
commandment be revoked: and not to do, as did the Consul Fuluius, unto the
Senate, and to yield unto the decrees thereof, as unto laws. And truly
Charles Duke of Burgundy, was for nothing else, but for that they had condemned
a citisen to death, after the death of the Duke; before they were again
confirmed in their authority and office, although it was not a thing
altogether necessary; as with like examples we have declared. Yea it is
almost a perpetual thing, for them which are in authority and have power to
command, to be able of their own right to execute that was commanded them,
yea after that the time of their authority is expired, if he that gave them
the authority and charge knowing and wittingly shall dissemble the fact, or
not forbid it when he might.

Now all that we have hitherto said, is to be understood only of such letters
or rescripts Whether the magistrate b^ to examine the truth of that he is by^
the prince commanded, before he proceed to the examination thereof?
the examination of the matter, be by special command expressly taken from the
magistrate, or else left unto him: if it be left unto him, there is then no
doubt, but that the magistrate may and ought to enquire of the truth of such
things, as are reported in the princes rescripts or letters: but if al
examination of the matter be taken from the magistrate, then some doubt, whether
he may inquire of the truth thereof or not; and especially if it be expressed
in the rescript or mandate, that the prince being well informed Constantine,
provided by an express law, that the magistrates should inquire, whether these
things were true or not, which were set down in his rescripts or letters of
command, whether it were so in them expressed, or left out. And as for the
other point, if in the rescripts or letters, Sforces, they made a law, that all
faith and credence should be given unto the princes commands and letters; yet
was the same law again with that testification, as that he ought therefore
with greater diligence to inquire Whether the ma gistrate ought to enquire of
the sufficie^sie of him of whose wisdom and (...) the prince shall himself by
his rescripts or letters testify; in the bestowing of any office or other
charge upon him
of him, for that the prince supposed him to be indeed such, and would not
have such benefits or preferments bestowed upon an ignorant or unwise man. But
contrary wise, if the prince shall simply give unto any man an office or place
of command, he is no farther by the magistrate to be inquired of, for that the
prince in his wisdom has thought him worthy such honor and place; if the
prince first give him not leave so to do, or that the custom of the country
so require: as in the latter times they did in Rome; but afterward, almost
^ery where: but especially in the appointing of judges. So also in ancient
time, in the reign of the Goths, trial was made of the Senators, before they
were to be admitted into the Senate. For Theodoric, king of the Goths,
writing unto the Roman Senate, for the receiving of a new Senator, says,
Admittendos in Senatum examinare cogit sollicitus honor Senatus* the care (we
have) of the honor of the Senate, causes us to examine such as are to be
admitted into the Senate.

But if any man under a false pretensed color shall encroach upon the prince
the profits and commodities unto him granted, being in the princes rescript
expressed, yet is he thereof by the magistrate to be embarred; and the rather,
if the common treasure be with immoderat gifts exhausted: unto which disease
every where spreading, remedy might be given, if the law of Valois concerning
gifts might take place. For Philip Valois the French king, commanded those
gifts and graunts to be revoked from them, who in the letters of such gifts or
graunts, had not expressed what they or any other It much con^neth the
Commonweal what gifts or privileges be granted unto particular men.
must thereunto have a most vigilant eye, and especially in popular estates,
wherein as all public things lie open unto the spoil of all men; so for the
same cause occasion is ministered unto the seditious, to the trouble and
oftentimes to the ruin of the Commonweal. And for this cause it was most
straightly provided by a law in the twelve tables, that no privilege or
dispensation might in any wise be granted, and that upon pain of death, but
only in the great assembly of the whole estate of the people: the words of the
law being these, Priuilegia nisi Commitijs Centuriatis ne irroganto, qui secus
faxit Capital esto, ^et no privilege be granted, but in the great and general
assembly of the people: and he that shall otherwise do, let him die the death.
And after that Constantine the emperor writing unto the people, says, Nec
d^mnosa fi^co, nec legibus contraria impetrari oportet, ^t is not fit, things
hurtful unto the common treasure, or Priuileg^ (...) things odious and (...)
unto the law^, how they are to be interpreted.
contrary unto the laws, to be obtained* howbeit that all privileges are
directly contrary unto the law; for otherwise they should not be privileges.
And i^ it be so, that they must needs pass after the second command (as we
have before said) yet beseems it the magistrate to cut them short, and to
interpret them in strictest manner that he can, and to the least hurt of the
Commonweal, as things odious, and contrary unto the law; and not by
favorable interpretations to increase their strength, or to draw

But for that our purpose is not here to enter into the disputing of
privileges, which Privileges to be most straightly examined.
were a thing infinite, suffices it in passing by, in general to advertise the
magistrate to have special regard unto the privileges by princes granted, and
most straightly to examine them, what good report soever the prince therein make
of him that has obtained De motu proprio (of our own mere motion) which
invented at Rome, has from thence crept abroad into all Europe. For why, there
is almost neither king nor kesar, which when question is for the breaking of a
law, or repealing an edict, or for giving way unto dispensations and
privileges, joins not thereunto De motu nostro proprio (Of our own proper
motion) howbeit that the same princes have been importuned, and as it were
enforced to grant that even unto unknown and most unworthy men, for whom
they have been so importunatly requested. There is at Rome a field called
Flory, or Flourishing, not so much for the plenty of flowers, as of witnesses
that are therein; out of which every man may take testimonies, for the
bestowing of benefices upon them which dwell even in the remotest places of
Asia and Africa, and that with these words, De motu proprio. By which only
clause, all the fraud and deceit of them that sued for preferment, be they
never so bad or unjust, are easily excused: and by virtue of which words the
examination of all slye incommings or crafty intrusions, cease, if we will
receive the opinion of some Bodin deputy of Vermandois.

But what if the prince by his rescript or letters pattents, shall expressly
forbid the magistrate Whether the magistrate expressly forbidden to examine the
truth of things contained in the princes grants or letters, may yet pass
beyond such his sovereigns prohibition.
to examine the truth of such things as are contained in them, albeit that they
be false or doubtful; ought the magistrate in this case to examine the matter?
And it seems that he ought so to do: For we have before said, that he may,
and ought to unto a lawyer, neither the one nor the other ought by the
magistrate to be admitted or

Now if a man should say that a Prince ought not to command any thing that is
dishonest or unjust, he therein says well: neither ought the prince (if it
were possible) to command any thing not beseeming his honor, or that were so
much as subject unto reprehension or slander, or knowing the magistrates to be
of contrary opinion unto his, to constrain them thereunto: for that the
ignorant and common people is no way more moved unto disloyalty, and contempt
of their princes edicts and laws, Whether the magistrate commanded by his
prince any thing contrary to the common profit, or course of civil justice,
ought to obey such his princes command, or to give up his place.
good liking published and forced. But now here the question is, what the
magistrate ought to do, in case the prince forgetting his duty, command any
thing contrary to the common profit and civil justice; yet provided still
that it be not against the law of God and nature: whether the magistrate ought
to obey such his princes command, or to give up his place? And if so it be,
that the worldly magistrate ought to be obeyed, albeit that he command such
things as are unjust: Ne Praetoris matestas contempta videatur, Lest the
majesty of the Praetor should seem to be contemned (as says the law) how
much more then ought men to obey their sovereign Prince, of the majesty
Cicero (albeit that he was a mortal enemy unto the Tribunes of the people)
that men were to obey even the unjust oppositions of the Tribunes, in these
words: Parere iube^ lex intercessori, quo nihil praestantius: impediri enim
bonam rem melius est, quam concedi male, The law (says he) commands us to
obey the magistrate that opposes himself, then which nothing is better: for
better it is a good thing to be crossed then evil granted. And before he had
said: Nihil exitiosius ciuitatibus, nihil tam contrarium iuri ac legibus, nihil
minus civil and humanum, quam composita and constituta republica quicquam agi
per vim, Nothing is more dangerous unto cities, nothing more Dangerous unto
Commonweales for the the magistrates to refuse to put in execution their
princes Edicts or commands.
and settled Commonweal to have any thing done by force. We often times see the
subjects to take up arms against their prince, the laws violated, and justice
go to wrack, and all for the false opinion that the people have of the equity
and integrity of the judges, refusing to verify and put in execution the
Edicts and commands of their prince. O but say they it is an unjust Edict or
law, neither can we, nor ought we, to obey the same: an honest speech, if
indeed thou can not; but where learned thou that thou ought not? from
whence had thou that doctrine? will thou (being a magistrate) with stripes,
imprisoment, fines, yea, and with death it self enforce private Saul commanded
all the priests of God without just cause in his presence to be slain, yet was
there no man which refused not his ungodly command, except Doeg, who himself
alone performed that so cruel an execution. An other notable example there is
of one Petronius governor of Syria, who received A notable example of a wise
governor or magistrate.
commandment to place the image of Caligula the emperor, in the fairest
place of Petronius advertised the Emperor, and that it could not be done
without great trouble and slaughter of the people: wherewith Caligula more
incensed, sent more express and strait command unto Petronius, to assemble
all the old bands of his garrison soldiers in those quarters, and so with a
puissant army to put his commission in execution. Of whose coming the Jews
hearing, left their Towns, and the tillage of their grounds, and so in great
companies all unarmed, went to meet him, if happily they so might by their
Petronius told them that it concerned his life, to perform his commission: and
so to terrify them the more, marched with his army unto Tiberias, (as
supposing himself to do nothing contrary to his own religion, or to the
laws of God or man) but there the people came running unto him from all parts,
disarmed, and resolved all Petronius had beset them round: who seeing the great
constancy of the people, and their exceeding zeal toward the honor of their
God, as to choose rather to die, than so much as to see the image of 2 man in
the Temple of God; wonderfully moved therewith, and with their pitiful
complaint and tears, (and being himself also a man of a courteous and mild
nature, and far from that cruelty, which the Jews feared not whatsoever it
had been) he commanded them all to return home; promising again to write in
their behalf unto the Emperor, and rather himself to die than to execute his
commission, accounting his life a worthy ransom for the saving of the
guiltles blood of so many innocent Caligula therewith the more enraged, sent
unto him a new command, with grievous threats to put him unto the most
grievous torture that he could possibly devise, if he forthwith put not his
commission in execution, according to his command. But the ship, together with
them that brought the commission, was by force of tempest carried an other way,
and news brought into Jury of the death of the tyrant, before that the cruel
commission could come thither. And so Petronius having discharged his
conscience toward God, his duty toward his prince, and well showed his
great love toward the subjects, and discharged all the parts of a most wise
Governor: was himself by the divine providence wonderfully preserved from the
cruelties unto him by the tyrant threatened. But yet this is especially to be
considered, that we That the Magistrate ought not upon a vain show of religion,
or ^ conscience evil grounded, to refuse to execute his princes commands.
pretend not the vain show of religion, or rather of superstition, against our
princes commands, and so upon a conscience evil grounded open a way unto
rebellion: for when the magistrate makes conscience, and a matter of religion,
about the executing of his princes commands, he seems himself (and gives
occasion unto others also) to suspect evil both of the religion and conscience
of his prince. Wherefore he ought to be well assured of the true knowledge of
the eternal God, and of the true worship and service unto him due: which
consists not in vain and counterfeit shows of religion or conscience.
Diverse other examples I could to the same purpose produce, were I not afraid
lest those whom we call Pagans should therein ashame us, with whom the fervent
zeal unto the honor of God is so abated, and by process of time cooled, as

CHAP. V. Of the power an^ authority of a Magistrate over particular and private
men, and of his office and duty.
WE have before said, That a Magistrate is an officer which has public The
Magistrate a living law.
breathing law, which puts all this in execution, seeing that the law in it
self carries or contains nothing but commands or prohibitions, which are
but mockeries and to no purpose, if the Magistrate and the punishment were not
attendant at the foot of it be pronounced by the mouth of the Magistrate.
Whereby it evidently appears The force of the law to consist in the
Magistrate, or him that has the power to command and constrain.
all the force of the law to consist in them which have the command, whether
it be prince, people, or magistrate, unto whom so commanding, except the
subjects yield their obedience, they have power to enforce or punish them,
which Demosthenes calls the very sinews of the Commonweal.

We have said, that the Magistrate ought to have public power, to put a
difference What power the Magistrate ought to have?
betwixt this power and the domestical power. We said also, that the Magistrate
should have power to constrain such as would not obey: for the difference from
them which have the hearing of matters, who may also judge and pronounce
sentence, and call men before them, but yet have no power to compel or
constrain men, or to put their sentences or commandments in execution; such
as were in ancient time the bishops,

We have before said, that the first constraint of all them which had power to
command, The first constraining power that the magistrate has.
is the ceising or attaching both of men's goods and persons; which the
auntients called prehensio, or as we say an apprehending or laying on of hands:
for it were to no purpose, for the Magistrate to call a man before him, to judge
him, or to fine him; and wh^^ all is done not to have power to seize upon their
goods nor person of him that shall disobey him. Now we have before said, that
some there be, which have such power to apprehend and attache men; which yet
have no authority or power to call a man before them, neither to examine a
matter, neither to rescue a man, neither to enlarge them whom they have
committed; as we have showed of the Tribunes of the people, of the eleven
Magistrates in Athens, of the Capital Triumuiri in Rome, of the Auogadours in
Venice, of the kings Attourneies, and the deputies of them which have The
diverse power of Magistrates.
not death: and some having power to put to death also, and that some of them
such power, as from whom men may appeal; and some others, such as from whom
men may not appeal. But the last and highest degree, is of such as have the
absolute power of life and death; that is to say, power to condemn to death,
and again to give life The Lighest marque of soueraign majesty is to have
power of life and death.
unto him which has deserved to die; which is the highest mark of
sovereignty, above all laws, and above the power and authority of all
Magistrates, as proper only unto sovereignty, as we have before declared.
Whereby it appears, that there are two kinds of commanding by public power:
the one in sovereignty, which is absolute, infinite, and above the laws, the
Magistrates, and all other private persons: the other is a lawful command, as
subject unto the laws and sovereignty, and is proper unto Two sorts of
commmaunding by public power: the one in sovereignty, and the other by law
the Magistrates, and them which have extraordinary power to command, until
it be again revoked, or the time of their commission expired. The sovereign
prince next under God knows none greater than himself; the Magistrate under
God holds his power of his sovereign prince, and remains always subject
unto him and his Impero and iubeo, I charge and command: which in ancient
time signified, I will and command, seeing that the will of every Magistrate,
and of all others also, which have power to command, is bound and depends
wholly of the sovereign, which may alter, change, and revoke it at his
pleasure. For which cause there is neither Such is our pleasure: or this
clause, Upon pain of death, for that none but a sovereign prince or state,
can use the same in their edicts or laws.

And hereof rises a notable question, which is not yet well decided, viz.
Whether Whether the power of the sword be proper only unto the soueraign
prince or common also unto the magistrate to whom the prince has communicated
the same?
the power of the sword (which the law calls Merum imperium, or mere power)
be proper unto the sovereign prince, and inseparable from the sovereignty;
and that the Magistrates have not this merum imperium (or mere power) but only
the execution thereof: or that such power is also common unto the Magistrate, to
whom the prince has communicated the same. Which question was disputed
betwixt Lothaire and Azon, two of the greatest lawyers of their time: and the
emperor Henry the seventh chosen thereof judge, at such time as he was at
Bononia, upon the wager of an horse, which he should pay, which was by the
judgment of the emperor upon the aforesaid question condemned. Wherein
Lothaire indeed carried away the honor, howbeit that the greater part, and
almost all the rest of the famous lawyers then held the opinion of Azon;
saying, That Lothaire equum tulerat, sed Azo aequum (Lothaire had carried away
the horse, but Azon the right) nevertheless many since have holden the opinion
of Lothaire: so that the question remains yet (as we said) undecided, which
for all that deserves to be well understood, for the consequence it draws
after it, for the better understanding of the force and nature of commanding,
and the rights of soueraign majesty. But the difficulty thereof is grown,
for that Lothaire and Azon neither of No magistrate in Rome after the kings
once driven out* had power o^ the sword.
whipped or beaten, after the law Portia* published at the request of Cato
Tribune of the people, 454 years after the foundation of the city. By which
law the people took this power, not from the Magistrates only, but dispoyled
even it self thereof also so much as it could, giving the condemned leave for
what fault or offense soever it were, Cicero for transgressing the same escaped
not, but being Consul, and having caused certain of the conspirators with
Cateline to be executed, was therefore himself afterward banished, and his
goods all confiscated. Cornelius Sylla the dictator published his laws
concerning public judgments, whereby were appointed a certain number of
Praetors, as ordinary officers, which were to judge of all such causes as
whereof the comminaltie before judged, or at leastwise appointed commissioners
for to judge of such crimes, as of murders, of robbing of the common treasure,
of treason, or of extortion; but yet so, as that these Pretors had their lesson
by writing, beyond which they might not pass a jot. For they by lot drew a
certain number of particular judges out of them, which by the laws might in
such causes be iudiciarie judges, who before all the people having heard the
accusations and Non Liquet, or it is not manifest, or the matter is farther to
be inquired of (which they called Ampliare, and Amplius quaerere.) With these
tables was also brought unto the judges a vessel whereinto every one of them
did cast one of the three aforesaid tables, without any word speaking: Which
done they counted the tables so cast in, and if there were more marked with C.
cast in, then the Praetor in his purple robe mounting into an high seat, in open
place, and in the sight of all the people pronounced these words, Reus parum
cauisse videtur, which is to say, It seems that the Non iure fecisse videtur,
He seems not to have done right; or Videtur prouinciam spoliasse, He seems
to have spoiled the province. This was the Roman gravity in judgment mixed
with The great modesty of the Romans in their judgments.
modesty, least they should seem therein to lie, or rashly to affirm any
thing which was not altogether most manifestly tried. Of which sort are these
words also, Si quid mei iudicij est, If my judgment be any thing. So presently
after the Praetor had pronounced the aforesaid words, the penalty of the law
was put in execution, the party condemned voided the country and went into
exile, and the receivers seized upon his goods. If such penalty were for the
offense of the law appointed, unto which law except Martian the lawyer writes,
concerning the decree of the Senate, at the motion of Turpilian, Si iudex
pronunciauit haec verba, calumniatus es, condemnauit eum, If the judge (says
he) has pronounced these words, Thou have slaundered, he has therein
condemned him: and albeit that he say no more concerning the punishment of the
offender, yet shall the penalty of the law nevertheless

Now if question were for the fine of any public crime, which was not provided
for by the law, the lesser assembly of the common people or comminaltie, was
called together therefore: But if question were of the life, good name, or the
whole estate of any citisen, the people then in their greatest and most solemn
assemblies gave judgment Si M. Posthumous ante Calendas Maias non prodisset,
neque excusatus esset, videri eum in exitio esse: ipsi aqua and igniplacere
interdici, If M. Posthumous made not his appearance before the first of May,
neither made his excuse, it should seem good that he should be banished, and
decreed, That he should be forbid the use of fire and water: all which things
are more plentifully and at large set down by Liuie Asconius, and Cicero. But
if the state of the Commonweal being changed, and the power of judgment
Papinian the great lawyer, who gave occasion unto Lothaire and Azon to make
question of the matter, in these words by him set down as a maxim, Whatsoever
it is that is given unto Magistrates by decree of the Senate, by special law, or
by the constitution of princes, that is not in their power to commit unto other
persons: and therefore (says he) the Magistrates do not well in committing that
their charge unto others, if it be not in their absence: which is not so
(says he) in them that have power, without the limitation of special laws,
but only in virtue of their office, which they may commit unto others, albeit
that they themselves be present. And thus much for that which Papinian does
say, using the words, Exercitionem publici iudicij: as if he should say, That
they which have the sovereign majesty have received unto themselves the power
of the sword, and by special law given, but the execution thereof unto the
Magistrates. And this is the opinion of Lothaire. By which words yet Azon
understands the right and power of the sword it self to have been translated
and given unto the Magistrates. Now there is no doubt, but that the opinion of
Lothaire was true, if he had spoken but of the ancient Pretors of Rome, and
so kept himself within the terms and compass of Papinian his rule: but in
that he was deceived, that he supposed that maxim or rule of Papinians, to
extend to all Magistrates which have been since or yet are in all Commonweals,
who Great (...) in commonweals to have now oftentimes the power of the sword
committed unto them even by virtue of the^ offices.
same punishment, or else quite to absolve them: and so the like in other
public crimes also, thought it much better to ordain and appoint certain
Magistrates, who according to their conscience and devotion, might increase or
diminish the punishment, as they saw equity and reason to require. And first
of all Augustus unto the three little tables noted with A. C. and N. L. added a
fourth, whereby it was lawful for the judges Suetonius. And by little and
little the ancient order and manner in the judicial or penal laws set down,
was changed; the penalty by every one of them appointed yet nevertheless
still remaining, not by any to be increased or diminished, but by them which we
have before said, what diversity of causes soever happened. And oftentimes the
emperors committed it unto the Senate, or some other the great and most worthy
magistrates extraordinarily to judge of great personages, or of some notable
crimes, and to punish them as they saw cause, or thought best, without binding
them unto the ordinary penal laws. But in the time of Papinian, Seuerus the
emperor gave power unto the great Provost of Rome, extraordinarily to judge of
all offenses Papinian shows example. And sometime the Praetor preventing the
great Provost, so by way of prevention extraordinarily judged of extraordinary
crimes, together with the great Provost. As for the presidents and governors
of provinces, in that they had power and authority of all the Magistrates of
the city, and extraordinarily judged of all offenses, and according to their
own discretion appointed both penal and capital punishment unto all men,
except the citisens of Rome; no man can Potestates: for that before the
creating of the great Provost, there was none but the governors of the
provinces which had the power of the sword; whom they yet call even to this
present in Italy, by the name of Potestats. Now it is plain by the maxims of
the law, that the Magistrates which had power extraordinarily to judge, might
condemn the guilty parties to such punishments as they would, yet so, as that
they exceeded not measure: For so Vlpian the lawyer writes, him to exceed
measure, who for a small or light offense inflicteth capital punishment; or
for a cruel murder imposes Al magistrates having ^thoritie to judge of
capital crimes, to have the power of the sword.
a fine. Whereof we may then conclude, that the great Provost, and the
governors

And thus much briefly, concerning the question betwixt Lothaire and Azon: for
the fuller and more plentiful declaration whereof, it is needful for us yet
to search farther: where it is first to be enquired, Whether the Magistrates
office be proper unto the To whom the propriety of estats, magistracy, and
offices do properly belong.
bestowing of them, resting with them whith hane the sovereignty (as we have
before said) and cannot by inheritance be appropriat unto any particular
persons, but by the grant of the sovereign; and long and secret consent of
the estates, confirmed by a Dukedomes, earledomes, marquisats, and such like in
ancient time but simple commissions, now for most part are become hereditarie.
provinces, and so the command of them, had the same in ancient time but by
commission only, to be again revoked at the pleasure of the sovereign
prince, but were afterward by little and little granted unto particular men
for term of their lives, and after that unto their heirs males, and in
process of time unto the females also: insomuch as that in fine, through the
negligence of princes, sovereign commands, jurisdictions, and powers, may
lawfully be set to sale, as well as may the lands themselves, by way of lawful
buing and selling, almost in all the empires and kingdoms of the West, and so
are accounted of* as other hereditarie goods, which may lawfully be bought

Other public officers there be also which have neither jurisdiction nor
command, Some public offices to be with out any jurisdiction or command at
al.
but only a certain public and servile charge: as the four offices of the
Waxe-chafers in this realm, by right of inheritance belonging unto certain
men, by Jews. Diverse also have attempted by process of time to prescribe the
offices of the Constables both of Normandy and Champagne; as also the offices
of the great Chamberlaines, by right of inheritance to belong unto them:
howbeit that in that their suit they have been often times by diverse decrees
rejected, and amongst others by one solemn one, in the records of the court
made in the year 1272. True it is that the word (Constable) was in ancient
time no other thing than the captain of a company, which they called a
Constableship, as we oftentimes read in Frosard. And in the records of the
Chamber of accounts I remember I have red, three hundred Constables to have
been at once in the army. We read also that by the decree Simon County of
Montfort was excluded from the successiue right which he pretended to the honor
of the Mareshalship D'la foy, which the lords of Mirepoix challenge unto
themselves in their styles. And forasmuch as certain Mareshals of France
would have continued their estates in their posterity and successors, The
states of the marshalships of France part of the demaine of the crown.
they were embarred so to do by a decree made in Parliament the xxij of
January, in the year 1361, as is to be found in the records of the court:
wherein it is expressly set down, That the estates of the Marshalships of
France should be as part of the demaine of the Crown, and the execution
thereof to remain unto the Marshals so long as they lived. And albeit that the
power of the Mareshals was not of force but in time of war, (as was judged by
a decree of the xv of August in the year 1459,) yet nevertheless the
military discipline carried with it the power of the sword, albeit that it
could never have been kept and preserved) from whom there was no mean to appeal
Marshal magistrates and Generals must of necessity have the power of the sword
given them.
as says Polybius, and for that cause says he, the Consuls had royal power:
howbeit he marked not, that the Praetors, Dictators, Quaestors, and other
Generals of their armies, had even the self same power. In like manner the
Constable of France by his letters of commission has not the power of the
sword, or of life and death granted unto him: but having the managing of the
wars, and conducting of the armies, as in his absence the Mareshals of
France have: the power of the sword is also left unto them, as without which
military discipline cannot possibly be maintained: which martial power the
simple captains abused also, putting their soldiers to death, with out any
form or fashion of just trial. Unto that Henry the second the French king, at
the request of Francis Colineus the Dandelot, then Colonel of the footmen, by
express

If then the martial Magistrates and Generals have in every Commonweal the
power of the sword without any limitation or restriction unto the form of
proceeding or of the punishment to be by them inflicted, according to the
variety of crimes and offenses, all being as it were left unto their own
discretion and judgment, a man then cannot truly say them to be but the
simple executioners of the law, considering that they have no law whereunto
they are in this regard subject: and so consequently we may conclude, that the
power of the sword is transferred into their persons, that power now not
remaining in the prince alone. Whereby it also follows, that they being
present, may commit unto others, so much of that power and authority which
viz. That the The power and authority granted unto magistrates by virtue of
their office, proper unto the office and not to the person of the magistrates.
the office, albeit that the honor and dignity of the office be not proper
unto the person: for Papinian saying, That Commissioners and Lieutenants have
nothing proper unto themselves, but that they use the power and authority of
them, which have commissionate and deputed them, sufficiently shows, that the
power is proper unto them which so commissionate and deputed them, whether they
be Sovereign Princes, or Magistrates having power so to do. And so in like
case the law says, That the Governor of a country or province, has within
his government all power and authority next unto his Prince: wherefore it is
not then only in the prince. But the difficulty of this question depends
principally on this distinction, (whereunto the The propriety of offices to
belong unto the Commonweal: and to be with the magistrate but as things left
with them in trust.
a thing put in trust unto the magistrate. And for that cause the Bailiffes of
cities and towns are so called of the word (Bail,) that is to say Gardiens or
keepers. So also the When the power and authority lies in the magistrate, and
when not.
general question, and discuss the controversy betwixt Lothaire, and Azon,
who spoke but of the power of the sword only: and conclude, that as often and
whenever the Magistrates and Commissioners are bound by the laws and decrees,
to use the power and authority which is given them, in such prescript form
and manner as is therein set down, whether it be in the form of proceeding,
or concerning the punishment;

Now as in every Commonweal there are two principal points which the
magistrates Two things to be always in every Commonweal by the magistrate
principally respected.
ought always to have before their eyes: that is to say, the Law, and Equity:
so say we, that there is also the execution of the law, and the duty of the
magistrate, which Legis actionem, and Iudicis officium: or as we say, the action
or execution of the law, and duty of the judge; which is to command, to
decree, or to put in execution. And as the word Iudicium, or judgment, is
properly understood of that which is ordained by the magistrate following the
strict terms and tenor of the The difference betwixt a judgment and a
decree, and so likewise of magistrates, which have power and authority in
themselves, and others which have not.
law: so the word Decretum, is likewise properly understood of that which the
magistrate ordains or decrees, following equity without the prescript law;
the law it self being still referred to the strict execution thereof, and
equity unto the duty of the magistrate. And for this cause all the decrees of
the Prince are properly called Decreta, and not Iudicia, Decrees I say not
judgments: for why the sovereign prince is not subject unto the law; wherein
they deceive themselves, which take a decree to be any appoints. Now of these
the one is is servile, the other is noble; the one is bound No appealing from
the law: and why?
that the judge has declared and denounced the party accused to be guilty:
whereas it is right lawful for a man to appeal from the punishment which the
judge by his own discretion appoints: For he which appealeth from the law,
appealeth from the prince, from whom no appeal is to be made. And thus much
concerning the distinction Lothaire and Azon is decided, but many others also
concerning the charge and duty of magistrates, wherewith diverse have sore
entangled themselves, some mistaking the practice, and some the theorique, but
most part, for not having understood the Roman estate, albeit that they were
well exercised and seen in all the parts of their laws, and yet nevertheless
in the state of magistrates, concerning their power and authority they found
themselves greatly troubled. For Moulin himself (the honor of lawyers) not
using the distinctions by us before set down, has without reason followed the
opinion of Alciat and Lothaire: Whereunto he adds the Pretors of cities,
whom we call Bailifes, and Seneshals, by the laws of this realm, to have
had the power taken from them Charles the seventh, and the eight, were the
first which made an office of the Lieutenants, or deputies of Bailifes and
Seneschals. For if Moulin his opinion were grounded upon reason, why should
Papinian expressly say, That magistrates may depute and commit in their presence
so much and so long, and with such limitation as they themselves please, of
such things as they have by virtue of their office, and Legatum, from the
office of the Proconsull himself: and so of the deputy termed a particular
Commissioner, whom they called Iudicem datum, from the Commissioner himself,
and of him unto whom power was given by the magistrate to command, whom they
called Eum cui mandata inrisdictio est, the doctors have confounded all
together under the name of Delegats, which were a thing too long, and too
superfluous to refute, having proposed unto ourselves no other end, but to
entreat of that which concerns the estate and duty of magistrates in
general.

It is also worth the noting, that in Popular and Aristocratique estates, such
as were The Magistrates in Popular and Aristocratique estats much more bound
unto the prescript laws then in a regal Monarchy.
those of the Greeks, and of the Italians, their chief drift was so much as
they could, so to bind their magistrates, governors, ambassadors, captains,
lieutenants, and other their great officers and ministers unto their laws, as
that they should not one jot swerve or stray therefrom: which the auntients did
much more than they of our time: whereas in a regal monarchy it is quite
otherwise, where in public judgments all pains and penalties, and in private
judgments that which concerns every private man's right, is left to be judged
and determined according to the discretion of the magistrate. And albeit that
Justinian the emperor made a law, That every man's right should be tried by
the law, so to have kept the magistrates within the power of the laws: yet was
that his law to no purpose, but much troubled all the judges and lawyers,
willing to Why in trial of private men's right, as also in public judgments,
many things are to be left unto the wisdom and conscience of the magistrate?
in fact, and not in the law: by which words Paulus (the great lawyer) seems
even by the root to have cut up all the opinions of all the interpretors of the
law, being not only in number almost infinite, but also altogether inexplicable,
thereby giving men to understand, that that which concerns every man's right,
ought not only in private, but even in public judgments also to be left unto
the fidelity, integrity, conscience, and wisdom of the magistrate. Which
with us is by a royal constitution provided for, and by the use of judicial
proceedings, in respect of the infinite variety of causes, places, times, and
persons: which for that they are infinite, can in no laws, writings, or tables,

Now I have before said, that there was a new officer erected in Rome, who was
the The power of the Provost or Praetor in the city of Rome.
Provost or Praetor of the city, with power given him, to correct, supply, and
amend, the laws and customs, in that which concerned his jurisdiction, so
far as he saw good in private judgments: and every year the new chosen
Praetor in the Tribunal seat appointed for the making of orations, after he had
thanked the people for the honor he had of them received, gave them there to
understand of his edicts, and in what sort his purpose was to administer the
law. Which his edicts he caused afterward to be painted, and set up in some
public place: which for all that were not laws, neither had Cicero taunting
Verres, intemperatly abusing the power and authority of his Pretorship, says,
Quiplurimum edicto tribuunt legem annu amappellant, tu plus edicto complecteris
quam lege, They which attribute most unto an edict, call it but an annual law,
but thou comprehendest more in an edict, than in a law. For the magistrate how
great soever he be, cannot of himself derogat from the law, and much less
abrogat the same: for these things we have showed properly to belong unto
sovereignty. Papinian.
correct, amend, or supply the laws, that he had therefore power to derogat
from them, or to disanull them, which is the highest point of sovereignty: but
that he might by the authority of his office expound the obscure laws, and
in what they might with equity be extended, yet without breaking or impugning
the same. And that is it, for which the law generally says, That the Praetor
never could give possession of the goods unto them, who by the laws and
ordinances could not be the heirs. Neither was it also in the power of the
Pretors, nor yet of all the magistrates together, to make an heir of him which
by the laws could be none; for why, that was to be done only Aebutius
presented a request unto the people, which passed in force of a law; which was
that the laws of the twelve tables, which by long tract of time were then
grown out of use, might by an express law be repealed and abolished: which
law needed not, if the Pretors by virtue of their edicts had had power Cicero
by way of reproach objected to Verres, saying, Ille nulla religione motus,
contra quam edixerat, decernebat, That he moved with no religion, judged quite
contrary unto that which he himself had before decreed. Howbeit that this
reproach was but a flourish of the Orators, and not of any great importance:
For as no man was subject unto the law which he himself made, so also might
he upon good and just cause derogat from the same. Yet certain Cornelius the
Tribune, That the Pretors, and so every other magistrate also should be
constrained in giving of judgment, to observe their own edicts by themselves
published and set up at their first entrance into their office, and not to
depart therefrom; which cut off many courtesies and favors which the
magistrates before showed unto such as they thought good. Nevertheless this law
being published without the good liking and consent of many: and also contrary
unto the nature of laws (which can never bind them that made them) was shortly
after abolished. Howbeit that the magistrates for their own particular, and in
their own causes, were constrained to endure the same edicts, judgments, and
decrees, which they themselves had made, and caused to be executed upon The
Magistrate may revoke his own decree or commands, but not his judgment once
given.
forbid that which he has commanded, although that he cannot revoke that
which he has once judged and pronounced sentence of. For that judgments and
decrees given or made upon the hearing of a cause, cannot without injury be
reuersed or changed, as also for that nothing ought to be more firm and sure
then judgments once given, as whereby all civil society is especially
maintained: wherein many interpretors Varro) is nothing else but Magistratus
iussum (that is to say) the magistrates command, and whereof another error
has risen also, viz. That such the magistrates simple commands should bind no
man: For so the ancient doctors affirm. Which their opinion, if it were
true, wherefore then The Magistrates simple commands of right ought to be
obeyed.
should the law command us to obey the magistrates bare command, without
regard whether it be just or unjust? Or why should the lawyer Maetian say,
Reipublicae interesse, vt iniustis and ambitiosis decretis pareatur, It
behooves the Commonweal, that even unjust and proud decrees (of the
magistrates) should be obeyed. Yea and all the ancient Philosophers and law
makers, have more religiously recommended nothing

Of this error (for not obeying the magistrates command) is risen also a far
greater, Whether private men may by force resist the Magistrate offering them
violence or wrong.
some defending that it is lawful for men in fact, and by force to resist the
magistrates, offering them violence, (for that is the word which they use)
whether it be in the administration Appius Claudius enflamed with the desire
and lust of the fair maiden Virginia, (wresting the laws) was about to give
sentence against her liberty, Virginius her father to preserve Private men are
not to judge whether the Magistrate do them wrong or not.
outrageous facts troubled, what violence soever be done by the magistrate.
Howbeit that it belongs not unto private men to judge whether the magistrate
offer to do wrong, or not: which to determine, if it appertain but unto the
greater magistrates, or the Prince only, in vain then it is to ask whether
private men may by force resist the magistrates, offering them violence? but
only this, whether Magistrates which go about In what cases the magistrates
offering wrong, may of right in their judgments be withstood?
withstand the magistrate offering us violence: as many evil taught, and worse
instincted in civil policy and government most daungerously affirm: by
whose positions (if they will be like themselves) the estates of all cities and
Empires must needs be Violence in Co^monweales, to be always detested.
robbers into places, unjustly by them possessed, if they were from thence by
force cast out, and excluded the true owners thereof from their rights for
proceeding by way of force. And albeit that some particular men having
territoriall jurisdiction, may (in the opinion of many) in a sort in their own
right of themselves lay violent hand, upon Vis in populo abesto, Let violence
be from among the people, is not to be understood only of violence to be done
by force of arms, whether it be publicly or privately done: but also when
men would have things otherwise done then by the ordinary Plato is to be of us
rejected, who in his books of laws has left the shameful violence and abuse
offered unto maidens or boys, to be revenged by their kinsfolk, and not by
the Magistrate.

Now of this question depends an other; as whether the Magistrate may revenge
Whether the magistrate may revenge the wrong and injury offered him as he
sits in place of justice.
the wrong and injury offered him, as he sits in place of justice: whereof
what to say altogether lawfully do that which they could not do apart: and the
reason seems Private injury so nest by sufferance buried.
the persons of magistrates. And albeit that the law says, That the action of
injury is easily to be forgiven, and that it is soonest by sufferance buried;
that is to be understood of particular men, and not of public persons, and
especially of Magistrates unto whom That the person of the magistrate ought to be
always sacred and inuiolat^.
whosoever shall offer violence, is by the law in danger of treason. And for
this cause an outrage committed against the person of a Magistrate, the
indignity of the fact is together with the heaviness of the punishment thereby
increased* and that not only when he exercises his estate, but also in what
place soever it be wherein he carries with him the marks and tokens of his
office, or is known to be such a man, he ought Sacrosanctus, or most holy: for
that word the law, Horatia (published for the safety of Magistrates) uses,
conceived in these words: Qui Tribunis plebis, Aedilibus, Iudicibus nocuerit
eius caput Ioui sacrum esto; familia ad aedem Cereris, liberi, liber aeque
vaenum ito, He that shall hurt the Tribunes of the people, the Aedils, or
Judges, let his head be sacrificed to Jupiter, and his family and children,
male and female, sold at the Temple of Ceres. Wherein some are of opinion that
the word Iudicibus (or judges) is meant or to be understood of the consuls, who
were afterward the only judges amongst all the magistrates: whereof they have
some probability, for they were first called Pretors, and after that Judges;
and after that their jurisdiction for the city was given to one special
Praetor, they were called Aedituos (for why, the great and honorable Aediles,
whom they called Curules, were not yet erected) was meant to comprehend all
judges; considering withal, that the law it self was not published at the
request or motion of any of the Tribunes, or in disgrace of the Consuls, but at
the motion of Horatius the Consul himself. And this law Horatia was made
forty four years after the sacred law Iunia, made for the safety of the
Tribunes of the people: whereby they were as by a special law, more
religiously provided for than were the rest of the magistrates. Whereby it
appears this law to appertain to all magistrates, but especially unto judges,
whose lives and persons are the more subject to all Si nocuerit, which is, if
he but hurt them. And well it is to be noted, that it is not said, as they are
exercising their authority and jurisdiction only, but even in what other
place soever they be: which otherwise were but to open a gap to have them
slain in every other place where they ^at not in judgment. So when as with
us a certain noble gentleman being called into An heavy ^sure upon a man for
striking of a magistrate.
question, had with his sword wounded one of the judges of the court of Paris,
not as then sitting in judgment: the court condemned (...) to have his right
hand cut off, his body afterward to be quartered, his goods confiscated, and a
most great fine to be Aulus Hostilius the Aedile, when as by night he had
attempted to have broken open a Courtisans doors, was there grievously hurt:
whereof he complaining unto the people* in hope to have found some good
remedy, was sent away with shame enough* for that the outrage unto him done,
was not to be punished as done unto a magistrate. Which ought not to seem
strange, seeing that one of the Tribunes, who had unlawfully abused a boy, and
taken by the Capital Triumuiri, was by him punished as a slave or stranger

Neither is it not only unlawful to offend or abuse the magistrates by word or
deed, Magistrates to be (...) religeously respected.
but necessary it is, that we should duetifully respect and honor them, as
them unto Vectius a citisen of Rome, for not rising unto the Tribune of the
people, but passing by him, was by the people slain. Yea the law it self
calls it sacrilege, not to reverence the magistrate. We understand also not
the same, but yet great reverence to have been given unto the magistrates even
amongst the Greeks also, in that it was not lawful for a man to laugh in the
council of the Areopagits. We read also, that Fabius Maximus his de lapide
emptos, as says Cicero. But howsoever power and authority be got, whether it
be by favor, by wealth, or Samuel judge of Israel, now grown weak with age:
whose commands when as the people did refuse, It is not thee (says he) but
me, whom they have despised.

Now if these deriders of authority and power, be not to be moved either with
the fear of God, or the touch of religion, yet can they not deny, but that it
is more than necessary for private men to obey, respect and honor the
magistrates, for the defense of Commonweales, and of the civil society of men.
Which the aunrient Poets have unto Pitharchie (which signifies the obedience
of subjects unto their princes and magistrates) wife unto Jupiter* Savior: and
of that marriage Eutuchia (that is to say Felicity) to have been engendered The
duty of the magistrate for the maintenance of his reputation.
and borne. Wherefore the magistrate on his part also ought to give a good
opinion of himself, for his justice, wisdom, and sufficiency, that so the
subjects may have occasion to honor and reverence him: and not by his
unworthiness to suffer the honor of the Commonweal to be trodden underfoot or
despised: for the fault which in a private man is but light, is in the person of
the magistrate doubled. And therefore Solo^ in his laws gave leave to kill the
drunken magistrate, without any danger of punishment therefore. Truly an
unreasonable law, for that it was thereby to be feared, least Lenity of rig^
neither of them commendable in a magistrate.
themselves, who having extraordinary power to punish without law, have
thought equity to consist in lenity and mercy, repugnant to the rigor of
the laws: howbeit that equity is of such a nature, as that it in nothing
communicates either with rigor, or with mercy; but declining from both the
extremes, cruelty (I say) and Lenity more hurtful in a magistrate than
severity.
pitiful offends more, than if he should seem to be cruel: For cruelty,
although it be indeed to be blamed, yet keeps it the subjects in obedience
unto the laws, for fear of punishment; whereas too much lenity gives
liberty unto offense, and causes the magistrate himself, the laws, yea and
the prince which established the laws, to be altogether Gravity b^st
beseems a magistrate.
and uprightly, enclining neither unto cruelty nor mercy, but yet cannot
keep that gravity and severity which best beseems a magistratias in our
time one of the chief magistrates of this realm, who in the highest seat of
justice, and even then when he pronounced the sentence of death upon the
condemned, would with one merry conceit or other, minister unto the hearers
occasion of laughter. Whereas Augustus Gaesar did far otherwise, who albeit
that he was accounted a sincere and upright iusticiar, yet for all that he
never pronounced sentence of death upon any, but with deep sighs fet even
from the bottom of his heart. Some other to the contrary, all enraged,
Claudius, who one day with a countenance more like a beast than an emperor,
struck him in the face with a pen knife, whom he was to pronounce sentence of
death of. Yet blame I not the grave exhortations, and bitter reproves of the
magistrate unto the offenders, and then especially, when as he means to use
more lenity than the rigor and extremity of the law requires. For why, it
is one of the things most requisite in a magistrate to cause the offenders to
have the better understanding and feeling of the greatness of their offenses:
that so they may the better also perceive and see what they have therefore
deserved, and so to be the rather induced to repentance. But it were a kind of
injury, and not beseeming the authority and wisdom of a magistrate Papirius
Cursor was of all that lived in his time (than which none is said to have been
Papirius Cursor a notable man.
more plentiful of virtues) a man most famous both at home and abroad in the
wars, but so terrible with the majesty of his command, as that he caused
even the stoutest of his followers to tremble and quake at the force of his
commanding speech: which his roughness of speech he for all that wisely
tempered with great lenity in the executing of punishment. As when the
general of the Prenestines was come unto him with his promised aid after the
battle fought and the victory obtained* Paperius with stern countenance,
and such speech as caused all there present to tremble thereat, having first
Paptrius commanded the same Lictor standing ready with the axe in his hand,
to have done execution (as all men thought) but to cut up a stub of a tree
which stood in his walk, and condemned the negligent captain in a great fine,
which he right willingly paid, with great thanks that he had so spared him
his life. Whom if he had put to death, it was in danger least that those his
followers the Romans allies would have thereupon revolted: which so great a
fault no doubt Papirius would not have pardoned a Roman. But as there is great
difference More severity to be required in a Martial magistrate then in a civil
which severity ought not yet to pass into cruelty.
betwixt faults which are committed in war, and elsewhere (for that as an
ancient captain Seneca propounds one act of Piso the Proconsull, for an
example of his notorious cruelty toward his soldiers. The notorious
cruelty of Piso the Proconsull.
For seeing a soldier returning alone out of the field into the camp, from
forraging, in a rage condemned him to death, for that he was returned out of
the field without Piso would not admit, but sent him presently to be executed.
But lo, whilst that the execution was about to be done, he suddenly returned
who was supposed to have been slain. Whereupon the captain which had the
charge to see the execution done, returned to the Proconsull with both the
soldiers, who embrasing one the other, were with great applause and rejoicing
of their fellow soldiers brought before him: Wherewith the Proconsull
enraged, caused them all three to be put to death: The first, for that he was
before condemned: The second, for that he was the cause of his fellows
condemnation:

CHAP. VI.
IN every well ordered Commonweal there be three degrees of Three degrees of
Magistrates in every well ordered Commonweal.
Magistrates: The highest, which is of them which may be called sovereign
magistrates, and know none greater then themselves, but the sovereign Majesty
only: The middle sort which obey their superiors, and yet command others:
And the lowest degree of all, which is of them which have no command at all
Dangerous in a Commonweal to give power to one Magistrate to command over all
the rest.
magistrate to be above the rest, who may lawfully command all the rest, as well
private Praefectum Praetorio, who had command over all the Magistrates
throughout the whole Empire, and might receive the appeals from all the other
magistrates and governors; but might not be appealed from himself, no not
although the appeal were made even unto the Emperor himself, albeit that the
first which were promoted to this dignity and honor, were but captains of
the praetorian legions: as Seius Strabo the first that was preferred Augustus:
and after that Seianus under Tiberius. Which honor the other succeeding
Emperors thought good to bestow upon such as of whose integrity, fidelity,
and devotion toward them they had had good experience and proof: such as they
would in some sort to be their imperial Lieutenants, upon whom they for the
most part discharged the mannaging of their greatest affairs, such as were by
the Emperors themselves to have been discharged: as the hearing of imperial
causes: the receiving and dismissing of Ambassadors: the hearing of appeals
from the Magistrates of all provinces; which great charge for that no man could
well execute, except he were skillful in the Laws, the Emperors in steed of
captains of their legions, preferred lawyers to that honor. So did Otho the
emperor promote Martian: Seuerus, Papinian: and Alexander, Vlpian. And at
length under the Greek Henry duke of Aniou, king Charles his great Lieutenant:
and the chief Bassa in the Turks empire: and the great Edegnare or Diadare in
Egypt under the principality of the Mamaluke Sultans. Yet in this they
differ, that in the Turkish empire the Great Sultans children in the absence of
their father command above all the Bassaes, and had the pre-eminence and
precedence before them: and in Egypt the great Soueraign power to command
over al magistrates not to be given to one alone, but in the most dangerous
times of the commonweal
the sovereign power to command over all Magistrates and officers without
exception, ought not to be given to one alone, but in case of necessity; as
when the Commonweal cannot otherwise be preserved: and yet then not with the
authority and countenance of a standing office, but by way of commission
only, such as were in ancient time granted unto the Roman Dictators, the
Archo of the Thessalians, and Azymnets In the presence of the sovereign
prince, all the power of the magistrates holden in suspense.
commissioners cease: For as the force and strength of all rivers and floods is
together with their names lost and swallowed up when they once fall into the
Sea; and as the other heavenly lights, as well the planets as other stars,
lose their light in the presence of the Sun, or as soon as he approaches
the horizon, in so much as that they seem again to render unto him the whole
light that they had before borrowed of him* even so likewise all the authority
of the Senate, and all the command and power of Magistrates cease in the
presence of the prince. So we see that he which delivers the sovereign So
and so the king commands, or says. But to the contrary, if the prince be
absent, the Chauncelour or President keeping the kings place above the other
princes, pronounces sentence or judgment according to the opinion and mind of
the Senate or Court wherein he sits, having ordinary jurisdiction and power,
and not in the name of the king. And for as much as William Poyet Chauncelour of
France, and President of the great Counsel, in the absence of the king,
oftentimes in judgment used this form of speech, The king says so and so
unto you; he was therefore charged with treason, besides the other points of
his accusation. Wherefore many are deceived which think those laws or Edicts
which are Velitis, Iubeatis, May it please Cassia Tabellaria, used these words,
Omnes qui hic assident volumus, iubemusque, All we that here sit will and
command. And after the laws called Tabellarias, the letters A. and V. R.
written in the tables, signified Antiquo, (or, I repeal the law) and Vti Rogas
(or, as you request). And in like manner the people of Athens gave their voices
sitting, the magistrate in the mean time speaking unto them standing, so long
as they had any thing to say unto them.

But then might some man say, If it be so, that the magistrates had no power to
command particular men, nor yet one another, in the presence of the people
which had the sovereignty. Why did the Tribune of the people send his usher
unto Appius Claudius the Consul, to command him to silence? And why did the
Consul ^o requite him with like, send his sergeant unto him likewise, crying
with a loud voice, That the Tribune was no magistrate? Whereunto I answer,
that such contention and debate* oftentimes fell out amongst the magistrates,
and especially betwixt the Consuls and the Tribunes: yet may we not thereof
conclude, that either of them had any power to command the one the other, in
the presence of the people, both their authorities then ceasing. So a
controversy arising betwixt the high court of Paris, and the court of Aids,
for wearing of their purple robes, and accompanying the king, not far from
Henry the second the French king, the president of the greater court of Paris
sent a sergeant unto the judges of the court of Aides, to forbid them to go any
further: (and albeit

But yet some man might object and say, That if the magistrates had no power to
command in the presence of the prince, they were no more magistrates, neither
should so great regard be had of their honors and dignities the prince being
present, so as we see there is. Whereunto mine answer is, That the
magistrates by the presence of the prince loose nothing, but still continue in
their offices, and so consequently in their dignities and honors, their power
to command being but suspended. As in like case viz. Creaeto Dictatore
magistratus abdi^aht, Whereby it might seem that the Dictator being created,
the magistrates were out of office: which is not to be understood of their
offices, but of their power, as we have before said, which was so for a while
suspended. For otherwise the Why the power of the (...) suspended.
expired. And the reason is general, that the power of the inferior should be
holden in suspense, in the presence of the superior: for otherwise the subject
might command contrary to the will of his lord, the servant contrary to the
good liking of his master and the magistrate contrary to the will and pleasure
of his sovereign prince^ o^ might at leastwise oppose himself against him,
and by the virtue of his office forbid the inferior persons to perform the
commands of their superiors: which can in no wise be done, without inevitable
prejudice unto the sovereignty* except it be that the prince laying aside the
sovereignty of his person, goes to see how his magistrates command; Claudius
ofttimes went openly to see the doings of his magistrates, and without
disguising himself sat beneath them, foolishly giving to them the more
honorable place: or else in case tha^ the prince, his majesty in a sort set
aside, give leave to the magistrate to judge of his cause. For the maxim of the
law, which says, That the magistrate of equal or greater power may be judged
by his companion or fellow in office, or by his inferior also, when he
snbmitteth himself unto his power, has place not only in private persons and
magistrates, but even in sovereign princes also; whether it please them to
submit themselves or their causes to the judgment of other princes, or of
their own subjects. And albeit that they may be judges in their Much more
honorable for soueraign princes to referr the hearing of their own causes unto
the magistrates than to judge thereof themselves.
own causes, unto whom power is by God given to judge, without being bound
to the law, as Xenophon says; yet neuerthesse it is much better beseeming
their majesty, and more indifferent also for them in their own causes to
abide the judgment of their magistrates, than to become judges thereof
themselves. But to the intent that the sovereign majesty of princes should
not in any thing be impaired of the greatness thereof, and yet that the
brightness and glory of the royal name should not dazzle the eyes of the
judges, it was wisely in this realm ordained by our ancestors, That the king
should not plead but by his attorney; and that in all public causes wherein
the king or Commonweal were privately interessed, the kings name should be
still cancelled, and the matter pleaded but in the name of his attorney. Which
thing the rest of the Augustus the emperor writ unto the lieutenants of his
provinces, That they should not suffer his name to be debased with being too
common in their commissions, as Tranquillus reports. Yet is it by a certain
special custom by our ancestors received, that if the king will in private
judgments against private men, be restored, the kings attorney shall not in
demanding thereof hold his seat and place, but change the same, least he
should seem to plead a public and not a private cause. But whereas we have
said, the power of the magistrates to be suspended in the presence of the
prince, belongs unto the whole princes family, so long as they wait upon
the prince: for over them the civil magistrates have no power, except such
magistrates as the prince has

Yet a man might demand, Whether the magistrate might forbid a subject or
private Whether a magistrate may for^ a subject to come unto the (...) being as
then within the jurisdiction of his territory?
man to come unto the court, being within the jurisdiction of his territory?
Which is not without some difficulty: howbeit without entering into farther
dispute, I say, that the magistrate banishing the guilty subject out of the
territory of his jurisdiction, where the prince may then be, secretly also
forbids him to approach the court, albeit that he cannot expressly forbid him
to come unto the princes court. Wherein the rule of Vlpian the lawyer takes
place, which says, Expressa nocent, non expressa non nocent, Things expressed
hurt, but things not expressed hurt not. And I remember how that Allemand (who
familiarly used my council) having by their sentence condemned him, forbad him
also to come within ten leagues of the court. Which thing the council
understanding, decreed, That it was lawful for no man but the prince only to
make any such prohibition. And happily was the chief cause that the president
(of whose council I was) obtained of the king, to have the judgment reuersed.
For it were not only an hard and inhumane thing, to keep the subjects from
having access unto the prince, to deliver unto him their petitions (as well
agreeing with the laws both of God and nature) but it should also be a thing
much prejudicial unto the majesty of a sovereign

Now as the presence of the Prince holds the power of all Magistrates in
suspense, The power of the lesser magistrates to cease in the presence of the
(...).
so is it also to be deemed of the power of the superior magistrates or
commissioners over the inferior. As a man may see in France, where the
Presidents and Councelours, every one in his jurisdiction, and the Masters of
Requests in all seats of justice, (except Iudicium soluitur, ventante eo qui
iudicare iusserat, vel qui maius imperium in ea jurisdiction habet, The
judgment is stayed, he forbidding it which commanded it, or he which has
greater power in the same jurisdiction. Where the word, Imperium, or power,
signifies not only the power to command, or forbid, but even the magistrate
himself: As when Cicero says: Maius imperium a minori rogari ius non est,
Lawful it is not, for the greater power to Messala the Lawyer declares by
example, as thus: A minore imperto, maius, aut a maiore collega rogari iure non
potest: quare neque Consules aut Praetores, Censoribus, neque Censores,
Consulibus aut Praetoribus turbant, aut retinent auspicia, at Censores inter
se; rursus Praetores Consulesque inter se, and vitiant et obtinent, The greater
power cannot by right be examined by the less, or a fellow in office, by an
other his fellow officer though greater then him self: wherefore neither the
Consuls or Pretors trouble, or keep the south-sayings from the Censors,
neither the Censors from the Consuls or Pretors, but the Censors Messala, which
he says himself to have writ out of the xiiij book of C. Tuditanus, but
has failed in that which he says after: Praetor etsi Collega Consulis est,
neque Praetorem, neque Consulem iure rogare potest, The Praetor although he be
the Consuls companion, can by right examine neither the Praetor nor the Consul,
which was happily done by the error of him that write it: For he should have
said: Praetor etsi Collega Praetoris est, The Praetor although he be the Pretors
companion, and not, Consulis, or the Consuls: except we should salve the
matter, in saying that the Consuls, Pretors, and Censors were all fellows and
companions: Quia soli ijsdem auspicijs, ijsdem comitijs, id est maioribus
creabantur, caeteri magistratus minoribus auspicijs and comitijs, for that they
alone were created and chosen, by the same diuinations and assemblies, that is
to say the greater: whereas the other magistrates were chosen by the lesser, for
otherwise the Latins never abused the word ( Collega) in that sense; Besides
that the Praetor was never the Consuls companion or fellow: but well to the
contrary, appeal might lawfully be made from the Praetor to the Consul. As we
read that Aemylius Lepidus the Consul received a man appealing from the Praetor
Orestes; and by a contrary decree reuersed the Pretors decree. So we read also
that Luctatius the Consul took the triumph from Valerius the Praetor, for that
he being Consul was the general of the army, although he were that day from
the army wherein the victory was got. That shows also the Praetor Vrbanus
duos Lictores apud se habeto, isque ad supremum solis occasum ius inter ciues
dicito, The Praetor (or Provost) of the city, let him have with him two
Lictors, and let him administer justice amongst the citizens unto the going
down of the sun. Wherefore let this stand for good, not only fellows and
companions in the same power, but also magistrates of like and

But yet question may be, whether a companion or fellow in office, or one of
lesser Whether a companion or fellow in office may stay the proceedings of his
equal or superior in authority.
power, or he which is no fellow in office at all, yet having power in his own
jurisdiction, may therein stay the acts or proceedings of his equal or
superior in authority? For oftentimes great controversies have fallen amongst
magistrates about such prerogatives. And the difference is right great betwixt
commandment, and empeachment or opposition: for companions or fellows in
office have no commanding power one of them over an other, and yet
nevertheless they may in public actions one of them oppose themselves
against an other, and so hinder one an others proceedings. Fellows in office
although they have no power one of them over an other, yet may they well hinder
one an others proceedings, and why?
As Piso the Praetor or judge betwixt strangers and the citisens of Rome, often
times troubled Verres the Praetor of the city, sitting in judgment of causes
betwixt citisen and citisen: causing his tribunal seat to be brought near
unto the tribunal seat of the Praetor of the city, so to hinder the unjust and
injurious decrees of Verres; and so administered justice unto the citisens
flying from the tribunal seat of the city, unto him, as by the law they
might. And therefore Cicero in one of his laws says: Magistratus nec
obedientem, and nociuum ci^em, mulcta, verberibus, vinculis coerceto, nisi par
maiorue potestas prohibessit, Let the magistrate restrain the disobedient and
hurtful citisen, with fine, stripes, and bonds, except an equal or greater
power forbid it to be done: The Magistrate can do nothing in the presence of his
companion equal in power with himself without his express consent.
neither suffices it to say prohibessit, or forbid it, for that the magistrate
can do nothing Paulus the lawyer says: Apud eum cui par imperium est manumitti
non posse, and Praetorem apud Praetorem manumittere non posse, Before him which
has equal power (with himself) a man cannot manumize, and a Praetor before
another Praetor cannot manumize. Neither does that saying of Vlpian contradict
or impugn the same: Consulem apud Consulem manumittere posse, which is, That
one of the Consuls may manumize before the other Consul: seeing that that is to
be understood that he might not do it upon the same day that he which did
manumize or enfranchise had the bundels of rods and power to command; for that
they both never had power upon Festus Pompeius, as is in many places to be
seen, whether they were at unity betwixt themselves or not. And therefore
Liuie surnamed the Salter, carried away the triumph from Claudius Nero his
fellow and companion in the Consulship, for that he commanded that day wherein
the victory was obtained (as says Liuie) albeit that the battle were given
against Hasdruball by consent of them both; For Lucius Caesar (as Festus
Pompeius writes) deemeth him to be called the greater Consul, which had the
bundels of rods or maces; or him which was first made Consul; which Paulus
himself confirms. And all this wisely, for if both of them should at once
have had the power, nothing could have been peaceable, nothing firm or the
force of the law which forbids, is greater then of that which commands.

But whereas we have said Magistrates of like power or fellows in office not to
be Magistrates of like power, or fellows in office, bound to the power or
command of their fellows, being* In number more.
bound to the power or command of their companions or fellows, that is so
true if that they both be in number equal: for in all Corporations and
Colleges, they which are in number most, are also superior in power: and
therefore the less part of magistrates fellows in office, cannot forbid the
greater. But if all the Magistrates were of one mind and opinion, these words
were wont to be written upon their decrees and edicts, Pro Collegio, for the
College, (which shall in their place be expounded.) But if it be true that we
have said, why did then Messala say? Consulem ab omnibus magistratibus
concione^ auocare posse* ab eo neminem: deinde Praetorem ab alijs preterquam a
Consulibus: minores magistratus nusquam nec concionem nec comitatum auocasse,
That the Consul Messala says is true in other magistrates, but not in the
Tribunes of the people: whom we have Seruilius the Senator directing his
speech unto the Tribunes, says, Vos Tribunt plebis Senatus appellat, vt in
tanto discrimine Reipublicae Dictatorem dicere Consules provestra potestate
cogatis, Tribuni pro collegio pronuntiant, placere Consules Senatus dicto
audientes esse, aut in vincula se duc^ iussuros, The Senate calls upon you the
Tribunes of the people, that in so great a danger of the Commonweal, Drusus
well caused Philip the Consul to understand, whom he made to be cast in
prison

That also which we have said, the greater part of a company, or college of
magistrates The opposition of one of the Tribunes of the people, sufficient to
hinder the proceedings of all the magistrate in Rome, as also the proceedings
of the rest of his fellow Tribunes.
to prevail against the lesser, takes not place amongst the Tribunes of the
people, one of the Tribunes voices being able of it self to stay all the
proceedings, not of the Senate only, but of all other the magistrates, yea and
of the rest of his fellow Tribunes also: whereas to the contrary, the acts of
one Tribune alone, were of force, except some of his fellows and companions
openly opposed himself against the same. As is in Liuie to be seen, where he
says, The farmers of the public demaine to have been discharged by a decree
published under the name but of one of the Tribunes only. And Appius the Censor
by force held his power and Censorship longer than he should have done, and the
time thereof being now expired, contratie to the law Aemilia, Sempronius the
Tribune of the people in the open assembly of the people, said unto him, Ego
te Appi in vincula duci iubebo nisi Aemiliae legi parueris, approbantibus sex
Tribunis actionem collegae, tres auxilio fuerunt summaque inuidia omnium or
dinum solus Censuram gessit, I will command thee, O Appius (says he) to be
cast into bonds, except thou obey the law Aemilia; and six so of the Tribunes
allowing and approving the doing of their companion and follow Tribunes, three
others of them took part with Appius, and so he alone Cicero then Consul
(the army of Cateline being discomfited and overthrown, by the conduct of C.
Antonius the other Consul) bare all the sway in the city, and had turned all
the favor of the people unto himself alone, nine of the Tribunes of the
people to restrain such his immoderat power, were all of opinion to send for
Pompey with his army; and had so done, had not Cato one of the Tribunes of the
people alone opposed himself in Ciceroes behalf, and so hindered the
proceeding of his fellow Tribunes. So when Scipio Africanus accused of
extortion, was to have been cast in prison, he was saved only by Sempronius
one of the Tribunes, and father of the Gracchies, opposing himself against his
fellows.

But how (might some man say) could one Tribune alone let the actions and
proceedings of the Senate, of the Consuls, yea and of all his companions and
fellows in office also? Yet most certain it is that he might so do, if the
other Tribunes preferred not a request against him unto the people, to have him
put out of his office and authority. And therefore at the request of Tiberius
Gracchus the Tribune, Marcus Octauius another of the Tribunes, withstanding the
profit of the people, and the enacting of the laws for the division of lands,
was of necessity to be thrust out of his office of the Tribuneship, before the
law Sempronia for the division of lands could be established. And to that end
tends that speech of the Tribune unto the Senators, in Liuie, Faxo ne iuuet
vox ista veto, qua collegas nostros tam laeti concinentes auditis, contemni iam
Tribunos plebis, quippe potestas Tribunitia suam ipsa vim frangat intercedendo,
I shall make (says he) that this word Veto, (or, I forbid) which you now so
merry hear our fellows together singing, shall help you nothing, the
Tribunes of the people must now needs be contemned, for that the Tribunitial
power does weaken the power of itself, by opposing it self against it self.
But this power and opposition of the Tribune, was ordained and provided for the
liberty of the people, and against force offered them, and not for the private
profit of the Tribunes themselves: who if question were of any particular of
theirs, whether it were in civil or criminal causes, were not in any thing
respected, but suffered judgment, as other men did, if some one or other of
their fellows Lucius Cotta one of the Tribunes of the people, being sued,
would neither answer nor pay his creditors, Fiducia sacrosanctae potestatis,
as bearing himself upon the reputation and credit of the most sacred power of
the Tribuneship; his companions in office openly denounced unto him, That they
would aid the creditors against him, except he made them payment. Yet at
length by little and little it was agreed, That the college or company of
Tribunes, should be also bound unto the same laws and customs that other
colleges and companies were, viz. That decrees made by the consent of the
greater part should bind the rest. As is easily to be gathered of that which
Liuie says, Ex auctoritate Senatus latum est ad populum, ne quis templum
arcemue iniussu Senatus, aut Tribunorum plebis maioris partis dedicaret, It was
by the authority of the Senate propounded to the people, That no man without
the command of the Senate, or of the greater part of the Tribunes of the
people, should dedicat a temple or a castle. And afterward by the law Attilia
it was ordained, That the Praetor of the city, and the greater part of the
Tribunes of the people, might appoint tutors unto women and fatherless
children. Which custom grew into such force, as that the Senate commanded
Quintus Pompeius Rufus a Tribune of the people to be cast into prison, for that
he being but one, went about to forbid an assembly of the states to be
called. Whereas otherwise the wilful rage of one furious Tribune might have
troubled the whole state of the Commonweal. And this was the cause why the
Consul being about to assemble Auspicia, that is to say, unto the disposition
of the air, or the flight of birds, for the coniecturing thereby, whether the
thing which was then taken in hand, were agreeable with the will and pleasure of
their gods or not. For if it thundered or lightened never so little, or if the
birds were seen to fly on the right hand, or if any of them there present
fell of the falling sickness, (which was therefore called Morbus comitialis) or
if any other monster were borne, the assembly was accounted thereby polluted,
and so the people presently broke up and departed without any thing doing: the
soothsayers thereby denouncing unto them, That the gods were then angry, and
not well pleased with their doings. Caius Figulus the Consul with his
companion, after he had been chosen, taken his oath, and transported his army
even into Spain; yet was he nevertheless with his fellow Consul, by a decree
of the Senate, called back again home and enforced to give up their power and
authority: For that the soothsayers had before declared unto Tiberius Gracchus
the Asellius the Praetor, or Provost of the city, for favoring Appius
Saturninus Tribune of the people, slew Munius the Consul, Appeals to be still
made from the lesser magistrates to the greater; and not from the greater to the
lesser, or to any other, but equal in authority with them.
in the very assembly of the people.

And as public actions are troubled or let by magistrates equal or greater
in power than they by whom they are done, opposing themselves against them: so
being once done, appeal is to be made from the lesser magistrates unto the
greater, saving unto every man his jurisdiction and power. Now if it be not
in the lesser magistrates power to command the greater, or to stay his
proceedings, much less can he undo Caesar as then but Praetor, being accused
before one Cateline, caused both the accuser and the Questor being both
grievously fined to be cast in prison, and especially the Questor, for that he
had suffered a greater magistrate than himself to be accused before him, as
says Suetonius. So the court of Paris by a severe decree forbad the judges or
magistrates of them which have territoriall jurisdiction, to bind the kings
magistrates or judges with their edicts or prohibitions: and that if they did
otherwise, the kings magistrates or judges might by way of justice proceed
against them for so doing.

But here a man might doubt, Whether the inferior or lesser magistrate, who may
Whether the inferior magistrate which may be commanded by the superior, may
also be commanded by the superior magistrates Lieutenant or deputy.
be commanded by the superior, may also be commanded by the superior
magistrates lieutenant, or deputy? Which most have thought to be a thing
without doubt, Charles the seventh that the lieutenants should be placed and
displaced by the Seneschals: but the doubt arose after that they were by him
erected in title of office, as having then their power from the king, and not
from the Seneschals. But we must not thereupon presume, that the purpose and
intent of the king therein, Apud legatum Proconsulis non est legis actio, that
is to say, that he might do no exploit or act of justice, but in the name of
another man: not for that* it was not lawful for the Proconsuls Cuias has
denied, and in the ancient reading corrected these words, Ex quo prouinciam
ingressus est: Which his correction if it were to be admitted, thereof should
follow diverse inevitable absurdities, these words (as he would have them)
being left out: for so the lieutenants could not in the territory of their
magistrates, ordain, decree, command, or do any thing; which is all that the
law properly calls Legis actiones, or the actions of the law; all which we
read lieutenants to have still done in their own provinces: and yet
nevertheless the Maires, and Duumuirs, or Consuls of villages and towns, had
power to manumise or enfranchise, and The power of the superior magistrates over
the inferior* extends not farther than their own terri^ory seat and
jurisdiction.
Paris, adjudged for the bishops of Troy, and Neuers: Whereby it was said, that
they

But now the question might be asked, Whether that magistrates equal and
fellows Honor and dignity in nothing to communicate with authority and power.
in authority and power, be also equal in honor and dignity? Whereunto I
answer, that honor and dignity does in nothing communicate with authority
and power: yea oftentimes it chances and comes to pass, that he which
has most honor, has so much the less power: than which secret none is
almost greater, or more profitable for the maintenance and preservation of the
Aristocraticall or Popular Commonweales, Vrbanus (or the Praetor of the city)
was in dignity and honor above the rest, and so called the Greatest Praetor,
for that he was first of all Charles the viij, the

But forasmuch as we have said, that magistrates equal in power, or which hold
nothing Whether equal lords or co^peeres of the same territory and
jurisdiction, may chastise or reform one another.
one of them another, cannot be commanded one of them by another; a man may
doubt whether if amongst many princes or coequall lords, one offend, he may be
restrained or corrected by the other princes or lords his equels? For why,
jurisdiction is of it self by nature indivisible: and lords of one and the
same jurisdiction have one of them as much power as the other; and every one
of them has entire power for all: which is not so amongst princes or
magistrates which have their charges or territories divided, and which have not
any thing to command one of them the other; and much less when many
magistrates in one body or college have one and the same charge together;
where no one of them has of himself any have: yet so it is, that the fact in
question is always in judgment to be tried, whether In a college or company
of magistrates or judges the greater part agreeing in one, may judge or chastise
any one or the lesser part of their fellows. A difference betwixt service and
jurisdiction.
judges, if the greater part of them agree in one, there is no doubt but that
they may judge or chastise any one, or the lesser part of their fellows: as
they did in the Senate of Rome, after the law which Adrian the emperor made for
the judging of Senators; Philip the fair more straightly provided for: yea
although the donation were by the sovereign prince made to religious or devout
uses; which many (but without cause) have excepted, the law being made
general. Seeing therefore that magistrates in power equal, or which hold not
any thing one of them of another, cannot be commanded or corrected one of them
by yet flourishing, that to put in execution a mandat or judgment out of ones
own territory, Sententiam Romae dictam, possunt Praesides in prouincijs, si
hoc iussi fuerint exequi, The Presidents in their provinces may put in
execution a sentence (or judgment) given at Rome, if they be thereunto
commanded: yet much more seemly it were by the good leave of the magistrate to
obtain the same, than by force to extort it against his will. As in like cause
the Emperor said unto him which complained of his companion, without having
before spoken unto him, Alloquere illum, ne rem iniustam faciat, Speak unto
him, that he do thee not wrong: forasmuch as the princes command, or
constraint of the superiors in such case, gives occasions of quarrels and
iealousies amongst Magistrates, seeing the decrees of their equals, or of their
inferiors, Marcellus, who in Contention betwixt great magistrates or courts,
about their power and jurisdiction, always unto the poor subject hurtful.
despite of Caesar caused certain of the citisens of Nouocome to be whipped,
to make them to know (as he said) that Caesar had no power to give unto them
the right and freedom of the citisens of Rome. But much greater is the poor
subjects harms if such contention and difference for power and authority,
fall out amongst the greatest magistrates, or highest Courts. As I remember such
a difference fell out betwixt the

But what if the Magistrate shall have no respect or regard unto the requests
or decrees Wilful magistrates by the prince or their superiors to be enforced to
suffer justice to be done within their jurisdiction
of his equal, or of the inferior magistrate, nor suffer their commandments
to be put in execution within his jurisdiction. Truly in this case he is to be
thereunto by the superior magistrates compelled: or if they be of the higher
sort of magistrates which are at controversy among themselves about their
jurisdiction and power, they are by the princes authority to be enforced: for
so these words of Vlpian the Lawier are to be understood, Si hoc iussi
fuerint, If they shall be so commanded: viz. by the prince, (but not by the
magistrates) at such time as the Presidents or governors of countries, every
one of them in his own province had the chiefest power and authority next unto
the Prince, by whom only they were to be commanded. And whereas in the Edicts

But yet it might be demanded, whether the inferior Magistrates might cause
their Whether the inferior Magistrate be to have leave from the superior, unto
whom appeal was made, to put his own sentence in execution, the appeal being
now let fall.
commands to be put in execution, without the leave of the superior
magistrate, unto Fatalia, enduced thereunto by an old error and inueterat fault
of them which have translated the Code, and authentiques out of Greek into
Latin, wherein for (...), they have red (...), which is to say, fatal days,
for days prefixed and of assignation: which the law of the twelve Tables
called Statos d^es, days appointed; as in this law, Si status dies cum host,
that is to say, If the day appointed with a stranger. Neither ever did lawier
or man that could speak Latin, use this form of speaking, neither has any of
the Latins or Greeks called them for (...) or Fatales. The Lawiers have
oftentimes divided Dies sessionum, a diebus continuis, Days The error of the
word Fatales.
of Session, from days of Continuation. And if any thing were by the magistrate
commanded to be done within a certain time, the Lawiers called it Statutum
tempus, and edictum peremptorium, a time appointed, or edict peremptory: but
when the time wherein the suit ought to be determined is expired and past, or
that the suit is let fall, we say, Litem mori, the suit to die; or instantiam
perimi, the instance to be lost: as before, we say, Litem viuere, or, the suit
to live: but none of the Lawiers has usurped Fatalem diem, or Fatalia tempora,
a fatal day, or fatal times. But all this error is derived of the changing
of this one Greek letter (...) into (...), for seeing that by the word (...),
or (...), the Greeks as well as the Hebrews signify Fatum, or destiny, they
must needs translate (...), fatalem diem, that is to say, a fatal day.
Demosthenes statum diem; and we in our practice, praefixam, that is to say, an
appointed, or prefixed day: for so Demosthenes says against Media, (...), and
against Stephanus, (...): and sometimes also he says, (...), as to
Nicostratus: and the later Greeks have called it (...), and (...), but never
called it (...). And so pope Synesius metaphorically calls the last day of a
man's life (...), because he would not call it (...), or Fatal; a word unto
Christian men and true religion strange. Wherefore for Fatal days of
appeals, we shall more truly and better use the terms of Appointed times,
for so the lawyer calls them. But that Justinians laws were written in
Greek before they were written in Latin, I suppose no man to Theodosian and
Hermogenian Codes, out of whom Justinians Code was almost all compiled, were
as well written in Greek as in Latin, it is plain: and so the law Properandum
to have been translated rather by a Greek than by a Latinist, being
altogether writ in the Greek phrase, as namely calling the defendant
fugientem, or the party flying away; which is the proper Greek word (...)*
Neither ought it to seem strange, that the Greeks translated the Roman
laws, and even Justinians Iustitutions into Greek; seeing them to have
translated most of the writings of Thomas Aquinas, as also the latter books of
Aristotle's Metaphysikes out of Arabike into Greek, the Greek copy being
before lost. But to return again from Charles the seventh, were utterly
abolished and taken away: suffices it the appeal being once given over before
the judge that gave the sentence, to request, that the same may now be put in
execution, except the superior magistrate unto whom the party condemned has
appealed, has expressly before forbid the executionto be done. In which case it
is needful, that such prohibitio^ be taken away, before the inferior magistrate
proceed further. For otherwise

Now all that which we have hitherto said concerning magistrates, and of the
obedience that one of them owes unto another, is to be understood of
magistrates that be of the self same Commonweal. But what shall we then say of
magistrates of diverse Commonweales? As if a man by the magistrates condemned in
this kingdom shall fly into Greece, whether shall the Grand Signior of the
Turks, at the request of the French king, or of some other private man whom
the matter does concern, cause the judgment to be put in execution, without
further inquiry of the equity of the cause? The Howbeit if question were of
the honor, or life, not of one of our own subjects only, Adrian the emperor
commanded the governors of his provinces, to use (...) (for that word the law
uses) that is to say, to judge again of them which had been condemned, by
the justices of peace even of the same Roman empire. And that which I have
said, is right straightly observed and kept in the Commonweales of the Swissers,
of Geueue, of Venice, Lucque, and Genes, who cause the condemned strangers
flying unto them, to be again of new tried, before they restore them unto
foreign princes, demanding from them such their condemned Whether soueraign
princes be bound to restore strangers flying unto them, unto their own
princes demanding them again.
subjects again. For so all lawiers almost with one consent say; Sovereign
Princes Baldus adds this condition thereunto, Not to restore him to be right,
so that the prince unto whom the condemned or guilty person is so fled, do
upon him justice. But if they will confess every Prince by the laws both of
God and nature to be bound to do justice; they must also confess that he is
bound to restore another man's subject unto his own natural prince, demanding
him: not only for the more manifest trying out of the truth, and discovering
of A notable (...) of Mahomet the Great, first emperor of the Turks.
like bond, so well agreeing with the laws both of God and nature? Wherein the
notable Mahomet (the second of that name) emperor of Constantinople, even he
which was surnamed the Great, is tight worthily commended; in that he caused
the murderer, who had most cruelly slain Julian de Medices in the Church
before the Altar, to be apprehended at Constantinople whether he was fled, and
so bound hand and foot, to be restored to Laurence de Medices and the state of
Florence, requesting of him: which he did not as respecting the power of the
Florentines, being then but small, but as fearing the hand and power of the
immortal and almighty God. And in this Realm the custom has always been
to restore the guilty fugitives unto their own Lords and Princes demanding
of them, except therein question be made of the majesty, bounds, or state of
the kingdom, which has been by their decrees the Swissers made with the
emperor Charles the fifth, as Duke of Millan, the vij article Henry the second,
after he had by his Ambassador requested the Lords and people of Geneua, to
restore unto him Baptista Didato an Italian, his Receiver general of Roan, who
was thither fled with all the money of the receipt: which they being thereto
oftentimes requested, refused to do: At length the king protested unto the
Lords of Berne, in whose protection the Seignorie of Geneua then was, that he
would use the law of Reprisall against them of Geneua; who before had resolved
in their grand Council of two hundred, in no wise to restore him: but
afterward being by an Herault sent from them of Berne, willed to deliver him
unto the king, they changed that their former opinion for the detaining of
him: So at length the robber of the common. Anne Mommorancie Constable of
France, so that they are to be blamed which otherwise either think or write.
Wherefore I hold it to be an injury unto the estate A guilty fugitive is not
by another prince to be detained, but restored after he is by his own prince
demanded.
of another man, to detain a guilty fugitive after he is demanded to be
again unto his own prince restored; and much more if he should be so detained
by the subjects among themselves. For which cause all the Tribes of Israel
combined themselves against the Tribe of Benjamin, which was so utterly
destroyed, except six hundred ^. Iudic. 20. cap.
same cause we find that the Hippotae were all destroyed, and their city
v^terlie razed by the Thebaus; for that they chose rather to defend the
murderers of Phox the Baeotian, and for them to take up arms, then to restore
them unto the Thebans, demanding them. But if the Prince unto whom the
fugitive is retired certainly know him A guilties and innocent fugitive tiue,
is not to be restored unto his angry prince demanding of him.
whom he has so received, to be an innocent and guiltles man, and to be
unjustly pursued and sought after, as having but escaped the cruelty of a
tyrant, it is not only a shameful and injurious thing to betray the poor
innocent and strange man unto the cruel tyrant: but he should rather for the
miserable man's defense, and safeguard of his life take up arms, seeing that by
the law of God, we ought not to restore a fugitive Deuteronomy. 16. (...) 23.
servant unto his angry master, from whose fury he is fled into another man's
house.

And thus much concerning Magistrates; and the obedience that they owe unto
Princes, and of the power that they have over particular men, and of the
respect that they ought to have one of them toward an other. But to compare
the Magistrates of ancient time, with ours now, belongs not to this our
purpose, considering that they are still in change, howbeit that we see them
to be like in effect, although that they differ in names. As we read in the
book of the kings, where it is said, That Azarias the son of the high priest
Tsadoc was near unto the person of Solomon to instruct him in matters
concerning Religion; that Iosophat was chief of his council, or his
Chancellor; Eliphore, and Aiah were his Secretaries for the estate; that
Banaia was his Constable; and Azarias the son of Natan his Lieutenant
general over the governments of the twelve Tribes, which are and have been as
it were like in all Monarchies. So in like manner we see in the Turkish Empire,
that the first and principal Bassa is General of the army, as Constable or
chief Mareschall; and Beglerbegs are governors general of Provinces; the
Zanzacks are as more particular and inferior governors; the two Cadilesquires
are the Chauncelours, attendinding unto the administration of justice, the one
in Asia, the other in Europe; the Sabbassaes and Cadies are the ordinary
magistrates and judges; the Mophti is the great Bishop. So in the kingdoms of
Thunes, of Fes, and of Maroch, the Munafide is as Chauncelour, the

CAAP. VII. Of Corporations, and Colleges, Estates, and Communities, and what
profits
NOw after that we have spoken of a Family, and of the parts thereof, of
Sovereignty, and of Magistrates; we must speak of Corporations and Colleges
also: wherefore let us then first speak of the cause of Corporations and
Colleges, and after of their power and privileges in general, and of the
manner of punishing of them, if they offend: and last of all whether the
Commonweal can be without them. The difference of a Family, from Corporations
and Colleges, and so of them from The difference betwixt ^ family, a
college, and a Commonweal.
by amity alyed, are members of one corporation and community; so many
corporations and communities allied by a sovereign power, make one
Commonweal. Now a family is a community natural; a college is a community
civil; and a Commonweal has that moreover, That it is a community governed
by a sovereign power, and may be so strait, as that it may have neither
corporation nor colleges, but only many families in it. And so the word
Community is common unto a family, a college, and a commonweal. And
properly a Corporation is understood A Family the beginning of all civil
societies.
(as we say) it self a natural society, and by the father of nature it self
first founded in the beginning together with mankind. But when reason, by God
himself ingrafted in us, had made man desirous of the company and society of
man, and to participate together both in speech and conversation; the same so
wrought, as that proceeding farther from the love of them that were domestical
and their own, it extended farther, to take pleasure in the propagation and
increase of families. So also families by little and little departing from
their first beginning, learned by civil society to imitate the natural
society of a family. For why, a Commonweal is a civil society, which can
Towns. But being grown to such a multitude, as that they could not longer be
contained The beginning of strong towns and cities.
places; or to take from them their springs, their fountains, or pleasant
places; or to drive them from their pastures or feedings: which violence so
offered by the stronger, enforced the weaker either to seek out places by
nature defencible and strong, or else by art or wisdom to fortify
themselves, their children, wives, and families, with ditches, trenches, and
walls, whereof strong towns and cities arise. For so Dionysius Seruius to
have placed certain places of refuge in the mountains and strongest hills,
whether the poor country men might retire themselves out of the fields, so to
save themselves from the incursions of their enemies. And yet could not the
enemies force be so kept off with walls and other fortifications, but that
they which had so shut up themselves therein, were yet nevertheless besieged
by the stronger. For why, the first sort of men was most given to rapine,
murder, and theft, delighting The first sort of man, most delighted in theft
and murder, and oppressing of others weaker than themselves.
in nothing more, nor accounting any honor greater than to rob and kill, and
to oppress the weaker sort as slaves: as Plutarch well agreeing with the
sacred history most truly writes. And long before Plutarch, Thucidides the
most famous historiographer of them that flourished among the Greeks reports,
all Greece but a Theft and robbery in ancient time no disgrace nor shame.
by the mightier sort; and then robbery and theft to have been no disgrace or
shame. Yea such as traueiled by Sea or land (as the same author reports)
when they met, before they came near together, used commonly (and that without
any reproach or imputation) to ask whether they were Robbers or Pirates or
not. And not only Plato, and his disciple Aristotle, have put robbery among
the kinds of hunting, but the Hebrews also* who call Thieves and Robbers,
mighty hunters, as they did Nimroth. And by the laws of Solon it is plain,
that men might lawfully join in fellowship Theft in ancient time lawful both
amongst the Greeks and Latins.
to rob and steal, (provided always that it were not from the subjects of
their Vltra Promontorium pulchri praedae aut mercaturae gratia Romani ne
nauiganto, Polyb. Lib. 3.
Beyond the fair Promontorie, the Romans shall not sail either for booty, or
in trade of merchandise. From which kind of robberies long it was before other
people also abstained: for so Caesar speaking of the Germans in his time
says, Latrocinia nullam habent infamiam, quae extra fines cuiuscunque
ciuitatis fiunt, atque ea iuuentutis exercendae, ac desidiae minuendae causa
fieri praedicant, Robberies done without the bounds of every city, have with
them no infamy; and those they say to be done for the exercise of the youth,
and avoiding of sloth. This license and impunitie of robbing and reauing,
constrained men which as yet had no Princes nor Magistrates, to join themselves
in society and amity for the defense of one an other, and to make Communities
and Fraternities, which the Greeks called (...), and (...), as brethren which
drew water of the same well, which they called (...), as also (...), which are
rural and country people using the fair fountain, which the Dorians called
(...), and whereof such country villages were called Pagi, as Commessari, who
in the same country villages, which the Greeks called (...)* did ordinarily
eat and drink together: as Festus in verbo pagi. The societies of men, why
they were first sought out.
Festus writes. Whereby it is plainly to be seen, the societies of men among
themselves, to have been at the first sought out for the leading of their lives
in more safety and quiet: and them first of all to have sprung from the love
which was betwixt man and wife: From them to have flowed the mutual love
betwixt parents and their children: then the love of brethren and sisters one
toward another: and after them the friendship betwixt cosens and other nie
kinsmen: and last of all, the love and good will which is betwixt men joined in
alliance: which had all at length grown cold, and been utterly exstinguished,
had it not been nourished, maintained, and kept, by societies, communities, The
happy estate of the people of Israel before they had any king, or other form
of Aristocratique or popular commonweal.
over them. So the people of Israel for a long time flourished in great
tranquillity without kings, and without any Popular or Aristocraticall estate,
every man living at his pleasure in all liberty, every Tribe being in it
self united by the bond of blood and kindred, and all of them together by the
community of their law and sacrifices. Who when they were by any enemy to be
assailed or invaded, the estates of their Tribes and communities assembling
together, made choice of a chieftaine, unto whom they gave sovereign power;
and namely of such an one as God had with his spirit enspired and stirred up
amongst them. So of many Tribes and families together united, was made
Fraternities, communities, and colleges, why they were first instituted and
ordained*
together. So we see that Numa Pompilius, king and lawgiuer unto the Romans
(after he had abolished the name of the Sabines, which some thing divided the
Roman state) established certain fraternities, and colleges, or companies of
men, of all manner of occupations; appointing unto every fraternity certain
patrons, priests, and solemn Mercury for their patron: which he seemed to
have done to the imitation of Solon, who by a positive law permitted all manner
of fraternities and communities whatsoever, with power for them to make such
laws and statutes among themselves as they should see good, so that they were
not contrary unto the public positive laws of the state. Lycurgus also did
not only permit, but straightly command also to maintain and cherish such
societies and communities, as well general as particular; and that all his
subjects should take their refection and diet in companies of fifteen and
fifteen together: which for that they were kept for friendship sake, were
called (...), of the friendship that they had Sodalitia; for the unity,
company, and Amity and friendship the foundation of ^l humane and civil
societies and more requisite for the keeping and maintaining thereof than
justice is self.
friendship they had among themselves, eating and drinking together for the
most part: and having no judges but themselves, if any difference or strife
chanced to fall out amongst them, being such companions and fellows; as
knowing that amity and friendship was the only foundation of all humane and
civil society, and much more requisite for the keeping and maintaining
thereof, than justice it self: For that justice never flexible, but always
keeping the uprightness of it self, by just judgment well

Wherefore the Cretentians in ancient time did all eat and drink together,
young and old, men and women; for to maintain the love and amity which we
have before Orderly feasts and meetings of old time instituted to maintain
love and amity amongst men.
and kept in the Christian primitive church, who oftentimes made such feasts,
which they called (...), for the devout kissings, and charitable embracements
one of them (in the feruensie of their zeal) gave to another, in the ending of
them, besides their ordinary Pythagorians, who ordinarily met together, and
lived for most part of their time in common. And thus much concerning the
cause, the beginning, and progress of corporations, and colleges,
communities, and companies: which afterward by succession of time have in all
Commonweales been better ruled by laws, statutes, and customs.

But that all things which are to be said of corporations and colleges, may in
order be declared: Let us first orderly set down and show, what power every
corporation The diuisiion of colleges and companions.
Commonweal can be without colleges or companies, and what colleges are most
necessary and best fitting a Commonweal. Which the better to understand, we
may say, that all colleges and companies are ordained either for religion, or
for policy, and so concern but worldly things. If they be instituted but for
policy, either they have jurisdiction, or are without all jurisdiction.
Colleges without jurisdiction, are such as are ordained for the bringing up of
youth, or for fellowship of physicians, or of other scholars, or of merchants,
or of handie craft and trades men, or of companies of husbandmen: but such as
have jurisdiction, are colleges of magistrates, and judges, such What a
corporation or college is.
And every one of them may have diverse rules, statutes, and particular
privileges. So that we may say, that every corporation or college, is a
lawful community or consociation under a sovereign power. Where the word
Lawful imports the authority No corporation or college to be suffered
without the leave of the soueraige.
of the sovereign, without whose permission there can be no college: and is
referred not only unto the power of meeting together: but unto the place also
where it ought to meet, unto the time and manner of meeting, and to what things
ought to be entreated of, in their assembly. And the word community, or
consociation, signifies that there ought some thing to be common to all that
be fellows of the college or Every college of society must have something
common to all the fellows thereof, being otherwise no college.
society: For where there is nothing common, there is no college: sufficient
it is for Collegia, or colleges. Yet some colleges there be, which have
almost all those things among themselves common, as we What number of fellows
ought to be in ^ college or society.
see those to have, which are together joined for study, religion or devotion
sake.

As for the number of fellows in a college or society, it is no matter what
it be, so that they be not fewer than three: for that otherwise it cannot be a
college. Wherefore the Romans called it not a college of their Censors, or
Consuls, as they did of What number of fellows ought to be in a college or
society.
their Pretors, Tribunes, and Questors. And as for the fellows themselves, my
meaning is, that they should be equal of power, in respect of their community
or fellowship, having every one of them a deliberatiue voice in their
affairs: howbeit that it may be, that the college, or prince, may make choice
of one of the fellows to command, reform, and chastise every one of the
fellows in particular, but not all of them in general: such as are our bishops
and abbats, having power to chastise their religious and chanons But if this
head or chief have power over the whole body of the society or college in
gross, it is not then rightly a college, but rather a form of family, such
as are colleges or schools ordained for the bringing up of youth: wherein
there be no bursors or fellows, which have therein any deliberatiue voice:
For if it have in it

And hereof arises a question, Whether a bishop in the company of his
priests, or an abbat amongst his religious, be to be accounted fellows, having
the very title and Whether the head or principal of a college be to be also
accounted a fellow thereof
right of a fellow, and himself making a part of the college, without the
quality or title of a bishop or abbat? Which question being by the learned on
both parts disputed, yet remains undecided. But to leave the disputation
apart, it seems, that he which is chosen by the college or prince to
command all the fellows in particular, has a That a college is a name of
right: and consists not in the persons of the fellows, but may still remain,
all the fellows thereof being dead.
that a college is a name of right, and that all the reuenew and right of a
college

And whereas we have said, that a college or society may be without any
common Antoninus first that gave leave for legacies to be given to colleges
stock or treasure: that it also to be understood, that a college or society
may be ordained with such prouiso, that nothing shall be left unto it by gift
or legacy. Antoninus the emperor was the first which gave leave for legacies
and donations to be given to al colleges, except to the colleges of the
Jews, unto whom it was yet lawful to meet together for religion sake, and to
have their Synagogues: as is to be seen in the oration of the ambassador
Philo, unto the emperor Caligula. And Augustus himself by letters pattens
directed unto the governors of the provinces of the empire, commanded, That
they should permit and suffer the Jews to enjoy their colleges. Whereupon
Augustus a great fauorour of the Jews.
Narbanus Proconsull of Asia, forbad the magistrates of Ephesus in any sort to
let of disturb them. Yea that more is, Augustus himself commanded a daily
and perpetual sacrifice of a calfe, a goat, and a ram, to be made at
Jerusalem for the welfare of himself, and of the Commonweal: and willed an
ordinary alms or doale to be given unto the Jews, of his own proper costs
and charges, for the relief of their necessity. There be also corporations
and colleges of judges and magistrates, which yet are not capable of
testamentarie legacies, if they have not express leave by their erection and
institution so to do. As was judged against the Senate of Rome: whereunto
Russius Caepio one of the Senators, had given by legacy a certain sum of
money, which he willed to be still distributed to them only which came unto
the council: which legacy Caepio his heirs denied it to be unto the Senate
due: in which controversy Domitian the emperor gave sentence for the heir,
and excluded the Senate, although it were the most ancient, and most necessary
corporation of all the Roman Commonweal.

And thus having set down and declared the beginning and definition of
colleges, and communities: let us now also speak of their power in general;
which is not determined by their particular foundations, statutes, and
privileges, which are diverse and The colleges of judges and the chief colleges
in a Commonweal.
almost infinite, according to the diversity of the particular colleges and
communities themselves. Now the chief corporations or colleges, and which
have most power in a Commonweal, are the colleges of judges and magistrates:
who not only have

But question might be made, Whether it were more expedient that the colleges
Whether it w^ more expedient the colleges of magistrates and judges to be
judged and reformed by their fellows of the same society, or by others.
of magistrates and judges, should be judged by their fellows, or by others?
for some particular reasons, which in due place we shall hereafter set down.
But here to make the matter short, If the college for the most part be
composed of evil and naughty men, it is not to be left unto themselves, to
judge of their own misdemainers; but they are to be judged by the superior
magistrates, if they have power over them; or by the prince, in case they be not
by any other superior magistrate to be reformed. But if the Adrian decreed,
That the Roman Senators should be judged by the Senate only. And for the self
same reason the civil jurisdiction of merchants, and for the trade

As for other corporations and colleges, as of physicians, and tradesmen,
albeit that Colleges not having any jurisdiction but only a restraining power,
how they are to use the same.
by their foundation they have not any jurisdiction or commanding power; yet
nevertheless so it is, that they always have a certain restrayning
authority and power by their statutes and privileges, limited and allowed
them; and sometime without any limitation at all left unto the wisdom and
discretion of the corporation or college, or Diana whilst they were yet in
whipping; most part of them not daring so much as to sigh or groan, for fear
they had to be accounted faint hearted cowards. And albeit that the Frederike
the second gave power and authority unto the rectours of Universities, and
that the principals of schools and colleges have always had the correction
of their disciples and scholars: yet that is to be understood but of light
matters, and not of such chastisement and correction as the magistrate has by
the princes grant over private offenders; as many have been of opinion. For
why, neither the German emperor, no^ the pope can give any such power unto the
principalles of colleges, or to the colleges themselves: but in such
countries as are unto themselves subject. For albeit that pope Gregory the
eleventh in a Bull granted for the confirmation of the privileges of the
Vniuer^itie of Paris, before granted by the popes Urban the fifth, and Innocent
the sixth, in one article provided, That if a scholar Whether children having
taken upon them any vow of religion, be yet nevertheless bound to honor and
obey their parents.
of children toward their parents, remains always in force and power,
notwithstanding whatsoever bond and vow they have made to any corporation or
college. For why, neither man's laws, nor the statutes or privileges of
princes can derogat from the laws of God and nature, which has expressly bound
children unto the obedience of their fathers and mothers; from which they can
by no otherwise free, or yet deliver tthemselues, than by lawful emancipation:
or their fathers silence, who in saying nothing, seem to have consented unto
their childrens vows, which by speaking they might have let: which consent
for all that excuses not children from doing the honor and reverence due unto
their parents, although that they being so professed, D'aurade, to be in their
habits shamefully drawn upon a hurdle to the place of execution, and there to
be quartered, without disgrading of them, for having most cruelly murdered
That Monks may convent their Abbot before the ordinary judge: and also appeal
from the in^ust sentence of their Abbot.
the head of their monastery, whose severity they could by no means endure.
Yea the abbat himself may by his monks be conuented before the ordinary
judge, and that as well in criminal as civil matters: who may also freely
appeal from the sentence of their abbat unto his superior, as it has
oftentimes been judged by the decrees of the parliament of Paris; and that
without leave, as witnesses Panormitan the Abbot.
the abbat of Palermo; Cicero of the Roman merchants, Mercuriales and
Capitolini, M. Furium hominem nequam, equitem Romanum de collegio deiecerunt,
The Mereuriales and Capitolini (says he) thrust M. Furius a naughty man, and
yet a gentleman of Rome, out of their college or company. And in Lacedemonia
(as Plutarch writes) it was lawful for to thrust out of their colleges or
companies, him that Panormitan the abbat writes, That in abbeys or colleges
erected for devotion, the chapiters have power to thrust out any of the
fellows, or to deprive him of his ordinary diuidents, but not to beat him, or
to use sen^re correction upon him, or yet to imprison him; as has been iudeged
by a decree of the parliament of Paris.

But yet here a man might ask, Whether a college may make a decree, That none
of the fellows shall convent or sue another of his fellows, before any other
judges but the college? And in case it be so decreed, whether he that shall
break the decree so made and sue his fellow before another judge, shall be
bound unto the civil penalty in the decree set down? Wherein Sceuola the
lawyer is of opinion, the decree to be would not. For in all communities,
corporations and colleges, and so generally in How decrees are in colleges and
societies to be made, to bind every one of them to that is common to every one
of them in particular, as also to that which is common to them all jointly and
indiuisibly together.
every society and company, if question be of any thing which is common to
them al in particular and apart from the community, the express consent of
every one of them is therein requisite, if any thing be therein to be done. But if
question be of that which is common to them all jointly and indiuisibly, it
suffices that the greater part be of one opinion, for the binding of the rest:
Provided always, that nothing be ordained or decreed, contrary to the
statutes of the college, established by the sovereign prince, or by the
founder of such corporation or college, authorized by the prince. Wherefore the
laws of the Commonweal, and the statutes of the college standing whole and
entire, the college may make decrees which may bind the lesser part all
together, and all the fellows in particular: yet still provided, that two
third parts of the fellows consent unto

But yet it might be doubted, Whether decrees made by the consent and good
liking Whether decres made by the consent of an whole college or society: may
by the greater part thereof again be abrogated or repealed.
of an whole college or society, might be again repealed and abrogated by
the greater part, or two third parts of the same society or college? Which I
doubt not viz. of the Clergy, the Nobility, and Comminaltie, nothing can be
done or decreed by any two of the orders, to the hurt or prejudice of the
third, especially if the matter concern every one of the orders by themselves
apart. By which reason I caused two of the orders of Henry the iij had called
an assembly or parliament of all the kingdom of France) a great and weighty
question was moved amongst the three estates, Whether it were more indifferent,
and better also, the requests of the people to be before the prince judged and
determined by 36, men which every one of the three orders should by voice
choose, than by the prince himself with his council? And now the Clergy and
Nobility had not only so decreed, but had drawn a great part of our sort
unto their side also, having with hope of great rewards gained their voices. At
which time I perceiving the drift and purpose of certain ambitious persons
that were dealers in the matter, answered, from their former received and
settled opinion. But when the Archbishop of Lions Ruze Bishop of Angiers, and
other Lords, That Bodin at his pleasure had over ruled the Estates.

But if question be of a thing common to all a corporation or college, and
which The greater part of a College or Community always reputed for the
whole, and therefore may as it seems good, determine of any thing which
concerns the whole corporation or college.
concerns not any the particular members apart from the whole body, but the
whole and entire body only; the greater part of the society, may at their
discretion thereof determine: albeit that the whole community have determined
that their Statutes and orders should not be infringed, but by the consent of
all the fellows. For why, The greater part of a Community is always reputed
for the whole. Yea the law wills, that he which is chosen of a community or
college to entreat and discide of their common affairs, may bind every one of
the college. Wherefore they are deceived Jews the xij the French king, it is
ordained, That two parts of the Judges, and no fewer, may in the higher Courts
end any civil cause: whereas in criminal causes, equal voices acquit the
party accused; who yet otherwise is to be condemned, if the greater part do
but by one voice exceed the lesser. So also by a decree of Gregorte the x,
concerning the election of the Pope, he must have two third parts of the
college of Cardinals that is to be chosen Pope. As also in many elections of
the heads of Colleges, it is necessary that two third parts of the college
should agree in one. Yea sometime it is necessary that all the fellows Pro
Collegio, for the College: otherwise if there be no special statutes or law
to the contrary, the greater part of two third parts sufficieth in all acts
concerning the community of corporations and colleges.

It is also necessary, that the consent whereof we speak, be given in the
common assembly of the corporation or college: for albeit that all the
fellows had seperately For the making of a decree in a college, or
corporation, the consent is to be given in the co^^on assembly of the same, and
that in time and plac^ by the statutes the^eof appointed.
and apart consented unto any thing concerning that which is common to all the
College, yet so it is that such act is not to any effect or purpose, neither
for nor against them which have so given their consents, although it were done
even before public notaries: for that it is not done by the College, which
is done by all the fellows apart. Neither suffices it that all they of the
Corporation or College were called together, if it were not in time and place,
by the Statutes appointed. Wherefore two parts of the fellows gathered
together, can do more, than all the fellows consenting apart.

But here some man may ask, who shall call the fellows together? Wherein many
are of opinion, that the most ancient fellow of the College or Society, has
power To whom it belongs to call the fellows together in a college or
society.
to call the rest together; as also to condemn them of contumacie for not
coming* and yet for all that not to have power to fine them, which is but a
ridiculous thing, if such contumacie cannot be punished, neither by him, nor
yet by the college; as certain it is that it cannot: wherefore such calling of
the fellows together, by the most ancient fellow, is but vain, except that
the fellows of their own accord be content to obey the same. And therefore
the Senate during the Consulship of Caesar could not be assembled or called
together, Caesar the greatest magistrate forbidding the same, as is before said.
Othersome are of an other opinion, and hold, That two third parts of a College
may of right call together the rest: but yet who shall then call together those
two third parts they say not. Howbeit is two third parts suffice to do and
determine Marcus Antonius being Consul, threatened Cicero to pull down his
house, if he came not to the Senate being called. So that there is no question
where he that calls together the fellows, has power to command. But if the
College or society be destitute of an head or magistrate which has power to
command, or having power, yet is not willing to constrain them which will not
obey him; then he whom it concerns to have the society assembled, is to
obtain commission from the magistrate to constrain them to come together, and
so we use to do. Yet may the greater part of the fellows together, deprive
every particular fellow of part of the profit and commodity he is to have of
his College, if being orderly called he shall refuse to come, it being so
decreed; yet so that it be moderately That it is lawful for all colleges and
corporations to make such orders as they shall think best for themselves, not
derogating from such orders as were given them from their sovereign prince, or
from the laws and ordinances of the Common weal.
done. Wherefore to conclude this question of the power of Communities,
Corporations, and Colleges, we may say Solons law to have generally place in
every Commonweal, and to be approved by the Interpretors of both the laws:
that is to say, that it is free for all lawful communities, corporations, and
colleges, to make such orders as they shall think for themselves best, so that
thereby they do not derogate from the statutes of the College, made or
established by the Sovereign Prince, or that they be not repugnant or
contrary to the laws and ordinances of the Commonweal. And in ancient time
it was not forbidden corporations and colleges to make decrees and ordinances
within themselves, without derogating from the public laws; as also to put
thereunto such and so great a penalty and punishment, as pleased What things
Corporations and colleges are in their assemblies and meeting^ to entreat and
consult of?
for the hearing of the matter, if it be so reserved unto him. But whereas we
said that a lawful Corporation or college may make ordinances and decrees,
not derogating from the laws of the Commonweal: that is so yet to be
understood, as that they in their assemblies and meetings entreat only of that
which is unto themselves common, and not of such things as whereof they are by
the law prohibited not only to determine, but even to consult also: lest in so
doing they incur the penalty appointed against unlawful Colleges and
Companies.

And thus much concerning the power, rights, and privileges of Corporations and
How Corporations and colleges are to be corrected and punished when they shall
offend.
Colleges in general. Let us now see also how and in what sort they are to be
corrected and punished when they shall offend. Howbeit that one might say that
where no offense is committed, there no punishment is to be inflicted. Now so
it is that a college or corporation cannot offend, nor so much as consent, or
do any thing by fraud or deceit (as the law says;) and therefore there lies
no action of fraud or deceit against a college or corporation, although all
the fellows of the same college, or all the inhabitants of a city, or all
the estates of a country, had particularly and every one of them apart
consented thereunto: a thing yet altogether impossible in corporations and
communities of Towns, Countries, Provinces, and Commonweales, considering that
the children and furious persons which therein are, cannot yield their consent
How Corporations and Colleges are said to offend.
collegiatly assembled, or by the greater part of the inhabitants of a town or
city in a lawful assembly, are supposed to be done by them all, therefore
the whole college or corporation is punished: as in rebellions of Towns, and
seditions of communities, which are punished in their Corporations by loss of
their privileges, or of the right of their community, by fines, charges,
services, and other punishments, according to the quality of the offense:
which punishment yet ought not to take place, if the rebellion or other crime
be not committed by the consent of the community or corporation, and decree
for the doing thereof made in their common assembly: as it was judged by a
decree of the parliament of Paris, for the community of the city of Corbeil.
And deliberation of all, they may be all therefore conuented, and every one of
them apart Cassius used, at such time as he in full Senate, Omne magnum exemplum
habet aliquid A notable saying.
ex iniquo, quod publica vtilitate compensatur, Every great example sauoreth
something of injustice, which (yet for all that) is with the common profit
again recompensed or requited. But this is not (may some say) to pay the debt,
to allege one inconvenience in defense of an other, and of one absurdity to
conclude an other. Whereunto I say, that the best justice that a man can do
is, of diverse inconveniences at once Of diverse inconveniences at once
propounded, it is always best to shun the greatest.
propounded, to shun the greatest, especially when question is of such
offenses as may in no wise be left unpunished. For we see that the wisest, and
most advised Lawiers The severity of the Romans against their rebellious
conspitors.
all the inhabitants of their rebellious Towns after that they had taken them:
and yet always observed this point, to punish the heads more severely than the
rest, and to preserve them that had resisted the seditious; having still
aspeciall regard whether the rebellion were consulted of and decreed in the
Corporation and community or not. So Liuie says: Valerius Leuinus Agrigento
capto qui capita rerum erant, virgit caesos securi percussit, caeteros
proedamque vendidit, Valerius Leuinus having taken Agrigentum beheaded them
that were the chief authors (of the rebellion) being before whipped, the rest
and the prey he sold. And in an other place: Quoniam defectionis authors merit
as poenas a dijs immortalibus, and a vobis habent P. C. quid placet innoxia
multitudine fieri? tandem ignotum est illis, and ciuitas data, For that the
authors of the rebellion (says he) have from the immortal Gods, and you the
appointed fathers, received their deserved punishment, what is it your pleasure
to be done with the rest of the guiltless multitude? at length they were
pardoned, and the freedom of the city given them. The Consul Fuluius, having
after a long siege taken the city of Capua, being renolted from the Romans,
beheaded fourscore of the Senators, beside xxvij others which had before
poisoned themselves, and caused three hundred more of their chief gentlemen to
be in prison starued, the rest of the inhabitants he sold for slaves. As for
the other Towns which were under the obedience Atella, Calatiaque in
deditionem acceptae, ibi quoque in eos qui capita rerum erant animaduersum,
Atella and Calatia (says Liuie) were taken in by composition, and there also
execution was done upon such as were chief doers in the rebellion. The other
Consul Appius more severe than his fellow Fuluius, would have inquiry made
also of their allies, who had had secret part in the same conspiracy:
Whereunto Fuluius would not agree, saying, That so to do, were but to provoke
their faithful and loyal allies to rebel, in giving credit unto the
traitorous Campanians* Whereby it is manifest with The notable clemency of the
emperor Aurelianus.
what severity the Romans thought it good to punish their rebellious
conspirators, during the time of their popular government. And as for the Roman
Emperors, Aurelianus for his clemency deserves to be for ever commended, who
laying siege unto the city Thyane, swore that there should not a dog escape
alive, if he should take the city: but having by force won it, changing his
mind, as with compassion moved, he straightly forbid any man to be therein
slain; and when some to provoke him unto wrath, put him in remembrance of the
oath he had made: he said it concerned but dogs, which he commanded to be all
forthwith killed. The like clemency Henry the fifth the German Emperor,
having condemned the city of Brixia to be utterly rased, and laid even with
the earth; yet when he had won the same, pardoned the citisens nevertheless,
least the innocent people should Antonius Caracalla, who in revenge of certain
rymes and songs made and sung against him The great cruelty of Antonius
Caracalla, Theodosius the great, Xerxes, and Sylla.
at Alexandria, caused certain of his garrison soldiers and Praetorian
bands to be entermingled with the people as they were there beholding plays:
who upon a signal given, slew an infinite number of the poor Citisens one
with an other Theodosius the great caused seven thousand of the inhabitants to
be slain one with another pell mell in revenge of certain of his Receiours
and other his magistrates and officers there slain, without any deliberation
or decree for the doing thereof, before made in their Community or
Corporation. Xerxes king of Persia used an other manner of revenge, not in
deed so cruel as the other, but yet far more ignominious and despirefull,
causing the noses of all the people of a city in Syria to be cut off (which
city after that was Rhinocura) for the like fault done by some few of them.
But of all cruelties that of Syllaes passed, who beside three score thousand
citisens of Rome by him slain, caused also all the inhabitants of Preneste to
be put to death, pardoning none but his host, who would also needs die with
the rest, saying, That he would not be beholden for his life, unto the
murderer of his country. Which cruelty may yet be borne with, when the
vanquished shall choose rather to die than to become subjects; as in all ages
there have been such: but not if they shall be content to serve and obey them,
by whom they are overcome and vanquished. So the Pisans (in the memory of our
fathers) not able to endure the just government of the Florentines their lords,
by the favor of Charles the eight the French king, yielded themselves to
Valentine Borgia, who being not able to protect them, they in vain offered
themselves first to the Genowayes, and then to the Venetians: By both which
states they being rejected, after that they had for a long time been most
straightly besieged, they yielded themselves subjects unto the Florentines their
old lords, of whom they easily obtained pardon, and so afterward continued
their good and faithful subjects. But Jews ear of Flaunders, and the last of
his house (for after his death that earledom The great mischeite which befell
(...) earl of Flaunders, in seeking to ^ke too sha^ reueng upon the Gantoies
his rebellious subjects.
fell into the house of Burgundy) having brought the Gantois rebelling against
him to such extremity, as that they were glad to crave of him grace and
pardon, would not so receive them, but propounded unto them most hard
conditions, and not beseeming a free people to accept of: as that they should
all come unto him out of the city to crave No more cruel enemy against the
prince, than are his desperate (...) Some princes unto cruelty to have also
added contumely, in revenge of their rebellious subjects.
and never afterward willingly endured their princes commands. Whereby it was
then perceived, No more cruel enemies to be found against the prince, than his
desperate subjects, Nor any war to be more just, than that which is by
necessity imposed; as said an ancient Roman Senator. But that the aforesaid
war was such, it is evident and plain, seeing that together with their most
shameful yielding, most cruel death did hang over all their heads, and a
reproach heavier than death it self; reproach and disgrace being always more
dreadful unto men of honorable minds, than most cruel death. But in that
time it should seem, that princes took pleasure to increase their cruelty
with reproach and despite against their disobedient and disloyal subjects.
For so This Frederike having sharply chastised the rebellions Millanotes his
subjects, afterward in dispite caused such of them as would have their lives
spared with their teeth to draw a figue out of a mules tail: whereof grew
the dispite full mock yet used by the Italians, by showing the thombe betwixt
two fingars, with these words: E^co, la (...).
Frederike the second, the German emperor, to revenge the miurie done unto his
Dagobert king of France, not contented to have slain the inhabitants of
Poitiers, for ayding his enemy against him, caused also the town to be rased,
and the ground to be plowed with an eternal curse, and salt to be sown upon
it to make it barren: whereof they are yet called Salted men of Poitiers. But
as princes which with sufferance pass over the seditions and rebellions of the
corporation or community of any town or province, give example to others to
do the like: so those princes also which without measure exercise cruelty
upon their vanquished Severity in punishing of rebellion ought still to be
tempered with ^gitie.
subjects, get unto themselves not only the title of most barbarous and cruel
tyrants, but in so doing sometimes also hazard their whole estates. But he
shall deserve the praise and commendation of a just prince, and preserve also
his estate, which shall keep the mean in punishing the authors and
ringleaders of rebellions, tempering severity with lenity. As did Charles of
France king Jews the ninth his brother: (afterward king of Naples) who
having commission from the king, to chastise the inhabitants of Mont Pelier,
who had slain certain of the kings receivers and officers: took from them
all their liberties and privileges, appointed the walls of their city to be
rased, their steeples pulled down, and a fine of six score thousand crowns to
be set upon them: or as some write, caused half the goods of the citisens to
be confiscated, Charles the sixth the French king disarmed the Parisians risen
up in rebellion against him, and executing the authors thereof, restrained the
rest of the whole body of the citisens, by imposing upon them a great fine.
And admit all the citisens of a city, by their common consent, and the matter
being before well debated, T. Quintius the Consul The wisdom of T. Quintus and*
^ Scipio Affricanus in chastising of their mutinous soldiers.
did wisely, who when he could not with the safety of the Commonweal chastise
the army which he then had under his conduct and leading, for their rebellious
mutiny, after he had appeased all matters, and yet thought it not safe for the
soldiers so in danger Ne cui militum fraudi esset secessio, That the mutinous
revolt might not be dangerous to any of the soldiers: which he with the
great good liking both of the Senate and of the people obtained. With like
wisdom Scipio Affricanus the father, repressed the mutiny of his army at
Seuerone, with the execution of thirty five of the soldiers only:
Certabatur vtrum in authors tantum seditionis xxxv animaduerteretur, an
plurium supplicio vindicanda defectio magis esset quam seditio: vicit sententia
lenior, vt vnde culpa orta esset, ibi poena consisteret, ad multitudinis
castigationem satis esse, Question was (says Liuie) whether execution were to
be done only upon thirty sieve, the authors of the sedition: or that so Scipio
made unto the army, he uses these words, Se non secus quam viscera secantem
sua cum gemitu and lachrimis xxx hominum capitibus, expiasse octo millium
noxam, Him no otherwise but as a man cutting his own entrels, with sighs and
tears to have made satisfaction for the offense of eight thousand men, with
the heads of thirty. So when Appius the Consul (with great rashness should I
say, or pride) would by strong hand have restrained and corrected his army, A
notable regard to be had in all general and popular punishments.
of a city, yet such general and popular punishments are not to be used: but
in chastising of such offenses, an especial regard is to be had, Vt poena ad
paucos, metus ad omnes perueniat, That the punishment it self should touch but
few, but that the fear thereof should come unto all; Tullie. That it beseems
not a soueraign prince to be the executor or to behold the general execution of
his rebellions subjects.
as an ancient orator no less eloquently than wisely said.

Yea moreover it beseems not a sovereign prince to be the executor or
beholder of the execution of such general punishments; (if otherwise it may
be in his absence Antiochus the The wise moderation of some great princes in
chastising of their rebellions subjects.
great king of Asia, who having given commission to Hermeas his constable, to
punish the rebellion of them of Seleucia: and he condemning the corporation of
the city in a fine of six hundred thousand crowns, and banishing also a great
number of the citisens, and taking away the liberties and privileges of the
city: Anoiochus called home again the banished; and contenting himself
almost with the tenth part of the fine, restored again unto the city the
ancient liberties and priuilegs thereof. But not to go further, Henry the
second the French king, having given commission to the duke Mont-morencie
constable of France, to chastise the rebellion of the country of Guyenne, and
especially of the inhabitants of Bourdeaux, granted them afterward a general
patdon, and forgave them the rasing of their town hall, wherein they had made
their assemblies, with the fine of two hundred thousand pound, and the charges
of the army brought against him: in all which the inhabitants of Bourdeaux
were by the duke condemned; restoring unto them also the right and freedom of
the corporation of the town, excepting them only who had laid hands upon his
officers, and some few privileges and demaines of the town, which were then
abridged and cut off. But the emperor Charles the fifth, not so cruelly as
wisely, by one and the self same judgment, The wisdom of Charles the fifth in
the severity by him used in chastising the rebellious Gaunties: and in the
lenity to the contrary by him used toward the Spaniards rebelling against
him in Spain.
revenged the often rebellions and injuries which they of Gaunt had of old used
Frauncis the French king to receive them with their city into his protection:
and he refusing them, had solicited his other subjects, their neighbors to
rebellion: the council of Spain decreed, That the city should be rased and
laid even with the ground, and all the goods of the citisens confiscated.
Howbeit the emperor having it in his power, spared the country and city
wherein he was borne and brought up: but executed thirty of the chief authors
Frauncis duke of Aniou, and of the Low countries. And not long after king
Frauncis, who had refused to protect the Gantoies going in person himself to
repress the rebellion at Rochell, raised for the custom of salt, with the
majesty of his speech terrified them of Rochell, and fined them, but yet put
no man to death: yea he left unto the city the liberties and societies thereof
whole, yet protesting himself to have had no less occasion to revenge
himself than had Charles the fifth, but that he had rather to increase his
commendation, by saving, than by spilling of his subjects, and by gentleness
rather than by cruelty. By these examples before set down it is well to be
understood, what is to be determined for the punishment of Communities,
Corporations, and Colleges: wherein they which affect lenity, do give
occasion unto the same citisens oftentimes to rebel: which in a Commonweal is
of a prince especially to be taken heed of. In which thing no man seems to
have behaved himself more wisely than Charles the fifth. Yet he that seemed to
have been so severe against the Gauntois, used the greatest lenity that might
be toward the Spaniards of all sorts, at such time as they had not only
rebelled against him, (when he went to take possession of the empire) but also
chosen the duke of Calabria Charles thought it not good to punish one, and that
right wisely: for that in so doing he should have launced all the members of
the Commonweal. For albeit that it is an wholesome thing to cauterise or cut
off a mortified member for the preservation of the whole body; must we
therefore if all the members of the body be in a consumption, or taken with a
Gangrena use sections or cauterisations? Hypocrates the great physician says
no, forbidding us to apply remedies to desperate diseases, and so much the
less, if a consumption shall take hold of the chief and principal members of
the body. How a community or corporation offending is to be punished.
Wherefore to conclude this question, if the offense be committed by the
council or deceit of a community or corporation, that which belongs unto
such a community Whether a commonweal can be without communities,
corporations, or colleges.


But these things being thus declared, concerning the punishments of
Communities and corporations: it remains for us to see, whether that a
Commonweal can be without such Communities, Corporations, and Colleges. We
said at first, men every where to be, and always to have been desirous of the
society and company of men: and so out of a familiar and natural society by
little and little to have grown into a college, into a corporation, into a
community, and so at length into a city: and so to have made these empires
and kingdoms, which we here in the world see, having no surer foundation
whereupon to rest (next unto God) than the love and amity of one Which is an
error whereat the greatest spirits have often times stumbled; for Great harms
ensuing of corporations or communities evil governed.
regard of the great good which otherwise ensues thereof unto the Commonweal.
I confess that colleges and communities evil governed, draw after them many
factions, seditions, part-takings, monopolies, yea and sometime the ruin of
the whole Commonweal also: and that in stead of sacred love and amity, there
arises of them coniurations, and conspiracies of one of them against another.
And that more is, it has been seen, that under the shadow of religion diverse
colleges have covered some most detestable and execrable impiety. Whereof no
better example can be given, than of the fraternity of the Bacchanals in
Rome, which devised under the color of Religion the fairest color for a
foul matter.
for the abominable villainies by them committed under the color of that
religion, which has always the fairest and most glorious show that can be
devised, to be set upon a foul matter; as said Flaminius the Consul
speaking unto the people of Rome, concerning the impieties by him found out,
Nihil in speciem fallacius praua religione; vbi Deorum numen praetenditur
sceleribus, subit animum timor, Nothing is in show more deceitful than corrupt
religion: For where the majesty of the gods Damonax a wise Grecian had long
time before attempted to persuade the Athenians of, saying, Those Nightly
conuenticles under the color of religion suspicious and in every Commonweal
dangerous.
night-sacrifices to have always seemed unto him very suspicious. And better
it is in every Commonweal openly to suffer whatsoever assemblies or
sacrifices to be done by day, in the sight of all the people, then nightly
assemblies to be made under Cato the Censor most grievously said, Ab nullo
genere non summum periculum est, sicaetus, and consilia, and secretas
consultationes esse sinas, There is no sort of men from whom the greatest
danger is not to be feared, if you shall suffer conuenticles, and secret
councels and consultations to be kept amongst them: Which can so much the
less be avoided, when as the false opinion of religion is pretended for to
color villainies. For that there is no conspiracy, which may not be contrived
and made in such secret assemblies: which growing by little and little, and not
perceived until they be grown great, at length bursting like to a rotten
impostume, infecteth the whole body of the Commonweal. As for proof thereof
in our remembrance, whereas there have always been many conuenticles and
meetings so many disciples, as that many the greatest lords and princes, both
of Italy and Greece, Polibius) troubled almost all the estates both of Italy
and of Greece. And for this cause the emperors, and almost all other princes,
popes, and councels, giving the Jews leave to have their meetings and
synagogues (which Tyberius, Claudius, and Domitian) the emperors, had of
ancient time taken from them) commanded yet, That they should Pharao king of
Egypt (terrified with the judgments of God) would have also granted them,
but was by Moses refused, alleging, That it was to be feared least the
Egyptians should ouerwhelme with stones the Jews, using a strange religion,
and by the laws of the country forbidden. And to say the truth, it is a thing
most hard and The common people hardly to endure any religion contrary or
repugnant to their own.
difficult to maintain colleges or corporations in a Commonweal of what
religion soever, either publicly or privately, being contrary to the religion
of the people, or of the greater part of them: For that the people every where
most jealous of their religion, cannot but most hardly endure any rites and
ceremonies, differing from the religion by themselves generally received:
neither are by the laws, or by the magistrates command, Thomas emperor of
Constantinople, pulling down the altars and images of the saints, was by the
angry people most cruelly slain in the very temple of saint Sophia. We have
also seen in the city of Franckford four corporations The Jews, and
Catholics by the protest ^nts borue within Franckford, and they of the
confession of Geneua forbidden.
and colleges of diverse religions, to have been publicly allowed and exerci
sed, namely those of the Jews, of the Catholics, of the Protestants, and of
the Confess* sion of Geneua: But it so fell out in the year 1562, in the month
of May, that the Protestants assuring themselves of the strength of their
partakers, fell upon them of the Confession of Geneua, (who in their profession
came nearest unto them) and bearing Chrysostom therefore calls The mother of
the Gentiles: the princes of Europe and of Barbary having always granted unto
the Jews, their ancient privileges, corporations, and colleges, for the
exercising of their religion, in paying unto them certain tribute, as they did
unto the Roman emperors, which was called Aurum Coronarium; which the German
emperors ordinarily give unto the emprises, for the confirmation of the Jews
privileges, Cazimir the great king of Polonia granted unto them, at the
request of a Jewish lady, called Hester; such as had of ancient time by a
Persian king been unto this nation given, at the instance of another Jewish
lady of the same name. Where they so mightily increased, as that there was no
prince in the greater Asia, which had not in it one or other Collonie of the
Jews; as we read in Josephus, and Philo. Wherefore the most ancient
antiquity of that the Jewish religion, together with the great poverty of the
Jews themselves, who in no place of the world may possess any lands, makes
that they need the less, and are indeed the less able to sight for their

But it may be, that the consent and agreement of the nobility and people in a
new religion or sect, may be so puissant and strong, as that to repress or
alter the same, should That a sect or religion grown so strong, as that it
cannot without the extreme peril of the state and commonweal be altered, is
of a wise prince to be suffered.
be a thing impossible, or at leastwise marvelous difficult, without the
extreme peril and danger of the whole estate. In which case the best advised
princes and governors of Commonweales do imitat the wise pilots, who when they
cannot attain unto the port by them desired, direct their course to such port
as they may: Yea and often times quite changing their course, give way unto the
storms and tempests, least in seeking too much to put into the desired haven,
they suffer shipwreck. Wherefore that religion or sect is to be suffered,
which without the hazard and destruction of the Constans the emperor suffered
the companies and colleges of the Arrians, not so much for the love and
affection he bare toward them, as diverse have written but so in quiet to
preserve his subjects, and estate. And Theodosius the Great being himself a
Catholic, and always contrary to the Arria^s opinion, yet bare with their
religion, which he could by no means suppress, maintaining both the one sort
and the other in peace and obedience. And after him Zeno the emperor, to
reconcile the companies of all sorts of religions among themselves, and
together with the Commonweal, commanded an edict, which they called (...),
which is to say, of union and tranquillity or quietness to be published. After
Anastasius caused the law of forgetfulness to be set forth, cherishing the
grave and modest preachers, and removing such as were of vehement and turbulent
spirits.

And yet no doubt, but that a prince favoring one sect or religion, and
disliking another, How a prince favoring one sect or religion and disciding an
other, may without force or f^ur suppress that religion he disliketh, and
advance the other which he better likes of.
may if he will without force or constraint, or any violence at all, suppress
that which he likes not (except it be by the hand and power of the almighty
supported) and that by keeping the maintainers thereof from all preferments and
places of command; and by showing himself in deeds rather than in words, to
abhor that religion which he desires to have extinguished, For the manner of
men is, to love such things as their princes embrace: and minds resolved, the
more they are crossed, the stiffer they are, A dangerous practice of such as
are near unto great princes: to devise false calumnies against the professors
of any religion, so to bring them into hatred, and to enrich themselves with
their wealth.
of the Primitive Church, under the first emperors, so many gross and
impudent calumnies, and slanderous reports, were devised and put in writing
against the Christians, for the taking away of their assemblies and meetings,
as the like whereof were never before devised, and would indeed seem
incredible, were they not yet in writing extant. As witnesses Anaxagoras the
orator, in his apology to Antoninus: Tertullian in his apology for the
Christians: and Origin against Celsus, certain of whose writings are yet
extant. Whereby it is to be understood, that it was commonly objected unto the
Christians, that they were Atheists, irreligious contemners of all gods,
incestuous murderers: and such as in their secret assemblies and meetings used
to kill young infants conceived of their mutual incests, and after that they
had so killed Epiphanius reports of the heretics called Gnostic^: as that
they should in their meetings beat in a mortar their newborn children,
begotten in incest,, with the yeolkes of eggs, flower, honey, and certain
spices mingled together, and so to make cakes of them, and to bake them, and
eat them: and that to have been with them accounted a sacrament of the body
and blood. Which slanders so falsely objected against the Christians, might
seem altogether incredible, if in the time of our ancestors the like
accusation had not been commenced against the Templers, viz. under the reign
of Philip the fair; for which the The Templers falsely accused, and for their
great wealth wrongfully suppressed.
Colleges in France before granted unto the Templers, at last by a decree of
pope Boniface the viij were taken from them, the master with a great number of
his fellows The Jews in like manner wronged.
France under Dagobert, Philip Augustus, and Philip the long: as afterward in
Spain under Ferdinand king of Aragon and Castile, who of a merciless devotion
drive them quite out of their countries, and enriched themselves with their
goods, it being given out, that they had crucified boys, and poisoned wels
with the blood of their leprous persons.

Wherefore, to discide the question before propounded, as whether Communities,
Communities, Corporations, and Colleges, necessary in every Commonweal, but
especially in a popular estate.
Corporations, Societies, and Colleges be good in a Commonweal, or no? or
that the Commonweal may well be without them? Truly in mine opinion nothing
could ever have been devised more effectual or better for the keeping and
mainteining of popular estates, or for the overthrow of tyrannical
gouernements, than corporations and societies: For why, the Commonweales and
estates being one unto an other contrary, do by quite contrary means both
maintain and ruinate themselves. And therefore the people and popular estates,
accept and embrace all manner of communities, corporations, and colleges; as
we said that Solon did, in establishing the popular estate of Athens. All which
tyrants in their tyrannical governments seek vtterle to overthrow, as well
knowing, the unity and amity of subjects among themselves, Numa was the first
that ordained Societies and Fraternities of artificers and men of occupation;
and so Tarquin the proud was the first that took them away, and that forbid
the assemblies of the people, and that had in himself a purpose also to have
suppressed the body of the Senate, by the death of the Senators, not suffering
any new to be chosen in the rooms of them that died But he was no sooner by
his subjects driven Clodius the Tribune to be the more gracious with the
people, and to maintain them in jar and discord with the nobility (which he
had renounced, causing himself to be adopted by a base fellow, so to become
Caesar being got to be Dictator, to maintain his own power and weaken the
peoples, put down; but were afterward by Augustus having assured his estate,
by an express edict again restored. All which Nero the the tyrant again
suppressed. Whereby it appears, Tyrants always to have hated the
corporations and communities of the people, and Communities, Corporations, and
Colleges, always hateful unto Tyrants.
by all means endeavored to have them utterly extinguished: Insomuch that
Dionysius the tyrant of Sicilie would not that even near kinsfolks should so
much as visit one an other, but as they came late from supper from their
friends, caused them to be robbed and spoiled. As in like manner did Nero, who
often times by night walking the streats, The great benefit and use of
Communities, corporations, and colleges, in a just Monarchy or royal estat^.
has not any more assured foundation or stay, than the Estates of the people,
Communities, Corporations, and Colleges: For if need be for the king to levy
money, to raise forces, to maintain the Estate against the enemy, it cannot
be better done, than by the estates of the people, and of every Province,
Town, and Commutie. Yea we see that they themselves which would have these
estates of the communities and societies of the people suppressed and
abolished, have in time of their necessity no other refuge or stay to fly
unto, but even to these estates and communities of Frauncis duke of Aniou. Our
kings do not so often call together the assemblies of their estates, as do the
kings of England. But whereas there are accounted sixteen Provinces in this
kingdom, whereof six have their particular assemblies among themselves,
(namely Bretagne, Normandy, Bourgundie, Languedoc, Dauphine, and Prouence)
some there were, who for fear their villainies and extortions should in those
assemblies have been found out, labored to the uttermost of their power to
have had the same assemblies and meetings of the Estates of the aforesaid
Charles the eight, at such time as it was with one general voice called upon,
that a general assembly of all the Provinces might be had; there wanted not
some who threatened it to be Treason to such as in the counsel should consent
with the people for the calling of such an assembly: whose opinion Philip de
Commines (a most worthy counselor and a man of great experience) most
earnestly withstood. But how necessary the assemblies and meeting of the whole
people for to consult The general assemblies and meetings of the people to
consule of matters, necessary for the good of the Common weals.
of matters, are, is hereby perceived; in that the people which may so call
together such their counsels, with them all things go well: whereas others which
may not so do, are oppressed with tributes and servitude. For as the shot of
many pieces of artillery delivered Buzac to be executed, the most notable
Buzac a notable thief and robber.
robber that ever was in our remembrance, of whom neither judge, nor
magistrate, no nor yet the parliament of Thoulouse it self, could take
punishment, he being grown so strong as to do his robberies in form of
justice, and yet no man so A measure to be had for the number of Corporations
and Colleges in a Commonweal.
of the Empire, which without this policy had long ago been ruinated and
fallen.

We said that the mean and measure which is in all things commendable, ought
also to be kept in all just Monarchies and Aristrocraties, in regard of the
number of Corporations and Colleges to be had in their kingdoms and
Commonweales: For That it is better or the Commonweal, that men of one trade
or occupation should be divided into diverse streets, and quarters of the city,
the^ to dwell all in one street together.
pluck up the weeds alone, rather then both the good and bad together. And to
avoid Monopolies amongst artificers and trades men, it is good to divide them
into diverse Mummius as says Liuie: Concilia omnia singularu^ Achaiae nationum,
and Phocensium, and Baeotorum, aut in alia part Graeciae deleuit, Suppressed
all the councels of all the particular nations of Achaia, and of the
Phocensians, and of the Baeotians, or in what soever other part of Graecia
else: But after that they were once become good and obedient subjects unto the
Romans: Antiqu^ concilia genti cuique restituta, The ancient councels were
unto every nation again restored, as says Strabo.

CHAP. VIII. Of the orders and degrees of Citisens.
NOw forasmuch as we have already spoken of Corporations A convenient and
decent order to be in all things fit and requisite.
and Colleges, it remains for us also to speak of the orders and degrees of
Citisens. For if so be that in all things we desire and seek after a
convenient and decent order, and deem nothing to be more ougly or foul to
look upon, than confusion and broyle: then how much more is it to be sought
for in a Commonweal, so to place the Citisens or subjects in such apt and
comely order, as that the first may be joined with the last, and they of the
middle sort with both; and so all with all, in a most true knot and bond among
themselves, together with the Commonweal? For why, it is a most ancient and
received opinion of the wise, Almighty God himself the great and supreme
Chaos, and so settled every thing in his due place and order. Neither can there
be any thing faiter to behold, more delightful to he mind, or more commodious
for use, than is order it self. But they which go about so to make all
subjects or Citisens equal one unto another in dignity, order, and and place,
as that there shall be nothing in a City or Commonweal first, or in the
midst, but will have all degrees so mingled together and confounded, without
respect of sex, age, or condition they seem to me to do as they do which
thrust barley, wheat, rise, mill, and all other kind of pulse into one heap
together; whereby they loose the

As for slaves we have before said, them by the general con^ent of almost all
people, Slaves accounted no citisens and yet indeed worthy to be so reckoned
of* though in the lowest and basest degree of citisens
to have been still exempted out of the number of Citisens. Yea Aristotle has
termed slaves, but instruments for other men's uses; whereas some others have
accounted of them, but as of beasts, or rather worse: and yet the question
rests undecided, Whether that slaves are to be accounted in a man's goods or
substance, or not. But if the determining hereof might be unto me referred,
surely I should wish the right and liberty of the city to be set open, as
well unto the slaves as unto the free borne men. For what is this so arrogant
temeritie (should I say) or impiety of men, that forgetting men's conditton and
state, they should enforce this so divine a creature, having his liberty
shamefully taken from him, not only to serve their lust, but also to make no
more that forasmuch as the force and boldness of men is so far broken out,
as that we see Cicero obiecteth unto Antonius, That he had so contracted
affinity, as that he might thereby the better commend himself unto them that
were of the meanest degree: he meant it by them which had been mannumised men,
and not by the slaves indeed: for that in the city Rome, slaves indeed had
neither place nor degree. Neither did Metellus his speech concerning marriages
to be made in degrees together belong unto Paulus the lawyer writes in the
second book of Sentences, albeit not altogether advisedly, for that they held
the right of blood, as did other citisens, and were forbidden incestuous
marriages as well as others; although that they had not the other rights of
marriages. And for that slaves were oftentimes borne of vncertane fathers,
their children were also accounted uncertain: and therefore slaves and
manumised men were not said to be of any family, stock, or house; only they
which were of the nobility descended, boasted themselves to have stock, or
house from whence they came. Hereof came that speech of Decius against them
that were descended from the nobility, Semper ista audita sunt, vos solos
gentem habere: an hoc, si Claudiae familiae non sim, nec ex Patricio sanguine
ortus, sed vnus Quiritium quilibet, qui modo me duobus ingenuis ortum sciam,
reticere possim? These things have always been heard, you alone to have a
stock and house, But if I were not of the house and family of the Claudians,
neither borne of noble blood, but some one of the common people, which but knew
my self to be borne of two free borne persons, could I in this hold my peace?
Whereby he sufficiently insinuates neither slaves nor mannumised men to have
had any stock or house from which they might account themselves descended: and
them only to have been accounted Why we call such as be noble borne by the
name of gentlemen?
so to have, which had their beginning from them that were free borne: and

Next unto slaves are they whom they call State-free men, and after them the
Libertines, Four kind of libertines or of manumised men in Rome.
or as we may term them the manumised men, who were every where of diverse
sorts and condition, as there were also diverse sorts of slaves. And to let
other viz. those whom they called Romani, Latini, Iuniani, and Dediticij:
whom for that they be usual and common, I let them pass: suffices it as it
were with the finger to point out the fountains of them, least in a city
these diverse orders of enfranchised or mannumised men might be together
confounded. Now the order or degreeof state free men, was in a mean betwixt
slaves and the Libertines or manumised men, for in that their liberty was yet
holden in suspense, they were in better State free men better then slaves and
worse then libertines.
case and condition than were the slaves, and yet withal in worse than were
the libertines, or men already enfranchised. And these orders every one of
them according to the quality of their condition and state, were also likewise
in their degrees The nobility always divided from the vulgar and common
people.


The rest of the citisens are divided according to the variety of their
conditions and estates, and diversity of their manners and customs. Yet that
is common almost to all people, that noble men should in order and dignity be
divided from the vulgar and common people, since first Nimrod the great robber,
most notably attended upon with a great power of wicked companions, and such
as himself was, with cruel servitude oppressed them that were too weak for
him, and so first took upon him the government The first nobility grounded
upon violence and oppression.
of the Assyrians, as we have before said. So left his nobility got by
villainy, for his posterity to imitat: which opinion further spreading, took
such deep root, as that every man as he was the mightier in violence and
murdering of others, he was True nobility grounded upon virtue.
thought to be so much more the nobler: until such time as that the people by
good laws and civility better instructed, deemed, that the true nobility,
was by virtue and not so by villainy to be sought for.

But forasmuch as one man excels another in some one or other virtue: and
for Nobility in diverse places diue^sly accounted of, and neither in all places
alike.
that such virtues as are in one city or place most highly commended, are in
some other no less contemned. Hereof it comes, that no one definition of
nobility could ever yet be made agreeable unto the nobility of all the
people: honor and infamy being still deemed and reputed of, according to the
manner and custom of every country. For by the customs of the Perusines and
Florentines, he which but now began Whether the bearing of ar^es in the wars
make a man therefore a gentleman or not?
by the consent of all the three estates, yet is it no where else with us so
found. But that the bearing of arms should of it self make a gentleman, I see
it to have so pleased not only the Florentines and Perusines, but diverse
interpretors of the law also, and especially Alciat, who has not doubted to
cite Triuultius the great captain as author thereof. Calasyres: and many worlds
of years after, for the Mammalukes in the reign of the Sultans, to serve and
bear arms: who therefore enjoyed most great privileges. Yet other people have
divided genter^e from war, neither have therefore reputed any one to be a
gentleman, for that he was a soldier: unto which opinion all the greatest
lawyers together with Plato have almost with one voice consented. And albeit
that the Romans far exceeded all other people in martial honor, and
bestowed the greatest privileges upon soldiers: yet for all that they bound
not gentry unto martial service: seeing that it was lawful for the
Libertines or manumised men to serve in the wars, and that men for the
filthiness of their lives, and judgments, therefore upon them passed,
infamous,

But forasmuch as all citisens after they had taken upon them the manlike
atttire, were bound to bear arms, so by that reason all the citisens should
have bin thereby ennobled, which were a thing absurd: for were all the citisens
noble, none of them were indeed in that vulgaritie of nobility to be accounted
at all noble. Wherefore Lucius Siccius Dentatus is of Dionysius Halicarnasseus,
called a common and ordinary man, whose speech against them of the nobility
and gentry is yet at this present extant: Wherein he boasts himself to have
been in pay forty years in the service of his Lucius Sic^ius Dentatus, a most
worthy and Famous soldier, and yet not therefore accounted any gentleman.
country, to have fought in an hundred and twenty set battles, to have
received 45 wounds, and twelve of them in one day, all of them in the fore part
of his body: and in token of his good service, to have received fourteen
Ciuic or oken crowns (the honorable rewards due unto him that had saved so
many citisens) three others the rewards of his good service done in the
besieging of towns, fourscore and three gold chains, an hundred and
threescore bracelets of gold, ten fair lances, and thirty five fair
furnitures for horses. And yet this so worthy and valiant a man, adorned with
so many trophies in reward of his valor, was by the Roman laws no more but as
a common person. For they accounted him first a gentleman, that was the son
of a new raised man: and him they called a new man, who was the first in his
family that Whom the Romans first accounted a gentleman.
had borne some honorable charge or office, and so had power to erect unto
himself his statue or image; such as were Caius Marius, and M Tullius Cicero
of Arpine, both of them being but new men. Of whom the one being first made
Quaestor, and then Aedilis, and afterward Praetor, at last came to be Consul;
who in the time of his Consulship, in an oration which he made unto the
people, boasting therein of his newness, thus said, Ego nou^s homo primus
omnium claustra nobilitatis refregi, etc. I being but a new man, was of all
others the first which brake open the bars of nobility. The other having
been seven times Consul, in an oration which he made against the nobility,
said, Contemnunt nouitatem meam, ego illorum ignauiam: mihi fortuna, illis
probr a obiectantur. Quod si me iure despiciunt, faciant idem maioribus suis,
quibus vti mihi nobilitas ex virtute caepit. Nunc videte quam iniqui sunt: quod
ex aliena virtute sibi arrogant, id mihi ex mea non concedunt: scilicet quia
imagines non habeo, and noua nobilit as est, quam perperisse melius est, quam
acceptam corrupiss^, They contemn (says he) my newness, I their cowardice:
my fortune is to me objected, but unto them their vices. But if they therefore
of right contemn and despise me, let them so also do their own ancestors,
whose nobility begun of their own virtues, as does mine. Now but see how
partial they are in their own cause; that honor which they arrogat unto
themselves by other men's virtues, that they will not grant unto me for mine
own: and all forsooth, because I have no images of mine ancestors to show,
and for that my nobility is but new, which yet is better for Cicero had six
competitors in his Consulship, whereof two were noble men, two other of them
were the first of their family which had borne office, only Cicero himself
was a gentleman borne: whose father, as also the father of Marius, of Cato the
Censor, of Q. Pompeius, of Curious, of Philo, and of Genutius, were all base
persons of the comminaltie, but yet their sons were accounted of as new men
The Patritij who they were in Rome.
and gentlemen. But such as were descended from the Senators, by Romulus in the
beginning of his reign appointed, or from them which were afterward by the
Consul Publius Valerius joined unto them, were called Patricij (as having
their beginning from Patres) all the rest were common men, or else men of some
better note, whom they called Equites, or Gentlemen; who were in the midst
The Equites or gentlemen in Rome what place they held*
betwixt the Senators and the common people, being partly dissended from the
Senators, and part of them risen out of the communaltie: who if any of them
were chosen into the Senate, they were no more to be accounted amongst those
Equites or gentlemen: as is to be seen by Lucius and Nero the Censors, who yet
serving upon public horses, were one of them by the other commanded to sell
them: for after the overthrow by the Romans received from the Veians, the
gentlemen began to serve upon horses provided for them of the public charge.
Now I find that there were of the Patrician Families in Rome, about forty: but
of such as by their valor left nobility to their posterity The Patritian
families in Rome: Syl^ia, Pomp^lia, P^titia, Mar^ia, Hostilia, Tull^a, Tarqu^,
Fabia, Antonia, Iunia, Sergia, Iulia, Gegania, Ma^tia, Aemylia, Ch^oelia,
Valeria, Horatia, Posth^mia, Mene^ia, Virginia, Sulpitia, Furia, Lucretia,
Quinctia, Papiria, Claudia, Ser^ilia, Cormlia, Manilia, Cassia, Aebutia,
Pinaria, V^turia, Sempronia, Mutia, Aquila, Quintilia, Hortensia.
in Ciceroes time scarcely thirty: of which families, or houses, seven were of
the same name with the Patricij, viz. Pompilia, Martia, Tullia, Iunia, Mutia,
Claudia, and Sempronia. And for that the entrance and way unto the honorable
preferments in the state, before the law Canuleia, was kept shut up and stopped
by the Pratricij (or them that were of the Senators descended) against the
common and vulgar sort of the people; and yet for all that none of these
Patricij was accounted noble, except some of their ancestors had borne the
honorable offices of the state: many of the Patricij, who were descended from
the Senators, and yet could not cite such their ancestors as had borne such
honorable charge in the estate, (which was well to be understood by their
statues or images) were accounted of as of men of base and low degree. So it
came Patricij unnoble, that is to say, obscure and unknown. As Marcus Aemylius
Scaurus, a man descended of the Senators raze, had his ancestors base and
obscure men: whereas he himself being but a new man, came to be Praetor,
Consul, and Censor, and at last being made chief of the Senate, raised
nobility The noble Families in Rome. Licinia, Aurelia, Decia, Caecilia, Aelia,
Domi^ia, Cl^adia, M^tia, P^rlia, Curia, Fabritia, Co^cania, Acilia, Maria,
Pompeia, Liuia, Iunia. Tullia, Fuluia, Sempronia, Atilia, Calpurnia, Marcia,
Pompilia, Luctatia, Platia.
to all his posterity. Wherefore the Roman nobility lay in the voices and
judgment of the people, which as they thought best, bestowed the honorable
preferments in the estate and Commonweal. Yet was it an absurd and most
unreasonable thing, that any most wicked murderer and manquellar, were he
never so basely borne, might by the benefit of bearing of some great place or
office in the estate, leave nobility unto Ignobilis with the Latins, which in
the self same sense is of the Greeks called (...), and (...); that is to say,
such as either by some foul or notable fact or deed done, came into the
knowledge of men: which is yet oftentimes taken in the better part, for they
which are called (...), refer it unto the honor of their house and stock: which
amongst the Romans did especially appear amongst the Patricij or posterity of
the ancient Senators: which for that they were almost dead and worn out, Caius
Caesar by the law Cassia, Augustus by the law Seruia, chose many of the more
noble families into the order of the Patricij. For before the law Canuleia it
was lawful only for the Patricij to be bishops and priests, and for them
alone to make sacrifices, and to keep the Auspicia or divine observations. But
after that Genutius (first Consul that was made of the people) was in battle
with the great slaughter of his army under his conduct overthrown, Patres non
tam publica calamitate maesti, quam feroces infoelicis Consulis plebei ductu,
fremunt, omnibus locis, irent, crearent Consulem explebe, transferrent auspicia
quo nefas esset, The fathers (as says Liuie) not so heavy for the public
calamity, as become insolent with the evil conduct of the unfortunate Consul
chosen from amongst the people, murmured and fretted in all places, that they
should go and again create Appius Claudius the Consul, before that answered
one of the Tribunes, asking him in an assembly of the people, Why one of the
Consuls might not be chosen out of the people? Because (said he) none of the
vulgar and common sort of the people can hold the Auspicia or diuinations; and
that therefore the Decemuiri had appointed a certain order of marriage, least
the sacred diuinations should have been polluted with persons uncertainly
descended. At which answer, the people was with indignation exceedingly
enraged, to hear it denied them to hold the diuinations, as if they were unto
the immortal gods, more hateful than viz. honors, commands, judgments,
diuinations, cures, priesthoods, councels, powers, statues, triumphs, and all
other the greatest preferments in the Commonweal; yet could it never be
obtained, that any one of the common sort of the people, should nominat the
Interrex, or pronounce who should be the Archpriest, the Priest of Mars, or of
Romulus: or yet be chosen into the college of the Salij. But as a statue or
image Certain honors in Rome never communicated unto the people.
was among the Romans the sign of nobility obtained: so in antie^t time with
us arms, with Cognisances set over them, were the tokens of nobility. Lawful
it has always been, and so still will be, for every man to devise unto
himself his Cognizance to be Statues the sign of nobility among the
Romans: as are arms with us.
known by, but yet not to usurp the Cognisances, or bear the arms of other
noble families. Aristides, and the seditious declamations of Ephialtis) might
by lot, and few by voices obtain: but How the ancient Graetians demed their
nobility.
nobility with them was still to be derived from the stock of their kings, or
race of their great worthies, as from the Heraclide, the Aeacidae, or
Cecropidae, or from such other like: or else from such, as who for the worthy
acts, either by themselves, or by their ancestors done, had by the general
good liking, and public decree of the people, and of the nobility, with
commendation obtained a crown of gold, extraordinary privileges, statues, to
sit in the highest places, or to have their diet allowed them in the Prytanaeo,
or other like public places: Such as is that decree of the Athenians (whereof
Plutarch The P^taneion was a place in Athens, wherein the judges and magistrates
sat to consult of the great matters of state.
writes) concerning Lycurgus the son of Lycophron, It pleased the people of
Athens (says he) that requital should be made unto such as had well deserved
of the state, as to praise Lycurgus the son of Lycophron for his virtue and
justice sake: and in the honor of him to erect a brazen Statue for him in the
market place, except in such place as where the law forbids any statue to be
erected, and diet in the Prytanaeo to be for ever allowed unto the eldest of
the posterity of Lycurgus. So in like manner Isaeus the orator writes public
diet, the first places, and privileges, to have been granted unto the
posterity of Harmodius the tyrant queller. Which thing Aristotle reports to
hane been a thing common unto all the cities of Graece, to allow diet of the
public The lenity of the graetians in bestowing their honors.
charge unto the children of such as had valiantly dyed for their country.
Howbeit that Demetrius Phalereus, they again in a moment caused them all to
be cast down: and not yet so contented brake them also with such fury, as
that no fragment of them was left, except that only which was kept fast shut
up in the tower of Pallas.

Amongst the Hebrews were two sorts of noble men; the one descended from the
The nobility of the Jews: in whom it especially rested.
stock of Aaron, who only were priests: the other from the stock of the kings.
For why, Aaron, and in establishing of him after the most grievous reuolts and
misery of his people. And therefore as often as he commands extreme
destruction to be denounced and threatened unto his people, he oftentimes
doubleth that (...), which is to say, That the state of the priest and of the
common person, should be all one. And therefore when the Jews had cast off
from the servile yoke of Antiochus the Noble: the Family of the Aesmonaeans
being of the stock of Aaron, held the high priesthood, together with the
kingdom about two hundred years, that is to say, even unto the reign of Herod
the Great. Wherein the Hebrews did Priesthood honorable.
nobility by the places men hold, and not by their persons. Truly all the
best learned lawyers are of opinion, That the priestly dignity is to be
preferred before all other honors and vocations: and that the ministers of
divine things, and moderators of the most sacred rites, are not to be accounted
among the number of the vulgar and common people: The most ancient kings to
have been also priests.
which is no new or strange opinion, but drawn and derived even from the most
ancient antiquity. For the most antie^t kings, to make their roial power the
more reverend and stately, exercised also the priestly dignity. Neither did
the Greeks only, but the Roman Caesar in recounting of their degrees, first
reckons up the Druides, then their knights or horsemen, and after them the
common people. For the order of knights in the time of their ancestors, with a
most strong power of horsemen excelled all people; as witnesses Caesar
himself, as also Marcus Antonius: so that therefore I suppose them to have The
great honor the Turkish and Arabian princes do unto their Musties or high
priests.
been called (...); for the Greeks call him (...), whom the Latins called
Sellarium, and we an horseman. We said before the Turkish and Arabian princes
yet in all their kingdoms and empires, to honor and observe their Mufties, or
high Bishops, with the greatest honor and respect possibly to be given unto
them, still referring The order of the Venetian Commonweal.
places of command, and from all offices, least happily they should bewray the
secrets of the city unto the pope, to whom they are by duty and oath bound.
Wherefore among The Florentine how they divided their citisens
the Venetians, the order of the Senators is first and chief of all others,
for that in it is the sovereign power of that state: next unto the Senators
follow the gentlemen, who are not accounted of the number of the Senators* and
last of all the c^mmoners, who yet are both by one name called Citadinia, or
Citisens. But the Florentines before that all was swayed by one man's command,
divided not only the nobility from the clergy, but even from the common
people also; and the common people they divided The auntients, Egiptians how
they divided their citisens.
their whole multitude of citisens, into Priests, Soldiers, and Laborers:
setting the Priests and Soldiers, whom they called Calasyri, free from all
taxes and payments. Hyppodamus, who gave laws unto the Melesians, did a little
otherwise divide the people into Soldiers, Artificers, and Husbandmen: whose
writings Aristotle seems either not to have well understood, or else not so
wisely reproved, as is evidently to be gathered of those fragments which are
yet to be seen extant in Stobaeus. I know not Plato his mind, that having made
a division of his citisens into Keepers, Soldiers, and Husbandmen, he
separateth the Soldiers (under whose bucklers and defense the citisens ought
to rest) I know not how, from keepers. But in brief, he would have the keepers
of his Commonweal to excel all others in wisdom and experience: and so to
rule over them, without any respect to be had either to the honor of their
dissent, or to the greatness of their wealth or substance. Truly it was
wisely so set down by that most wise man: who although he were himself
descended of the most ancient stock of the Senators, and derived his pedigree
by the mothers side even from Solon himself, the Athenian lawgiver, vet
thought the true glory of nobility and sovereignty to consist in virtue
only: Which thing Euripides had before True nobility to be measured by virtue.
all lawyers, do with one consent in mine opinion agree, denying any place to
be left for nobility without honesty. And two things propounded, to wit,
Noble descent, and Virtue, they have decreed, That the more higher and more
honorable place is to be given The knowledge of secret and most excellent
things, the second cause of nobility.
unto virtue, whether question be of bearing of rule, or of honor, or
concerning the gravity and weight of their testimonies and witness. The next
cause of nobility unto virtue, many have appointed to be the knowledge of
hidden and most excellent things, whom they which have attained thereunto, the
law it self expressly calls most Knowledge makes most noble: or else as
Cassiodorus says, ex obscuro nobilem efficit doctrina, Learning makes of an
obscure man a gentleman. But then how much more noble is he than both of them,
whom moral virtue concurring Integrity to be preferred before knowledge.
with the virtues of the mind and knowledge, has together ^obled? But yet if
integrity be divided from such knowledge of most secret and most excellent
things, the prioritie in this case is of right to be given unto integrity and
virtue: except in such vocations and callings, as wherein such excellent
knowledge is of necessity required: For why, it is better and more agreeing
with reason, to have a General skillful in martial affairs, although he be
otherwise a naughty man to govern an army, than a good

But yet that which Plato sets down, That they which are but obscurely
borne, Virtue joined* with noble descent to be preferred before nobility for
virtue only.
excelling in virtues, are to be preferred before them which are nobly
descended, excelling also in the same virtues with them; seems to me a thing
very absurd and unreasonable. And truly these two things thus propounded, it
is right that some regard should be had of the virtue and nobility of a man's
ancestors, and on that opinion the Lawiers have always been, whether
question be for the obtaining of honors, or for the taking of places in
solemn assemblies and meetings, That they are still to be preferred, which both
for their own virtues and the nobility of their ancestors together, are to
be commended. But he whom the prince has made noble, although he be not Civil
nobility by the prince unworthily bestowed, no true nobility.
or for his learning and knowledge: yet by the consent of all the Lawyers he is
to be accounted in the rank and order of the Nobility. And therefore Pliny
writing to Traian said: Caesaris esse vt nobiles efficeret ac tueretur, That it
was the Emperors part to make noble men, and also to defend the^. But this
nobility Bartholus, not unfitly has called Civil nobility; declaring thereby
them to have so gotten a certain counterfeit kind of nobility in the opinion
of men, but yet indeed to have no part of the honor of true nobility, without
virtue. Wherefore let us grant them to enjoy the fruits of such their civil
nobility, unto who^ they are so by the princes gift and grant conferred*
whether that such their nobility be for money or reward, or for the pryme of
their youth, or for some Bartholus writes to have but the principality,
especially if they be subject unto the command of superior princes, or have
fellows or companions in their government: who cannot so much as make a man
base borne to be legitimate. Much less true it is, that some have written,
the minions and domestical attendants of princes to be therefore become noble:
for albeit that they thereby enjoy certain privileges and exemptions from
other services, yet are they not therefore to be accounted noble, except they
have borne the greater and more honorable offices and places of command.

Yet question is, and I see it to have often times been before demanded,
whether Whether an honorable fe^, make a man noble or no^*
he which by some chance or casualtie has obtained some great place of
service, or other fee, be thereby made noble? which I see to have so pleased
many, so that an honorable power and command be knit and joined to such fee;
such as are those of Dukes, Counties, and Marquesses, or that the title of
nobility be by the sovereign Prince expressly set down in the charters and
graunts of homage and fealty, and so given unto the things themselves, and the
professors thereof. And hereof rise that beginning of noble and unnoble fees.
But by the custom of our country, wherein fees are deemed by of the same
right and nature that other lands and possessions be: as concerning Nobility
not to depend of lands or fees.
the right of the persons that had them, the Artificer which by inheritance, or
Of virtue and nobility do trafique is to be made.
so bought and sold. For of two of the greatest things, namely, of Virtue, and
of Nobility, as Euripides plainly witnesses no trafique is to be made, (...).

Wherefore seeing that by our customs, as well as by the customs of the
Germans, the Spaniards, the Brittons, and Italians, all these fees, whether it
please you to Wealth and riches be they never so great to bring forth no true
nobility.
Euripides brings in a person according to the opinion of the common people
thus speaking: (...), Nobility is in riches. And in Aulide: (...).

And yet we read not only the vulgar add common sort of men, but even *
Aristotle Lib. 4. poli^.
Solon also in like manner made choice of the Citisens of Athens by their wealth
and riches, unto honors and places of command: the cause whereof we will in
due place declare. Which opinion has taken so deep root, that many think
wealth, riches, and great substance, not only to beget nobility, but that all
the glory of nobility is by poverty and want of wealth quite extinguished
and blotted out, howbeit that they which so say are themselves but men of small
authority and credit. Truly Augustus the emperor supplied the wants of the
poorer sort of the Senators, Bartholus has expressly written, True nobility to
be neither got by wealth, nor lost by poverty. Neither did M. Aemylius Scaurus
deem the honor of his house to be taken True nobility to by neither got by
wealth, not lost by poverty.
from him by his poverty: yea the nobility and glory of his family
delivered him from the power of his most gracious and mighty accusors. Now
then if there be a most shameful villain, and thereto rich withal; shall he
therefore be in degree superior unto the honest poorer sort? men I think will
not so say: then how much less ought we to judge murderers and men polluted
with all kind of villainies, because they abound with wealth to be therefore the
more noble? For why the Romans always divided wealth from nobility, for so
Tacitus reports of Cassius and Syllanus, the one Cicero called Rossius for
nobility and wealth the chief man of the town wherein he dwelt. Wherefore our
kings at such time as they, troubled with wars and pressed with want of
coin, had set nobility to sale, and that many men for their bad lives
infamous, were yet for their money become noble* the Prince by a law made,
declared none of them to be therefore so to be deemed noble, but that he might
still be accounted amongst the number of the meaner sort, and bear offices
amongst them. For what can be more absurd or pernicious, than to measure
reputation by gain, degree by money, and nobility by wealth? whereas these
things often times by theft and robbery, or immoderat lauash prodigality of
tyrants are bestowed upon every bad How far the honor of the ancestors
should extend unto their posterity.
of the Grandfathers should be extended farther then unto their Nephues sons,
A good custom of the Turks, whose reputation still depends of their own
worth and virtue, and not of their ancestors.
wisely, to the intent that every one of them should endeavor themselves by
their own virtues to renew the declyning honor of their stock and kindred;
being otherwise, to be accounted in the number of the base and common sort of
people. Howbeit that by our depraved and corrupt manners, the farther that a
man is in descent or degree from the virtue of his ancestors, from whom he
took the beginning of his honor, the more noble he is therefore reputed:
neither if he shall by all manner of villainies, or Noble men by exercising of
base trades, to loose their nobility thereby.
he which exercises base trades, and not beseeming a noble man, is even
without any such public judgment to be thrust into the order of common
persons. But which Herodotus writes, That in his time they were by the
customs of all people accounted base, which used handycraftes: Handycrafts
accounted base trades.
of which opinion we read Xenophon also to have been, who yet yields a
reason thereof not beseeming a philosopher; as forsooth that men of such
occupations were still busied, and led a close and sedentarie life: for what
can be more painful or troublesome than the Generals life? or more close and
sedentarie than the judges calling? And yet what can be more glorious or more
noble than they both are in every City and Commonweal? But Aristotle said
better, who writ all Mechanical Handycrafts men why ^hey commonly are basely
minded.
or handiecraftes men in the cities of Graece to have been still kept from
Eccles. cap. 38.
Smithes, Potters* Image makers, and such other handycrafts men from bearing of
authority and rule, from honors, and from taking places with the judges.
Lycurgus The Lacedemonian and Roman citisens by Lycurgus and Romulus their
lawgiuers forbidden to exercise mechanical or handycrafts.
also and Romulus separated their citisens far from all handycrafts; yet
Romulus permitted his citisens to use husbandry, and to bear arms: whereas
Lycurgus gave his leave only to exercise arms. And to the end it may be the
less doubted of, Dionysius Halycarnasseus repeating the same thing says: Hoc
lustro, qui puberes essent supra centum millia censa: mulierum autem, seruorum,
mercatorum, artesque sordidas exercentium (siquidem Romanorum nemini
cauponariam artem, aut vlla opificia tractare licet) triplo plus quam turbae
ciuilis, In this view were mustered of them that were fourteen year old,
above an hundred thousand: but of women, servants, merchants, and such as used
base occupations and trades, (for why it is not lawful for any Roman to keep
a Tavern, or to exercise any other handicraft) were reckned three times more
than there were of the ciuiler sort or citisens. Yet some there be which think
Numa Pompilius to have derogated from the law of Romulus, seeing that he
appointed Colleges or Companies of artificers, as if they might not have been
made of strangers, or of slaves. Which seems to be also confirmed by that
which Cicero said, Many to have been in Catilins conspiracy, which flockt
together about the Tauernes, in hope that the Dionysius Halycarnasseus writes,
viz. that in the seventh view were mustered an hundred thousand citisens,
beside artificers: By which words it is manifest, that Numa derogated not from
Romulus his law, for as much as king Seruius, the third from Numa, was the first
that so viewed or mustered the people. Neither does that which is alleged
convince them to have been citisens whom the Tribunes or seditious citisens
stirred up to rebellion, seeing that very slaves in like case were often times
called C. Cinna. Cicero also thus speaks of the Artificers, whom the
conspirators with Catiline stirred up to rebellion: Etenim omne eorum
instrumentum, omnis opera, ac quaestus, frequentia ciuium sustinetur, alitur
otio, For (says he) all their instruments and tools, all their work and
gain, is maintained Al Roman Citisens bound to bear arms.
by the multitude of Citisens, and with quietness nourished. Now it were very
improperlie said, artificers to be maintained by the multitude of citisens, if
they themselves had been also citisens. But by the Martial law of the Romans,
the citisens after Toga virilis or the man's gown was by the Roman citisens
worn, when they were come to be seauenteene year old.
they had begun once to wear the *man's gown, were compelled to serve in the
wars until they were five and fifty years old. Neither was there any way for
a citisen of Rome to attain unto any honor, except he had served in the wars
ten years: For Liuie reported, two thousand of the citisens to have been
openly sold, for that they had not for four years space served in the wars;
which could by no means have been done unto artificers: whom Liuie also in one
place writes, to have been men altogether unfit for the wars. That
testimony of Cicero is in this point also of more weight: Illiberales sunt and
sordidi quaestus mercinariorum omnium, quorum opera non quorum arts emuntur,
est enim in illis ipsa merces author amentum seruitutis, The gains (says he)
of all mercinarie men are servile and base, whose works and not whose skill are
of men bought, for in them their very wares is the earnest penie of their
slavery. But where he speaks of the Roman citisens indeed, he neither
thinks nor writes any thing of them which is contemptible or base, or that
The base regard that was had in Rome of artificers and men of occupation.
Artificers and men of occupation in Rome, to have been either slaves, or
strangers, and men of most base and low estate and condition: or if that by
manumission they were become citisens of Rome, yet they were therefore but in
the number of Libertines, having as it were in some sort lost the right of the
citisens of Rome, no otherwise then Noble men with us, which have given
themselves to base and gainful occupations or trades, who as they have thereby
left their nobility: so have they also lost their degrees and places: except
they have therefore obtained pardon of our Prince, as that enforced with
necessity, they have so intermedled in such base trades. Whether to use the
trade of merchandise be against a man's credit and reputation or not?


Howbeit concerning the trade of merchandise, it is not well agreed upon
betwixt the Lawiers and the ancient writers amongst themselves, whether it be
repugnant unto a man's credit and reputation or not. We read that by the
Tribunal law Claudia, it was forbidden the Senators to have any greater ship
at Sea, then of the burden Amphoras, the Roman measure is more then our
bushel by 16 pound weight.
of three hundred Amphoras, and that also for the carrying of the fruits of
their lands: Quaestus omnis (says Liuie) patribus indecorus visus, All
gayning by trade (says he) seemed unto the Senators unseemly. Which law
Hortensius said to be in his time dead: as in Cicero we read: Whereby it is yet
to be gathered, that not only to have been lawful for the rest of the
citisens to do, every man's credit and reputation saved whole: But also even
the Senators themselves, not to have altogether The Roman knights and
gentlemen to have used the trade of merchandise.
by that which Cicero says against Verres: Lucius Praetius splendidissimus
Eques Romanus qui Panormi negotiatur, Lucius Praetius a most worthy Roman
knight, which does trade at Panormo. And in another place: Q. Mutius Eques
Romanus qui Syracusis, Q. Mutius a Roman knight who tradeth at Syracusa. Much
less therefore was the trade of merchandise forbidden the common sort of men.
And yet Dionysius Halycarnasseus, who writes above an hundred thousand
citisens to have been cessed: but of women, and merchants, and others of base
trades, three times as many as of the citisens: whereby he seems to have
exempted merchants out of the number of the Roman citisens.

Neither do we see that to have been the manner and fashion of the Romans only,
The better sort of citisens in diverse commonweales forbidden to deal in the
trade of merchandise.
but of the Lacedaemonians and Thebans also. Howbeit that the use of gold and
silver, being taken from the Lacedaemonians, there was no place left for
merchandise: yet was it Lycurgus his pleasure, by an especial law more
solemnly to provide therefore. Plato, Aristotle, Apollonius, Thyaneus, say, The
trade of merchandise to be an enemy unto virtue. Yea the law of God seems
also to have restrained the holy people Non erit mercator in populo tuo, The
people of God forbid to be merchants.
There shall be no merchant in thy people: that is to say, (...), which word
improperly signifies a deceiuer, but more properly a merchant: for (...), is
properly to buy and sell; and in that sense it is almost always used. For that
divine law which forbad the people, but not strangers, to commit usury,
seems also to have forbidden to buy any thing, to sell the same thing the
deerer unto a natural Israelite. Whereunto agrees that which he the * Prince
of wisdom writes, Mercatorem manus a scelere puras vix Eccles. 24. Ezech
chap. 82
habiturum, A merchant hardly to have his hands clean from wickedness.
Wherefore the * Prophets most often, and the interpretours of holy scripture,
more often do Chrysostom. Homil* 21. in Mat^eum.
so detest the trade of merchants, as that * Chrysostom not obscurely or
doubtfully, but Vlpian the lawyer writes.

Yet of that we are to he warned, that whereas the immortal God forbid his
people (whom he by a singular right and choice had consecrated unto himself)
to trade in merchandise: belongs not to other people in like manner also; for
that he would have this his people to excel all others in purity and
integrity of life. For why, merchandise is not only unto cities profitable,
but honest also; and not only honest, but also necessary. For what if a city
be built in such a barren soil, or situat in such a place, The trade of
merchandise both honest and necessary.
as that men cannot therein not commodiously, but even not at all otherwise
live? Such M. Tullius out of the number of merchants, or at leastwise of base
men, exempteth them which exercise a plentiful and gainful, and not a base
and bare trade of merchandise, Mercatura si tenuis est, sordida putanda est,
simagna and copiosa, multa vndique apportans, multisque sine vanitate
impertiens, non est admodum vituperanda, The trade of merchandise (says he) if
it be small and bare, is to be accounted also base, but if it be great and
plentiful, bringing in on every side many commodities, Platoes, if it bring
in but such things as are necessary, or at leastwise profitable for the
citisens, and carry out but such things as are unprofitable, and to be spared.
And therefore many lawyers say, The trade of marcandise abounding in plenty of
all things, in nothing to derogat from the honor of a man's birth, his degree,
or nobility. Which happily may be so in Italy, in England, and in Portugal,
but not with us in France, nor yet in Germany. Yet that is every where The
merchants trade in diverse countries diversely reputed of.
true which Cicero writes, Sordidos iudicari qui mercantur a mercatoribus quod
eodem loco ac momento vendant, Them to be deemed but base, which buy of
merchants that which they hold even in the same place, and self same moment
again sell: for why,

But baser than these are the buyers and sellers of things dishonest, be they
never so precious, and to be placed beneath handie crafts-men and laborers, or
rather so much as is possible to be quite driven our of all cities: which
cannot yet altogether be done, The same thing that in one place is accounted
honest or profitable in some other to be reputed dishonest or unprofitable.
for that the law for things honest and dishonest, for things profitable and
disprofitable, Protogenes? or more glorious than Apelles? one of whose tables,
which for that it was most curiously wrought, preserved the Rhodes from
destruction, Demetrius besieging of it: Which table is reported to have been
esteemed at more than three hundred talents. And as Tully says, It was given
as a praise and commendation to Fabius, a most noble gentleman, That he was
seen in painting: which yet the Hebrews account of all other occupations the
basest. And by the laws and customs of the Turks, as of all them of the
East, and of Affrike also, it is not only a base thing, but capital also,
with the needle, pencill, or Eccles. cap. 38
be suffered them to be equal with orators and lawyers. For why, the most
famous Marcus Cato witnesses) flourished above six hundred years without
Physicians: whereas no city can without laws, and the lawful knowledge of
the law, any small while endure or stand.

The order and vocation of Husbandmen and Grasiers, is also right commendable:
The vocation of husbandmen and grasiers in ancient time right commendable, and
why now less respected.
as they which by those two most ancient trades, have taught cities, towns,
villages, and families, to relieve and maintain themselves with things of all
others most necessary. And truly Cyrus the Greater, of nothing vaunteth so
much, as of the fields set and planted by his own industry and labor.
Serranus, also Curious, Concinnatus, Torquatus, Cato, men no less famous for
their civil than their domestical praises; were yet for that most commended,
Quod attritis opere rustico manibus salutem publicam stabilirent: quaeque modo
arantium boum iuga rexerant, triumphalis currus habenas retinerent, That with
their hands worn with country labor, they established the welfare of the
Commonweal: and that those hands which of late ruled the yokes of oxen at
plow, now held the raines of the triumphall chariots in the city of Rome. But
these things were chiefly done in that age when as such men as had before been
Consuls were now from the plow called unto the Dictatorship. Truly of all
things whereby any thing is gotten, nothing is better than husbandry and
grasing, nothing more plentiful, nothing more pleasant, and I might say also
with Theophrastus, nothing better beseeming a free

The Hangmans office almost every where is deemed of all other the basest:
neither The hangmans office in some places respected* * Deuteronomy. 17. and 19.
by the Censors laws was it for him lawful to have a dwelling place within
the city: as in this our age it is not lawful for him at Toulouse. Whereas by
the laws of the Hebrews it was not only honest, but necessary also, even
the noblest of them if they had been witnesses of capital crimes, to be also
the executioners therein. Yea and The author in this custom by him reported
much mistaken and deceived.
in England the nearest kin to them that be hanged, be it their fathers, their
brethren, or nearest kinsmen, the last kindness they can do them, is to play
the part of the hangman, and to strangle them hanging upon a low pair of
gallows. But by our customs we see gainful rewards propounded unto this so
base an office, least we should be at any time destitute of an office so
necessary for the cities: as we have heard say it to have long since happened
in Gaunt, where the judge for lack of an hangman commanded

There is also in cities a great multitude of idle lazy fellows, who neither
in time of Idle people to be thrust out of the city, or elssetto work.
peace, nor war, have any occupations to set themselves to work, o^ other
trade to busy themselves withal: whom it is needful either to banish out of
the city, or to Amasis king of Egypt put to death, in like manner as if they
had been thieves and robbers. Wherein they of Paris do much better, who thrust
the strong and lusty of these idle mates into their public works;
courteously ^eeding and curing the sick and aged, and diligently instructing
the fatherless and poor boys and maids, some in learning, some in
occupations, in four diverse colleges, besides a great hospital endowed with
most fair revenues.

But if citisens live idle upon such goods as they have themselves before got,
or were Pliny writes to prefer still the best and richest man unto honors
and places of command.

Wherefore in what order citisens are to be placed, is to be referred unto the
judgment and discretion of the masters of the ceremonies of every city, for
the vnliknesse of How citisens are in a Monarchy to be ordered and placed.
their laws and customs almost infinite. Yet I suppose, that citisens in a
monarchy might in this order not unaptly be placed. That next unto the king
himself, who out of the number of the citisens, going far before the rest
should follow the holy order of the clergy: next unto the sacred order of the
clergy, the Senate: after the Senate should follow the martial men, and amongst
them, first the general of the army, or great Printers to be amongst men of
occupations especially to be regarded.
be compared, yet seems it for the excellency thereof, before all the rest
worthily to be preferred. For as for painters, image makers, caruers, makers
and sellers of women's paintings, minstrels, players, dauncers, fencers,
tumblers, iesters, and bauds, are in mine opinion either to be quite driven out
of cities, or else to be placed in the lowest place of all: so that even bath
keepers, barbers, sailers, hucksters, ostlers, coach men, carters, grave

Neither are citisens but most seldom, and that also in time of great
necessity, to be Citisens but seldom and that also upon great necessity to
be into orders divided.
in orders from other citisens divided: for that so doing may give occasion and
minister matter unto civil sedition: when as some of them divided from other
some, shall perceive themselves to be noted also with a difference of their
order and degree. Yea we Citisens better to be divided into three parts, than
into two.
the laws, as if they dwell together. But if assembly of all the orders and
degrees of citisens, must of necessity be made (for that degrees must needs
in some sort be distinguished from degrees, that a certain dignity of
degrees may be kept) especial care is to be had, that the citisens be not
divided into two parts only, and yet that in such assemblies there be not more
than three degrees or places: for that contention arising betwixt two, they
easily break out into force; or else upon equal voices break off, and leave
the matter undecided: when as one thing is contrary but only unto one, and
that by nature many things cannot unto one be contrary, but that the third
must

It shall also be more commodious and profitable to have one orator or
speaker, Whether it be good for to have one speaker for all the degrees of
citisens, or diverse.
for all the degrees of citisens together, then for diverse orders and degrees,
diverse: so that it be agreed upon amongst all the degrees and orders what is to
be requested, determined of, or done: as heretofore at Thurin and Orleance,
when they called their assemblies. But if the orders and decrees of citisens
shall therein differ among themselves, it albeit that there be many speakers,
yet the matter is still in the end put to voices.

But that division of the citisens (which we have spoken of) into three degrees
or parts, Better three parts taking in a commonweal than two.
as it is unto all kinds of cities profitable, so is it in an Aristocratie most
necessary, that two of them disagreeing, the third may end the strife, or
taking part with one, may draw the other whether it will or no from the former
received opinion. For if two factions shall arise, they which are wise, and
wish the good and welfare of the Commonweal, should set up an head of a third
faction, and join themselves unto him: For three leaders of diverse factions,
or part*takers, are right easily reconciled; whereas two are most hardly
brought to agreement: whereof oftentimes arise seditions and civil wars, and
that especially in the Aristocratike estate: For that in that estate, betwixt
the nobility and common people, can be no third degree, all the right of
sovereignty being in the Patricij and Not good in great assemblies to divide
the people into three degrees and orders.
the people, as made of both degrees. But for that both the Patricij and the
knights made scarcely the fifth part of the whole people, the people did
therefore the more imperiously reign and rule: which was then especially
understood, when as by a law concerning the Theaters, place for the beholding
of plays, was first given to the Senate, and next after them unto the knights
or gentlemen, all apart by themselus from the people: whereof Liuie thus
writes, C. Attilij Serrani, L. Scribonij Libonis Aedilium Curulium Ludis
Romany primum Senatus a populo secretus spectauit, praebuitque sermones sicut
omnis nouitas solet alijs tandem, quod mento ante debuerit tributum censentibus
amplissimo ordini, alijs demptum ex dignitate populi quicquid maiestati patrum
adiectum esset interpretantibus: and omnia discrimina talia quibus ordines
discernerentur, and concordie, and libertatis aeque minuende esse: ad
quingentissimum quinquagissimum Sextum annum in promiscuo spectatum esse, quid
repent factum? Cur non immisceri sibi in cauca Patres plebem vellent? Cur
dives pauperem consessorem fastidierit? Nonam and superbam libidinem ab nullius
ante gentis Senatu neque desideratam, neque institutam Postremo Africanum
quoque ipsum, quod Consul auctor eius rei fuisset, poenituisse ferunt, At the
Roman plays of C. Atilius Serranus, and L. Scribonius Libo, the honorable
Aediles, the Senate apart Africanus also himself to have repented him, That
being Consul, he had been author of that matter. Thus much he. Whereby it is
to be understood, that for the preserving of the popular liberty, and concord,
degrees ought so to be placed with degrees, as that al of them may more easily
be joined unto all in society and communion together. Wherefore this fact of
Africanus was blamed, not only of the common people, but even of the Senators
themselves, whose favor he was thought to have gotten: For so Tullie writes
him to have been blamed, not only of the wiser sort, but even of himself
also; for that, that was by force from the people extorted, which had before L.
Roscius Otho, Tribune of the people, That the knights or gentlemen should sit
and take their places upon the fourteen steps or degrees next unto the stage:
For when the magistrates and the rest of the Senators, by the Censors law, did
more commodiously see and hear from the first and nearest places unto the
stage, the higher degrees and farther off, were accounted of less credit: and
albeit that the places of the Theater were of right great receipt (as which
contained oftentimes threescore thousand of the citisens) yet could they not
contain them all: and therefore by the law Roscia concerning the Theater,
Roscius the Tribune, whom it beseemed to have been a keeper and preserver of
the popular liberty and dignity; at such time as he came to behold the
plays, he was by the knights (whose favor he had won) with great acclamation
and applause received, but of the people with greater tumult and stir, in so
much that Cicero the Consul was glad to call all the assembly of the people
out of the Theater. And so as a man of great wisdom and eloquence, with a
grave oration repressed the peoples insolency, and with a reproof and
chiding, well beseeming the dignity of a Consul, so appeased the tumult, as
that the people returned again into Pliny in commendation of Cicero, Te
suadente tribus Roscio Theatralis legis auctori ignouerunt, notatasque se
discrimine sedis aequo animo tulerunt, The tribes (says he) at thy persuasion
pardoned Roscius, author of the law of the Theater, and took it patiently
themselves to be noted with the difference of their seats and sittings. Now a
punishment was set down by the law of the Theater, Ne quis nisi censum
equestrem haberet in xiiij spectaret, That no man except he had a knights
wealth, should stand in the xiiij steps or degrees to behold the plays. But
when many, their patrimony being by the civil wars wasted, durst not for
fear of this Theatrall law behold the plays from the fourteen steps or
seats, Augustus the emperor decreed, That they should not be therewith bound,
who themselves

Finis Lib. Tertij.
THE FOVRTH BOOK
CHAP. I. Of the rising, increasing, flourishing estate, declining, and ruin
of Commonweales.
ALl Commonweales take their beginning either from a Family, The beginning of
Commonweals.
by little and little increasing; or else arise at once, as when a multitude of
people as a Colony drawn out of another City or Commonweal, do as a young
swarm of bees fly abroad unto another place: or as a slip or science plucked
off from a tree, and planted in a strange soil, which taking root, brings
forth much more plentiful and pleasant fruit, than do those trees which grow
up of small kernels, or of their own accord, Yet both the one and the other of
these Commonweales, are established either by the strength of some stronger The
flourishing estate of commonweales endure not long.
chaunges of worldly things, which are so mutable and uncertain, as that the
greatest Commonweales oftentimes fall even all at once with the weight of
themselves, some Demetrius (he which was called the Besieger) deemed no man
more happy, than him who had longest quietly lived in the greatest abundance
of al things, never having tasted of adversity, as a man by fortune deemed
most abject and unworthy, What the conversion and change of a Commonweal is.
of a Commonweal, when as the state thereof is altogether changed: as when a
Popular estate is changed into a Monarchy; or an Aristocratie into a
Democratie; or contrariwise: For as for the change of customs, laws,
religion, or place, it is but a certain kind of alteration, the state and
sovereignty continuing still: which Paulus Manutius seems to have done: who
writes The age of a Commonweal how it is to be measured.
the Venetian Commonweal that now is, to have stood twelve hundred years;
which has yet suffered three changes, as we shall forthwith declare. Sometime
it happens also no change either of the city, or of the citisens, of the
customs, or religion to be made, or any other force offered, or wrong done to
any man; and yet that the state may perish: as when any sovereign prince
willingly subiecteth himself, his kingdom, Attalus king of Asia; of Coctius
king of Alps; of Ptolaemee Kings which made the Romans their heirs.
king of Cyrenae; of Eumenes king of Pergamus; of Nicomedes king of Bithynia;
of Polemon king of Pontus, who left the people of Rome heirs of those so many
their kingdoms: for then those kingdoms were quite taken away, and those
Commonweales brought into the form of Provinces, and no change made of their
Monarchies into a popular Estate. And so contrariwise, if of one or many cities
or provinces Diverse changes of commonweales.
be made one or many Monarchies or popular estates divided in sovereignty,
that is not to be accounted any conversion or change, but even a very
beginning of diverse Quirites, which name the Magistrates in Tatius king of the
Sabines not long after to be also slain: wherefore the Sabines Commonweal so
perished not, either accrewed unto the Romans (as some have been of opinion)
albeit that other people called them neither Sabines, nor Quirites, but Romans:
For that that name once given unto the City and the people, could never more
be changed; or for that the name of the Romans was more stately; or else for
that those two people so grew together within the walls of Rome, yet so as that
the one became not subject unto the other: as it chances Cune^u the lawier,
who doubts, Whither the subjects of the one Commonweal, if they be joined
into one and the self same body with the subjects of another Commonwealth, be
thereby the subjects of them with whom they are so joined: which thing
Bartholus denies; and for example thereof alleges Raimond County of
Toulouse, not erring indeed in his resolution of the question, but in the
example by him produced, not having good regard unto the treaty made betwixt
the County and the estates of Languedoc of the one part, and Jews the ix the
French king on the other part, wherein it was comprised, That the only daughter
of the county Raymond should Alphonsus county of Poitiers, the kings brother,
with condition, that if they died without heirs of their bodies lawfully
begotten, the country of Languedoc should in full right return unto the
crown; yet for all that so, as that the customs of the country should not be
changed, neither any taxe*imposed without the consent of the estates of the
country* which has always been observed, the sovereignty over the country
and the inhabitants of Languedoc remaining unto the kings, as it had before
that the county was therefrom exempted. But most certain it is, that an
estate subject unto another, makes not another Commonweal, but only a part
of the subjects.

But that these things may the better be perceived, it is to be understood,
that al conuersions The natural change or fall of a Commonweal.
so that in due time to take end seems to be a thing of every thing to be
wished for.

Now Commonweales be also changed some times to the better, and sometimes to
the worse, whether such change be natural or violent: yet the violent change
still having violent motions, and so quickly done; and the natural changing
still be little and little, and so the less felt. But of all chaunges of
Commonweales, no voluntary The most pleasing and easy change of a Commonweal.
chaunges is more pleasing or easy than that which is made by the consent and
good will of him which has the sovereignty, and of his subjects: when as he
which has Sylla, with incredible violence to have taken upon him the
Dictatorship, and that not without the most cruel slaughter of the people, and
so to have turned the sovereignty of the Commonweal from a popular estate,
into a Monarchy; and yet him the same man within four years after,
voluntarily and of his own accord, dispoiling himself of the Monarchy, which
he had covered under the color of his Dictatorship, to have again restored
the sovereignty unto the people, to the great contentment of them all in
general, and the good liking of Pandulphus the tyrant, violently afterward
invaded. And as in men's bodies diverse changes happen from the qualities of the
elements, the disposition of the body or the mind, the temperature of the
humors, as also from the manner of the education thereof, and diversity of
diet: so also the Commonweal may suffer an universal change or ruin, from
friends or enemies external or internal, or from both, whether it be from
good to evil, or evil to good, and that often times contrary to the good liking
of the subjects, who must sometimes as children and mad folks, be cured even
against their wills, as Lycurgus, who changed the laws and royal

But forasmuch as there are but three sorts of Commonweales, as we have before
Six perfect conuersions or changes of Commonweales.
declared: there are also but six perfect conuersions or chaunges thereof, viz.
of a Monarchy into a Popular estate, or of a Popular estate into a Monarchy:
and so likewise of a Monarchy into an Aristocratie, and of an Aristocraty into
a Monarchy: and of an Aristocratie into a Popular estate, and of a Popular
estate into an Aristocratie. So also of every estate there be six other
imperfect chaunges, or rather alterations; that is to wit, from the Royal
estate unto the Lordlike: from the Lordlike estate unto the Tyrannical: from
the Tyrannycall unto the Royal, or from the Royal into the Tyrannical: from
the Tyrannical into the Lordlike, and from the Lordlike into the Imperfect
changes of Commonweal.
Royal. So might one also say of an Aristocratie, lawful, lordlike or
factious: And of a Popular estate, lawful, lordlike, and turbulent. I call it
an imperfect change, as the Marcus Antonius, Augustus, and Lepidus) as also a
Tetrarchie (or government

But besides these conuersions and chaunges of estates, which we have already
A Commonweal sometime holden in suspense.
spoke of, it happens some time that the estate of a Commonweal is holden in
suspense and sufferance: as after the death of Romulus, the people of Rome was
a year without a Monarchy, a Popular estate, or Aristocratie: For the hundred
Senators which commanded one of them after another, had no sovereign power,
neither commanded but only by commission: true it is, that one might say,
That the sovereignty was again returned unto the people, and the charge of
command unto the Senators, until that by common consent they had chosen them
a king.

And some times again it chances, that the Royal, Aristocratike, or Popular
An Anarchie.
Commonweal being quite extinguished, there ensues a mere Anarchie: when as
Iephte, when as their (...). 27.
estate was brought to a mere Anarchie, and vpholden only by the providence
and power of God alone, the best and greatest king: for so it is in holy writ
reported. So likewise at Syracusa, after the death of Dion, and in Florence
after that the nobility was thence driven out by the people: which so
continued a certain time without government, as a ship without a pilot or
governor. And so after the death of Abusahit king of Fez, that kingdom was in
most miserable case eight years without a king. As also after diverse murders
of many the Egyptian Sultans, the Mammalukes made choice of Campson Gaurus,
having lived a certain time in a pure Anarchie. And in

Wherefore when an estate is come unto a mere Anarchie, that is to say, when
no A mere Anarchie the very ruin of a Commonweal.
man either commands or obeys, it is to be accounted the very ruin and
destruction, and not the changing of a Commonweal: although that the families
and colleges therein continue friends together. But if the nobility or people
have power to create the prince, and he being dead the magistrates shall
themselves retain the sovereign power and command: yet is it not therefore
to be deemed an Anarchyie, for that the sovereignty is still like again to
fall either unto the nobility, or to the people.

The last point is, when as an Estate or Commonweal is together with all the
peopled Commonweales sometime together with the people utterly extinguished.
quite extinguished: as it happened unto the people and seigneurie of Thebes,
which Alexander the Great utterly rooted out, together with their city, saving
only the house of Pindarus the Poet: upon the entrance whereof was written*
(...), Burn you not Pindarus his house. So also the Madianites, the Amorites,
the Iebusites, and Phaerezites, were by the people of Israel utterly destroyed:
which was not the changing of one estate into another, but a mere ruin of
the estate with the people together. But yet it may well be, that some one
member of a Commonweal, or that some one province thereof may be destroyed, or
a town rased, and all the people therein slain, and yet the Commonweal
stand: as it chanced to the town of Arzille, Sebastia, in the kingdom of
Amasia, which Tamarlan the Tattar king used in like sort: and to the town of
Bizance, a member of the Roman empire, which after it had been three years
besieged by the emperor Seuerus, was in the end taken, sacked, rased, and all
the people slain, and the site thereof given to the Perinthians, who
reedified it, being afterward called Constantinople, and now corruptly
Stamboll, the choice seat of the Turkish emperors.

But this is in Monarchies special and proper, that the Monarchs one of them
oftentimes A thing unto Monarchies special.
by force driven out by another, do not yet therefore change their estate: as
in a few months in our remembrance it happened in the kingdom of Telesin,
where the Abuchemo was by the people driven out of his kingdom, and Abyamein
chosen king in his stead: who forthwith after was also cast out by Hariadenus
Barbarussa, who long time reigned not there, but that Abuchemo returning with
the forces of the emperor Charles the fifth chased away Barbarussa, and took
sharp revenge upon his dissoiall subjects, making himself the emperors
tributarie and vassal: but was again not long after driven out again by
Barbarussa: the state of a Monarchy yet never changing, no more than did the
Roman empire, for having had four emperors in one year; one of them slain
by another: the estate of the Monarchy nevertheless still remaining as the
prise and reward of the victor.

Sometime also rule and sovereignty is even thrust upon men by force and
against their will: as first Claudius, and then Gordianus the elder were even
drawn and enforced to take upon them the Roman empire. And in our remembrance
the inhabitants of Tripolis in Barbary, after they were revolted from Iachia
king of Tunes, chose Mucamen An Heremite against his will chosen and crowned
king of Tripolis.
for their king: who being shortly after poisoned, they upon the sudden
enforced a religious Hermit to take upon him the crown and the kingdom;
wherein he reigned against his will, until that Peter of Navarre, by force
took the city of Tripolis, together with the king, whom he sent prisoner
into Sicilie: but was afterward by the emperor Charles the fifth (to his great
contentment) sent back again to live in his solitary cell in Affricke. Some
commonweales even in their beginning destroyed.


But as of men some perish and die in the most flourishing time of their age,
some others in their youth, some in their childhood, and some before they could
be well borne; so we also see some kingdoms and cities to be cut up and
destroyed before they could strengthen themselves with laws and arms,
othersome as abortiues to be dead and extinguished before they were borne: as
in our time the kingdom of the Anabaptists at Munster (the metropoliticall
city of Westphalia) was taken away and subverted before it was well thought to
have been borne. John of Leiden, a Sadler, and their ringleader, who had there
by the space of three years borne himself for a king, and taken upon him the
sovereignty (though still by the imperial host besieged) being at last
together with the city taken and publicly executed.

Now when I speak of the flourishing estate of a Commonweal, my meaning is
When the flourishing estate of a commonweal is.
not, that it should be come to the height of most absolute perfection: for
that in these transitory things there is nothing so perfect, and in man's
actions less than in any thing in the world: but I call that the flourishing
estate of a Commonweal, when it has attained unto the highest degree of the
perfection and beauty thereof; or to say better, then when it is least
imperfect, and farthest from all kind of vice: which cannot be well known, but
after the declination, change, or ruin of every Commonweal: As the Romans
having made proof of the Royal, Tyrannical, Aristocratike, and Popular
estates and Commonweales, yet never flourished more than in the Popular estate:
neither did that their Popular estate ever flourish more in arms and laws,
than in the Papirius Cursor: Illa aetate, qua nulla virtutum feracior fuit,
nemo erat, quo magis innixares Romana, quam in Papirio Cursore staret, In that
time (says Liuie) than which The flourishing estate of the Roman commonweal
to have been in the time of Papirius Cursor
none was more plentiful of virtues, there was no man on whom the Roman
Commonweal resting stayed, than upon Papirius Cursor. This was the judgment
of the Romans, of the most flourishing time of their Commonweal* for never
after was the military and domestical discipline, the laws and ordinances
better executed, faith better kept, religion more sincerely embraced, nor vices
more severely punished* So that it ought not to seem strange, if there was
never than then greater store of most valiant and worthy men.

Now if any man shall object and say, That the Romans were then but poor, as
not The excellency and perfection of a commonweal how it is to be deemed.
is not to be measured by the foot of wealth and riches; neither the
excellency and perfection of a Commonweal, by the largeness of the bounds
thereof, but by the bounds of virtue it self. So that I deem those their
untrimmed and rough shades and groves, to have had in them more majesty and
honor, than had afterward their pleasant green woods, with the trees most
artificially planted in order of the cu^ious Traian the emperor, who joined
unto the Roman empire, not only Arabia Felix, but many other great provinces
also beyond the river Euphrates, and with incredible workmanship The Romain^
commonweal at the highest in the time of Traian the emperor, and yet not then
in the greatest perfection.
having built a bridge over the Danubie, (the remainders whereof are yet to be
seen) subdued Decebald, with the kingdom of Dacia, and with the Roman legions
danted the most cruel and barbarous nations that then lived; when as the city
of Rome it self, being head of the whole empire, did so abound and flow with
ambition, covetousness, pleasures and delights, as that it seemed to retain
no more but the shadow of Lycurgus seemed to have been almost extinct, and so
indeed not long after that same Commonweal came headlong tumbling down. And
thus much concerning the differences of the changes of Commonweales, which it
is needful for us to note, the better to conceive such conuersions and changes
of estates, which none have touched heretofore.

Now as for the causes of the chaunges of Commonweales, although they be The
causes of the changes of commonweales.
right many, and hard to be all reckoned, yet so it is that they may be
brought into

We have now here before declared, That Commonweales had their beginning The
first monarchies to have taken their beginnings from opression and tyranny.
by violent tyrannies: whereof some have afterward continued in the state of
Lordlike Monarchies, and othersome in Royal Monarchies by right of succession:
unto whom diverse chaunges have also happened for the causes by us before
touched. And that it is so, all the Histories, both sacred and profane agree,
That the first sovereignty and form of a Commonweal had beginning by the
Monarchy of the Assyrians, and that the first prince called Nimroth (which is
to say a Bitter Ruler) Ninus, by force and tyranny made himself a sovereign
prince; and that after him his successors continued that Lordlike Monarchy,
taking unto themselves the whole and entire disposition of their subjects and
their goods, until that Arbaces governor of the Medes, drove out
Sardanapalus, which was the last king of the Assyrians, and made himself king,
without any form of fashion of election at all. The cause why, being for that
Sardanapalus drowned in vain pleasures and delights, was more amongst women
than he was amongst men: a thing which men of courage and valor take most
impatiently, to see themselves subject to such an one, as has nothing of a man
more than the figure Artabazus, the kings of Persia, of Egypt, of the Hebrews,
the Macedonians, the Corinthians, the Sicionians, the Athenians, the Celtes,
and Lacedaemonians, are all come by right of succession unto their kingdoms and
principalities, for most part founded by force and violence; but afterward by
justice and good laws polished, until that their posterity The beginning of
Aristocraties.
failed (which oftentimes drew after it the changing of the estate) or that
the princes abusing their power, and evil entreating their subjects, were
themselves driven out or slain: and the subjects fearing again to fall into a
Tyrannical government, if they should give the sovereignty to one alone, or
not willing to endure the command of one of their own companions, founded
amongst them the Aristocraticall estates, little The greatest honors and
offices even in Popular estates still bestowed upon the nobility and richer
sort of the people.
Lions: Or if it were that the Monarchy changed into a Popular estate, yet so
it was nevertheless, that the nobility or richer sort still carried away all
the great offices and places of state: as for example, Solon having founded the
Popular estate in Athens, yet would not that the poor and common sort of the
people should have part in the estates. Neither the Romans having chased out
their kings (albeit that they had established a Popular estate) yet so it was,
that the honorable offices and preferments were still reserved unto the
nobility only. We also read, that the first tyrants being driven Aristides
and Pericles in Athens, and Canuleius and the other Tribunes in Rome, first
opened the gate of honorable offices and preferments unto all the people in
general. But afterward A monarchy of all estates most sure and durable.
when as it was by long experience found out, That Monarchies were more sure,
more profitable, and more durable also, than were the Popular estates, or
Aristocraties; and amongst the Monarchies, them also which were founded in the
succession of the next heirs male: these successiue Monarchies were generally
received almost throughout all the world, and the Popular and Aristocratike
estates driven out. Yea the people sometime fearing the death of their princes,
without heirs male, persuaded them whilst Numa Pompilius (to rule their
religion together with their policy) made choice of Tullus Hostilius, a good
captain. Yea most Unto most cruel tirants oftentimes succeed most just and
upright princes.
commonly it chances, that unto the greatest and most cruel tyrants
succeeded the most just and upright princes, as men ashamed to follow or imitat
the doings of them whose ends they abhor; or else upon certain conditions,
having taken the sovereignty upon them, and so having their lesson by
writing, have also their power therein somewhat diminished. So after the
unfortunate end of Marcus Antonius, a man altogether given to riot and
voluptuous pleasure, succeeded the great Augustus, a most wise and sober
prince. So after the miserable death of Nero a most cruel tyrant, succeeded
Galba, Vitellus, succeeded Vespatian the most continent: And unto the monster
of nature Princes natures much altered by sovereignty.
Heliogabalus slain and drawn in the same faction that was Vitellus,
succeeded Alexander Seuerus the most virtuous: a thing most strange,
considering that he was his cousin german, and together with him nourished and
brought up: and that the power to command in sovereignty has this mischief
in it, that often times it makes of a good man, an evil; of an humble man a
proud; of a merciful man a tyrant; of a wise man a fool; and of a valiant man
a coward. For what could be more notable then the first five years of Nero his
reign? what more excellent then his youth? or who for modesty was to be
compared in the beginning to Tiberius? who so behaved Suetonius) as if he had
almost been a private man: and being of one called Lord, commanded him, that
he should no more by way of reproach so call him: and against slanderous and
infamous libels made of him, often times said no more, but that in a free city,
men ought also to have their tongues free: but speaking unto the Senate: I have
had this good fortune (said he) to have you for my gracious Masters, and so
long as I live I will acknowledge you for my good Lords: for a good prince
(said he) must be the slave not only of the Senate, but also of all the
citisens in general, and often times of every one of them in particular.
Neither did he any thing in the beginning of his reign, no not even in the
least things, without the advice of the Senate; and yet afterward having well
tasted of the power of sovereignty, he became the Herod the elder reigned six
years as a good and just king (as says Philo) and one and thirty years as a
most cruel tyrant, who caused seauentie Senators of the the house of David to
be all slain, which was indeed the whole body of the Senate except Semneas,
and afterward put to death his wife a most noble gentlewoman, with three of his
own children: and now lying at the point of death, gave commandment to kill
all the best and chief of the Nobility of the whole land, to the intent that
The fairest beginnings of princes reigns prove not always the best.
great mourning might thereby be after his death. Which examples I have amongst
many other marked, whose beginnings were too fair to continue long: the reason
whereof may well be, for that he which at the first seems to be so notable
wise and Tiberius the emperor is said to have excelled all others. Whereas of
them which have so curiously learned the art of false semblant and
dissimulation, and have their countenances at command, nothing that good is,
true, or honest, is to be expected; but all things vain, salse, and fained,
full of hypocrisy and craft: Whereas he which at the first discovers his
imperfections (albeit that he be not therein wise) yet can he not possibly be a
man exceedingly mischievous or naught: yea of such an one it is to be hoped,
that he may at length prove an upright and just man: such an one as John the
French king is reputed to have been, who was of such a stomach, as that he
could by no means endure to look ar^ ^t upon him Why there be so few
virtuous princes?
whom he hated or liked not of: And yet for all that we read not of (...)
thing by him either dishonorable or wickedly done. Neither ought it unto any
man to seem strange, if there have been but few princes for their virtues
famous: for if every where there be such a scarcity of good and valiant men,
and that kings are not chosen out of the number of such: and that they to whom
their kingdoms come by succession, commonly have their education polluted with
so many vices, as that hard it is to say which of them is the greatest: it is
almost a miracle if one of them shall be able to get out of such a gulf of
all manner of vices. Yet if any such there shall be, as shall for his virtues
become famous, he as a toarch upon an high place or watch tower, fills al
things with the light and brightness of himself: neither is only whilst he
yet lives Evil princes even for their fathers virtues oftentimes of their
subjects beloved.
highly commended: but being dead, leaves unto his children and posterity
also, the most fragrant and sweet smelles of his virtue and worth, who though
they shall right wickedly live, yet are they the rather borne with, for their
fathers virtues sake. Cambyses did many most cruel and shameful things, yet
was he always both loved and honored of his subjects, and redoubted of his
enemies, and all for the great love they bore unto his father Cyrus, which was
so well graven in the hearts of the people (as says Plutarch) that they loved
even all such as had a great and rising nose, such an one as Cyrus had. And the
emperor Commodus, albeit that he were a most cruel tyrant, and had in one day
commanded the great Provost of Rome to kill all the beholders of the plays in
the Theater (which were not fewer than threescore thousand persons) for Marcus
Aurelius his father. A new prince without great virtues hardly to maintain his
estate.


Wherefore we see kingdoms which come by succession, seldom times to suffer
change or innovation, albeit that a wicked son succeed a good father: for
that his kingdom is like unto a great tree which has taken as deep root as
it spreads branches: whereas he which comes but newly unto a kingdom
commended nor strengthened with no virtue or power of his ancestors, is
indeed like unto an high tree: which for that it is not well rooted, is with
the wind and tempest easily overthrown. Hierome a tyrant of Sicilie, who
succeeded to Hiero his grandfather, a new prince in his kingdom, which he had
by no right or claim gained, but was yet for his manifold and great virtues,
of a private man, thought right worthy of that so great a kingdom, which he so
held almost sixty years, without force or garrison, to the great contentment
of all men; beloved not of his own subjects only, but of all his neighbor
princes also, and especially of the people of Rome, to whom Dionysius
Dionysius the elder, who by fraud invaded the estate, which he of long time
held with strong garrisons and fortresses, without the stay or alliance of any
other foreign prince: but he once dead, and this his son a man unskillful of
the government, and altogether given to riot, succeeding in his place, and
banishing his uncle Dion, and confiscating his goods, he was by the same Dion,
returning out of exile again into his own country, with an army thrust out
of his kingdom, and all the fortresses of his tyranny overthrown: which Dion
not long after being also slain, the Monarchy was again changed into a
Popular estate. Whereby it is to be understood, new princes without great
virtues Herod the elder, upon whom Caesar for the valor of Antipater his
father, by a decree of the Senate bestowed the kingdom of the Jews: who
although he were in great favor with Marcus Antonius, and Octauianus Augustus,
yet for the better assurance of his kingdom, built most strong castles, and to
gain the good will of his subjects, bestowed great masses of money for relief
of the poorer sort, and eased the people of a third part of their woonted
tributes: but knowing how little he had for all that gained, he took also an
oath of alleagiance of his subjects, seeking to gain them of the better sort
with extraordinary favors and good turns: and yet for all that he could do,
he was so hated of his subjects, that being become Herod his son been then
in great favor with Augustus the emperor, unto whom the elder Herod had
before by his That is nine hundred Thousand crowns.
will left fifteen hundred talents of gold. Howbeit yet, that all the
successors and posterity of Herod, which were in number many, in less than
threescore years, all in poor estate perished, as well for that he being but
a new man, was not descended of royal race: as for that his prowess and
valor failed in his successors.

But these conuersions and chaungings of kingdoms and Commonweales chance
Covetousness, cruelty, and the voluptuous lives of princes, oftentimes the
causes of the change or ruin of their estates.
so much the rather, if the tyrant be too great an exactor, too cruel, or too
much given to his voluptuous and unlawful pleasures, or be delighted in all
these together: as was Nero, Tiberius, and Caligula: and yet of these,
wantonness and whoredom has ruinated more princes than all the other causes:
and so is it also much more dangerous unto a prince for his estate than
cruelty: for cruelty keeps men in fear and awe, and brings a terror
upon the subjects; whereas wantonness brings after it an hate and contempt
also of the tyrant; forasmuch as every man deemeth the effeminat man to be
also faint hearted, and far unworthy to command a whole people, which has
Voluptuousness more dangerous unto a prince than cruelty.
not power over himself. So we see that Sardanapalus king of Assyria, Canades
king of Persia, Dionysius the younger, and Hierosme, kings of Sicilie,
Heliogabalus, Amyntas, Chideric, Periander, Pisistratus, Tarquin, Aristocrates
king of the Messenians, Timocrates king of Cyrene, Andronicus emperor of
Constantinoble, Rhoderike king of Spain, Appius Claudius, Galeace Sfortia,
Alexander Medices, the Cardinal Petruce Tyrant of Sienne, Lugrac and Megal,
kings of Scots, all for wantonness to have lost their estates, and most of
them slain upon the fact doing. Neither is it long since Delmendin and
Delmedin, two of the greatest cities of Affrike, were by rebellion dismembered
from the kingdom of Fez, and brought under the obeisance of the Portugals, for
a maiden by force taken from her husband to whom she was betrothed, by the
governor, who was therefore afterward slain: as was also Ahusahid king of
Fez himself with his six children all massacred by a secretary of his, for
having abused his wife. Neither for any Delcaid a Christian renegat, than to
obey the king of Tunes his son. And why in our time was Muleasses thrust out
of his kingdom, and so lost his estate, but for intemperance? and yet
nevertheless was so drowned in delights, as that returning out of Germany,
without hope that the emperor Charles the fifth (in whom his greatest trust
was) would afford him any aid, and banished as he was out of his kingdom, yet
spent he an hundred crowns upon the dressing of one peacock, as Paulus Iouius
reports: and to the end he might better conceive the pleasure of music, still
covered his eyes, as having learned a double pleasure, not to be so well
perceived by two Extreme cruelty oftentimes cause of the change of the princes
estate


But for the cruelty of a prince, the estate easily changes not, if he be
not more cruel than the wild beasts themselves, such as were Phaleris,
Alexander Phereus, Nero, Vitellius, Dometian, Commodus, Caracalla, Maximinus,
Ecelinus of Padua, and John Maria of Millan, who were all slain, or driven out
of their dominions, and their Tyrannical estates for the most part changed
into estates Popular. Which befell them not so much for the cruelty by them
used against the common sort of people (whereof no reckoning nor account is made
in a Tyrannical estate) as for cruelty committed in the Bodile, who for that
he was by the commandment of Childeric king of France whipped, slew not
only the king, but the queen also, being then great with child. So was also
the emperor Justinius the third slain by Atelia general of his army, whose
son he had slain, and in despite prostituted his wife unto his servants.
And Archetaus king of Macedon, was likewise slain by him whom he had put into
the hands of Euripides the poet, to be whipped: as was his nephew also king of
Macedon, slain by him whom he had without punishment suffered to be abused
against nature by Antipater, and scorned him craving of him revenge.

The Aristocratike estate also of them of Mitylen, was changed into a Popular,
for that it chanced certain gentlemen as they went along the streets with
their bastanadoes, in sport to strike all such of the common people as they
met: Whereupon one Megacles took occasion to stir up the comminaltie to fall
upon the nobility, and so to kill them. And not to seek for examples farther,
Henry, of late king of Sweden (but now a prisoner) was also thrust out of his
kingdom, for that he not only disdainfully rejected the request of a certain
gentleman his subject, but also with his own hand most cruelly stabbed him
with his dagger: wherewith the nobility and people moved, took him prisoner,
and enforcing him to resign his kingdom, gave it to his younger Rewards still
given unto the killers of tyrants*
either the estate or goods of the tyrants by them slain, or the greatest
honors and preferments in the state, as rewards due to their deserts. So both
the one and the other Brutus, obtained the greatest estates in Rome; the one of
them for having driven out the proud king Tarquin, and the other for having
slain Caesar. And Arbaces governor of the Medes having brought Sardanapalus
king of Assyria to such extremity, as that he was glad to burn himself alive
together with his concubines and treasures, for reward enjoyed his kingdom. So
Jews of Gonzaga having slain Bonacolse, tyrant of Mantua, was by the subjects
chosen their prince, his posterity ever since by the space of about two
hundred and fifty years having enjoyed that estate. And the Venetians
Eceline, obtained the seigneurie of Padua.

Some others there be, which seek the tyrants death, and so the change of the
Some for desire of revenge* and some for the desire of honor and the
deliverance of their country, to have procured the tyrants death and so the
changing of the estate*
estate; having nothing before their eyes but the desire of revenge, and that
without either the fear of God, the regard of their country, or love of their
nearest and dearest friends: as he which to be revenged of king Roderike, who
had ravished his wife, drew the Mohammedan Moors into Spain, who drove out the
king, and there using an hundred thousand cruelties, possessed the kingdom of
Spain, which they held by the space of seven hundred years after. And some
others there be also, who neither for hope of bearing of rule, of preferment;
or of wealth: neither for revenge of wrongs, nor Harmodius; and Aristogiton in
Athens, and those which slew Domitian and Caligula the cruel emperors. A
thing which most commonly happens in the Popular estates, wherein the new
tyrants by force or fraud having oppressed the liberty of the people, are
never assured of themselves, or of their estate, without great and strong
garrisons about them. So we see Alexander Medices, nephew to pope Clement the
seventh, and son in law to the emperor Charles the fifth, by whose forces and
power he obtained the sovereignty of Florence, and drove out them also that
were of greatest power and Laurence Medices, not only his near kinsman, but
his most familiar and domestical friend also* when as the said Laurence had
promised to prostitute unto him his own sister; that so he might the better
deliver the man disarmed (even as he was kissing and embrasing his sister, who
me he thought to have ravished) to the murderer to be slain* which was so
covertly done, as that the soldiers of his guard, whom he kept for the
saftie of his person, making merry in a dining chamber fast by, perceived
nothing of the murder of their prince. And yet in so doing, the said Laurence
neither Cosmu^ Medices, who after the death of Alexander, by the help of the
garrison soldiers, the supportation of his friends, and favor of the pope,
obtained the same government* albeit that he was reported to have been one of
the wisest princes of his age, or of long time before him, and a right great
justicier, even by the report of his enemies themselves, and had diverse strong
castles even in the city it self: yet nevertheless was he an hundred times
in danger of his person, by the conspiracies of his subjects against him,
being not able to endure a master over them, albeit that he were both just
and virtuous. And he which now reigns, not long since missed not Puccinus,
neither can be safe without a strong garrison, so long as the citisens his
subjects shall either remember or hope for the rewards of their valor and
liberty. And for this cause Dionysius the elder of Syracusa, being chosen
general, and having made himself master of all, and changed the Popular
estate into a Monarchy, had always forty thousand soldiers in readiness at
his call to set forward, beside a great garrison still attendant about his
person, and diverse strong holds, only to keep the people of Syracusa with a
part of Sicilia in subjection. And yet nevertheless was he no tyrant, as we
call a tyrant, that is to say, a cruel, vicious, and naughty man: neither was
he ever amorous of other men's wives, but to the contrary sharply reproved his
son (as says Plutarch) for having taken away one

Now if any man shall object and say unto me, That force and fear are two
evil Force and fear, things necessary for a new prince, for the maintenance
of his ^state.
masters for the maintaining of an estate: true it is, and yet needful for a
new prince to use, who by force changes a Popular estate into a Monarchy, a
thing altogether contrary unto a Monarchy Royal; which the less guard it
has, the surer it is: and therefore the wise king Numa put from him the three
hundred archers which Romulus his predecessor had taken unto him for his
guard, saying, That he would not distrust a Seruius having of a slave made
himself a king, beset himself with strong guards, and that wisely, as being
forsaken of the Senators, who took his servile government in great evil part:
For as just, pleasing, and gracious, as he was, yet had it been a thing
impossible for him without guards, garrisons, and fortresses, long to have
maintained himself and his so new an estate, but that he should have fallen
into the hands of his enemies. There was never a more gracious, magnificent,
noble, courageous, or courteous prince then Caesar; and yet notwithstanding,
all these his great virtues were not able to preserve him, but that he was by
his son Brutus and other the conspirators with incredible consent and
fidelity Augustus his successor followed not, but first caused to be put to
death all the conspiratours against Caesar, (not so much in revenge of the
death of his uncle Caesar, as he pretended, as so to provide The notable
wisdom of Augustus in his government, for the establishing of his estate.
for his own safety) after that he still guarded with a strong guard about
him, easily kept himself from the violence of his enemies: And albeit that
having quite Sextus Pompeius, and Lepidus, and overcome Marcus Anthonius in
battle at Actium, (who afterward also slew himself) and the other citisens
of greatest force and courage, either in battle slain or otherwise taken out
of the way; he might have seemed to have been able to have reigned in great
security: yet nevertheless he dispersed forty legions into the provinces,
placed three legions in Italy, and that not far from the city, kept a
strong guard about him for the safety of his person: forbid the Senators
without leave to depart out of Italy, and committed the government of his
legions not unto any the great Lords, but to gentlemen only, or some of the
meanest of the nobility. As for the creating of the officers of the city, he
divided it betwixt himself and the people; yet so as that of such as stood
Seneca) and so began to love and reverence him: he again on his part
discharged his guard, going as a private man sometimes with one man, and
sometimes

Now all Monarchies newly established by the change of an Aristocratie, or
Popular How Aristocraties or Popular estates are changed into Monarchies.
estate, have as it were taken their beginning, after that some one of the
magistrates, captains, or governors, having the power of the state in his
hand, has of a companion made himself Lord and sovereign, or else that some
stranger has subdued them, or that those states have willingly submitted
themselves unto the laws and commandments of some other man. As for the first
point, and the most ordinary change of these estates we have examples enowe.
For so Pisistratus, when he had got the chief office in the common weal,
invaded the liberty of the people: as did also Cypselus Thrasybulus, Gelo,
Dionysius, Hiero, Agathocles at Syracusa, Panaetius, and Icetes at Leonce,
Phalaris at Agrigentum, Phidon at Argos, Periander at Ambrace, Archelaus in
Ca^die, Euagoras in Cyprus, Polycrates in Samos, Anaxilaus at Rhegium, Nicocles
at Sicyon, Alexander at Pheree, Mamercus at Catana, the Decemuiri at Rome, and
there after them Sylla and Caesar: the Scaligers at Verona, the Bentinoli at
Bolonia, the Manfreds at Fauentia, the Malatestes at Atiminum, the Baleones at
Perusium, the Vitelles at Tifernas, the Sforces at Millan, and diverse others of
like sort, who of governors of cities and armies have taken upon them the
sovereignty. For in matters of estate it may be holden for an undoubted
maxim, that he is Master of the forces, Master of the Estate.
master of the estate, which is master of the forces. Wherefore in well ordered
Aristocratique Orders necessary for the maintenance of Aristocratique and
popular commonweal.
many, as in matters of war it is; then the power so granted unto the
magistrate or General ought to be but short. And therefore the Romans made
chief commanders their two Consuls: and the Carthaginensians their two
Suffets, who every other day commanded by turns: For albeit that the
dissension which is commonly betwixt them which are in power equal, is
sometimes an hinderance for the execution of good and profitable things: yet so
it is that such a commonweal so governed is not so subject to be turned into a
Monarchy, as it were if it had but one chief and sovereign Archon at Athens,
the Prytani with the Rhodians, the yearly General with the Achaeans and the
Aetolians, and the Duke at Genes. And for the same cause the Dictatorship in
Rome continued no longer then the charge required, which never passed six
months at the longest; yea and sometime lasted but one day; which time
expired, the power to command ceased: and if so be that the Dictator did for
any longer time retain his forces, he might therefore be accused of treason.
And in Thebes, so long as it was a Popular estate, the law was that the
General of the army should be put to death, if he retained the forces above a
day after the appointed time: which was the cause that the great capitaines
Epaminondas and Pelopidas were condemned to death, for having retained their
forces four months after and Aristocraticall Commonweales so much as
possible is, to beware that the laws To change the laws and ordinances
concerning the magistrates time, or to prorogue his charge, a thing most
dangerous in an Aristocratique or Popular Commonweal.
and ordinances concerning the Magistrates time be not changed, neither their
charge prorogued, if the necessity be not very great: as the Romans did to
Camillus, to whom the Dictatorship was prorogued for six months, which had
never to any other person been granted. And namely by the law Sempronia it
was straightly forbidden that the governments of Provinces should be granted
unto any for longer time than five years: which law had it been kept, Caesar
had never invaded the estate as he did, having the government of the Gauls by
the consent of Pompeius and Crassus granted for five years more than the law
allowed of; whereunto in that point was derogated in favor of him. Which was a
notable oversight, considering that they had to do with the most ambitious man
that ever was; who so well grounded his power to Paulus the Consul nine
hundred thousand Wonderful bribes given by Caesar in aspiring to the estate.
crowns, to the intent that he should not oppose himself against his
enterpises; and unto the Tribune Curio, fifteen hundred thousand crowns to
take his part. The people of Rome moreover allowing him pay for ten legions of
soldiers so long as the wars in France should last. Which so great a power
was joined with the hardiest heart that then lived, and the most valiant that
ever was, and descended of so noble an house, as that in an oration unto the
people he doubted not to say, That by the fathers side he was descended from
the gods, and by the mothers side from kings; and yet withal so modest, as
that his great enemy Cato said, That there was never so modest a tyrant as he,
and withal so vigilant: as that Cicero an other great enemy of his,
Aristocratique and Popular Commonweals still ruinated by the subjects, having
too much power committed unto them.
of Aristocratique and popular Commonweales, them to have been still ruinated,
which have at any time given too much power unto the subjects whereby to exalt
themselves: Which thing Julian the Apostatament by that his embleanie or devise
of an Eagle shot through with arrows fethered with his own feathers, being
before plucked from her. For so do the sovereign governors and magistrates of
those estates, especially when too great power is given to him which is of too
ambitious and hautie a mind. And thus much concerning the change of a Popular
or Aristocraticall estate

But the change of a Popular estate into an Aristocratie chances commonly
upon The mutual change of a popular estate into an Aristocratie, and of an
Aristocratie into a Popular estate.
the loss of some great battle, or other notable detriment of the state,
received from the enemy: as to the contrary the Popular power then most
increases when it returns from the wars with some great victory over
their enemies. Of which manner of chaunges as there are many examples, so is
there none more fit than those of the Athenians and Syracusians, two
Commonweales of the self same time; when as the Athenians by the default of
Niceas their general, vanquished by the Syracusians and so discomfited,
forthwith changed their Popular estate into an Aristocratie of four hundred
men, who yet bare themselves for five thousand by the deceit of Pisander: so
Alcibiades against the Lacedaemonians, took up arms against the four hundred
of the nobility, whom they by the leading of Thrasybulus thrust out or slew,
and so again changed the Aristocratie into a Popular estate. And in like
manner the Thebans overcome by the Enophites, changed their Popular estate
into an Aristocratie. And albeit that the Pirrhus changed not their popular
estate, yet so it was that indeed it was then a fair Aristocratie of three
hundred Senators which governed the estate, and but in appearance and show a
Democratie, or a Popular estate, the people being never than then more calm
and tractable. But so soon as the Romans had gained the estate of Tarentum,
the people forthwith began to set up their horns, demanding to have part in
the lands which the nobility had of long time possessed. And yet nevertheless
afterward, when as Hannibal had brought the Roman estate into great
extremity, the people became as humble as was possible: but after that the
Carthaginensians were overcome, king Perseus overthrown, Antiochus put to
flight, the kingdom of Macedonia and Asia subverted* then immediately
Gracchies, wherewith the Tribunes armed the people in most insolent manner,
insulting upon the nobility. In like manner the Florentines overthrew their
Oligarchie, established by Pope Clement the seventh, restoring the people
again unto their wonted liberty: for so soon as news was brought unto
Florence, That Rome was by the imperials sacked, and the Pope with the rest of
the Cardinals and Bishops besieged* it is not to be believed, with what pride
the headstrong people began to rage against them of the house of Medices; with
what ^urie they cast down their statues, defaced their arms, and reuersed all
their decrees and laws. The Popular estates of the Swissers indeed first took
their beginning from the pride and insolency of the governors Nothing more
profitable for the preservation of a Popular estate than wars.
to be more profitable for the preservation of a Popular estate, than to have
wars, and to make enemies for it if otherwise it have none. Which was the
principal reason that moved Scipio the younger so much as in him lay, to hinder
the rasing of the famous city of Carthage, wisely foreseeing, that the people
of Rome being altogether martial and warlike, if it had no enemies abroad
would at length be enforced to make war upon it self. For which cause also
Onomadesme general of the Commonweal of Chio, having appeased the civil
wars, and driven out the most mutinous, would by Popular estates most
commonly to change into Monarchies.


Yet amongst other conuersions and chaunges of Commonweales, the change of a
Popular estate into a Monarchy oftenest happens; and that either by civil
wars, Cicero speaking of the civil wars betwixt Caesar and Pompey, says,
Ex victoria cum multa, tum certe Tyrannis existit, Of victory ensue many
things, but especially a Tyrannical government. For that almost always in
civil wars the people is divided: wherein if it so fall out, that the
leaders of the factions bring the matter unto the trial of a battle, no man
can doubt but that he who therein shall carry away the victory, possessed of
the forces and powers, shall either for ambition and the desire of honor, or
for the saftie of his person, keep unto himself the Tyrannical governments
most commonly to change into popular estates.
sovereignty. Whereas contrariwise Tyrannical governments (for the most part)
change into Popular estates. For that the people which never knows how to
keep Pisistratus was slain; at Rome, after Tarquin the proud was driven out:
at Syracusa, after Hiero slain, and again after that Dionysius was banished:
at Florence, after that the duke of Galuagno the tyrant had there lost his
estate, where the people of Milan for fifty years after, held a Popular
estate, until that at last it was again changed into a Tyrannical government
by the Toresa^s. Neither did the Swissars otherwise establish that they Popular
estate (which by the space of 260 years has continued even unto this day) but
by killing of the tyrannical deputies of the empire, tyrannizing over them.
The like we see to have happened in Thessalie, after that Alexander the tyrant
of the Phereans was slain: and in Sienna, after that Alexander Dichi the new
tyrant, was by the conspiracy of Hierome Seuerin slain, and his partakers of
the nobility De Monte Nouo cast out, slain, and banished, the people
forthwith took upon Alexander Medices the new tyrant, would have taken the
government from them of the house of Medices, and reestablished their Popular
estate, if they had certainly known the tyrant to have been slain: but when
as almost only Laurence Medices with Caracciolus the muttherer were privy to
the murder (supposed to be not only the tyrants familiar and domestical
acquaintance, but his most inward friend also) no man could by him be
persuaded, that he had slain the tyrant: but so by present flight making shift
for himself, gave opportunity to young Cosmus Medices his cosen (who then had
the forces of the estate in his power) to take upon them the sovereignty. But
this conversion or change of Tyrannical governments into Democraties,

Sometime also the people are so fickle and fantastical, as that it is almost
a thing impossible The ^ickelnesse of the people oftentimes cause of the change
of the estate.
for them to hold any one estate, which it is not by and by again weary of:
as we may say of the ancient Athenians, Samians, Syracusans, Florentines, and
Genowayes; who after they had changed from one estate or form of government,
would by and by have another. Which fantastical disease most commonly
chances unto such Popular estates, as wherein the subjects be too wise and of
too subtle spirits, as Thucidides, Xenophon, and Plutarch, the Athenians less
than in an hundred years, six times to have changed their estate; and since
them the Florentines seven times: which so happened not neither unto The fickle
and turbulent estate of the Florentines
nobility having so got the sovereignty, began also to strive amongst
themselves for the principality: and with mutual hatred and proscriptions so
weakened themselves Charles of France brother to king Jews the ninth, who at
the request of the pope, and of the Florentines themselves, came to Florence,
and with the good liking of the people in general, took upon him the
government, ended their quarrels, and reconciled the citisens among themselves,
together with the Commonweal: and so having appeased the citisens, and
reformed the Commonweal, being invited to the kingdom of Naples, he left in
the city of Florence his deputies. But he was scarce well gone out of the
city, but that the Florentines weary of the government of the deputies, came
again unto their popular government, and so with all renewed their civil
wars. For redress whereof were still turning and tumbling of their estate,
until they light upon Cosmus Medices, Antoninus Poggius M^biauellus.
been played also by the people of Affrike (who in sharpness of wit are said to
pass the Italians) when they made proof of Popular estates: whereof I will
set down but one

Now albeit that Aristocratike estates seem to many both better and more
assured Discord amongst themselves dangerous unto the governors of an
Aristocratie.
and durable also than the Popular, yet so it is, that the governors thereof if
they be not of accord among themselves, are still therein in double danger:
the one from the faction among themselves, the other from the insurrection or
rebellion of the people, who never fail to fall upon them if they once find
them at variance among themselves, as we have before showed of the Florentines.
The like whereof happened at Vienna, at Genes, and diverse other Commonweales in
Germany also. As it also chanced in the Peloponesian war, unto all the
cities of Greece which were then governed by the nobility or richer sort.
Which is also yet more dangerous, when the governors Multitude of strangers
in an Aristocratie dangerous.
the least occasion rise up against them, and so happily chase even the natural
lords out of their own country: As it chanced at Sienna, at Genes, at Zurike,
and at Cullen; where the strangers increasing, and seeing themselves
surcharged and evil entreated, without having any part or interest in the
estate, drove out the governors and slew most part of them. And namely they of
Lindaw, after they had slain the governors, changed their Aristocratie into a
Democratie or Popular estate: as also did the inhabitants changing afterward
that Aristocraticall estate into a Popular government. The like The number of
the inhabitants of Venice in the year 1555.
Religious men, 1157 Jews: which are in all, an hundred thirty and two
thousand three hundred and thirty persons; whereunto putting a third part more
for the number of them which are under twenty years old, (taking the ordinary
age and the lives of men to be 60 years, as the law pre^ineth) it amounts to
the number of about an hundred seauentie six thousand four hundred and forty
citisens, beside strangers. In which number the nobility or gentlemen were not
comprehended, who could not be above three or four thousand, accounting as
well them that were absent, as them that were present. And truly I cannot but
marvel why the Venetians have published, yea and that more is have suffered to
be put in print the number that then was Seneca writes. We read in the
history of Cardinal Bembus, that the greatest assembly

Now all these changes of Aristocraties into popular Commonweales have been
The change of popular estates into Aristocraties of all others most gentle and
quiet.
violent and bloody, as it happens almost always: whereas to the contrary
it comes to pass that Popular estates change into Aristocraties by a more
gentle and insensible change. As when entrance is given unto strangers, who
in tract of time by little and little plant themselves, and multiply, without
having any part in the estate and government, it falls out in the end that
the natural citisen employed in public charges, or in the wars, or by
popular diseases wasted, do so decay; the strangers still increasing: whereby
it comes to pass, that the lesser part of the inhabitants Aristocraties by
some great ou^r throw of the nobility oftentimes changed into popular
estates.
changed the Aristocraty into a Popular estate, in the time of Themistocles.
And for this cause the nobility of the Argiues, being almost all slain by
Cleomenes king of Lacedemonia, Liuie writes. And therefore the Venetians,
better citisens than warriors, if they be to Monarchies hardly changed for
the loss of the nobility.
not slain together with the rest of the nobility: as the manner of the Turks
is to do in all places where they have any purpose absolutely to command,
where they spare not so much as a gentleman: whereof have ensued the
destruction of many Commonweals in the East, and great increasing of the
Turkish empire. But this change, or rather union or encreasement of one estate
by another, proceeds from external force. So in France also, when as almost
all the nobility of France was slain in the expedition of Lothaire the eldest
son of Jews the Gentle, on the one part, and Jews and Charles the Bald on
the other: yet for all that all their three Monarchies stood still firm: and
namely when the country of Champagne had lost so much of the nobility in
those wars, as that for the restoring thereof, the gentlewomen had especial
privilege to ennoble their husbands with whom they should marry, and yet for
all that the Monarchy in the state thereof felt no change at all. And thus are
the great and notable changes commonly made in Aristocratike and Popular
Commonweales.

But nothing is so much in an Aristocratie to be feared, as least some gracious
man Ambition and the unworthy bestowing of the great preferments of the
commonweal, things most dangerous to an Aristocrati^
of the nobility, or of the people, desirous of rule and authority, should
stir up the people against the nobility, and become leader of them himself.
For thereof ensues the most certain destruction of an Aristocratie, together
with the nobility. In this sort Thr^syllus first, and afterward Thrasybulus at
Athens, Marius and Caesar at Rome, Fra. Valori, and P. Sodorin at Florence,
armed the people against the nobility: which is also so much the more to be
feared, if the great honors of the estate be bestowed upon most filthy and
wicked men, and other virtuous men and such as have well deserved of the
Commonweal, kept back and excluded. Which thing seems not grievous only to
every good man, and not to be borne withal, but ministers occasion also unto
the seditious and popular, to inflame the people against the nobility. Neither
Heracleotes, a man for his evil life infamous. Which thing also was the
destruction of Nero and Heliogabalus, for that they had bestowed the greatest
honors and preferments of the empire, upon most wicked and corrupt men. Which
of all other things is most to be feared and shunned in an Aristocratie
Aristocratically governed: that is to say, where the people is kept from all
honors and places of command: which although it be of it self an hard thing
patiently to endure, yet were it the better to be borne, if the government
were committed to good men: but when it is given to wicked and unworthy men,
every audacious fellow upon occasion offered, will easily Discord among the
nobility a thing most dangerous to the sta^
so is it especially in an Aristocratie to be eschewed and fled. Now discord
often times arises even of most small matters, which as sparks raise the great
fires of civil wars, which at length take hold even of the whole body of
the estate of a city or Commonweal. As it happened at Florence, for the
refusal made by a gentleman of the noble house of Bondelmont, to marry a
gentlewoman to whom he had before given his promise, gave occasion to the
raising of a faction amongst the nobility, who so wasted and devoured one
another, as that the people to end the quarrel, easily drove Small matters
oftentimes the caus^ of great chaunges in commonweals.
out all the rest, and commanded the state of the city. And for like occasion
arose of Burgundy and the Swissers, which could no otherwise be ended, but by
the death of Great men hardly to be called in question to give an account of
their doings, without the danger of the estate.


Sometime also the changes and ruins of Commonweales come, when the great ones
are to be brought in question, to cause them to give an account of their
actions, whether it be for right or wrong: wherein even they which are
guiltless (and especially in Popular estates) not without cause always fear
the calumnies and doubtful issues of judgments, which most commonly endaunger
the lives, the goods, and honor of such as are accused. And to leave foreign
examples, we have store enough of our own, and that of such as of late have set
on fire all the kingdom with civil wars when it was but spoken of, for
calling them to account for two and forty millions. And Pericles, a man of
greatest integrity, and which had most magnificently spent even his own
wealth for the Athenian Commonweal, rather than he would hazard the account
that they demanded of him for the treasure of Athens, which he had managed,
and so generally of his actions, raised the Peloponesian war, which never
after took end until it had ruinated diverse Commonweals, and wholly changed
the estate of all the cities of Greece. Who always having been a good husband,
and had the charge of the common treasure of that Commonweal, by the space of
almost fifty years, was therefore yet found never the richer, as Thucydides,
a most true historiographer, and Pericles his most mortal enemy reports of
Caesar was of himself most ambitious and desirous of sovereignty: yet was he
not so much desirous to bear rule, as afraid to be called to account by
private men, for such things as he had done, as his enemies had openly boasted
that he should, so soon as he was discharged of his charge: not the least
cause that moved him to ceise upon the estate. For what assurance could he have
of himself, seeing before the two Scipioes ( Africanus the honor of his time,
and Scipio Asiaticus) Rotulus and Cicero, by the judgment of the people
condemned? Now if good men were to fear, what should the wicked do? who
besides Cateline* That the fire (forsooth) which had taken hold of his house,
which he could not with water quench, he would yet quench with the utter ruin
of the same. And truly much he missed not, but that he had utterly overthrown
the Roman Commonweal, or stepped into the sovereignty, had not Cicero the
watchful Ca. Antonius his companion (although it were with much a do) slain
him so desperate a citisen, with all his fellows. Neither ought Cicero (by his
good leave be it said) to have driven Catiline out of the city, but to have
oppressed him even there, the conspiracy once detected. For it is not to be
hoped, but that he which sees himself banished from his house, and from his
country, if he have power, will forthwith put himself in arms, as he did. And
had he gained the battle against Ca* Antonius, he had put the How dangerous
a matter it is in every commonweal to bannish a great man.
whole estate in great danger, being one of the most noble gentlemen, and best
allied of all them that were in Rome. Certain it is that by his departure out
of the city, a great and dangerous sink of the Commonweal was so well
cleansed; yet had it been better This was the Ostracisme banishment.
very good friends, or else utterly to destroy them, rather than to drive them
out of the city; except we should for honor banish them: as they did in the
cities of Athens, Argos, and Ephesus, where the great Lords mighty in wealth,
favor, or virtue, were for a certain time (which for all that never exceeded
ten years) constrained to absent themselves, without any loss of goods or
reputation; which was an honorable kind of banishment. Of whom so banished,
not any one of them is reported to have therefore made war upon his country.
But to banish a great Lord with loss of his good^ and contumely, is not to
quench but to kindle the fire of war against the estate: For Dion banished
out of Syracusa by Dionysius the younger, against whom for all that he yet took
not up arms until he was by him proscribed. And Martius Coriolanus, who cast
into exile, brought the Romans to such extremity, as that had he not suffered
himself to have been overcome with the prayers and tears of his mother, and
the other women whom the Romans had sent unto him, the Roman state had there
taken end. In like manner the banished men of the house of Medices, and the
nobility of Zurich in the year 133^, thrust out of their cities, by the help
and power of their friends and allies besieged their own native countries, and
for a long Artaxerxes king of Persia had cast in prison Cyrus the younger,
guilty of high treason, and had commanded him in princely manner to be bound
with chains of gold; and afterward overcome with his mothers requests
enlarged him: but he had no sooner got his liberty, but that he made most
grievous war upon the king, and was like enough by his brothers Great men
en^mies unto the estate, are either to be slain, or by great kindness to be
made thereunto faithful friends.
or make them our good friends: as did Augustus, having discovered the
conspiracy of Cinna against him, and having him in his power attainted and
convinced by his own letters, yet nevertheless pardoned him; and not so
content, took him by the hand, and swore a bond of mutual friendship with
him, and afterward bestowed the greatest honors and preferments of the estate
upon him, at the time that Cinna expected nothing but the sentence of
condemnation, and so present execution; using these words of grace and favor
unto him: Vitam tibi Cinna iterum do, prius hosti, nunc insidiatori ac
parricidae; Ex hodierno die amicitia inter nos incipiat, contendamus vtrum ego
meliore fide vitam tibi dederim, an tu debeas, Cinna (said he) thy life I give
thee again, being before mine enemy, and now a traitor and a murderer; But
from this day, let us begin to be friends, and from henceforth let us strive,
whether I with greater trust have given thee thy life, or thou with greater
faithfulness do ow it. After which time he never had a more faithful
friend; being also afterward by him appointed heir of all his goods. Augustus
had before put to death an infinite number of such as had sworn and conspired
his death: but now had a purpose in Cinna to prove if by gentleness and mercy
he could gain the hearts of men, wherein he was not deceived: for from that
time there was never any found which durst attempt any thing against him. So
the Venetians also having taken prisoner Gonzaga the duke of Mantua, Jews of
France for the overthrow of the Venetian state) did not only set him at
liberty, but made him General also of their forces; by which so honorable a
kindness he bound, for ever after continued their most fast and loiall friend.
And this is it for which Pontius the old captain of the Samnites said, That
the great army of the Romans surprised in the straites of the Appenine
mountains was either frank and freely to be set at liberty, or else all to
be put to the sword: for that so it should come to pass, that either the power
of the Romans should by so great a slaughter be greatly weakened, or else having
received from the Samnites so great a benefit, as the life and liberty of so
many men, they should for ever after keep good league and

But these conuersions and chaunges of Commonweales do more often happen in
Small Commonweales more subject unto change than great.
little and small cities or estates, than in great kingdoms full of great
provinces, and people. For that a small Commonweal is soon divided into two
parts or factions: Whereas a great Commonweal is much more hardly divided; for
that betwixt the great Lords and the meanest subjects, betwixt the rich and the
poor, betwixt the good and the bad, there are a great number of the middle
sort which bind the one with the other, by means that they participate both
with the one and the other, as having some accord and agreement with both the
extremes. And that it is for which we see the little Commonweales of Italy,
and the ancient Commonweals of Greece, Small occasions serve to raise great
dissension amongst citisens, and so the change of the estate.
the estate. So the city of Fez was never at quiet, neither could the
slaughters and murders ever be appeased or stayed, until that Joseph king of
Marocco and of Fez, of two towns standing somewhat distant one of them from
the other by continuate building made them both one, and that now the greatest
city of Fez, whereby he gained the praise and commendation of a most wise and
discreet prince; for that he so not only joined houses to houses, and walls to
walls, but bound also the minds of the citisens and inhabitants of both places
(before burning with an incredible hatred one of them against an other, and
always divided in wars) now in perpetual love and friendship together.
Which happened also unto the Clazomenians, where one part of the city standing
in the maine, and the other part in an Island, there was always discord and
Pericles with long walls joined the Haven unto the City. For which cause also
such tumults and quarrels fell betwixt the citisens of Venice, and the mariners
and other the seafaring men, as had brought the city into extreme peril and
danger had not Peter Lauredan with his great authority and wisdom appeased
the same.

But most often it happens the chaunges of Commonweales to follow after civil
discord, especially if some neighbor prince shall upon the suddein oppress a
city or Commonweales most often changed or ouerthrowme by foreign princes,
taking the advantage of the civil discord of the subjects amongst themselves.
State weakened with the slaughter of the citisens or subjects, or else the
citisens or subjects themselves being by the ears together: As the Englishmen
have often times vanquished and ouerrunne the French being at variance among
themselves: And the king of Fez easily took the city of Tefza, the citisens
being almost all consumed and spent with civil war, And in the memory of
our fathers Philip the second duke of Bourgondie joined unto the bounds of his
dukedom Dinan and Bo^ines, two cities in the country of Liege (parted in
sunder but with a river) after that they had with long wars weakened
themselves, which two cities for all that he could not before by any force
subdue; howbeit that in taking of them he did but marry the one of Philip
Commines. So also whilst the kings of Marocco were in arms together for the
sovereignty, the Governor of Thunes and of Telesin dismembered those two
provinces to make himself a kingdom of. And by the same means Lachares
seeing the Athenians in combustion, in the time of Demetrius the besieger,
stepped into the Seignorie. And that more is, we read that four thousand five
hundred slaves and banished men invaded the Capitol, and missed but a little
to have made themselves lords of Rome, whilst the Nobility and Common people
in the mean time were together by the ears in an vproar in the midst of the
city, who thereupon fell to agreement among themselves; not unlike unto two
dogs, who ready to pull one an others throat out, seeing a wolf, fall both
upon him. Wherefore such civil discord is most dangerous unto cities or
estates, especially if there be

Yet for all that a Monarchy has this advantage proper unto it self, above
the A Monarchy not so easily changed or overthrown, as is an Aristocratie or
Popular Commonweal.
Aristocratique and Popular estates, That in these commonly there is but one
town at the same time yielded themselves unto him also. But the king taken
prisoner, is Charles the fifth was the resolution of king Francis then his
prisoner, who gave him to understand that he was The resolution of Francis the
French king, being prisoner to the Emperor Charles the fifth.
upon the point to resign his kingdom unto his eldest son, if he would not
accept of the conditions by him offered: For why, the realm and all the Estate
stood yet whole without any change taking, or any alteration suffering. And
albeit that Spain, Italy, England, all the Low Countries, the Pope, the
Venetians, and all the Potentates

And yet is there no kingdom which shall not in continuance of time be
changed, The insensible change of estates best and most tolerable.
and at length also be overthrown. But they are in better case which least
feel such their chaunges by little and little made, whether it be from evil
to good, or from good to better; as we have showed by the example of the
Venetian Commonweal: which at the beginning was a pure Monarchy, which
afterward was sweetly changed into a Popular estate, and now by little and
little is changed into an Aristocratie, and that in such quiet sort, as that
it was not well by any man perceived that the estate was at all changed. An
other example we have also of the German Empire, which founded The insensible
^stanging of the Venetian estate, and of the state of the German Empire.
by Charlemaigne and discending to his posterity, so long continued a true
Monarchy under one sovereign princes government, until that the line of
Charlemaigne Iagellon failing: as also the Danes, after that Christierne their
king was by them his subjects imprisoned, and his brother to be chosen king in
his place, sworn to such conditions as the nobility would: and after that
Frederike which now reigns has been constrained to confirm the same, (as I
have before noted) whereby it manifestly appears, that the Nobility there
hold as it were the sovereignty, and that by little and little that kingdom
will change Frederike should die without children.

And albeit that the estates of Hungary, Bohemia, Polonia, and Denmark, have
always Kingdoms going by election and so indeed but A^istocraties, long
continued in one family, easily change at length into Monarchies as by
succession discending.
pretended the right of election of their kings, although they have children,
(which prerogative they still maintain) yet commonly the kings their parents
appointed their children unto the succession of their kingdoms, who so chosen
in their fathers places, better maintain the rights of sovereignty than do
strangers (who have the same often times cut short, and so their sovereign
power in them restrained) so that the kingdoms so descending, as it were in
succession from the great grandfathers unto their nephews, the sovereign
rights by little and little without violence return again from the nobility
unto the kings themselves: which is both an easy change, and most Cazimir the
Great, king of Polonia, worthily defended the sovereign rights by him received
from his great grandfather: but he dead without issue, the Polonians indeed
called Jews king of Hungary (and Cazimir his nephew) unto the kingdom of
Polonia, but with the sovereignty therein much diminished; he for the gaining
of the kingdom yielding to whatsoever the estates desired. But Jews dead also
without heirs male, Iagello duke of Lithuania marrying one of the daughters
and heirs of Jews, and so with her obtaining the kingdom of Polonia, yet
more impaired the sovereign rights than they had before been: the princes of
whose posterity nevertheless as it were in successiue right, for the space of
above Sigismundus Augustus, last heir male of that house: unto whom by right
of election succeeded Henry of France, Charles the ninth the French kings
brother: but with oaths and conditions bound unto the estates, so much
derogating from the rights of a sovereign Monarch, as that indeed he might
have seemed rather a prince than a king. And to say yet more, I being sent to
Mets, to assist them which were thither sent with the duke, to receive the
ambassadors of Polonia, and to parle with them, it was told me by Solomon
Sboroschi one of the ambassadors, That the estates of Polonia had yet cut much
shorter the power of the new elected king, had it not been in the regard they
had of the honor Charles the fifth the emperor upon this condition gave them.
And albeit that the college of cardinals after the death of Julius the second,
determined in the conclaue, to moderat the popes power: yet shortly after they
flew from that they had before decreed, in such sort that Leo the tenth, then
by them chosen, took upon him more power than had any pope of long time before
him.

But that change is of others most dangerous to a Monarchy, when as the king
The most dangerous change of a Monarchy.
dying without issue, there is some one who in wealth and power exceeds the
rest; and so much the more, if he be also ambitious and desirous of rule: For
no doubt, but that having the power in his hand, he will, if he can, take the
sovereignty from the other weak princes. For so Hugh Capet the right line of
Charlemaigne ended, being Provost of the city of Paris, and a man of great
wealth, and no less favored of the people, excluded Charles duke of Loraine,
who with his son Otho were the only men left of all the posterity of
Charlemaigne. Which is also to be feared of the great Othoman princes, who
although they have their families of the Machaloglies, of the Ebranes, and the
Turacans, of the princes house and blood, to succeed in the Turkish empire: yet
for all that if the Othoman family should altogether perish, it is to be
thought, that some one of the Bassaes or other great men, in greatest favor
with the Ianzaries, and the other soldiers of the court will carry away the
estate and sovereignty from the other princes of the aforesaid families, being
but weak, and far off These noble families are now also al or most of them
extinguished and come to naught.
from the Grand Signior, which might so raise the greatest civil wars in the
East, for the great opinion which the people has of long conceived of the
valor and majesty Cleomenes the king vanquished and put to flight by
Antigonus, the kingdom was changed into a Popular estate, which so continued
for three years: during which time the people made choice of five Prouosts, or
chief magistrates, whom they called Ephori, chosen out of the people
themselves: but news being brought of the death of Cleomenes, slain in
Egypt, two of the five Ephori conspired against the other three their
companions and fellows in office: and so as they were doing sacrifice, caused
them to be slain: which done, they proceed to the election of Agesipolis for
their king, a prince of the royal blood. But whereas before Cleomenes they
were wont to have two kings: one Lycurgus a man Chilon, a noble gentleman,
descended from Hercules, being for his poverty and want of ability excluded,
who not able to endure so great an indignity offered unto his house and family,
procured all the magistrates to be slain: Lycurgus himself only escaping, who
after great effusion of blood, held the sovereignty himself alone, having
before almost quite destroyed the royal race of the Heraclides posterity of
Hercules. And thus much concerning the change and ruin of Commonweales, which
whether they may by any means be forseene and prevented, let us now also see.

CHAP. II. Whether there be any mean to know the chaunges and ruins, which
are to chance unto Commonweales.
SEeing that there is nothing in this world which comes to pass by chance
or fortune, as all divines and the wiser sort of the Philosophers have with one
common consent resolved: We will here in the first place set down this maxim
for a ground or foundation, That the chaunges and ruins of Commonweals, are
humane, or natural, or divine; that is to say, That they come to pass eitheir
by the only Plato according to the opinion of Homer has called the Golden
Chain, that is to say, (...), or by the will of man, which the divines
confess to be free, at the least concerning civil actions: howbeit that
indeed it is no will at all, which in any sort whatsoever is enforced and
bound. Which will of man is so mutable and uncertain, as that it should be
impossible to give Man's will still mutable, and God his judgments inscrutable,
afford no mean for man by the^ to foresee the changes and ruins of
Commonweales.
thereby any judgment, to know the changes and ruins which are to fall upon
Commonweales. As for the council of God, it is inscrutable, but that he
sometime by secret inspiration declares his will, as he has done unto his
Prophets, causing them many worlds of years before to see the falls of many
the greatest empires and Monarchies, which posterity has by experience found
to be true. But this divine power of the almighty most seldom times shows
it self immediately without the coming betwixt of mean causes; neither does
he it without greatest force and most sudden violence: as when he in one and
the self same moment with wonderful fire, and revenging flames, destroyed the
five cities with Sodom and Gomorrha: and so changed God his inmediate
judgment most su^den and most dreadful.
also the place then full of most sweet waters and abundance of fish, with a
most stinking

Wherefore seeing that man's will is still diverse and mutable, and God his
judgments most secret and inscrutable: there remains only to know, whether
that by natural causes (which not altogether obscure, but by a certain
constant order of causes and effects governed, kept their course) a man may
judge of the issue and success of Commonweales. By what natural causes the
ch^nges and ruins of Commonweales are to be foresee^
Yet by these natural causes having in them this power (which are many and
diverse) we mean not civil causes, whereunto the change and ruin of cities
and Commonweales must needs immediately follow: as when good deserts go
unrewarded, and great offenses unregarded, who knows not but that such a
state or Commonweal must needs in short time perish and come to naught? For of
all causes none Psalm 10^. Leuit. 27. Job. 12.
* of God and of his religion, and God therefore to be angry, and to stupifie
the wisdom even of the most wisest magistrates, and to arm even his stars
against princes. And every one of these have their causes, by the help and
concourse whereof wise men may guess the change or ruin of a city or
Commonweal. In which point we see many to err and be deceived, which think,
that to look into the stars, and to Astrologicall pre dictions, not to
derogat from the majesty and power of God.
search after their secret influencies and virtues, is in some sort to diminish
the majesty and power of almighty God: whereas to the contrary it is thereby
made much more glorious and beautiful, to do so great things by his creatures,
as if he did then immediately by his own mighty hand, without any other mean
at all.

Now what man is there of sound judgment, which feels not the wonderful
Nothing done by the necessity of nature, it self be ing still subject to the
power of God:
force and effect of the celestial bodies in nature in general? Which yet for
all that no necessity of nature works, for that it may by almighty God be
still kept back and restrained, being himself free from the laws of nature,
which he himself has commanded; not as by a decree of a Senate, or of a
people, but even of himself: who being of all others the greatest, can do
nothing but that which is right and just, for that he Esaias. 19.
perpetual care of all people and nations, but yet thereof himself secure, for
that he is himself the greatest. But as all things which had beginning have
also a loose and frail dissoluable nature (as by most certain and undoubtful
demonstration is to be proved) it must thereof needs follow also, not only All
worldly things still subject to mutabilitie and change.
cities and Commonweals, but even also other things, which from their first
beginning have innumerable worlds of years flourished, must at length in tract
of time fall also and take end. And albeit that Plato the prince of
Philosophers, having not as yet the knowledge of the celestial motions, and so
much less of their effects (which as then was covered in most thick darkness
and clouds) when as he with a notable invention had conceited such a form of a
Commonweal, as seemed unto many to be Secundus (a Philosopher of the Stoike
sect) greatly comforted Pompey, discouraged and almost desperate after the
Pharsalian overthrow. Neither yet therefore do they which think the course of
natural causes to concern the changes and ruins of cities and Commonweals,
thereby bind the free will of man, and Plato has written, Kingdoms then to
fall and take end, when as the sweet consent and harmony of them should perish
and decay; is a thing not worth the refutation: whereof yet for all that more
in due place shall be said.

Now many there be, which have thought the conuersions and chaunges of estates
and Commonwealas, to depend of the force, power and motion of the superior
celestial The notable ^tors of the Astrologers
great variety and inconstancy of them which have observed the force and
course of the celestial stars and orbs; insomuch, that some one has written
the same star in the self same moment to have been in his direct motion, and
another has likewise written the same to be retrograde, which yet for all
that, was to be seen in the heavens stationarie and immovable. So that they
are by their own rashness to be refelled, Cyprian Leouicius, following the
table of Alphonsus, (the evident error of whom Copernicus has declared) has
made so apparent faults, as that the great conjunctions of the superior planets
were seen one or two months after his calculation. And albeit that Gerardus
Mercator have endeavored by certain eclipses of the sun and of the moon, by
ancient writers set down, more curiously than any other, Julius Maternus,
contrary to the opinion of the Arabians, and of all other the Astrologers, who
write, that the sun was then in the sign Aries* being yet both therein
deceived* these, six signs; and Mercator too. For why it is manifestly to be
proved, not only by the most ancient orders and customs of all people, but by
the most divine testimonies of holy scripture also, The sun in the creation
of the world, to have been The sun in the creation of the world to have been
in the sign^ Libra. Exodus 23. ver. 16 Exodus 11. ver. ^
in the sign Libra: whereby the Feast of the gathering of the fruits is
commanded to be Moses has expressly written to have been the first, before the
departure of the people out of Egypt. Which to the intent it might be the
less doubted of, we read to be oftentimes by him repeated: for when he had
commanded the feast day Abib, that is to say, The feast of weeks, which the
Greeks call (...): he joins herunto these words, (...), that is to say, And
the feast of the gathering of fruits in the end of the year. But the last
moment of the year past, is the beginning of the year following; as Orus
Apollo writes, the Egyptians to have declared the revolution of the year, by
a dragon turned about into a circle. But Josephus, the best interpreter of
antiquity, declares the month Abib, which of th Chaldaies is called Niscan,
and of Josephus, but almost all the Hebrew Rabines also, namely Eleazar,
Abraham, Ezra, Ionathas the Chaldean interpreter, with almost all the rest,
constantly affirm. Which for that it has great force for the discerning of
the ruins of Commonweales, is of us The world to have taken beginning in
Autumn.
more manifestly to be explaned. The ancient school of the Hebrews, begin the
reading of Moises his books, the Genesis, in Autumn: and Samuel, the most
ancient Rabine of the Hebrews, appoints the first Tecupa, or yearly
conversion of the year, Julius Firmicus writes, the Egyptians having
received it from their ancestors, to have delivered it unto posterity, The
sun in the beginning of the world to have been placed in the last part of
Libra. The same was also the opinion of the Indians, who are yet worshippers of
the Sun, and of the Moon, as the Spaniards have reported. And although the
year of the Grecians, took beginning from the summer Solstitium, yet
nevertheless the people The ancient To maines to have begun the year in
September.
the Ides of September, Lex vetusta est (says Liuie) and priscis scripta
literis, vt qui Praetor maximus sit, Idibus Septembris cl^uum pangat, It is an
old law (says he) and written in old ancient letters, that he which was the
great Provost, should ever the Ides of September drive or fasten a nail. This
nail Festus calls annalem, or an annual nail, Qui quotannis figebatur in
dextra part capitolij vt per eos clauos numerus colligeretur annorum* Which
was every year fastened in the right side of the Capitol, that so by those
nails the number of the years might be gathered. Augustus appointed also the
Olympic games in the month of September. And albeit that the Astrologers (as
Moses, and begin their account of the spring division, yet nevertheless they
begin their tables of the celestial motions received from the Egyptians and
Chaldeies from the Autumn division. Which antiquities, with the authority of
so many and so worthy men, although they make the matter manifest enough and
out of all doubt* yet even nature it self leads us thither also, as that we
must needs confess the beginning of the world to have been in Autumn. For if
we grant, as we must needs, man as all other living creatures also, to have
been by almighty God created in such state and perfection as that they should
need no nurses; so also is it to be thought him to have provided for all living
creatures, and especially for mankind, ripe fruits for Adam was created about
Jordan, whereas corn in the spring time yet shoots not on ear; and the
month Abib is so called, for that the corn in the spring time in those places
runs but up in spindle, and the trees but scarcely bud: neither is the law
of nature, or the season of the spring, or of Autumn, from the beginning of
the world changed. Wherefore Plutarch in his Symposiaques, when he pleasantly
questioneth, Whether eggs or birds were first? resolves birds to have been
first created: and so whatsoever things else are contained in the whole world,
to have been in all parts created perfect For otherwise viz. the world to have
been created in the beginning of the spring, and young shoots to have been made
for fruitful trees, and so likewise other things to have been created young,
and not in their perfection. Whereby it is evident them greatly to err and be
deceived, which accounting and taking the beginning of the world from the
spring, and the beginning of the day from noone, do with their vain
conjectures go about to blot out and extinguish the authority of the sacred
Adam being a naked child, should have taken cold. Seeing therefore the
Astrologers, even as these men also to have laid false principles and grounds,
of the celestial motions, and much to differ amongst themselves, concerning
Astrological predictions uncertain.
the course of the stars and planets, they can therefore (I say) set down
nothing certain, concerning man's affairs, or the ruins of cities and
Commonweals.

But yet it has less probalitie by the foundation of towns and cities, to
judge of The rising or falling of commonweales not to be judged or deemed of by
the foundation of the towns or cities therein.
the rising or falling of Commonweales: as many do also of houses before they
lay the foundations of them, to foresee and let that they should not be burnt
or rased, or sick D. Cuias a most diligent interpretor of ancient readings,
be of their opinion, which for aetatibus, think it ought to be read
quantitatibus (as who should say by their quantities, rather than by their age)
whereunto the lawyer never had respect. For his meaning was, That houses
according to the stuff and matter they were built of, were to be esteemed of
longer or shorter continuance: as if an house were built of clay Pliny says)
if they be built upright are everlasting. And so Victruuius, and all other
builders were wont to esteem of the loss sustained, by the age and
continuance of the houses burnt. For to esteem of them by the elle, or by the
greatness, so a barn built of clay or straw should be esteemed more worth
than smaller buildings built of marble or of porphiree, as the temple of
Porphiree at Sienna, one of the least, but most costly buildings of Europe. But
the deciding of such questions we must refer to Victruuius, and other
builders. And as for that some think we are M, Varro (whom Tullie writes to
have in learning excelled all other Greeks and Latins) commanded Tarentius
Firmianus to declare unto him the Horoscope of the city of Rome: for so
Plutarch and Antimachus Lyrius report. Whereupon he by the progress of that
Commonweal gathering the causes thereof; and by things ensuing after, gessing
at things forepast, and so by ret^ogradation judging the causes by the effects,
by most light and vain conjectures affirms the foundation of the city to
have been laid in the third year of the sixth Olympiade, the one and twentieth
day of April, a little Saturn, Mars, and Venus, being as then in Scorpio,
Jupiter in Pisces, the sun in Taurus, the moon in Libra, Gemini holding the
heart, or middle of the heavens, and Virgo rising. But seeing that the chief
points of this figute belonging unto Mercury, and that this whole celestial
Scheame betokens men of traffic, or otherwise studious of Philosophy, and
all kind of learning, how can it come to pass, that these things should agree,
or be applied unto the Romans, a people of all others most courageous and
warlike? Howbeit that Taruntius in this his figure, or Horoscope of the
foundation of Rome, is most shamefully deceived, as having therein placed the
celestial orbs in a situation quite contrary unto nature, viz. Venus opposite
unto the Sun: which yet can never be above eight and forty degrees Taruntius
Firmianus deceived in his horoscope or figure of the foundation of Rome.
at the most distant from the Sun: which yet were a thing excusable and
worthy to be pardoned, if it had been by him done by forgetfulness: as it
happened to Augerius Ferrerius an excellent Mathematician, who in his book of
Astronomicall judgments, has set Venus and Mercury, one of them opposite unto
another, and both of them opposite unto the Sun: a thing by nature impossible,
and he himself acknowledging that Mercury can never be six and thirty
degrees from the Sun. Yet true it is, that John Picus earl of Mirandula,
grounding upon this demonstration of the celestial motions, without cause
blames Julius Maturnus, for that he placed the Sun in the first house, and
Mercury in the tenth, which cannot be (says he) except the sun should be from
Mercury the fourth part of the circle (or three signs distant:) not having
Mercury may come unto the meridian, yea unto the tenth house two hours before
noone, and yet not be thirty dgrees from the sun. But Plutarch writes
Antimachus Lyrius to have left recorded, the Sun to have been then ecclipsed,
which yet he says to have been the diametre of the circle distant from the
Moon. And yet there is another greater absurdity in that theme of Taruntius,
in that he places the sun in Taurus the xxj day of April, which then
entered not thereinto until the thirtith of April. Howbeit also that Lucas
Gauricus, who collected the celestial theames of many most famous cities,
differs altogether from this theme of Rome, by Taruntius before set down:
for he places Libra in the East, as does also Manlius. But of all

Wherefore then I rest not upon such opinions, and much less upon that which
Cardan says, who to seem more subtly than others to handle these hidden and
obscure matters, and to raise an admiration of himself with men unskillful of
these things, maintains the beginnings and encreasings of the greatest cities
and Empires to have Cardan his error detected and his opinion rejected.
men ignorant of the celestial motions wonderfully admire the same, and are
therefore by us to be refuted. For perceiving that last star of Vrsa Mayor to
be daily unto many people vertical, though perpendicular unto them only
which are subject unto the circle which that star describes, Cardican says
it should be vertical at such time as the Sun touches the Meridian circle: in
which state he supposes it to have been, Romulus the founder of the city
laid the foundation thereof: which could not by nature so be, viz. that the
last star of Vrsa mayor in the same hour, that is to say at noonetide,
should together with the Sun touch the vertical circle: For that star being
now in the xxj degree of Virgo, by proportion of the motion of the fixed
statres, by reason of the motion of the eight Sphere, it must needs have been
in the xix degree of Leo at such time as the foundation of the city of Rome
was laid, and the Sun in the xix. degree of Aries, as the foregoings of the
Sun declare. So that that star was the third part of the circle, or four
signs and twenty degrees distant from the vertical, when as it ought to have
been in the same sign, and in the same Cardan his doctrine were true: who yet
when he knew the same star to have been vertical unto many great cities at
the time of their foundation, since the beginning of the world, the Sun also
then being in the Meridian; he to meet with that objection, said the Monarchy
to be due but to one of them. But why that to the Romans from whose vertical
it is distant twelve degrees, rather then to the Scottish fishermen which dwell
near unto the Orcades? or unto them of Norway, and other the Northren people?
unto whom the same star is not only vertical, the sun touching the Meridian
in September, but is also directly perpendicular? Yet is it also more strange,
to say the same star to have given the Empire to Constantinople, considering
that that city was built nine hundred years Porphyrie (as some affirm) and
copied out by Lucas Gauricus the Bishop, declares the Sun then to have been
in the xvij degree of Taurus, the Moon in the v of Leo, Saturn in the xx of
Cancer, Jupiter and Venus coniunct in the same sign, Mars in the twelft,
Mercury in the first of Gemini, Aquarius holding the vertical of heaven, and
the xxiij of Gemini in the Leuant; which he sets down to have been in May
upon a Monday, two hours after the sun rising. An other celestial Theme of
the same City is also taken out of the Vatican, Valens of Antioch, later than
the former by forty minutes. But yet that is very absurd which Gauricus the
good Bishop to come to his acconut supposes the city of Constantinople to
have been built in the year of our Lord 638, three hundred years after the
death of Porphyrie: which yet it is manifest to have flourished above 500.
years before Christ: which he thinks also to have been afterward taken by
the Turks army in the year of Christ 1430. when as in truth it was by them
won and sacked in the year of our Lord 1453, the xxix day of May, being 1800
year before taken by the French men: wherein they reigned until the time of
Clyarus king of Thracia, as Polybius (tutor unto Scipio Affricanus) writes; at
which time it was called Bizance. And again afterward also was taken by
Pausanias king of Lacedemonia Alcibiades general of the Athenians. And long
time after, three years together again besieged by Seuerus the Emperor, who
after he had sacked it, razed it also down to the ground, and carrying away
the rest of the citisens into captivity, gave the ground whereon it stood unto
the Perinthians about the year of our Lord two hundred: which yet not long
after was again reedified, and by Constantine the great wonderfully enriched
after that he had thither translated the seat of his Empire. And yet again
after that, was with fire and sword most cruelly wasted by the army of
Galienus the Emperor, all the citisens therein being either slain, or else
carried away into captivity. Yet ceased it not for all that to be still the
seat of the Greek empire, until that the Baldwin Earl of Flaunders seized
thereon; which they held together with the Empire, until that about fifty
years after they were by the Palaeologi again driven out: who having so
recovered the city there reigned, until that it was by Mahomet the great
Turk won. All which changes of the Empire, and ruins of the city, Gauricus
never touched; neither did Cardan himself so much as suspect them: otherwise I
suppose he would never have written things so absurd, and so disagreeing with
themselves. But great marvel it is that this Cardans star has had such
power as to grant the Empires of the world to Italy, Greece, France, and
Germany, when as it was to them but vertical, and yet has had no power at
all upon the realms of Norway and Sweden, where it is not only

But for as much as it were a thing infinite to refell all men's errors in this
kind of The error of Peter Cardinal of Arliac.
matter, I will only touch theirs, who have thought themselves wiser than the
rest, and have been had in reputation as best seen in the judgment of the
heavens for the chaunges of Commonweales: such as was Peter of Arliac
Chauncelour of Paris, and afterward Cardinal in the year 1416: For he
writes the beginnings, channges, and ruins of religions and Commonweales, to
depend of the motion and conjunction of the superior Planets. And to me it
seems right strange, why John Picus Earl of Mirandula has without farther
search; accounted of the shameful errors of this man, concerning the
knowledge of the Celestial Spheres, as of most certain and approved
demonstrations; who having noted six and thirty great conjunctions of Leupold,
Alcabice, and Ptolomee were also of the same opinion, viz. the remouings of
people, wars, plagues, deluges, plenty, dearth, the chaunges of Estates and
Commonweales, to depend of the motion and coniuction of the Planets, and
especially of the superior planets Saturn I say and Jupiter, and so much the
more if Mars be also in conjunction with them both. And so indeed as often as
they are in conjunction together, such things thereof ensue as often times draw
even the wiser sort into admitation: howbeit that no necessity be imposed upon
man kind by the influence of the Alphonsus, Eusebius, and Beda; which the great
consent not of the Hebrews only, but of all Christians also has long ago
rejected: so soon as by the old interpretation of the Bible it was perceived
them to have erred in their account above a thousand five hundred years:
whereas all Churches at this present follow the more certain account of Philo
the Jew, who followed almost the mean betwixt Josephus and the later Hebrews:
for Josephus differs 342 years, and Philo but an 160 from the other
Hebrews. Whereof it is to be Bodin writ these things in Latin) to have been
5531, or at most 5555 since the creation of the world. Wherefore Arliac is
deceived, who put the conjunction of the superior Planets seven thousand
years ago, in the 320 year after the creation of the world: which after that
computation must have happened twelve hundred years before that the world was
made. The same man does suppose also that at the creation of the world, the
Horoscope whereof he discribeth, the first degree of Cancer to have been then
rising, the Sun then to have been in Aries, (which to be false we have by
necessary arguments before proved) the Moon and Venus in Taurus, Saturn in
viz. that Mercury when he is farthest from the Sun, never to be farther off
than six and thirty degrees. Which may suffice in passing by, ot show that the
Hypothesis of the Cardinal of Arliac and his foundation being false, the rest
that is thereon built cannot stand. But this he had propounded unto himself,
It to

But how much more certainly and better do they, which having consideratlie
looked through the antiquities of the Hebrews, and the animaduertions of
Copernicus (who most diligently corrected the errors of Alphonsus, and of the
Arabians) going orderly retrograde from these oppositions and conjunctions of
the Planets which we now behold, unto the very first beginning, judge of the
revolution of the time past, as also of the change and state of Commonweales;
if yet by this means How a man may without offense presage the chaunges of
Cities and Commonweales.
this sort it is lawful for a man looking into the yearly course of time, by
writing to commend unto posterity the chaunges of cities and Commonweales, and
so by things precedent and already forepassed to judge also of things to come:
yet saving always the majesty of almighty God, who is himself bound unto no
laws of nature, neither has thereunto bound any of his servants. Wherein many
greatly offend, who think the power and influence of the celestial Spheres to
be nothing, when as yet for all that their strength and power has always
been most great and effectual, not only upon these elements which we here
see, and so upon all other sorts of living Ioh. 39. and 40.
seen, and yet of the good nothing at all to be feared. So many stood in great
doubt in the year 1524, wherein the three superior Planets, Saturn, Jupiter,
and Mars were in conjunction in the tenth degree of Pisces, the rest of the
Planets together with the Dragons head being in Aquarius and Pisces, both of
them waterie Signs. Which self same year in the month of February were
twenty other conjunctions of the Vain fears often times conceived, upon
Astrologers vain predictions.
Planets also among themselves, besides the six stars; which of all other
things, was a thing most worthy the admiration. So that hereupon the
Astrologers all the world over agreeing together for the destruction of the
world, with a great fear terrifyed the minds of many weak men; in that they
so constantly all with one consent affirmed, Auriolus President of Tholose a
most cunning lawier, but a man either ignorant, or a contemne^ of the laws of
God, howbeit that he heard the promises of God still preached unto him, and the
oath by him made unto Genes. 7.
Noah that he would no more destroy the world by water. And true it is that in
that year were floods and inundations of waters in diverse countries, but yet
no such general deluge as was foretold and feared, neither any cities or
countries at all known to be drowned. Wherefore to affirm any thing of the
chaunges and ruins of Commonweales, it suffices not to behold The vanity of
the Chaldean Astrologers.
fained, who vaunted themselves to have spent 470 thousand years in the
practice of natiuities, the better to persuade men of the certainty of their
knowledge, and to make it thereby the more saleable. Which the Chaldean bables
spread abroad far and wide unto all people, but unto none more foolishly then
to the Indian Chinois, who say 783 thousand and seven hundred sixty two
years, to be the last year past Linus the most ancient writer of the
Greeks, Orpheus and Heraclitus, shut up the period of the greatest year
within the revolution of 360 thousand years, whereof they supposed an hundred
fourscore four thousand to be past. But a certain Aegiptian priest vaunted
before Solon, the Aegiptians his country men to have an history of twenty
thousand years written in Hieroglyphicall letters. And a little while after
Herodotus (called the father of history) understood from the same Aegiptians,
records of thirteen thousand years to be extant in their sacred letters.
Diodorus younger then the rest going into Aegipt to find out the truth, heard
certain Priests to say antiquities of three and thirty thousand years old to
be Philo, or within little less then two hundred years. And truly
Callisthenes persuaded by the speech of Aristotle his master, when as others at
the sacking of Babylon greedely sought after the Persian wealth, he diligently
searched out and gathered together the books and antiquities of the Chaldies,
and there noted all the history of the Chaldies to have been comprehended in
1903 years: which time well agrees with the sacred history, if we account
the time from Nimrod, who first Simplicius a mortal enemy of the Christians,
as we have elsewhere declared. And therefore Ptolomey, who farthest repeating
from uttermost remembrance the antiquities of the Chaldies (of them I say,
which had noted the stedie courses of the celestial Spheres) brings the
beginnings of the celestial motions no farther than from Nabonassar, and from
those eclipses of the moon which happened in the time of his reign, that is,
the year of the world 3750: But Ptolomey flourished in the time of Adrian the
emperor, about four hundred years after Nabonassar. Wherefore it ought not
to seem strange to any man, if he neuersomuch as once suspected the motion of
trepidation, neither understood the revolution Hisparchus had taught to have
happened 285 years the same day of the month, about midnight, whose errors
could scarcely be perceived in the time of our ancestors: as not long ago Io.
Regiomontanus showed the motion of trepidation, before unto Astronomers
unknown. Wherefore by what means could they by any art conclude men's
fortunes, or the chaunges and ruins of cities and Commonweales, who understood
not so much as the celestial motions, and much less the histories of all
nations, when as yet they scarcely knew the tenth part of the world?

Wherefore they do foolishly which attribute the Quadripartite book to
Ptolomey, The triplicities of the caelestiall signs not to be determinatly
assigned unto certain regions and countries, as the Astrologers appoint.
wherein the fiery Triplicitie is given to Europe, and those countries which
lie betwixt the West and the North; the ayrie triplicitie unto Asia, and those
places which are seated betwixt the North and the East; the watrie triplicitie
unto Affrike, and the earthly triplicitie unto the other places. Neither have
those things followed the conjunctions of the superior planets, which should
have followed had their rules been true. Now if any man think (as many there
be which think right foolishly) the places of the signs being changed, the
force and nature of the celestial Spheres to be changed also; he must surely
utterly subvert all the knowledge of the force and power of the stars by them
before set down and delivered: seeing that the fix stars are found since the
Nabonassar unto this our time, to have ouergone almost a whole sign, (...), or
which is all one, the Equinoctials in the same space, to have prevented the
stays of the wandering stars, (...), and yet nevertheless the force and
power of the celestial houses approved in men's natiuities, is still the self
same that it is reported to have before been: which thing to be so, Cardan
himself confesses: whom yet for all that it ashamed him not to write the
Britons, Spaniards, and Normans, in ancient time gentle and modest nations, to
be now (the regions of the stars being changed) become sly, crafty, and
deceitful thieves; for that they Cassius did unto a certain Chaldean
Astrologer, who forbad him to fight with the Parthians before the moon was out
of Scorpio: unto whom The jest of Cassius unto a Caldean Astrologer.
Cassius pleasantly answered, Non Scorpiones metuo, sed Sagittarios, I fear
not (said he) Scorpions, but Sagittaries; meaning the Parthian archers, by whom
the Roman legions wherewith Crassus in Chaldea discomfited and overthrown. And
truly if Cardans opinion were true, the nature of all things must needs so be
subverted, which yet is still the same which ever it was: For the people toward
the North are now taller and stronger, and more warlike than the rest of the
people of the world; and such Vitruuius, Pliny, Caesar, Strabo, and Plutarch,
have writ them to have been sixteen hundred The conjunctions of the superior
Planets to have oftentimes wrought great effects for the alteration and
changing of Commonweales.
of the superior planets in the same celestial house, viz. in Scorpio to have
showed their force (if it were any) in Asia, and Europe, and not in Affrike,
which they say to be governed by the sign of Scorpio. For before the change
of the Roman empire was made, and that Popular estates transferred unto the
sovereignty of Caesar alone, the superior planets with a great conjunction
met together in Scorpio: which conjunction changed again about seven hundred
years after: at which time innumerable legions of the Arabians having received
the new doctrine of Muhamed, Ladamachus king of the Tartars was by his subjects
thrust out of his kingdom: Henry the sixth, king of England was by his
subjects also taken and in prison slain, Edward the iiij of a subject made
king: Frederike the third driven out of Hungary by Matthias Coruinus, who of a
prisoner was chosen a king: Jews the eleventh the French king, by his
nobility and vassals besieged in his principal city, and brought in danger
to have lost his estate. At which time also Alexander (commonly called
Scanderbeg) the king of Albania his soon, brought up in the Turks court,
revolted from the Turk, and took up arms against him. Yet is it worth the
noting, that the great conjunctions of superior planets, show their effects
more in Scorpio, a martial sign, than in any other the rest of the signs, and
so much the more if Mars be there als^, or else some one of the other planets
be also in conjunction or opposition with them. With like conjunction the same
planets met together also in Sagittarie, in the year of our Lord Christ 74: at
which time all the land of Palestine was sacked, the city of Jerusalem burnt
and rased, and eleven hundred thousand dead in the wars: at which self same
time were seen in Europe great civil wars, and four emperors slain the
same year. Two hundred and forty years after, another conjunction of the
Constantine the Great being therein chief doer: who having put to flight and
slain four emperors, and translated the seat of the empire from the West into
the East, by a perpetual law took away the vain and superstitious
worshipping of the Paynim gods. We see also, that after the conjunction of the
same planers in Aquarius, in the year 430, the Goths, the Ostrogothes, the
Francons, the Gepiges, the Heruli, the Hunnes, and other Northern people going
out like swarms of bees, ouerranne and ransacked the provinces of the Roman
empire, and most cruelly sacked the very city it self, sometime the seat of
the empire. And again in the year 1524, when as the conjunction of the
Frederike, his brother Christierne being driven out of his kingdom, possessed
the kingdom of Denmark: Gostauus of a private man became king of Sweden:
Francis the French king overthrown at Pauia was taken prisoner by the
Spaniards. Besides that, it is to be seen, that after the great conjunction of
the same superior planets in Leo, in the year 796 king Charlemaigne overthrew
the estates of Charlemaigne made himself Lord of Germany, took away the
Paynim superstition in Saxony, and changed all the Commonweales and
principalities in Germany, and Hungary, which he brought under his obeisance.
With this great conjunction happened also four eclipses: which has not
happened since: but six hundred thirty six years after, viz. in the year
1544, in which time happily there The error of Leouicius.
Ciprianus Leouitius, who of a conjunction of almost all the planets, than to
come together with an eclips of the sun in the year 1584 by his writings (as
from an oracle) denounced the end of the world even then to come, saying,
Procul dubio alterum aduentum filij Dei and hominis in maiestate gloriae suae
praenuntiat, Without all doubt (says he) it foreshoweth another coming of the
son of God and man in the majesty of his glory. But seeing he had so
strongly assured men then of the consummation of the world, why did he yet
write his Ephemerides for thirty years after, when as the celestial signs
and all Commonweales should according to his predictions have before Albumar,
who with like rashness had written, That the Christian religion should take
end in the year 1460. And Abraham the Jew (surnamed The Prince of Astrologers)
who prophesied, That in the year 1464 should be borne a great captain (whom
they call Messiah) who should deliver the Jews his country men from the
servitude of the Christians. And Arnold the Spaniard, who with like folly
prophesied of the coming of Antichrist, in the year of our Lord 136. But
Leouicius might have known, that since the creation of the world unto this
time, there have been two hundred and threescore conjunctions of the superious
planets, wherein were twenty four great ones; that is Jupiter and Saturn
meeting together in the same triplicitie (as they call it) and the lesser
every twenty years: and the meanest planets, as of Saturn and Mars, every
thertie years in the sign Cancer: and the greatest of all, viz. of Jupiter
and Saturn in Aries, which comes again about every eight hundred years.
Howbeit that Messahala calls it the greatest conjunction of all, when as the
three superior planets meet together in Aries: which yet I see not shall
chance in the year 1584, as Leouicius supposes, when as Jupiter shall be
distant twelve degrees from the full conjunction of Saturn and Mars: which
cannot rightly be called a conjunction so much as by their Spheres. But whereas
the same conjunction, yea and a greater too, together with the Charles the
Great, yet we see not the world therefore to have taken end. True it is, that
the Hebrew learned men write, the destruction of all this elementarie world,
and so of all The opinion of the learned Hebrews concerning the consumation of
the world.
mankind, and of all Commonweales, to ensue after every seven thousand years,
by the inundation of waters, or else by fire, and so to rest a thousand years:
after which God shall again restore that which is perished: and that this shall
be done seven times, which makes nine and forty thousand years complete, and
that then this elementarie world and the celestial also, with all the bodies
thereof shall take end, the majesty of the great eternal God, with all the
blessed spirits yet still remaining. Which they say to be by the word of God,
howbeit very obscurely declared: when as the tilling of the ground Io.
Regiomontanus has since within this four and twenty years made plain
demonstration: of the truth of which motion neither the ancient Chaldies nor
Egyptians had any knowledge, but were thereof altogether ignorant. And albeit
that the ancient learned Hebrews, have by the gift and goodness of God, had
not only Porphyrie the greatest of all the Philosophers of his time
confesses: and that this doctrine of the Hebrews curteth off the impiety of
them which hold the eternity of the world, or else that God was for an
innumerable world of years altogether idle: yet do these so learned Hebrews
attribute nothing unto fatal necessity, either fear any the decrees of the
celestial stars, but affirm all things to be governed and changed by the
will and pleasure of almighty God: as by him which as often as he will is of
power to shake the nature of all things, yea even the very foundations of the
world it self, as was well seen in the general

Yet doubt I not but that some more certain precepts might be given of the
chaunges, By what order and mean some more certain and probable conjecture
might be made of the chaunges and ruins of commonweales.
and ruins of Commonweales, if a man would enter into a certain account of
the time past even from the beginning of the world: and so comparing one thing
with another, and knitting one thing unto another, shall proceed farther, and
set in order the variety of Historiographers at varience among themselves: and
also going backwards, shall of all the eclipses of the Sun and of the Moon,
even to the beginning of the world, by most certain demonstrations comprehend
the reason of the whole time past: and compare the histories of the most true
writers amongst themselves, and with the oppositions and conjunctions of the
celestial stars and bodies, knit and conioyne Chaos before the world it
self: beside that it is in the sacred books of Genesis so often Vespere and
mane dies vnus, The evening and morning were made one day. Truly I commend
many things in Gerardus Mercator a most pure writer for the observation of
time: but in that I cannot commend him, that he begins the year elsewhere
than of Libra; whereas we have by most certain reasons not only out of the
most ancient customs of almost all nations; but also out of the most pure
fountains The greatest and most notable chaunges of estates and Commonweales to
have commonly happened in the month of September.
of sacred scriptures, declared the year to have taken beginning in Autumn.
Which we will again show by the great and notable changes of estates and
Commonweals: whereby things to come may be the better and more certainly
perceived, and the greatest chances, alterations, and changes, seen to have
happened about Autumn, that is to say, a little before, or a little after the
Autumnall equinoctial in September, the Sun viz. in the year 1526, and 27, in
the month of September a great earthquake happened at Puteoli. The third day
of the same month, in the year of our Lord 1556, such a tempest of rain and
thunder happened at Lucerne, as that a greater (as is reported) was never
seen: which self same month and day the town hall at Maidenburg in Germany,
with the citisens dancing therein, were all together with lightning consumed.
The victory of Augustus also against Antonius in the battle at Actium, was
by him obtained the second of September, where question was of the greatest
empire that ever was, and the matter tried with the greatest forces that ever
were assembled in any wars whatsoever: by which victory the empire both of the
East and of the West, fell into Augustus himself alone. The third day of the
same month the Macedonian empire, which had so long, and with so great glory
flourished, was by Paulus Aemilius changed from a great kingdom into diverse
Popular estates, the king Perseus being by him overcome and taken prisoner.
Sultan Soliman on the like day took Buda the chief city of Hungary, with
the greatest part of that kingdom. The same day and month Rhoderike king of
Spain was by the Moors overcome and chased out of his kingdom, which wrought
a wonderful change in the state of all that Monarchy. On the same day and
month reuoluing, Jews the twelth the French king took the city of Milan,
with Jews Sfortia duke thereof, whom he deprived of his estate. The like day
the emperor Charles the sift passed over into Affrike, and invaded Sultan
Soliman died before Sigeth, which being one of the strongest holds of
Christendom, was by the Turks taken the seventh day after. The ninth of
September, in the year of our Lord 1544, James king of Scots was by the
English men slain, and his army overthrown. The same day in the revolution
of the year, the council of Possi was gathered in France, Charles the ninth
then reigning in the year 1561, and a decree made for the receiving of the new
religion, which raised most great troubles in France. The same day and month
Alexander the Great at Arbela overthrew Darius king of Persia, with his army
of four hundred thousand men; and so joined the kingdom of Persia unto his
own. The tenth of September John duke of Burgundy, was Charles the seventh
slain, whereof great wars arose throughout all France. The like day and month
was Peter Louys the tyrant of Placence slain by the conspiratours. We read
also, that the eleventh of September the Palaeologues, the Greek emperors
took the imperial city of Constantinople, and drove out thence the earls of
Flaunders, who had there possessed the empire 560 years. The fourteenth day of
September the Swiffers were with a great slaughter overthrown by the French,
in the expedition of Mirignan: which self same day also the Turks great army
laid siege to Vienna, the Metropoliticall city of Austria. The seventeenth day
the French army was by the English overthrown at Poitiers, and king John of
France by them taken prisoner. Which day also, (or rather the like in the
revolution of the Francis the first, the French king, and the emperor Charles
the fifth, being both ready with their great armies to have fought for the
kingdom, to the great hazard of both their estates, in the year 1544: a thing
the more to be noted, for that the same year, month, and day, was also a
great conjunction of the superior planets. The same day of the same month, in
the year 1575 the Christian fleet with a great slaughter overthrew the Turks
great fleet in the battle of Lepanto. The eighteenth day of the same month
Boulleine was delivered unto the Englishmen. And the four and twentieth of
September Constantine the Great, in a bloody battle overcame Maxentius the
emperor, in the year of our Lord 333, and so of a simple strange captain
made himself a great Monarch (which wrought a Denis) threatened the world with
great calamities, and the people with the change of their estates, which
afterward indeed chanced: howbeit that in that the author of the history
erred, that he says, How that the same year there was an eclips of the Sun
the eleventh of April, and another of the Moon Charles the ninth the French
king, was by his subjects assailed near unto Meaux, where by speedy flight,
and the help of the Swissers he hardly with life escaped the hands of the
conspiratours: the which self same day, month, and year, Henry king of
Sweden was by his rebellious subjects dispoiled of his estate, and east in
prison, where he yet remains, without any great hope to be ever with life
from thence again delivered. The battle Montcontour was fought also in
September. And the eighteenth day of September Bajazet at Nicopolis with a
notable overthrow defeated a great army of the Christians, of three hundred
thousand men. And the same day Saladin took the city of Jerusalem, on Pompey
had before taken it. Pope Boniface the eight also was in September 1303 by the
French taken prisoner, and deprived of his papal dignity. We read also many
the greatest princes and monarchs of the world, to have as this month died:
as namely the great emperor Augustus, Tiberius, Vespasian, Titus, Domitian,
Aurelianus, Theodosius the Great, Valentinianus, Gratianus, Basilius,
Constantine the fifth, Leo the fourth, Rodolphe, Frederike the fourth, Charles
the fifth, all Roman or Greek emperors. And of the French kings, Pipin, Jews
the younger, Philip the third, Charles the fifth surnamed the Wise, and Jews
his kinsman king of Hungaria and Polonia, with other most noble and famous
Monarkes in number infinite. But that is worth the marking Lothaire and Charles
the bauld, the one the king of France, and the other the German Emperor (and
both of them the sons of Jews the devout emperor) both dyed the xxix of
September, the first of them in the year 855, and the other 877. So Charles
the fifth, and Sultan Solomon, two of the greatest Emperors that were these
many ages, were both borne in one year, and so both also in one month dyed,
viz. in September. Antonius Pius also and Francis the first the French king,
both of them great and famous Monarques, were both borne in September, and died
both in March the month opposite to September. Octauius Augustus was also
borne in September, What times of the year the notable chances and chaunges
of the world most commonly happen in.
and so likewise in the same month of September dyed. Whereby it is to be
understood, Autumn and especially that month wherein the world was created,
viz. Leouicius following the dreams of unskillful men, ought not to refer the
creation and destruction of the world unto the month of March; and much less
to threaten unto the world even a present Maximilian the Emperor the
sovereignty of all Europe, with power to correct and chastise the cruelty and
tirannie of other Princes (for so he writes) of whom for Leouicius taxed.
all that it beseems him to have more modestly writ: But Maximilian was so
far from the sovereignty which he had in his vain hope conceived, as that
he yet living, and with the German host also looking on: Sultan Solomon
without any empeachment having far and wide wasted the borders of the Empire,
besieged and forced Sigeth the strongest place of the Empire, yea of all
Europe: showing well that he should not have too far assured himself upon the
prophecy of Luther, who has left in writing that the power of the Turks
should from thenceforth diminish, which yet Leouicius saw nothing of the
strange change of the three kingdoms his next neighbors: which since he saw
not, how could he have such certain knowledge of the end of the world, never as
yet unto the Angels themselves revealed? For all which he brings no other
reason, but that the Christian religion must together with the world take end
in the waterie triplicitie, for that Christ Jesus himself was borne under the
waterie triplicitie; willing as should seem to bring in an other deluge:
Wherein he shows no less impiety then ignorance, whether we respect the
maxims of the Astrologers, who affirm and say that never planet ruinateth his
own house, which should yet happen unto Jupiter being Plato, and of the
Hebrews, and of all other Philosophers, who generally say, That the world is
to be successively destroyed first by water, and then again by fire: or else
that we rest our selves (as indeed we ought) upon the promises of God, who
cannot lie, which he in mercy made to Noah never to drown the world again.
But as we ought not rashly certainly to affirm any thing of the chaunges and
ruins of Monarchies and Commonweales: So can we not deny but that the effects
are right great and wonderful in the conjunction of the higher planets, when
they change the triplicitie, and especially when the three Great and marvelous
effects wrought by the conjunction of the superior Planets.
superior planets are in conjunction together: or that such their conjunction
have concurrence with the the eclipses of the Sun or of the Moon: as it
happened the day before the taking of Perseus king of Macedon, and the battle
of Arbella in Chaldea, which drew after them the ruin of two great Monarchs,
and the change of diverse Commonweals, there appeared two most great and dark
eclipses of the Moon. As there did also in the beginning of the Peloponesian
war, wherewith all Grecia was on a fire, the Sun upon a fair day was
wonderfully darkened, even at such time as Pericles the Athenian General began
to set sail.

But as for them which contemn the force of the heavenly stars, or else are
altogether ignorant thereof; they stand as men amassed, to see in the same
instant such conuersions Polybius (himself an Atheist) in his history
exceedingly maruelleth, That in the hundred and thirtieth Olympiade in one
self same time there was seen upon the sudden a new change of princes almost
throughout the whole world. As namely Philip the younger to become king of
Macedon, Achaeus to be king of Asia, which he usurped upon Antiochus, Ptolomeus
Philopater to become king of Egypt, Lycurgus the younger, king of Lacedemonia,
Antiochus king of Syria, Hanniball general of the Carthaginensians: and all
these people as it were at the same instant up in arms one of them against
another; the Carthaginensians against the Romans, Ptolomey against Antiochus,
the Achaeans and Macedonians, Scipio Affricanus, Hannibal, and Philopoemenes,
to have all died (as Liuie writes) in one year. These great chaunges are more
evident to be seen after the conjunction of the two superior planets, with
the Sun, or Mars: as it happened in the year 1564, that the superior
planets were in conjunction in the sign Leo, together with the Sun and
Mercury: So have we afterward seen strange motions and sturres almost all
Europe over. We have seen in the same time, in the same year, in the same
month, in the same day, viz. the twenty seventh of September, in the year
1567, the French king guarded with the Swissers, assailed and in danger to
have been taken by his subjects: and Henry king of Sweden dispoyled of his
Mary the most noble queen of the Scots spoiled of her kingdom by her
subjects, and by them imprisoned, by whom it beseemed her to have been
delivered: and the king of Thunes driven out of his kingdom by the king of
Algiers: the Arabians up in arms against the Turks, the Moors of Granado and
the Flemings against the king Catholic, the Englishmen against their queen,
and all France in combustion. The same conjunction of the three superior
planets happened also an hundred years before, viz. in the year 1464, but not
so precisely, neither in the sign of Leo, but only in the sign of Pisces,
and yet by and by after all the people were seen up in arms, and not only
the princes among themselves, but the subjects also against their princes, as

Now as for that which Copernicus (the great Astrologer of his time) says, The
changes The opinion of Copernicus concerning the motion and influence: of the
earth, refuted.
and ruins of kingdoms and Commonweales, to depend of the Eccentrique motion
of the earth, it is such, as that it deserves no answer or account to be
thereof made. For that he for the ground thereof supposes two things most
absurd: the one That the influences which all Philosophers attribute unto the
stars, proceed from the earth, and not from the heavens: the other, That the
earth it self moves with the same motions, which all the Astrologers of
former times (except Eudoxus) have alwais given unto the heavens. And yet more
strange it is to make the Sun immouable Eudoxus, Ptolomey has by probable
arguments and reasons refuted. Whereunto Copernicus has well answered: unto
whom Melancthon has only with this verse right well replied, God in the
heavens has a tabernacle for the Sun, which comes out as a bridegroom out
of his chamber, and rejoices as a Giant to run his course. It goes out from
the uttermost part of the heaven, and runs about to the end of it again:
and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof. So also might he say, That
Joshua commanded the Sun and Moon to stay their course. But unto all this
might be answered, That the Scripture oftentimes accommodateth Copernicus
might by a manifest demonstration, which no man has yet used, easily be
refelled, viz. that one simple body has but one simple motion proper unto the
same: as is manifestly to be proved by the principles of natural Philosophy:
then seeing that the earth is one of the simple bodies, as the other elements
be, we must necessarily conclude, that it cannot have but one only motion
proper unto it self: and yet for all that Copernicus has assigned unto it
three diverse motions: whereof it can have but one proper unto it self, so that
the other must needs

But let us now come unto the opinion of Plato, who thought the chaunges and
The most dark and obscur^ opinion of Plato concerning the chaunges and ruins
of Commonweales.
ruins of Commonweales to ensue, when as the consent of the sweetness which
proceeds from the harmony thereof is interrupted and broken. Which chances
when in the nuptial number (as he terms it) you depart farthest from those
concords which the Musitions call (...) and (...). As for the nuptial number
he defines it to be, that number which beginning of an unity, as of a maiden
inuiolate is divided in a double or triple sort of consent, in such sort as
that the male, perfect, imperfect, quadrate, spherique, and cubique, so that no
sort of numbers be wanting. But this order of numbers may be infinite, for that
the force and power of tune and consent, is in division as infinite, as any
other dimension whatsoever. So that the form of a well ordered Commonweal
shall so long be firm and sure, as it shall keep right consent and tune, well
agreeing unto the sweet delight of the ear. The Dupla or Diapason, Plato would
say, for no man as yet has explaned this point; so that antiquity it self
has not without cause long since complained, nothing to be more obscure than
the Platonicall numbers. Nothing more obscure than the Platonical numbers.
For Forrester the German is far from the mind of Plato, when as he seeks
after triple and quadruple proportions, for that in so doing he overthrows
the foundations of the nuptial number and the sides of the Triangle, which
consist of the double and triple proportion. But in him is also absurd, that he
thinks the same proportion to be betwixt 27. and 64* which is of three to
four, a thing by nature impossible, and contrary to the grounds of the
Mathematiques. But Plato wills us also to fill the vacant place of the
propounded triangle of the nuptial number with such other numbers as
proportionally arise of the mutual conjunction of the male and female numbers,
yet still continuing the harmony, for that the same concords viz. of two times
three is begot the number of six, which placed in the midst fills up the
empty place betwixt 4. and 9, which two numbers by no means make any consent
or harmony, but the proportion of either of them unto six, is the same which
is is of three to four, that is to say, Sesquialtera or (...), or a fifth. And
so also if the number of two be as it were married or in proportion joined unto
six, or the number of three, so combyned unto six; as viz. two times six, or
three times six, thereof shall arise two numbers, viz. 12. and 18, which shall
fill the empty space of the triangle betwixt 8. and 27. So if the number viz.
two times twelve, or three times eighteen) thereof shall arise the numbers of
24. and of 54. And again, if three be joined unto twelve, or that which is all
one, two to eighteen, thereof arises the number of 36. which three
proportionate numbers of 24. 36. and 54. shall fill up the vacant place of the
triangle betwixt 16. and 81, the mutual proportion of which numbers so put
into the void places of the triangle, and so filled with the numbers next,
still keep a perpetual sweet course, although the sides of the triangle were
infinitely extended, of which triange let this be the form. If therefore
choice be had of such proportions as make a sweet consent in the perpetual
course of numbers, the Commonwealth shall so be everlasting: if so be that the
The true discord which indeedmaryeth the sweet harmony of a Commonweal.
state of Commonweales depend of harmony. But that harmony (as says Plato)
is sometime broken, so that the sweet consent thereof must needs perish, and so
Commonweales at length come to ruin and decay. But to say the truth, is it not
much more to be feared, lest the subjects or citisens erring or declyning from
the sweet and natural harmony of well tuned laws, and customs, shall in
steed of them embrace most wicked and pernicious laws and fashions? And yet
for all that will I not deny but that harmony and music have great force and
power for the changing of a Commonweal, in which point both Plato and
Aristotle well agree. Howbeit that Cicero is of opinion it to be a thing
impossible, that for the music of a Commonweal Music to be of great force,
for the changing or maintaining of a Commonweal.
changed, the Commonweal should it self therefore take change. Whereof for
Polybius was the first which noted it so to have happened, for that they had
left to take pleasure and delight in music; which from all antiquity had
been always more honored and esteemed in Arcadia than in any place of the
world else, in such sort as that by the laws and customs of that country
every Polybius) the first lawgiuers of that people wisely devised, to quiet and
tame them, being by nature rough and barbarous, as commonly Music most
honored in At^hadia.
all the inhabitants of the mountains and cold countries be. The like we may
almost also say of the French nation, whom Julian the Apostata in his time
calls a barbarous and fierce people and of all others most desirous of
liberty, who yet now at this day are in civility inferior to no people of
all Europe, none being more tractable unto their magistrates or obedient unto
their Princes than they, as men by nature well, but by instruction better
taught, and in the judgment of all their neighbors most skillful in Music.
Wherein that is also worth the noting, that almost all Plato and Aristotle
forbid the youth and women to use: for that they be of great force and power to
mollify and effeminate the minds of men; and therefore would have them to use
the Dorian tune, which our men call the first tune, to the intent that so they
might be the better instructed with a certain pleasant modesty, mixed with
gravity, a thing proper unto this Dorian Music. Which prohibition might have
served better in the lesser Asia, where they have no other songs but of the
fifth or seventh tune; and namely in the countries of Lydia and Ionia: But the
people of the cold and mountain Northern countries, which are ordinarily more
savage or at least Light music forbidden in the primative church
barbarous people of their savage and cruel nature, and makes them quiet and
tractable: As it is happened unto the Frenchmen, who happily had not been so
pliant and Julian the Emperor says to have been in them so hautie and
impatient of servitude, had not by Music been attempered and mollified.

But of all those things which we have yet brought to judge of the future
chaunges Numbers to be of greatforce, whatby to deem the change and ruin of
a Commonweal.
and ruins of Commonweales, we see no rule (whether it be of Astrology or
music) certain and sure: howbeit that we have by them some probable
conjectures, whereof yet none seems unto me more certain or easy, than that
which may be drawn from numbers. For why I think almighty God who with
wonderful wisdom has so couched together the nature of all things, and with
certain their numbers, means, measures, and consent, bound together all things
to come: to have also Plato with Aristotle therein agree. But when that period
shall be, neither of them declares: except some there be which suppose Plato
to signify it by certain obscure numbers in his eight book De Republica: at
which rock not only all the Academikes, but even almost all the sects of
other Philosophers also, have suffered shipwreck. And first of all Aristotle
skippeth over this place as over a dich, neither does here carpe his master
(as his manner is) when as for the obscurity thereof he had not wherefore he
might reprove him. Proclus also having curiously enough enterpreted seven of
Plato his books de Republica: The eight book of Plato de Repub. most
difficult and obscure.
would not so much as touch the eight, stayed (as I suppose) with the
difficulty of the matter. Theon also of Smyrna (for there is an other Theon
also of Alexandria; who writ a commentary upon Ptolomee in Greek) a man most
skillful not in Plato his philosophy only: but in the Mathematiques also: at
such time as he expounded Plato his Commonweal there stuck fast, neither
took upon him to expound this place. Cicero in one word excuses the
difficulty of Plato his numbers. Marsilius Ficinus (in mine opinion) the
sharpest of all the Academikes plainly confesses himself not to know what
Plato in that place meant: fearing lest it should so fall out with him as it did
with Iamblichus, who seems to have been willing in three words not to have
manifested a thing of it self most obscure, but rather to have made Philo the
Jew every where imitating of Plato, thought that obscure and hidden number to
be fifty, and that he says to be signified by the right cornered Scalenus,
such an one as Pithagoras comprehended in the three numbers 3, 4, 5. and
thereunto he supposes those words of Plato to be referred, sesqui tertia radix
quinario coniuncta: sesqui tertia the radix or root joined unto the number of
five for the proportion of 3, 2, 4. is the proportion sesqui tertia. But in
that he is deceived for that he has brought in a plain number, whenas it
appears Plato his meaning to have been to have a solid number sought out,
which should in it self contain all kind of numbers, excepting the numbers
perfect. Yet Philo of these radical numbers, 3, 4, 5,

Sesquitertia i^ that which contains all that an other thing does, and a
third part more.
brought every one of them apart into themselves makes three quadrats:
whereof Plato make mention of the hundred cube. Beside that there be Dimetients
incommensurable unto the sides, as in the number of Plato: whose words it
pleases me hear to set down, and to interpret the same: as well for that
the interpretors do in the interpretation thereof very much differ amongst
themselves: as also for that he says the ignorance of that number to be unto
the Governors of Cities and Commonweals almost capital. (...). Truly the
compass of such things which take their beginning from God, is by the perfect
number comprehended: but the compass of worldly things is contained by that
number wherein are found numbers exceeding, and numbers exceeded by increase
and decrease, three spaces in four terms comprehended; whereof are made
numbers among themselves both like, and unlike, numbers increased, and
diminished, which may be called by their own names, and compared among
themselves: whose sesquitertiall radix joined unto the number of five, makes
two consents thrice increased, one equal equally: an hundred times an hundred:
an other equal, on one part of it self longer, of an hundred dimetients,
which might among themselves be compared, the numbers of five detracted less
by the unity: but two of ineffable proportion: but an hundred Cubes of the
ternarie it self. And this number made by Geometrical proportion, is in
worldly things most mighty, to them which have either the better or the worse
beginning. Here Plato is s^ylie led away, not unlike the fish Polypus, having
on every side Obscurity by Plato and many the ancient writers of purpose in
their writings affected.
cast out his blacking like ynke, lest otherwise he should have been entangled
and caught. Wherein truly he seemed to have imitated Heraclitus, to understand
whose writings he said a man had need of a most skillful interpretour. Which
obscure kind of writing and speaking by Heraclitus devised (when as he most
often would beat into his Scholars ears that his (...), that is to say speak
obscurelie) is often times used not of Plato only, but even of Aristotle him
self also, to the intent that so having Aristotle boasts himself of purpose
to have so writ, as that he would not have them to be understood, imitating
therein Plato his most obscure Timaeus: Which thing Lucilius writ also of him
self, that he had rather not to be at all understood, then to be reprehended
or found fault with all. But let us discover Plato his deceit by those things
which he himself writes Plato discovered and in some sort refuted.
more plainly, that we may more certainly judge of those things which he
fouldeth up in such obscurity of words: for he would that those things which
take their beginning Plato, but even the Manichies also themselves confess;
who yet most wickedly thought all earthly things to have had their beginning
from the prince of evils. True it is that the earth brought forth plants and
other living creatures, the waters also fishes, and fowls; yet both of them by
the commandment of almighty God: But unto the creation of Faciamus hominem:
Or let us make man.
Angels present. Howbeit that Aristotle was of opinion the forms of all things
to be in a sort divinely infused into them, when as he writ in all things to be
(...), or some divine thing. As for the mind of man he calls it not obscurely
or doubtfully but even plainly (...): which is (as I interpret it) (...), from
above, from God, or from heaven, not out of the power of the seed, as he says
of other living creatures: of whom for all that Virgil in general says:
Igneus est ollis vigor and caelestis origo, A fiery force they have, and a
celestial beginning. Wherefore we must confess all things to be included in
perfect numbers if we will believe Plato. But let us grant unto the Academikes
(which yet is an impiety to do) these earthly things which we speak of, to
have had their beginning The four perfect numbers within an hundred thousand,
are 6. 496. 6^8* and 8128.
within an hundred thousand: there being also other perfect numbers * above
that number of an hundred thousand, but such as cannot be applied either unto
divine, or human or worldly things. Wherefore seeing that the number of six
is the first of Perfect numbers above an hundred thousand: 130811, 2096128,
33550336. 536814528.
the perfect numbers, it ought by the opinion of Plato to agree unto things
immediately by God himself created; and yet we see the same number
nevertheless to agree unto most vile and abject living creatures. For
Aristotle writes the Hare (by the Virgill allotted, and their hiues are still
made six cornered; all which base creatures except the Hare are engendered of
putrifcation. But as says the Poet: Numero Deus impare gaudet, God delights
in an odd number. And odd numbers are attributed unto men: For that which
Seneca writes: Septimus quisque annus aetati notam imprimit, Every seventh
year imprinteth some mark into age, is to be understood only of the male
sex: for experience shows us even unto the view of the eye, that the number
of six makes a change, and leaves a mark unto the female kind: So that
Plato vainly to attribute the perfect or even numbers unto heavenly things.
also are concluded in septenaries, or such other odd numbers. In many places
also Diamonds grow by nature it self pollished six square, as Pliny in his
33. book reports, which in the mountains of the Pyrenes is a common matter.
Wherefore it is an absurd thing that Plato attributes the beginning and ending
of divine things unto perfect numbers only. But Porphyree the most famous
philosopher of his time, when he enterpreted that of Plato out of his Timaeus
(...), writes the estate of all Commonweales, and the life of spirits to be
determined, at the Plutarch in his book entitled (...) supposes the life of
Spirits to extend longer, but yet neither of them sought after the perfect
numbers. But if so be that Plato in so great fewness of perfect numbers, could
not tell which of them should agree to things sprung from a divine beginning;
by what numbers then should he discide so great variety of worldly things? or
if he knew that number, why did he pray and make vows unto the Muses that they
would show him it.

Wherefore it behooves a man of deeper consideration to seek out such numbers
The numbers of seven and nine to be of great force in the change of worldly
things.
as may signify the conuersions and chaunges of worldly things, and which are
by long experience, and not by light and vain conjectures approved: such as I
deem the viz. 49, 81, 343, 729, to be. For as the number of six (which is of
all perfect numbers the first) changes the manners, habit, or nature of the
Female kind, so most Hippocrat. de partis septimestri.
ancient antiquity has by experience proved the number of seven in some
sort to change the Male kind also: and that as the numbers of seven or nine
use commonly to give unto men The number of six to be of great power in the
femaile sex, and the number of seven in the maile kind.
the beginning and time of their birth, that so the number growing of the
multiplying of either of them, has been wont to bring unto them their end and
destruction. Which same thing I transfer and apply unto Commonweales also, so
that the numbers of seven and nine, and such as arise of their quadrate and
cubike numbers, do often times bring ruin and destruction unto Commonweales.
For that which we Seneca and Censorius every seventh year to imprint some
mark into the age of man, and so the dangers of men's lives and substance to
happen still upon their seventh years: understand that to belong especially
unto men. Of which mine opinion I have use and experience the author: For it
is every sixth year which leaves a most certain note of it self unto women.
And first to begin withal the strength of body and of mind is increased in
them the sixth year, or else therein they die: the twelft year they begin to
wax warm, and the eighteenth year are ready for husbands: and if diseases
fall upon them in their sixth years, they are so often times in danger: The
like whereof happens unto men the seventh, the fourteenth, and one and
twentieth year: So that Plato not without cause attributes the even Plutarch
says, The ancient Romans to have used to give name unto their male children
the ninth day, for that the seventh was more dangerous, and unto their female
children or daughters the eight day: for that (as says he) the even number is
proper unto the female sex: And therefore I suppose them of old time to have
used every eight day to do sacrifice unto Neptune, for that the element of
water agrees unto women, as does the fiery element unto men: As also that they
thought the number of seven to be feared. Howbeit that the law of God
commands the male children to be circumcised the eight day: which the sacred
interpretors of the Hebrews think The seventh day of all others most blessed.
to have been done, that so there might be one Sabbath betwixt the birth of
the child and the circumcision thereof, and so more strength might thereby be
given unto the child. For why, Moses does in sacred writ teach us, God most
plentifully to bless the Seventh day (which was the birth day of the world)
with his grace and all other good things: which abundance and stoare of his
good blessings is no where seen to be given unto the rest of the other days,
by a certain wonderful cause of nature from all Philosophers hidden.

Yet nothing seems in man's nature more wonderful than that the year
threescore The clymactericall year of 63, most commonly fatal unto old men.
three has been still noted to be unto almost all old men fatal, Obseruandum
est (says Au. Gellius) in multa hominum memoria, expertumque in senioribus
plerisque omnibus sexagesimum tertium vitae annum cum periculo and clade aliqua
venire, aut corporis morbis grauioris, aut vitae interitus, aut animi
aegritudinis, It is a thing observed (says he) in the great remembrance of
men, and also by experience proved in many old men, The threescore and third
year of their age to come unto them all with some danger and hurt, either of
the body, or of some great disease, or of loss of life, or of some tormenting
grief of mind. Yea there is an epistle of Augustus the emperor unto his
nephew Caius, bearing date the ninth of the Calends of October, written to the
same purpose, in this sort, Aue mi Cai, meus ocellus iucu^dissimus, quem semper
medius fidius desidero quum a me abes: sed praecipue diebus talibus qualis est
hodiernus: oculi mei requir unt meum Caium: quem vbicumque and hoc die fuisti,
spero laetum and been valentem celebrasse quartum and sexagesimum natalem meum:
nam vt vides (...) communem seniorum omnium tertium and sexagesimum euasimus,
etc. All hail my Caius (says he) my most sweet delight, whom of my faith I
always long for when thou art from me, but especially on such days as this is
mine eyes do now seek after my Caius, whom wheresoever thou have this day
been, I hope that thou merry and in good health, have celebrated my threescore
and fourth birth day: for as you see we have escaped the threescore and third
year, the common Climacteriall year of all old men, etc. Howbeit that
Augustus lived until he was seventy seven years old; as did also Pomponius
Atticus, who died at that age. We might reckon up an infinite number not only of
the poor and baser sort, but even of the nobler sort also, who ended their
Great learned men which dyed at the 93. year of their age.
days in the threescore and third year of their age: but we will only reckon
up some such as were for their learning famous, who as at that age died, viz.
Aristotle, Cicero, Crysippus, S. Bernard, Boccace, Erasmus, Luthar, Melancthon,
Siluius, Alexander Imolensis, the most famous lawier of his time, Cardinal
Cusan, Linacre, and Sturmius: And therefore the old Greek divines seem to have
consecrated the number of seven unto Apollo, and of nine unto the Muses, as
Plutarque writes.

Now if any man will more curiously search out these things, whether it be in
the The seventh and ninth years still dangerous or fatal unto old men; and
the sixth year unto women.
sacred or profane histories, he shall find the lives of men for the most part
to have expired and taken end still in the seventh or ninth years of their
age: and women in the Plato is said to have died at the age of fourscore and
one, which is nine times nine years: Theophrastus at 84, which are twelve
times seven years, which period few men pass; or else they pass to xiii
times seven, as did S. Hierom and Isocrates, who lived 91 years. Pliny,
Bartholus, and Caesar lived fifty six years, which is eight times seven
years: Lamech lived 777 years, and Methusala (who of all others lived the
longest) 970 years: Abraham lived an hundred seauentie and five years, which
are five and twenty times seven years: Jacob 147 years, which are xxi
septinaries, or spaces of seven years: Isaac lived 190 years, which make xx
times nine years: David lived seauentie years, which make ten times seven
years. An infinite thing it were to reckon up all which are in histories found
to have ended their days at these aforesaid Ioannes de temporibus lived 361
years, that is to say three and fifty times seven years. It is manifest
also men to be always borne in the ninth or seventh monethe whom the Graeks
therefore call (...) and that they which are borne either sooner or later live
not. For which cause Hippocrates writes a child to be fully made and perfected
in all the parts and limbs thereof the seventh day: and afterward to take
increase: and being borne the seventh month to live: but none to have lived
being borne in the eight month: a child also in the seventh year to have all
the teeth, and that men (as Pliny writes it to have been even from the
farthest memory of men observed) having been kept from meat seven days,
albeit they may live longer, shall yet The Saboath or Seventh day of all other
days the most blessed.
nevertheless at length die thereof. The law of God has most religiously also
both consecrated and commanded, the seventh day to be kept holy, as the birth
day of the world, and of all that therein is: which one day of all others God
almighty blessed, and which day all antiquity has by long experience
reported to be so unlike the other days of the week, as that it is taken up
as an old proverb, No seventh day (...) pass wherein the sun is not at one
time or other therein to be seen. Upon which day the ancient Hebrews
constantly affirm, The rage of devils to be restrained, wisdom to be into
the minds of men infused, their bodies to be strengthened, and their fields
with increase of fruit to be blessed. The seventh year also is by the law of
God holy, as is also the seventh time seven year, which is the year of
Jubilee: neither is if to be Calvin (following Galen, as I suppose) calls
Perfect (where he entreats of the rest of the Sabbath day) which he even to
astonishment woundereth to be so often and so religiously propounded, to be of
all men observed and kept, in so much that even the pain of death is
propounded unto the breakers thereof: so that the whole sum of all God his
laws may seem to be therein contained: yet is not therefore the number of
seven a number perfect, for that it is odd and masculine: whereas all perfect
numbers are even and feminine. For why, What a perfect number is?
the Mathematitians define that to be perfect, which may be divided into the
same Lactantius * In lib. de oppi^icto Dei.
in the same error offended, who calls the number of three and ten, perfect
and full numbers: and also Cicero, who deceived many, in calling the numbers of
seven and In somnio scipionis.
eightfull numbers; which Macrobius understands to be solid, and others to
be perfect numbers: neither of which can truly be said of the number of
seven: as for the number of eight it is indeed a solid, but not therefore a
perfect number. With like error is Plutarch himself deceived, who writes,
Three to be a number perfect: howbeit that Aristotle deemeth the force of that
number to be of great force in the Philo was herein also deceived, in taking
ten to be the most perfect number. But four perfect numbers from one to an
hundred thousand.


Now indeed there are but four perfect numbers from one unto an hundred
thousand, viz. 6, 28, 496, and 8128, amongst which the last cannot serve for
the changing of Commonweales, for that it exceeds the age of the world:
neither the two first, for that they are too little: so that but one of them
can be well applied unto the chaunges of cities and Commonweals, viz. the
number of The number 469* the only perfect number which can well be applied
unto the changes of cities and Commonweales.
496, which is made of seventy septenaries of years, and a perfect number: it
being also a thing by most ancient antiquity observed, All cities in the
revolution of five hundred years, to suffer either some viz. unto the princes
themselves, or else unto the continuance of their kingdoms and empires. As if a
man should say, This kingdom of France to fall and take end, after that
threescore and three kings had therein reigned, this number consisting of the
numbers of seven and The numbers of seven and nine fatal unto Commonweales.
nine, converted in themselves. As Esaias, who living in the time of Romulus,
prophesied, That nine kings should more yet reign in Judea, and that the tenth
should together with the people be led away into captivity, and so that
kingdom to take end: As also that there should be nine kings of the Persians,
or as that the seventh king of the Romans should be thrust out of his kingdom:
which number of princes well agrees viz. 182, a number consisting of six and
twenty septenaries: and at Rome 244, for in the 75 septenarie, that is to say,
in the 245 year Tarquin the proud, last king of Rome, was thrust out of his
kingdom. Hieremie the Prophet then lived, when as the prophecy of Esaias was
fulfilled, and himself prophesied, That the people should be again delivered
in the seventy year of their captivity, as indeed they were, and the temple
again restored. The same Prophet Chap 24.
Esayas prophesied also, The most famous city of Tire to be in 70 years after
unpeopled and left desolat, and afterward within seventy years more after the
ruin thereof, to be again restored. The same number agrees unto the Athenian
Commonweal, fatalis n^merus, or a Fatal number, viz. 1728 (being indeed a
quadrat number) seems to have been expired from the reign of Ninus unto the
victory of Alexander the Great, at Arbela, and the overthrow of the Persian
empire. For Herodotus, Diodorus, Trogus Pompeius, Justin, and Ctesias, begin
that empire from Ninus. And at such time as Jerusalem overwhelmed with most
bitter calamities, was won and rased, the temple overthrown, king Sedechias
slain, and the people carried away into captivity: at the self same time the
Egyptians rebelled against the kings of Assyria, the Athenians Pisistratides,
and the Romans expulsed the proud Tarquins. Now the temple had before stood 427
years, a time cousisting of whole septenaries. But for that in the computation
of times, there is great difference amongst the Historiographers, we will use
the Roman Fasts or Calenders, which cannot lie. Wherein we see, that from the
foundation of the city, and of the Roman Commonweal unto the battle of
Actium, wherein Marcus Antonius was by Augustus vanquished, and the whole
empire brought under the power of one only Monarch, and a general peace
established throughout the world, there are accounted 729 years, the solid
number of nine. The same number of years passed from the conquest of the
kingdom of the Lombards by Charlemaigne, unto the conquest of the Jews the
twelfth the French king, upon the Venetians and the Sforces. The like number of
years is accounted also from the overthrow of the kingdom of the Picts, and
the great victory of the Scots unto the captivity of Marie Steward their
queen. As also from Egbert king of the West Saxons (who having vanquished the
East Saxons, made himself the sole Monarch of England, and called the people
Englishmen) unto queen Marie, who was the first woman that took upon her the
sovereignty of that people in fourteen hundred and forty years space. So
from the reign of Augustus, after the victory by him obtained at Actium, and
the temple of I^nus the fourth time shut up, unto Augustus the last of all the
Roman emperors, slain by Odouacer king of the Herules, and the empire
possessed by the Goths, there are accounted Odouacer began to reign. Wherein
it is also worth the noting, that as the first emperor Augustus with
wonderful felicity and wisdom, both established and increased that so great
a Monarchy, which he held more than forty years: so Augustulus the last of the
Roman emperors diminished both in name and sovereignty, held that his empire
scarce a whole year, which happened the tenth of the calends of September. As
it happened to Constantine the Great, who established the seat of the empire at
Constantinople: and to Constantine the last Christian emperor, there dispoyled
of his estate, and slain by Mahomet king of the Turks, surnamed the Great.
Now from the Augustulus, are accounted 1225 years: which number consists of
whole septinaries: which thing Vectius the great sooth-saier foretold, as The
number perfect of 496 a number proper unto the chaun^es of Commo^nweales.
Censorinus out of Marcus Varro writes. The same number of years we find
from Ninus king of Assyria, unto the death of Sardanapalus, whom Arbaces
governor of Media dispoyled of his government, and translated the kingdom
unto the Medes. Now from Saul the first king of the elect people of God unto
that Sedechias was slain, and his kingdom overthrown, returns that perfect
number of 496 years. But whereas Josephus reports the burning of both the
Temples, and the taking of the city, to have chanced the selfsame day, viz.
the ninth day of the first month; he in that agrees not with the book of the
Kings, neither with the Prophet Hieremy, viz. 496. are accounted from Caranus
first king of the Macedons, unto Alexander the Great last king of that
country, descended of the line and issue of Hercules, and of Aeacus. Some
there be which add certain years more, and some others which detract some
also. Wherefore my meaning is not to allege any other than the records set
down by the most certain Historiographers, and such as every man may draw
even out of the very fasts and calenders of the Romans themselves. Of which
sort is that, that from the foundation of the city of Rome, unto the sacking
thereof by the French men, are accounted 364 years, which number consists of
whole septinaries: As also from the building of the city, unto the slaughter
at Cannas, Terentius Varro being then Consul (at which time the Quinctilius
Varro, are passed 224 years, a number consisting of whole septenaries: both
which overthrows happened the second day of August, as is by the ancient
Romans reported. Neither is that less memorable which Tarapha a most certain
Historiographer amongst the Spaniards reports, The Moors and Arabians to
have invaded Spain in the year of Christ 707, and that also the seventh year
of the reign of king Roderike, and to have holden the same kingdom 770
years, neither could utterly be from thence again expulsed, before the time
of Ferdinand king of Arragon and Castile. It is also worth the noting, Aman,
and the delivery of the Jews at the intercession of Hester, unto the victory
of Judas Machabeus against Antiochus the noble king of Syria and his
lieutenant, there passed 343 years, which is the solid number of seven, that
is to say seven times seven septenaries: both which victories happened the
thirteenth day of the month Adar, as the Hebrews have well noted. The same
number of years passed from the time that Octauianus (having vanquished Marcus
Antonius, and united the whole Roman empire under his own obeisance) was by
the Senate called Augustus, unto Constantine the Great; a time notable for the
strange chances which then happened in the whole empire, as well in the laws
politic, as in matters of religion. Tacitus has also noted in another
singularity, That the city of Rome was by Nero burnt, on the like day that it
had long before been burnt by the Gauls, which was the fourteenth of the
calends of August: where^in some have gone so far, as to number how many
years, months and days, passed betwixt both those fires.

But that the numbers of six are almost unto women fatal, I thought it not
needful The number of six to be unto women fatal.
by examples to prove, least I might be thought to stand upon triflles, only
that I note, that in the year 1582, at such time as the prince of Orange had
received a mortal wound, the one and twentieth of March, being the forty
ninth year of his age, and that all men dispaired of his life, he yet
recovered his health at his entrance into his fiftieth year: But Carola
Charlet of Burbon his wife within two months after Francis duke of Alanson at
Anwerpe.

But now for that we are by way of discourse come so far, the last that
remains is for me to answer some thing to them which take pleasure rather
to carpe than to commend my writings: for that In his book: De Method
historiarum.
I said I understood not the prophecies of Daniel concerning the rising and
ruin of Empires and kingdoms. For I doubt not but that Cyrus then beginning
his reign, what time the captivity was ended, according to Hier. 2^. and
Daniel 9.
the prophecy of Jeremy, (which he begins from the destruction of the
City and of the Temple, and not from the reign of Ioachim as some suppose)
and the holy people returned. He defines A good discou^ of Daniel his
seauentie weeks.
it (I say) by seauentie weeks of years, that is by 490. years, and that
right plainly; when as the prophecy was made in the last year of the
captivity, which was the seauentieth from the destruction of the City and of
the Temple: that so the prophecies Pompee said well: Vrbe deserta, in
parietibus Rempublicam non consistere, That the city being forsaken, the
Commonweal consisted not in the walls thereof. But many Josephus. Funccius.
Mercator. Philo.
Historiographers from Cyrus unto the reign of Herod the great (who having
taken Jerusalem and slain all the Senators together with the king himself,
and spoiled the Jews of their kingdom) do account 490. years. Others there
be which reckon otherwise, and so great variety and difference there is
amongst them, as that all the opinions of all of them, may well be refelled,
not only by every one of them a part, but even by all of them together. As for
those things which Daniel writ concerning the Empires, he openly and plainly
has called the Medes, the Persians, and Grecians unto the Empire of Babylon;
but besides them none. The fourth Empire (by him spoken of) we have showed not
to belong unto the Romans, seeing that question is there concerning Babylon,
which the Romans never subdued; which when they passing over the river
Frankbergerus the Saxon and Bishop of Lipsic, by the authority of Luther, and
one Dresserus a mere schoolman with railing without any reason at all
refelleth, whom I shall yet count an eloquent man, if he shall but learn
as well to speak, as he has learned to speak evil: But for that the angry
man (a common fault of the wise) is angry with me, for that I dare not rashly
judge of the divine oracles, least in so doing I might offend in such his
matters, Daniel to have there omitted fifty empires, which I have In meth^do
(...).
noted to have bin ten times greater than the German empire, and such as have
in them also contained a great part of the Babylonian empire? Why also Daniel
in his first chapter has writ of himself, That he lived in the first year of
the reign of Cyrus king of Persia? And yet more, why he should write himself
to have received that divine oracle or prophecy in the Chap. ^.
third year of the reign of king Cyrus? And why in the chapter following does
he make mention of Darius king of Persia* who was invested in that kingdom
seven and thirty years after that Cyrus began to reign? For neither Berosus
a most true interpretor of the Chaldean antiquities, whom Ctesias and most of
the ancient Megusthenes the Cronicler of the Persian affairs, neither
Herodotus, called the Father of History, neither any of the Greek or Hebrew
historiographers, report any to have been before Darius Hystaspes: I except
only Josephus, who in that place dissenteth from Berosus. But least we should
seem to deal to sharply, and to press them too far, What is the reason why
Daniel in the eleventh chapter of his prophecy writes, That Darius should
have three Persians his successors and that the fourth should come out of
Grecia, who by mighty force and strong hand should obtain the empire? But
that this was Alexander the Great no man doubts, who thrust Darius Codomaenus
out of the Persian empire, whose father was Darius Achos, his grandfather
Darius Mnemon, and his great grandfather Darius Nothus, unto Daniel turns his
speech. Which if it be so, Daniel must needs have lived two hundred and
twenty years, if he were a youth grown when as he was carried captive into
Chaldea, which he must needs be, for that he then spoke both most eloquently
and wisely. And thus much every man may most plainly gather both out of the
sacred scriptures, and also out of the ancient histories of Herodotus and
Josephus. For Cyrus died in the 30 year of his reign, Cambyses in the 6,
Darius Hystaspes in the 37, Xerxes in the 21, Artaxerxes in the 44, Darius
Nothus in the 19, Darius Mnemon in the 36, Darius Achos in the ^6, Darius
Cadomanus in the 10, all making the sum of 228 years. For Daniel was taken
prisoner together with king Ioachim. But let the interpretors of these divine
oracles suppose all things to be manifest unto Zacharias Chap. ^.
and Aggaeus, who writ their prophecies in the end of the seauentieth year of
the captivity, Darius Nothus * Chap. 23.
as they will have it then reigning. This is now (say those Prophets) the
seauentieth year* And if it be so that they will have the seauentie years to
be accounted not from the destruction of the Temple, but from the Edict of
Xerxes, then truly Zerubabel and Nehemiah the chiefetaines of the people must
needs have lived full two hundred and fifty years, being so old when Cyrus
began his reign, as that they were able to conduct Nehemiah himself, him to
have lived even to the last Darius. Wherefore all Historiographers are here
much troubled and at great variance among themselves: one saying that there
were but five of these Persian kings: an other six: and others seven: many
eight: some nine: yea and some there be which have devised a tenth also. Truly
Genebrardus in his Chronology affirms there to have been of them only five:
but Functius says ten. Wherefore in so great rietie of opinions one of the two
may be: as viz. that none of them all be true, the other can in no wise be,
that more of them then one should at all be true; and which of them it is I can
not affirm: neither if I could would I. And in mine opinion S. Hierome has
rejected many things which are found in the writings of Daniel: And that the
Hebrews allow not of the rest which are not writ in the Chaldee, but in the
Greek tongue by Theodotion.

Wherefore these examples thus propounded, it is lawful by a certain
coniecturall How it is lawful for a man to guess at the rising and falling of
a Common wealth.
gessing to aim at the rising and falling of Commonweales: as also for a man
looking into the precedent causes of things, with the diverse conjunctions and
oppositions of the Planets, to go so far as the knowledge of such things will
bear: not

CHAP. III. That it is a most dangerous thing at one and the self same time*
to change the form, laws, and customs of a Commonweal.
HOw Cities and Commonweales arise; by what means they are also increased;
what diverse alterations and chaunges befall every one of them; and by what
conjectures the fall and ruin of them is to be Wise men not to be subject unto
the power or influence of the stars, as sensual men be.
of the stars: but only they which give the raines unto their disordered
appetites, and beastly desires, not suffering themselves to be governed by the
rule of reason, or of other the best laws: unto whom Solomon the master of
wisdom has sharply threatened the torment of the wheel, saying, That God
should cause the wheel to pass over them: that is to say, the force and
effect of the celestial Spheres, which over the good should have no power at
all. Seeing therefore that the power and influence of the stars may by the
power of God, that is, by wisdom (by the gift and goodness of almighty God
given unto men) be avoided: and that wise physicians have found the means to
change the diseases, and to alter fevers contrary unto their natural
courses, The mine of a Commonweal to be by the wisdom of the governor
prevented, or ^ls warning thereof to be by him in d^e time given unto his
subjects.
not the wise politician, or governor of a Commonweal, foreseeing the
conuersions and chaunges which naturally happen unto Commonweales, by good
laws and other convenient remedies prevent the ruin thereof: or if the force
of the mischief be so great, and the destruction so certain, as that it can
by no wisdom of man be prevented or stayed, yet shall he perform that which
cunning physicians do, who by the Symptoms appearing upon the critical
days, and by the causes of the disease, do more certainly and better guess
of the sick man's death in what manner it shall be: and so yet in good rhyme
gives thereof warning unto his ignorant subjects, lest that they should upon
the suddein be utterly oppressed with the ruin of the falling Estate Wisdom
never discouraged with the dangers of the Commonweal: so long as they see the
state wisely and dis^ governed.
and the greatest grief thereof, do yet put their patients in greater comfort,
if the Symptoms, be good then if the grief or fit without them were but easy
and gentle; and as to the contrary when they see a man in the highest degree
of health that may be, they are then in the greatest fear, lest he should
suddenly fall unto some extreme sickness, as the great physician Hippocrates
says: So also a wise governor of a Commonweal, seeing the state on all sides
beset, and almost overwhelmed with enemies, yet if in so great danger he
otherwise see wise men sitting at the helm of the Commonweal, the subjects
obedient unto the Magistrates, and the Magistrates unto the Laws; he takes
courage thereat, and promises both unto himself and others What opinion wise
men had of the distressed estate of the Roman Commonwealea, f^et the great
overthrow at Cannas.
victories of Hanniball: For why almost all men now despaired of the estate of
the Roman Empire: at which time of distress, of all others no man more hurt
the Commonweal than did Terentius Varro the Consul, who with some few having
escaped from so great a slaughter (as wherein threescore thousand of the
citisens of Rome were slain) writ letters unto the Senate and people of Capua,
That the Roman Hanniball: when as in deed the Consul should have extenuated the
overthrow and loss received. Whereas Scipio, who was afterward called
Africanus, to the contrary with comfortable speeches then cheered up diverse of
the citisens dispairing of the state of the Commonweal, and by oath
constrained such as were about to have abandoned the city, to stay there
still, and not to stir, but resolutely to adventure their lives for the
defense of their country and Commonweal. Neither was Hanniball, after his so
many and so great victories over the Romans: Yet for all that, the Senate of
every city favored the Romans: For so says Liuie, Vnus veluti morbus omnes
Italiae populos inuaserat, vt plebs ab optimatibus dissentiret: Senatus Romany
faueret, plebs ad Poenos rem traheret, One disease as it were (says he) had
infected all the people of Italy, viz. That the people still dissented from
the nobility; the Senate Hiero king of Siracusa, accounted the wisest prince of
his age, did then much more carefully than before honor and reverence the
amity and alliance of the Romans, not doubting in what he could to help and
relieve them; yea and in that their desperate estate amongst other things sent
them a statue of Victory (of gold) for a present* as he which had oftentimes
proved the incredible wisdom of that Senate in the mannaging of their affairs.
Wherein a man may see, that the wiser sort seeing the Romans so advised and so
constant in their extreme necessity, and that their laws were never more
straightly kept, or martial discipline more severely observed, (as Polybius an
eyewitness of those things, himself writes) were always of opinion that the
issue of Scipio being then their general.

Wherefore the first rule for the keeping and preserving of Commonweales in The
first rule for the keeping and preserving of Commonweales in their estates.
their estates, is well to know the nature of every Commonweal, together with
the diseases incident unto them: whereof we have more at large discoursed in
the former Book. For it is not enough to know which kind of Commonweal is
better than other, but it behooves us also to know the means how to maintain
every one of them in their estate, if it be not in our power to change the
same, or that in changing thereof we shall put all to the hasard of utter
ruin and decay. For why, it is better to have an evil Commonweal than none
at all: as with convenient diet in some Violent remedies never to be used but
in desperat^ diseases.
sort to preserve the sick man, than by applying of medicines to an incurable
disease so to take away his life quite. For as physicians say, we must never
apply violent remedies

And albeit ihat some laws there be good and indifferent to all sorts of
Commonweales, yet so it is, that the ancient question of right wise Politicians
is not yet well resolved, viz. Whether a new law being better, be to be
preferred before an old ancient law A notable question.
that is worse? For the law be it never so good, is nothing worth if it carry
with it a contempt of it self, or of the rest of the laws: Now so it is, that
newness in matter of Ancient laws though worse still of greater esteem and
reverence than the new though better.
laws is always contemptible, whereas to the contrary, the reverence of
antiquity is so great, as that it gives strength enough unto a law to cause it
to be of it self obeyed, without the authority of any Magistrate at all joined
unto it: whereas new edicts and Ancient laws concerning the estate of a
Commonweal not to be without great danger altered.
the estare, is as dangerous, as to remove the foundation or corner stones
which uphold the whole weight or burden of the buildings; in which doing* the
whole fabrike is to be sore shaken, and beside the danger of falling,
receives more hurt by the shaking thereof, than it does good by the new
repairation, especially if it be now become old and ruinous. For even so it is
in a Commonweal now already grown old, wherein if a man never so little
remove the foundations that vpholdeth the same, he is in great danger of the
ruin thereof. For the ancient maxim of the most wise politicians ought well to
be waied, That we must not change any thing in the laws of a Commonweal which
has long maintained it self in good estate, whatsoever apparent profit may
be thereby pretended. And for these causes the old law of the Athcnians, which
was afterward Publius Philo, was the most necessary law that could be in a
Commonweal, viz. That it should not be lawful for any person upon pain of
death to present any request unto the people, without the priuitie of the
Senate. Which law is yet better kept in Venice than in any place of the world
else, whereas it is not permitted so much as to present any request even unto
the Senate, without the advice of the council of the Sages. And yet The
extreme danger he was in, which moved any new law amongst the Locrensians.
in the Commonweal of the Locrensians, this law was much straiter, Where he
which would present any request, to have it pass in force of a law, was
constrained to move it before the people with a rope about his neck, wherewith
he was there upon the place to be strangled, if he prevailed not to prove the
law by him moved to be good and profitable Lex talioni^ (or the law of like
punishment) which was then common to almost all nations: For why, it was reason
that he which had maliciously deprived another man of his sight, should
himself be deprived of his own sight also.

Now if any man should say, That many laws must often times of necessity be
changed, Laws concerning ordinary policy may oft^ntimes be changed but not
laws concerning the estate.
as the laws concerning victuals, or the bringing in, or carrying out of
merchandise, or concerning the augmenting or diminishing of the punishment to
be inflicted upon offenders, which are even in a short time to be changed; I
therein agree with him, for that necessity has no law: first, if new laws
give good hope of fruit and profit The chief law of all Commonweales.
Commonweales, is this, SALVS POPVLI SVPREMA LEX ESTO, The welfare of the
people, let that be the last law. For what reason moved Themistocles to
fortify the city of Athens with walls and bulwarks, even the very same
reason induced Theramenes to persuade the Athenians to raze their walls, viz.
the welfare of the people: whereas otherwise the Lacedaemonians had undone the
citisens together with the city. Wherefore no law is so sacred, but that upon
urgent necessity it is to be changed. And therefore Solon after he had
published his laws, caused the Athenians to swear to No law so sacred but
that upon urgent necessity it is to be changed*
observe and keep them for the space of one hundred year: giving them thereby
to understand, that laws could never be made immutable, neither were to be all
at once together changed. Lycurgus also in like manner took an oath of the
Lacedaemonians his subjects, to keep his laws until his return from the
Oracle of Apollo, from whence he afterward never returned, but went himself
into voluntary exile, out of his native country; so to bind his citisens so
much as possible was to the perpetual Better to suffer evil laws by little
and little to grow out of use; then upon the soden with danger to abrogate
them all at once*
keeping of his laws. And albeit that the iniquity of some ancient law be
by right evident, yet is it better to endure it, until that it in time by
little and little of it self loose the force, than upon the sudden by violence
to repeal it. For so did the Romans by many the laws of the twelve tables,
which they would not abrogat, but only by not observing them, in that they
were unprofitable or unjust, suffered them so to grow out of use: which they so
did, least in abrogating of them, they might seem to impair the credit and
authority of the rest of the same laws. Yet after that they had by tract of
time been of long buried as it were in oblivion (which was seven hundred years
after that they were first published) it was at the motion of Aebutius the
Tribune, decreed, That such of those laws as were as it were of themselves
grown out of use, should be

But for that the nature of man as of all other worldly things also, is most
slipperi^ Neither are old laws to be altogether suddenly without danger
abrogated: or new laws rashly ^stablished.
and unconstant, running still headlong from good to evil, and from evil to
worse; vices by little and little still increasing, not unlike unto evil
humors, which without sencible feeling increase man's body, until it be full
of them, breeds in it many most dangerous diseases, and so at length
brings it unto utter destruction. For remedy where of new laws must of
necessity be devised: which must yet for all that by little and little be
done, and not violently all at once. As Agis king of Lacedemonia unwisely
attempted to have done: who desiring to reestablish in the Commonweal the
Lycurgus, now by the negligence of the magistrates almost grown quite out of
use, caused all the obligations and scedules of private men to be upon a sudden
brought out and burnt: which done, he was about to have proceeded to the making
of a new division of lands, to the end to have so made an equality of wealth
and goods amongst the citisens, as Lycurgus had before done: which although it
were a thing desired of many in the Lacedemonian Commonweal (which had indeed
so been founded) yet so it was, that in making too much have in the doing
thereof, he not only fell from his hope, but thereby kindled such a fire of
sedition also, as burnt up his whole house, and so afterward dispoiled of his
estate, and by his rebellious subjects together Lycurgus done before him; and
then to have forbidden them the use of gold and silver, that so it might have
grown into as little estimation as iron: and in some time after that, to have
forbidden all sumptuousness in apparel, and rich furniture, and not at once
to have encroached upon the liberty of the people, to have proved their
patience, and changed their discipline: For that to use such a violent letting
Augustine Barbarin their duke, attempted not in any thing to abridge his power,
though by them much misliked and feared; least in so doing they should either
have offered some disgrace unto him their prince, now grown old, or else have
raised some new sturres, and so have troubled the quiet of their Commonweal.
But he once dead, before they proceeded unto the new election of Loredan,

But as it is a dangerous thing for the subjects all at once to abridge or cut
short Dangerous for a prince upon the soden to displace or cast offe the
anntient seruitor of his predecessors, or great magistrates of the estate.
the power of a sovereign prince or magistrate, who yet has the power in his
hand: so is it also no less dangerous for a prince upon the sudden to
displace or cast off the ancient Galba being deceived, and having thrust Otho
out of the hope he had conceived of the empire, to adopt Piso to succeed him
in the government, and yet for all that without disarming of Otho, he was
shortly after by the same Otho (a man in great favor with the Pretorian
soldiers) slain together with Piso, whom he had before adopted to succeed
him in the empire and government of the state. All which perils and dangers
are less to be feared in an Aristocratike or Popular estate, for that in them
they which have the sovereignty never die; howbeit that there is in them no
less danger in changing of their sovereign magistrates, or generals (as we
have before declared) or in making of All alterations of laws or other great
matters in a Commonweal are best to be made by little and little.
in brief, when question is for the displacing of great magistrates, or for the
suppressing of corporations or colleges, or for the cutting short of
privileges, or the augmenting of punishments, or for the reforming of disorders
amongst the people, or for the calling of great men to account, or for the
reducing of religion to* the former course and beginning thereof; which by
succession of time, following the natural corruption of man, has bin altered
and changed from the first purity thereof: there is no better means than
Charles the fifth (even he that was surnamed the Wise) who at such time as he
was Regent in France (his father being as then prisoner in England) by the
evil council of some, ignorant in matters of estate, at one chop suspended
all the officers in France, of whom also he suppressed the greatest part,
appointing fifty commissioners for the hearing of such accusations as should
be laid against them for the extortion and briberie by them committed and used:
whereupon all France was in such tumult and vp^ore (for the infinite number
that then were of male contents) as that shortly after for remedy thereof, he
Cum regiae potestati and procurationi, quam gerimus, non modo quae ab alijs,
sed etiam quae a nobis ipsis and in Rempublicam, and in singulos peccantur
emendare consentaneum sit, rebus plane perspectis and cognitis, quae de imperio
magistratibus adempto noua lege iussimus, placet abrogari; vt quidem abrogamus,
and aperte declaramus, legis illius, quae importunis quorumdam rogationibus
erepta est, nullam vim fore, and quae acta gesta sunt, cum magno nostro dolor
acta gesta fuisse; nec illam magistratuum ac honorum abrogationem, quam non
iure factam esse censitemur cuiquam fraudi esse: aut cuiusquam ius ac
dignitatem violare nos vlla ex part voluisse: ac proinde legem illam iure a
nobis rescindi and abrogaritestamur, vt omnibus magistratibus salua omnia and
integra restituantur, Whereas by the regal power and authority which we
bear, it is fitting for us to correct and amend, not only such things as by
others, but even by our selves also are trespassed against the Commonweal, or
other men in particular: all things thoroughly looked into, and tried, our
pleasure is, That what we have by a new law commanded concerning power and
authority taken from the magistrates, to be again abrogated, as indeed we
abrogat, and plainly declare the force of that law (which was by the
importunat suit of some wrested from us) to be nothing: and that such things as
were then done, to have been done to our great grief: neither that that
deprivation of offices or honors, which we confess to have been not lawfully
done, to be impu^ed to Charles the ninth coming unto the crown, and seeing
the number of officers through the liberty of the times grown almost infinite,
to The wise course taken of Charles the IX for the abating of the infinite
number of officers in the Commonweal.
the great hurt of the Commonweal, in such sort, as that it seemed a thing
almost necessary to have deprived them of their honors and fees, yet did he
not so, for that it could not without great injury be done, when as the money
they had before paid for them, could not by reason of the want of coin in the
common treasury, be again repaid unto them: neither if it could have been,
could he yet be without imputation and Not good for a prince to use the
greatness of his power in displacing of the great officers of his realm and
state.
power had been so great, as with his beck or a wink of his eye, to cause all
his subjects to tremble, and so to be able to do what thing soever he list,
should he yet seem to do wisely by force to take away the offices and places
before sold unto his magistrates and officers: For that not only they which
have received the injury, but even other his subjects also, are often times much
moved and incensed with injuries and wrongs done unto other men: Besides that,
the mightier that a man is, the more justly and temperately Religeous houses
with great wisdom quietly suppressed at Basil and Coire.
Wherefore the Senate and people of Basil did wisely, who having renounced the
Bishop of Romes Religion (which they now detested) would not upon the sudden
thrust the Monks and Nuns with other the Religious persons out of their
Abbeys and Monasteries: but only took order, that as they dyed, they should
die both for themselves and their successors, expressly forbidding any new to be
chosen in their places; that so by that means their colleges might by little
and little by the death of the fellows be extinguished. Whereby it came to
pass, that all the rest of the Carthusians of their own accord forsaking
their cloister, yet one of them all alone for along time remained therein, and
so quietly and without any disturbance held the right of his Lucilius merrily
says) having neither trade nor occupation to live upon, out of the old
possession of their lands, were it never so unjust. Whereof beside the injury
unto them done, danger might have also ensued, least they not having whereof
to live, and so brought into despair, might have attempted some thing against
the state; and so happily drawn after them all their friends and allies alo, to
the great trouble of the whole Commonweal. For the same cause the king having
given leave for the free exercise of the new religion in this realm of
France, and seeing that they which under the color thereof were gone out of
there cloisters, demanded a portion in the lands and inheritance of their
parents or near kinsmen: it was decreed, and that upon

But now that which we have said, That the multitude of officers, or of
colleges, and The best and surest way for the suppressing of a tyrant.
which have no force nor effect but for the time to come. And albeit that
tyranny be a thing most cruel and detestable, yet so it is, that the surest
way and mean to suppress the same, if the tyrant have neither children nor
brethren to succeed him, is together with the death of the tyrant to abolish
also the tyrannical government; and not by force whilst he yet lives to
strive to take from him the government, with the hazard of the Tarquin the
proud, and other tyrants following his steps used commonly to do) or to
suppress the magistrates or other great officers which might stay the course of
his tyranny, to the end that he may without let or controlement do
whatsoever him pleases: then in this ease violent remedies are to be used,
but with such limitation and restriction as we have before set down, and not
otherwise, least so we might seem rashly to arm the subjects against their
princes.

We ought then in the government of a well ordered estate and Commonweal, The
wise politician in the government of the estate is to imitate the works of God
in nature who by little and little brings great things to perfection.
to imitat and follow the great God of nature, who in all things proceeds
easily and

CHAP. IIII.
FOrasmuch as both cities, citisens, and Commonweales, use commonly to be for
nothing more turmoiled and troubled than by men for the obtaining of offices
and honors, me think this question to be one of the most profitable and
most necessary of any that can be made in matter of estate, Whether it be
better to have annual or perpetual Magistrates in a Commonweal? Than which
question I know not whether there be any amongst them which concern a
Commonweal more harder to decide, or more pleasant to understand, and therefore
not in any wise by us in this place to be omitted. Which I say not as meaning
to take upon me the deciding of this question, but only to touch the reasons
which might well be given both on the one side and the other, leaving the
resolution thereof unto them which heretofore have better sounded the proceeding
and consequence thereof. Neither is it mine intent or purpose, either to
propound and move this question, to give foot unto them which would change the
laws already received, which the subjects ought to hold for good and wholesome
in every Commonweal*

Now the first and strongest reason that is to be had to make the magistrates
and officers Reasons to show that magistrates ought not to be perpetual.
annual, is, for that the first and principal end of every Commonweal ought
to consist in virtue: and that the scope of every good and true law* giver, is
to make his subjects virtuous. Which to attain unto, it behooves him to
propound unto the view Rewards for virtue ought to be unto all men common.
and sight of the whole world, the rewards of virtue, as the mark whereat
every man ought to aim in best sort he can.

Now most certain it is, that honor is no other thing than the reward and
prize of virtue, which neither ought nor can by the counterpoise of profit be
esteemed: whereas

Another point which the wise law giver ought still to have before his eyes,
is, To The root of sedition is by all means to be cut up in a Commonweal
which can hardly be where magistrates and officers be perpetual.
cut up the roots, and to take away the seeds of civil sedition, so to
maintain his subjects in good peace and amity amongst themselves, and one of
them with another. Which is a matter of such weight, as that many have thought
it to be the only end which the good law maker ought to hope after. For
albeit that virtue may oftentimes be banished out of Commonweales, for men to
live in a disordered licentiousness of all kind of voluptuous pleasures: yet
in that all men agree, that there is no more dangerous a plague unto
Commonweales, than civil sedition and discord. Forasmuch as

Now if there were no more but the two reasons before alleged, viz. The
enjoying Perpetuity of offices the caus^ of impunitie of the great officers.
of virtue, with the rewards thereunto due, and the avoiding of sedition, the
greatest plague of a Commonweal; yet were they even sufficient to let, that
offices should not be perpetual, but rather annual, to the end that every
man so having therein part and interest, might so also have occasion to live in
peace. But yet there are farther reasons also, which is, that by such
perpetuity of offices and promotions, not only the unity and concord of
subjects, and the true rewards of virtue are so taken away, but that the due
punishment by the laws appointed for offenders are thereby also impeached, or
rather quite abolished: Whereof the wise law giver ought to have a greater
regard than of the rewards to virtue due* For that the wise and accomplished
man Frater noster est, He is our brother, shall suffice to cover and bury all
the villainies, deceits, and extortion, of the most unjust magistrate that a man
could imagine. So that hardly one of a thousand which had deserved punishment,
should in five hundred years be brought to execution.

But if the magistrates were annual, it is most certain, that the fear to be
called to account, Great magistrat^ and officers in doubt to be called to
account where they are but annual.
would always keep them in awe, and that they would tremble and quake as
often as they heard that thundering threatening which the Tribunes of the people
made to Manlius, Priuatum rationem rerum ab se gestarum redditurum, quoniam
Consulnoluisset, That he being a private man, should give account of such things
as he had done, for that he would not so do being Consul. And indeed what
could a man see more fair, than them which had but a little before administered
justice, and taken charge of the common treasure, with other such public
offices, after that they had put off their robes of dignity, to come in their
common attire as private men, to give an account of Plutarch has so highly
commended the custom of the ancient Romans, who animated the young men to
commence their public accusations against such as had evil acquitted
themselves in their public charges, setting them on as grayhounds upon wolves,
or other wild beasts. In which doing not only the offenders were punished, but
every man else also upon an emulation and strife, as it were endeavored him to
do well; but especially they, who had themselves accused others, as well
assured that there never wanted some, who still right narrowly looked into all
their doings, so that it much concerned them to bear themselves most uprightly
in the whole course of their lives. Which benefits those estates and
Commonweales must neeedes want, which have Claudius wisely renewed an old edict
or law, then grown out of use: which was, That he to whom the government of
any province was by lot fallen (as the manner was) should forthwith, all excuses
set apart, go unto his charge; and that the time of his authority and charge
once expired, he should not forthwith take upon him any other new public
charge or government, to the intent that the evil behavior or extortion of
the magistrates should not by such continuation of their power and authority
remain unpunished. For whatsoever decrees or laws be made, the evil
magistrates would still Evil magistrates most commonly hold together.
keep the power in their hands, and do what they can one for another; in such
sort strengthening themselves, as that is a thing almost impossible to have of
them any reason. Hannibal that great captain to present a request unto the
people of Carthage, To make their judges annual, which before held their
places for term of life, and that none of them should keep his place two
years together, as Liuie reports, whose words we thought good thus here to
set down, Iudicum or do ea tempestate dominabatur Carthagine, eo maxim quod
ijdem perpetui iudices: res, fama, vitaque omnium in illorum potestate erat;
qui vnum eius ordinis, and omnes aduersos habebat. horum in tam impotenti regno
Praetor factus Annibal, vocare ad se Quaestorem; idem pro nihilo habuit; nam
aduersae factionis erat: and quia ex qu^stura in iudices potentissimum ordinem
referuntur, iam pro futuris mox opibus animos gerebant: id indignum ratus
Annibal, viatorem ad prehendendum Quaestorem misit, subductumque in concionem
non ipsum magis quam ordinem iudicum (prae quorum superbia atque opibus nec
leges quicquam essent, nec magistratus) accusauit, and vt secundis auribus
accipi orationem animaduertit, legem extemplo promulgauit pertulitque, The
order or company of the judges (says he) did at that time bear all the sway
at Carthage; and well the more, for that the self same men were still
perpetual judges: every man's wealth, fame, and life, was in their power; he
that had one of them of that order against him, had them al his enemies. In
this their so insolent a reign Hannibal being made Praetor, conuented one of
the Questors, or public receivers before him, which made thereof no reckoning,
for why, he was of the contrary faction unto him: and forasmuch as out of the
Questors choice was still made into the most mighty order of the judges, they
still Hannibal taking for a great indignity, sent a sergeant to lay hands upon
the Questor, and having brought him into the general assembly of the people,
accused not him more than he did the whole order of the judges (through whose
pride and wealth, neither the laws nor the magistrates were (as he said) any
thing at all regarded) and perceiving his speech to be with the good liking of
the people received, forthwith enacted, and proclaimed a law, That the judges
should be every year chosen, and that none of them should be judges two years
together. And thus far he. For why, it was otherwise a thing impossible to
chastise them, a man still having them all his Chr. Thuan, chief justice in
that court, and John Tili, register of the court (who took upon him the
defense of his daughter being absent) were, for alliance only, threescore
judges on the one side, and two and forty on the other, challenged and
rejected* and all upon the same bench. And for this cause it was ordained in
the assembly of the estates John Durande, attorney for that country, That
amongst other his instructions, he should especially move the king, that it
might please him to ordain, that the nie kinsmen or other of alliance unto the
judges, should not from thenceforth be admitted unto the same bench, neither
into the same court. Which same request four years after, was by the estates
of France presented unto the king in the parliament at Orleance, howbeit that
nothing could therein be obtained, neither can be, so long as honors and
preferments are in perpetuity given in the Commonweal. For it is now two
hundred and fifty years since that king Charles the fifth, Philip the Fair
had ordained, That no man should be judge in the That ^o man should be a judge
in his own country.
same country wherein he was borne: as in like case Marcus Aurelius made an
edict, That no man should be governor in his own country. Of which law the
profit was thought so great, as that he would have the same afterward extended
even unto them which were but councillors or assistants unto the governors of
countries: which was a thing then well put in execution, as it is at this
present in Spain, and in most The ordinary judges in Italy strangers.
of the cities in Italy, where the ordinary judge is most commonly a
stranger. Which was also by the ambassadors of Moscouie requested of the
estates of Polonia. Howbeit that the decrees of our kings concerning those
matters, were quickly buried, after that the public offices and charges began
to be with us given for term of life. And Caesar his Lib. 7.
Commentaries, that the ancient Gauls, and namely they of Autun, had amongst
them an inviolable law, which expressly forbad the magistrates to be continued in
their places above one year, and that two of one family could not be
magistrates together, nor yet one of them, so long as the other who had already
been magistrate should live. And that more is, it was always expressly
forbidden, That two of one family might be counselors together, neither yet
one of them, so long as the other who had already so been a counselor was
alive.

Moreover the thing which ought of all others to be most recommended unto all
The great office^ and preferments of the Commonweal given in perpetuity
breeds a carelesnes of the Common good both in the magistrates themselves and
others
subjects in general, and every one of them in particular, is the
preservation of the Commonweal. of the common welfare than of his own. As for
them who already enjoy the public

And yet besides these three, there is another great inconvenience also, in
that offices One man to have many offices and especially in perpetuity, not
good for the Commonweal.
and preferments are in Commonweales granted unto men for term of life: that
is to wit, that some few would have all, and some one would possess himself
of many public charges and offices at once; as it was in ancient time
permitted them in Carthage: which for all that seemed both unto Plato and
Aristotle a thing right dangerous, For that it is an hard matter for one man
well to discharge one office, but well to discharge many no one man can; and is
therefore in every well ordered Commonweal a thing forbidden. Howbeit that
the ambitious desires of men always passes beyond the prohibitions of the
laws, the most unworthy most commonly burning with the hoatest flames of
ambition; not unlike the weak stomach, which is always

Then how much more dangerous is it, to make the magistrates and public
charges perpetual, only to serve the ambitious desires of some, and so to
make the Commonweal subject unto the desire and pleasure of some few? For why,
it is to be feared Campus Old m^n in danger to be thrust off the bridges.
Martius, for the choosing of their chief magistrates, and other their great
officers, certain narrow bridges were in diverse places laid for the citisens
to pass over by, that so the little tables wherein their voices were
contained, might the better be of them received: at which time such as were
threescore years old, were still warned to give draw after them the fall of
many others also, together with the ruin of the whole Ambitious men never
satisfied with honors, oftentimes the cause of great trobles in a Commonweal.
Commonweal* as did Marius, who having passed through all the degrees of
honor, and been six times Consul (which never Roman had been before him) yet
not so content, would needs take upon him the charge of the wars against king
Mithridates (which by lot was fallen unto Sylla) howbeit that he was now
grown extreme old, to the intent to obtain the seventh Consulship, and to
continue a perpetual commanding power unto himself. But Sylla understanding
of the commission given to Marius, and of the authority by a tumultuous
assembly of the people taken from him now absent (and having also an army with
him) contrary unto the law and the custom of their ancestors, straight way
returned to Rome with his partakers, seyzed upon the city, where he made a
most horrible massacre; which afterward in such sort continued, Marius his
faction being by Sylla slain, but even his companions, friends, and kinsmen
also, being most shamefully proscribed, or else banished, and so the Popular
estate brought unto an extreme tyranny. So even for the same occasion three
hundred years before, the Popular estate was there changed into a faction of
an Oligarchie; not for having of offices in perpetuity for term of life, but
only for having continued the charge unto the Decemuiri, or ten Commissioners,
for two years together; men appointed for the reforming and amending of the
laws, who would have so continued the third year also, and by force of arms
still maintained their commission, encroaching upon the liberty of the people,
had they not by force

So by the same means many Popular and Aristocratique estates were changed
into Continuation of great offices oftentimes the cause of the change of the
estate.
Monarchies, or at leastwise into tyrannical governments; for having given the
public charges and commissions unto their magistrates or commissioners, for
longer time than was needful, or for proroguing of them longer than by the law
they should; as to Pisistratus in Athens, to Philon in the city of Argos, to
Cypselus in Corinth, to Dionysius at Syracusa, to Panaetius at Leontium, and to
Caesar at Rome. Which Aemylius Mamercus the Dictator foreseeing, presented a
request unto the people, which passed into the force of a law, whereby it was
ordained, That the Censors power from that Vt scitas quam mihi diuturna imperia
non placeant, That you may know (said he) how little long lasting authority
and power please me. And for the same occasion the law Cornelia, published at
the instance of one of the Tribunes of the people, provided, That it should not
be lawful for any man to seek to have one and the same office more than once
in ten years. Neither missed it much but that Gabinius the Tribune had by the
Senators themselves been slain in the full Senate, for having by his request
made unto the people, procured commission for five Pompey, for the ending of
the Piraticall war: Whereof Dion gives a notable reason, For that (says he)
the nature of man is such, as that a man having for long time borne some
honorable charge, commonly has al other men in contempt and disdain, neither
can well endure to live in subjection after he has for a long time commanded.
Which thing Cassiodorus almost in the same sense writes, Antiquitas,
prouinciarum dignitatem voluit annua successione reparari, vt nec diutina
potestate vnus in solesceret, and multorum prouectus gaudia reperiret,
Antiquity (says he) would the honor of the provinces to be repaired with
annual succession, in such sort as that one man should neither grow insolent
with long power, and preferment be a comfort to many. And happily it was not one
of the least causes that

But how then comes it to pass, that even children by way of complaint sue
to Great inconveniences ensuing by making of offices and dignities hereditarie.
be maintained and kept in the possession of the honors and estates that their
fathers and grandfathers had? As in fact has been seen in the constables of
Campaign, of Normandy, and of Britaigne: in the marshals De la Foy, as they
term them, in the great chamberlaines, and other infinite, even unto the
sergeants sees of Normandy, as I have before noted. And namely in Aniou,
Touraine, and Maine, the house of Roches had made the offices of bailifes and
stewards hereditarie, had not Jews the ninth revoked them, and made them
mutable and iusticiable, by his decree in the year 1256. Thomas Moore,
chancellor of England, who in the Commonweal by him devised, makes all the
magistrates and officers therein annual, some from six monethis to six
months, and othersome from two months to two months, and all to avoid the
inconveniences which I have before spoke of. And these reasons they for most
part use, which say, That magistrates and officers should not be in a
Commonweal perpetual.

But now on the other side, they which maintain it to be more for the public
The great inconveniences ensuing of having the offices in a Commonweal still
annual or changable.
good, to make the estates and offices in a Commonweal perpetual, allege,
That nothing can be well done in a years space, when as the magistrate must
depart out of his wars begun be delaid, judgments interrupted, actions of
the wicked abolished, punishments Scipio Africanus, the people, the Senate, and
the magistrates, found themselves therewith greatly entangled; Mutis (says
Liuie) contentionibus and in Senatu, and ad populum acta res est: postremo eo
deducta vt Senatui permitterent: patres igitur iurati (sic enim conuenerat)
censuerunt vt Consules prouincias inter se compararent, The matter (says he)
was with great contention debated, Scipio understanding of the decree of the
Senate, whereby one of the Consuls was forthwith to succeed him, without farther
delay concluded a peace, more to the advantage of the enemy than he would
otherwise have done, if he had not feared least his successor should have
carried away from him the glory and honor of his victory, as it is reported
himself to have oftentimes said. So the war against king Mithridates was
protracted Epaminondas and Pelopidas, whose charge expired even at such time as
they were to give the enemy battle: who yet nevertheless seeing themselves
to have an advantage of the enemy, and that they could not without the most
manifest danger of the state leave their charge, gave battle, and so obtained a
most glorious victory, whereby the Thebans with their allies were

And yet there is another reason which might well stay the preferments and
offices of the commonweal from being mutable, which reason Tiberius the
emperor had The reason why Tiberius the Emperor would not have the great
officers often changed.
still in his mouth, at such time as men complained him to be the first that
had for many years together continued the estates and offices still in the
same men's hands: I do it (said he) to the end that they which are already full
of the blood of the people, may as Horseleeches, full and ready to burst, give
the subjects some release, fearing lest such as should come new and all an
hungered, should without remorse or respect at all, draw out the rest of their
blood, gnaw their bones, and suck out the very marrow that was yet left in the
subjects. And this unto me seems to be a reason of right great importance:
Non parcit populis regnum breue, a short reign spares not the people. And yet
in the reign of Tiberius, offices and other places of command, were usually
given and not sold; obtained, but not craved, upon men of desert bestowed, and
not shamefully set to sale to them that would give most: which opinion of
Tiberius ought to be of much more force in such places as where port sale is
made of all preferments and offices of the common weal: for it is to be
presumed (as says Alexander Seuerus the emperor, and after him Jews the 12)
that the merchants of offices must sell by retaile, and as dear as they can,
that which they had before bought in gross.

And beside that which we have already said, how is it possible that he should
command with such authority as beseems a magistrate, which sees that by and
by after

In brief, if we would have (as all men ought to wish to have) magistrates
wise, stout, and well experimented in the charge committed unto them, we must
wish them to be perpetual: for why it is impossible that new magistrates should
be expert in their charge the first year, considering that the life of man is
right short, and the nature of authority and power most difficult, whether it
be for the training up of the subjects in wars, or for the maintaining of
them in peace; for the administration of Justice, or for the mannaging of the
public revenues: all which cannot in short time of new magistrates be either
thoroughly learned, or duly practiced. For as the ruin of families commonly
comes of new seruitors, even so the falls of Commonweales also proceeds from
New lords new laws.
new magistrates, who still bring in new devises, councels, laws, factions,
customs, edicts, styles, judgments, ceremonies, actions, and in brief a new
change of all things in the Commonweal; whereof ensues a contempt of the old
laws and customs, as also of the magistrates themselves. All which may well be
seen in the ancient Commonweals of of the Greeks and Romans, wherein the new
magistrates were no sooner placed, but they forthwith forged new edicts and
laws, so to cause themselves to be the more spoken of; without regard whether
they were profitable for the Commonweal or not: propounding only this unto
themselves, how to leave a remembrance of their names unto posterity: whereas
men so sick of ambition, are still more desirous of a great than of a good
name. Howbeit that it is not needful to use many arguments to prove and show
Plato would that the offices in his Commonweal should still for the most part
be perpetual. So that in brief we see the reasons by us alleged,

Now it is not like so many people and nations to have failed of the light of
nature,

But as men oftentimes err in the maintaining of the societies of men* and
government Two great errors oftentimes committed in the government of
Commonweales.
of cities and Commonweales; so do they in two notable things also especially:
whereof the one is, That they too narrowly look into the inconveniences of a
law, without weighing of the good that ensues thereof: the other, That they
run from one extreme into another; and so as it were shunning the water, run
all headlong into the fire, when as they should have stayed in the midst.
Plato would, that the magistrates in his Commonweal should be all perpetual:
which extremity seemed unto Aristotle blameworthy, who therefore running
himself into the other extremity, and rejecting the opinion of his master
Plato, opened a way unto all the citisens, to all Michael hospitalis
chauncelour of France.
embraced the opinion of Aristotle, has endeavored himself by all means to
change all the offices into commissions, to be holden but by sufferance: who
never had other thing in his mouth, and yet without any distinction in what
form of Commonweal this change were, without harm to be received.

Now most certain it is, that Commonweales in nature contrary, are by
contrary Commonweales in nature contrary, by contrary means to be also
maintained.
laws and means to be also governed and maintained (as we have oftentimes
before said, and yet must often times say) so that the rules and orders proper to
maintain and preserve Popular estates, serve to the ready ruin and overthrow
of Monarchies and sole governments. The Popular estates are maintained by
Annual magistrates best in a popular Commonweal.
continual change of officers, to the end that every man according to his
quality might have part in the offices, according as they have part in the
sovereignty, which can in no wise be where offices be given in perpetuity.
Besides that equality the nurse of Popular estates is by the annual
succession of magistrates the better maintained, and the long custom of
continual command give not an appetite or desire to some one or other
ambitions citisen to aspire unto the sovereignty alone. The policy and craft
of tyrants.
And therefore tyrants, who are no less hated and feared of their subjects,
than they themselves fear and hate them, having little or no trust or
confidence in them, for most part guard themselves with strangers only, and
some few of their own subjects,

But the Royal Monarch, who is in such sort to entreat his subjects, as is the
good father The magistrates in a royal monarchy some perpetual and some
annual.
his loving children, albeit that he be no more bound unto man's laws, than are
the other Monarchs, yet will he nevertheless of himself establish decrees
and laws, for the placing and displacing of magistrates and officers, to the
end they might so be holden; dividing the honors and rewards of virtue not to
all indifferently, without discretion, but unto such as deserve the same;
having still more respect unto the experience charge: as did the most wise
emperor Augustus unto a great number of the Senators, That the colleges and
companies of judges ought to be pe^tuall.
or Commonweal may be the more religiously distributed, he shall for the
administration thereof appoint perpetual colleges and companies of Judges,
and especially of such as are without appeal to judge of the lives, fame, and
goods of the subjects: not only that these judges should so be the better
experimented (as well for hearing the opinion of diverse, as for their long
exercise in judgment:) but also that so Pliny says: Nemo omnes, neminem
omnes vnquam fefellerunt: melius omnibus quam singulis creditur. No man ever
deceived all men, neither did all m^n ever deceive any man: better it is to
believe all than one. Howbeit, yet that by the wisdom and virtue of some one
good judge, a whole company, or bench of judges of the same court is
oftentimes relieved: and their factions and secret practices broken; or being
otherwise good men, yet misse-enformed by false accusers and petty Potier a
learned judge of great integrity and virtue: who has left unto his country
his two sons inheritours of their fathers virtues: one of them Master of the
Requests: and the other, Secretary of the Finances; in virtue not inferior
unto their father. Besides that, the experience of many worlds of years has
given us sufficiently Aristotle thinks it better to have every judges opinion
considered of apart by it self: and that he says to have been the usual
manner of judgment in many the cities of the Greeks. Now the Romans to have
holden both these fashions and manners of judgments Asconius Paedianus is the
Author, where he says: Aliam esse rationem cum vniuersi Iudices constituunt,
aliam cum singuli sententiam ferunt, It to be one manner of proceeding when all
the judges together determine of a matter, and another when every one of them
deliver their opinions apart. Wherefore causes are more indifferently and
uprightly discided in Europe by a competent number of Better many judges then
one alone.
judge of a Province according to his will and pleasure determines of all
appeals made unto him from the other particular and inferiout judges in that
province. And albeit that in Grand Caire (one of the greatest cities of the
world) there be four judges which have their diverse and separate
jurisdictions, and every one of them have also their diverse Deputies, who judge
also of causes apart and by themselves, yet are the appeals still brought unto
the first judge chief of the four; who alone without any companion or
assistant by him self at his pleasure discideth all appeals: whom it is no
great matter for him to win, that stands in his good grace, or that has
the greatest presents to give him. Howbeit that the two Cadeleschers are the
chief of all

Now we have before said that in the royal Monarchy all the Magistrates and
Officers Good that inferior Magistrates and officers should be perpetual.
should neither be perpetual, neither all still mutable: For that it is not
needful to change the mean officers, as Clarks, Sergeants, Vshers, Notaries,
and such other like, who for that they have no power or authority to command,
cannot hurt the Estate: and yet nevertheless the experience of their charge
which cannot but in long time and by great practice be got, requires that they
should be perpetual. And so That Senators and Counselors of estate ought to
be still perpetual.
been in Rome, in Lacedemonia, and amongst the Areopagi in Athens, perpetual:
and so I think they ought to be every where else, so that in the perpetual
change of mutable magistrates, the Senate should still be constant, firm, and
immutable, and that upon it the other mutable offices and magistrates should as
upon a most sure slay rest: which was not so well provided for by * Plato, who
would have his Senate to be Lib. de Legibus Cap. 174.
every year by lot chosen. But now as for such great magistrates and officers
as acknowledge no command more than the sovereign Princes alone, whither it
be in martial affairs, the administration of justice, or the charge of the
public receipt if the royal Monarch shall keep them but one, two, or three
years in their charge at the most, he shall so leave open a way unto his
justice, for the examining of their actions, and by the same means shall cause
the wicked and corrupt magistrates to quake, standing always in dread to be
called to give an account of their doings. And for that Magistrates and Officers
are not to be changed all at once (for that all sudden chaunges in a
Commonweal are dangerous) and that the public actions be not interrupted,
the change of such great Magistrates as are in corporations and colleges

But yet generally in every Commonweal this rule has always place without
exception, A general and necessary rule to be kept in every Commonweal.
viz. That the perpetual Magistrates and Officers should have either no power
at all, or else very little power to command, or else some companion joined
with them: and that they to whom great power is given, have the same but for a
short time, also lest the wicked by briberie mounted unto the more hie degrees
of honor, should Jews the ix, and Philip the fair, for the chastising of the
officers, and the calling of them to account.

Now some difficulties concerning the changing of Magistrates and Laws are by
us before set down, and more I suppose will be imagined: yet were it
unreasonable to look into the discommodities of a law (and so for the same to
reject it) without consideration No law so good but that it draws after it
some discommoditie.
also of the profits thereof, seeing that there is no law so good (as says C^o
the Censor) which draws not after it some incommodities. And in mine opinion
that law may always be accounted good and profitable, if the good which may
ensue That a good law is not to be changed for some one discommoditie ensuing
thereof.
thereof be manifest, and greater then the harm that is to be feared thereof:
wherein Dangerous to change all the chief magistrates of a Commonweal at once.
but so falling into such dangers as they before thought not of, straight
ways blame the laws, and often times change the same, when as in truth they
should have accused and changed them selves. So some good Princes evil
advised often times to their harm cancel a good Law for some one incommoditie
they have seen therein* Whereof we will use no other example then that of
Jews the xj, who coming to the Crown at once displaced all his fathers
ancient seruitours, and removed also the princes his nie kinsmen from the
government of the state: who therefore with a wonderful consent conspired with
the enemy against him, and brought him to such a strait, adjudged, and the
parties condemned. Which edict he commanded to stand in Charles. And albeit
that he could not so bind the hands of his successor, yet so it is
nevertheless, that this his decree and law has ever since been inuiolably
kept, although the ancient clause, So long as it shall please us, remain
still in all letters of office. Which words declare no perpetual power to be
given unto the magistrates or officers, but by sufferance only, except by law
or custom it be otherwise provided. Yet still remains that idle clause, that
thereby it may be understood, all power and authority to have in ancient
times been given by our kings during their pleasure, and so to have of the
magistrates been holden but by sufferance only. And albeit that in the reign
of Philip the Fair this string was again touched, for the giving of offices
in perpetuity, Philip Valois revoked the commissions, and ordained, That from
that time forward the royal offices should be perpetual; which well
declares them before to have been mutable at the pleasure of the kings,
albeit that the officers had not forfeited them. And amongst those praises
which they give unto king Robert, one of the greatest is, That he never
displaced officer, if he had not for some foul and infamous fact before
forfeited his office. Whereby it is to be gathered, king Robert his ancestors
to have used other laws and customs.

But yet happily it may seem unto some, that if offices should still be given
with that clause, During the Princes pleasure, the magistrates would better
discharge their charges for the hope they should have by this mean to continue
still in their places, proceeding That offices in a royal Monarchy are rather
to be bestowed by order of law, than by the Princes will and pleasure only.
this bestowing of offices during pleasure, sauoureth somewhat of tyranny, or
of a Lordlike government, rather than of a Royal Monarchy; which (so much as
possible is) should by laws, and not by the princes will and pleasure only
be governed:

The learned Budeus who was of opinion that it were best to have the magistrates
and offices still changeable, without having regard unto the law made by Jews
the xi. has holden, That in ancient time the Presidents and counselors of
the parliament of Paris were but annual: and that the solemn oath which they
still take the 12. day of november, and the letters patents which they still
are to have from the king for the opening of the Parliament, show sufficiently
that their estates were not perpetual, but still at the pleasure of the prince
to be revoked, and so to be by them holden but by sufferance: and so by these
reasons drew many to be of the same opinion with him, who The erection of the
parliament of Paris.
had they but turned over the records of the court, and of the chamber of
accounts, they should have found that that Parliament which before was
ambulatorie and moveable, and which had no power but by commission, was by
Philip the long ordained to be an ordinary Court, with ordinary power,
circuit, and jurisdiction; in the erection whereof was expressed that it
should still have therein one or two Presidents, of whom the first was the
Earl of Burgundy the kings nie kinsman, as in like sort the President in the
Imperial chamber, is always one of the princes of the Empire. And so for a long
time also the President of the court of Paris was still a martial man and not
a gown man as he now is: and even yet at this present the Great Praetor of the
court of Paris, whom we call the chief President, is still honored with the
quality and Miles, or a soldier, although he never drew sword: which title
the other judges of that court have not, who then were but three score, but now
are an hundred and fifty. Whereby it is plain the court of Paris so founded
to have an ordinary and perpetual power, neither to have need of the Princes
annual rescripts, or letters patents for the disciding and determining of
controversies. Howbeit that king Henry the second coming into the Parliament
for the publishing of certain Edicts and laws, which in that court could
hardly find passage (having it put into his mouth by certain flatterers) said
openly, That the Parliament had at all no power, if it pleased not him by
sending of his letters Patents every year to give opening unto the same; which
his speech being dead neither change their attire, nor use any mourning
garments, or other Jews the eleventh, in such sort as that their power is not
only ordinary, but perpetual also, not only in the whole bodies of
themselves, but even in every one of the members, officers, and ministers of
the said Courts of Parliament. The giving of offices during the princes
pleasure not to be discommended.


And yet for all that is not the manner of those Princes to be discommended,
who unto their Officers and Magistrates give their power but by sufferance,
which they (if cause be) at their pleasure again take from them, as the kings
of England have used to do. For albeit that the ancient and modern
Commonweales, especially the Popular and Aristocratique (more straightly bound
unto the laws than are Monarchies) Octacilius the Consul, who at the request
of Fabius Maximus was removed from his charge, as a man not sufficient for the
mannaging of so great and dangerous a war as the State had then in hand.
Neither had they for the removing of their magistrate, regard only if he had in
any thing trespassed, and so deserved to be removed; but even unto the
insufficiency of him also, whither Lucius Torquatus chosen the third time
Consul excused himself before the people for the infirmity of his eyes;
saying, That it was not reason to put the government of the Commonweal into
his hands, who could not see but by other men's eyes. But O how many are there
of the blind, deaf, and dumb, not having in themselves any light of nature,
neither wisdom, nor experience so much as to govern themselves, who are not
yet content to guide the sails and tackles, but desire also to lay hands even
upon the very helm also of the Commonweal?

Now that which we have said concerning the mean that ought to be kept in the
change and continuation of Magistrates and Officers, has not only place in
royal Monarchies, but even in Popular and Aristocratique estates also, where
the offices That in every commonweal there ought to be some estates and
magistrates perpepetuall.
almost all, or for the most part, ought to be every year, or from two years
to two years still mutable: as they do among the Swissers, and diverse other
Commonweals. Yet nevertheless for the preservation of the same, there must
still be some estates in the Commonweal perpetual: as namely those whose
experience and wisdom is always necessary for the stay of the rest, such as
be the Counselors of estate: And this is it, for which the Senate in Rome, in
Athens, and in Lacedemonia, was still perpetual. keep this mediocritie or
mean proper unto the royal estate. And so for the same Jews the xij,
delivered from the most cruel tyranny of County Valentinus Borgia) taking
order that their Duke should from that time forward be perpetual, to the
intent that the Commonweal before in perpetual motion and change of all their
estates and offices, might yet have some thing firm and stable whereupon to
rest and stay it self: which good order being in short time after by the most
turbulent Florentines abolished, they fell again into greater tumuls

CHAP. V. Whether the unity and concord of Magistrates amongst themselves be
good and wholesome for the Commonweal, or not?
THis question, viz. Whether it be good that the magistrates and officers of a
Commonweal should be of accord, or else at discord and variance among
themselves? may perhaps seem altogether needless and vain. For who ever
doubted but that it was always expedient, yea and necessary too, that the
Magistrates in every Commonweal Reasons to show that magistrates ought to be at
un tie and concord among themselves.
should be of one and the same mind? to the end that they all together might
with one consent and heart embrace and seek after the public good: And if so
it be (as wise men have always thought) that a well ordered Commonweal ought
to resemble a man's body, wherein all the members are united and conjoined with
a marvelous bond, every one of them doing their office and duty; and yet
nevertheless when need is, one of them still aideth another, one of them
releeueth another; and so all together strengthen themselves, to maintain the
health, beauty, and welfare of the whole body: but if it should happen them
to enter into hatred one of them against another; and that the one hand should
cut the other, or the right foot supplant enmity, until that at length all
break out into open civil war, all for the maintenance Plutarch says) her
suitors enter into such a jealousy and passion, as that desiring every one of
them to have her to himself, they so in stead of loving and embracing of her,
most cruelly rent her in pieces amongst them. And what good success may a man
expect of an army, or what victory is to be hoped for over the enemy, where
the captains and commanders are at discord among themselves? or what justice
is to be looked for, where the judges are divided into factions? Agesilaus king
of the Lacedaemonians (albeit that he was one of the most famous of them that
ever was) to impair the credit and authority of Lysander whom he hated,
reuersed all his judgments, and gave sentence quite contrary, not so much for
the iniquity of the cause (as he himself said) as in despite of him his
enemy only. And to make the matter short, most certain it is, that
dissentions and civil wars (the capital plagues of Commonweales) take foot,
root, increase, and nourishment, of nothing more than of the hatred and enmity
of the magistrates among themselves.

But now they which more subtly reason of these matters, deem to the
contrary, Contrary reasons to show that it is good for the Commonweal, that
magistrates should be at discord and variance among themselves.
the health, and welfare of the Commonweal to be best preserved and kept by
the discord of the magistrates. For why (say they) the force and nature of
virtue is such, as that it cannot be contrary unto virtue; neither that good
men, although they be at never so great odds, can yet be enemies among
themselves: but being provoked by the injuries of the wicked their adversaries,
do still well the more and more increase and flourish: neither is the valor of
worthy men any where more evident and manifest, than Taxilas king of the
Indians had by his ambassadors freely and without resistance offered his
kingdom unto Alexander the Great, (then bearing down all the kingdoms of the
East before him) if so be he wanted wealth; and withal refused not to receive
wealth also at his hands, if he had of it too much: Alexander glad of such a
match, said unto him, If we must thus contend and combat together, it shall
never be said, that you shall take this point of honor from me, as to be
accounted more magnificall, more courteous, or more royal, Tullus Hostilius
king of the Romans, said unto Metius Suffetius Dictator of the Albanians, The
civil discords which thou obiectest unto us, we deem them as profitable to
our city; for we strive together, whether of us shall better or more earnestly
fight for the good of the Commonweal.

Now if contention and emulation be thus good and profitable amongst valiant
and good citisens, and wholesome for Commonweales, how much more then ought it
to be thought necessary for most base and abject men, for the stirring of them
up to virtue, The fruit of ^oes.
and deterring of them from vice. For of all the great profits which men use to
reap Philip Commines in England, that whilst the great lords slew or condemned
one another, the poor people in the mean while remained safe from their
invasion. Which was the wise council of Cincinnatus, seeing the Consul Appius
openly to withstand the people to hinder them for the doubling the number of
their Tribunes: Let be (said Cincinnatus) for the more they shall be, the worse
they will agree. And right needful oftentimes it was the power of the Tribunes
to be broken and weakened by their own division, Cincinnatus therein said
wisely, for so the Commonweal stood and flourished, the Tribunes oftentimes
being at discord and varience among themselves, which (they being at unity and
concord) would have in a moment fallen: and so long it well stood until that
Pub. Clodius a most wicked man, about four hundred years after presented a
request unto the people, which passed into the force of a law, whereby it was
ordained, That from thenceforth the opposition of one of the Tribunes should
not hinder the proceeding of the rest of his fellow Tribunes. And therefore Cato
the Censor, the beauty of the Roman wisdom (and one to whom was given the
chief praise for wisdom and virtue amongst the Romans) could neither Mar.
Bibulus to buy his Consulship, and the voices of the people, to the intent to
oppose him against Caesar his known enemy, who had cunningly set up Luceius
his friend (whom the Senate would have had excluded) that so he might do all
things as he thought good, his friend and fellow in office agreeing thereunto.
And not to go farther, we have herefore the witness of Julius Caesar, who in
his Commentaries Lib. ^.
says, The Gauls to have had a most ancient custom amongst them, to stir
up their great lords one of them against another, to the intent that the common
people (which were as he reports but slaves) might so be safe and free from
their Lycurgus the wise law giver also, who therefore himself set dissension
betwixt the two kings of Lacedemonia, and appointed also, That there should
always two enemies be sent ambassadors for the Claudius Nero should carry
away the Consulship, an hot and sturting man, and withal a most valiant and
courageous captain to oppose against Hannibal: the Senate (I say) procured to
have joined unto him for his companion or fellow in office Liuius Salinator an
old captain, and a man of Liuius, now a little too cold for the wars: who so
joined and united together, gained a most notable victory against Hannibal,
which was the ruin of the Carthaginians, and the preservation of the Roman
estate. These two men also afterward were by the people made Censors together;
who still at discord, noted one of them another of infamy, a thing never
before seen: and yet they thus still at variance, were in all men's judgments
two of the most famous and virtuous men that then were in Rome. With like
wisdom the Romans joined together Pabius Maximus, and Marcus Marcellus, in
their wars against Hannibal, both of them right great and most expert
captains, but the one of them being a cold, and

And these reasons may on both sides seem probable, but what in truth is to
be The resolution of the former question.
resolved upon, is not so easy to judge which to do, not only the quality of
the magistrates themselves, but the diverse forms of Commonweales, is to be
also considered. And yet I suppose, that in every kind of Commonweal it is
good that the inferior magistrates and officers, being under the power and
authority of the greater, should still be at variance and discord among
themselves, and that more in a Popular estate than in any other: For that the
people having none but the magistrates to govern them, is most easy to be
pilled and polled, if the magistrates be not one of them by another controlled.
And in a Monarchy it is expedient also, that even the greatest magistrates
should sometime be at odds, considering that there is a sovereign prince to
chastise and correct them; so that he be not mad, furious, or a child, or one
otherwise subject Scipio Affricanus, the elder, and Fabius Maximus: betwixt
Scipio the younger, and Cato; betwixt Liuius and his companion Nero; or the
contention of Lepidus with Fuluius, of Marcus Scaurus with Catulus; or of
Themistocles with Aristides: whose notable contention for virtues sake was
always unto the Commonweal wholesome. But if the greatest magistrates in a
Popular estate be evil and wicked men, or that their ambition be founded
Marius and Scylla, betwixt Caesar and Pompey, Augustus and Mark Anthony,
Thucidides and Pericles. And yet much more dangerous such contentions are in an
Aristocratie, than in a Popular Commonweal: For that the governors, which are
always the fewer in number in an Aristocratique estate, and yet command the
rest, have still to do with the people: who upon the first occasion take up
arms against their lords, if they once enter into quarrels. For a few lords in
an Aristocratie are easily drawn into two parts, by the great magistrates, who
if they fall into sedition among themselves, as also with the people, it

But in every Commonweal it is expedient and necessary, that the numbet of
the That the number of the sovereign magistrates in a Commonweal should still
be odd.
sovereign magistrates, or of them which come near unto the sovereignty,
should still be odd, to the end that the dissension amongst them might still be
composed by the greater part or number of them; and that the public actions be
not by the equality of them hindered or let. And that is it for which the
Cantons of Vrie, Vnderuald, cannot be where only two bear the sway, except
they had alternatiue power to viz. of Bases, Trebles, and Means, cunningly
confused and mixed betwixt both: even so also of the mighty, and of the weak,
of the hie, and of the low, and others of the middle degree and sort betwixt
both; yea even of the very discord of the magistrates among themselves Caesar
making sharp war upon them of Beauuis, having in his army two captains
deadly enemies one of them unto the other, commanded them to turn all that
their hatred upon their enemies, who so in his very sight with great emulation
gained a notable victory over their enemies, which their dissension had given
unto their enemies, had they not had a general above them, who kept them both
in awe. Which as it oftentimes happens, so did it also chance to Jews the
twelfth the French king, who gained the estates of Bolonia, and overthrew the
Popes army, by reason of the discord betwixt the cardinal of Pauie, and the
duke of Vrbin, who through jealousy of one of them against the other, so
hindered and entangled themselves, Fabius Maximus, and Minutius the Roman
generals, which had undoubtedly given Hannibal the victory, and the Romans the
overthrow, had not Fabius for the good of the Commonweal forgot his
displeasure, and by his valor delivered his rash companion together with the
Roman army, from a most certain and present destruction.

Wherefore the contentions of the greater Magistrates are most dangerous in a
The contention of the great magistrates most dangerous in a popular Commonweal:
and their too great friendship to be no less perilous also.
Popular estate or Commonweal, (where there is no other head to command them
but the multitude) and especially if he seek how to serve their own proud and
ambitious desires, rather then the common good. And therefore the Roman Senate
seeing Marcus Lepidus, and Q. Fuluius mortal enemies chosen Censors together,
went unto them in great number to persuade them now at length for the
Commonwealth sake to become friends, or at least wise to suspend their enmity,
so the better to attend unto their office, being the fairest and of greatest
importance in the whole Commonweal. The like whereof we read to have been
often done by the Senate, in setting the busy Tribunes, and proud Consuls
agreed, at such time as their dissentions seemed to tend unto the danger of
the State. But as it is not good that the greatest magistrates in a Popular
estate should be too great enemies; so also is it not convenient that they
should be too great friends, especially if they be not good men, and that for
the Cato seeing Pompee, Caesar, and Crassus so straightly allied together, and
that they so conjoined, were too strong for all the rest of the people; cried
out aloud the Commonweal by such combyning of the great ones to be bought and
sold; foreseeing as it were out of a watch tower the storms and tempests
thereof then at hand. Yet true it is that of two extremities it is better that
the great Lords and magistrates in a Popular or Aristocratique estate should be
of one accord then at discord: for that being of accord, they will always like
better to command others, and so in some sort or other to preserve the Estate
such as it is, than together with the Commonweal, quite to overthrow their
own power, whereunto their discord would bring them, when they had once given
Liuie said of Caluinus the Campanian: Improbum hominem, sed non ad extremum
perditum, qui mallet incolumi quam euersa patria dominari, A wicked man (says
he) but not altogether desperate, who had rather to rule over his country yet
standing upright, then over the same overthrown. So albeit that Mar. Tullius
said, The three-headed alliance of Caesar, Crassus, and Pompee to be a thing
greatly to be feared: Yet when he saw Crassus the moderator with the Roman
legions slain in Chaldea, and Iulia Caesar's daughter Pompee his wife by
untimely Philip. 2.
death taken away, he cried out: Vtinam Cn. Pompei, amicitiam cum Caesare
nunquam coisses, aut nunquam diremisses, I would to god, O Pompee, (said he)
thou Caesar become master of all. And as for that which Caesar writes, our
ancestors the ancient Gauls to have thought the dissension of their princes
and great governors to have been profitable unto their estates, I can hardly
be persuaded therein: when as by the report even of Caesar himself, the
dissension of the princes and of the estates of France, (then for the most
part governed by Aristocraties) wrought their own destruction; some of them
praying aid of the Germans, Philip Comines writes; yea at such time as I was
Ambassador in England, I understood by some of the inhabitants there, them to
fear nothing more then the factions of the Nobility and their civil discord:
for the better appeasing and repressing whereof they have often times used to
assemble the high court of Parliament, whereunto all the States are assembled.
And thus we have declared in what sort the Magistrates ought to behave them
selves toward their Prince, as also how they ought to bear them selves one of
them

CHAP. VI.
IT may seem unto some that this question not before reasoned of, has not in
it any doubt, and that it is not needful for us farther to enter there into,
considering that all the ancient and wise polytitians are of accord, that
kings were never for other thing established than for the administration of
justice, as says Herodotus speaking of the Medes; and Cicero likewise of the
Romans; Kings first established to judge his subjects.
as also we read that the first kings of Greece, Aeacus, Minos, and Radamanthus
had no title more honorable then the title of Judges; who for Jupiter an
everlasting power and office for judging of the ghosts in hell. And albeit that
Homer calls princes the pastors, or feeders of the people. Yet so it is that
the title of Judges has long time after him continued in the person of the
princes of Athens, who had the sovereign government for ten years. And not
only the princes of the Medes, the Greeks, and Latins, but even the Generals
also, who were as sovereigns amongst the Hebrews, had no other title then the
title of Judges: And at such time as they demanded of Samuel (now wearied with
age) a king, they joined thereunto, that he might judge them, as other kings
did their people: Which shows sufficiently that the principal charge which
they had, was to do justice themselves in person. Reasons to show that princes
themselves in person ought to administer justice unto their subjects.
subjects, is the mutual obligation which is betwixt the Prince and his
subjects: For as the subject owes unto his lord all duty, aid, and
obedience; so the Prince also owes unto his subjects justice, guard, and
protection: so that the subjects are no more bound to obey the prince, than is
the prince to administer unto them justice. Neither is it sufficient to have it
done by an other man, as by the Magistrate at the Princes command, seeing that
the subjects being commanded to yield their faith and obedience unto the
prince, cannot do it by their Deputies, but only by themselves in person; and
that this obligation betwixt the Prince and the subject is reciprocal. Howbeit
that it is less inconvenient that the vassal should give his faith and homage
unto his Lord The great good that ensues when princes in person themselves do
justice unto their subjects.
more hardly to be borne, than is a simple wrong or injury. Whereas to the
contrary when the subjects see their Prince to present him self in person
unto them to do them justice, they go away half contented, albeit that they
have not that which they desired, or at least wise they will say, The king has
seen our request, he has heard our difference, he has taken the pains to
judge our cause. And if so be that the subjects be by their king seen, heard,
or understood, it is almost incredible, how much

But not to rest altogether upon reason and arguments, we will also use the
examples Examples of great Princes, who themselves in person administered
justice unto their subjects.
herein of the most wise and noble princes. What man was there amongst men to
be in wisdom compared with Solomon? And yet we read, That the only prayer
that he made unto God, was to obtain wisdom wherewith rightly to judge his
people, which his prayer was so acceptable unto God, as that he seemed
therefore most plentifully, and to the great worlds wonder, to have powered out
upon him all the treasures both of wisdom and of knowledge; that so all men
might understand God not only to have inspired him with wisdom, but also that
the office of right judgment was Augustus? And yet nevertheless we read that
he without ceasing was still busied in the administration of justice, insomuch
that even when he was sick, he caused himself to be carried in his
horselitter to do justice. Howbeit that that was the ordinary vacant time of
the Roman emperors, who for the administration of justice were commended above
all the princes of the world, A notable example of the great emperor Adrian
for the doing of a poor old woman justice.
even so far, as that a poor old woman to whom the Great emperor Adrian
refused to answer her preferring unto him a request, excusing himself, That
he was not then at leisure, Reign no longer then (said she) but discharge thee
of thy charge thou bear. Whereunto the emperor having not what to answer,
presently staid and did her justice. Pliny the younger says) there is no more
noble Philosophy, than to entreat of the public affairs, and to do justice,
putting in practice that which the Philosophers have taught.

Now if the knowledge of that which is right, and the administration of
justice, bring so many and so great profits unto princes; how much greater shall
the same then be, if they To be necessary for a prince to understand of the
affairs of estate.
shall by themselves handle but those things only which are proper unto their
sovereignty? For as for the rest of the civil affairs, a prince may well
commit them unto the magistrates: but the rights of sovereignty, and the
deciding of them, he can in no wise put off, but together with the
sovereignty it self. Surely they are very blind, deaf, and dumb, which
never but by other men's eyes see, and by other men's ears hear, and by another
man's tongue, and that oftentimes a strange tongue also, speak and talk of
such things as are theirs, and most proper unto themselves. Now we have before
showed also, not by the examples of strange nations only, but even by the
examples of our ancestors also, the idle slothfulness of kings, who
committed the mannaging of all their affairs unto their domestical servants,
to have thereby brought both themselves

These arguments and reasons thus by us before alleged, make a fair show unto
them who sufficiently understand not, nor by experience know not, the secrets
of sovereignty, Reasons to show that it is not meet for princes themselves in
person to administer justice unto their subjects.
and hidden knowledge for the maintaining of majesty: But unto me looking
nearer into the matter, they are not sufficient to resolve this question, nor
to maintain, That a prince ought in person himself to administer justice: Yea
unto me it seems not only not necessary, but not profitable unto the
subjects, the prince himself to be unto them the minister of justice. True it
is, that for them so to do, it should be not only profitable, but even
necessary also, if the princes were themselves such as Scylax feigned unto
himself the kings of the Indians to be; that is to say, so much better their
vices unto their subjects? the least vice in a prince being like unto a canker
in Such a prince, such a people.
the manners, unto the doings and sayings of their prince; there being neither
gesture, action, nor countenance in him, be it good or bad, which is not
marked, or counterfaited by them which see him, having their eyes, their
senses, and all their spirits, wholly bent to the imitation of him. So that
Pliny well called the princes life a Perpetual Censorship, whereunto we still
direct and conform our selves. And this is a doctrine from most ancient
antiquity delivered unto all posterity, first by the master of wisdom
himself, and after by Plato, Cicero, Liuie, and Cassiodore, repeated as an
infallible rule, That such as the prince of a Commonweal is, such will the
people also be. Yea Theodoric king of the Goths, writing unto the Senate of
Rome, passes further, using these words, Facilius est errare raturam, quam
dissimilem sui princeps possit Rempublicam formare, An easier thing it is (said
he) for nature to change her course, than for a prince to frame a Commonweal
unlike unto himself. And though examples need not in so plain a matter, yet
we have seen king Francis the first, in this realm, and Mansor, surnamed the
Great, emperor of Affrike and Spain, who both two in diverse times, and in
diverse places, began to have learning and learned men in estimation; when
suddenly the princes, the nobility, the clergy, yea even the soldiers and
artificers, with all the people in general, gave themselves so to learning, as
that there was never found so great a number That an evil prince ought not
much to come abroad for the people to imitat his vices.
that the princes example is of so great force and power for the conforming and
changing of his subjects manners, either to good or bad; great heed is to be
taken, that the prince, except he be by nature well, and by education better
framed and instructed, come not much abroad for the people to behold and
imitat: but if he be evil and wicked, then by all means to be as a popular
and common plague kept out of the sight of his subjects. Yet happily some man may
say, That an evil prince should not therefore abstain or withdraw himself
from public affairs, or from the judgment place or Senate; for that no man
was so bad, but that he has in him some virtues or commendable quality; or
which cannnot at leastwise dissemble some of his vices: of which his virtues
and The subjects still ^eadier to imitate the vices than the virtues of the
prince.
his vices, than his virtues: and so much the rather, by how much the corrupt
nature of man is more prone and inclined unto vice than unto virtue; as also
for that there is but one most strait way which leads unto virtue, whereas on
both sides there are innumerable crooked by-ways and turnings unto vice,
whereinto they may more easily fall, than into the straight and right way of
virtue. In Alexander the Great were many most rare and heroical virtues, yet
so it was, that he greatly blemished the beauty of them, as also of his other
noble acts, by an evil custom that he had to be drunk; wherein he took
such delight, as that he propounded a talent as a prize unto 600 Crowns.
him which could drink most: in which beastly contention and strife forty
together with him which had gained the prize burst and perished; he himself
almost looking on. Mithridates also king of Amasia, imitating of Alexander the
Great herein, surpassed him, that having set up a prize for him that could eat
and drink most, he (as Plutarch says) gained the foul victory in both (if
to be overcome of intemperance and excess be to be accounted at all a
victory.) But to counterfeit virtues, or to dissemble vices, as it has
always seemed a most hard thing unto all men, so has it especially unto
princes, for that they of all others have least learned to command their
desires, to restrain their lusts, to bridle their affection, which he that
knows not how Princes of all others most hardly to counterfeit virtues, or to
dissemble their vices
to do, shall never be a good or cunning dissembler. Dionysius the younger
moved with the fame and virtue of Plato, caused him to be sent for unto
Syracusa, who had no sooner begun to taste of the wisdom, virtue, and learning
of the man, but that in a moment all minstrels, players, drunkards, bauds,
harlots, and such like, were quite vanished out of the princes sight, and the
court so suddenly changed, as if it had been from heaven inspired. But for
that Dionysius had but changed his countenance, and not his mind, and cast out
the allurements of pleasures, but not pleasures themselves; he could not long
dissemble his vices, eithes yet e^dure Plato, who was no sooner gone out of the
court, and disembarqued out of Sicilie, but that the prince forthwith returned
unto his woonted vices, by him before for a while forborne, but not quite
forsaken: at which Francis the elder, for the healing of a wound he had
received in his head, caused his head to be polled, when suddenly after all his
household servants, all the princes, all the nobility, the magistrates, the
artificers, and people of all sorts in general, caused their heads to be from
that time forward polled also, insomuch that if any did from thenceforth use
the old fashion, and account it an indecent thing to be polled, he was
therefore of all men derided: whereas before Peter Lombard bishop of Paris (for
the power and authority which bishops then had above kings) obtained, That it
might be lawful for the common people to wear long hair also. True it is,
that the flatterers of princes help much to conform the manners and fashions
of the people unto those of the princes, they still rather counterfeiting than
imitating even the vices and defects of the prince, whom if they see laugh,
they laugh also, although they know no cause why; if he be lame, they halt
down right also. Alexander the Great, and Alphonsus king of Aragon, being
both wrie necked, Plutarch in the life of Pyrrhus writes. Seeing therefore the
nature of man is inclined to follow the vice of the prince, were it not even to
undo a people, and to ruinat an estate, to thrust still into the sight of the
people a prince evil brought up; and a pottraitor of vices for them to imitat?
And yet it is more dangerous for that for one vice which the prince has,
oftentimes those of his train have an hundred, who every where as they pass,
may alter and mar the good disposition of the people; or like swarms of
flies and caterpillars, who having devoured the leaves, and fruit, do also
leave their spaune behind them, able to insect the fields and trees be they
never so clean and fruitful.

But suppose we the prince not to be vicious (a rare gift, and by the goodness
of God given unto men, when as in every age a tolerable prince is scarcely to
be found) but to be of great virtue and perfection, yea even a man without
fault (howbeit that there is a great space betwixt them which are endued with
virtues, and them which are without vices) yet is it almost a thing impossible,
but that some thing shall at one time or other fall from him, which well noted
may seem unto the people foolish or rediculous: wherein much is derogated from
the reputation and dignity which the subjects ought to have of him. But let us
suppose that also, him to be neither a man evil given, nor foolish; neither
yet so to seem, but to be a man endued with great virtues, and of good Too
much familiarity of a prince with his subjects; not good: and always to be
seen of them in his majesty, a thing unto them dreadful.
education; yet so it is that too ordinary conversation, and too great
familiarity of the subjects with the prince* much diminishes his majesty,
and withal engenders a certain contempt of him: of which contempt proceeds
the disobedience of the subjects unto him and his commands, to the ruin of
the whole estate. And now again to the contrary, if the prince to maintain
his majesty shall ordinarily show himself unto his subjects, in his
greatness, with a terrible port, it may be that so he may be the more of
them redoubted: but it is dangerous least he should be therefore the less
loved. Whereas the love of subjects toward their sovereign is much more
necessary for the preservation of an estate, than is fear; and so much the
more, for that love cannot be without fear to offend him whom we love;
whereas fear may well be, and

And truly unto me more deeply considering of the matter, almighty God (the
How princes are to behave themselves, to be of their subjects both beloved and
fea^ed.
sovereign prince of the whole world) seems to have showed a short way unto
worldly princes (the true images of himself) how they are to communicate
themselves unto their subjects, to be of them both beloved and feared: For the
communicates himself unto men but by visions and dreams, and that but to a
few of the elect and most perfect of them also, men of great integrity of
life. But when he with his own voice published the Ten Commandments, he
caused his fire to be seen heavens high, and the mountains to tremble with
thunder and lightning, with such a dreadful Moses. So that that people of all
others most chosen, had but once almighty God (who shows himself but in
spirit to be seen) himself sounding forth his laws; when as yet for all that
to allure men the more fervently to love him, he at all times, and in all
places and countries, does with great love, and eternal bounty, foster and
cherish all mankind, yea indeed all sort of living creatures, pouring
continually upon them his great and infinite favors, larges, and bounty. If
therefore the wise De Mundo (or of the world) dedicated to Alexander the Great
(and without cause ascribed to Aristotle, as sauouring nothing of his style) a
comparison is made of a sovereign prince unto God; as that the great king of
Persia was still resiant in a proud and stately palace or castle, compassed in
with three high walls, full of all pleasures and delights, most commonly used
to withdraw themselves from the sight of the multitude Tiberius Caesar of all
others the most cunning dissembler, made choice of a most desert island,
wherein he for many years lived in all kind of voluptuous and beastly
pleasures. Which was of him right filthily done, but yet more wisely than they
who with the most odious smell of their loathsome pleasures pollute and defile
as well public as private places: who besides that they offend more by giving
of evil example than by the wickedness it self by them committed, do also
in the minds and conceits of men engender a neglect and contempt of themselves.

Wherefore a prince that wise is, so often as he should show himself unto the
people How a prince is to frame his countenance and speech when he shows
himself unto the people.
(which he should most seldom do) should so prepare himself, as that he may
unto all That the fool himself in holding his peace is accounted wise, how
circumspect and advised ought a prince to be, when he opens his mouth to
speak in public place? considering that his words, his countenance, Tiberius
the emperor, least he should in any thing offend, brought in a new fashion, as
to be spoke unto, and also to give answer by writing, for what matter soever
it was, Moris erat (says Tranquillus) eo tempore principem etiam presentem
scripto adire, The manner (says he) at that time was, with writing to go unto
the prince even then present; to the end that nothing might escape which had
not before been well thought upon. For it is not possible but that they which
speak much in open assemblies, as in the Senate, or before the people, must
many times err: which done by a prince, shall breed contempt, or at leastwise
cause him to be the less esteemed: so that a Grecian (I wot not who) not
unfitly said, That a prince if he be wise should unto the people, or in open
audience no otherwise speak, than he would do in a Tragedy.

But I know that some of contrary opinion unto mine, will say, Is it not the
true estate and office of a prince, to do justice unto his people? to hear
the complaints of his subjects? to see the requests of his own? and by the
mouth of every one to understand of their just grieuances, which are commonly
suppressed, or at leastwise disguised by another man? And why then should the
prince hide himself from his people? talk but with few, and those of his most
inward friends also? or answer nothing unto many, of right asking him of many
things? yea not to be willing so much as to hear his subjects speak? Things
altogether absurd, and not beseeming the majesty of a sovereign The manner of
the kings of Borney.
and children; neither is seen of any, but still speaks unto others by one
of his gentlemen through an hole by a reed or cane which he holds in his
mouth, as he did unto the king Catholic (as we read in the histories of the
Indies:) but my meaning is, How a prince ought but seldom times to converse
with his subjects.
that he should not be much in the assemblies of the people, neither easy to
be spoke withal of all men, not to use much discourse with his subjects,
except with such as are near unto him, or of his familiar acquaintance; not to
take pleasure in jests and taunts, Francis D' Aluarez is to be seen, where he
speaks of the majesty of the Great Negus, Prester John: and in the history
of Leo of Affrike, where he speaks of the king of Tombut, before whom his
subjects appear not, but upon their knees, with dust upon their heads.

Now if any man shall say, That the kings of the East, and of the South are
thus to be honored, for that their subjects are of an abject and a servile
nature; but that they of the North, or of the West, whose subjects be of
greater courage, are not able to endure such a servitude and slavery: this
shall be in due place decided, as also what the nature of every region is: and
yet for all that I see the kings of England, Sweden, Denmark, and Polonia, who
are situat toward the North, much better to maintain the majesty of their
estates with their subjects, than do the kings of France, or the

Now the greatest danger that can come unto a prince, to do all by others,
is, least How the danger least a prince should be dispossessed of his estate by
him whom he puts in trust for the mannaging of his affairs, is to be
prevented.
that they upon whom he should so discharge himself, should take from him his
estate and sovereignty, and so possess themselves thereof: which for all that
has never chanced in this realm, but only under king Childeric, surnamed the
Loutish* since the time that the kings of France showed themselves unto their
subjects in their majesty but once a year, viz. the first of May; as we read
in our own histories, and also in Cedrinus a Greek author, who says, That
the ancient kings of France took no other pleasure but to eat and drink,
leaving the mannaging of all their affairs unto the great Tiberius having made
Seianus too great; and so Commodus, Perennius; Theodosius the second,
Eutropius; Justinian, Bellisarius; Xerxes, Artaebanus; and Childeric, Pepin:
committing unto them alone the mannaging of all their affairs, with the guard
of their persons, they fell into the dangers which we spoke of,

As for the administration of justice, and the hearing of the complaints and
griefs of Justice better to be administered by good and sufficient magistrates,
than by the prince himself.
the subjects, it shall be always better provided by good and sufficient
magistrates, than by the prince in person himself. For who knows not so many
good parts to be requisite in a good judge, as are not all well to be found in
the most sufficient prince in the world? Yea who knows not so many things to
be within the compass of the duty of a good judge, as may ouerslip and
escape even the most skillful and careful men? whereof many must needs escape
the prince before he can perceive them, and so many times the very substance
of the matter consists in that which is ouerslipped. Augustus, Traian,
Adrian, Marcus Aurelius, Alexander Seuerus, and the other Roman emperors are
reported to have had: who were always accompanied with most worthy and
excellent personages: truly that seemed not so hard a matter unto the Roman
princes, so brought up and so enured thereunto, but now we live after another
manner and fashion. And who is there that sees not, not only the prince not
to be able to endure so many dilatory pleas, so many slights of the lawyers, so
many shifts of the plaintifes; such petitions and outcries of such as run from
court to to court? but not even the magistrates themselves without incredible
tediousness to be Demetrius (he which was called the Besieger) has for just
cause been blamed: who having received a great number of his subjects
requests, put them into the lap of his mantle, and at the first bridge he came
unto, whereby he was to pass over a river, shook them all into the water:
Whereof the subjects seeing themselves by him contemned, conceived a mutual
hatred against him, so that shortly after Pyrrhus together with the kingdom,
which he so gained without battle. Besides that in this course taken, we
should be always driven to have recourse unto the commissioners for
instructions: and afterward unto the prince for judgment of the cause:
howbeit that it is sometimes hard, and oftentimes pernicious also, to seperat
the instructions of the matter from the judgment.

But suppose that the prince were at leisure, and that he both could and would
see, An hard chargesble, and dangerous matter, for subjects to prosecute their
suits before the prince.
hear, and judge all the causes of his people, yet were it a thing not
beseeming the majesty of a king to make such an ordinary confusion of his
court, where beside the subtilties, the countenances and favors, (not there
subject to inquiry) and the contraritie Conan king of Scots, which is at this
day in use in Scotland, and called the Indict: and yet is better provided for
by the ordinance of Milan (which well deserves to be religiously kept in
every Commonweal) where in every town there is a chest with an hole in it,
in every principal church, whereof the governors have the key, whereinto
Tiberius the emperor having obtained the empire, protested in the full Senate,
and afterward by his letters made it known unto the officers, That he would
take upon him nothing which belonged unto the jurisdiction of the magistrates;
Why the office to judge and decide matters, a thing proper unto the au^tiene
kings, now belongs unto magistrates and judges.
for that it was more that was required of a prince, than of a magistrate.
Neither ought it to seem unto any man strange, why the office to judge and
decide matters,

But here some man may say, That a prince may be so wise, so just, and so full
of understanding, Not good for a loue^gne prince how sufficient soever, to sit
in judgment himself, for fear of too much lenity, or else seu: ritie* to
the perverting of justice.
as that he will give no judgment but such as is agreeable unto equity and
Titus (a man of so great courtesy, as that he was called Humani generis
delitias, or the myrror of mankind) gladly took upon him the office of the
great bishop, because he would pronounce sentence of death upon no man, either
pollute his hands with man's blood, when as yet some other emperors who were
also bishops (though not so religious as he) least of all others abstained from
such capital judgments of life and death. Now nothing is more contrary unto
true justice, than pity; neither any Nothing more contrary unto true justice,
than lenity and piti^.
thing more repugnant unto the office and duty of an upright judge, than
mercy: he not only by the civil law, but even by the law of God also being
forbidden to have Augustus the great emperor, for wisdom inferior unto
none, examining a murderer, began in this sort to question with him, I am sure
thou have not killed thy father: in which words he not only instructed the
guilty man what he was to answer to him both his prince and Nero also at
such time as the condemnation of a man was presented to him to sign, is
reported to have said, Vtinam liter as nescirem, I would to God I knew not
letters. And therefore Cicero pleading before Caesar, before resolved in any
wise to have put Ligarius to death, said, That he pleaded not before him as a
judge, but as before the father of the people: and having somewhat appeased his
anger, began thus to press him farther, Causas, Caesar, egi multas, and quidem
tecum, cum te tenuit ratio honorum tuorum, certe nunquam hoc modo; ignoscite
iudices: errauit, lapsus est, non putauit, si vnquam posthac: ad parentem sic
agi solet, ad iudices, non fecit, non cogitauit, falsi testes, fictum crimen,
Dic te Caesar de facto Ligarij iudicem esse etc. Caesar (says he) I have
pleaded many causes, and that with thee, when thou stoodst Caesar, thy self to
be judge of the deed done by Ligarius, etc. And in this sort secretly
infinuating unto Caesar, that he ought not to be a judge, holding the place of
a sovereign: and afterward highly commending Caesar his noble acts, his
valor and his clemency, moved him so much, as that he changed both his
color and countenance, and was in such a sort ravished, as that he could not
hear the one half of the oration (the shortest of all them that Cicero left
in writing) but that he granted more unto the Caesar himself, one of the
greatest orators that ever was (even in the judgment of his capital enemy
Cicero) and one of the most valiant and wisest men of his time, was so overcome
by the force of eloquence, pardoning him whom he deadly hated, and had before
resolved to put to death: what shall the less circumspect prince do, be he
never so little inclined unto pity? how shall he be able to endure the filed
speech of an eloquent aduocat? the pititious complaints of poor old men? the
cries and sighs of distressed women? the weeping and wayling of little
children? King Agesilaus a most famous prince of his time, overcome by the
importunat requests of a friend, writ unto the judges, requesting them, That if
the party accused, in whose behalf he writ, were not guilty, he should be
acquitted by the Agesilaus his sake discharged, and so in any case acquitted. But
O how many should escape the penalty of the laws, if judges in such cases
should hearken not only unto the princes secret letters, but even unto their
letters pattents also: and then what may we deem that a prince himself would
do? Wherefore himself in person to sit in judgment, beseems not the
majesty of a sovereign prince.

But now if it be so hard for a prince in this case not to err and be
deceived, then The people in a Popular estate easily moved unto pity.
how much more hard is it in a Popular estate, where the people suffer
themselves to be deceived and led away with fair words, as a man may see
almost in all the accusations made both in Athens and Rome, when the people
give sentence; where the Seruius Galba a great orator, accused, attainted, and
condemned of treason before the people of Rome; not having any more to say for
himself, but turning his speech and action, wholly framed to the moving of
pity; and so embracing his children, and with tears commending them unto the
people, so moved the beholders, as that he easily obtained pardon, and so
escaped. Whereupon Cato the elder, who had accused him, said That had not Galba
abused his children and his tears, he had been well whipped. Whereas other
noble and valiant men, who could neither abuse their prayers nor tears, but
bearing themselves upon their integrity, if Jews king of Polonia and
Hungary: That if question were of any of their lives and honors, they should
not be judged but by the king himself: foreseeing, that so they might easily
escape the judgment of the king, but not the judges, who are bound unto the
stricktnesse of the laws. And hereupon it is come to pass, that none of the
nobility are ever there condemned to death, what offense soever they do, but
always Zamosche the Polonian ambassador.

But suppose the prince to be such an one as is not easily to be moved unto
pity or A most hard thing for a sovereign prince sitting himself in
judgment, to keep a mean betwixt too much lenity and severity.
compassion, yet then is it to be feared, least he in judgment fall into
cruelty. For whereas to keep the mean is to every man a right hard thing,
so unto princes it is of all others most difficult, who easily suffer
themselves to be carried into the one extremity or other. If he be a good
prince and an embracer of virtue, he will have wicked men in extreme horror
and detestation, wherewith even the wisest men are moved Augustus the emperor,
who was accounted to be one of the most wise and virtuous princes that ever
was, and at his first sitting in judgment endured as it were the pain of the
condemned: and suffered not less (as says Seneca) than did they themselves
which were executed. And yet nevertheless this virtuous prince by continual
custom of judging and condemning such as were convict before him (as most
necessary it was) became too much rigorous and cruel, suffering himself to
be transported with passion and indignation against the wicked: in such sort,
that one day sitting in judgment, and condemning many the accused to diverse
punishments: his friend Mecenas being not able for the preasse to come near
Augustus suddenly stayed, and finding himself transported with choler, and so
to be too hasty in judgment, to stay his anger forthwith brake up the court.
And for this cause our fathers have right wisely ordained, That the Criminal
Chamber of Parliaments should from three months to three months still be
changed (which for this cause is called Tournelle: for that all the judges of
the other Chambers judged every one of them by turns, to the intent that the
common custom to condemn and put men to death, should not change the
natural mildness of the judges, and make them cruel and hard hearted. Besides
that it is Theophrastus) that a good and honest man, should not enter into
choler, seeing the most detestable enormities of the wicked, and so sometimes
to become as a man even furious, and as it were out of his wits. So Claudius
the emperor hearing one day the plaintiff rehearse the great and manifold
villainies of one accused, fell into such an outrage, that taking up a knife
which lay before him, he threw it into the accused man's face, even in full
judgment. But if the prince which intermedleth himself with judgment be by
nature cruel, he shall then make a butcherie of his court; as did the emperor
Caligula, who by one The most strange and extreme cruelty of Caligula the
emperor.
only sentence, for diverse crimes condemned fifty persons, even unto the same
kind of death, and often took pleasure to cut off the heads of many goood men,
sometime to prove his own strength, and sometime to prove but the edge of his
Cimitar,

But let us proceed farther, and suppose, that the prince have the gravity,
the knowledge, The best and surest means for the maintenance of a prince in
his estate, is by all good means to procure the love of his subjects: and how
the same is to be obtained.
the wisdom, the discretion, the experience, the patience, and all other the
virtues requisite in a good judge: yet so it is, that he cannot be without
danger, if he shall in person judge his subjects. For the best and fairest
rule for the maintenance of the state of a Monarchy, is, that the prince, if it
may be, cause himself to be beloved of al, without Hiphil, ordinarily used,
when it speaks of the vengeance of God. We read also in the Poets (though
somewhat otherwise) that Jupiter had three kinds of lightning, which they
called Manubias Albas, Rubras, Atras, The first is white, which serves for
advertisement, but hurts no man, as proceeding only from Jupiter, and his
friendly aspect unto the Sun: For which cause Seneca says, Id solum fulmen
placabile est quod mittit Jupiter, That only lightning (says he) is
peaceable which Jupiter sends. The other is red, and proceeds from the
aspect of Jupiter unto the inferior planets, whom they call the inferior
gods, which hurts and blasteth fruits and beasts, but kills no man. The
third is black, and made by the aspect of Jupiter unto the high planets and
the six stars (which they call the high Marcus Varro witnesses in the one
and twentieth book of worldly things: wherein they all agreed, That the great
God, which they thought to be Jupiter (to speak properly and according to the
truth) could not be himself augrie, neither hurt nor condemn any man, but all
things to be done by mean causes, and the ministry and power of angels. And
therefore the ancient Egyptians derived a law even from Promethius their law
giver, whereby their kings were not only forbidden to kill any William Poyet
(my country man) Chauncellor of France was accused of treason, and by the
envy of his most gracious enemies circumuented, the king who had received the
wrong would not himself be judge in the cause, neither so much as be present
at the trial; yea when the party accused had refused all the judges of Paris,
it was the kings pleasure, that two Thomas Moore Chauncellor of England, and
Hierome Moron Chancellor of Milan, both of them accused of treason, had for
their judges, one of them even the very conspirators themselves, guilty of
the same treason against the prince, and the other his great enemies.

But here happily some man may say, the honor of noble personages to require,
that when question is of their lives, their honor, or whole estate, the king
himself should take upon him the hearing of the matter. For when the duke of
Alencon ( Charles the Jews the eleventh, when question was for the trial of
Renate of Aniou king of Sicilie, the court gave the same answer, viz. That it
could not so Not lawful for the French king to be in person assistant in the
trial of a prince or peer accused of treason.
much as give an interlocutorie decree against a peer of France, when
question was of his honor, except the king himself were there present. I say
for all that, that this was not for the king to judge. For why, it is to be
proved, that the king in ancient time was not in person himself assistant in
the judgment of treason, although it were in the trial of the princes, or of
the peers; as is to be found in the records of the court, a protestation
Charles the sixth, wherein is contained, That the king ought not to be assistant
at the judgment of the king of Navarre, arraigned of treason; and that so to
be, appertained not but only to the peers of France, saying, The like
protestation to have been made against king Charles the fifth, to the intent
he should not be present at the trial of the duke of Britain: and in case
he would needs pass on farther, and break the custom of their ancestors,
the peers of France demanded in full parliament, That an act of that their
protestation might be unto them decreed, and so afterward it was enjoined unto
the clarke by a decree of the court, to deliver unto the peers, and to the
kings Attorney general an act of such their protestation. So Francis the
first, it was by lively reasons, and by the authority of the laws both of God
and man maintained, That the French king could not in that judgment be
assistant, seeing it concerned the confiscation of the marquisat: and albeit
that the kings Attorney general urging the matter, the king was at the
judgment present, yet gave he not sentence, whereby the marquess was
himself condemned, and his goods most justly confiscat, yet that judgment for all that seems unto many but extorted, and the other princes rested therewith
much discontented. So also Alexander the Great would never take upon him the
person of a judge, neither thought it meet to be assistant in the Philotas,
Calisthenes, and others which conspired against his person, least he should so
seem to have terrified the judges, or to have taken from The king ought not to
be judge, where he is himself a party, as in matters concerning his own
interest.
them the free power of judging: as we read in Quintus Curtius. For if it be
contrary unto the law of nature, that the party should be judge also; and
That the king is a party in all causes which concern either the public or
his own proper patrimony in particular, in which case he cannot be a judge;
by a much stronger reason ought the same to take place in the offense of
treason, and especially in the chief point, where question is, the party
accused to have attempted the honor or life of his prince. And for this cause
Jews the ninth would not pronounce sentence at the judgment of Peter Mauclere
duke of Britain, albeit that he was there present when the judgment was
Thomas earl of Flaunders. Neither yet Philip the Long the French king, in the
cause of Robert earl of Flaunders attainted of treason. Yea that more is, the
decrees or sentences are given in the name of the peers, and not in the name of
the king, albeit that he were himself there present: as is to be seen in the
sentence given against Robert earl of Flaunders, which begins thus, Nos
pares Franciae ad requestam and mandatum regis venimus in suam curiam Parisijs
and tenuimus curiam cum xij alijs personis, etc. We the peers of France at
the request and commandment of the king came into his court at Paris, and
with twelve other persons held court. The sentence also against Peter Mauclere,
whereby the fee of the county of Britain was taken from him, is given by one
archbishop, two bishops, eight Matthew Montmorancie the vicount of Beaumont, and
John of Soissons, conceived in these words, Notum facimus quod nos coram
clarissimo domino nostro Ludouico rege Franciae iudicauimus, etc. We make it
known, that we before our most noble lord Jews king of France have judged,
etc. By which words it appears that the king, albeit that he was present, yet
gave not sentence, no not even in trials concerning sovereignty. So also we
may see in the case of the succession of Alphonsus county of Poitiers,
although there were but question of the demaine, the king yet nevertheless
gave not therein his opinion or judgment. Neither in like sort did king
Francis, howbeit that he was present at the judgment of Charles of Burbon the
constable attainted of treason* And that more is, when question was of the
fealty and homage which the Iudicatum est a paribus regni, videlicet a
Rhemensi Archiepiscopo, and Lingonensi, Guillielmo Catalaunensi, Ph.
Beluacensi, Stephano Nouiomensi episcopis, and Odone duce Burgundiae, and alijs
episcopis, and baronibus, etc. Nobis audientibus and iudicium approbantibus
etc. Now if the prince ought to doubt to judge the causes of his subjects,
where it concerns but their particular, and wherein he himself can have no
interest, to the end not to give occasion of coffeehouse to them whom he
should condemn, whether it were right or wrong, but ought still to maintain
himself in the love and unity of his own people, as in a most Charles duke
of Burbon, one Valier examined in the tower of Loches, by the president de
Selua, and the bishop of Puy, and other the conspiratours examined at Tarrare
by John Brinon president of Roan, deposed, That the occasion which caused the
duke to rebel, was the answer that king Francis made unto the articles which
the duke had sent unto the court of parliament, concerning the suit he had
against the king and the regent, concerning certain lands and demaines which
the duke claimed as belonging unto himself. Wherein had not the king in any
sort meddled, but left it all

Now to say as some men do object and say, That if the prince in person
himself A vain objection for the shortning of suits, if the prince himself
in person take upon him the administration of justice.
should take upon him the administration of justice, men should have a good and
quick dispatch of their suits; and that such numbers of appeals, such
exceptions and petitions, with other long delays of justice, should be so
quite cut off; deserves not so much as answer. For who is he which knows
not at what great charge he must be, how many circumstances and delays, how
many windings and turnings, how many repulses Thucidides (the most famous of
them that were of his time, of the council of the Areopagi in Athens) seems
to have been in the same opinion that some others were, viz. That offenses
once committed, were forthwith to be punished; yet I verily suppose the opinion
of Plutarch, yea of the Hebrews themselves to be the truer: for these think
it necessary for him that will judge aright, to use delays in public
judgments. But he in that little book which he wrote of the slow vengeance of
God, plainly The quicker justice not always the better.
teaches men to be warned by almighty God, if they will be the true imitators
of his Causes worthy and well beseeming the princes hearing and deciding.
assistance of his wise and learned counselors; and the causes such as may
seem worthy the princes hearing and judgment: following therein the council
of Iethro, who seeing Moses troubled from morning to night in doing justice to
all men, and in all causes, You kill your self (said he) with taking so much
pain; choose me out of the Moses followed. So likewise we read, that Romulus
having committed unto the Senate and the magistrates, the ordinary
administration of justice, reserved unto himself only the hearing of matters
of greatest importance. And albeit that the Roman emperors afterward would
have their judgments to extend something farther, yet was the emperors
jurisdiction for the hearing of matters still shut up and included within
certain bounds: which for all that the princes flatterers, or else the princes
themselves often times went beyond, sitting in judgment sometimes Claudius the
emperor, (the most sottish lout that ever was) who yet would always be
judging and deciding of causes and controversies: of whom Tranquillus thus
writes, Alium negantem rem cognitionis sed ordinarij iuris esse, subito causam
apud se agere coegit, He compelled (says he) another man denying the matter to
belong unto the emperors hearing, but to be only an ordinary matter, and so
to belong to the ordinary jurisdiction, he compelled him (I say) even
forthwith and without more adoo, to plead the cause before him, but that so
foolishly, as that the lawyers openly mocked him, therefore insomuch that one
of them was so bold with him as to say unto him in Greek, which yet most of
the standers by Claudius the emperor derided for taking upon him the deciding
of common causes and matters.
understood, (...), An old man, and a fool too. And another Solomon, in
wisdom The great care that a prince should have of himself, which would
oftentimes ^it in judgment, or much show himself, and especially unto
strangers.
to Angustus, and in modesty to Anreltus; or else but seldom to come abroad,
and more seldom himself to administer justice, and that so much the less in
the presence Agesilaus had with the bruit thereof filled all the lesser Asia,
Greece, and Affrike, whom yet when the king of Egypt had seen lying upon the
ground in a meadow, with a course Greek cloak on his back, and himself but
lean, little, and lame withal, he made of him no great account, but Jews the
eleventh, who being chosen arbitrator in a controversy betwixt the kings of
Navarre and Castile, and going unto the frontiers of his kingdom, the
Spaniards at their arrival mocked the French men and their king, Who seemed
unto them as a pilgrim come from Saint James of Compostella, with his great cap
upon his head, set all about with brouches, and his iacket of course cloth,
without any majesty at all, either in his countenance, or in his behavior;
and they of his train all in like sort apparrelled: (For why, he could not
abide to see any man in brave attire) whereas the king of Castile and his
troop being come, showed themselves in most sumptuous attire, with their
horses in their rich caparisons: which Jews the eleventh considering princes
by the opinion of men to be either praise or disprayse worthy (who commonly
are led away but with the exterior show) hearing that the ambassadors of
Venice were come bravely apparrelled, and well accompanied, he caused himself
to be also most magnificently in royal robes attired, and so sitting in an
high chair of Estate, admitted the ambassadors unto his

Wherefore with greater reason ought a prince, when as he comes to an enter
That princes ought seldom to come to an enteruiew of their persons.
view with another strange prince (which he ought but most seldom to do) to
show himself in such sort, as that there be nothing in his attire, and much
less in his countenance or behavior and speech to be discommended. And that
is it for which Philip Comines speaking of the enterview of princes, says,
That they ought to shun it so much as they may: for that their presence always
diminishes their fame, and the opinion conceived of their persons, causes
them to be the less esteemed: a thing yet more to be feared toward the
strangers than toward the subjects.

Now that which I have said, It not to be fit for sovereignty, or for
sovereign princes The people v^fie to judge of matters.
for the great difficulties in assembling of the people, and to cause them to
understand reason; and then after that they have understood it, to induce them
well to judge thereof, their judgments being often times perverted by seditious
declamations or factions: which was the greatest occasion of the civil wars
amongst the Romans, until that Sylla the Dictator had remitted the hearing of
all causes unto the magistrates, excepting the offense of treason, and that in
the highest degree.

But yet besides the inconveniences by us before noted, nothing has ever been
more That the Senate or Magistrates are not to be deprived of their authority
and power to have the sam^ given to the prince.
dangerous, or more ruinated Commonweales, than to translate the authority of
the Theopompus king of Lacedemonia, who having increased the power of the
Senate, and appointed five Ephori in title of office, as Tribunes of the people:
and being therefore by his wife reproved, for that in so doing he had much
diminished his own power: So have I also (said he) much more assured the same
for the time to come. For hard it is for high and stately buildings long to
stand, except they be vpholden and staid by most strong shores, and rest upon
most sure foundations; all which consists in the Senate or council, and in
the good duties of the magistrates. In which thing the Venetians, as they have
done many things wisely, so have Where the more heads there be, the less wit
there is, and so the worse resolution also. Neither like I of Xenophon that
most famous man's opinion, who speaking of the Athenian Commonweal, says, That
the more popular that the laws are, the better they maintain a Democratie, or
Popular estate, When as (says he) the people has the hearing of all matters,
and that all passes by lot and voice: which thing indeed does utterly
overthrow all Popular Commonweales. As in Athens, when as by the persuasion of
Pericles, the hearing and deciding of matters, and the mannaging of the state,
was taken from the Senate or council of the Areopagi, to be brought back unto
the people; the The Popular Commonweal not to be the best maintained by the
most Popular laws.
city destitute of wit, and without council, fell first forthwith into great
broils, and not long after into utter ruin and decay. But amongst the
Swissers, where their Popular estates have now flourished 260 years, and so
yet continue and grow from good to better, still flourishing both in peace and
war: those their estates are preserved and vpholden by laws of all other
least popular, nothing being almost left unto the people more than the choosing
of their officers, the other rights of sovereignty being but sparingly and
within a certain convenient measure communicated unto them. Neither was the
Roman Commonweal ever fairer or farther from civil wars, than when (the
majesty of the people saved whole) all things were done by the Senate and the
magistrates: which was from the first Carthaginensian war, unto the conquest
of Gracchies by their most popular laws had taken from the authority of the
Senate and the power of the magistrates, as much as they possibly could, all to
increase the wealth and liberty of the people; there ensued thereof a most
miserable change of that Commonweal: neither did the city of Rome ever after
cease from civil wars and sedition, until that immoderat liberty of the
insolent people, was by the power of one oppressed and brought under, and they
so brought into extreme misery and servitude. The same inconvenience or
mischief befell the Megarensians, who from a Popular estate fell into a most
miserable Tyrannical government (as says Plato) for the unbridled liberty
and insolency of the people, taking upon them the hearing of all things, above
the authority, jurisdiction,

But the best kind of Commonweal is that, wherein the sovereign holds what
The best ordered Commonwealth
concerns his majesty, the Senate maintains the authority thereof, the
magistrates execute their power, and justice has her ordinary course. Whereas
otherwise if the prince or the people shall take upon themselves the authority
of the Senate, or the commands, offices, or jurisdictions of the magistrates; it
is much to be feared, least that they destitute of all help, shall at the
length be spoiled of their own sovereign majesty also. And in mine opinion
they shamefully err, which think themselves to increase the princes wealth
and power, when they show unto him his Claws, giving him to understand, that
his will his countenance, and his look, ought to be as an edict, a decree,
Caligula, who would not that the The foolish saying of Caligula.
lawyers should so much as give their council and opinions, when as he said,
Paciam vt nihil respondeant nisi Eccum, that is to say, That is he to whom it
alone belongs to give his opinion; meaning by himself: but by the word
Eccum, which is, Behold the man; alluding to the word Aequum, which is, That
which is right and just. But this opinion by little and little crept into
princes minds, breeding in them an incredible desire of oppression and tyranny.



CHAP. VII.
NOw we have already declared* What a Sovereign Prince ought to be in the
administration of justice toward his subjects; and if he should take upon him
the person of a judge, when, and how, and in what sort of Commonweal he ought
to do it: let us now also see out of the terms of justice, when the
subjects; All factions and part-takings dan gerous unto Commonweales*
it be possible, by all means to be prevented; or if that cannot be before
they be plotted, yet to search the means to heal them* or at leastwise to
employ all convenient remedies to mittigat the disease. And albeit that of
civil seditions and part-takings there sometime comes great good, as some one
or other good law, or some other good Fauorinus the Philosopher highly
commended the fever quartaine: which were but to confound the difference
betwixt good and evil, the difference betwixt profit and disprofit, betwixt
honor and dishonor, betwixt vice and virtue; and in brief to confound fire
and water, heaven and earth together. Wherefore as vices and diseases are
dangerous both unto the body and the soul; so seditions and civil wars
are hurtful and pernicious unto all estates and Commonweales.

But it may be some man will say, That seditions and civil wars are good and
profitable Seditions and factions dangerous even for Tyrannical governments
for Tyrannical Monarchies, and for the maintaining of Tyrants in their
Tyrannical estates, they being always enemies unto their subjects, and such
as cannot long continue, if the subject be once at accord amongst themselves.
But we have before declared, the Tyrannical Monarchy to be of all others the
weakest, as that which is not but by cruelties and villainies nourished and
maintained; and yet commonly we see it to fall and take end by seditions and
civil wars: so that if we look into all tyrannies which have been destoyed
and overthrown, we shall find it most commonly to have happened of factions and
civil tumults. Yea even the most crafty and subtle tyrants, who by little
and little put to death, now some, and then others, to fat themselves with

Now if seditio^s and factions be dangerous unto monarchies, then are they much
An especial benefit a Monarch has above other Commonweales.
more dangerous unto Aristocraties and Popular estates: for that Monarchs may
Private factions how they are to be suppressed.
of an handful of people, or some small number of subjects, but even of a good
part of them banded against an other, able to trouble the whole estate: but if
they be but few in number, he that has the sovereignty in hand, ought at the
first to repress them; which he may do either by commanding them to lay
down arms, or by referring oppressed* lest happily the whole estate of the
commonweal were often times by some

But all this which we have yet said, is to be understood but of factions which
concern Factions and conspiracies against the prince or estate, how they are
to be repressed and the conspirators punished.
not the estate; for if the faction be directly against the state, or the life
of the sovereign prince, there is then no question whether the prince should
take a part, or show himself an open enemy unto such seditious, which so
profess themselves of all others the greatest enemy of their prince and
commonweal: for otherwise, if when the state and welfare of the commonweal,
or the prince his own life is attempted, he shall sit still but as an idle
beholder, he shall so inuit and annimate not the more desperate sort of men
only, but even very cowards to seek after his life also. But yet a great
difference That in a conspiracy it is not good to make too strait enquiry to
find out all the conspirators.
out all the conspirators, least by force of torture and torment, such things
be happily Francis the first the French king, but yet not daring so to do, to
have repented him now of his so wicked and detestable a purpose, was therefore
of the friar so much as in him lay pardoned; who yet nevertheless forthwith
revealed the same unto the king, who causing the gentleman to be apprehended,
sent him unto the parliament of Paris to be tried, where he was as a traitor
condemned to death. Howbeit, that (in mine opinion) the king in his greater
wisdom Augustus with Q. Gallus, who having not only purposed, but even
desperately also attempted to have slain him; and being therefore by the Senate
condemned of treason, was yet by the same emperor Augustus (dissembling the
matter as if he had thereof known nothing) pardoned, and so sent away unto his
brother then governor in one of the provinces: but was yet nevertheless upon
Augustus himself, as many men supposed, using therein the like subtilty: a
craft that had his uncle Caesar before used, in giving pardon to M. Marcellus
at the request of the Senate; who yet was immediately after slain, as one of
Caesar his most mortal enemies. Yet more likely it is, neither Caesar (who in
a certain natural clemency exceeded almost all other princes) neither
Augustus (placed in so high a seat of honor and majesty) to have been
willing to have defiled or stained their so great honor and dignity with the
secret murder of them whom they might most justly have executed. Howbeit that
some of the finer sort to the contrary excuse the matter, as by them done for
the safty of their own lives; and yet so by his means still to maintain the
great opinion which they had before Torture for the finding out of conspirators
ought to be most warily used.
caused men to conceive of their clemency and mercy. But if the conspirators be
in number many, and that they be not all discovered, the wise prince ought to
beware how he puts to torture those that be condemned, albeit that he might
even with a beck without danger kill them all: for that for one that he should
put to death, there would arise up an hundred of their allies and friends, who
it may be, have power enough, or at least wise never fail of will enough to
revenge the death of them which were of their blood; and in case all this were
not so, yet ought the prince always to shun the note and blame of cruelty,
as well of his subjects as of strangers: wherein Nero was greatly deceived, who
having discovered the conspiracy against his person and estate, would needs by
torture and torment know all them that were partakers therein: wherein Alexander
the great having put to death Parmenio, Philotas, and the rest which had
conspired his death, by a new decree or law abrogated the ancient law of the
Macedonians, whereby five of them that were the nearest of kin unto the
conspirators were still to be put to death. But the best and surest way to
avoid the farther danger of a conspiracy already prevented, is for a prince to
dissemble the matter, as if he knew Tacitus well said, Optimum remedium
insidiarum, est si non Conspirators prevented to have oftentimes been right
wisely dissembled, and not farther enquired after.
intelligatur, The best remedy of a conspiracy is, not to seem to understand
thereof. So when Hanno general of the Carthaginensians, had purposed to have
slain all the Senators, and chief men of the city, under the color of the
marriage of his daughter; the Senate understanding of the matter, but
dissembling the same, forthwith caused an edict or law to be published,
concerning the charges to be made at feasts: wherein the number of the guests,
and the charges of the feast (which was not great) was most straightly appointed.
By which decree of the Senate, the conspiracy intended, was without any tumult
or bloodshed at all quietly suppressed. So in like manner Eteocles captain of
the Lacedaemonians, with a strong garrison of soldiers holding the island of
Chio realms, in their own palaces, yea even in their own bed chambers. The
conspiracy of Princes oftentimes better to understand of the conspiracies
against (...) princes, than of such as are against themselves at Rome contrived.
Pelopidas, for the surprising of the castle Cadmea, and the expulsing of the
Lacedaemonians out of Thebes, was known in Athens, before that any thing
thereof was disconered in Thebes, as the event showed. For why, but even a
little before that Archias the captain of the castle was together with the
garrison soldiers therein slain, he was by letters from the bishop of Athens
warned to look to himself: which letters because he would not at supper read,
he used the common proverb; In crastinum negotia, To morrow will serve for our
business. Who knows not the emperor Charles the fifth to have been either
partaker, or privy almost to all things that were any where done by other
princes, yet did he not so much as once suspect the conspiracy which 1552.
duke Maurice and Albertus marquess of Brandeburg his familiar and domestical
Amboise, which set all France on fire, was diuulged in Germany, England, and
Italy, before it was once suspected by them against whom it was contrived in
France: unto whom the cardinal Granuellan is reported by his letters to have
first discovered the same, and yet there were above ten thousand persons which
had therein a part. Whereby it is plain, such conspiracies as wherein the
force and power Conspiracies hard to be concesl^d, being often times ^ even by
women revealed.
of many is to be required, to have always had most difficult and dangerous
events: for that they can neither by a few be effected, neither yet by many be
concealed. Yea often times it chances the conspirators most secret designs to
be even by women first Philotas, who discovering the conspiracy against
Alexander the Great unto a courtisan whom he loved, was together with his
accomplices to his destruction by her bewrayed. So Fuluia understanding of
Cateline his conspiracy by one of his soldiers, revealed the same unto the
Consul Cicero. And in our time the secret designs of the Prior of Campania
(general of the French galleys) for the sudden surprising and rifling of the
city of Venice by a soldier revealed unto a courtisan, The most dangerous
conspiracy that can be against the person of a prince, and the hardest to b^e
avoided.
was forthwith by her discovered and made known unto the Senate. Yet for all
that an hard matter it is for a prince, be he never so wise or subtle, to
preserve himself from the danger of a resolute man that has sworn his
death: for that as the secret, and Sc^uola is reported to have been; who of the
event gave first name unto his house and family, for that he of his own
accord had thrust his right hand into a burning fire, so to be burnt of, for
that he mistaking the man, had slain the kings lieutenant in stead of the king
himself. With no less boldness (or valor should I say) did a servant of
Lazarus the Despot of Seruia kill Amurath the king of the Turks, in the
midst of his legions of men, so to revenge the death of his lord, and the
dishonor done unto the queen his wife. So Pausaenias also in the sight of the
whole army slew Philip king of Macedon, Alexander the Great his father. And
Peter Aloisius also duke of Placence, Domitian went to seek him out even into
his cabinet with his arm in a scarf: in such sort as did Aod kill Eglon king
of the Moabites. And if Cosmus Medices duke of Florence (having ceized upon the
estate) had not always gone armed, neither could his great guards, nether yet
his strong castles have kept him from the hands of most desperate men, who
oftentimes found means to enter even into his most close and secret places, to
have slain him an hundred times, what death soever they should therefore have
died. Yea amongst the rest of many most desperate murderers, there was one, who
even in the council chamber struck

But forasmuch as we have before touched certain means which may preserve a
prince from falling into these dangers, and whereby to hinder the conspiracies
which might be made against his person: Let us now see how he ought to bear
and behave himself in conspiracies and factions, which are not directly
against himself nor his estate, but amongst his great lords among themselves,
or among the estates, towns, or provinces subject unto him; all which he ought
by all means to prevent, and not to Of small sparks often times do arise the
great flames and fires of sedition.
even so seditions and civil wars the destructions of cities and
Commonweales, are most times begun for most small matters, and such as a man
would not think that even they should work such effect. In the reign of
Iustiman the emperor all the cities of the Greek empire were divided into
factions, for the maintaining of the colors of Green and Blew, which they
according to their fancies took unto them in their sports and iusts, one of
them brauing and contending with another: which in the end took such force and
went so far, as that the judges and magistrates of Constantinople, going about
to punish the seditious, were let so to do by others of the same faction
who Sophia: and to avoid the punishment which they (having laid down arms)
were not to hope for, made choice of one Hippatius the captain and ringleader
of their faction, for emperor; Justinian with his family in the mean time
lurking in a corner. Which tumult proceeded so far, as that thirty thousand
men were in one day in that quarrel slain: and had not he the leader of the
faction (and he even the new chosen emperor) there been killed, the emperor
Justinian had undoubtedly had much to do to have saved his life; who yet at the
beginning together with his other That the quarrels of great men ought even in
the beginning to be wisely appeased, or by force of the prince suppressed.
enflamed, to cast on cold water, or else quite to quench the same: that is to
say, to proceed to the preventing thereof, either by sweet speeches and
persuasions, or elsby open Alexander the Great, who seeing Ephestion and
Craterus his greatest friends, upon a mutual emulation to be at discord and
varience amongst themselves, and so to draw the rest of his valiant captains
into parts-taking with them: he at the first with fair words, and gentle
persuasions sought to make them friends together, but afterward taking them
apart, sharply rebuked them both, threatening withal to band himself against
him which soever of them should first by word or deed offend the other: by
which sharp reprehension putting them both in fear, made them friends
together. And so our king Jews, he who for his devotion toward God, for his
love toward his neighbors, for his charity toward particular men, and
upright dealing Archidamus king of the Lacedaemonians, wisely provided for
himself, who A wise part of Archidamus in making of two great enemies friends.
seeing two great men his most dear friends at odds betwixt themselves,
brought them both into the temple, and there demanded of them whom they would
make choice of to be arbitrator of the difference betwixt them? who both
answering, That Archidamus himself: Swear then unto me (said he) that you
shall both abide mine award, and do as I shall enjoin you: which they both
doing, he straightly enjoined them both, Never to depart out of that same church,
until they had reconciled themselves one of them unto another, and so became
sworn friends. Whereby he wisely without any offense or displeasure unto
himself (by giving of judgment betwixt them) made them friends, and so with
thanks enjoyed the fruit of their friendship and good agreement, than which
nothing ought to be more deerer or more precious unto a prince: for that no
fortresses are unto princes more assured, no castles stronger, than is the love
and fidelity of their subjects toward them. But here I speak of a good
prince, and not of a tyrant which takes The craft of tyrants in setting other
m^n together by the ears, sometime dangerous unto themselves.
that it oftentimes falls out, that the dogs falling unto agreement among
themselves, fall all upon the wolf: so as did the factions of the Colonnois
and the Vrsins, who having discovered that pope Alexander the sixth set them
still at discord and variance among themselves, so by their calamities and
falls to increase the strength and power of his bastard son Borgia; they
fell to agreement among themselves, and so made head against him their common
enemy.

Sometime also a tyrant seeing the nobility in the State to flourish with the
strength John Bentiuole the tyrant of Bononia is reported to have done: who
fearing the good agreement of them of the greater sort, easily suffered the
chiefest of the house and family of the Marischots (then the richest and a man
of greatest credit in all that country) to be of his enemies slain, to the
end that he might so be dispatched of him, and supported of them of the
contrary faction: all reconciliation being by that so great an outrage broken
The obligation of wicked and desperate men grounded upon some norable villainy,
in all Commonweales most dangerous, and how to be suppressed.
even out of the chiefest strength of his tyranny. But as the bond and
obligation of a notable villainy is of all others the strongest, so is it also
in every Commonweal most of all to be feared, for that thereby all the hope of
amity and concord is cut off toward them which have received the injury. As
it happened to the army of Carthage, which for want of pay reuolting against
the seigneurie or state, under the conduct of two or three of their mutinous
captains, ceized upon diverse strong towns and Hasdrubal the General with the
rest of the Carthaginensians which were fallen into their hands, to the end
that having bound them by such cruelties, they should now have no hope at al to
save their lives by composition. In which case there was no other mean for the
Seigneurie to use, but even plain force, so utterly to root them out which
could not otherwise be healed: as was afterward that army of the
Carthaginensians, being by a long and cruel war at length defeated. For why,
they had directly banded themselves against the seigneurie: in which case we
have said the prince must of necessity

But if discord and contention be amongst the princes and great men themselves,
and How a soueraign prince is to end the quarrels and controversies that are
betwixt the nobility.
that under the same sovereign prince, which yet he cannot either by his
princely authority, neither by fair persuasion, nor hope of rewards, appease;
he ought then to give them arbitrators, men of great integrity and wisdom,
and such as they themselves can like of. In which doing the sovereign prince
shall discharge himself of the heaviness of the judgment to be given, and of
the hatred and displeasure of him or them that should be condemned. For if this
manner of proceeding is and always has been commendable for the ending of
controversies even betwixt kings themselves, by committing their differences
unto the arbitrament of princes; and that all nations use this

But in ending such controversies, the prince above all things must beware that
he Dangerous for a prince not to show himself indifferent in the quarrels and
controversies of his great subjects.
show not himself more affected unto the one part than to the other: which
has been the cause of the ruin and overthrow of many princes and estates. So
Philip the first king of Macedon was not slain, but for that he openly
favored Antipater against Pausanias a mean gentleman, in denying of him
justice; which was the cause that Pausianas discharged his choler even upon the
person of the king himself. Neither for any other cause did Henry the sixth,
king of England, stir up that long and deadly civil war, wherewith all
England was in combustion eight and twenty years, and wherein were lost about
fourscore princes of the royal blood (as Philip Comines reports) but for
that the king took upon him to be captain of them of the faction of the house
of Lancaster, against them of the faction and house of York: who at length
having vanquished and overcome their enemies, put to death the king himself in
prison, with all the rest of his nearest kinsmen. The conspiracy also of the
marquess of Pescara, against Charles the emperor, was grounded upon the
favor that the emperor bare unto the viceroy of Naples, against the
marquess. It were but lost time to Robert of Arthois, Jews of Eureux king of
Navarre, John Montford, John of Burgundy, and diverse others of our time, which
it is not needful to rehearse, and all for the favors of the kings, who
forgetting the high degree of majesty whereunto they were mounted, would
basely take upon them the offices of aduocats, of judges, and arbitrators; so
descending from the highest unto the lowest places, so to follow the passions
of their subjects, making themselves companions unto some of them, and unto
other some of them enemies.

But some will happily say, That by this means the king shall know news, and
keep When, and how a sovereign prince is to use his force for the appealing
of the controversies and quarrels betwixt his great subjects
mind will not by any reason, persuasion, judgment, or arbitrament, suffer
himself to be ouerruled or persuaded. In which case I say, that necessity
has no law: and yet that the prince before he may come to that point of
extremity, as to use his force, ought to prove all the means that he possibly
may, for the composing of the matter in controversy, and making of those his
great subjects friends: which if it may not be,

Yet might some man say, That the occasion of the quarrel may be so secret, as
that no proof can thereof be made, neither any judgment given, and yet that
he which has so received the injury, demands thereof an amends: in which
case the princes find themselves oftentimes much troubled, as when an injury
or offense is unto any man secretly offered or done, which he which did it
denies, and that the truth cannot The beginning of combats.
stand upon their nobility, deem their honor to be stained, and their
reputation greatly impaired, except he have satisfaction, who upon his oath
affirms himself to have so been by any man secretly wronged. For why, such
men say, the subjects lives and goods to be all in the princes hand and power
to be disposed of* but not their honor and reputation. In which case the
people of the North have for the trial of the matter appointed combats; as is
to be seen in the ancient laws of the Lombards, of the Saliens, the
Ripuaries, the English, the Burgundions, the Danes, the Almaines, and the The
law of appearance: which many for all that have as a most beastly thing
rejected, as never received or practiced by the Assyrians, the Egyptians, the
Persians, the Greeks, or Latins, except in lawful war, one man against his
enemy, and that by the good leave of the General of the army; or else
sometime one General encountering hand to hand with another, for the sparing
of their subjects blood: so Cossus and Marcellus in battle hand to hand
overcame their enemies kings? Or else one king against another king, as did
Romulus with the king of the Latins, and Hundig king of the Saxons, with Roe
king of Denmark. So also Charles king of Naples challenged Peter king of
Arragon unto the combat, for the trial of their right unto that kingdom,
which they yet performed not. Corbis and Orsua contending for the principality
before Scipio Affricanus the Roman General, said, That they would have none
other judge, either of God or man, to decide their quarrel, but Mars only.
And yet Combats when to be admitted.
for all that it is better to appoint combats amongst subjects, according to
the ancient and lawful manner of our ancestors, when the persons are of like
quality which so stand upon their honor, and that there is some apparent
conjecture of the wrong received (for why, the ancient laws never admitted
combat in a plain and evident matter, or wherein good proof was to be had)
for that to deny combat vnro noble personages standing upon their honor, and
at so great odds as that they can by no other means be appeased, were but to
nourish the fire of civil war even in the entrails of Combats by diverse great
princes forbidden, and for the avoiding of greater inconveniences by them
again^ allowed.
dangerous also. Rotaris king of the Lombards, had taken the law of Combats
from amongst his subjects, but yet at their instant requests was enforced to
restore the same again into the former force; protesting withal, That it was
but inhumane and naught, (as is in the laws of the Lombards to be seen) but
yet for all that necessary to avoid greater inconveniences: For that the law
of Combat being so taken away, more good and innocent men were most cruelly and
secretly slain and made away, than happily Jews the ninth, having the honor of
God, and the welfare of his subjects before his eyes, was the first that forbad
combats in this realm; which edect was thus, NOVS DEFENDONS BATAILLES PAR TOVT
EN NOSTRE DOMAINE EN TOVTES QVERELLES, We forbid Combats in all quarrels
throughout our dominions. And for that this edict was evil kept, Philip the
Fair, king Jews his nephew, caused the like also to be published, whereby he
utterly forbad combats: who yet within two years after was at the instant
request of his subjects constrained to restore them again, by reason of the
secret murders and stabbings, yea even of the most valiant men, who then were
in every place so Philip of France, surnamed the Hardy, duke of Burgundy, did
not altogether forbid combats in Holland, but yet commanded them not to be at
all suffered, without the lawful appointment of the magistrates: whereas before
they were there open and common without just cause even to all sorts of men.
But it was a thing most barbarous, that Fronto king of Denmark in ancient
time appointed all causes and quarrels to be decided by combat, as the Saxon
historiographer says. Howbeit that the Russians and Hungarians otherwise use
it not, but when there is no evident proof of the matter brought in question.
But in our remembrance the prince of Melphe, the king his lieutenant in
Piemont, found no remedy or means better, for the restrayning of the secret
murders and mutinies which were ordinary amongst his soldiers, than Of the
lie given, what is to be thought.


But now, when as to have the lie given one, was neither by the Romans thought
to be a thing injurious, neither that our ancestors had allowed the combat for
the lie given to another man; it began in our age to be a thing not only
contumelious, but even Francis the first the French king, who in a great
assembly of his greatest peers one day said, that he was not an honest man
which could endure the lie given him. Which he said, having by his heraults at
arms given the lie to Charles the fifth, for some dishonorable speeches he had
given of him. Which yet since with us is grown as it were into a law, so that
none of the nobility or martial men, which will put up the lie, is accounted
of, as of a man of any worth or valor, but as of a base or vile fellow.
Whereof have risen great quarrels, brawles, and murders, amongst all sorts of
subjects. Which to meet withal, Henry the second, who not without much grief
with a great number of his nobility, had seen a matter ended by combat,
Charles the ninth reviving the edict made by his father, for the forbidding of
combats, joined thereunto moreover, That he would take unto himself the honor
and reputation of such as found themselves grieved, for that they might not
have the combat for the lie offered them: and yet there was never in France so
many murders seen, as when combats were so forbidden. For who should not be
well laughed at, which for the lie given him should appeal unto the judges?
And yet in the opinion of the nobility and martial men, he shall seem to
incur the most heavy note of infamy, which shall not by force of arms
repel such a reproach or disgrace offered him.

But whereas we before said, that the combat is for the avoiding of greater
inconveniences How, and for what cause combats are to be granted.
to be borne withal, my meaning is not, that it should be by law allowed, but
only in case of necessity granted, and that by the princes express letters,
after the hearing of the parties, and for the avoiding of murders and
seditions, which might otherwise ensue. Whereby that inconvenience shall be
avoided, which otherwise without combat could not be provided for, that
kinsmen, neighbors, and friends, should for one man's wrong in a sort be
enforced to take up arms, and so to entertain Philip the Fair having
forbidden combats, thought it not good otherwise to restore them again unto
the nobility,

But if quarrels and contentions arise betwixt whole families, or betwixt whole
corporations Combats nor to be admitted for the quarrels and contentions
betwixt families.
and colleges of the same city or Commonweal, and upon such like causes as
do betwixt private men: combats in that case are not to have place* but the
parties so at odds are by way of justice to be kept in good peace; or
otherwise by force and sharp punishment to be inflicted upon the offenders to
be kept in awe; yet for all that in such sort, as that justice should still
have place even in arms in the execution doing: as it was in Rome, at such
time as by a decree of the Senate it was appointed and set down, That four
hundred innocent slaves should be all put to death; with which unusual manner
of execution the common people all enraged was about to have taken Seditions
arising for the execution of justice, how they are to be prevented.
up arms, if the emperor Nero had not for the keeping of them in, dispersed
the soldiers of his guard into every quarter of the city, so to keep all
quiet, until that the execution was done. Whereof Justinian the emperor
having even in like case failed, fell into the great and dangerous sedition
(whereof we before spoke) which upon the sudden set all Constantinople almost
upon a light fire. As not long ago the two most famous cities of Paris and
Antwerpe, were in great tumults and vproares, at such time as the people saved
from execution certain persons for their religion condemned to die: whereof
the revolt of the Low countries against the king begun. Neither is this any new
matter, but known to have happened in the glory of the Roman Commonweal: when
as at such time as the Consul had commanded one Volero a factious fellow
Ianus, which was the sign of an universal peace, but twice in seven hundred
years space. And if we mark the histories well, we shall find nothing to
have Nothing more hurtful unto a warlike people than peace.
been more daungerons and hurtful unto a valiant and warlike people, than
peace: For that men accustomed to wars, and still trained up in arms, seek
for nothing else but dissentions and broils, neither hate any thing more than
to be at rest and quiet. And that is it for which the histories report Ca.
Marius to have been the best general of his time in the wars abroad, but the
worst and most troublesome man alive at home and in time of peace: for that he
well knew not what peace and quietness meant. Yet whether it be better in a
Commonweal to train the people up in peace or war we will

Now we have in some sort touched certain means for the preventing of
seditions and part-takings: but as it is much more easy to stay the enemy
from entering, than to drive him out after he is once entered; so is it more
easy also to prevent seditions and tumults, than to appease the same: and yet
that more hardly also in a Popular estate or Seditions in a Popular Commonweal
of all others most dangerous, and how to be appeased.
Commonweal, than in any other. For why, the prince in a Monarchy, and the
lords in an Aristocratie still are, and ought to be, as sovereign judges and
arbitrators of the subjects: and so often times of their absolute power and
authority appease and quiet all their differences: whereas in the Popular
government the sovereignty lies in the people themselves, which are so
divided into factions, who in no other acknowledge the and fashion, to draw
them unto his own, and so to fall by little and little* until that

And as for them which go about by force of arms and strong hand to stay the
That the people up in tumult or sedition, is not by strong hand or open force
to be stai^d or appeased
angry peoples rage and fury, if they be not very strong and well assured
of the victory, Appius Claudius seeing the people of Rome to demand to have
had the obligations and bands for money lent, canceled, (wherein the richer
sort and usurers had a notable interest) was of opinion, not to have any thing
of the due debt remitted. And at another time the people being revolted from
the nobility, he the same man would have had them most rigorously entreated,
without any regard to have been had of them at all; for that the people
otherwise would swell with pride, and become insupportable: howbeit, Seruilius
at the first time, and Menenius Agrippa at the second, withstood him, and so
carried away the matter from him. Which Agrippa showed in deed, and by a most
excellent fable of man's body and the parts thereof (which he so Cato the
Censor, speaking of the people of Rome, said, The hungry belly has no ears.
Neither in that case must the magistrates The hungry belly has no ears.
spare fair words or promises, yea more than is ever to be performed. For that
the matter so standing, both Plato and Xenophon give leave unto the magistrates
to lie, as physicians to children and their sick patients. So the wise
Pericles, to draw the people The wisdom of Pericles to draw the common peo
ple of Athens to understand reason.
of Athens unto reason, fed them with feasts, with plays, with comedies, with
songs and daunces; and in time of dearth caused some distribution of corn or
money to be made amongst them: and having by these means tamed this beast with
many heads, one while by the eyes, another while by the ears, and sometimes by
the belly, he then caused wholesome edicts and laws to be published,
declaring unto them the

Yet whereas we have said, that the people is to be flattered, and to have
something How, and when the people is to be flattered.
granted unto it: yea sometimes even things unreasonable; especially in
popular and Aristocraticke estates, that is to be understood in time of
extremity, when as it is already up in sedition: and not for that one ought
still to follow the appetite and passion of the insatiable people, and without
reason: But even to the contrary, it is so to be governed, as that it be not
too hard curbed, neither yet left with the reins at too much liberty. For as
it is a right slipperie high standing place to serve the appetite and pleasure
of the unsteady people, so is it yet much more dangerous also, openly to
oppose Appius, Coriolanus, Metellus, C^to the younger, Phocion, and
Hermiodorus, who whilst they would have all things of the people by strong
hand, and rather break than bow, they did either utterly undo themselves
together with the Commonweal, or at leastwise brought it into most great
peril and danger. True it is, that for the prince or magistrates thus to temper
majesty with clemency toward an unruly and headstrong people, without
judgment and reason, is a most hard and difficult matter: yet is there nothing
more necessary, especially in Popular governments, than not too much to
flatter, neither yet to deal too roughly with the people. But as the Sun
goes, rising and setting with the other stars and planets, daily carried
about with the most swift motion of the superior celestial spheres, and Force
never to be used against the people, where fair means may prevail.
to attain unto the full of his designs. And albeit that a prince had the
power by force to repress and reform a mutinous and rebellious people, yet
ought he not so to do, if otherwise he may appease them. For what Physician is
there so inconsiderat, as to use sections, and cauterisings, or burnings, if
the disease might otherwise be cured? And so what prince is there so evil
advised, as by way of force and fact to proceed against his people, if with a
kind word speaking he may appease all? But especially in Pacuuius Caluinus of
Capua, who being accounted a great favorer of the comminaltie, and an utter
enemy unto the nobility of that city, yet understanding of a purpose that
the people had upon the sudden to kill all the Senators of the city, which so
cruel a murder he greatly detested, but yet seeing the common people so
resolutely set down upon the matter, as that they were not to be removed, he
himself made show also, as if he had as well as any of the rest liked of that
the peoples will and purpose, yet withal gave the Senators The commendable
deceit of Pa^uius, to deceive the angry people.
so afterward the Tribune or chief leader of the mutinous people, having shut
up all the Senators into a strong place, as men appointed for the slaughter:
but indeed so to preserve them from the present fury, he then with a merry
and cheerful countenance coming forth unto the angry people, spoke unto
them thus, That which you men of Capua have oftentimes wished for, That it
might once be in your power to be revenged of the most wicked and abominable
Senate; you now have the same put into your hands, not by uproar and tumult, by
assaulting and breaking open their houses one by one, which they keep and
defend with strong companies and guards of their servants and friends, but even
at your pleasure, and without danger. Receive them all shut up in the court,
where I will give you power to pronounce sentence of every one of their lives.
But before all things it behooves you so to satisfy your anger, as yet to
deem your own health and welfare better than the satisfying of your rage and
wrath. For a Senate you will not altogether be without: for that you must needs
either have a king, which is a thing to be abhorred; or else a Senate, the only
Council of a free city. Wherefore two things rest for you to do, the one
that you take out of the way the old Senate: and the other, that you choose a
new. And this said, he sat down; and so the Senators names being all Well,
I see then (said Pacuuius) what his doom is: let him be cast out; and now for
him an evil and wicked man, make you choice of a good and upright Senator to
be put into his place. Whereupon they all at the first were silent* for lack
of a better to make choice of: but as soon as one more impudent than the rest
had named one, presently a greater cry was heard than before; some crying out,
That they knew him not; othersome exclaiming as fast against him as a naughty
base fellow, of some beggarly trade or other, and so unworthy of the

But if the people once enraged be already up in arms, it is a most hard and
dangerous The mutinous people best appeased by the good persuasion of some
good old virtuous personage.
matter to appease them: in so much as that not long ago there was one that
set fire on his own house (least the Commonweal should with the flames of
sedition Virgil most excellently expressed in these few verses following*

Ac veluti magno in populo cum saepe coorta
Seditio est, saeuitque an^mis ignobile vulgus;
Iamque faces and saxa volant, furor arma ministrat:
Tum pietate grauem ac meritis si forte virum quem
Conspexere, silent, arrectisque auribus astant:
Ille regit dictis animos, and pectora mulcet.
And as a sudden tumult raised amidst a people great,
When as the base and rascal sort are in the greatest heat,
And firebrands now and stones do fly, such weapons as there lie,
Then if some good grave worthy sire they fortune to epsy,
They silent with attentive ear stand listening to his lore:
He with good words their minds does rule, and calmes the whole uproar.
Such we said Pericles to have been in Athens, Menenius Agrippa in Rome, and
not long ago Peter Loredan in Venice, who at such time as the mariners and
seafaring men banded themselves against the rest of the citisens, and in such
sort massacred one another, as that neither duke, neither the Senate, nor other
magistrate could come nie, but that they were by force and violence of the
furious people rejected; this plain gentleman Peter Loredan (I say) a private
citisen, and bearing no office at all, showing Peter Lored an a most notable
citisen.
but himself in the midst of these combats, and holding but up his hand on
hie, caused

There is also in the reverend fear of religion a great power for the staying
of the The reverend fear of religion a good mean for the appeasing of the
seditious people.
tumultuous people. For at such time as the Florentines were fallen out into
such a fury among themselves, as that the city swome with the blood and
slaughter of the citisens: and that they could by no means be parted, Francis
Soderin the bishop attired in his bishoplike attire, and attended upon with a
company of priests, and a cross carried before him, came into the midst of
the furious citisens, so bandying it one against Iadus the Jews high Priest,
in his Pontifici^libus met Alexander the Great coming toward Jerusalem with
his victorious army, with whose port and majesty Alexander terrified,
worshipped the High Priest, and was so far from ransacking either of the
country or holy city, as that he gave it great privileges, with whatsoever
the High priest else requested. With like wisdom pope Urban is reported to
have turned Attila king of the Hungarians from the siege of Aquilia.

But sometime such is the deadly hatred of citisens amongst themselves, as that
they Seditions sometimes appeased by the interposition and mediation of friends.
need of the help of their friends and allies, yea and sometimes even of mere
strangers to set them agreed. In which case an other good old man of Florence
seeing the citisens without pity to kill and massacre one another, and on all
sides to burn one another houses, went to request the Luquois their
neighbors and friends, to interpose themselves for the appeasing of these so
deadly broils, as had well near ruinated the whole estate: Wherewith the
Luquois moved, came in great numbers, by whose good travel and mediation all
those slaughters and broils were well stayed and quited: a thing both
commendable and profitable, not to them only which are so set agreed, but even
to them also which were the workers therein, as reaping thereby great Nothing
more dangerous unto a prince, than in seditions to make himself a party.
it, that sometime it happens the sovereign prince to make himself a party,
in

But religion by common consent once received and settled, is not again to be
called It is dangerous to call that into question which ought to be holden as
resolved upon.
into question and dispute, that so all the ways and entrances unto sedition
and faction may be stopped, and the assurances of unity and peace strengthened;
for that all things called into disputation, are so also but as things probable
called in doubt: and what can come nearer to impiety then by probable arguments
to call in doubt the laws of God, which are by their nature immutable and
eternal; and such as of the truth whereof every man ought to be most certainly
resolved and assured Besides that, nothing is so firm and stable, nothing so
manifest and clear (except it rest upon most Religion once received and
settled, to be no more called into question or doubt.
plain and undoubtful demonstrations) which may not by disputation and force
of arguments be obscured or made doubtful; and especially where that which is
called

There is a most ancient law of Licurgus extant, which the Florentines (of all
others the sharpest disputors) established in their popular estate, viz. Ne de
legibus semel reepctis ac probatis disserere liceret, That it might not be
lawful to dispute or make question laws once received and allowed. For why he
of others the wisest* well understood, laws disputed and reasoned upon to be
still doubted of; which doubting brought with it an opinion of the iniquity
thereof; whereof must needs follow the contempt Anaxagoras maintained the snow
to be black, and Fauorinus the Quartaine fever to be a very good and
wholesome thing; and Carneades having one day highly commended justice, the
very next day preferred injustice before it, and that it was (without all
comparison) better to be a very knave than a virtuous honest man: which they
all so perfuasiuely did, as that they drew a great number of men to be indeed
Aristotle said them which made question, whether snow were white or not, to
want sense: but them which doubted whether there were a God or not* not to be
with arguments refuted, but by the laws punished: howbeit that he himself by
necessary demonstration proved there to be one everlasting God, and that there
could be no more gods but he. Wherefore, all the kings and princes both of
Affricke and of the East, do most straightly forbid all men to dispute of their
religion. Which like strict prohibition is also set down by the laws and
decrees of Spain. So also the king of Moscouie seeing his people, who had
received the rites and ceremonies of the Greeks, divided into diverse sects and
factions, by reason of the diverse preachings and disputations of the ministers:
he thereupon forbad them upon pain of Moses, when he had most curiously
written all those things which he had learned and received from Almighty God,
and declared the same unto the people: yet in one chapter of the law (the
people yet wandering up and down in the desert) he commanded the priests and
Leuits aloud and distinctly to read the law, yea, and that daily also, that so
it might be understood Optatus Mileuit^nus. For why, disputation was * Lib. 3.
invented* but for things probable and doubtful; and not for things religious
and necessary, and such as every man is bound to believe: which by disputation
are always made doubtful. Wherefore seeing that disputations of religion
bring not only the doubt and overthrow of religions, but even the ruin and
destruction of Commonweales Disputations of religion dangerous.
also; it behooves them to be by most strait laws forbidden: which after long
civil war was by the estates and princes of the Germane empire provided for,
and a decree made, that the princes should with mutual consent defend both the
Roman and Saxon religion: whereunto that was also joined, That no man should
upon pain of death dispute of the religions. Which severe punishments, after
that the Germane magistrates had inflicted upon diverse, all Germany was
afterward at good quiet and rest: no man daring more to dispute of matters of
religion. Moreover, seeing that not only all wise law-giuers and Philosophers,
but even the very Atheists themselves also (as namely Lib. 6. De militari ac
domestica Romanorum disiplina.
Polybius himself an Atheist) are of accord, That there is nothing which does
more uphold and maintain the estates and Commonweals than religion: and that
it The power of religion.
magistrates, for the fear of doing evil, and for the mutual love and amity
of every one toward other, it is by most strait and severe laws to be
provided; that so sacred a thing as is religion be not by childish and
sophistical disputations, (and especially by such as are publickely had) made
contemptible, or by probable arguments made doubtful, and so at length quite
taken out of the minds, both of the hearers and of the disputors together.
Neither are they to be heard which think themselves to be able with more
subtle reasons to persuade all things: for that as Papinian most wisely said,
Summa ratio est quae pro religione facit, It is of all the greatest reason,
which tends to the maintenance of Religion.

I will not here in so great variety of people so much differing among
themselves in Religion not to be enforced.
religion, take upon me to determine which of them is the best (howbeit that
there can be but one such, one truth, and one divine law, by the mouth of God
published) but if How a prince well assured of the truth of his religion is to
draw his subjects thereunto, being therfo^e divided into sects and factions
the prince well assured of the truth of his religion, would draw his subjects
thereunto, divided into sects and factions, he must not therein (in mine
opinion) use force: (For that the minds of men the more they are forced, the
more froward and stubborn they are; and the greater punishment that shall be
inflicted upon them, the less good is to be done; the nature of man being
commonly such as may of it self be led to like Theodosius the elder, who at
the beginning of his reign found all the provinces of the empire full of
Arrians, Ambrose in these words declare, Trade Arrianis Basilicam, mei namque
sunt omnia iuris, Give (says he) unto the Arrians a church: for that all are
in my power. Which thing Rotaris also king of the Lombards by his law
permitted. And yet nevertheless this emperor living according to his religion,
and instructing his children and kinsmen in the same, wonderfully diminished
the Arian sect in Europe: howbeit that they have ever since continued, and so
yet do, both in Asia and Affrike, under the law of Mahomet, grounded upon the
same foundation. The great viz. That of the Jews, that of the Christians, that
of the Grecians, and that of the Mahometanes: and besides that, sends alms
unto the Calogers or religious Monks, dwelling upon the mountain Athos
(being Christians) to pray for him: as did Augustus to the Jews, to whom he
ordinarily sent his alms and perpetual sacrifices to Jerusalem, which he
commanded to be Ne qui nisi Romani dij, neu quo alio more quam patrio
Colerentur, That no gods should be worshipped but the Roman gods, neither after
any other manner than after the manner of the country) yet for all that did
they easily suffer every man privately within the city to use his own manner
and fashion, and his own religion: yea the Romans themselves received into the
city the sacrifices of Isis and of Esculapius, and suffered the Pantheon to be
dedicated to all the Antiochus the Noble besieged Jerusalem, the Jews took
truce with him for eight days, wherein they might keep holy the Feast of
their deliverance out of Egypt, dedicated unto the honor of the immortal
God: Whereunto Antiochus (as Plutarch writes) willingly condescended; and yet
not so contented, with great reioicing brought also bulls and rams for the
furnishing of the sacrifice even unto the gates of the city. Howbeit that
afterward the time of the truce expired, he took the city and sacked it. But
as he was about therein to have sacrificed after the manner of the Greeks, the
Priests and Levites cursing and banning, forsook the Temple. For which cause
Antiochus enforced Ptolomeus Lagus (as Agatharchides writes) and after him
Pompeius, after long siege having taken Jerusalem (the same day that the Jews
had before taken truce with Antiochus) yet both of them kept their hands from
sacrilege: which Crassus did not, neither Flaccus: whom yet Cicero denies to
have taken any gold belonging unto the temple; in which oration, as served for
his purpose, he said, The gods of the Jews to have delivered their servants
from the bondage of the Romans. So that the Jews detesting Quadratus being
President of Judea, a common soldier had in contempt showed his tail unto
the Jews, as they were sacrifising in the temple, such an vpro^e and tumult
ensued thereof, as that twenty thousand of the Jews were there slain. At
which time the Jews by a decree of the Senate, were driven also out of Rome:
where Tiberius caused such as would not remove thence, either to change their
religion, or to become slaves; but this was done in Rome only. For the same
Tiberius forbad Pilat, who had determined to have placed certain shields and
escutchions in the temple of the Jews, to place the same, or to alter any
thing of their religion. But Alexander Seuerus the emperor in his private
sacrifices worshipped Abraham, Orpheus, Hercules, and Christ. But when the
Christians as well as the Jews, had begun to detest those thirty thousand
gods which Pindarus now in his time worshipped, and so began to breed a
contempt of the gods in the minds of men, the princes and magistrates began
likewise with most grievous punishments to persecute them, except they would
forswear Christ and the Christian religion, the Jews (bearing themselves upon
the antiquity of their religion) being become their accusers and enformers
against them, least they should seem partakers of the same impiety with them.
And thus as the multitude of religion and sects was innumerable, some detesting
the rites and ceremonies of others: so thereof proceeded also the diverse and
Antiochus, whom we but even now spoke of. Which was the cause that
Theodoricus king of the Goths (though favoring the Arrians) would not yet
enforce the conscience of his subjects, nor have them tormented for their
religion; least under the pretense of impiety he should have seemed to have
taken the spoil of their goods, or bind their minds, which could by no threats
or commands be constrained or bound. For so he wri^ing unto the Senate No man
to b^ compelled against his will to believe.
at Rome, uses these words, Religionem imperare non possumus, quia nemo
cogitur vt credat inuitus, Religion (says he) we cannot command, for that no
man is compelled Cassiodore: Which reason of all others seems unto me most
effectual, for the taking away of such punishments, as are under the color of
religion to be inflicted upon the subjects. Wicked and strange rites and
ceremonies, and such other as the greater part of the subjects of greatest
power detest, I think it good and profitable to have them kept out of the
Commonweal. For the preservation of the subjects love amongst themselves,
which is especially nouished and maintained by their consent and agreement in
matters of religion: yet if the same religion be liked of by the opinion of
neighbor nations, and of many of the subjects, then ought it not only with
punishments not to be restrained, but also so much as may be provided, that if
it may not without sedition be publicly profes^ed, yet that no To forbid men
the private exercise of their religion, is to make them oftentime^ to become
Atheists.
to pass, that they which are destitute of the exercise of their religion, and
withal distasted of the religion of the others, shall become altogether
Atheists (as we daily see) and so after that they have once lost the fear of
God, tread also under foot both the laws and magistrates, and so inure
themselves to all kinds of impieties and villainies, such as is impossible by
man's laws to be redressed. Howbeit what lettteth us to follow the council of
the most holy prophets, of whom Baruc^.
the one persuaded his countrymen l^d away into captivity into Chaldea, That
at such time as they should be enforced to fall down before the idols, yet
that they should with a pure mind always worship the ever living God: and the
(...).
other admitted the request or excuse of Naaman the Atheism worse than the
greatest Superstition.
Anatchie, when as there is neither prince nor magistrate, none that obeieth,
neither yet any that commands, but that all men live as they list at
liberty in all looseness of life, without fear of punishment. So the
greatest superstition that is, is not by much any thing so detestable as
Atheism. And truly they (in mine opinion) offend much, which think that the
same punishment is to be appointed for them that make many of the religion
which is publicly received, we should seem to allure or stir the subjects

But now, whereas some men marvel how it came to pass, that in the time of
Theodosius, Why many sects better agree in a Commonweal than two only.
considering the diversity of sects and of religions that then were, they
could so stand without civil wars, being then at the least an hundred diverse
sorts of them according to the account of Tertullian and Epiphanius: whereof
the cause was, the multitude and variety of such different opinions, which so
still held one of them in counterpoise with another. Now in matters of sedition
and tumult, nothing is more dangerous, than to have the subjects divided into
two opinions or factions only, whether it be before matters of estate, or of
religion, or for the laws and customs, or other matters Solon by law
provided, That in civil seditions and troubles, every man should of Whether
Solons law for part-taking* as that every man should be of necessity bound to
take either the one o^ the other part in time of sedition, be good and
profitable unto Commonweals or not
necessity take either the one or other part, and that it should not be
lawful for any man to stand as neu^er: which unto many seemed a thing
unreasonable, considering that the greatest praise and commendation of a good
subject is; to be a quiet civil man, desirous and doing the best that he can
to live in peace. Besides that, by this means Solons law seems to repugne, in
forcing a man to take either the one part or the other, although that they be
both naught. Howbeit that a man might say unto Solons law to be most profitable
and necessary also unto Popular and Aristocratike estates, wherein is no
sovereign, which standing as neu^er, may determine and decide the differences
of them which shall so be at discord and variance. For men well know, that the
most crafty men in time of civil wars, withdraw themselves so much as
possibly they can out of the preasse, if they be not well assured of the
victory of the part that they themselves take (if it be not so, that they see
the danger such, as that the public fire is like to take hold and burn even
their own private houses) yea oftentimes the more subtle and deceitful sort
set the rest at dissension and debate, that so they may themselves the better
fish in troubled water, and make a bridge for themselves to pass over, to
ceize upon other men's goods and honors: imitating therein Mars, whom the
auntients called (...), or Fire-bearers, who having orderly performed their
solemn execrations, cast fire brands betwixt both armies standing ready
ranged, and so stirred them up to battle: but yet retired themselves in
safety out of the medley and danger. Now if the law of Solon might take
place, these fire makers durst not sow debate and discord among the citisens,
seeing that they must themselves then run into the same danger with others. And
as for other honest men which love peace, and like neither of the one nor other
faction, if they must needs be constrained to take a part, they will then
enforce themselves by all means to prevent seditions, and in what they may to
withstand them: or if they cannot be foreseen, yet Solons law seems to be
unto cities and Commonweales profitable. Besides that, if in the leagues and
societies of princes among themselves, it be good and profitable for them all,
some one of them to be of greater power than the rest, or at leastwise to join
himself with them that be of greatest power: how much more true and
profitable is it in civil wars still to take the one or the other part:
where he which stands as neuter, as he is of no man protected, so lies he
open to the common The dangerous estate of them that stand as neuters in time
of sedition.
spoil of all men. For so Theramenes, who all the time of the Peloponesian
war, and the troubles of the Athenians, had kept himself quiet, and stood
still looking on, but as an idle beholder, without taking part either with the
one or with the other, was himself at the last forsaken of all, and so left
unto the mercy of the tyrants, who made him a miserable spectacle unto all
men, and in the end most cruelly put him to death. He therefore which will
stand as neuter, whether it be in civil war, or in wars amongst
strangers, ought at the least to do his endeavor to set the rest agreed: or
if he shall see the quarrels, wars, and ruins of others, to tend to the
profit of the better sort, or the assurance of his estate, his wealth or person
(as it sometimes happens that tyrants A thing which God (as Solomon Proverb.
4.
says) abhors: if it be not in case (as I have said) that the concord and
agreement of the evil, tend to the inevitable ruin and decay of the good. For
as for one good virtue, there are many vices one of them quite contrary unto
another; and that for one good man, there be ten which are nothing worth: so
God has also appointed, That the evil and wicked men should even one of them
by another be brought to ruin and destruction: I will revenge me (says God,
speaking by the mouth of the prophet Jeremy) of mine enemies, by mine enemies.
I have said, that good princes and good subjects ought to dissemble the good
and pleasure they take in the discord and contention of other the wicked
princes or citisens; for that there is nothing which grieueth a man more, than
to see others in all security, to take pleasure and rejoice in his ruin and
decay.

Thus have we seen certain means for the appeasing of tumults and seditions
The use of belles, why in many countries forbidden.
amongst many. For which there might yet some more particulars be also
rehearsed; as to take away the use of belles from rebellious or seditious
citisens: so as we read to have been done in the rebellions at Montpelier, and
at Bourdeaux, which were yet afterward unto them again not without a great
fine restored: howbeit that the greater and to thrust fools headlong into
fury: as did he, who the more to stir up the people

Another and the most usual way to prevent sedition, is to take away the
subjects The best and surest way to prevent sedition.
arms: howbeit that the princes of Italy, and of the East cannot endure that
they should at all have arms; as do the people of the North and of the West:
no more then they did in ancient time in Greece and in Asia. For so Aristotle
speaking of the Barbarians, accounts it for a strange thing, that a man
should in a quiet and peaceable city The common wearing of weapons in a
peaceable Commonweal, the occasion of many evils.
wear a sword or a dagger in time of peace: which by our laws, as also by the
manners and customs of the Germans and Englishmen is not only lawful; but
by the laws and decrees of the Swissers even necessarily commanded: the cause
of an infinite

Amongst many the lawdable manners and customs of the policy of Paris, there
is one a very good one, and well put in execution, which is, That no car-man or
porter shall wear sword, dagger, knife, or any other offensive weapon, and
that for the murders by them committed in their ordina^ie quarrels which they
still had one of them against another* which if it might take place upon all
persons: also a thousand murders and stabbings are committed, which should
never have happened, neither the seditions and broils raised, which have upon
this occasion been in many places kindled. For it is not the part of a wise
politician, neither of a good governor, to expect until the murder be
committed, or that the sedition be raised, before he forbid the bearing

Now we have before spoken of the causes which work the change of estates and
Impunitie of offenders to draw after it ruin of estates.
commonweales, of which self same causes proceed also seditions and civil
wars, as of the denial of justice, of the oppression of the common people,
of the inequall distribution forbids a charitable dealing one of us toward
another (as many have thought) but Achab, who had saved the life of Benadab the
king of Syria, whom he should have put to death, God caused it to be told
unto him by his prophet, That he was become surety for another man, and that
it should surely cost him his life therefore. Which being but spoken in
particular unto this one king, extends yet in general unto all princes and
Commonweals, who have no more certain cause of their ruin and decay, than the
want of the due execution of justice. To punish the rebellious, is also one of
the means to prevent and meet with rebellions yet to come, which how it is to
be done we have before said, when as we reasoned Hippocratts, who unto
desperate diseases forbids us to apply any remedy at all. But beside the
causes of seditions and rebellions, which we have The immoderat liberty of
speech given unto Orators a great cause of seditions and rebellions.
before spoke of, there is yet another, which depends of the immoderat
liberty of Hercules Celtique not as a young and strong man with a great club in
his hand, but as a reverend bauld old man, drawing after him a great number of
people enchained, and hanging by the ears with chains, which all issued out
of his mouth; to show, that the armies and power of kings and monarchs are not
so strong as the vehemency and force of an eloquent man, who encourages and
enflameth the most cowardly and faint hearted to vanquish even the most
valiant, who strikes arms out of the hands of the most courageous, who
turns rage into mildness, and barbarism into ciuility, who changes whole
The force and power of eloquence.
evil, than to good. For seeing that this is nothing else but a disguising of
the truth, and an art to make that seem good, which is indeed naught, and that
right which is wrong, and to make a great matter of nothing, as of an Emot an
Elephant (that is to say, an art to lie cunnungly) we need not doubt, but that
for one which uses this art well, fifty use the same evil, and that amongst
50 Orators it is hard to find an honest man. For that to seek after the plain
and bare truth, were a thing altogether contrary unto their profession, seeing
that the best rule that Cicero gives under the person of Marcus Antonius the
Orator, is to say nothing against himself: or rather as Aristotle says, So
well to disguise all the empires both of Affrike and of the West: yea and many
of them so wrested Joseph, from whom a preacher under the veil of religion
took both the crown and scepter: and albeit that he was commonly called the
Ass Knight, yet preached he so well, as that he assembled an army of sixscore
thousand men to take his part. In like sort he which was first called the
Sophi, invaded the kingdom of Persia, and in short time drove out the children
of Vsun Cassan the lawful king, under the same color of religion. As also
not long ago John of Leiden (who of a botcher became a preacher) ceised upon
Munster the Metropoliticall city of Westphalia, and there taking upon him the
state of a king, was hardly after three years siege by the imperial army
thence removed. And by the self same Hierome Sauanarola a preacher, incited by
Anthony Soderin, upon the contention which happened among the inhabitants at
Florence, about the estate, so much prevailed with his persuasions unto the
people, as that he translated the sovereignty from the nobility unto the
people, and changed the Aristocratie into a Democratie or Popular estate. No
otherwise than had before Ephialtes, by the setting on of Pericles by his
seditious orations, drawn unto the people the sovereignty of that state,
taken from the Senate of the Areopagi; and so made the Athenian estate of all
others the most Popular. And to be brief, we have seen all Germany in arms,
and an hundred thousand men slain in less than in a year space, after that
the mutinous preachers had stirred up the people against the nobility. How
often has the speeches of preachers been Nestorius, preaching before the
emperor at Constantinople in this sort, Give me emperor, the earth void of
heretics, and I will give thee heaven: destroy with me the heretics, and I
with thee will ruinat the power of the Persians: for which he was called the
Fire maker: For had the emperor given credence unto him, he had so put to
death the greatest part, and almost all his subjects, and Nestorius himself
first of all. Wherefore a knife is not more dangerous in the hand of a
Eloquence in an evil man as dangerous, as a sword in a mad man's hand.
mad man, than eloquence in the mouth of a mutinous Orator. And yet
nevertheless it is a mean for them which will well use it, to reduce the
people from barbarism to humanity, to reform disordered manners, to correct
the laws, to chastise tyrants, to cast Plato says) by the sweetness of their
eloquent persuations, charm even the most savage and cruel people. Neither is
there any other A wise, virtuous, and eloquent preacher, of all others the
fittest man to appease rebellions, and to keep the people in obedience to
their prince.
greater or better means for the appeasing of seditions and tumults, and to
keep the subjects in the obedience of their princes, than to have a wise and
virtuous preacher, by whom they may bend and bow the hearts of the most
stubborn rebels, especially in a Popular estate, wherein the ignorant people
bears the sway, and cannot possibly be kept in order but by the eloquent
Orators: which for this cause have always holden the chief degree of honor
and power in such Popular estates, causing the honorable charges and
commissions, gifts and rewards, to be still given to whom they saw good: so

THE FIFTH BOOK OF
CHAP. I. What order and course is to be taken, to apply the form of a
Commonweal to the diversity of men's humors, and the means how to discover
the nature and disposition of the people.
HItherto we have treated of that which concerns the general Estate of
Commonweales; Let us now show what may be particular to some, through the
diversity of peoples humors, to the end that we may accommodat the public
weal to the nature of the place; and the ordinances of man to the laws of
nature, whereof many have had small regard: but striving to make nature obedient
to their edicts, have The nature of the people is much to be regarded in the
framing of a Commonweal.
oftentimes troubled, yea ruined great estates. And yet those which have
written of a Commonweal, have not treated Towns unevenly built upon
mountains and valleys, are subject to seditions.
places, are more subject to seditions and chaunges, than those that are built
upon an Plutarch (having not duly examined the cause) does wonder why there
were three factions in Athens of diverse humors: those of the high city, which
they called Astu, demanded a Popular State; those of the base town required
Oligarchia, or the government of few; and the inhabitants of the Port Pjree,
desired an Aristocraticall State, that is, a mixed government of the nobility
and the people: whereof we will soon show you a natural cause. And if
Theophrastus find it strange that the people of Greece be so different in
manners and dispositions, who would not admire to see such contrary humors in
one and the same city? we cannot impute it to the mixture of people which have
come thither from all parts, seeing that Plutarch Solons time, when as the
Athenians were so little mingled with any other nations, as they held for
certain, that they were issued out of the land of Attica, wherein the Orator
Aristides does glory. In lik sort we say the Swissers (having their original
out of Sweden) to be very different in manners, nature, and government: for
although they be more strictly allied than ever any nations were, yet the five
small cantons of the mountains, and the Grisons, are held more fierce and more
warlike, and do govern wholly popularly: the rest are more tractable, and are
gouerded by an Aristocratie, being more inclined thereunto, than to a Popular
estate. It is needful to have a special care to the nature and inclination of
the people, if we will change an estate To frame an estate, we must apply it
to the nature of the subjects.
as it happened in Florence, about an hundred years since, when as the
Commonweal Aristocratia, the citisens being so increased, as they were forced
thrice to enlarge the compass of their walls. For the prevention whereof the
Senate was assembled, and the matter propunded: whereas the Senator Vespucius
did show by lively reasons, That an Aristocraticall estate was without all
comparison the most sure, and far better than a Popular government; giving
for an example the state of Venice, flourishing under the command of few
gentle men: but Antonie Soderine maintained a Popular estate, and prevailed;
saying, That Guichardin.
the nature of the Venetians was proportionable to an Aristocratie, and the
Florentines to a Popular estate. We will soon show if his grounds were true.
We read also, that the Ephesians, Milesians, and the Siracusians were almost of
the Florentines humor: The humors of sundry people.
much more fierce and rebellious, being more Westward. The people of the East
have much more ostentation and many words, in the judgment of all ancient
writer, and even of the ambassador of the Rhodiots, excusing the fault of his
masters, upon their natural inclination, making mention also of the natural
vices of other people, Gentes aliae (inquit) iracundae, aliae audaces, quaedam
timidae, in vinum ac venerem proniores aliae sunt, Atheniensium populum fama
est celerem and supra vires audacem ad conandum, Lacedemoniorum cunctatorem:
non negauerim and totam Asiae regionem inaniora Liuius lib. 4.
parere ingenia, and nostrorum tumidiorem sermonem esse, Some nations (said he)
are cholerike, others bold; some fearful, others prone to wine and women; the
people of Athens are said to be sudden, and exceeding bold to attempt any
thing; the Lacedaemonians are slow and deliberat: I will not deny, but that all
the region of Asia brings Notable differences between the Atheniens, Romans,
and Carthaginians.
forth vain wits, and ours great talkers. The people of Athens (said Plutarch)
were cholerike and pitiful, taking pleasure in flatteries, and enduring easily
a scoff: but those of Carthage were cruel and reuengefull, humble to their
superiors, and imperious to their subjects, faint hearted in adversity, and
insolent in prosperity. The people of Rome contrary unto them were patient in
their losses, constant in their victories, moderat Cato demanding the
Censorship of the people, said, That they had need of a severe Censor,
threatening to punish vice with severity: yet the people desired rather to
choose him that threatened them, being but of a mean calling, than the greatest
Plut. in Calon^ Censorio.
noble men* that flattered them. The like they did to L. Torquatus, whom the
people did choose Consul without his priuitie: understanding of his election,
he told the people, That his disposition was such, as he could not tollerat
their vices, neither could the people endure his commandments; and therefore
if they were wise, they should make another choice: yet was he chosen again by
the people. That which I say may Alcibiades speaking to the people, let fly a
quail out of his bosom, and the people run after it, and brought it to him
again. If he had done this in Carthage (says Plutarch) before the people,
they would have stoned him: the Romans would not have suffered it unpunished;
for that a citisen of Rome was deprived of his Bourgeship, for that he had
Valerius Maximus does testify.

Therefore a wise governor of any Commonweal must know their humors, before
he attempt any thing in the alteration of the state and laws. For one of the
greatest, and it may be the chiefest foundation of a Commonweal, is to
accommodat the estate to the humor of the citisens; and the laws and
ordinanees to the nature of the place, persons, and time. For although Baldus
says, That reason and natural equity is not restrained nor limited to a
certain place: that is to be understood, when as the reason is universal,
and not whereas a particular reason of places and persons receives A good
Architect fits his building according to the stuff he finds upon the place.
a private consideration. For which cause we must vary the estate of the
Commonweal to the diversity of places; like unto a good Architect, which does
fit Isocrates said in the praises of Busiris king of Egypt, whom he esteems
very much, for that he could choose a country and a people the fittest in all
the world to govern. Let us first speak of the nature of the people of the
North and South, and then of the East, and West, and the difference betwixt the
mountainers and those that live in valleys, or in moorish places, or that are
subject to violent winds: then will we show how much discipline may change the
nature and disposition of men, rejecting the opinions of Polybius, and Galen,
who held, That the country and nature of the place did rule necessarily in the
manners of men. And the better to understand the infinite variety which may be
betwixt the people A division of people.
of the North and South, we will divide all the nations that inhabit the earth,
or this side the Equator, into three parts: the first shall be of thirty
degrees on this side the Equator, which we will attribute to the burning
Regions, and people of the South: and the thirty degrees next, to those that
inbabit the temperat regions, unto the sixtieth degree toward the Pole, and
from thence unto the Pole shall be the thirty degrees of the nations of the
North, and the regions that be exceeding cold. The like division may be made of
regions beyond the Equator, toward the Antartike Pole: then we will divide
the thirty degrees of the burning regions into the moitie, the fifteen first
The heat is greater under the Tro pick, than under the Equator.
being more moderat, betwixt the Equator and the Tropickes; the other fifteen
more burning, under the Tropicks: and by the same means we will take the
fifteen degrees (...) and Saxo Grammaticus.
have given the reason of these divisions in a particular book of the Method
of Histories, and therefore need less now to enter any further into it. These
points being concluded, Hipocrates does confess, the which we must reconcile
with the rest, in setting Aristotle and Hipocrates agree herein.
the limits as I have said. And the saying of Hipocrates shall be understood
of those nations that inhabit beyond the 70 degree toward the Poles. We will
also allow of the opinion of Hippocrates, and after him of Aristotle, who have
written, That the people of the North have a flaxen and fine hair. And yet
Galen says, That they Plutarch, Tacitus, Iuuenal, and in our times the Baron
of Herbestein have observed: and The difference of the people in the Northern
regions.
as I have discoursed in my book of the Method of Histories, and showed that
Amiot in his translation of Plutarch, upon the town of Marius, terms them
red and chestnut eyes: whereas he should have called them green eyes: the which
is very apparent. Nictalopes. Of this I was assured of the ambassador
Pruinski, a Lituanian, and of Holster Commissarie of the wars, borne at
Ostolcome in Sweden, who is haired like a Kow, and eyed like an Owl: which
color, force, and bigness, comes (as Aristotle says) of the interior heat:
as the inhabitants of Affrike have black eyes, for the little heat they have
in their interior parts, being exhaled by the heat and drought of the sun:
whereas the cold does keep in the heat in the Northern regions, if it be not
so vehement as it does in a manner quench it: for which cause those that inhabit
beyond the 75 degree, are weak, In the history of Moscouie.
sometimes before it falls to the ground, the which may seem incredible. But
it is most certain that the Baltique sea freezeth in such sort, as whole
armies pass from the maine land to the islands; although the heat in summer is
sometimes so violent, as it burns not only the fruits of the earth, but also
the houses and villages, as the same author writes that it has happened in
Moscouie, in the year 1524. The which also chanced in Polonia, in the year
1552, as Thomas Cromer writes. And the like chanced in England, in the year
1556, as I have seen by letters from M. de Nouailles ambassador in England fot
the French king: in the which he does assure, That the heat had been so
Aristotle does affirm in his Problemes, That the heat The heat more vehement
in summer in cold countries than in hot.
is more violent in cold countries than in hot: but that is to be understood
in watery places. And whereas there is some mountain which doubleth the heat by
reuerberation; as it happened in the town of Naim in Gascoine, the which was
wholly burnt with the heat of the sun at noone day, in the year 1540: and the
town of Montcornet near unto Laon, the which was burnt in the month of May,
in the year 1574, after a strange manner, the fire flying through the streets,
and through places far distant from the houses where it first began: for the
situation thereof is waterish, as I Why the sun is hoater on the earth than
in the air.
effect upon the earth than in the air; and in a vaporous air in moist
regions, than in a dry country, whereus the air is subtle, and without any
sencible bodies: which may be the cause that God has made the Southern
countries more rainie, and less waterish: and those places which are moist in
the Southern parts, lie commonly toward What places in the South are most
subject to waters.
(which is so called for the abundance of waters) has the Pyrenean hills.
Barberie has mount Atlas, which is wonderfully high, out of the which the
springs and rivers rise all toward the North (as we read in Leo of Affrike)
also the sun casting his beams perpendicularly upon the country, would make
that inhabitable, the which is one of the most fruitful and best peopled
countries in the world. And even as in winter the places under ground, and the
inward parts of creatures, retain the heat which does euaporat in summer: even
so it fares with people that inhabit the Northern parts, which have the inward
heat more vehement than those of the Southern regions: which heat causes the
forces and natural powers to be greater in the one than in the other: Hannibal
passing into Italy, and the army of Moors and Arabians, which have come into
Europe: and of seven thousand Spaniards which passed into Germany, under the
emperor Charles the fifth: and of forty thousand Gascoines, which went to
succor the king of Sweden, who obtained goodly victories. And contrariwise the
armies that come out of the North, grow weak and languish, the more Why the
armies of the North languish when they go toward the South.
they go toward the South, yea even in summer; as it appeared in the
Cimbrians, of whom Plutarch witnesses, That they were all molten with sweat,
and languished Charles of Bourbon and of George Fronsperg, of the which after
they had sacked Rome, there died ten thousand without any blow, before the year
was expired, as Guichardine writes. This does also plainly appear in the
troops of cattle which go out of the North into the South, they loose their
fatness, and their milk, and fall away: the which Pliny has noted, and the
merchants find it true by daily experience. And even as the Spaniard doubles
his appetite and forces, coming out of Spain into France; even so the French
loose their appetites and languish, going into Spain: Leo of Affrike, and
Francis of Aluares, (who have Why the people of the South be abstinent.
written the histories of Affrike and Ethiopia) had well observed this reason,
which is natural, they had not so highly commended the abstinence of those
people: for they cannot have any appetite, the interior heat wanting in them.
Neither must we blame the people of the North, for that they are more hungry,
and devour more than they Why the people of the North are more hungry.
of the South, considering the inward heat and greatness of the men. The same
effects are found in the Antartike regions: for (...) read in the Histories of
the Indies, That Magellan found near unto the strait which he called by his
own name Giants Patagenes, so great and mighty, that eight Spaniards armed
were troubled to hold one; but otherwise very simple. The people of the North
get it by force, and they of the South by policy: so they of the midst
participat of the one and the other, and are more fit for war, by the
judgment of Vegetius and Vitruuius: and therefore they have erected great
empires, the which have flourished in arms and laws. And the wisdom of God
has so well distributed his graces, as he has never joined fo^ce with
excellency of wit, neither in men nor beasts: for there is nothing more cruel
than i^iustice armed The people of the middle regions are better tempered in
wit and body.
the South, and less policy: and more wit than they of the North, and less
force; and are more fit to command and govern Commonweales, and more just in
their actions. And if we look well into the histories of all nations, we shall
find, That even as great armies and mighty powers have come out of the North;
even so the hidden knowledge of Philosophy, the Mathematikes, and other
contemplative sciences, are come out of the South: and the politic sciences,
laws, and the study thereof, the grace of well speaking and discoursing, have
had their beginning in the middle regions, and all The greatest empires were in
the middle regions.
great empires have been there established; as the empire of the Assyrians,
Medes, Persians, Perthians, Grecians, Romans, Celtes. And although that the
Arabians and Moors Tacitus says, speaking of the Germans. And although that
Traian had made an admirable bridge upon the river of Danow, and vanquished
Decebalus Adrian his successor, caused it to be broken down, fearing least
the people of the North (having such a passage open) should enter into the
heart of the Roman empire: as they did after that the emperor Constantine had
discharged the Roman legions, which guarded the river of Rhine and Danow: For
soon after the Almans, then the Goths, Ostrogothes, Vandales, Francs, The
people of the North dispersed throughout all the Roman empire.
Bourguignons, Herules, Huns, Hongres, Lombards; and in succession of time,
Normans, Tartars, Turks, and other nations of Scithia, invaded the Provinces
which the Romans had held. And although the English have had great victories
over the French and conquered the country which lies South to them, yet for
these nine hundred years they could never expel the Scottish men out of the
island; and yet it is well known Esai. 14. 41. Ezec. 16. 51. Dan. 8. 48. Za^h.
11.
the North, foretelling that war murder, and the ruin of Commonweales should
come from thence. For although that men be much diminished in numbers, force,
proportion, vigor, and age, in respect of the auntients (a complaint of most
writers by Pliny) so hardly upon the face of the earth shall you now find a
city comparable to Capua (containing thirteen miles in circuit) much less
matchable to the famous Babylon, which though it were situated four square in
a level soil, yet could a good foot man hardly travel round about it in
three days: but this notwithstanding in multitudes of people, in strength of
bodies, and large proportion of members, the Northern provinces do at this day
far excel the Southern. In regard whereof that military discipline of the
Romans, which priuileged soldiers at fifty years from future service, was
not allowable amongst the Lacedaemonians; who being nothing inferior to the
Romans, either for strength of body, or warlike experience, yet freed their
people from the service thereof, at forty: the reason being, for that they
Lacedemon more Southerly than Rome.
were so much the more unable to hold out so long as the Romans, by how much
the one nation approached more near to the South than the other. So bring a
Scithian from his native habitation to the South, and you shall find him
presently to droop, and fall away with sweat and faintness. And therefore the
pirates of the Mediterrannean finding by experience, that the English and Dutch
captains are unfit for pains taking in those hot countries, in their markets
prize them at a very low rate. For the people of the North are inwardly hot,
enjoying a most dry air, and therefore more thriftie than the Southern, who
inwardly are cold, according to the property of the South, a climat moist by
nature. Wherein the Grecians deriuing, (...), i. ab humore, from moisture, are
to be believed; experience teaching us, That when the Tacitus has not
forgotten, speaking of the manners of the Germans, Diem noctemque (inquit)
continuare potando nulli probru^, ita vt craebrae inter vinolentos rixae
fiebant, They held it no disgrace (says he) to sit all day and night drinking:
so as oftentimes there fell out iarres among these drunkards. The which is not
the fault of the men, but of the region: For such as travel from the South to
the North, will eat and drink no less than they that are home bred. But
Tacitus was deceived, in saying, That the Germans did drink more and eat
less, by reason of the coldness and barrenness of the country. The reason
why they of the North drink more than in the South.
must of necessity drink more. In like sort the people of the Northern
regions have their skins softer, more hairie, and subject to sweat than the
people of the South; which have the skin hard, little hair and curled, and the
skin withered with dryness, enduring heat easile without sweating: but they
cannot well bear with cold, not wet; as appeared in the Spaniards, which died
of cold in great numbers upon the high mountains of Peruana. And no wonder,
for men bred and brought up in hot regions, in colder places inwardly wax
chill, whose bodies if any extraordinary or sudden Northwards, abounding with
rivers and lakes, do enure men's bodies to fogges and cold Herodianus, who
writes, That the Germans infested the Romans with their missiue weapons,
themselves standing safe in the midst of the waters. Which secret of nature
Galen not well understanding, seems to wonder at, especially for bathing
their newborn infants in cold ^unning rivers; a custom used in like manner
by the Ausonij,

Natos ad flumina primum,
Deferimus, saeuoque gelu dur^mus and vndis:
Our newborn babes at first to springs we bring,
To Endure cold storms their bodies so enuring.
The ground of which German custom Iulianus surnamed the Apostata writes to
be, that this people held an opinion, That the true borne children would flote
upon the waters, but the base and bastards would sink to the bottom. And even
as the people Proof to know the bastards from them that were lawful.
of the North do languish soon with heat, so are they soon wearied and tired
with labor in the Southern parts, or in a hot season. The which was first
known at the battle of Plombin, whereas the Celtes being environed with two
armies of the Romans, fought valiantly: but after they had spent their first
fury, they were soon vanquished. Polybius says, That to vanquish the Celtes,
you must but ward their blows Caesar holds the same opinion of the Gauls, That
in the beginning of a battle they were more than men, but in the end less
than women. The which is more natural to the Germans, and other people of the
North (as Tacitus says) who had known them by long experience: For the
Gauls, especially those of Languedouich, hold the middle region betwixt the
cold and extreme heat, although the quality of the Western region makes the
country more cold. And those which are in the midst are impatient of cold or
heat: the which Caesar does witness of the Gauls, who suffet cold more easily
than the Spaniards, and heat than the Germans. And even as the people of the
middle regions hold of the two extremes in humor, so do they agree with the
one and the other in manners and The middle region participats of both the
extremes.
complexions: and as God by his admirable wisdom does unite all things by
convenient means to their extremities. In like sort we see that he has
observed the same order betwixt the nations of the North and South, which can
never concur together for the contrariety of manners and humors that is
betwixt them. The which is a thing very considerable, when there is any
question to treat a peace, or to make a league betwixt two nations so
contrary, or to lead them both forth to the war together; you must place
that nation betwixt them that does participat of both their natures, and that
have their affections more moderat. As Galen says, That the Germans and
Arabians have not that commendable civility which is in them that are borne in
Asia the less, the which is not only betwixt the Pole and the Equator; but
also betwixt (...) and humanity comes from Asia.
commended by Tully, that he doubts not to affirm, That therein not only
rested the mirror of civility, but that from thence it has bin derived to all
foreign nations. But I am not of their opinions, who draw their arguments of
civility and ba^barisme from the effects of heat and cold, finding every day
by common experience, that the Southern people go beyond al other nations in
quicknes of wit, whereas barbarism and rude behavior proceed from ignorance
and want of education, a lesson long ago verified by Herodotus, who for good
wits and civil behavior commends the Egyptians before all other people of
what nation soever. And after him Caesar (in his Ipsi homines ingeniosissimi ac
subtilissimi, The men themselves were very witty and politic: And yet Egypt
is partly under the Tropique, whereas the heat is more violent than under the
Equator, by the judgment of Possidonius and the Spaniards. The Romans held the
like opinion of the people of Affrike, whom they called Paenos, who had often
deceived the Romans, and overthrown their forces by policy. So Columella
terms them Gentem acutissimam, A most subtle nation: But yet they had not
such excellent wits as the Egyptians, neither are they so near the South. And
without any further search we have the proof Philip of Comines with
admiration, for that the French lost most commonly in their wars against
them, and won still in their treaties. We may write the like of the Spaniards,
who never made treaty for these hundred years with the French, The nature of
the French.
but they had the advantage: the which were long to repeat in particular. I
will only produce the treaty of Cambresis, made in the year 1559. It cannot
be denied but the forces of France were great and sufficient to withstand a
mighty enemy, yet the Spaniard got more by this treaty, without striking
stroke, than they had done before The Spaniard always circumuents the French
by treacheries.
in forty years, never hoping (as they confessed afterward) to draw Sauoy
no^ The reason why the Spaniards circumuent the French.
active, as they would easily yield to that which was demanded, being tired
with many iourneies, and the ordinary tediousness of the Spaniard, the which
was not forgotten in this treaty. It was also observed, That in all the
sittings and assemblies made by the deputies, always the French were first
come, and although they had set all their people to watch, that they might
sometimes enter the last; yet were they still deceived by the subtlety of the
Spaniards, and impatience of the French, who seemed by this means to sue for
peace. This fault is not to be imputed to them that had the charge to treat a
peace, but unto nature, which is hardly vanquished. For we read the like of the
ambassadors of France, conferring with the ambassadors of the emperor, of
Venice, Francis Sforce duke of Milan. Our manner (says Philip de Comines) is
not to speak treatably, as they do: for we speak sometimes two or three
together, so as the Duke said, Ho, one to one. Whereby we may judge as in any
other observations, That the nature of the Spaniard (being much more
miridionall The nature of the Spaniard.
than we) is colder, more melancholic, more stayed, more contemplative, and by
consequence more ingenious than the French; who by nature cannot stay to
contemplat, being cholerike and full of spleen, the which makes him more
active and prompt, yea so sudden, as he seems unto the Spaniard to run, when
he goes but his ordinary pace: for which cause both the Spaniard and the
Italian desire to have French men to serve them, for their diligence and
quickness in all their actions: so as yearly there go The Spaniard heavy and
slothful
and Limosin, to build, plant, till their lands, and do all manual works,
which the Spaniard cannot do, but would rather die for hunger, he is so
slothful and heavy in all his actions. When as N. Strossie Prior of Capoua,
attempted to surprise Valencia in Spain, by means of the French galleys,
whereof he was then Admiral: the practice being discovered, the Viceroy sought
to expel all the French out of Valencia, which were found to be ten thousand:
for whose loyalty the Spaniards stood bound, rather than they should depart:
which shows how greatly that country is peopled with French. And without
doubt those which are bred of the mixture of those two nations, are more
accomplished than either of them: For in the Spaniard we desire more Whence
the variety of complexions does grow
their complexion is more black and yellow, black being the color of
melancholy, and yellow of choler. Galen confesses, That phlegm makes men
heavy and dull; blood The disposition of the four complexions.
and according to the mixture of these four humors, more or less, so many
varieties there be, which Theodore Duca of the house of Lascare emperor of
Constantinople has labored to comprehend in 92 kinds, not only for the four
humors, but also for the three parts of the soul, Reason, Anger, and Appetite
(or Desire:) but for that his opinions are not grounded upon the proof of any
example, nor upon necessary reason; and for that he makes no distinction of
the parts of the world, neither of moist places, hilly nor windy, from those
that are dry, plain, and temperat: neither for that he has not denied those
people which have been brought up in civil discipline, from the rude and
barbarous, in this variety of souls and humors which he has supposed, we
will Tacitus speaking The people of the North not subtle.
of the Germans, says, It is a nation that is neither subtle nor crafty,
discovering their secrets as it were in jest, and then they go easily from
their promises. The like judgment we find of the Scythians in Herodotus,
Justin, Strabo, Pliny, and Vegetius, and therefore ancient princes as well as
at this day, had no other guards for their persons than Scythians, Thracians,
Germans, Swissers, and Circassians. And even the Seigne^rie of Rhaguse or of
Genes, have no other guards but Germans and Swissers. And which is more, the
kings of Affrike beyond mount Atlas, have none other guard but Mansor emperor
of Affrike and of Spain: and heretofore the king of Tunis had 1500 light
horsemen of Christians renigadoes, and his guard of Turkish and Christian
slaves, as Leo of Affrike says; knowing well that the people of the North have
more force than subtlety, and having received entertainment of any prince,
they always remain faithful for the guard of his person, and to revenge his
injuries (although he be a tyrant) never aspiring to his estate. And therefore
Chereas captain of the guard to the emperor Caligula, having slain the
emperor, was The people of the North faithful to the prince that entertaineth
them
presently murdered by the guard, which were Germans, who could not (as
Josephus writes) forbear revenge. In like sort the ancients have observed a
barbarous cruelty in the people of the North: for even Thucidides son to
Olorus king of Thrace, terms the Thracians a most cruel nation: and Taritus
speaking of the Germans, They do not (says he) put the guilty to death after
order of law, but by cruelty, as enemies. I will let pass the ancient, and
content my self with late examples. We have none more notable than that of
George captain of the rebels in Hungary, being taken by them of
Transiluania, they caused his soldiers and companions to fast three days,
and then gave them to eat their captain half roasted, and his bowels boiled.
I omit Strange cruelties of the people of the North.
the strange cruelties of Dracula duke of Transiluania, and of Otton Trucces,
who caused Grombache a German, was condemned to have his heart pulled out being
alive, and to have his face beaten therewithal, by Augustus duke of Saxony in
the castle of Goth. We find also, that the breaking upon the wheel was
invented in Germany, and the impaling or setting men upon stakes alive, in
Tartaria. Neither is it less cruel in Tartaria, to force them that are
condemned, to break their own necks, or else to whip and torment them: Which
makes men to think, that the cruelties of the king of Moscouie published and
printed, are very likely. For the less reason and judgment men have, the
more they approach to the nature of brute beasts, who canno more yield to
reason and govern their passions than brute beasts. And contrariwise,
Melancholic men cruel and reuengefull.
the people of the South are cruel and reuengefull, by reason of melancholy,
which does inflame the passions of the soul with an exceeding violence, the
which is not easily suppressed. Polybius speaking of the wartes of the
Speudians, and Carthagineans, people of Affrike, he says, That there was never
seen nor heard of any (...), where there was more treachery and cruelty: and
yet they are but toys in respect of Terrible cruelties of the people of the
South.
the horrible treacheries mentioned by Leo of Affrike (and in our age) betwixt
Muleasses and his own children. And even the king of Tenesme being solicited
by Joseph king of Marocco to submit himself under his obedience, which his
grandfather had rejected, he slew his ambassadors; wherewith the king of
Marocco being insenced, put a million of people to the sword in the realm of
Tenesme, leaving him neither Homar Essuein a minister to Mahomet, seeking to
make himself king, after that he had forced the fort of Vngiasen, he was not
content to put all to the sword, but he cut and tare the children out of their
mothers wombes. And the same author writes, That Isaak king of Tombut in
Affrike, having taken the king of Gagao, he caused him presently to be put to
death, and his children to be guelt to serve him as slaves, doing the like unto
all the kings he takes. We read of the like cruelties or greater at the
West*Indies, newly discovered: for the Brasilians are not contented to eat the
flesh of their enemies, but will bathe their children in their blood. But the
cruelty is more remarkable, when as they do execute any one that is condemned
by law; the which should be done without passion, and free from The people
betwixt both extremes, not subject to cruelty.
that is so fleaed: Which cruelties the people that live betwixt both these
extremes can neither see nor heat without horror: and therefore it seems,
that for this cause the Romans suffered them that were condemned, to die of
hunger, and the Greeks gave them hemlocke (which is a sweet poison) to drink:
and those of Chio did temper it with water, and the Athenians with wine, to
take away the bitterness thereof, as Theophrastus says. We may therefore note
the difference of cruelty betwixt the people Why the people of the South are
more reuengefull then others, and more subject to madness.
their affections. And therefore there are more mad men in the Southern
regions, than toward the North. Leo of Affrike does write, That in the
kingdoms of Fez and Marocco there are great numbers: And even in Grenado (which
is more Southernly) there are many hospitals for mad men only. The variety of
mad men shows Why music cures mad men, and expels devils.
laugh and leap in their fooleries: and in Germany it is called the disease
of S. Victus, the which is cured by music: whether that the sweet harmony
thereof does recall the reason which was distempered, or whether that music
does cure the infirmities of the body by the mind, as the physic does cure
the mind by the body, or that evil spirits which do sometimes torment mad men
are expelled with this divine harmony, Saul in rest, which seems to have been
the cause why Elizeus when he would prophecy before the kings of Judah and
Samaria, he caused one to play of an Instrument. And when as Saul was
encountered by the holy troop of the Prophets playing upon instruments of
music, presently the spirit of God fell upon him. Oftentimes evil spirits do
apply themselves to the humor of mad men: for chollerike men strike in their
fury, which happens not in those that are of a sanguin complexion, and much
less in them that be flegmatike, which have a Lethargy, the which is a dull
and sleeping fury. And for that the melancholic man is the wiser, if he
chance to fall mad, his fury is the more incurable, for that a melancholic
humor suffers Tully says, Furor in sapientem cadere potest, insania non
potest, and furioso curator datur, The difference betwixt a furious and a mad
man.
non insano; quia insanus dicitur, qui suis cupiditatibus imperare nescit:
Fury may well fall into a wise man, but not madness: a governor is given to a
furious man, but not to a mad man, for he is called mad that cannot rule his
own desires. As touching that which we have said, that the people of the South
are commonly more grave, more discreet, and more moderate in all their actions:
it is plainly seen not only in diverse other nations, but also in this realm,
which seems to be the cause that those which have made the customs, have
limited them to be of full age that live toward the Charles the 5 called the
wise, the which he granted for the privileges of the University of the said
city in these words, Quodque inter regiones alias Regni nostri, ciuitas
Andegauensis veluti fons scientiarum irriguus, viros alti consilij solet ab
antiquo propagatione quasi naturali prouidere: For that among other provinces
of this our realm, the city of Angers like unto a flowing spring of all
sciences, is wont to

We have yet another notable difference betwixt the people of the South and of
the North, for that these are more chaste and abstinent, and those of the South
much given to lust, the which grows by reason of the spongious melancholy, so
as all Monsters do commonly come from Affrike, which Ptolomie says to be under
Scorpio and The people of the South much given to women.
Venus, adding moreover, that all Affrike did worship Venus: and Titus Liuius
speaking of the Numidians (who were the most Southerly of all the Romans
subjects or allies) The Numidians (says he) were given to venerie more than
all the other Barbarians. We read also that the kings of Affrike and Persia
had always great troops Alcazares had 400 wives: and the father of Attabalipa
the last king of Peru, (who was defeated by Pizarre) had 200 wives, and fifty
children: and the king of Giolo had 600 children: so many had Hierotimus king
of the Parthians, who had also a great number of wives: and Surenus General of
that army of the Parthians which defeated Crassus, had ten thousand. The
Scythians and Germans have enough of one wife: and Caesar in his Commentaries
says, that the Englishmen in his time had but one woman to ten or twelve men:
and many men in A strange manee of gelding of men, which they used in Scythia
and low Germany.
the North parts knowing their own insufficiencies, geld themselves in
despite, cutting Hippocrates says: who seeking out the cause of this
disabilitie, concludes, that is for the coldness of the belly, and for that,
they are commonly on horseback: wherein he is deceived, for Aristotle holds,
that agitation does provoke; and as for want of heat, it is most certain that
those which dwell in cold countries abound with heat inwardly, as it appears
by the corpulencie and strength of those Northen nations: and contrariwise
those of the South are very cold. It is the nature of melancholy which abounds
most in them of the South, the which being frothie, prouokes to lust, as
Aristotle writes in his Problemes, where he Melancholik^ men most given to lust.
demands why melancholic men are most lecherous: the which is notorious in
the Hare, the which is the most melancholic of all other creatures, and which
only conceiues M. Varro, and other writers do witness, and experience has
taught us; so as we may say they are much deceived which have so much extolled
the pudicitie and chastity of the Scythians, Germans, and other Northen
nations, as Caesar writes in his Commentaries. Among the Germans (says he)
it is a dishonest and villainous thing for a man to know a woman before the age
of 25 years, which thing they conceal not: and Tacitus says, The people of
the North enemies to women.
there are none but the Germans among the barbarous nations that content
themselves with one wife: yea sometimes they live in perpetual chastetie, as
the Emperor Henry 2. did, and Casimir 1. king of Poland, and Ladislaus king of
Bohemia would never marry; the which was not for that they were chaste, but
rather through a natural Ihon 2. great Duke of Muscouia, did so abhor women,
as he did even sound at the very sight of them, as the Baron of Herbestein does
write, speaking of the Muscouites, They never see their wives (says he) until
the day of their marriage. The people of the North are so little subject to
jealousy, as Alcomer a German, and Irenicus do write in commendation of
their country, that men and women throughout all Germany does bathe together
pel mel, yea and with strangers, without any touch of jealousy, the which as
Munster says, is not known in Germany: whereas contrariwise those of the
South are so passionate, as oftentimes they dye of that disease. Being The
people of the South much given to jealousy.
sent into England with an Embassage, I heard Mendoza the spanish Ambassador
say, That it was a shameful thing to see men and women sit together at holy
sermons: Dale Master of Requests answered pleasantly, That it was a more
shameful thing for Spaniards to think of satisfying of their lusts even in
holy places, the which was far from Englishmens minds. We read in the
history of the Indies that the king of Puna was so jealous, as he did cut off
the privy parts, with the noses and arms of those Eunukes that attended of
his women. The people that inhabit the middle regions hold a mediocritie in all
this, but the most part of them allow but one lawful wife: and although that
Julius Caesar did persuade Helu^dius Cinna to publish the law of Poligamie (or
many wives) to the end that Cesarion (whom he had by the Queen Cleopatr^)
might be legitimate, yet this law was rejected: and the same law being
revived by Ihon Leiden a cobbler, having made himself king of Munster in All
laws agree not with all nations.
them of the North, making no difference of their dispositions, wherein many
have been much deceived, and even Cardan, who says, That man is wiser than
all other creatures, for that he is more hot and moist; the which is quite
contrary to the truth, being most apparent that the wisest beasts are colder
than any other, in the opinion of Aristotle. In like sort among military
punishments, one was, to let the soldier blood that had offended, for that
those which abound in blood had the passions of the mind more violent and less
obedient unto reason. Of all beasts the Elephant is held to be the wisest, of
the Ancients, for that their blood is coldest; and the most melancholic of all
others, the which makes them leapers: and to this leprosy the people of the
Melancholy the cause of wisdom
South are much subject, the which was called by the Ancients Elephantiasis, a
disease unknown in Greece before Plutarch, or in Italy before Pompey, as
Pliny writes. But he deceiues himself to say, that it was proper to the
Egyptians, for all the coast of Affrike abounds with them; and in Ethiopia it
is so common, as the leapers are not separated from the sound. But Leprosy
differs from Elephantiasis, the which is a great swelling Melancholy the cause
of long life.
blood, and that very melancholy. Francis Aluarez reports, that he had seen
Abuna Mare Bishop of Ethiopia who was 150 years old, and yet very lusty,
which was the greatest age that ever was found in the Censors registers at
Rome. And we must not wonder if Homer says, that Memnon king of Ethiopia lived
five hundred years, for Xenophon long after writes, that in the same country
there were men that lived six hundred years: but those of the South have
very dry bodies, and are subject to the falling sickness, quartaine agues, and
the Kings evil. Hereby we may judge, that Titus The people of the South
subject to extremes.
Liuius having much commended Hannibal for his heroical virtues, These great
virtues (said he) were accompanied with as great vices, inhumane cruelty,
treachery, impiety, and contempt of all religion: for greatest spirits are
subject to greatest virtues and vices. Wherein the ancient writers have been
deceived, commending so highly the virtue, integrity, and bounty of the
Scythians, and other people of the North, and condemning the vices of the
South: For he deserves no praise for his Posse and noll^ nobile.
but he that knows evil, and how to put it in practice, and yet is an honest
man. In like sort Machiauel was ouerseene, saying, That the Spaniards,
Italians, and Frenchmen, were the wickedest people in the world; showing
thereby, that he had never read any good book, nor known the disposition and
differences of nations. But if we shall look more narrowly into the
disposition of the people of the North, of the South, and of them that are
betwixt both; we shall find that their natures are like unto young men, old
men, and them of middle age, and to the qualities which are attributed unto
them. In like sort every one of those three in the government of the
Commonweal uses that which he has most at command: The nations of the
North, by force; The manner of government in the three temperatures.
magistrate (says Tacitus) commands nothing in Germany, but with the sword in
his hand. And Caesar writes in his Commentaries, That the Germans have no care
of religion, and make no account of any thing but of war and of hunting. And
the Schythians (says Solinus) did stick a sword into the ground, the which
they did worship, placing the end of all their actions, laws, religions, and
judgments, in their force and arms. We find that combats came first from the
people of the North, as we have said elsewhere: all the laws of the Saliens,
Francons, English, Ripuaries, and other Northern nations are full of them: And
the law of Fronton king of Denmark would have all controversies decided by
single combat: Which laws could never be abrogated, Brennus captain of the
Gauls said unto the treasuror Sulpitius. The middle nations are more
reasonable and less strong, they have recourse unto reason, unto judges, and
unto suits. It is most certain, that laws and the manner of pleading are come
from the people of the middle nations; as from Asia the less (whereas great
Orators and Pleaders were in credit) from Greece, Italy, and France: whereof
a certain Poet speaks, Gallia causidicos docuit facunda Britannos, Eloquent
France has The Frenchmen given by nature to pleading.
of suits and contentions, the which cannot be altered and taken away, unless
they change the nature and disposition of the people: and it is much better to
decide all controversies by law, than by the sword; the one is fit for
reasonable creatures, the other for brute beasts: and to conclude, all great
Orators, Lawmakers, Lawyers, Historiographers, Poets, Comedians, and others
which draw unto them the hearts of men with goodly discourses and sweet words,
are in a manner all of the middle nations. We see in the histories both of the
Greeks and Latins, before they attempted the least war, the matter was
debated with many solemn orations, denominations, and protestations: the which
the people of the North do not use, who presently fall to The several
disposition of people according to the clima^s.
arms, and even as the one use force only like unto Lions, so they of the
midst arm themselves with laws and reasons. In like sort the people of the
South have recourse unto craft and subtlety, like unto Foxes; or unto
religion: for eloquent discourses agree not with the gross wits of the
Northern people, and they are too base for them of the South, who allow not of
any legal reasons or rhetorical suppositions, which hold truth and falsehood
in suspense, but they require certain demonstrations or divine oracles, which
exceed any human discourse. So we see that the people of the South, the
Egyptians, Caldeans, and Arabians, have brought to light the hidden sciences
both natural and mathematical, which torment the greatest wits, and force
them to confess Melancholic men most given to contemplation
their spirits settled and given to contemplation, the which is called by the
Hebrews and Accademiks a precious death, for that it draws the soul out of
this earthly body Means to govern the people of the South.
unto spiritual things. It is no marvel then if the people of the South be
better governed by religion, than by force or reason, the which is a point
very considerable to draw the people, when as neither force nor reason can
prevail: as we read in the history of the Indies, that Christopher Colombus
when he could not draw the people of A fine policy of Colombus the Geneuois.
the West Indies unto humanity by any flattery or fair means, he showed
them the Moon the which they did worship, giving them to understand that she
should soon lose her light: three days after seeing the Moon ecclipsed, they
were so amazed, as they did what he commanded them. So the more we draw toward
the South, the Francis Aluarez, and Leo of Affrike do say, that religion is
much more reverenced and honored there than in Europe, where among other
obseruatio^s Leo notes, That in one city of Fez there are seven hundred
temples, Religion most respected in the South.
and the greatest is 1500 paces in compass, 31 gates, and within it 900 lamps,
the yearly revenue of which temple is 73000 ducates. But Aluarez reports far
stranger things of the greatness of temples, of the incredible fasts and
devotion of the people of Ethiopia, and that the greatest part of the nobility
and the people make very strict vows of religion. The greatest reason that
has so long maintained Ethiopia in that goodly and flourishing estate, and
that does still hold the subjects in the obedience of Aluarez says) That good
and evil comes not unto them by their friends or enemies, but by the will of
God. As for suites, there are fewer than in any part of the world: and which is
more strange, they keep no records in writing of any decrees, judgments,
testaments, or contracts, except the accounts of the receipt and expenses. Who
so should seek to govern those nations by the laws and ordinances used in
Turkey, Greece, Italy, France, and other middle regions, he should ruin their
estate. In like sort he that should accustom the people of the North to the
pleading of France and Italy, should find himself much troubled, as it
happened to Mathias king of Hongarie, who sent for Judges out of Italy to
reform the jurisdiction of Hongarie, but in a short time the people Ferdinand
king of Spain sending Pedrarias Viceroy to the West Indies, the which then
were newly discovered, he did expressly forbid him to carry any lawyer or
advocate with The disposition of the people is greatly to be observed in the
government.
him, to the end he should not sow any seeds of suits and pleading where as
there was not yet any. But who so should seek to root out all suits and
processes in France and Italy, he should thrust the people into perpetual
seditions: for even the Judges themselves being unable to determine and end
suits, for the difficulty and contrariety of reasons that are of either side,
they oftentimes depute arbitrators, or else they prolong Three virtues proper
to three nations of the North, South, and middle region.
they of the South being less capable of government, give themselves wholly to
the contemplation of natural and divine sciences, and to discern truth from
falsehood. And even as the wisdom to know good and evil is greatest in the
people of the midst, Prudenti^. Scienti^. Ars.
arts which consist in handie works, are greater in the people of the North
then in any other, and therefore the Spaniards and the Italians admire so many
and so diverse kinds of works made with the hand, as are brought out of
Germany, Flanders, and England. And as there are three principal parts in the
soul of man, that is to say, the imaginatiue or common sense, reason, and the
intellectual part, even so in every well ordered Commonweal the Priests and
Philosophers are employed in the search of divine and hidden sciences, being as
it were the heart of the city, the magistrates and officers to command, judge,
and provide for the government of the State, being as it were the reason of the
city: and the common people apply themselves to labor and

We may conclude the like of the universal Commonweal of this world, the
which God has so ordained by his admirable wisdom: As the people of the
South are The disposition of the three nations in the government of the world.
made and appointed for the search of hidden sciences, that they may instruct
other nations: Those of the North for labor and manual arts: and those of
the middle betwixt the two extremes, to negotiat, traffic, judge, plead,
command, establish Commonweales; and to make laws and ordinances for other
nations: whereunto those of the North are not so apt for want of wisdom:
neither are the people of the South, be it that they be too much given to
divine and natural contemplations; or for want Why those of the South are not
fit to govern a state.
of that alacrity and promptness, which is required in humane actions; be it
that he Cambises: and to the Pithagorians in Italy. And it seems this was
figured by the fable of Jupiter, who expelled his father Saturn out of his
kingdom: that is to say, an ambitious and politic courtier dispossessed a
Philosopher given to contemplation: For who so shall well observe the nature of
Planets, he shall find in my opinion, that the division of them does agree with
the three regions above mentioned, according unto their natural order, giving
the highest Planet, which is Saturn, to the Southern region, Jupiter to the
middle, The proportion of the Planets to the people.
and Mars to the Septentrionall parts, the Sun remaining in the midst, as
the spring of light equally common to them all. Then follows Venus, proper to
the people of the South, then Mercury to them of the middle regions: and last
of all is the Moon for the North parts, which shows the natural inclination
of the people of the North to war and hunting, fit for Mars and Diana: and
the people of the South to contemplation, besides their disposition to venerie.
And the nations betwixt both the quality of Jupiter and Mercury, fit for
politic governments: the which has a strange sympathy in man's body, which
is the image of the universal world, and of a well ordered Commonweal: for
setting the right hand of man toward the North, In Method. hist. cap. 5.
and the true constitution thereof; as I have showed in another place: the
right part which is the more strong and masculine, having the liver and the
gall, which the Hebrews attribute to the Moon and Mars, shows plainly the
nature of the people of the North to be sanguin and warlike. The left side,
which is the feminine part (so called by the Philosophers) and the weaker,
having the spleen and the melancholic humor, discouers the quality of the
people of the South. Even so we find more women in the Southern parts, and
more men in the North: for else it were impossible that every man in the South
countries should have so many wives. More women in the South than men.


And thus much as touching the general qualities of all people: for as for the
particular, Julian the emperor) how the Persians and Syrians are mild and
tractable. Who sees not the fury of the Celtes and Germans, and how jealous
they are of liberty? the Romans are courteous and warlike, the Egyptians
witty and subtle, and withal effeminat. The Spaniards have observed, That
the people of Sina (the which The people of the East more courteous, and more
ingenious than those of the West.
are farthest Eastward) are the most ingenious and courteous people in the
world: and those of Brezill, which are far Westward, the most cruel and
barbarous. To conclude, if we look well into histories, we shall find, that
the people of the West do participat much of the nature of the North; and the
people of the East with them of the South in the same latitude. The natural
bounty of the air, and of the Easterly winds, is the cause that men are more
fair, and of a bigger proportion: and it is strange, if the plague or any
other infectious disease comes from the West into the East, or from the North
into the South, it continues not: whereas if they begin in the East, or in any
part of the South, they are long and very infectious: as it has been proved
by experience in old times, and at this day the conjecture is infallible in the
country of Languedoc, Remarkable particularities of places.
in the same climat or like latitude, yea in the same degree, which causes a
wonderful difference betwixt the one and the other: as it is plainly seen in
mountains which stretch from the West to the East: as the Appenin, which
divides in a manner all Italy in two, mount Saint Adrian in Spain, the
mountains of Anuergne in France, and the Py^enees betwixt France and Spain,
mount Taurus in Asia, and Atlas in Affrike, other nations which are on the
other side mount Atlas: for the one are very The cause or the diversity of
humors in Italy.
and yet the Florentines in their assemblies spoil all through the subtlety
of their wits: whereas the Venetians in their councels resolve gravely, as we
have observed for these two hundred years: for those that have least wit, yield
to reason, change their opinions, and refer themselves to men of best
judgment: but so many great spirits being subtle and ambitious, are obstinat,
and will hardly yield from their opinions: and for that every man holds
himself able to command, they will have a Popular estate, A mountain^ causes
a great difference of people that live in opposite valleys.
to Valence, find a great alteration from cold to hot, in the same degree of
latitude, by reason of the diversity of the one vallie turning to the South,
and the other to the North: in like sort shall they find a diversity of
spirits. And therefore Plato gave God thanks, That he was a Grecian, and not a
Barbarian; an Athenian, and not a Theban; although there be not twenty leagues
betwixt Thebes and Athens: but the situation Why the people of the North have
elective kingdoms.
to be commanded imperiously. So all their kings are elective, whom they
expel if they insult or tyrannize: as I have observed of the kings of Sweden,
Denmark, Norway, Poland, Bohemia, and Tartarie, which are elective.

That which I have spoken of the nature of the Northern countries, agrees with
the mountains, the which are oftentimes more cold than the regions that are
far Northward: for in many places they have snow and ice perpetually: and
even under the Equator the mountains of Peru are so high and cold, as many
Spaniards died for cold, and lay long dead before they corrupted; as we read in
the histories of the West Indies. Leo of Affrike has no cause to wonder, why
the inhabitants of the high mountain of Megeza in Affrike are white, tall, and
strong; and those of the vallie are little, Leo does testify. This force and
vigor does cause the mountainers Why those that live upon mountains love
Popular states.
to love popular liberty, who cannot endure to be braued; as we have said of
the Swissers and Grisons. And in like sort the inhabitants of the mountains of
Bugia, Fez, Marocco, and Arabia, live in all liberty, without any commander:
not through the assurance of any places that are fortified by nature, but for
that they are savage and cannot be reclaimed. The which should serve for an
answer unto Plutarchs demand, Why the inhabitants of the high town of Athens
required a Popular estate, and those of the low town the government of few:
considering the reason that I have given.

We must therefore carefully observe what every nation desires, and what they
abhor^e; and first you must draw them to a milder kind of life, before you
propound a royalty unto them, the which is effected by quietness and ease,
inuring them to the studies of sciences and music. And for this cause
Polybius says, That the ancient lawgiuers of Arcadia, had strictly bound the
inhabitants of the mountains of Arcadia, to learn music, upon great
penalties: thereby to temper the natural sauagnesse of that people. Titus
Liuius also speaking of the Aetolians dwelling on mountains, Ferociores Aetoli
quam pro ingenijs Grecorum, The Aetolians were more fierce than was agreeable
to the humor of the Greeks: They troubled the Romans more (although they had
but three towns) than all the rest of the Greeks. In like sort, the
inhabitants of the mountain of Genes defeated the Roman armies, and continued
war against them one hundred years, neither could they ever bring them in
subjection until they had transported them from the mountains into the
valleys, after which time they became good and quiet subjects; as we read in
Titus Liuius. We must not then marvel, if by the Swissers In Swisserland every
one is bound to we are a sword.
laws every man is bound to wear a sword, and to have his house furnished
with offensive and defensive arms: which other people forbad for the most
part. And contrariwise

As for the inhabitants upon the Sea coast, and of great towns of traffic,
all writers Inhabitants of valleys are effe^inate.
have observed, That they are more subtle, politic, and cunning, than those
that lie far from the sea and traffic. Therefore Caesar speaking of the
inhabitants of Tournay, These men (says he) for that they are far from the
ports of the sea, are not (...) and effeminat with the merchandise and delights
of strangers And to that end Tully said, That the inhabitants of the river of
Genes, were called deceivers and conseners; and those of the mountains, rude
and uncivil: for that these were not accustomed to traffic, to Joseph
speaking of the inhabitants of Jerusalem and Sparta, says, That they were
remote from the sea, and less corrupted than others. For which cause Plato
forbids them to build his Commonweal near unto the sea, saying, That such men
are deceitful and treacherous. And it seems that the proverb which says,
That Ilanders are commonly deceitful; should be applied to this that we have
spoken, for that they are more given to traffic, and by consequence to know
the diversity of men and their humors, wherein the policy of trading does
consist, to dissemble his words and countenance, to deceive, lie, and to cosen
the simple for gain, the which is Merchants given to lie and deceive.
the end of many merchants. And to this end the Hebrews apply that text of
Scripture, where it is said, Non eris mercator in populo tuo, There shall be no
merchant among

There is also a great variety for the difference of places subject to violent
winds, which makes people to differ much in manners, although they be in the
same latitude and climat: For we see plainly, that those people are more grave
and stayed, when the The violence of the wind breeds a great variety in men.
air is calm and temperat, than those which live in regions beaten with
violent winds: as France, and especially Languedoc, high Germany, Hungary,
Thrace, Circassia, the country of Genes, Portugal, and Persia, whereas men
have more turbulent spirits, than those of Italy, Natolia, Assiria, and
Egypt, whereas the calmnesse of the air A fertile country breeds (...)
people.
therefore Titus Liuius said, That men of a fat and fertile soil, are most
commonly effeminat and cowards; whereas contrariwise a barren country makes
men temperat by necessity, and by consequence careful, vigilant, and
industrious: as the Athenians were, whereas idleness was punished capitally:
Neither by Solons law were the children bound to reliue the parents, if they
had not taught them some means whereby to get their living. So as the
barrenness of the soil does not only make men more temperat, apt to labor,
and of a more subtle spirit; but also it makes towns more populous: A barren
soyl^ makes the people (...).
best artisans in the world: and so are the cities of Limoges, Genes, and Gand.
But those that dwell in valleys become soft and slothful through the richness
of the soil. And as they that lie upon the sea for their traffic, and those
of barren countries for their sobriety, are industrious: in like sort those
which make the frontiers of two estates being enemies, are more fierce and
warlike than the rest, for that they are continually in People given to (...)
fi^rce and sauag^.
have treated of peace and alliance with France and Scotland, and that they
have been governed by a mild and peaceful princess, they are grown very
civil and full of courtesy. Whereas contrariwise the French, which did not
yield to any nation in courtesy and humanity, are much changed in their
dispositious, and are become fierce and barbarous since the civil wars: as
it chanced (as Plutarch says) to the inhabitants of Sicilie, who by reason of
their continual wars, wete grown like vuro brute beasts.

But he that would see what force education, laws, and customs, have to
change Tacitus the Proconsull, Education alter^ nature.
had neither laws, religion, knowledge, nor any form of a Commonweal;
whereas now they seem to exceed other nations in goodly cities, and well
peopled, in arms, variety of arts, and civil discipline: And the
inhabitants of Bugia (which in old time was Carthage, the which in former times
had contended with the Romans for the empire of the world, being the most
warlike people of all Affrike) by the continuance of peace, and the practice of
music (wherewith they are much delighted) they are become so effeminat and
timorous, that Peter of Navarre coming thither with fourteen ships only, the
king with all the inhabitants fled, and without striking stroke abandoned the
city, whereas the Spaniards built goodly forts without any opposition. Plato
maintained, That there were two arts necessary in all cities, Wrestling,
Wrestling and Music necessary in all Commonweales.
and Music; the one being the nurce of the mind, the other of the body. If
they neglect wrestling, the force of the body must languish: if the study of
Music, they will become rude and barbarous: if both, then must both body and
mind grow dull with idleness and sloth: For commonly we see those whose minds
are delighted with the sweet sound of Music, to be very mild and courteous.
What should I speak of the Romans, and of that famous city, which had so
often triumphed over Europe, Asia, and Affrike, whilst that it flourished in
arms and learning; which has now lost the beauty and virtues of their
fathers, through sloth, to the eternal infamy of their idle prelates. Whereby
it appears how much education preuailes: whereof Licurgus Caesar says, That
in his time (which was some five hundred years

But it is needful to purge an error into the which many have fallen, having
taxed the French of lightness, imitating therein Caesar, Tacitus, Trebellius,
and Pollio. If they term a certain alacrity and promptness in all their
actions, Lightness; the injury pleases me, the which is common to all the
people of the middle regions betwixt the Pole and the Equator: for even in like
sort Titus Liu^us does call them of Asia, Greece, and Syria, Leuissima hominum
genera, Light kind of men: the which the ambassadaur of the Rhodians did freely
confess in the open Senate at Rome. And Caesar himself does interpret that
which he would say, acknowledging that the Gauls have good Scaliger borne at
Ve^ona, writes, That there is not any nation of a quicker and more lively
spirit than the French; be it in arms or learning, be it in the trade of
merchandise, or in well speaking: but above all, their hearts are generous and
loyal, keeping their faith more constantly than any nation. And Baptista
Mantuanus, the most excellent Poet of his age, writes thus of the French,

Hot fiery spirits have the Gauls, their bodies passing white,
And of that white have they their names; a crimson color bright
Their woman's faces garnisheth, wherewith a comely grace
Being mixed, Nature out of two sundry colors one does raise:
Frolike they are, of cheerful hew, delight in rounds and rhyme,
Prone unto Venus sports, to banqueting, and when they see their time
As prone unto Church service. They list not bear the yoke,
Hypocrisy they fly amain, and what is falsely spoke:
Hating the sullen Saturnist, they give themselves to game,
To hunting, hawking, hills and dales they will through them amain.
I, they in wars delight them too, the barbed horse to ride;
Their brigantines, their bow, and spear, to use it is their pride:
Whole nights abroad to sleep on ground it is their chiefest joy,
And to be slurd with sun, and rust, the account it nothing coy,
With dust to be orespred, to sweat under the weight of arms,
For country, kin, and eke for king, to under go all harms;
Yea death it self to them is sweet. Thus far Mantuan.
The constancy of the French appears plainly by the religion which has been
received The French held to be constant.
and allowed by our predecessors, for the which we have contended these
threescore years with such obstinacy, as no nation in the world has endured
such burnings, spoylings, tortures, and civil wars, as we have caused unto our
selves. Whereby Caesar's testimony appears to be very true, writing, That all
the nations of the Gauls was much Veronensis says, which we see in the french,
and the wonderful alacrity in doing of things proceeds from choler: from
thence grow the violent motions of the mind, from thence come murders, when as
from words they fall to blows, and choler enclining unto rashness breaks
forth suddenly, the which if it be restrained within the bound of reason it does
greatly increase wisdom the gouernesse of man's life, as Galen says, writing
of a chollerike humor, but if it be distempered, it turns into rashness,
Inconstancy incident to them of the North.
which properly we call lightness, but this inconstancy is much more proper and
incident to the people of the North. We have said (speaking in general) that
the people of the South are of a contrary humor and disposition to them of
the North: these The difference of humors betwixt them of the North and South.
hair and skin black; the one fears cold, and the other heat; the one is
joyful and pleasant, the other sad; the one is fearful and peaceable, the
other is hardy and mutinous; the one is sociable, the other solitary; the one
is given to drink, the other sober; the one rude and gross witted, the other
advised and ceremonious; the one is prodigal and greedy, the other is
covetous and holds fast; the one is a soldier, the other a philosopher; the
one fit for arms and labor, the other for knowledge and rest. If then the
inhabitants of the South be wilful and obstinate, as Plutarch says, Tacitus
writing of the Germains, says, that they hold it no dishonor to deny their
word. The Eastgoths and Weastgoths being expelled by Attila, they required some
land to inhabit from the Emperor Valens, swearing to imbrate the Christian
religion, which having granted them, they treacherously seized on Valens, and
burnt him alive, and the people of Gronland which are nearest unto the Pole,
being of an inconstant humor, as Munster The people of the North careless of
their faith.
says, did easily embrace the Christian religion, and then afterward fell
again to their Idolatry. And as for the Muscouites, the Baron of Heberstein
says in their history, that he has not known any nation more dis^oyall,
which will have all men to keep their faith with them, and they with no man.
This falsehood or treachery comes from distrust, or from fear, and both the
one and the other from want of spirit and wit: for a wise and considerate man
as those of the middle region be, is not distrustful, for that he foreseeth
what may happen, and with courage and constancy does execute what he has
resolved, the which the people of the South do not so well, being fearful,
nor they of the North which want wit. And to make it manifest how distrustful
and suspicious the people of the North be, look into the realm of Denmark
and Sweden, The government of a state alters the peoples dispositions.
of every City is of great force in the alteration of the peoples natures and
dispositions: if they be oppressed with tyranny and servitude, they grow
faintharted and dejected: they which live in popular estates and enjoy their
liberties, must of necessity be more bold and warlike, wherein not only the
nature of the heavens and regions in general are to be considered, but also
the particularities of the regions. What may grow in the minds of men from the
air, water, winds, hills and valleys, what from religion, laws, customs,
discipline, and from the state of every commonweal, and not to observe the
climate alone, for we see in climates that be alike and of the same elevation
Great differences of people in color in the same climats.
for that the West Indians are generally of a duskish color like unto a
roasted quinze, unless it be a handful of men that are black, whom the
tempest carried from the coast of Affrike: and in Civil of Spain the men are
white, at Cape Bonne Esperance black, at the river of Plate of a chestnut
color, all being in like latitude, and like climates, as we read in the
histories of the Indies which the Spaniards have left in writing: the cause may
be the change from one country to another, and that the Sun in Capricorn is
nearer unto the earth by all the eccentricall latitude, the which are above
four hundred thousand leagues. The transportation of Collonies works a great
difference in men, but the nature of the heavens, winds, waters and earth, are
of more Charlemaine brought into Flanders, differed much from all the French,
but by little and little they were so changed as they retain nothing of the
Saxon but the language, the which is much altered, pronouncing their
aspirations more lightly, and interlacing the vowels with the consonants: as
the Saxon when he calls a horse Pferd, the Flemings say Perd, and so of many
others. For always the people of the North, or that dwell upon mountains,
having a more inward heat, deliver their words with greater vehemency and
more aspiration than the people of the East or South, who interlace their
vowels sweetly, and avoid aspirations all they can (and for the same reason
women who are of a colder complexion than men, speak more sweetly) the which
was verified in one tribe of the people of Israel, Ephraim which remained in
the mountain and toward the North, which they called Gallaad, were not only
more rough and audacious and bold than those that dwelt in the valies, of the
same tribe, but did also pronounce the consonants and aspirations which the
others could not pronounce; so as being vanquished, and flying from the
battle, not able to distinguish the one from the other being of one nation,
they watched them at the passage of Iordain, demanding of them how they called
the passage or foord, which was named Schibolet, the which they pronounced
Sibolet, which does properly signify an ear of corn, although that they be
both oftentimes confounded, by which means there were 42000 men slain. It is
most certain that at that time the Hebrews held the pureness of blood
inviolable, and that The nature of the place does commonly change the language.
against the Geneuois, making them to pronounce Cabre, and killing all them
that could not do it. The like did the inhabitants of Montpellier in a sedition
which happened in the time of king Charles the fifth, seeking to kill the
strangers, they showed them Febues, and the inhabitants of the country called
them Haues; like unto the Sabins, which did pronounce Fircus Faedus, for Hircus
Haedus, as Marcus Varro says. And thus much touching the natural inclination
of people, the which notwithstanding carry no necessity as I have said, but
are of great consequence for the settling of a Commonweal, laws and customs,
and to know in what manner to treat with the one and the other. Let us now
speak of other means to prevent the changes of Commonweales, which grows
through abundance of riches.

CHAP. II.
AMong all the causes of seditions and changes of Commonweales The chiefest
cause of the change and subversion of a state
there is none greater than the excessive wealth of some few subjects, and the
extreme poverty of the greatest part. All ancient histories are full, whereas
it appears that all they which have pretended any coffeehouse against the
state, have always The cause of (...) in an estate.
and live most continently, so as seeing themselves in liberty and oppressed
with poverty, Plato called riches and poverty The two plagues of all Common^.
the two ancient plagues of a Commonweal, not only for the necessity that
does oppress the hongrie, but also for the shame, the which is more
insupportable to many than poverty it self: for the preventing whereof, some
have sought an equality, the Equality the surest maintenanc^ of a Commonweal.
subjects, as in our time Thomas Moore Chancellor of England in his Commonweal
says, That the only way of safety for an estate, is when as men live in
common: the Plato having charge to frame the Commonweal and new Colonie of the
Thebans and Phociens, by the consent of the subjects which sent Ambassadors to
him to that end, he departed, leaving it unfinished, for that the rich would
not impart any of their wealth unto the poor: the which Licurgus did with the
hazard of his life, for after that he had banished the use of gold and silver,
he made an equal distribution of the lands. And although that Solon could not
do the like, yet his will was good, for that he made frustrate all bonds, and
granted a general abolition of debts. And after that the use of gold and
silver was allowed in Lacedemon after the victory of Lisander, and that the
testamentarie law was brought in, the which was partly the cause of inequality
of goods: King Agis seeking to bring Nabis the tyrant having taken the city of
Argos, published two Edicts, the one to free them of all debts, the other to
divide the lands equally: Duas faces (says Titus Liuius) no^antibus res ad
plebem in optimates accendendam: Two firebrands for them that sought for
innouations to kindle and incense the people against the better sort. And
although the Romans have in that point seemed more just than other nations,
yet have they often granted a general recision of debts sometimes for a fourth
part, Equality of goods dangerous to a Commonweal.
more pernicious and dangerous to Commonweales, than equality of goods, the
which have no firmer support and foundation than faith, without the which
neither justice, nor public society can stand, neither can there be any
faith, if there be not a due observation of conuentions and lawful promises.
If then bonds be broken, contracts Abolition of debts ruins the poorer sort.
of debts comes; whereas the usurers prevent it, and oftentimes gain by it: as
it happened when as Solon and Agis did publish an abolition of debts, for the
usurers (having some intelligence thereof) borrowed money of all men, to
defraud their creditors. Besides, the hope of these abolitions do encourage the
prodigal to borrow at what rate soever, and when their credit is cracked to
join with the poor which are discontented and desperate, and to stir up
seditions: whereas if the hope of these abolitions The equal division of lands
most iniust.
other men with their spoils: for they that seek to be freed from their
debts, pretend the oppression of usury, and the barren nature of silver, the
which cannot be in lawful Equality of goods the ruin of humane society.
successions, so as we may rightly say, that such a division of another man's
goods, is a mere robbery under a show of equality, and the ruin not only
of a Commonweal, but of all humane society. To say, That equality is the
nurce of friendship; is but to abuse the ignorant: for it is most certain,
that there is never greater hatred, nor more capital quarrels, than betwixt
equals: and the jealousy betwixt equals, is the spring and Hippodamus the law
giver of the Milesians, to ordain, That the poor should marry with the rich,
not only to avoid inequality, but also to make their friendship the more
firm. And whatsoever they say of Solon, it appears sufficiently by the
institution of his Commonweal, that he made four degrees of citisens
according to their revenues, and as many degrees Solons division of citisens.
of state and honors: the rich had five hundred measures of corn, wine, or
oil, in rent; the next three hundred, others two hundred, and those which had
less might Plato has made three estates in his second Commonweal, one richer
than another, ordaining, That every one of the five thousand and forty
citisens, should leave one of his children sole heir. And as for that which
Licurgus did, who would have equality perpetually observed in succession,
dividing the lands by the powle; it was impossible, for that he might see
before his eyes, or soon after, Equality impossible to be kept in a state.
this equality quite altered, some having twelve or fifteen children, others
one or two, or none at all: the which would be more ridiculous in those
countries whereas plurality of wives is tolerated, as in Asia, and in a
manner throughout all Affrike, and at the new found lands, whereas it falls
out oftentimes, that one man has fifty children. Some have sought to prevent
this inconvenience, as Hippodamus lawmakers to Aristotle did like well of, but
by that means they must banish the overplus, or else execute the cruel law of
Plato approved by Aristotle, who having limited the number of his citisens A
cruel law made by Plato.
to five thousand and forty, ordained that they should cause the rest to
miscarrie as soon as they were conceived, and those that were borne lame or
crooked should be cast off: the which cannot be spoken without great impiety,
that the goodliest creature which God has made, should not only be made away
after it is borne, but also be destroyed in the mothers womb. Whereunto Thomas
Moore Chancellor of England seems to agree, who would not have less than ten,
nor more than 16 children in one family: as if he might command nature. And
although that Phidon lawgiver to the It is injurious to tie a city to a
certain number.
Colonie, or banish them injuriously. But in my opinion they err much which
doubt ofscarcitie by the multitude of children and citisens, when as no cities
are more rich nor more famous in arts and disciplines than those which abound
most with citisens. It is indeed less to fear that by reason of so great a
multitude of citisens there will be deuisions, for that there is nothing that
does keep a city more free from mutinies and Great cities are less subject
to seditions than others.
factions than the multitude of citisens, for that there are many which be as a
mean betwixt the rich and the poor, the good and the wicked, the wise and the
simple, and The manner how to divide a conquered city.
country: the which division should be made by families, and not by the powle,
reserving always some prerogative for one of the family, and some right for
the elder in Leui to give him the right of the elder above the other twelve, he
gave them no lands but only houses in cities, appointing them the tenth of
every tribe (which was twelve tenths) without any labor, the which was twice
as much at the least as any tribe had, all things deducted. And among the
Levites the right of the elder was reserved to the house of Aaron, which had
the tenth of the Levites, and all the oblations and first fruits: and to every
private house he assigned Division of land by the law of God.
twice as much of the goods and lands unto the elder as to any other of the
heirs, excluding the daughters wholly from the succession, but for want of
males in Leui, an equal division of inheritances; and among the yongers an
equal division of the succession, except the right of the elder, the which was
not of two third parts, nor of four five parts, nor of all; but of the half,
to the end that such inequality should not be the cause of the great wealth of
some few subjects, and the extreme poverty of an infinite number: which is the
occasion of murders among brethren, of divisions in families, and of mutinies
and civil wars among subjects. And to the end the divisions thus made may
remain indifferent, there must not be any prohibition of alienation, either in
a man's life, or by testament; as it is used in some places, if

As for abolition of debts, it was a thing of a dangerous consequence, as it
is said, not Abolition of debts pernicious.
so much for the loss of the creditor (the which is of no great moment, when
the question is of the public state) as for that it opens a way for the breach
of faith in lawful conuentions, and gives occasions to mutines to trouble the
state, hoping still to have Usury must be cut off.
unjust in regard of strangers, if it were lawful for them to deliver out
money upon interest unto the subject, from whom he should draw his whole
estate, if the subject might not use the like prerogative unto strangers. This
law has been always much esteemed of all lawgiuers, and of the greatest
Politicians, that is to say, of Solon, Licurgus, Plato, Aristotle, and even the
ten commissionars deputed to reform the customs of Rome, and to make choice
of the most profitable laws, would not allow above one in the hundred for
interest; the which they called Vnciarium, for that the usury of Tacit. lib.
5. Pest. lib. 19.
every month came but to an ounce, which was the twelfth part of the hundredth
crown which had been borrowed, and the usurer which exacted any more, was
condemned to restore four fold: esteeming the usurer (as Cato said) worse than
a thief, which was condemned but in the double. The same law was afterward
published An usurer esteemed worse than a thief.
anew at the request of the Tribune Duilius in the year of the foundation of
Rome 396: and ten years after Torquatus and Plautius being Consuls, it was
reduced to half an ounce in the month, and a half penie in the hundred: so
as it did not equal the Usury forbidden in Rome.
by the law Genutia, for the daily seditions which happened by the contempt of
those laws of usury: for what moderation soever you make of usury, if it be
any thing tolerated it will soon increase. And those which maintain under a
color of religion, That moderat usury or rents, after four or five in the
hundred, are honest and just, for that the debtor reapes more profit than the
creditor, abuse the word of God, which does expressly forbid it. For although
some would take light interest for the good of the debtor, yet many would abuse
it. For even as a hatchet at the first makes but a little rift, but in the end
breaks all in sunder: so the Laws are unprofitable without penalties.
without some punishment, the which are not regarded if they be not duly
executed, therefore the law Genutia being ill executed, was by little and
little neglected. And the rest in money. It is true, that at the first council
of Nice, the bishops procured the emperor to forbid usury in money and
fruits: the which in regard of fruits, were so much and half so much more:
that is to say, fifty for a hundred. But it was not observed, especially for
fruits, whereas he that borrowes in a time of dearth is glad to pay it again
and half as much more after harvest. Wherein it seems there is great reason,
for he that lends might have gained Usury in fruits seems tolerable
more if he had sold it in a time of scarcity, as they do commonly. Besides
there is nothing deerer than that which nourishes, nor any thing more
necessary. And therefore Nothing deerer or more necessary than that which
nourishes.
the emperor Justinian having rated usury for the country man at four in
the hundred in money, he decreed, They should pay but twelve in the hundred in
fruits, and not fifty in the hundred as had been formerly used. Charles of
Molins had no cause to seek to correct the Greek and Latin text of the law,
against the truth of all copies, that he might defend the edict of Jews the
twelfth, and the decrees of the court of parliament, which made equal the
interest in fruits and money: but the difference is great betwixt the one and
the other: for by Justinians law, the poor labourer reaped great profit, being
freed for thirteen bushels of corn after harvest, for twelve Justinians
decree, it was lawful to take fifty in the hundred for fruits. It is far
better to rely upon the law of God, which does absolutely forbid usury, and
the creditors good deeds shall be more meritorious and more honorable to lend
without A meritorious deed to lend without usury.
profit, than to receive of the poor laborer, in the quality of usury, a
handful of corn, for so great and necessary a good turn. Therefore Nehemias
(after the peoples return from captivity) did forbid them to take any more
usury, as they had done before taking twelve in the hundred, as well in money
as in fruits: and according to this example the decree of Nice was made: but
after that Calixtus the 3, and Martin the 5, popes, Justinian, and partly
practiced by the Cantons of the Swissers, is far more easy and more
supportable, although the laws of France and Venice do not allow any man to
demand above five years arrerages past: For this sufferance of interest,
without interest has grown to be a law, whereby the usurers do suck the
blood of the poor with all impunitie, especially in sea towns, where there is
a common bourse or bank; as at Genes, where there are some worth four or five
hundred thousand ducats, others above a million, as Adam Centenier, and they
say that Thomas Marin has twice as much. So as the merchant for the sweetness
Annuities worse than interest.
of gain gives over his traffic, the artificer scorns his shop, the
labourer leaves his The Clergy enriched, and others made poor.
Counties, Baronies, Lordships, Castles, houses both within and without Towns,
rents of all sorts, and bonds made freely; and yet they took successions of
all sides: they sold, exchaunged, purchased, and employed the revenues of
their benifices for other acquisitions; and all without tax, subsidy, or any
charge, even in those places whereas the taxes are personal. So as it was
necessary to enjoin the Clergy to put away such land as had been left unto
the church within a certain time, upon pain of confiscation: as by a law
made in England by king Edward the first, which did forbid all church men to
purchase any land; as it appears in Magna Carta: the which has been since
Clergy men forbidden to purchase lands.
renewed by the emperor Charles the fifth in Flanders, upon pain of
confiscation: the Vrbin the fifth. For the same reason the parliament at Paris
did prohibit the Chartrens and Celestines of Paris, to purchase any more,
against the opinion of the abbat of Palerme. Yet these defenses were grounded
upon the chapter, Nuper de decimis. And at Venice it has been enacted, and
church men were commanded to dispossess themselves of all lands, prohibiting
to leave any legacy to a Clergy man, nor to make a will by the mouth or
writing of a clergy man. And by a law made at the request of the states of
Otleans, the twenty seventh article, all clergy men are forbidden to receive
a testament or last will, in the which any thing is given him (the which is
very ill executed) for the abuses In old time every man was forced to leave
something unto the church.
that were committed. Not a hundred years since within this realm, they would
not have laid any dead body in holy burial, if he had not bequeathed some
legacy unto the church; so as they took out a commission from the official
directed to the first priest of the place: who taking a view of his goods that
had died intestat, bequethed what he pleased unto the church in his name that
was dead* the which was reproved by two decrees of the parliament of Paris, one
in the year 1388, and the other in the year 1401. I have also a declaration
drawn out of the Treasure of France, by the which the twenty barrons of
Normandy named in the act, dated in the year 1202, declare unto Philip
Augustus, That the goods of him that dies without making a will, Richard king
of England and earl of Poitou, it is said, That the goods of the Rochelois
should not be confiscat, although The anntient rights o^ the duke of Nor^andie
and earls of Poitou.
they died intestat: the which was also common in Spain, until the ordinance
made by Ferdinand in the year 1392, bearing these words, Que no sellauen
quintos da los que mueren sin fazer testamento dexando hijos o parientes dentro
del quarto grado que pueden hauer and heredar sus bienes, vz. The fifth shall not
be levied of those which die intestat, so as they have any children, or
kinsfolk within the fourth degree fit to succeed. It is no wonder then if the
clergy were rich, seeing that every man was forced to make a will and to leave
the church a legacy, under rigorous pains; being also straightly defended for
many Charles the ninth a suruay was made of all the revenues of the church
within this realm, the which was found to amount to twelve hundred The
revenues of he Clergy in France.
and thirty thousand pounds starling a year rent, not comprehending the
ordinary and extraordinary alms. But Allemont president of the accounts at
Paris, made an estimat, That of twelve parts of all the revenues of France,
the Clergy enjoyed seven. And by the registers of the chamber of accounts it
appeeres, that within this realm there are twelve Archbishopricks, 104
Bishopriks, 540 Abbaies, and 27400 parishes or cures (taking every town for a
cure, and the least village for one where there is a The property of land is
in vain whereas the vsufruit is perpetual
John the 22 had not disanulled the decree of Pope Nicholas, who had allowed
all begging friars to enjoy the fruits of lands, and the Pope should have the
propriety, the which was a gross cunning to frustrate the vows of poverty*
for that the property is fruitless and in vain, as the law says, if the
vsufruct were perpetual, as bodies and colleges be. I do not speak of the
well employing of their goods, but I say that this great inequality (it may
be) has ministered occasion of troubles and seditions against the An occasion
found out to ruin the Clergy.
Clergy, throughout all Europe, when as in show they made a color of
religion: for if this occasion had not been, they had found out some other, as
they did in time of our predecessors against the Templers and the Jews; or
else they would have required a Philip the Roman Tribune did for the people,
pretending that there were but two thousand men in Rome which possessed all,
although they were numbered in all to be above three hundred thousand; and those
few did so increase in wealth, as Marcus Crassus by a declaration of the
Censors, was esteemed to be worth six millions of crowns: and fifty years
after Lentulus the high Priest was found to be worth ten millions of crowns.
The Romans labored to prevent these inconveniences, publishing many laws
touching the division of lands: among the which the law Quintia and Apuleia,
would have the conquered lands divided among the people, The cause of seditions
in Rome.
the which if they had bin well executed, those seditions had bin prevented
which so troubled the Commonweal: but the mischief was, that the conquered
lands were Sextus Titius the Tribune presented a request unto the people, to
the end that the receivers of the revenues might (...) the arrerages that were
due, the which was granted, but being not well executed, it was a means to
present other requests unto the people, that the lands and revenues of the
Commonweal which private men held without paying any thing, might be divided
among the people: the which did greatly amaze the rich, and caused them to
suborne Thorius the Tribune under hand, That by his intercession unto the
people the lands should remain Tiberius Gracchus, the which differed from the
law Licinia, by the which all men were forbidden (of what estate or quality
soever) to hold above five hundred acres of the Commonweales land, a hundred
kine, and five hundred sheep and goats, and to forfeit the overplus: but the
law Sempronia spoke of nothing but of the public lands, ordaining that every
year there should be three Commissioners appointed by the people to distribute
unto the poor the surplusage of five hundred Law^ made for the distribution of
lands.
acres that should be found in any one family: but the Tribune was slain the
last day of the publication, in a sedition moved by the Nobles: yet Caius
Gracchus his brother being Tribune of the people ten years after, caused it to
be put in execution, but he was slain also in the pursuit thereof, after
whose death the Senate to pacify the people caused it to be executed against
many. And to the end those lands should not remain waste, the poor wanting
cattle and means to till it, it was ordained that according unto the law
Sempronia of Tiberius Gracchus, the treasure of king Attalus (who had made the
people of Rome his heir) should be distributed among the poor, to whom they
had given part of the lands: by which means many of the poor were provided
for. And to take away occasion of future seditions, they sent away part of the
C. Gracchus which was most necessary, and yet it was abrogated, Prohibiting
the poor to sell or make away those lands that were assigned unto them: for
the rich seeing that the poor had no means to entertain those lands,
redeemed them.

There was also another cause of this inequality of goods, which was by the
liberty The testamentarie law the cause of inequality.
that every one had to dispose freely of his goods, and to whom he pleased, by
the law of the twelve Tables. All other people, except the Athenians (where
Solon first published this law) had not free liberty to dispose of their
lands. And Licurgus having divided the lands of the inhabitants of the city
into seven thousand parts (some say Plutarch says, speaking of king Agesilaus,
who in the beginning was bred up straightly as a younger brother, for that he
was issued of a younger house. This for a time did entertain the 7000 families
in equality, until that one of the Ephores being incensed against his eldest
son, presented a request unto the Seigneurie, In Poland and many other parts
of the North, they may not dispose of lands by testament.
of the North. And therefore Tacitus writes, that the Germans had no use of
Testaments, the which many have unadvisedly attributed to ignorance and
barbarism. And even in Polonia it is expressly forbidden by the laws of the
two Sigismonds, according unto the ancient customs, to dispose of lands by
testament. The Oxiles and In some places noble men may not sell away their
seigneuries.
which is also strictly observed in Spain. We have also said before, that the
law of God did expressly defend all alienation of lands, either in a man's life
or by testament, reserving the right of the elder in every family, without any
difference of noble or villain, according to Licurgus law in his division of
7000 parts in Lacedemon: and those of Caux in Normandy, as well the Gentlemen
as others, do much better preserve the dignity and beauty of their ancient
houses and families, the which by this means are not dismembered, and all the
estate of the Commonweal in general: the which is the Great kingdoms
supported by noble families, especially in an Aristocratical estate, but they
are contrary to a Popular estate, or to a Tyranny.
and Colleges, the which being dismembered into pieces, will be the ruin of the
State. But this opinion is more probable than necessary, unless it be in an
Aristocraticall estate: for it is most certain that in a Monarchy there is
nothing more to be feared than great men, and corporations, especially if it be
tyranicall. As for a popular estate which requires equality in all things, how
can it endure so great inequality in families, Inequality main tained the
estat^ of Sparta.
point. There remains an Aristocratie where as the noble and great men are
unequal with the common people, and in this case the right of the elder may
mainetaine the estate, as in the seigneurie of Sparta, whereas the seven
thousand parts equally divided unto the elder of every family, maintained the
State: and as for the younger brethren, virtue advanced them to offices and
honors according to their merits: and commonly they proved the most famous,
having (as Plutarch said) nothing to advance them but their virtues. It was the
ancient custom of the Gauls: and without doubt our Nobility would be much
more esteemed, if the prohibition of selling of their seigneuries Albert, and
Sigismond Augustus kings in the year 1495 and 1538, and by an edict Laws
prohibiting noble men to ^ell their seigneuries.
made by Peter duke of Britain, forbidding the common people to purchase the
seigneuries of noble men, upon pain of confiscation. And although that Lewis
the 12 disanulled those defenses in the year 1505, yet king Francis the first
renewed the Edict in the year 1535 under the same pain of confiscation. The
means to unite the nobility A means to unite the gentry and the plebeians.
and the common people more strictly together, is to marry the younger children
of noble houses being poor (in an Aristocraticall estate) with the Plebeians
that are rich, as they did in Rome after the law Canuleia; the which is
practiced at this day by the says the law, that the inheritance may not be
drawn from the house by the daughters. I^ the East parts the daughters inherit
^o lands.
the East, and almost throughout all Affrike, although that Justinian the
Emperor, or rather Theodora his wife, having always favored her own sex,
reformed that custom of Armenia, terming it barbarous, not regarding the
intention of the ancient lawgiuers. Hippodamus lawgiuer to the Milesians, would
not frustrate the daughters of all succession, but he ordained that the rich
should marry with the poor, wherein he did observe the equality of goods,
and entertained love betwixt the couples, and betwixt the poor and the rich.
It is most certain that if the daughters be made equal The inequality of
goods grows, for that the daughters being heirs are married to the rich.
private families: the which was first verified at Athens, where as the
plurality of women gave name unto the city: and within these twenty years
at Venice, (whether comes a world of strangers) there was found upon a suruaie
two thousand women more than men: whether it be that they are not subject to
the dangers of war and travel, or that nature is apter to produce those
things that are less perfect. And therefore Aristotle said in his Politikes,
That of five parts of inheritance the women of Sparta held three, the which
came by the permission of the testamentarie law; and for this cause (says he)
they commanded absolutely over their husbands, whom they called Voconius Saxa
the Tribune, by the persuasion of Cato the Censor, presented a request unto the
people, the which passed The law of succession at Rome, d^frauded.
for a law, whereby it was enacted, That the females should not succeed so long
as there were any male carrying the name, in what degree of consanguinitie
soever he were; and, that they might not have given them by testament above the
fourth part of the goods; nor more than the least of the Testators heirs. This
law retained the ancient families in their dignities, and the goods in some
equality, keeping women in some sort in awe: yet they found a means to
defraud it, by legacies and feofments made in trust to friends, with request to
restore the successions or legacies unto the women which could not recover them
by order of law not by petition, before Augustus time; who Trebatius, took an
occasion to abrogate the law, demanding a dispensation of the law Voconia of
the Senate, for his wife Liuia: so as this law being trodden under foot, the
Roman citisens began to be slaves unto their wives, who were their mistresses
both in name and effect. Then might you have seen women wearing two rich
successions at their ears, as Seneca says; and the daughter of a Proconsull
who did wear at one time in apparel and jewels the value of three millions of
crowns, the inequality of goods being then at the highest, after which time
the Roman empire declined still until it was wholly ruined. By the ancient
custom of Marseilles it was not lawful to give above a hundred crowns in
marriage with a daughter, and five crowns in apparel. And by the Statutes at
Venice it is forbidden A commendable law at Venic^.
to give above 1600 ducats to a noble man's daughter: and if a Gentleman of
Venice marry a citisens daughter, he may not take above two thousand ducats;
nor the females succeed so long as there is any male of the family: but in
truth this law is as ill observed as that of king Charles the 9, which forbids
to give unto a daughter in marriage The law of France for the marriage of
daughters.
above a thousand pounds starling, and yet the ordinance of king Charles the 5
does give no more unto the daughters of the house of France. And although that
Elizabeth of France, daughter to Philip the fair were married unto the king of
England, yet had she but twelve hundred pounds starling to her dowry. Some one
will say unto me, that it was very much, considering the scarcetie of gold and
silver in those days: The law of God for dowries.
of God that the marriage of a daughter at the most was taxed but at fifty
sicles, which make four pounds starling of our money, in which penalty he was
condemned that had seduced a virgin, whom also he was forced by the law to
bring home, if the father of the maiden so pleased: which makes me believe that
the ancient custom of the Persians is likely, for that the Commissioners
deputed yearly to marry the maids The law of Persia.
gave the honestest and fairest to them that offered most, and with that money
they married them that were less esteemed (that none might be unprovided for)
with this Plato had. For to take from the daughters all means to prefer
themselves according to their qualities, were to give occasion of a greater
inconvenience. And it seems that the customs of Aniou and of Maine have
Custom of Aniou.
given them a third part in successions, of gentlemen in fee simple, the which
is left to the younger males but for term of life, to the end the daughters
should not be unprovided for, having not means to advance themselves like unto
the males: for the reformation Mondidier, and in that of Vendosme, (an ancient
dependence of the country of Aniou, before that it was erected to a County or
a Duchy) where as a younger brother of the house of Aniou, having taken his
elder brother prisoner, made him to change the custom of Aniou in regard of
the Chasteleine of Vendosme, the which he had but for term of life. And
although that in Britain by the decree of Cont Geoffrie in the year 1181 the
eldest in gentlemen's houses carried away all the succession, and maintained the
younger at his own pleasure: yet to prevent infinite inconveniences, Arthur the
first duke of Brittanie enacted, That the younger children should have a third
part of the succession for term of life, as it is observed Ferdinand in the
year 1492 in these words, Que los Egiptianos consennores salgan del Reyno
dentro sessenta dias: That all the Egiptians with their women shall depart out
of the realm within threescore

CHAP. III.
THis Chapter depends upon the former, for one of the causes which brings the
subjects to extreme poverty, is to take the goods of the condemned from their
lawful heirs, and especially from children, if they have no other support nor
hope, but in the succession of their parents: and the more children they have,
the greater their poverty shall be, to whom the succession of their fathers
belongs It seems against the law of nature to take the succession of the
father condemned from the child.
reduced to such poverty and misery, as they are thrust into despair, and
attempt any villainy, either to be revenged, or to fly from want which does
oppress them. For we may not hope, that they which have been bred up as
masters, will serve as slaves: and if they have not in former times learned
any thing, they will not now begin, when as they have no means. Besides the
shame they have either to beg, or to suffer the reproach of infamy, does force
them to banish themselves, and to join with thieves and robbers: so as for one
sometimes there go forth two or three worse than he that had Justinian the
emperor, received and practiced in many countries, is most just and
profitable: whereby it was enacted, That the goods of them that were condemned
should be left unto their heirs, Justinian left the goods of the condemned unto
the heir.
unless it were in case of high treason. Contrariwise some may say, that this
is a new law, and contrary to all the ancient laws and ordinances of the
wisest princes and lawgiuers, who would have the goods of any one condemned,
adjudged unto the public, without some especial cause to move them to the
contrary: be it for reparation Wicked men will attempt any thing to enrich
their children.
and many times they care not to loose their lives, yea to damn themselves, so
as their children may be heirs of their robberies and thefts. It is needless
to prove this by examples, the which are infinite: I will only produce one of
Cassius Licinius, who being accused and condemned of many thefts and
extortions, and seeing Cicero (who was then president) putting on his purple
robe, to pronounce the sentence of confiscation Cicero that he was dead during
the process, and before the condemnation, choking himself in view of the
judges with a table napkin, to the end he might save his goods for his
children: Then Cicero (says Valerius) would not pronounce the sentence. It was
in the power of the accused to save his life in abandoning of his goods,
according unto the conclusions of his accusers: as Verres and many others in
like case did* for by the law Sempronia they might not condemn a bourgesse of
Rome to death, nor whip them by the law Portia. And although that Plutarch, and
Cicero himself writes to his friend Atticus, That he had condemned Licinius,
it is to be understood by the advice and opinion of all the judges, not that he
had Tiberius, Pretium festinand^, A law in favor of murderers.
(says Tacitus) that is to say, Murderers in their persons had that advantage
over others. But whether that he were condemned after his death, or that he
died of grief, it appears plainly that many make no difficulty to damn
themselves to enrich their children. And it may be there is nothing that does
more restrain the wicked from offending, than the fear of confiscation,
whereby their children should be left beggars. The law of confiscation (...)
the wicked.
Therefore the law says, That the Commonweal has a great interest, that the
children

And if any one fears that want will drive the children to despair, and to all
kinds of wickedness: much more reason has he to fear, that wicked children
will abuse their fathers goods, to the ruin of good men and of the
Commonweal. And therefore the law excludes the sons of him that is condemned
for high treason, from all successions direct and collateral, and leaves unto
the daughters (who have less power to revenge) a fourth part of their mothers
goods. But there is a greater inconvenience if Rewards are necessary for
accusers.
the goods of the condemned be left unto their heirs, then shall the accusers
and informers have no rewards, and wickedness shall remain unpunished.

These be the inconveniences on either part, but to resolve of that which is
most fit, is most necessary that the true debts being either public or
private, and the charges of informations, should be deducted out of the goods of
the condemned, if they have wherewithal: else there should be no punishment of
the wicked. Yet this clause ought not to be annexed unto the sentence, and has
been reproved by many decrees of the court of parliament, to the end that the
judges may know, that they ought to do justice although the condemned has not
any thing. In like sort it is necessary that fines and amercements should be
le^ied out of their goods that are condemned in any sum What order is to be
observed in their goods that are condemned.
which they have purchased, and not out of those lands which come by
succession, the which must be left unto the heir. And in capital crimes, that
the mouables and lands purchased, should be forfeited and sold to them that
would give most, for the charges of the process, and the reward of informers;
and the rest to be employed to public and charitable uses, the succession
remaining to the lawful heirs: in so doing you shall prevent the extreme
poverty of the children, the covetousness of slaunderers, the tyranny of bad
princes, the evasion of the wicked, and the impunitie of offenses. For to
forfeit those lands which are tied unto the house, were no reason, seeing it is
not lawful to Lands which come by succession cannot be forfeited.
alienat them by testament, nor in many places to dispose thereof in their life
time: by the be a great occasion of false accusers to ruin the innocent. Yet
must informers have The inconveniences which grow in adiudging of confiscations
unto the public.
For if the public revenues be great, or the charges and impositions laid
upon Tiberius the emperor made the way to a most cruel butcherie, leaving to
the value of Confiscations the cause of tyranny.
sixty seven millions of crowns gotten the most part by confiscations. And
after him his nephews Caligula and Nero, polluted their hands with the blood
of the best and most virtuous men in all the empire, and all for their goods.
It is well known that Nero had no color to put to death his master Seneca,
but for his wealth. Neither Pliny the younger speaking of those times, We
have (says he) seen the judgments of informers, like unto thieves and
robbers: for there was no testament, nor any man's estate assured. And therefore
by the laws, the kings procurator is enjoined to name the informer, least the
accusation in the end should prove slanderous: the which is necessarily
observed in Spain, before that the kings procurator is admitted to accuse any
man, by an edict of Ferdinand, made in the year 1492, in these terms, Que
ningun fiscal pueda accusar a conse^o person particular sin dar primerimente
delator, That no fiscall or public officer may accuse any private person before
the Council, but he shall

If any one will object, That we need not to fear these inconveniences in a
Royal estate, having to do with good princes: I annswere, that this right of
confiscation is Confiscations most dangerous in a Monarchy.
one of the greatest means that ever was invented, to make a good prince a
tyrant, especially if the prince be poor. For he that has no pretext to put
his subject to death; if Tyrants are enriched by false accusations, by means
of confiscations.
he hopes to have his goods thereby, he will never want crime, accusers, nor
flatterets. And oftentimes the wives of princes kindle this fire, and inflame
their husbands to al cruelty, to enjoy the goods of them that are condemned.
Achab king of Samaria could Naboths vinyard, neither for price nor prayer, but
queen Iesabel subborned two false witnesses, to condemn the innocent as
guilty of treason both against God and man. And Faustine did still importune
the emperor Marcus Aurelius her husband, to put to death the poor innocent
children of Auidius Cassius, being condemned for treason, whose goods the
emperor left unto his children; as the kings of Persia were wont to do, even
in cases of high treason, and has been often practiced in this realm. And by
the laws of Polonia, confiscation has no place but in the highest degree of
treason: and oftentimes it is given unto the kinsfolks. But it is a hard
matter to recover the goods which are once forfeited, be it by right or wrong;
for they hold it for a rule, Jews? and yet by the means aforesaid, having
caused Peter of Dreux to be condemned, he did confiscat, and Thibaut king of
Navarre and earl of Champagne, who was in the like danger, if he had not
resigned Bray, Fortione, and Monstrueil: and Raymond earl of Toulouse, the
country of Languedoc. 1234.
The countries of Guienne, Aniou, Maine, Touraine, and Auuergne, are come unto
the crown by confiscations in the time of Philip Augustus. The duchy of
Alencon, 1202.
and the earldom of Perch, are also come by confiscations. In like case 1458.
Perigort, 1369.
Ponthieu, 1370.
la March, 1302.
Angoulesme, 1302.
l'Isle in Iourdaine, the marquisat of Salusses, and 1535.
all the goods of Charles of Bourbon, with many other private Seigneuries, have
been forfeited for high treason, according to the custom of other
Commonweales, and the ancient laws. But the custom of Scotland in cases of
treasons is more cruel,

If any man will say, That the king freeing himself of those lands which hold
not immediately of him, according to the edict of Philip the Fair, and giving
the most part of them which hold directly of him, unto such as shall deserve
well, the which he may do before they be incorporat unto the crown: he shall
not appropriat unto the public all the goods of private men, as else he might
do in time. And to prevent this inconvenience, the king cannot recover those
lands which hold directly of him, offering the price to them that bought them:
for so he might by purchase get all his subjects lands. I do therefore think
this more convenient, than to adiudge the confiscations unto Sylla the Dictator
did publish, after that he had enriched his friends and partisans with the
spoils of his enemies. But there is as small reason to give them to the
flatterers of princes, and to the horse leaches of the court, as it is usual
in all governed Monarchies, which opens a gap unto false accusers, giving unto
the unworthy the rewards of the well deserving. Who does not remember (although
I grieve to remember) the blood of innocent citisens shed for gain under a
color of religion, to glut these horseleaches of the court? Therefore to
avoid these inconveniences of either part as much as may be, I see no better
means than that which I have said, That deducting the charges of the suit, his
just debts being public or private, and the rewards of the accusers; the
surplusage of Informers must be rewarded with money, and not with lands.
given. As for charitable works, there never wants means to employ it, either
in divine things, or in public works, or else about the sick or the poor. In
old time at Rome amercements were adjudged to the treasury of Churches, to be
employed in sacrifices, and therefore they called amercements Sacramenta, as
Sextus Pompeius says: for which cause Titius Romilius refused the peoples
bounty, which had decreed that they should restore unto him the fine in the
which he had been condemned, saying, Archiptolome, Antiphon, and his consorts
in Athence in the form that follows. The 16 day of Prytanee, Demonicus
Dalopeie being Register, and Philostratus Captain, at the pursuit of Andron
touching Archiptolemus, Onomaches, and Antiphon, whom the Captain has
accused that they went to Lacedemon to the prejudice of the Commonweal, and
that they departed from the Camp in one of the enemies ships; the Senate has
decreed, That they should be apprehended, and that the Captain with ten
Senators named by the Senate, should determine of them, to the end they might be
punished, that The law of Athens in cases of treason.
given, execution might follow, according to the laws made against traitors.
And under the decree the sentence is set down in this sort, Archiptolemus and
Antiphon were condemned and delivered into the hands of eleven executioners of
justice, their goods forfaited, and the tenth reserved unto the goddess
Minerua, and their houses razed: afterward they did adiudge all unto the
public treasor, and yet the law did allow the Judges to dispose in their
sentence as they should think the cause deserved for public or charitable
uses, as we have a commendable custom in this realm. That which I have said
of successions should principally take place, when as there is any The law of
Germany for confi^cations.
treasury when there is any question of land in fee; whereby flatterers have no
means to accuse wrongfully, nor Princes to put good men to death for their
fees* which seems to have been the reason that by the laws of God the
amercement was consecrated unto God, and given to the high Priests, if he that
had offended were not in presence, or had no heirs. And for that this Chapter
concerns rewards and punishments, order requires that we discourse of the one
and the other.

CHAP. IIII. Of reward and punishment.
IT is needful to treat here briefly of rewards and punishments, for he that
would discourse thereof at large should make a great volume, for that these two
points concern all Commonweales, so as if punishments and rewards be well and
wisely distributed, the Commonweal shall be always happy and flourish, and
contrariwise The two principal foundations of every Commonweal.
if the good be not rewarded and the bad punished according to their deserts,
there is no hope that a Commonweal and rewards favorable, therefore wise
Princes have accustomed to refer punishments Seneca says, Altius iniuriae
quam merita descendunt, Injuries make a deeper impression than merits, yet we
will use it indifferently and according unto the vulgar phrase. Every reward is
either honorable, or Difference of rewards.
profitable, or both together, else it is no reward, speaking popularly and
politikely, seeing we are in the midst of a Commonweal, and not in the
schools of the Academikes and Stoikes, which hold nothing to be profitable
that is not honest; nor honorable which is not profitable: the which is a
goodly paradoxe, and yet contrary to Different^ of reward and benefit
upon good desert, and a benefit upon special favor. And as Commonweals be
diverse, so the distribution of honors and rewards is very different in a
Monarchy, and in the other two estates. In a Popular estate rewards are more
honorable than profitable: for the common people hunt only after profit,
caring little for honor, the which they The difference of giving rewards in a
Popular estate and a Monarchy.
do willingly give to them that are ambitious. But in a Monarchy the prince
is more jealous of honor than of profit, especially if he be a tyrant, who
takes nothing more disdainefully, than to see his subject honored and
respected; fearing least the sweet intising Caligula, who A tyrant cannot
endure to have the subject honored.
was jealous and envious of the honor that was done to God himself: and the
emperor Domitian, who was the most base and cowardly tyrant that ever was, yet
could he never endure that any honor should be done unto them that had best
deserved, but he put them to death. Sometimes princes in stead of recompencing
of worthy men, they put them to death, banish them, or condemn them to
perpetual prison, for the safety of their estates. So did Alexander the Great
to Parmenio his constable, Justinian to Bellisarius, Edward the fourth to the
earl of Warwike; and infinite others, who for the reward of their prowess have
been slain, poisoned, or ill entreated by their princes. And Tacitus writes,
the Germans did attribut all the honor of their goodly exploits unto their
princes, to free themselves from envy which follows virtue. And therefore we
never see Monarchs, and much less tyrants, to grant triumphs and honorable
entries unto his subjects, what victory soever they have gotten of the enemy.
The honor of the soldiers victory is due unto the captain.
But contrariwise a discreet captain, in stead of a triumph at his return
from victory, humbling himself before his prince, he says, Sir, your
victory is my glory, although the prince were not present: for he that
commands deserves the honor of the victory, even in a Popular estate: as it
was adjudged betwixt the Consul Luctatius and Valerius his lieutenant, upon a
controversy they had for the triumph, the which Valerius pretended to be due
unto him, for that the Consul was absent the day of the Charles the fifth, king
of France was, who gave his arms unto one of his gentlemen, and retired
himself out of the fight, fearing to fall into his enemies hands: And for this
cause he was called wise, remembering how prejudicial his fathers captivity
was unto France. The like we may say of Popular Why Popular estates have more
famous men than Monarchies.
estates, that the generals victories belong unto the people under whose
ensigns they have fought, but the honor of the triumph is given unto the
General: the which is not observed in a Monarchy. Which is the chief, and it
may be the only occasion, why in Popular estates well governed, there are more
virtuous men than in a Monarchy: For that honor which is the only reward of
virtue is taken away, or at the least much Preferments to honor breeds men of
desert.
estate, even in matters of arms. For as a generous and noble minded man does
more esteem honor than all the treasure of the world; so without doubt he
will willingly sacrifice his life and goods for the glory he expects: and the
greater the honors be, the more men there will be of merit and fame. And
therefore the Commonweal of Rome has had more great Captains, wise Senators,
eloquent Orators, and learned Lawyers, than any other Commonweal, either
Barbarians, Greeks, or Latins: For he that had put to rout a legion of the
enemies, it was at his thoice to demand the triumph, or at the least some
honorable charge; one of the which could not be denied him. As for the
triumph, which was the highest point of honor a Roman citisen The description
of a triumph at Rome.
honorable than a king could do in his realm, dragging the captive kings and
commanders in chains after his chariot, he sitting on high attired with a
purple robe wrought with gold, and a crown of baies accompanied with his
victorious army, being brave with the spoils of their enemies, with a sound
of trumpets and clarons, rauishing the hearts of all men, partly with
incredible joy, and partly with amazement and admiration: and in this manner
the General went vpto the Capitol to do sacrifice. Above all (says
Polybius) that which did most inflame the youth to aspire to honor, were the
triumphall statues or images lively drawn of his parents and predecessors, to
Titus Liuius, Matronis honor additus, vt eorum sicut virorum solemnis laudatio
esset, There was honor given unto matrons, that there might be a solemn
commendation of them as of men. I know there are preachers which will say, That
this desire of honor is vain, which every good man should fly: but I hold
that there is nothing more necessary for youth (as Theophrastus said) the
which does inflame them with an honest ambition; who when as they see
themselves commended, then do virtues spring and Thomas Aquinus says, That a
prince must be nourished with the desire of true glory, to give him the taste
of virtue. We have no reason then to marvel, if never any Commonweal did
bring forth such famous men, and so many, as Rome did: For the honors which
were granted in other Commonweals, came nor near unto them which were given
in Rome. It was a great reward of honor The honors given at Athens.
at Athens, and in the Olympike games, to be crowned with a crown of gold in
the open theater before all the people, and commended by an Orator; or to
obtain a statue of brass, or to be enterrained of the public charge, or to
be the first, or of the first rank in places of honors, for himself and his
house; the which Demochares required Demosthenes, after that he had made a
repetition of his praises, wherein there was no less profit than honor. But
the Romans (to give them to understand that they must not esteem honor by
profit) had no crown in greater estimation, The Romans esteemed honor more
than profit.
than that of grass or green corn, the which they held more precious than
all the crowns of gold of other nations. Neither was it ever given to any, but
to Q. Fabius Maximus, surnamed Cunctator, with this title, Patrie seruatori, To
the preserver of his country. Wherein the wisdom of the ancient Romans is
greatly to be commended, having thereby banished covetousness and the desire
of gainefull rewards; and planted the love of virtue in the subjects hearts,
with the price of honor. And whereas other princes are greatly troubled to
find money, to empty their coffers, to sell their Labienus lieutenant to
Caesar, for that he had hazarded his life courageously against the enemy,
saying, That he would not the reward of the covetous, but of the virtuous; the
which A worthy saying of a souldi^r.
is honor, that we must have always before our eyes. But virtue must not
follow, but go before honor: as it was decreed by the ancient high Priests
at Rome, when as Consul Marcus Marcellus had built a temple to Honor and
Virtue; to the end the vows and sacrifices of the one should not be confounded
with the other, they resolved Agrippa left not wherewithal to defray his
funeral, nor the Consul Fabricius nor the Dictator Cincinnatus wherewithal
to feed their families, yet the one was drawn from the plo^gh to the
Dictatorship, and the other refused half the kingdoms of Pyrrhus, to
maintain his reputation and honor. The Commonweal was never so furnished
with worthy men, as in those days, neither were honors and dignities better
distributed than in that age. But when as this precious reward The (...) refuse
honors when they are given to the vnwo^thy.
of virtue was imparted to the vicious and unworthy, it grew contemtible, so as
every one scorned it, and held it dishonorable: as it happened of the gold
rings which all the gentlemen of Rome neglected, seeing Flauius a libertine to
Appius and a popular man, created Aedile, or chief ouerseer of the victuals;
the which they were not accustomed to give to any but gentlemen, although he
had deserved well of the people. And the which is most to be feared, good men
will abandon the place wholly to the wicked, for that they will have no
communication nor fellowship with them: as Cato the younger did, who being
chosen by lot with diverse other judges to judge Gabinius, and seeing that they
pretended to absolve him, being corrupted with gifts, he retired himself
before the people, and brake the tables that were offered unto him. So did the
chaste women in this realm, who cast away their girdles of gold, the which none
might Que bonne renommee valoit meux que ceinture doree, That a good name was
better than a golden girdle. For always virtuous men have impatiently endured
to be equalled with the wicked in the reward of honor. Have we not seen
that the only means that king Charles the seventh found to make a number of
unworthy men, who had gotten the order of knights of the Star, by women or
favor, to leave it, he decreed, That the archers of the watch at Paris, should
wear a star upon (...) natural ^der of honor and virtue.
their cassockes, which was the mark of Saint Owen: whereupon all the knights
of this disorder left the star. As in like case the people of Athens
disanulled the law of Hyperbolus one of the worst and wickedest men of Athens
had been condemned by that law.

It is a dangerous and very pernicious thing in every Commonweal, to grant
honors and rewards without any difference, or to sell them for money; although
that they which think to win honor in buying their offices, abuse themselves
as much as those which thought to fly with the golden wings of Euripides,
making that which should be the lightest of all others, of the heauiest
metal: for then the precious treasure of honor turns to dishonor; and
honor being once lost, then do they exceed The reward of honor turns to
infamy, if it be given to the unworthy.
in all vice and wickedness: the which shall never happen if the distribution
of rewards Harmonicall proportion in the distribution of rewards.
must also have a respect unto the quality of persons: to Gentlemen the
offices of Consul, and Governments; to the Plebeians the Tribunes places, and
other mean offices fit for their qualities and merits: and if the virtue of a
mean man or of a private soldier be so great that he exceeds all others, it
is reason that he have his part in the greatest dignities, as it was decreed by
the law Canuleia, to appease the seditions betwixt the nobility of Rome and
the people: but he that would make a Consul, a knight of The estimation of
honors in old times.
to be Knights but with great ceremonies: as we may read of Saint Lewis, when
he made his son Philip the 3. Knight, who afterward created Philip the fair
Knight in the year 1284 and he his three children in the presence of all his
Princes: and which is more, king Francis the first after the battle of
Marignan caused himself to be dubbed knight by Captain Bayard, taking his
sword from him. But since that cowards and Charles the sixth at the siege of
Bourges made above five hundred knights banerets, and many other knights, which
had not power to raise a banner, as Monstrelet said. In like sort that
military girdle which the Roman Emperors did use to give as a reward of honor
to them that had deserved well of the Commonweal; as the collar of the order,
the which they took away in reproach, as Julian the Emperor did from Iouinian
and other christian Captains; and the honor of a Patrician, the which the
Emperors of the East did esteem as the highest point of honor and favor: in
the beginning it was not given but unto the greatest Princes and noble men. As
we read that the Emperor Anastasius sent the order of a Patrician to king
Clouis in the city of Tours, but Edward the third king of England made the
order of Saint George, or of the Garter: and soon after the 6 of January 1351
king Ihon did institute the order of the Star in the Castle of Saint Owen:
and long after that Philip the second The orders of England, France, and
Bourgongne
duke of Burgogne erected the order of the golden Fleece: and 40 years after
him Lewis the II king of France made the order of Saint Michaell; as also after
him the dukes of Sauoy have instituted the order of the Anonciado, and other
Princes have done the like, to honor with the title of Knighthood those that
deserved well, whose The law of the Golden Fleec^.
which was instituted the tenth of January 1429 no man might be Knight of that
order, unless he were a Gentleman of name and arms, and without reproach: by
the second, he might not carry any other order of what Prince soever, but with
the priuitie and consent of the chief of the order: the seventh article wills,
That all personal quarrels and dissentions of Knights among themselves shall
be decided by Judges of the order, the which is a body and College, with a
Chancellor, Treasorer, King at arms, Register, a private Seal of the order,
and sovereign jurisdiction, without appeal or civil request. Lewis the II
imitating the example of Philip Duke of Bourgogne, who had entertained him in
the time of his disgrace with his father, instituting the order of Saint
Michell into a College, the first day of August in the year 1469 he set down
those articles whereof I have made mention, and all other articles specified in
the institution The law of the order of Saint Michael.
of the Fleece: and besides in the 37 article it is said, That when any
assembly shall be made the life and conversation of every Knight shall be
examined one after an other, during which examination they shall depart out of
the Chapter, and be called again to hear the admonitions and censures of the
Chancellor of the order: and in the 38 article it is said, That an examination
and censure shall be made of the sovereign and head of the order, which is the
King, as of the rest to be punished and corrected, according to the advice of
the brethren of the order, if he has committed any thing against Lewis the II,
not to increase that number, although the Sovereign Prince and the whole
Chapter were so resolved; but in my opinion it is one of the chiefest articles
that ought to have been duly observed: to avoid the inconveniences which we
have seen by the infinite number of the order of Saint Michell, The excessiu^
number of Knights of the order, have ruined the order.
for the number is sufficient to receive them that shall deserve that honor:
and the fewer there are, the more it will be desired of all men: as at a prize,
the which is the more Francis the first the number was never full. So it is
most certain, that there is nothing that does more blemish the greatness of the
honor, than to impart it to so many And for this cause many seeing the small
account was held of the order, procured to have their Seigneuries erected into
Earledomes, Marquisats, and Duchies, which number has so increased in a short
time, as the multitude has Charles the ninth enacted by an edict, That after
that time all Duchies, Marquisats and Counties should be united unto the
Crown, if the Dukes, Marquises and Earls dyed without heirs males issued of
their bodies, although the said Seigneuries had not in former times belonged
unto the Crown: the which is a very necessary Edict to restrain the
insatiable ambition of such as had not deserved these titles of honor, whereof
the Prince should be jealous. And generally in all gifts, rewards, and titles
of honor it is expedient (for the greater grace of the benefi) tthat he only
which holds the Sovereignty should bestow it on him that has deserved; who
will think himself much more honored, when his Prince has given him his
reward, seen him, heard him, and graced him. Also the Prince above all things
must be jealous Alexander Seuerus did, who caused one to be tied Sellers of
smoke dangerous to an estate.
unto a post, as Spartian says, and smothered him with smoke, causing it to be
proclaimed by the trompet, So perish all such as sell smoke. He was favored by
the Emperor, who as soon as he knew the name of any one whom the Emperor
meant to grace either with honor or office, he went unto him, promising him his
favor, the which he sold at a high rate, and like a horseleech of the Court he
sucked the blood of the subjects to the dishonor of his Prince, who should hold
nothing more dear than the thanks of his gifts and bounty; else if he endure
that his household servants steal away the favors of his subjects, it is to be
feared that in the end they will make themselves Absolon did, who showing
himself affable and courteous to all the subjects, abusing the charges of
honor, offices, and benefices, giving them under the favor of the King his
father to whom he pleased; he stole from him (says the scripture) his subjects
hearts, and expelled him from his royal throne. We read also of Otho, who
having received 2500 crowns for a dispensation which the Emperor Galba gave
at his request, he gave them among the Captains of the guards, the which was a
chief means for him to vsurp the State, after that he had caused Galba to be
slain. This gift was like unto the Eagle which the Emperor Julian carried in
his Standard, the which pulled off her own feathers, whereof they made arrows
to shoot at her. For It is the ruin of princes to give too great authority to
his subjects.
the same occasion the last kings issued from Meroue and Charlemaigne were
expelled Loup Abbot of Ferrieres did write unto Charles the 3 king of France,
aduising him to have a special care that his flatterers and courtiers did not
steal from him the thanks of his liberality. Some will say, that it is
impossible for a Prince to refuse his mother, brethren, children, and friends:
I must confess it is a hard matter to avoid it, yet I have seen a King who
Charles the ninth to Henry.
being importuned by his brother for another, said unto him in the presence of
the suitor, Brother, at this time I will do nothing for your sake, but for the
love of this man who has deserved well, to whom he graciously granted what his
brother had demanded. But if the Prince will wholly yield himself to the
appetite of his followers, we Prince, who they will think understands not
thereof, or else he will satisfy them with Tranqud. in Tit^.
pertinent reasons, wherein the Emperor Titus is greatly commended, for that
he never sent away any man discontented, whether he granted or refused what he
demanded, and therefore they called him, The delight of mankind. Moreover an
impudent beggar knowing that his petition shall be viewed, red and examined by
a wise Chancellor, or an understanding master of requests will not presume to
pursue a thing that is unjust; for Princes never want flatterers and impudent
beggars, the which have no other end but to drink the blood, eat the boanes,
and suck the marrow both of Prince and subject: and those which have best
deserved of the Commonweal, are commonly Why good and virtuous men want
rewards.
most kept back, not only for that their honor forbids them to flatter, and to
beg the reward of virtue, which should be offered unto them: but also for the
charges and expenses Callicratidas a Lacedemonian Captain (one of the most
virtuous of his age) who was mocked of the Courtiers of young Cyrus, for that he
had not the patience to court it long: and contrariwise Lisander a flattering
courtier, if ever any were, obtained whatsoever he demanded. Plut. in Lisand.
A modest and bashful man is amazed in this case, where as the impudent
prevail, knowing well the humor of Princes, who always love them to whom they
have done most good, and the most part hate them to whom they are most bound:
and to say the truth, the nature of a benefit is such, as it does no less bind
him that gives, than him Tacitus gives the reason, Why we are more prone to
revenge than to requite.
saying, Proniores ad vindictam sumus quam ad gratiam, quia gratia oneri, vltio
in questu ^betur: We are more prone to revenge then to give thanks, for thanks
is held a burden, and revenge a gain. And although that many Princes neither
pay, nor give any thing but words, yet the least promise that is made unto them
they hold as a firm bond. There is yet an other point which hinders and cuts
off the rewards of good men, which is, that if a wise Prince bestows any
office, privilege, or gift to whom soever, before he can enjoy it, he must
give the one half in rewards: and oftentimes their promises are sold so dear,
as they carry away little or nothing at all, the which is an incurable
Punishments and rewards, the two supports of a Commonweal.
provide, seeing that punishments and rewards are the two firmest supports of a
Commonweal. The best means to prevent it is for the Prince to cause the gift
to be brought and delivered, and if it were possible to be present thereat
himself, specially if it be to a man of worth: for the gift coming in this
sort from the Princes own hand, has more efficacy and grace, then a hundred
times as much given him by an other repiningly, or curtalled for the most part.
The like censure is to be made of praise or commendations, which the Prince
delivers with his own mouth to him that has deserved it, the which has more
effect then all the wealth that he can give him: and a reproach or blame is as a
stabbe unto generous minds to force them to do well. But it is The sale of
offices and benefices most dangerous in a Commonweal.
good and wholesome laws; and even in this realm the ordinance of S. Lewis
notes them with infamy that have used the favor of any man to procure them
offices of justice, the which was reasonably well executed until the reign
of king Francis the first, and in England it is yet rigorously observed, as I
have understood by M. Randall the english Ambassador; the which was also
strictly decreed by an edict of Ferdinand, great Grandfather by the mothers
side to Philip, made in the year 1492 where as the form of choosing of
offices of justice is set down: Que no se puedan vender, ny trocar officios de
Alcaldia, ny AlquaZiladgo, ny regimiento, ny veyntes quatria, ny fiel
executoria, ny iuraderia. It is not needful to set down the inconveniences and
miseries that a Commonweal is subject unto by the sale of offices, the labor
were infinite being so well known to all men. But it is more difficult in a
popular State to persuade them that this traffic is good, then where as the
richest men hold the Soueraignetie. it is the only means to exclude the
poorer sort from offices, who in a popular estate will Sale of offices least
used in a Popular estate.
have their parts without paying any money, and yet hardly shall they observe
these prohibitions, when as the common people shall reap some benefit by
choosing of ambitious men. As for a Monarke, poverty sometimes forces him to
break good laws to supply his wants, but after they have once made a breach,
it is impossible to Cicero, whereby it was decreed that a Senator condemned of
ambition should be banished for ten years, but it was not observed by the
rich, who sent their broakers into the assembly of the States with great
sommes of money to corrupt the people, so as Caesar fearing to have one joined
with him in the Consulship that might cross his Luceius as much money as was
needful to purchase the peoples voices: whereof the Senate being advertised,
they appointed a great sum of money for his competitor Marcus Bibulus to buy
the peoples suffrages, as Suetonius does testify. This was upon the declining
of the popular estate, the which was overthrown The inconveniences which grow
by the sale of offices.
by this means; for undoubtedly they which make sale of estates, offices, and
benefices, they sell the most sacred thing in the world which is Justice, they
sell the Commonweal, they sell the blood of the subjects, they sell the laws,
and taking away all the rewards of honor, virtue, learning, piety, and
religion, they open the gates to thefts, corruption, covetousness, injustice,
arrogancy, impiety, and to be short, to all vice and villainy. Neither must
the Prince excuse himself by his poverty, for there is Poverty no lawful
excuse in a prince for the sale of offices.
pretense of poverty. And it is a ridiculous thing for a Prince to pretend
poverty, seeing he has so many means to prevent it if he please. We read
that the Empire of Rome was never more poor and indebted then under the
Emperor Heliogabalus that monster of nature, and yet Alexander Seuerus his
successor, one of the wisest and most virtuous Princess that ever was would
never endure the sale of offices, saying in the open Senate, Non patiar
mercatores potestatum, I will not endure these merchants, or A worthy saying of
an emperor.
buyers of dignities: and yet this good Emperor did so abate the taxes and
imposts, as he that paid one and thirty crowns under Heliogabalus, paid but
one crown under Alexander, resolving, if he had lived, to take but the third
part of it, but he reigned but Seuerus, by reason of his severity. He hated
flatterers as a The disposition of the emperor Seuerus.
plague to all Princes, neither durst the horseleeches of the court come near
him. He was very wise in all things, but especially in the discovering of men's
humors, and of a great judgment in decerning of every man's merits; being
reverent with a severe kind of majesty. We have showed before, that the
softnes or simplicity of a Prince is dangerous Francis the first became
(through his old age) austere and not so accessible, the flatterers and
horseleeches of the court came not The good husbandry of king Francis the first.
near him, so as the treasure was so well husbanded, as after his death they
found seventeen hundred thousand crowns in ready money, besides the quarter
of March which was ready to be received: and his realm full of learned men,
great Captains, good Architects, and all sorts of handicrafts, and the
frontires of his estate extending even unto the gates of Milan, being assured
by a firm firm peace with all Princes. And although that he had been
encountered with great and mighty enemies, and had been taken prisoner and
paid his ransom, yet did he build Cities, Towns, Castles, and stately
Palaces: but the facility and too great bounty of his successor Henry the
second brought The prodigality of king Henry the second.
the estate indebted within little more than twelve years after, four
millions three hundred forty eight thousand three hundred nintie three pounds
eighteen shillings starling (as I learned out of the accounts) and the
countries of Sauoy and Piedmont, with all that which they had conquered in
thirty years before, lost, and the rest much engaged. I omit to speak how
much France was fallen from her ancient dignity and beauty, how worthy men
were kept from their degrees, virtuous men trodden under foot, and the learned
contemned: and all these miseries came upon the realm, for that The cause of
the calamities of France.
he did prodigally give dignities, offices, benefices, and the treasure to the
unworthy, and suffered the wicked with all impunitie. That Prince then that
will enjoy a happy estate let him refer the punishment of offenses to the
Magistrate, as it is expedient, and Philip of Valois, and In the year 1333.
11. May.
verified in the court of Parliament, and chamber of accounts, whereby it was
enacted, That all gifts given by the king should be void, if his letters
pattents did not contain whatsoever had been given to him or to any of his
predecessors in former times by the Princes bounty: which law although it were
most profitable, yet was it abrogated two years after by their means that
were interessed, finding how much it did prejudice them, so as it was enacted
that it should be sufficient to have the derogatorie annexed to their
pattents, as I have seen in the ancient registers of the court: but that also
was taken away, least any remembrance of benefits should hinder the Princes
bounty.

There was another law made by Charles the 8. whereby all gifts above ten
pounds starling should be enrolled: but since they have used so much fraud, as
one in this realm In what sort the prince should give.
received, makes a show to have had nothing. For to give so much to one man,
although he deserve well, does not only waste the treasure of the Commonweal,
but also stir up the discontented to seditions and rebellions. And one of the
best means to preserve an estate in her greatness, is to bestow gifts and
rewards on many, to continue every Antigonus king of Asia said, That he had
two friends, whereof the one could never be satisfied, and the other could
never be forced to take any thing. To such men Dionisius the elder, lord of
Siracusa, behaved himself wisely, For to us (said Aristippus) which demand A
safe kind of giving.
much he gives little, and to Plato who craves nothing, he gives too much. This
was a safe kind of giving, retaining both the money and the thanks. Yet
princes have many other means to grace and reward a servant, than with money,
the which is less esteemed by men of honor, than a good look, an alliance, a
marriage, or a gracious remembrance. Charles the fifth, emperor, being come
into Spain, to An excellent policy of the emperor Charles the fifth.
requite the well deserving of the duke of Calabria (who had refused the crown
and kingdom of Spain, which was offered unto him by the estates) being then a
prisoner, he freed him out of prison, and married him to one of the richest
princesses that was then living, widow to king Ferdinand: with the which deed
the people received great content, the duke great honor, wealth, and liberty,
and the emperor the love of the duke, the love of the people, and the
assurance of his estate, without any charge: And moreover by this means he
kept the widow from marrying with any foreign prince: giving to the duke a wife
that was aged and barren, to the end that the dukes

It is a principal point which a prince ought to respect, That his bounty and
rewards be given with a cheerful heart: for some are so unpleasing, as they
never give any thing without reproach, the which takes away the grace of the
gift, especially if the gift be in stead of a reward or recompense. But they do
much worse, which give one and the same office, or one confiscatton to many,
without aduertising either the one or the other: the which is no benefit, but
an injury. This is to cast the golden apple among subjects It is pernitio^s to
give one thing to many.
to ruin them. And oftentimes we see them consumed with suits, and murder one
another with the sword: whereby the prince shall not only loose the fruits of
his bounty, but the love of his subjects, and reap for thanks eternal
hatred. The which is a gross The law of liberty.
command, That he should observe well to whom he gives, what he gives, at
what time, in what place, and to what end, and his own ability that gives.
But a sovereign Horatius Cocles (who alone had withstood the enemies army,
and saved the city from sacking, and the citisens from ruin) they gave him an
acre of land, or little more; the which was much at that time, having but two
leagues compass about the city. But Alexander the Great gave kingdoms and
empires, and thousands of talents: if he had done otherwise it had been
against his majesty and greatness. Alphonsus the fifth, king of Castile, gave
the kingdom of Portugal The beginning of the kings of Portugal.
to Henry of Boulogne of the house of Loraine, from whom are issued the kings
of Portugal for these five hundred and fifty years: it was for a reward of
his virtue, marrying him to his bastard daughter. But yet was he blamed, to
have given away so goodly an estate, his own not being at that time much
greater. In like sort we may say, that the custom of the ancient Romans was
commendable, to nourish upon the public charge three children borne at one
birth, for a reward of the memorial victory obtained by the three Horatij
against the Curiatij. But Solons law, which would have their children which had
been slain in the wars for their country, maintained by the public, could
not continue, although it were practiced throughout all Greece, as we read in
Aristotle, for it did quite waste and consume their treasure.

If any one suppose, that the bounty and greatness of a prince shall not
appear, if he give to none but to such as shall deserve; I will yield unto
him. I know that bounty and Bounty will besits a great prince
magnificence is well befitting a great prince: neither must we think it
strange if the prince advance one of a poor and base condition to honor and
wealth, so as there be virtue and merit in him: else if the prince shall raise
an unworthy person above good men, or equal him in rank with great
personages, in doing good to the one he shall wrong all the rest. That worthy
saying of Chilo is extant, one demanding of him what God did, He casts down
the proud (answered he) from above, and raises the poor and dejected to the
highest degree of honor. A good prince should imitat God, advancing the poor
and virtuous to honors and riches. But when as the college Iulio the third,
having created P. M. du Mont Cardinal, being a young boy whom he loved,
saying, That it was a great dishonor to blemish so honorable an order with so
base a man, having neither virtue in him, nor learning, neither nobility nor
goods, nor any mark which might merit (as they said) to approach to such a
degree: But the pope (who was very pleasant) turning unto the cardinals, What
virtue, (says he) what nobility, what learning, what honor, A pleasant
answer of pope Julius the third.
did you find in me, to make me pope? It is most certain, that a vicious and
unworthy prince, will always have his friends and followers of his own humor:
as it appears by the emperor. Heliogabalus, who gave the greatest offices,
and enriched the Aduancements bestowed on the unworthy incense the subjects
eyes, how disdainefully it has been taken to see the due rewards of good
subjects, and virtuous men, given to the vicious, to strangers, and to the
unworthy, the which has put the goodliest realm of Europe in combustion. For
we find, that the gifts in the year 1572 amounted to 270000 pounds starling:
and the year following to 204400 pounds: and in the year 1574 there was given
54700 pounds: and in the six months following they gave 95500 pounds starling,
besides pensions which were not less than twenty thousand pounds starling:
and the greatest part of all this treasure grew by the sale of offices, and by
confiscations, which was the cause of all our miseries: and yet by A
commendable custom of Alexander Seuerus.
Seuerus maintained, who caused his name to be set up in all public places,
whom he meant to prefer to any government, giving leave to all men to
accuse him, yet with the pain of death to him that did it falsely, saying,
That it was great shame to be less careful of the life and conversation of a
governor, than the Christians were of the qualities of their bishops and
ministers, whom they examined with all rigor before they were admitted. The
which is much more expedient than the manner of examination which the
Venetians, Genouois, Luquois, and Florentines, do use, after that the Solons
law was far better, by the which the life of the officer was examined both
before his admittance to the office, and after he had left it: as we read in
the (...). in or at. de fals^ legate. and contr^ Tim^rchum.
pleadings of Demosthenes. Having then examined the life and manners of such as
aspire to dignities, offices, benefices, knighthoods, exemptions, immunities,
gifts and rewards. If their lives be polluted and wicked, they are not only to
be rejected, but also to be punished. And rewards are to be distributed to
good men, according to every man's A true distribution of offices and charges.
to the strongest, the government to the wisest, the priesthood to the
deuoutest: yet having respect to the nobility, riches, age, and power of
every one, and to the quality of the charges and offices. For it were a
ridiculous thing to seek a judge that were a warrior, a prelat courageous, and
a soldier with a conscience. We have treated of Rewards, Triumphs, and
Honors, which are for the most part given unto men of war: Let us now see if
it be fit to exercise the subject in arms.

CHAP. V.
IT is one of the highest questions of State, and it may be of the greatest
difficulty to resolve, for the inconveniences that may rise on either part,
the which I will treat of as briefly as I may, setting down what I hold most
convenient, leaving notwithstanding the resolution to the wise politicians. To
follow the opinion of Aristotle simply, and to maintain that a city ought to
be well fortified, well situated for the sending forth of an army, and
Cleomenes king of Lacedemonia does witness, who seeing the strong fortifications
of a town, he cried out, O goodly retreat for women. And for this cause
Licurgus the lawgiuer would never allow Reasons against the fortifying of
towns.
the city of Sparta to be fortified, fearing least the subjects relying on the
strength of Preste-Ian, which is the greatest lord in all Affrike, having (as
they say) fifty kings under Francis Aluere^ in the history of Aethiopia.
him that do him homage, has no forts nor castles, but his tents, but that
fort only which is built upon the top of the mountain Anga, whereas all the
princes of the blood are kept with a sure guard, least they should draw the
subjects from the obedience of their prince by seditious factions. Yet there is
no prince under heaven more reverenced and respected of his subjects, nor more
redoubted of his enemies, than in Tartaria, and Aethiopia. Forts are held
fruitless and of small consequence in the opinion He that is master of the
field, is master of the towns.
of the greatest captains, who hold him that is master of the field, to be
master of all the towns. It is well known, that after the battle of Arbella
in Chaldea, whereas Darius the last king of Persia was defeated, that there was
neither city nor fort in all the whole Persian empire, that held out one day
against Alexander the Great, although Paulus Aemilius had vanquished Perseus
king of Macedon in battle, there was not any one town that made resistance,
but all the whole kingdom yielded in a moment. After the battle of Pharsalia,
who forsook not Pompey? all the towns and strong places of the East, which
before were shut against Caesar, did now open their gates unto him without any
difficulty. And without any further search, it is well known, that after the
victory which king Jews the twelft obtained against the Venetians, he was
presently master of the towns. As in like case after the battle of
Marignan, all Lombardie, and even the castle of Milan, yielded unto king
Francis; and

But there is a more necessary reason against the fortifying of places, it is
to be feared, that an enemy entering the stronger, and taking those strong
places, he will hold them, and by that means the whole country: whereas
otherwise having once spoiled it, he shall be forced to leave it. For this
reason John Maria de la Rouere duke of Vrbin, rased all the forts of his
country, and retired himself to Venice, finding his forces too weak to
encounter the enemy; assuring him that the duke of Valentinois coming with
all the power of the church could not hold it, being hated to the death, and
the duke of Vrbin beloved and respected of his subjects; as it proved true. for
pope The strongest fort is the love of the subjects.
Alexander being dead, the duke of Vrbin was received with great joy of his
subjects, Sforces were lords of Milan, to the end that foreign princes should
bring them no more in subjection by means of their fort. So the ancient
Siracusians did Acradina, and the Romans the cities of Corinth, Carthage, and
Numance, the which they had never rased, if the fort of Acrocorinth and other
places, strong by nature and easy to be fortified, had not forced them unto
it, least the inhabitants should make use of them, as Philip the younger, king
of Macedonie had done, who called the cities of Corinth, Titus Flaminius rased
to the ground, to free them from the servitude of the Macedonians, and to take
away all fear of tyrants. The which is another strong reason to take all
occasion from princes to tyrannize over their subjects, as those do which
assure themselves by Cittadels, which the people called Tyrants nests; and
tyrants termed them a scourge for villains, in contempt and scorn of the
poor subjects: as Grislerus lieurenant to the emperor in Swisserland did, who
built a fort in the vallie of Vri, and calling it Zwing Vri, that is to say,
the yoke of Vri, which was the first occasion that moved the The first cause
of the Swissers revolt.
Cantons of the Swissers to revolt, as we read in their histories. And Solomon
was the first that made a Citadell in Jerusalem, beginning even then to entreat
his subjects ill, Hannibal did at Saguntum, Sylla at Athens, the emperor
Seuerus at Bizantium, Dagobert at (...), Nabuchodonosor and Vespasian to the
city of Jerusalem, all which were revolted for the trust they had in their
^orts, eating even their children through the tediousness of sieges, and in
the end have been rased, and the inhabitants rooted out: the which would have
easily compounded, if the confidence Weak towns compound soon to save
themselves.
of their strong places had not abused them. For commonly we see, that weak
towns and ill fortified, do soon compound and send away the enemy, for some
Caesar forced it, the which had been long since rased if it had been
fortified, having been so often threatened by the enemy: but still they have
preserved themselves by treaties and compositions, the which they had not done
being well fortified, either for fear of reproach and dishonor which follow
them, which treat with an enemy when they may resist: or for the obstinacy of
the inhabitants, or the heads of a faction, who had rather die, than yield unto
an enemy, having Places of strength make the inhabitants obstina^.
no hope to escape, and seeing their houses on fire, they strive in ruining it,
to quench it with the blood of their fellow citisens. But there be no cities so
strong, that can long resist the canon, and much less famine: For if the
besieged be few in number, they shall

If then forts and citadels make a bad prince to tyrannize, an enemy to ceize
upon The inconveniences of forts and citadels.
the country, subjects to be cowards toward an enemy, rebels to their
prince, and seditious among themselves? we cannot say they be profitable, or
necessary; but contrariwise hurtful and pernicious to a Commonweal.

As for the other question, Whether we should train the subjects up in arms,
and seek war rather than peace: It seems we should not call that in doubt:
for we must esteem that Commonweal most happy, whereas the king is obedient
to the laws of God and nature, the magistrates unto the king, private men to the
Magistrates, the children to the parents, the servants to the masters, and the
subjects united together in love, villages, besiege, batter, force and sack
towns; massacre good and bad, young and War hateful to God and (...)
need examples in so manifest a matter? who can think of them without horror?
or hear them spoken of without sighing? Who knows not the wounds of the
husbandman? who sees not their miseries? who hears not their complaints? Every
man's field, ca^tell, and corn, wherewith we live and draw our breath, are in
the power of soldiers, that is (as many do interp^et it) of robbers. If it be
so, I see no reason why we should instruct citisens in this cruel and
execrable kind of life, or to arm them, but to The subject is not to be
trained up in arms.
repulfe violence in time of extreme necessity. For those which take small
occasions to make war, are like unto flies, which cannot hold themselves
upon a smooth polished glass, but up on rough places. And those which seek
war to enrich themselves with their neighbors spoils, shall be in
continual torment, leading a miserable life: for desire has no bounds,
although in show they seem to be contented with the desire of a kingdom: even
like unto a slave, who desires only to be freed of his bands; being unbound,
he affects his liberty; and being free, he demands to be made a citisen;
after that he desires to be a magistrate; and being come to highest place of
magistracy, he affects to be a king; and being a king, he will be an
absolute and sole monarch; and in the end he will be worshipped as a God. How
much more happy then Agesilaus boasted, but by justice, as Pompey said to the
king of the Parthians, when as he would have the river of Euphrates to
distinguish the bounds of the Roman and Parthian empires.

This have I briefly objected against the fortifying of cities, and military
discipline: but many things may be said on the contrary part, That towns
without walls lie open The inconveniences not to have fortresses.
to the spoil of thieves and robbers, and the lives and liberties of the
citisens, to the A town unfortified, is a bait for an enemy.
were well fortified: like unto men that travel unarmed, they encourage
thieves to kill them, to have their spoils. For it is manifest, that the sack
of cities is a bait for souldidiours, and he will willingly be an enemy to
them that are weak, that durst not look of them being armed. Besides, the
first, and in a manner the only occasion to gather men together into one
society and communaltie, was for the tuition of every one in A communalty
cannot be in safety without some defense.
particular, and of all in general, and of their wives, children, goods, and
possessions, the which cannot be in safety without walls. For, to say, that men
will make a wall against the enemy, that may well be when as they must fight:
but those which must make defense, are not commonly the fourth part of the
inhabitants, for that there are

It is a ridiculous thing to say, That men without walls will be more valiant:
if that were true, what need we any offensive arms to affront the enemy, nay
rather it should be necessary to command every man to fight naked, as Isadas
did, being one of the goodliest and most valiant gentlemen of Sparta, who
seeing Epaminondas with an army of Thebans fighting with the Lacedaemonians,
and laboring to enter into their city, he stripped himself naked, and with a
pertuisan in one hand, and a sword in the other, he charge the enemy
desperately, whereas he did valiant exploits: for the which Isadas punished for
his rashness, and rewarded for his valor.
the seigneurie gave him a crown, but he was condemned in a fine, having so
rashly abandoned his life unto the enemy, being unarmed. In like sort should
the Senate of Sparta have been condemned in a great fine, for that they had
abandoned the people and so great a city to the mercy of their enemies;
having no walls, the which without doubt had then fallen into the Thebans power
if they had not been fortified with ditches and rampars. If a rampar did then
avail for the safety of the citisens, who doubts but walls will be more
profitable? and if walls make the citisens cowards, mutinous, and rebels, why
did they not fill up the ditches of Lacedemon? But the event does show which of
the two is most profitable, for Cleomines king of Sparta having lost the
battle of Selaria, having no place of retreat was forced to fly into Egypt,
abandoning Lisander having taken Athens, would not have razed the walls, the
which Themistocles and Pericles had caused to be built for the defense of that
city, the which was afterward the most flourishing of all the East. To say
that the enemy shall not be able to hold a country if there be no walled
towns, I yield unto it: but who shall keep him from the spoil of cities,
from burning of houses, from murdering of men, rauishing of women, and leading
children into captivity, according to the ancient wars, that is, of the
stronger? all histories are full of these calamities. There is also as small
reason to think that weak Weak towns must ^eeld to the victors will
towns and without walls will compound with the enemy, and not stand out;
where A strong fort is oftentimes the ruin of the enemies army.
stay a great and mighty army, whereof we have too many examples: and many
times those which do besiege are besieged with cold, hunger, and diseases, and
for one they kill within, there are a hundred slain without. Constantinople
did endure the Turks siege eight years, until they were relieved by Tamberlan
emperor of the Tartars, who defeated Bajazet king of the Turks with all his
army. Even so the king of Fez indu^ed a siege seven years in the town of
Fauzara against the king of Marocco, whose army in the end was consumed with
the plague in the year 1412. And the Leo of Affrike.
town of Mecna in Affrike held out also seven years, whereas the enemies died
for the most part, and were forced to depart with shame and loss. And in our
age the city of Metz (although it were nothing so well fortified as it is at
this day) did long resist the army of the emperor Charles the fifth, and was a
buckler unto all France, which had been in great danger if the emperor had not
found this town well fortified, from whence he was forced to depart, being
both himself and his army besieged with hunger, cold, and many diseases. The
city of Tire held out-great Alexander seven months, during which time the
king of Persia had good means to leauie forces, and to provide for his estate.
And if walls made men faintharted and cowards, why did the Romans fortify
their city, being the most valiant people that ever were? And it was
available Marcius Coriolanus, the Tarquins, Hanni^all, and others did besiege
them, and burnt even unto their gates. And even when as the Gauls had forced
and wholly burnt the city, their estate had been utterly ruined if they had
not retired into the Capitol. The like had happened unto the Pope and
Cardinals after that the army of Charles of Bourbon had sacked Rome, if they
had not fled into the castle S. Ange, where they were besieged as long as the
ancient Romans were in the Capitol. And every man knows that countries
without forts are presently conquered upon the first battle that is won
within the country, as we read of England, which the Saxons conquered from
the ancient Britains, who were expelled, and their The realm of England
thrice conquered.
enemies took possession. After the Saxons the Danes entered, who were lords of
it for the most part: then William the Conqueror by the means of one only
victory became absolute lord, and took possession thereof. And during the
quarrels betwixt the houses of Lancaster and York, the realm was lost and
recovered thrice in six months: as if Henry the sixth, Edward the fourth, and
the earl of Warwike had played at base: and although that Edward in the end
inioyed the realm, yet soon after his death his brother Richard duke of
Gloucester (having made himself king by the murder of his nephues) was
defeated and slain by the earl of Richmond, who had bin banished into France,
from whence he brought some small aid which king Lewis the 11 had given The
Romans did always fortify their camps.
him. The which happens not in fortified countries where there is any retreat:
for which Paulus Aemilius did wisely discourse unto the army before that he
gave battle unto the king of Macedon, saying, Maiores nostri castra munita
portum ad omnes casus exercitus ducebant esse, vnde ad pugnam exirent, quo
iactati pugnae receptum haberent and qui castris exutus erat, etiamsi pugnando
acie vicisset, pro victo habebatur: Our elders held a camp well fortified, a
safe retreat for all events, from the which they went forth to fight, and
retired if they A country unfortified cannot long resist a strong (...).
can they not long resist nor vanquish him which is much more stronger. These
reasons shall serve to prove that it is necessary to fortify towns. We will
in like manner hold, that the citisens must be instructed in martial
discipline, for that seeing by the laws of Tully writ, That no The cause makes
the war just.
war was just but for the recovery of ones own; or, that was denounced
before unto the enemy: for the proclaiming of war makes it not just, but the
cause must be necessary: there can be none then more just than to defend the
lives of innocents. There are War against an enemy, entertaines the subjects
in love.
and to preserve it from rebellions, seditions, and civil wars, and to
entertain them in love, is to have an enemy against whom they may oppose
themselves. This appears by the example of all Commonweales, and namely of the
Romans, who never could find a more safe and surer remedy against civil
wars, than to affront the subjects with an enemy: for being on a time at
war among themselves, the enemy entered the Dion. Halicar. lib. 7. Liui^s
lib. 3.
town, and seized upon the Capitol, but suddenly they were reconciled, and
expelled him: a while after the Veientes seeing them return to civil wars,
they began to wast and spoil the Roman territories, but the Romans were soon
agreed, discharging their choler upon them, so as they never ceased until
they had razed their city, and Civil wars the ruin of states.
Empires and States mortal, which else would be immortal. In like case the
people of Spain being revolted from the emperor Charles the fifth, forcing in
a manner the duke of Calabria to accept of the Crown, being thus in arms one
against an other, king Francis the first sent an army which recovered
Fontarabie and the kingdom of Navarre, but suddenly this civil war was
pacified among the Spaniards, who with one common consent fell upon the french,
and recovered that from them which they had New haven taken by the English
caused the civil wars of France to cease.
wars ceased, and the subjects agreed to fall upon their common enemy,
which the english perceiving, they have since resolved to let the french fight
and ruin one another, and afterward to invade the realm without any
difficulty or resistance. But I will return to foreign examples, (and I
would to God we had no domestical presidents) to show that it is a hard thing
and almost impossible, to maintain subjects in peace and love, if they be not
in war against some enemy. It is apparent in all the histories Rest the cause
of civil ware in a warlike city.
Danubius and Euphrates, and to the deserts of Arabia: and having no more
enemies to make head against them, they murdered one an other most cruelly,
and so much the more, for that they were grown mighty, and had few enemies,
as in the civil war betwixt Caesar and Pompey for rule, whereof Cicero
speaking said, Bellum pium ac necessarium visum est, ciuibus tamen exitiabile,
nisi Pompeius vicerit, calamitosum etiam si vicerit: It seems, said he, to be
a godly and necessary war, yet fatal unto the citisens Pompey win, and
lamentable if he do win: But it was more cruel betwixt Augustus and Marc
Anthony: for which cause the emperor Augustus having changed the popular
estate into a Monarkie, was not so ill advised as to discharge the forty
legions, but he sent them into provinces, and upon the frontiers of barbarous
nations, to entertain them in martial discipline, and to prevent all
occasions of civil wars at Rome. But the emperor Constantine the great
(following the counsel of some Bishops The first occasion to ruin the Roman
empire.
and ministers unacquainted with matters of State) discharged the legions,
which made them forget the ancient military discipline, and opened a gate to
barbarous nations, who invaded the Roman empire of all sides, whereby it
appeeres that laws, justice, religion, subjects, and the whole estate next
under God, is in the protection of Arms the defense of states.
arms, as under a strong shield. There is yet an other reason of great moment,
to show that it is necessary to entertain martial discipline, and to make
war, for that there is no city so holy, nor so well governed that has not
in it many thieves, murderers, idle persons, vagabonds, mutins, adulterers,
and diceplayers, which lead a wicked life, and corrupt the simplicity of good
subjects; neither can laws, magistrates, nor any punishment keep them in awe.
And even it is commonly said that gibets are set up A mean to purge the
Commonweal of vagabonds and idle persons.
but for beggars, for that statutes and ordinances in many places are like unto
spiders webs, as Anacharsis said unto Solon, for that none but weak flies are
taken in them, and great beasts break easily through them. There is no better
means then to purge the Charles the wise king of France to send succors so
willingly unto the bastard of Castille under the conduct of Bertrand of
Guesclin Constable, the which purged France of an infinite number of thieves:
Even so did Lewis the II to the Earl of Richmond; and both the one and the
other not only purged France of idle persons, but also returned with honor to
have settled two kings in their estates, from the which they were expelled.
Moreover, the military discipline of the Romans which should be common to all
nations, made a coward The martial discipline of the Romans, was a school of
virtue.
valiant, an intemperat man modest, a slothful man active, a prodigal man
frugall, The praise of military discipline.
discipline and art of commanding. Besides, there is nothing that contains
the people within the duty of honor and virtue more then the fear of a
warlike enemy. The people of Rome (says Polibius) were never more virtuous,
nor the subjects more obedient Pyrrhus The fear of enemies keeps subjects in
awe.
at one time, and Hanniball at an other were at the gates of Rome; but after
that Perseus and Antiochus were vanquished, having no enemy left whom they
might fear, then vices began to take root, and the people fell into
superfluities and delights, which corrupted all good manners, and blemished the
beauty of their ancient virtue. O how wisely did Scipio oppose himself in
open Senate, that the city of Carthage should not The providence of Scipio the
younger.
be razed, foretelling they either should have civil wars, or that the
virtue of the Romans would soon decay, having no enemy to contend withal, for
even as moderate liberty puffes men up, and makes them proane to all vices, so
fear retains them in their duties: and we must not doubt but the great
politian and governor of all the Samuel in an oration which he made unto the
people said, That God had stirred them up enemies, to keep them in awe, try
them, and punish them. And that I may conclude briefly, if there be no respect
had of so many Wars allowed of God.
commodities, yet let us have a care of the health and necessity of the
Commonweal, least it grow wast and desolate through the spoils and insolency
of the enemy, for when as the enemies forces are near, although there be no
invasion, yet the flocks are forsaken, the tillage is abandoned, and all
traffic ceasseth; and oftentimes the whole years fruits are lost at the
tumor of any danger, or the terror of war. Who will The way to have a peace,
is to prepare for force
then to let him know that you have means to make war? Never wise Prince nor
good Captain made a peace unarmed, and as Manlius Capitolinus said, Ostendite
modo bellum, pacem habebitis, videant vos paratos ad vim, ius ipsiremittent:
Show them war said he, and you shall have peace, let them see you ready for
force, and they will A resolution of the question.
popular estate it is necessary to train the subjects up in arms, to avoid
the abouenamed inconveniences, unto the which a popular estate is by nature
subject; and if the people be warlike and mutinous by nature, as the nations of
the North be, being trained up to arms and martial discipline, it shall be
expedient to affront them often with their enemies, and not to admit any peace
but upon good terms, as a dangerous thing In a Popular estate the subjects
must be trained up in arms.
to a warlike nation. And a peace being concluded, you must notwithstanding
entertain your soldiers upon the frontiers, as the emperor Augustus did,
although he had changed In a Popular estate only the capital city must be
fortified
which is the seat of the popular estate) and much less any Castles or
Citadels, least some one thrust on with an ambitious desire of rule surprise
them, and change the popular Denis the tyrant did, having surprised Acradina
the Citadels not to be built in a Popular estate.
fort of Siracusa by fraud. Or else the enemy may take them and fortify them,
as the Lacedaemonians did, having razed the walls of Athens, they left a
garrison in the Castle: and doing the like unto the popular estate of Thebes,
they took their fort called Cadmee, leaving a garrison in it. For there is no
means to subject a people, or to change a Democratia into a Monarchy but by
Cittadels, so did the tyrants in old time: and in our age Cosme de Medicis duke
of Florence had made two Cittadels in Florence, with a garrison of strangers,
having found by experience that it was impossible Citadels the cause of tyrants.
to change the popular estate into a Monarchy, and to assure his life among
the people: and therefore the Cantons of Vri, Vnderuald, Glaris, and Appenzell,
which Aristocratia in regard of fortresses, as of a popular estate, the which
is so much more to be feared, for that it is more easy for one of the Citadels
more dangerous whereas few do govern
commanders to win the common people to his will, and to incense them against
the chief men. But as for royal Monarchies, if their bounds and limits be
large, it is not expedient for the Prince to build Cittadels, not places of
strength, but upon the frontiers, to the end the people may be without fear of
tyranizing; and yet having fortified the frontiers of his estate with places
impregnable, the subjects will still think it is against the enemy, and the
Prince at need may use them against all enemies, both strangers and subjects
in case they rebel: the which nature has taught us, which has To fortify
the frontiers, is according to the law of nature.
the other parts unarmed. But the Monarke is ill advised that does inuiron a
town with mighty walls, if he does not withal build a good Cittadell, for
that nothing does more animate the subjects to revolt, the which they would not
so easily attempt, seeing before their eyes Cittadels well fortified. It is
also necessary as well in a Monarchy as in an Aristocritie, that the governor
of the town depend not of the captain of the Cittadell, nor the captain of
the governor, neither that the captain of the Cittadell be a Prince, or a
great man: the which is well observed in Turkey, according to the rule of the
ancient Sultans of Egypt, as also our kings do, but the Venetians more
strictly Citadels in towns of strength, keep the subjects from rebelling.
every year send new Captains besides the Potestates or Governors, least that
he should hold the Cittadell as his inheritance. And those of Rhagouse (which
have but one city and a small territory) are forced to change their Captain
every day, who is Distrust of noble men in an Aristo craticall estate.
brought into the fort with his face covered. In like sort the Athenians
changed the Captain of their fortress every day, the which was one of the
nine Archontes, for the distrust they had that one of the subjects should make
himself lord. For the preventing whereof, it shall be needful to remove
Cittadels from the capital towns in Citadels not to be built in the chief
city of a Popular estate, nor in a Seigneurie.
to take all occasion from the duke, and to free the gentlemen from suspicion
of any alteration in the state. It was wisely provided in England, Turkey,
Muscouie, and in a manner by all the kings of the East and of Affrike, that no
subject should fortify his house in the country, for if the master of a
private castle be a great man, he will soon take an occasion to revolt, if he
be poor, to rob; and for this cause the imperial towns of Germany have
oftentimes razed gentlemen's castles, that rebels and thieves might have no
retreat, the which the Swissers have done throughout all their country, having
expelled the ancient lords. But this were a dangerous thing in an ancient The
Venetians do not practice arm^ in their Commonweal.
the above named inconveniences, have banished the art of war out of their
Commonweal, as Cardinal Contarenus says: the which is rather to be
attributed to sloth, then to any set or positive law, for that within these two
hundred years they were very warlike, and obtained great victories of the
Geneuois, but pleasing themselves with the continual fruits of peace and ease,
they have neglected the practice of arms, employing Why the Venetians
neglected arms.
strangers in their wars: neither can they endure any gentleman of the
seigneurie to be a commander, but if they know any Venetian gentleman that
aspires to histories are full of conspiracies, seditions and civil wars, which
they had in the midst of Why the Venetians employ strangers in their wars.
their city. The Carthagineans, being not yet well instructed in the art of war,
were wont to send for Lacedemonian captains, which should lead a Carthaginean
army under a General of Carthage; yet would they never have both General and
army strangers, least their Commonweal should fall into the power of
strangers. If war be not to be undertaken, but for the repelling of
injuries, and to enjoy peace, and that it suffices to make a Commonweal
happy to keep their own, to have their places near unto their enemies well
manned and fortified, and to enjoy the fruits of a desired peace; The seigneury
of Venice most happy.
without doubt the Seigneurie of Venice may justly term it self happy,
which has not only the seat of their empire by nature and art inexpugnable,
but also have their towns and fortresses upon the continent so well fortified,
as they neither need to fear The Venetians desire peace with their loss.
of war, as from the plague, and they never enter into it but by constraint,
and seek for peace at what price soever, even with the loss of their
revenues; as we may see in the treaty which they made with pope Iulio the
second, the emperor Maximilian, and the king of Naples, in the year 1508, their
ambassadors being humbled at their feet, yielding to all which they demanded.
As they did in like manner to Sultan Selim in the year 1570, abandoning the
holy league to purchase his peace, after they had lost a goodly kingdom. And
even as beasts which have no offensive arms, as hates that have no gall, as
Stagges and Does seek to save themselves from the hounds and A generous prince
demands neither peace nor war.
of a peace betwixt king Henry the second, and the emperor Charles the fifth,
as a certain rumor spread abroad, That the emperor demanded a peace: which
was to get the highest point of honor, which a generous prince may desire, yea
if he were entered into another country. As the same emperor did in the year
1544, having thrust all the forces of the empire, and his own, into this
realm, with those of the king of England on another side, who had already
divided the realm betwixt them (as Sleidan says) if the pope had not forced
the emperor to make a peace: which the king would neither demand, nor accept,
but with reasonable conditions. Although that Jews the eleventh reproched by
his subjects for demanding of a peace.
Lewis the eleventh demanded it of Edward the fourth, king of England, as
soon as he was entered into Picardie, and bought it dearly, caring little that
the earl of Lude and other his favorites called him cowardly king. But his
father Charles the seventh did a stranger thing for to obtain a peace of the
duke of Bourgongne, his vassal and natural subject; he sent the constable of
France, the chauncellor, a marshall of France, and many other great personages,
to treat a peace with him, who in open assembly, and in the name of the king
their master, craved pardon of the duke, for the death of John Charles the
seventh demands a peace basely of the duke of Bourgongne.
duke of Bourgongne, confessing openly, That the king had done ill, being
young, indiscreet, they ever demanded peace but of the Gauls, who held them
besieged in the Capitol, Coriolanus: But contrariwise being vanquished The
Romans never demanded a peace of any but twice.
by the power of king Perseus, they would never accept of any peace of the
victor, unless he would submit himself and his kingdom unto their mercy,
although he offered to pay them tribute. And when as king Pyrrhus (after that
he had obtained two notable victories, and was master almost of all Italy)
sent his ambassador to Rome, to treat a peace upon reasonable conditions: they
were answered, That the Romans would not treat of any peace, except that
Pyrrhus did first depart out of Italy; and that they did contend with him for
their honors and dignities, not for their lives and fortunes. The king
receiving this answer, said, That the Romans could not live in quiet, The
Romans of an undaunted resolution.
neither conquerors, nor conquered. This was the answer of a valiant people,
who Ferdinand, and so afterward it fell out. We have an example of the great
Knez of Moscouie, who seeing the Procope of Tartaria entered into his country
with eighteen legions, knowing well that Itis no dishonor to submit in time of
necessity.
he was unable to make resistance, he went to meet him unarmed, and humbling
himself before him, he saved his people and his estate from an inevitable
ruin, yet holding his count^ey by yielding homage to the Procope. But being at
this day equal or greater When a prince should give battle.
will he ever give battle, if there be not more apparent profit in the
victory, than of loss if the enemies should vanquish: as the emperor
Augustus said, who for this reason never gave battle but upon necessity. But
it is not unfitting a poor prince, Iulio the third, who demanded peace of
king Henry the second, calling him before God, to judge of the wrong which he
had done him: The king granted him a peace, and said, That he would appear
before God; but he doubted the pope would not show himself. Wherewith the
pope, who was of a pleasant disposition (seeing the letters which were signed
by the king in the camp lying at Metz, in the year 1552) was very glad,
although in show he seemed to be grieved, saying, That it was not the king
that had indicted those letters, but the capital enemy of the church. And as
the greatness of courage and magnanimity is the light of all other virtues,
and which does advance princes to the highest point of honor; so is it the A
show of courage does many times daunt an enemy.
and oftentimes gives the victory without blows: as Furius Camillus having
sent home the children of the Falisques, whom their Schoolemaister had brought
into his camp, he conquered their city without striking stroke. And Fabricius
having sent unto king Pyrrhus the Physician which offered to poison him,
refusing half his kingdoms and his treasure, (although he were one of the
poorest gentlemen in Rome) and causing their ransomes to be paid, whom Pyrrhus
had freely set at liberty, being loath the Romans should be bound in any
respect unto so great a king. Or as Scipio who having conquered a good part of
Spain with little pain, sent back a lady of singular beauty unto her
husband, prince of the Celtiberians, imitating the example of Cyrus. These
virtuous acts took from their enemies all courage, to make any more war
against so valiant and magnanimious a people, who could neither be vanquished
The Romans could never be vanquished by honor, not by (...).
by honor, nor vanquished by treachery: the which was more apparent after the
battle of Cannes, Hannibal having appointed eight thousand Roman prisoners to
be ransomed for an hundred crowns a piece one with another, hoping that the
Romans who had lost so many men, would willingly pay their ransoms: but the
Senate decreed, That no one should be redeemed at any rate, giving all to
understand, That either they must vanquish, or be slaves to the enemy:
Wherewith Hannibal was so amassed, and daunted, as he dispaired ever to vanquish
the Romans. And contrariwise the Romans did assure their estate, which was much
shaken and abandoned of all friends and allies. Hannibal having sucked so much
blood of the Romans, he would also exhaust their treasure, in drawing from them
eight hundred thousand crowns, and restoring unto them the veriest cowards of
all the Roman army; making every one to resolve either to vanquish or die,
having lost all hope of liberty, whereby they became fearful and invincible.
And even as they never fainted in their losses; so were they never proud nor
arrogant in their victories. For when as Antiochus the Great having lost a
goodly army, sent his ambassadors to both the Scipioes, offering to accept of
what conditions the Romans pleased: Whereunto Scipio the Affrican made an
answer worthy of a great and virtuous prince, That the Romans lost A worthy
answer of Scipio.
no part of their courage when they were vanquished, nor of their modesty,
when they A prince may not hazard his estate upon one victory.
upon a victory; as Antiochus, Perseus, Iuba, and Ptolome the last king of
Egypt did against the Romans: Darius against Alexander, and oftentimes the
French against the English. And for this cause Lewis the gross understanding
that the emperor Henry Gelasius into his protection, and suffered him to
excommunicat the emperor) he gathered together an army of two hundred thousand
men, as Suggerius abbat of Saint Den^s i^ France has left in writing, and
went as far as the Rhin upon the territories of the empire, which was the
only cause that made the emperor to lay aside arms, and to accept of what
peace it pleased the king. In like sort Philip Augustus advertised that the
emperor Otho the second, the king of England, with the potentats of the Low
countries, came into his realm with a mighty army, he fortified his places,
marched out of his frontiers, and defeated them in battle. And if king
Francis the first, when as he lost his army before Pauia, and himself taken
prisoner, had received such an

Many hold opinion, That a sovereign prince should not hazard his person on a
day of battle, especially if the enemy be entered into the heart of his
realm: It is true, if he be a coward and base minded: but having the
reputation of a valiant and generous The presence of the prince is of great
consequence to van^ an enemy.
prince, he doubles the courage and force of his army, and so much the more if
he be beloved of his army, and his presence works a wonderful effect, when he
is seen of them all, and every one seen of him, for oftentimes shame
retains a flying army, seeing Vrget enim (vt ait Maro) presentia Turni, The
presence of Turnus (as Maro says) does urge them to fight. As it happened to
Caesar before Therouenne; and in Spain, fighting for his life against Pompeis
children, where the battle had been lost if he had not been present. And many
believe that the victories which Edward the fourth got in nine battails, was,
for that he did always fight on foot. How many princes and great men do
willingly follow the kings person, which else would not march under any others
command. For when as Eumenes was very sick his army refused to fight,
unless he How a prince or General should carry himself in a battle.
were brought into the camp in a litter; such confidence they had in his
presence. Yet would I not that a sovereign prince or a General, should do the
office of a private soldiour, Pelopidas, Marcellus, Gaston de Foix duke of
Nemours, and many others, whose death has drawn after it the hazard of the
state.

I will not here treat of the art of war, which many have handled, but only
that which concerns the state. I conclude then, that a prince having well
manned and fortified his frontiers, if he doubts that the enemy will enter
into his country, let him prevent him, and put the war as far from him as
he may: and if he be entered, not to hazard his estate and person rashly upon
the event of a battle, especially if he have to deal with a warlike people,
who commonly get the victory being brought to despair, knowing well, that
there is no means for them to escape death in another country, John, who
chose rather to hazard his life, his nobility, and his whole estate, in a
doubtful battle at Poitiers, than to grant a peace unto the prince of
Wales, and the English army, who demanded only to depart with their lives:
there did ten thousand desparat men defeat an army of forty five thousand It
is dangerous to fight with a desp^rat army.
French, and led away the king captive. Gaston of Foix committed the like
error, having defeated the enemy at Rauenne, seeking to pursue a squadron of
Spaniards that fled, he lost his life, and left all that he had conquered in
Italy in prey to the enemy. What should I speak of ancient examples, the
histories are full of them: but there is Caesar, whose army was in despair
through famine and Necessity of an invincible force.
want, being environed both by sea and land with the enemies towns and
legions, and had soon perished for hunger, if they had not vanquished, yet
would Pompey needs give that battle of Pharsalia, having twice as many men as
Caesar. In so great a despair of things, the General of the Volsques did
encourage his army with a brief speech, after this manner, Armati armatis
obstant virtute pares, sed necessitate superiores estis, Armed men stand
against armed men, equal in virtue, but in necessity you exceed them. And
another captain of the Samnites said, Iustum est bellum quibus necessarium,
and pia arma quibus nulla nisi in armis relinquitur spes, That war is just to
whom it is necessary, and those arms religious to them that have no hope but
in arms. And therefore Fabius Maximus (the last of that family) endured all
the scorns and disgraces of his enemies, No prince should fight a battle,
but constrained.
rather than he would commit the fortune of the Commonweal to a doubtful
battle: and in the end he reaped the honor, To have preserved his country.
Whereas Hannibal having hazarded a battle against Scipio, who went to besiege
Car^hage, to draw the enemy out of Italy, lost both his army and the estate.
It is no good consequence to say, that the Romans fought three battails with
Pyrrhus, and as many with Hannibal, in the heart of Italy, for that they had
magazins of men of war, as well out of their own countries, as from their
allies: the which they could not want, for that by the laws every one was
forced to carry arms at seventeen years of age, and were not freed from
them until fifty five: neither was it lawful for any man to demand an office
or Plut. in Gracchis.
benefice, that had not carried arms ten years. And at one time there were
two thousand citisens excluded from the Bourgeship, for that they had been
four years together absent from the wars, except they which had been
dispensed withal upon some just cause (as Titus Liuius says) to the which
discipline they were at the first constrained by the incursions of their
bordering neighbors, being jealous of their greatness: But having afterward
brought all the people of Italy under their subjection, or treated alliances
with them, and finding that a people given to arms, could not live idly in
peace without civil wars, they found it expedient for the good of the
Commonweal, to seek out new enemies, making war sometimes to revenge the
wrongs The Romans sought occasion of war.
done unto their confederats: and sometimes defending them against their
enemies, Bebius the Tribune of the people did object unto the Fathers, That
war was sown upon war, that the people might never be at quiet: and
therefore there was no distinction betwixt military charges and offices of
justice: So as one and the self same citisen, might be a valiant Captain, a
wise Senator, a good Judge, and a great Orator: as it is said of Cato the
Censor, who was well skilled in tillage, as it appears by his books, yet was
he not ashamed to leave his arms to go to the plough; or to leave the plough
to plead, sometimes to be a Judge, to sacrifice, or to play the Orator before
the people or Senate. And Caesar was high Priest, and in Tullies opinion a most
Julius Pollux, That the Athenians were bound to go to war at fourteen
years, and continued until threescore. Therefore Aristides, Pericles,
Phocion, Leosthenes, Demetrius the Phalerian, Alcibiades, Themistocles, and
infinite other Grecians, were like unto the Plut. in Phocione
ancient Romans, and did excel in the art of war and policy. But the
wisest politicians did seperat the art of war from other vocations. In the
Commonweal of Creet every man was not allowed to carry arms, but certain
special persons: nor in Plut. in Licurg.
old times in France, whereas the horsemen had this charge, and the Druides
were exempt. In Egypt none but the Calasires were men of war: the which
Licurgus Herodot.
did allow. And therefore Plato divided the citisens into three orders,
Keepers, Men at arms, and Laborers: imitating the Egyptians, who made three
several kinds of estates. By little and little the Athenians made a
distinction of Arms, Policy, and Justice; In Phocione.
and so did the Romans. And truly in this short course of our life, there are
few that do excel in politic arts, but in both not any. It seems that
Augustus did first take from Senators, Proconsuls, and Governors of Provinces,
the power to wear arms: so as in succession of time they called offices
without arms dignities; as we Dion. lib. 53
read in Cassiodorus, Quamuis inquit, omnia dignitatum officia manu secludantur
armata, In forma Comitiue, Written to the Governor of a Province.
and ciuilibus vestibus induti videantur, qui districtionem publicam docentur
operari: tua tamen dignitas a terroribus eruatur, quae gladio bellico rebus
etiam pacatis accingitur: arma ista iuris sunt, non furoris, Although (says
he) that all offices of dignity be excluded from armed hands, and that they
seem to be attired with civil garments, that are taught to labor in the
difficulties of the Commonweal: yet the dignity seems to be plucked from
terrors, the which is guirt with a warlike sword, even in the quietest times:
these be the arms of Justice, not of Fury. And consequently all nations by
degrees, have separated soldiers from scholars and men of justice, being a
difficult thing to excel in one art, but impossible in all; nor worthily to
exercise many victories. Moreover it was a thing almost impossible, to train
all the subjects of a Commonweal up to arms, and to maintain them in the
obedience of the laws and magistrates. Francis the first, to cast the seven
legions of foot, which he had erected within this realm, in the year 1534,
every legion containing six thousand foot. And although that his son Henry
did renew them twenty years after, yet was he forced to alter his opinion,
seeing the Commonweal troubled, and mutinies grown in many places, by means
of those legions. And yet in the opinion of strangers, and of those that have
iudicially examined the goodly ordinances that were made to that end, there was
never any thing better instituted for the art of The entertainment of legions,
very necessary in a state.
war, the which is as necessary in this realm, as in any part of the world,
being environed with warlike and mighty nations, which make a common practice
to spoil: like to a country of conquest. Yea if they had entertained but
four legions of foot, Augustus Caesar said, That forty legions did suffice,
being but five thousand men in a legion. The four legions of foot and troops
of horse, paid in time of peace, according to the ordinance of king Francis
the first, would not have cost three hundred and fifty thousand pounds
starling, and yet is it half as much more as the legions had in Augustus his
time: and the whole pay of the men at arms of France, in the year 1560, came
but to 235300 pounds starling, as well the old bands, as the men at arms.
Augustus entertained forty legions of horse and foot, besides his and the
city Augustus kept forty legions continually in pay.
guards, and two nauies for the defense of both seas, keeping the empire safe
from foreign and civil wars, and all for twelve hundred thousand pounds
starling a year, with an excellent description of all orders: the which other
princes should propound unto themselves, to imitat such as Orosius, Dion,
Tranquillus, and other writers have described it in their monuments: and yet
was it not lawful for the Roman soldiers (notwithstanding their small
entertainment) to rob and spoil: as we see at this day. This was the means to
maintain martial discipline, to defend the rights of citisens, and allies,
and to repel the enemy: Else if you be pressed with war, you shall be forced
not only to abandon your neighbors, but also your country: or else in this
extremity you The inconveniences, not to have trained bands.
or else forced with necessity you must beg and buy foreign succors at a dear
rate. I do not think that foreign succors are to be rejected, as many
suppose: for there is no great empire can be angmented* without the succors of
confederats, neither can they long resist the violence of an enemy: but I
allow of those succors which come from allies, that are united together in an
offensive and defensive league, as the Cantons of the Swissers be: or at the
least in a defensive league, as they be with the house of France. For by this
means they are not only the more strengthened, but It is good to have mighty
friends and allies in an equal league.
they also take from the enemy those succors which he might draw from them,
and the occasion from all men to make war against either of them, unless he
mean to conquests should be common (as it has always been among the Cantons,
when as Polibius and Liuie. The Romans circumuented their allies in Italy in
their treaties.
allies had no pension nor entertainment from the Romans, nor any part of
their conquests which were made in common, nor in dignities and offices, except
some towns of the Latins; which was the cause of the sociall or confederats
war in Italy against the Romans, who were reduced to that extremity, as
they were forced to give the right of a citisen, with part of their offices,
and their voices at elections, almost to all

It may also be doubted whether it be fit to have many allies, or mercinarie
soldiers of diverse languages, for the difficulty there is to speak unto
them, and to encourage them by orations, a thing very necessary in war. But
experience has taught us, that diverse nations and diverse tongues are easy to
govern and lead, as Anniball did show, having an army consisting of
Carthaginians, Mauritanians, Numidians, Spaniards, Italians, Gauls, and
Greeks, and yet in fifteen years space he never had Polibius, a captain of
great experience, and Schoolmaster to Scipio Affricanus. That which we have
spoken touching the succors of allies, is not to be understood that an estate
should wholly rely upon them, but a well governed Commonweal must be
supported by her own forces, and always be stronger than the succors she
has from her allies: for he always commands the state that is master of the
force, and will make himself an absolute lord upon the least occasion, if he
have any desire, the which never wants in ambitious minds. And if allies and
confederates be to be feared in an others country when they are the stronger,
what assurance can we have of strange forces, which have no offensive Foreign
force^ being the stronger, make themselves maister^ over them that call them to
their succors.
nor defensive league with us? there is no doubt, but in danger they will be
more careful of their own lives than of an other man's, and will attribute
unto themselves the profit and honor of the victory, exhausting their
treasures, and growing soldiers at their cost whom they serve. How often have
we seen the stranger being the stronger, make himself absolute lord over them
that called him? We have in our age the example of Cairadin that famous pirat,
called in by the inhabitants of Alger, to expel the Spaniards out of their
fort; having vanquished them, he slew Selim their king with all his family,
and made himself king thereof, leaving the state to Ariadin Barbarousse his
brother. And Saladin a Tartar being called by the Caliph and the inhabitants of
Caire to expel the Christians out of Soria, after the victory he s^ew the
Caliph; and Sultan Selim Emperout of the Turks made himself lord thereof. By
the same means the Herules, Goths, and Lombards became lords of Italy, the
French of Gaul, the English Saxons of Britain, the Scottishmen of Scotland,
having expelled the Brittons and the Picts, who had called them to their
succors; and the Turk of the empire of the East and the realm of Hongary,
being entreated by the Emperors of Constantinople and the Charles the fifth had
reduced Germany into the form of a Province, and made it hereditarie by the
same fraud that the rest, when as a part of Germany under color of religion
called in the Spaniards and Italians, for having subdued the princes of Saxony,
he labored to subject the rest under the spanish empire, intending to make
Philip his son king of Germany, if Henry the second had not freed them with
the forces of France, who for this cause was called by the Germans in their
printed books the protector of the Empire, and the deliverer of the Princes.
The which the princes of Germany having foreseen, did bind the Emperor
Charles the fifth in the twelft article of his oath, that he should never bring
an army of strangers into Germany; but since the Emperors death the Electors
did Antiochus king of Asia their General for a year, the Tarentines king
Pyrrhus, the Polonians Henry Duke of Aniou; Leo king of Armenia one of the
children of Andrew king of Hongarie, to give him his daughter and his estate:
else it is to be feared that a neighbor prince chosen General but for a
year, will make himself perpetual, or if he be perpetual, will grow
hereditarie, taking from the subjects their right of election: or if the estate
be given to one that is a king and to his heirs, it is to be doubted he will
make it a tributarie Polonia, for it is not to be expected that he will ever
bear that affection to strangers that he does unto his own, but will easily*
abandon an others estate at need, to defend his own. To The conclusion of the
proposition.
conclude, in my opinion a Commonweal well ordained, of what nature soever,
should be fortified upon the approches and frontires, in the which forts there
should be good garrisons trained up daily to arms, having certain lands
appointed for soldiers the which they should enjoy only for their lives, as in
old time the fees and feudataries were, and at this day the Timars and
Timariots in Turkey, the which are given unto soldiers like unto benefices,
upon condition they should be ready with horse and lying upon the extremities
of hot and cold, as the Ethiopians, Numidians, Negros, Those which inhabit in
fertile countries, being environed by greedy enemies, have need to be warlike.
Tartars, Goths, Muscouites, Scottishmen, and Swedens, have no need of great
forts, nor to entertain any legions in time of peace, having no enemies but
such as they make themselves; the people of the North being by nature too
warlike, all horsemen, or for the most part, and given to arms, without any
need to train them up in it, unless it be to discharge the country, or as I
have said, for that they cannot be kept in peace. And to the end the state may
not be brought in danger by any treacherous and faithless allies, or that
strangers suck not the blood of the subjects growing warlike at an others
charge, being ready to invade the estate, let all offensive and defensive
leagues and alliances be equal, receiving as great succors at need as they
shall be bound to give; and yet the succors of the confederate must not be
such as they may force or Handicraftsmen unfit for war.
bred up in the shadow, whom all ancient and wise Captains have held unfit for
war, whatsoever Sir Thomas Moore says in his Commonweal. Seeing that we
have discoursed of men of war, of forts and of succors that are drawn from
them that are in league, let us now speak of the surety of treaties and
leagues betwixt Princes and Commonweales.

CHAP. VI. Of the suertie of alliances and treaties betwixt Princes and
Commonweales, and of the laws of arms.
THis treaty depends of the former, the which ought not to be omitted, seeing
that neither lawyer nor politician has ever handled it: and yet there is
nothing in all affairs of state that does more trouble Princes and
Commonweales, then to assure the treaties which they Plantius Consul, ^pud
(...) li. 8
of that Consul which said in open Senate, Neminem populum diutius ea
condition esse posse, cuius eum poeniteat, No people can continue long in that
estate whereof they are weary. The question was touching the Priuernates whom
the Romans had vanquished, for that they had broken the league, they demanded
of their Ambassador what punishment they had deserved? The pains, answered he,
of such as should live in liberty. Then the Consul replied, If we pardon you,
shall we be assured of a peace? the Ambassador answered, Si bonam dederitis,
and fidam and perpetuam, sin malam haud diuturnam: If you give us a good peace,
you shall have it kept faithfully and perpetually; if a bad one, it shall be
soon broken. The younger Senators found these answers too proud and haughty,
but the wiser sort said* That this people which contended only for their
liberty deserved to be made citisens of Rome, else they would never be good
subjects, nor trusty friends: and according to this advice the decree of the
Senate did pass in force of a privilege, and was confirmed by the people; and
yet had they yielded themselves to the mercy of the Romans, as all the other
cities of the Latins their allies had done, who had conspired against the
Romans. The assurance which the ancient Romans took of those whom they would
make ubiect after they had vanquished them, was to seize upon all their places
of strength, to put in garrisons, to Mos autem, inquit Liuius, Romany vetustus
erat, cum quo nec foedere nec aequis legibus iungeretur (...), non prius
Imperio in eum tanquam pacatum vti, quam omnia diuina humanaque dedid^sset,
obsides accepti arma adempta, praesidia vrbibus imposita forent: It was an
ancient custom among the Romans toward those with whom they had not joined in
league, nor contracted friendship upon equal ^earmes; never to govern them
peaceably, until they had yielded up all, delivered hostages, disarmed them,
and put garrisons into their towns. For we may not think ever to keep that
people in subjection which has always lived A free people i^ never kept in
subi^ction, unless they ^e disarmed.
in liberty, if they be not disarmed. To take away part of their liberty, is
to incense them more, than if they were wholly subjected: as Lewis the 12 did
unto the Geneuois, who A Popular estat^ must either be wholly subjected, or set
at free liberty.
only from them the stamp of their coin. It had been far better either to
have made them good subjects, or to have restored them to their perfect
liberty: for king Lewis the 11 to whom they had given themselves, made
answer, That he gave them unto the devil* refusing to receive a yearly
pension for the protection of such dis^oyall Charles the 6, having (...) them
into his protection to defend them against the Venetians. And the Earls of
Sauoy received those of Berne into their protection, being oppressed by the
lords of Bourdorg; but the fear being past, they desired nothing more than to
be freed from their protection, the which the Earl willingly granted, choosing
rather to have faithful fellows, than faithless allies. But king Francis the
first in my opinion committed a greater error, who refused two hundred thousand
crowns in his necessity, the which the Geneuois offered him to be freed from
his protection, giving him to understand that upon the first occasion they
would revolt, as they did after the battle of Pauia, and afterward expelled
the garrison which remained in their fort, and razed it to the ground: he
should either have ^ade them faithful and free confederats, being tied
together by an equal league; or

But some one will say, that it is a breach of faith to infringe the treaties,
and to change the protection into a soueraignetie. I answer, that it is and
always shall be lawful for the Patron to make himself absolute lord, if the
client be disloyal. We read that Augustus made those people subject which had
abused their liberty. And therefore king Charles the 9 (having discovered the
secret practices of the Spaniards with the inhabitants of Thoul, Metz, and
Verdun) was enforced somewhat to restrain their liberties, for in all treaties
of protection there is an express clause, That Imperial (...) made* subject
under color of protection.
Cambray, Vienna in Austria, and many others which have put themselves in the
protection of the house of Austria, have now lost their liberties. The kingdom
of Hongarie has run the same fortune: for after the death of king Ihon, the
estates of the country sent Ambassadors to the Turk to receive their young
king and the realm into his protection, fearing least Ferdinand should make
himself lord thereof, pretending the realm to belong unto him by virtue of
certain treaties made betwixt the house of Austria, and the kings of Hongarie;
but those treaties had no sure ground, for Matthew Coruin for their king, than
to lose the right of election: and although that the new king and the estates
of the country did ratify the former treaties with the house of Austria, yet
were they not kept, for that they seemed to be made by force against all law
and reason, wherefore they did choose rather to put themselves under the Turks
Hungary mad^ subject under shadow of protection.
protection; who soon after made himself absolute lord, knowing well that
Ferdinand would carry it, who notwithstanding had some part, but he was forced
to agree with The difference betwixt tribute and pension.
or by him that is equal in a treaty of alliance to have peace, and to
withhold the pensionar from joining with his enemies, or to have succors when
he shall require them; as in the treaties of equal league betwixt the kings of
France, and the Cantons of the Swissers, upon that condition that our kings
might at their pleasures leauie an army Why the king of France gave pension
unto the Swissers.
of Swissers for the defense of this realm, and should likewise help them
against the Francis the first, three years before the treaty, had gotten of
the Swissers at Marignan one of the goodlyest victories that ever Prince
obtained. And although we have said, That protection rightly was that, when as
one takes the defense of an other freely without any reward, for that the
mighty are bound to defend the weak against the injuries of their enemies:
yet for the assurance of treaties and protections, they use The mighty are
bound to defend the weak.
to receive a pension from him that puts himself into protection, to the end
that Saluian of Marseilles does greatly complain, saying, That the weak
putting themselves in the protection of the mighty, give all they have to be
protected. It is well known that they of Luques, Parma, Sienna, and many
others, pay great pensions to be protected: And oftentimes a pension is paid
to the protector, not so much to warrant him from his enemies, as from the
protector Charles the fifth, ten thousand ducates* the Siennois fifteen
thousand, and the duke of Ferrare fifteen thousand, the which he paid to the
Viceroy of Naples, under color of lending, without hope of restitution, being
in the protection It is dishonorable to abandon him you have taken into
protection.
of the French. But it is shameful and dishonorable, to take into protection,
to receive a pension, and to abandon the client in his great need. Not long
since Sigismund Augustus king of Poland had taken the protection of the
inhabitants of Lifland, against the king of Moscouia: but having made a league
with the Moscouite, he By the commandment of pope Pius the fifth.
against the queen of Navarre, to appear personally at Rome within six
months, and not by any procurator, upon pain of confiscation of all her
goods, estates, and seigneuries. King Charles the ninth took her into his
protection, saying, That she was nearly allied unto him in blood, that she was
a widow, and tied to the house of France, a Clement the seventh sent two
cardinals into England, to hear king Henry the eight, touching the (...)
betwixt him and Katherine of Spain. And for that the Citation and threat made
unto such a princess, touched his honor and the estates, the king of France
did advertise all his neighbor princes and allies, by his ambassadors, giving
the popes legate to understand, That his master should not take it ill, if he
did punish those that were the cause of this enterprise: as Lewis the young did
in the like case to Thibaud earl of Champagne, who had caused the earl of
Vermandois to be censured by the pope: entreating the pope moreover, to revoke
his sentences given as well by himself,

But it falls out often, that those which are received into protection, after the
danger is past, make war against their protector: We have many examples,
and without further search, in our memory we have seen many princes of
Germany cast themselves The Duke of Saxony.
into the protection of king Henry the second, to be freed from the captivity
and slavery The Lantgraue of Hesse.
which did threaten them: the king received them into protection, and in stead
of The Marquess of Brandebourg.
taking any pension, he gave them two hundred thousand crowns toward their
wars, and levied an army of threescore thousand men at his own charge for the
liberty of the empire. And although by the 34 article of the treaty of
Protection, it was concluded, and the king was advertised by letters of the
first of December 1559, from a pensioner Those which are in protection have
need of greater securiti^ than the protector.
towns but upon good and just considerations. And for that the protector
cannot be invaded by him that is in protection, being always the weaker: those
which put themselves into protection, have need of greater security than the
protectors, least under a color of patronage they loose their liberties.

Some one may object, That it is an absurd thing to demand security of the
protector, seeing that the client puts himself in his protection: and by an
ancient decree of the court of parliament, the vassal demanding security
against his lord, was rejected. But the deceit and treachery of man has so
far extended, as the wisest have held it The assurance of the league of
protection.
upon reasonable conditions annexed unto the treaty: the second of the letters
of protection, which the protector must deliver unto the clients, to testify,
That all the rights of sovereignty and majesty remain absolute unto the
client: and this is to be done in Monarchies, at the coming of a new prince:
for the protection is dissolved by the death of the client, as well as of the
patron: neither is the succession tied unto the protection. And therefore the
inhabitants of Mets, after the death of Henry the second, demanded to have new
letters of protection from Charles his son: not for that they Perseus king of
Macedon, after the death of his father, sent an embassage to the Senate of Rome,
to renew the league they had with his father, and to the end he might be called
king by the Senate. But when as the Senate offered to renew the same conditions
of the league which they had with Philip his father, Perseus refused them,
saying, That the treaty made with his father, did nothing concern him: and if
they would contract a new league, they must first agree upon the conditions. So
Henry the seventh, king of England having received the duke of Suffolk from
the Archduke Philip, father unto A league made with the father binds not the
son.
the emperor Charles the fifth, upon condition, That he should not put him to
death, he kept his faith; but he being dead, his son Henry the eight caused
his head to be cut off, saying, That he was not tied unto the treaty which
his father had made.

But for that protections are more dangerous for the adherents or clients,
than all other treaties, it is needful to have greater security: for often
times we see, that for want of security the protection is changed into a
seigneurie. And sometimes he thinks himself well assured, that makes the
wolf the keeper of his flock. And therefore protections must be limited to a
certain time, especially in Popular and Aristocraticall estates, which never
die. And therefore the inhabitants of Geneua having put themselves in the
protection of them of Berne, would not have the protection continue of the
Seigneurie of Geneua, published the fifth of June, 1559: whereby it is
Auouoison, and in Latin Aduocatio. The like may be said of Rotuille, and of
Mulhouse, which are The client is freed from the protection, if the protector
make any br^ach.
protector, if he does infringe and break the laws of protection. But the
chiefest caution and assurance, is, when as the protector is not ceised of the
places of strength, nor has not any garrisons in his clients towns. There is
nothing more true, than what was spoken by Brutus the Tribune of the people,
unto the nobility of Rome, That there was one only assurance for the weak
against the mighty, which was, That if the mighty would, they could not hurt
them: for that ambitious men that have power over another, never want will. And
therefore it was wisely provided by the Scots, when as they came into the
protection of the English, made in the year 1559, That the queen of England,
who took their protection, should give hostages, the which should be changed
every six months: and that she should not build any forts in Scotland,
Antipater, then of Cassander, of Ptolomey, and in the end of Demetrius the
Besieger, they suffered their protectors to seize upon their forts, and to put
in garrisons, who presently made themselves sovereign lords. The which
Demosthenes had well and wisely foreseen, when as one commended unto him the
mildness and courtesy of Antipater: he answered, We desire no lord and
master, how mild and gracious soever: and him did Antipater pursue even into
Italy, and slew him. But the Athenians were circumuented by the same fraud as
they had done their associats: For the Persians being expelled out of Greece,
all the cities of Greece made an equal league, for the defense of their
estates and liberties, concluding, Apolloes temple, whither all the associats
should yearly bring their money, that an account might be given of the
receipts and expenses by a common consent. Every city sent ambassadors for
the swearing of their league: Aristides surnamed the Just, came for the
Athenians, who after solemn sacrifice, did cast pieces of burning iron into
the sea, calling heaven and earth, and all their gods, to witness, and saying,
As this fire is quenched in the water, so let them suddenly perish, that shall
break their faith. But the Athenians seeing the The league broken by the ^raud
of the Athenians
common treasure great, fortified their city ports, and passages therewith,
and made provision of navy, ships, and galleys well armed. And then finding
themselves the stronger, The cities of Greece subjected under color of
alliance.
appellations of all the confederat cities came unto Athens; as we read in
Xenophon, and all charges and impositions were taxed by the Athenians, who had
freed themselves from all imposts: the which chanced for that the Athenians
trained their subjects up in arms, at their confederats costs. And so did the
Lacedaemonians to all their confederats, whom under color of an equal league,
they imperiously forced to obey: for that for the most part they were all
mechanike people. And contrariwise in Lacedemon there was not any Spartan that
was an Artisan, being against Licurgus his laws: so as the city of Sparta was
far more mighty, and held in a manner all their other allies in subjection;
as we read in Plutarch. We see that the Latins fell almost into the like
difficulty, Setin captain of the Latins complained, saying, Sub vmbra
foederis aequi seruitutem patimur, We are (says he) slaves unto the Romans,
under color of an equal league. And a little after, Consilia populorum
Latinorum habita, responsumque non ambiguum imperantibus milites Romany datum,
absisterent imperare ijs, quorum auxilio egerent: Latinos pro sua liberate
potius quam pro alieno imperio arma laturos, The Latins having held a
council, and given a plain answer to the Romans which commanded the
soldiers, they wished them to forbear to command them whose aid they
needed: the Latins would rather take arms for their own liberties, than for
another Licortas captain general of the Acheans, used the like complaints to
Appius the Consul, after that the Acheans had treated an equal league with
the Romans, Foedus Romanorum cum Acheis specie quidem aequum esse: re precariam
libertatem, ^pud Romanos etiam imperium esse, The league which the Romans have
with the Acheans, in show it is equal, but in effect it is an entreated
liberty, and with the Romans it is emperie or absolute command. For the same
cause the Samnites made war against the Romans, renouncing their league: for
that under a color of society, they would command absolutely over them. And
for the same reason the cities of Italy allied unto the Romans by an equal
league, revolted from their alliance for that the Romans drew from them an
infinite succor of men and money, so that in The cause of the sociall war.
all their wars they had two of their allies for one Roman, and by that
means conquered the greatest empire that ever was, and yet their associats had
no part of the conquest, but some pillage, after that the Romans had taken what
they pleased: which (...). 56.
was the cause of the confederats war in Italy, the which had no end, until
that the allies were made citisens of Rome, to have part of honors and
offices. And yet what equal league soever the Romans made, they were still the
stronger, and held their allies as it were in subjection. How imperiously the
Romans behaved themselves toward their confederats, the speech of the Consul
Appius unto the General of the Acheans, contending for the liberty of the
Lacedaemonians, is a sufficient testimony, saying, Dum liceret voluntate sua
facere gratiam inirent, ne mox inuiti and coacti facerent, Whilst Imperium
maiestatemque populi Romanor^m gens Aetolorum conseruato sine dolo malo; hosts
eosdem habeto quos populus Romanus, armaque in eos ferto: and bellum pariter
gerito, obsides arbitrio Consulis 40, and talenta (...) dato, You Aetolians
shall maintain the empire and majesty of the people o^ Rome, without any
fraud or guile, their enemies shall be yours, you shall carry arms, and make
war against them with the people of Rome: you shall give forty hostages
Maiestatem Romanorum conseruato, Maintain the majesty of the Romans; shows,
that the league betwixt the Romans and the Aetolians was unequal, and that the
one did respect the majesty of the other with all honor. And although the
Romans gave laws unto the Aetolians, yet they did enjoy their estate and
sovereignty: as they did in all Greece, which they freed from the power of the
kings of Macedon. And after that they had vanquished and taken Perseus king of
Macedon, they freed all the people, and discharged them of the moitie of their
imposts, suffering qui seruire regibus humiliter alijs superbe imperare
consueuerunt, Which had been accustomed to serve their kings humbly, and to
command others imperiously) to depart out of Macedon, and to pass into Italy.
And not content therewith, they divided Macedon into four provinces,
forbidding upon pain of death, That the one should have no access,
communication, traffic, commerce, nor alliance of marriage, with another: and
moreover, that the moitie of those charges which were paid to the king, should
be carried yearly into the treasury of Rome. And so the people of Macedonie
Macedonie made tributarie to the Romans.
received a law from the victor, and remained tributaries, yet they enjoyed the
government of their estates. The Consul Mummius used the like policy, having
subjected the estate of Achaia, he rased Corinth, and abolished the societies
and communalties of Greece; yet he suffered the free people to enjoy their laws
and magistrates, easing them of part of their tributes: the which was a subtle
means to draw unto the amity of the Romans all the people which had been held
in slavish subjection, and to make tyrants to tremble, or at the least to force
sovereign kings and princes to govern their subjects justly, seeing that the
prize and reward of the Romans victory, was the liberty The (...) of the
Romans victories
of people, and ruin of tyrants. Whereby they reaped the greatest honor that
men might in this world, To be just and wise.

It is also a double wrong which the lord receives from his subject, having put
himself in the protection of another, and from him that has received him, if
he hold not of him by fealty and homage, or has some living in the
protectors country. And for that Charles of Lorraine bishop of Metz, put
himself into the protection of the empire, and obtained a safeguard for him and
his, of all that which he held in the country of Messin, in the year 1565, the
king of France his lieutenant opposed himself to the publication of this
safeguard: whereby he (having recourse unto the empire) brought in question his
obedience due unto his prince, the protection of Metz, and his kings right. And
yet many princes receive all that seek it, without discretion, the which is
the cause of many inconveniences, if the protection be not just. It is a
dangerous thing to undertake unto the vanquished. And therefore many have been
of opinion, That it was expedient Neutralitie is sometimes profitable.
for a prince to be a Neuter, and not to meddle with any other princes wars:
the chief reason is, That the loss is common, but the fruit of the victory is
his only whose quarrel they maintain; besides, he must declare himself an
enemy to those princes which have not wronged him: but he that shall stand
indifferent, is oftentimes a means to reconcile enemies: and maintaining
himself in the love of them all, he shall reap thanks and honor of every
side. And if all princes be in league one against another, who shall mediat a
peace? Moreover it seems there is no better means to maintain the greatness of
an estate, than to see the neighbor princes ruin one another. For the greatness
of a prince (to speak properly) is nothing else but the ruin and fall of his
neighbors: How a prince maintains his greatness.
and his strength is no other thing, but the weakness of another. And therefore
Flaminius Attilius, intending to ruin the city of the Aetolians, That it was
not so expedient to weaken the Aetolians, as to oppose against the greatness
of young Philip king of Macedon. These reasons may help them that defend
neutralitie: but it seems they are subject to greater inconveniences. First in
matter of state it is a maxim, That he must either be the stronger, or of the
stronger faction (and this rule does not admit many exceptions, be it in the
self same Commonweal, or among Neutralitie is many times dangerous.
sundry princes) else he must always remain a prey at the victors
discretion: as the Roman ambassador said unto the Acheans, whom Antiochus
king of Persia persuaded, That they would remain neuters betwixt him and the
Romans. And it seems, that whosoever will maintain himself, must of
necessity be a friend or an enemy. Jews the eleventh, king of France,
against whom they made war of all sides, so long as he continued a newter:
but after that he had allied the Swissers more strictly among themselves, and
the city of Strausbourg with them, and that he had entered into that league,
never any enemies durst assault him, (as Philip de Commines says:) for
neutralitie, Neque amicos parat, neque inimicos tollit, It neither Liuius lib.
5.
purchases friends, nor takes away enemies: as an ancient captain of the
Samnites said. And the like conclusion was made among the estates of the
Aetolians, by Aristemus their General, saying, Romanos aut socios habere
oportet, aut hosts, media via nulla est, We must have the Romans either
confederats or enemies, there is no mean. We Neutralitie is oftentimes the
ruin of princes.
have infinite examples in all histories: Ferdinand king of Aragon found no
better means Peter of Albret, than in persuading him to be a neuter betwixt
him and the king of France, that he might be abandoned at need. And the
inhabitants of Iabes remaining neuters, and not engaging themselves in the
war which the people of Israel made against the tribe of Benjamin, they were
all slain, and their towns rased. As also the Thebans fell into great
danger, being neuters, when as king Xerxes came into Greece. As in the like
case the town of Lays in Soria, was surprised, spoiled, sacked, and burnt, by
a small troop of the tribe of Dan: for that (as the history says) they were
not in league with any sovereign prince Iud. c. 18.
or state. And without any further search, the Florentines after they had left
the alliance of the house of France, refusing to enter into league with the
pope, the emperor,

But it were an unjust thing, will some one say, to join in league against
France, with whom they had been so strictly conjoined: I confess it, so should
they not have left it at need as they did; for the league is not only broken if
thou be an enemy to my associates, or if thou ioynest with my enemies, but
also if for fear thou do abandon thy associates, being bound by the league
to succor them; as a Roman Ambassador said, Sisocios meos pro hostibus habeas,
aut cum hostibus te coniungas, If thou take my associates for thine enemies,
or ioynest with mine enemies. Yet some may say, that The difference of
neutralities.
to both parties, and these are far more assured, than if they were enemies
to both factions: for they are free from the victors invasion, and if there be
any treaty of peace betwixt both parties, they are comprehended of either
side. And if neutralitie be commendable in that manner, as I have said, it is
far more commendable in a Prince that In what case one should be neuter
for their persons and estates, and those which have followed either the one or
the other party, have drawn after them the ruin of other Princes. It was
thought very strange in Spain that Pope Alexander the 6 a natural Spanyard,
should enter into league with Lewis the 12, king of France against the
Spaniards; and when as the Spaniards S. Peter, he did write unto Pope Theatin,
who had entered into league with the house of France, that he should remain as
neuter for the dignity which he had above all other Christian Princes, but the
truce being broken, the armies in field, and their ensigns displayed, the end
was miserable, for the Pope renounced the league, leaving the french in their
greatest need, and it was concluded by Theatin was then unto the french,
without the which they had not bin reduced to such extremity, as in one day to
lose all they had conquered in thirty years. It is more strange, for that the
memory is more fresh of the like errors committed by pope Clement the 7,
favoring one of these princes against the advice of Lewis Canosa his
Ambassador, who advertised him by letters written out of France, that the
greatness and suertie of his estate was to show himself a neuter: so soon
after he see himself prisoner to the imperials and the city of Rome sacked
after a strange manner, and both himself and his Cardinals ransomed at the
victors discretion. I enter not into the worthiness of the Titus Liuius, Qui
iuuentutem aduersus suos socios, publica tantum auctoritate dempta, militare
sinunt, and contrariae saepe acies in vtraque part Aetolica auxilia habent,
Which suffer there your young men underhand to go to war against their own
confederates, Allies are someimes dangerous.
and oftentimes troops of Aetolians are seen in either army. Such allies are
more dangerous than enemies. But it may be some one will say that it is
dangerous to suffer a Prince so to increase in power as he may give law unto
the rest, and invade their estates when he pleases. It is true, and there is
no greater occasion then that, to induce a neuter to seek by all means to
hinder him; for the surety of Princes and Commonweales consists in the equal
counterpeeze of power. So when as the Romans made war against king Perseus,
some favored the king, others supported the Romans, Tertia pars (said Titus
Liuius) optima eadem and prudentissima, si vtique optio domini potioris
daretur, sub Romany quam sub Rege esse mallebat: si liberum inde arbitrium
neutram partem vole bat altera oppressa fieri potentiorem: it a inter vtrosque
conditionem ciuitatum optimam fore, protegente semper altero inopem ab alterius
iniuria, and illihatis vtriusque partis viribus parem esse: A third part, says
Titus Liuius being the best and the wisest, if they were to make choice of
their lord, had rather subject themselves unto the Romans than under the king,
but if they might have their free will, they would have neither of them
superior, with the ruin of the other, so as betwixt both the cities should be
secure, the one always protecting the weak from the injuries of the other,
and they both should remain equal, their forces being not impaired: So as the
wisest have held opinion, that there was nothing better for the surety of
estates, then to have the power of great Princes as equal as might be; yet
those which were of this opinion, when as the Romans and Macedonians were in
war, remained neuters, It is honorable for great princes to be neuters.
and mightiest Princes to remain neuters, although it be not so concluded
betwixt other Princes, as I have said before. And this is necessary for the
common good of all Princes and States, which cannot be reconciled but by their
common allies, or by them that are neuters. But those that be neuters do many
times kindle the fire in stead of quenching it; the which may be excusable, if
the preservation of their estate depends upon the war which they entertain
betwixt others; but it can hardly be concealed, and the matter once discovered,
the parties most commonly agree to fall upon their Lewis the twelfth
discovering it, he allied himself with all the other Princes, and then they
all jointly made a A general league against the Venetians.
league against the Venetians, who were reduced to that extremity, as they
yielded Creme, Bresse, Bergame, Cremona, and Guiradadde, being members of the
Duchy of Milan, unto the french king, and to the Pope Fauence, Rimini,
Rauenne, and Ceruie, being of the patrimony of S. Peter: to the Empire Padoua,
Vincentia, and Verona: to the Emperor the places of Friuli and Treuisan, being
the inheritance of the house of Austria: to Ferdinand the ports and places
engaged by the kings of Naples to the seigneurie of Venice, and to call home
their magistrates from the imperial towns, Treuiran Procurator of S. Mark
stayed the Senate, saying, That the Venetians were always accustomed to take
towns and castles, but having once taken them, it were absurd to restore them.
It is therefore more sase for him that remains a neuter to meditate a peace,
than to nourish war, and in so doing to purchase It is most safe for a neuter
to mediat peace.
honor and the love of others with the assurance of his own estate, as the
Athenians procured a peace betwixt the Rhodians and Demetrius the besieger, to
the great content of both parties, who were tired with war, and yet were loath
to demand a It is honorable for a prince to be an vmpire in other princes
quarrels.
the great opinion which was held of their virtue and integrity: and since,
this prerogative has been given unto the Popes among other Christian Princes,
who oftentimes have been chosen judges and arbitrators of all their
controversies: as in the treaties betwixt king Charles the 5, and Charles king
of Navarre, made in the year 1365; and betwixt Philip Augustus and Richard
king of England: If the Pope were not a party, as Innocent the 4 was against
the Emperor Frederick the 2, then the Emperor made choice of the Parliament
of Paris for arbitrator, which was the Senate of Peers and Princes, Clement the
7 making a league with the kings of France and England against the Emperor in
the year 1528, he caused it to be inserted in the treaty, That if it were
needful to conclude a peace with the Emperor, he should have the honor to be
arbitrator. Paul the 3 did the like betwixt the king of France and the
Emperor in the treaties of Marseilles and Soissons. One of the most necessary
things for the assurance of treaties of peace and alliance, is to name some
great and mightier Prince to be judge and vmpier in case of contrauention, that
they may have recourse unto him to meditate an agreement betwixt them; who
being equal, cannot with their honors refuse war, nor demand peace. But to
the end that other Princes be not driven to that exigent, it shall be
necessary for them all to join Philip the young, king of Macedon, and the
Aetolians, fearing the greatness of the king of Macedon, as we read in Titus
Liuius. And for this cause after the taking of king Francis the first before
Pauia, the Pope, the Venetians, the Florentines, the Duke of Ferrare, and other
Potentates of Italy, made a league with the Why many princes made a league
against the emperor after the battle of Pauia.
king of England for the delivery of the king of France: not for that the
afflicted fortune of the French did move them unto pity (as it is usual to
kings, to whom the name of majesty seems holy) but for fear of the
imperial Eagle, which having covered a Francis after the battle of Marignan,
and restored Francis Sforce to the Duchy of Milan; having found by experience
how dangerous It is dangerous to be neighbor to a mighty prince.
the neighborhood of a mighty Prince was, for if he be just and upright, his
successor will not resemble him, for which cause Methridates king of Pontus
seeing the Roman empire to reach up to heaven, he entered into league with the
kings of Parthia, Armenia, and Egypt, and with many cities of Greece against
the Romans, who had seized upon the greatest part of Europe under coulor of
justice, causing in one day forty five thousand Roman citisens to be slain
throughout all Asia, by a secret conspiracy, (...) treaties the parties
comprehended must be expressly named.
neuters, for if there be not a special expression, they may justly pretend
ignorance; for that affaiers of state are sometimes managed so secretly and so
suddenly, as a league is A league against France.
it, and much more to break it, being concluded. King Francis the first was
well advertised of the league made betwixt the Pope, the Emperor, the king of
England, the Venetians, the Dukes of Milan and Mantoue, the Commonweales of
Genes, Florence, Luques, and Sienna, all confederates against his estate; yet
could he not prevent it, but in quitting the duchy of Milan. Those which had
concluded a peace and perpetual amity with him, and those which were tied
unto him by a defensive league, brake their faith, and made open war against
him: the which was not held strange, for many make no esteem of the breach of
faith in matter of treaties betwixt princes, especially if they may reap any
profit thereby: yea some are so treacherous, as they Lisander was wont to say,
That men must be circumuented and deceived with oaths, and children with
toys; but he felt Plu^. i^ Lisand.
the grievous punishment of his disloyalty. Doubtless, perjury is more
detestable than atheism, for that the atheist who believes there is no God, is
not so wicked and impious, as he that knows there is a God which has a care
of humane things, yet under coulor of a false and counterfeit oath, is not
ashamed to skorne and abuse his deity: so as we may rightly say, That
treachery is always joined with impiety and baseness of mind; for he that
willingly forsweares himself to deceive another, shows plainly that he
skornes God, and fears his enemy. It were better never to Richard Earl of
Poitiers son to the king of England did, who giving a confirmation of the
privileges of Rochell, used these words, Test meipso, My self being witness.
Seeing then that faith is the only foundation and support of justice whereon
not only Commonweales, but all human society is grounded, it must remain
sacred and inviolable in those things which are not unjust, especially betwixt
princes: for seeing they are the warrants of faith and oaths, what remedy
shall the subjects have against their power for the oaths which they take
among Faith betwixt allies must be kept.
themselves, if they be the first which break and violate their faith. I
speak of just things, for it is a double impiety to swear to do a wicked
act, and in this case he that It is no disloialtie to break an unlawful oath.
oath, if they have promised to do more than is allowable by the Civil law.
Those things which are by nature unjust and unlawful no man may promise,
neither may any man urge them if they be promised. But wise Princes ought not
to swear any thing unto other Princes that is not allowable by the law of
nature and nations, not force any Prince that is weaker then themselves to
swear to unreasonable conditions. And to take away all ambiguitie of words, it
shall be needful to show what is unjust, Henry king of England and his
children on the one part, and the Dukes of Berry, Orleans, and Bourbon, the
Earls of Alancon and Armaignac, and the lord of Albret on the other part, who
swear to serve the king of England with their bodies and goods in all his just
quarrels when they should be required. There was no express reservation of
their sovereign, against whom the king of England meant to employ them by
virtue of this contract, the which he could not do. There is never any just
cause to take arms against ones prince or country, as an ancient orator
said, yet are not those princes free from the note of treachery, which
infringe their faith in matters which they have A dangerous opinion in
treaties.
forced to make a league or peace to his hurt and prejudice, may go from it
when occasion is offered. But it is strange that neither the first lawgiuers and
lawyers, nor the Romans who were the patrons of justice, did never think of
this shift and evasion. Quae enim viro forti, inquit Tullius, vis potest A
resolute man cannot be forced
adhiberi? What force can be used* says* Tully, to a valiant and resolute man?
It appeared in the Consul Marcus Attilius Reg^lus, who being taken prisoner by
the Carthaginians and sent to Rome upon his word, swearing that he would
return unless he could procure some noblemen that were captains to be set at
liberty, from the which he dissuaded the Senate, yet did he not refuse to
return, although it were to an assured death, nor yet the Consul Mancinus to
the Spaniards, when as he could not persuade Posthumous and his companion with
six hundred Captains, Lieutenants and Gentlemen of the Roman army, being
surprised by the enemy in the straights of the Appenine hills, whereas they
could neither advance, retire, nor yet fight; being set at liberty upon their
words, and having disputed of the law of nations in open Senate, and before all
the people, touching accords and treaties made in war; they did never pretend
force nor fear, but it was only said, that they could not treat of any
conditions of peace with the enemy, without an especial charge and

In the treaty of Madrill, made the 14 of February 1526, it was said, That
king Francis The treaty of Madril.
the first being come unto the first town of his realm, he should ratify the
articles which he had sworn in prison, and cause them to be ratified by the
Daulphin of France when as he came to age: and by the last article it was
agreed, That if the king would not observe the peace which he had sworn, he
should return prisoner into Spain, giving his two sons Francis and Henry
for hostages. Being at liberty, all Charles the fifth, to pull down his power
whom they had raised up to heaven. The king having assembled all his princes
and noblemen in his court of Parliament to resolve what was to be done touching
the treaty of Madrill: Selua the first president, seeking to prove that the
king was not tied unto the treaty, he grounded himself upon the authority of
Cardinal Zabarella, who held, That whatsoever was done by force or fear, was
not to be ratified; confirming it by the example of Ihon king of Cipres, who
being taken prisoner by the Geneuois, gave his son for hostage, and yet kept
not his promise. I wonder the President of so great a Senate did not blush not
only to Treaties made by a prisoner may not be broken.
commend a man that was ignorant of the laws of arms, but also to arm
himself An oath is needless where hostages are taken.
the breach of treaties, when as they took hostages: for that he is not tied
to any laws Posthumous maintained before the people, That there was no
contrauention in the treaty made betwixt him and the Samnites, seeing it was
no treaty of peace, or league, but a simple promise, the which did bind them
only which had consented thereunto, Quid enim (inquit ille) obsidebus aut
sponsoribus in foedere opu^ esset, sipraecatione res transigitur? Nomina
Consulum Legatorum, Tribunorum militum extant: si ex foedere res acta esset,
preterquam duorum foecialium non extarent, What need (says he) should there
be of hostages and sureties in a league or peace, if it be concluded by
entreaty? the names of the Consuls, Lieutenants, and Tribunes, which
undertook it, are extant: if it be ended by a league, there should be no names
joined unto it, but of the two heralds. Whereby it appears, that king Francis
the first, and the king of Cipres, who left their children for hostages, were
absolved of their promises by their enemies themselves, for that they had
pledges, and did not trust in their prisoners oath. And by the law of arms a
prisoner which has his liberty given him upon his word, is bound to return
to prison again. And by a proclamation made by the Senate of Rome, all
prisoners were enjoined upon pain of death (the which were very many, being
let go upon their Pyrrhus, to go visit their friends) should return at a
certain day, but no man gave any hostage. And if the prisoner be held in
bonds, he may escape, neither A prisoner taken in the war, being kept, may
escape without (...).
is he bound to him that took him: as king Francis the first said unto
Granuella the emperors ambassador. For as a Roman Consul was wont to say,
Vult quisque sibi credi, and habita fides ipsam obligat fidem, Every man
desires to be believed, and a trust reposed, binds the faith it self.

If any one say unto me, That the king had sworn to return, if the treaty
took not effect: and that king John returned prisoner into England, for that
he could not accomplish the conditions of the treaty, by which he had given a
great part of the realm to the English, and promised three millions of
crowns: I answer, that there was no John were tied unto it, seeing they had
taken their children for hostages. And therefore king Francis seeing that the
emperor would not remit the unjust conditions of the treaty, with the
council and consent of his princes and subjects he proclaimed a new war
against him: wherewith the emperor being moved, said, That the king had
carried himself basely; and that he had broken his oath, and that he would
willingly hazard his life with him in single combat, to make an end of so great
a war. The king being advertised by his ambassador, That the emperor had
touched his honor and reputation; he caused all the Perrenot Granuelle
ambassador for Spain, he said unto him, That Charles of Austria (having The
French king defies the emperor.
said unto the herald of France, That the king had broken his faith) had
spoken falsely, and that as often as he should say so, he did lie: and that he
should appoint a time and place for the combat, where he would meet him. The
king of England finding in like The king of England defies him.
sort that he was touched, used the like challenge, and with the like
solemnities. It was done like generous princes, to let all the world
understand, that there is nothing more foul and impious than the breach of
faith, especially in princes. Neither was there ever prince so disloyal, that
would maintain it to be lawful to break their faith. But some have pretended
that they have been circumuented in their treaties, by the fraud of their
enemies: others, that they have erred in fact, or have been seduced by evil
council: Iulio the second finding no means to break his faith with king
Lewis the twelft, that he might fly from the treaty of Cambray, he did not
say, that he was not tied to his oath, but he took occasion to advance a
factor in Rome to the bishoprike of Arles Gui^chardin writes, That pope Iulio
was wont to brag, That all the treaties which he made with the French,
Spaniards, and Germans (all which he called barbarous) was but to abuse them,
and to ruin one by another, that he might expel them all out of Italy. There
are others which curse and condemn traitors, yet they love the treason, and
hold the fruits thereof sweet: as it is ^itten of Philip king of Macedon: and
the Lacedaemonians condemned Phebidas their captain, for that contrary to the
tenor of the Plutarch writes. Some which can find no just cause nor Plu. in
Epawi^da.
colorable to falsify their faith, and have any respect to their honor, they
ask advise and council of lawyers: as the marquess of Pesquiere, who
aspiring to make himself king of Naples, caused many consultations to be made
under hand, to know if he which were vassal to the king of Naples, might
(with his faith and honor saved) obey the pope, who was sovereign lord of the
realm of Naples, rather than the king, who was but a feudatarie: having two
strings to his bow, for he made his account, that if the war were attempted
by the duke of Milan with the popes consent, against Charles the fifth, should
succeed well, he should then be king of Naples: but if he should fail, Maron
the dukes chancellor to be apprehended and put into the castle, and making of
his process, he suffered him to escape, fearing he should speak too plainly,
if he were ill entreated: and soon after he died of thought, knowing well that
his treachery and disloyalty was discovered, and inexcusable, seeing that he
betrayed both the emperor and the duke, and all those of the league by the
same means: the which is the most detestable treachery of all others. Yet do
I not blame him, that to assure himself has two strings to his bow, so as it
be done with a respect to his faith and honor: as it is reported of
Themistocles, who secretly advertised the king of Persia, That unless he
departed Antiochus, promising him al friendship, so as they might not be in
disgrace with the Romans, Idagebatur (inquit Titus Liuius) vt sirex
abstinuisset Epiro, integra sibi essent omnia apud Romanos, and conciliata apud
regem gratia, quod accepturi fuissent venientem, That was done (says Titus
Liuius) that if the king did forbear to enter into Epirus, they should
continue in favor with the Romans, and they should purchase grace with the
king, that they would have received him if he had come. But their councels
being discovered, they procured to themselves a miserable slavery with the
flight of Perseus. The lawyers hold it for a maxim, That faith is not to be
kept with them that have broken their faith. But they pas^e on further and say,
That by a decree made at the council of Constans, it was ordained, That no
faith should be kept with the enemies of the faith: for that the emperor
Sigismond having Lancelot king of Bohemia, and a safe conduct to John Hus, and
Ierosme of Prague, would not suffer any to proceed against them: but to free
him of that doubt, there were many Lawyers, Canonists, and Divines, especially
Nicholas abbat of Palerme, and Lewis du Pont surnamed Romain, which concluded
in this opinion, the which passed for a decree, and was confirmed by the
council. So as John Hus and his companion were executed, although that neither
the council nor the emperor had any jurisdiction over them: neither was the
king of Bohemia (their natural lord) of their opinion, to whom notwithstanding
the emperor had given his faith, but they regarded it not. Whereat we must not
marvel, seeing that Bartol (the first lawyer of If ^aith be to be kept with
enemies of the faith
his age) maintains, That faith is not to be kept with private enemies, but
with captains Julian was sent Legate into Hongarie, to break the treaties of
peace concluded with the Turk: against the L. conuentionum F. ^e Pactis.
which Humiades father to Matthew Coruin king of Hongarie opposed himself
vehemently, showing that the peace was concluded with very reasonable and
profitable conditions for the Christians, notwithstanding the Legate showed him
this decree made by the Council, by the which they might not hold no faith
with the enemies of the faith. The Hongarians building thereon, brake the
peace. But the Emperor of the Turks having notice of this decree, and of the
breach of the peace, leauied a mighty army, and has never ceased since, both
he and his successors, to increase in power* and to build that great Empire
upon the ruin of Christendom; Sigismond himself was chased away with all the
army of Christians, and the Ambassador which had carried this decree, was in
his return slain by certain th^es that were Christians, whereby it appeared
that God was displeased with that decree, for if it be lawful to break ones
faith with infidels, then is it not lawful to give it; but contrariwise if it
be lawful to capitulate with infidels, it is also necessary to keep promise
with them. The Emperor Charles the fifth made a league of friendship by his
Ambassador Robert Inglish with the king of Persia, who was pursued by the
Sangiac of Soria even unto the frontiers of Persia, and yet he had no other
reproach to make against king Francis the first but that he had made a league
with the Turk. It is well known that the kings Charles the fifth gave his
faith unto Martin Luther (whom the Pope had cursed as an enemy to the Church)
to come to imperial diet at Worms, in the year 1519, whereas Echius seeing
that he would not abjure his opinion, alleged the decree of Constance,
according to the tenor whereof he v^ged them to proceed against him, without
any respect to the faith which the Emperor had given. But there was not any
prince which did not abhor this request of Echius, and detested his decree.
And therefore the emperor to maintain the public faith, sent Martin Luther
back safe to his own home, with certain troops of horse. I know not how it
came in the fathers minds at the council of Constans, to take all faith from
Lib. 1. the 86 chapter, where it is said, That they should swear to keep their
faith with the Christians as loyally as their predecessors did with the Gifans
that were Idolaters. So Joshua commander Faith must be kept with Pagans and
Idolaters.
over the Israelites, having been circumuented by the Gabionites being Pagans
and Infidels, in a treaty which he had made with them, to save them, and four
towns which they had: and having afterward discovered their fraud, being
persuaded Sinan Bascha having capitulated with them of Tripoli in Barbary, and
sworn by his masters head to suffer Faith is not to be kept with them that
have broken their faith.
the knights of Rhodes to depart with their baggage after, that the town was
yielded, notwithstanding his oath he made all the inhabitants slaves, except
two hundred which he set at liberty at the request of Aramont the french
Ambassador: and being challenged of his oath, he answered, That no faith was to
be kept with them, for that Perjury ^red by a new treaty, may not be repeated.
concluded a peace and agreement together, else there should never be any
assurance of peace, nor end of treachery. But if one Prince has broken his
promise and deceived an other, he has no cause to complain if he be required
with the like: as the Romans having vanquished the Epirots (who had broken
their faith with them, and put garrisons Perseus, they made it to be given out
that they would also set the Epirots at liberty, and withdraw their garrisons,
inioyning ten men of the chief of every city to bring all the gold and
silver, and then suddenly they gave a watchword to the garrisons to sack Fra^d
circumu^nted by fraud.
and spoil the cities, the which was done, and in this sort they spoiled 70
cities. In the punishment of this treachery, the Romans behaved themselves
more cruelly than was needful, for that the revenge should not extend but to
them that had committed the perjury; and this dissembling was against the
ancient honor of the Romans. But if perjury were covered by a new treaty, it
were not lawful to revenge it: yet there are some so base and treacherous as
when they swear, they have no thought but for to swear Charles Duke of
Bourgongne gave a safeguard to the Earl of S. Paul Constable of France to sell
him dishonorablie to Lewis the II king of France. But Antony Spinola Governor
of the Is^e of Corsica for the Geneuois, committed a fouler act, adding
cruelty to his perjury; for having called all the Princes of the island
together under color of council, and inuiting them to a banquet, he commanded
them to be slain, the history is fresh. And the banished men of Cynethe a
city of Greece, being called home, and received by a new treaty made with
them which had expelled them, they swear to forget all injuries past, and to
live together in peace and amity: but in swearing (says Polybius) they
studied of nothing else, but how to betray the city, as they did, to be
revenged of the injury (which they had covered by a new accord) Fear^ is
o^ntimes the cause of a breach.
commonly do follow the victors party: as after the battle of Pauia, all
that were in league with the king of France in Italy, forsook him: and after
the battle of Cannes, almost all the Romans associats in Italy left them:
and even the Rhodians after the taking of the king Perseus (with whom they
were in league) they made a proclamation, That no man upon pain of death,
should say or do anything in favor of Fear may well excuse base minded men
from giving aid, but not from perjury: Fear cannot excuse periutie.
and circumuent? It is inexcusable to men, and detestable before God. And yet
the emperor Maximilian the first was wont to say, That he made no treaties
with the French, but to abuse king Jews the twelft, and to be revenged of
seventeen injuries which he had received from the French, although he could
not specify one: for every man knows, that for these two hundred years,
Europe never had prince more religious than Charles the eight, nor more upright
and just than Lewis the twelfth, who reigned in the time of Maximilian. Yea the
last, who alone among all others, was called Father of the people, did show how
loyal he was both in deed and word, having treated a peace with Ferdinand king
of Arragon, from whom he had received many Ferdinand was come unto the port
of Sauonne, the king of France entered into his gallie*, accompanied only with
two or three noble men, Ferdinand being amazed at his great assurance and
bounty, went out of his gally, and lodged in the castle of Sauonne. It was in
the power of the king of France to retain him (as Charles of Bourgongne did
in the like case to Jews the eleventh at Peronne) but he was so free from any
so vild adisposition, as he omitted no pomp nor magnificence to give him all
the content that might be. The confidence of both kings is disallowed by
treacherous men, who show plainly how perfidiously they would have dealt: but
to all good men it must needs seem commendable, What is to be observed betwixt
princes going to parle.
least the one (being secretly armed) should by fraud murder his enemy, as
Iphicrates the Athenian did Jason the tyrant: or as Mithridates, who slew the
prince of Armenia his sisters son. Or if the one comes weakly accompanied
and with small force, then must he take hostages from the other, or some places
of strength, before he approach, as it is commonly used. So did king Perseus,
who being come with a great train unto the frontiers of his realm, and would
have passed the river which divided the two kingdoms, Q. Martius Philippus the
Roman ambassador required hostages, if he meant to pass with above three in
his company: Perseus gave the chief of his friends, but Martius gave not any,
for that he had but three men with him. If there be question In what sort
hostages are to be given for a prince that i^ prisoner.
to give hostages for the delivery of some great prince that is a prisoner, it
must be done with equal forces on either side; and in delivering the hostages,
to receive the captive at the same instant; as they did when as king Francis
the first came out of Spain from prison: else it were to be feared, that a
disloyal prince would hold both prisoners and hostages: as Triphon the
governor of Soria did, having taken Jonathan by treachery, he promised to set
him at liberty for threescore thousand crowns, and his two sons hostage:
having delivered him the ransom and hostages, he kept the money and slew the
hostages with the prisoner: commanding his pupil the king of Soria to be
cruelly murdered. We must by all means shun these pestilent kind of men, and
Alphonsus king of Naples was, who slew Cont James the duke of Millans
ambassador. Such a one they write was Caracalla emperor of Rome (who never
showed a good countenance, but to such as he meant to murder) having made a
peace with the Parthians, he demanded the kings daughter, the which was
granted him: so as he went into Persia well accompanied to marie-her, being
all armed under their garments, who upon a sign given, when as they thought of
nothing but of good cheer, he caused all the noble men that were at the
marriage to be slain, and so fled away: being not ashamed to boast, That it
was lawful to use his enemies in that sort. This murder was Caesar Borgias
son to pope Alexander the sixth, was like unto this monster, whom Machiauel
does produce for the paragon of princes: he had learned of his father to poison
such as he invited to a banquet: it cannot be said, Which did exceed other in
treachery: Alexander The treacherous disposition of pope Alexander the sixth,
and Caesar Borgias his son.
the father never did that which he said, and Caesar his son never spoke that
which he did: and both of them did religiously hold, That faith was to be given
to all men, but to be kept with no man. Caesar gave his faith, and swear great
oaths for the assurance of the peace which he had made with the princes that
were in league against Consaluus Viceroy of Naples had given him his faith (not
being so skillful in Borgias came to Naples, which when as king Ferdinand
understood, he commanded him to keep Borgias Treachery paid with treachery.
prisoner: the Viceroy shows his charge, and Borgias did urge him with his
oath and faith: but the Viceroy could not give his faith without the kings
express commission, much less release a subject that is captive, when as the
king forbids it. Neither should Borgias have entered rashly into his enemies
country. We read that Albret earl of Franconie committed the like error to
the duke of Valentinois: for being besieged by the emperor Lewis of Bauiere,
Othon the Archbishop of Ments persuaded him to come unto the emperor upon his
faith, swearing, That if he were not reconciled to the emperor, he should
return safe with him unto his castle. This good Polybius, who notwithstanding
his shift, was sent back by the Senate of Rome, with his hands, and feet bound
to the enemy. But although the Archduke could not give his faith unto a
rebel, without warrant from the emperor, yet for that he had fraudulently
drawn a man into danger, who was ignorant of the laws of arms (otherwise than
Consuluus had done) he was not free from the foul crime of treachery: like
unto Paches, who persuaded Hippias, that he should come forth of his castle to
a parle, swearing, That he should return safe: the captain being come forth,
the castle was easily Hippias back safe into the castle according to his
promise, and there slew him. In like sort Saturnius the Tribune with his
accomplices, having seized upon the capitol by conspiracy and rebellion,
coming forth upon the Consuls faith and safeguard, they were slain, and their
memory condemned. The like chance happened in Luques in the year 1522, when
as Vincent Poge and his companions had slain the Gonfaloniet in the palace,
the magistrates gave them their faith and assurance, that they should not be
called in question for the fact, so as they would depart the city: for that
they were then in arms, and the stronger: yet soon after they were pursued
and punished as they deserved. And to the end that by the promise of
magistrates, the Pompey the Great did capitulat with pirates, giving them a sure
retreat in some towns and provinces, to live there under the obedience of the
Romans: Tacferin chief of an army of Tiberius taking this for an indignity,
would not so much as hear his ambassadors, saying in open Senate, That the
ancient Romans would never hear, nor treat in any sort with Spartacus the
slave, by his profession a Fencer, and captain of the thieves, although he had
gathered together threescore thousand slaves, and defeated the Romans in three
battles: but after that he had been vanquished by Crassus, all that escaped
were hanged. Whereby it appears, that it is dishonorable It is dishonorable
for a prince to deal with thieves.
for a prince or state, to treat with thieves: but having once plighted their
faith unto Augustus, who made a proclamation, That whosoever could bring unto
him Crocotus, captain of the thieves in Spain, should have 25000 crowns:
whereof he being advertised, he went and presented himself to Augustus, and
demanded the reward: the which the emperor caused to be given unto him, and
withal pardoned him, to A notable deed of the emperor Augustus.
give an example to others, that they must keep their faith, without any
respect to the parties merit.

There is great difference, whether faith be given to a thief, a friend, an
enemy, or a subject: for a subject which ought to maintain the honor,
estate, and life of his sovereign prince, if he prove treacherous and
disloyal unto him, and that he has given him a protection, or if he come to
capitulat with him, if the prince does infringe his oath Dagobert gave them his
faith, finding it dangerous suddenly to break such a troop of loose and
desperate men: but soon after upon a certain day, a watchword being given,
they were all slain. But there is a great difference, whether a sovereign
prince does capitulat with his friends or his enemies, and that those subjects
which have rebelled against his majesty, be comprehended in the treaty: Many
have made a question, if the prince breaking his faith with those rebels, and
seeking revenge of them, whether the enemy be thereby wronged, and if the
assurance given, or the truce, be Titus Liuius says of Philip king of
Macedon, Vnares Philippu^ maxim angebat, quod cum leges a Romany victo
imponerentur seuiendi ius in Macedonas, qui in bello ab se defecerant ademptu^
erat, One thing tormented Philip, that having laws prescribed him by the
Romans, he might not tyrannize over the Macedonians who had fallen from him
during A prince giving his faith to his subjects, must keep it.
the wars. I hold that in this case the treaty is broken, and that the enemy
or the prince which has contracted security for an other princes subjects,
may take it for an injury, and seek his revenge, although the subject were
guilty of treason in the highest degree. As the Barons of Naples, who went to
Naples upon assurance given, and an oath taken by Ferdinand king of Naples,
unto the Pope, sovereign lord of Naples, the king Ferdinand king of Naples,
who put them all to death, although he had received them under his fathers
assurance and his own. But there is no breach of the treaty if a private
person seeks revenge of former wrongs of them that are comprehended in the
treaty unless; he has precisely promised that he shall not suffer any
pursuit to be made against them for any thing that had been committed before
the treaty; or that assurance was given them in general terms to return
unto their houses. For a general clause in general terms has the same
force that a special clause in a special case, which may not be stretched from
the places, times, persons and cases, contained in the articles of the treaty
or safeconduit: Leo the tenth, who having given his faith and a pasport unto
Paul Baillon (who had expelled his nephew out of Perouze) when he came to Rome
he was committed prisoner, and his process made, not only for his rebellion,
but for many other crimes, for the which he was convicted and executed. The
history reports, that the pope had not only given his faith unto him, but to
all his friends in general: true it is they were all his vassals. He did the
like unto Alphonso Leo the tenth perjured to be revenged.
Cardinal of Sienne, being accused that he had attempted to poison the Pope:
to draw him into his snares he gave him his faith, and to the Ambassador of
Spain in the name of the Catholic king; yet he came no sooner to Rome but his
process was made: whereupon the ambassador of Spain complained greatly, but
the Pope (who Ambassadors cannot promise nor take assurance from another,
without an especial commission.
a protection for any one without a commission from his master, as we have
showed before; the ignorance whereof has oftentimes been a great plague and
ruin to princes. Pope Clement the 7 circumuented the Florentines in our age
with the like fraud, having promised the Spanish Ambassador to maintain their
estate free: but having seized of the city, he made it subject to Alexander
his brothers bastard, who put the chief men to death, after the proscription
of many, saying, That treason was always excepted: the which was a frivolous
and idle excuse, seeing that he was never lord of Swissers, in the year 1516
in the 17 Article it is said, that in matters of controversy,

There is an other point which does commonly deceive Princes, which is, to
treat with Ambassadors, deputies, or Lieutenants, without an especial
commission: for notwithstanding any promise which he shall make to have it
ratified by his master, yet is there no assurance, for that the Prince which
promises stands bound for his part, and Lewis the 12, who treated a peace with
the Archduke Philip passing through France in the year 1503, by virtue of an
ample Commission which he had from his father in law, promising moreover to
cause him to ratify it: but Ferdinand attended the issue of the wars of
Naples, whereas the French were vanquished in two battles, and expelled the
realm, so as he refused to ratify what his son in law Philip had concluded
with the king of France, saying, that the Archduke had no especial commission.
At Charles the fifth then Regent of France had not ratified touching the
sovereignty of Guienne. And the same occasion made them of Carthage break the
peace betwixt them and the Romans: for after the first war, they had made two
treaties, in the first all the associates of both nations were comprehended in
general terms only; and it was said, that the treaty made with Luctatius
the Consul should hold if the people of Rome did like of it, the which they
would not ratify, but sent an express commission into Affrike with the
articles they would have concluded, Asdruball General of the Carthaginians
confirmed them. In this treaty the Saguntines were expressly comprehended, as
allied unto the Romans, but this treaty was not expressly ratified by the
Carthaginians; upon which point the Senate of Carthage stood, maintaining that
Hanniball might lawfully make war against the Saguntines: and yet the
Carthaginians having observed the treaty made by their General in all other
clauses, they had ratified it in fact, which is more than words. It is
therefore the more sure not to conclude anything without an especial
commission, or express ratification, for there never wants excuses and devises
to cover their disloyalties, the histories are full of them, as of the
Calcedonians against the Bizantines, of Cleomenis against the Argiues, and of
the Thracians against the Thessalians, who when as Edward the third, king of
England, to quallifie himself king of France, and then they would take arms
for him, the which was done. Others distinguish upon the word, as king Lewis
the II, who making a show that he had need of the good council and advice of
Lewis of Luxembourg Constable of France, he said, That he wanted his head. And
the Emperor Charles the fifth by a subtle alteration of a letter denied that
which others thought he had affirmed, writing touching the delivery of the
princes of Germany out of prison. But George Cornarus found a more subtle
interpretation, Atabalippa king of Peru (being prisoner to Francis Pizarre,
Captain of the Spaniards) he promised the value of ten millions and three
hundred thousand ducats for his ransom, the which he paid: the Spaniards
having resolved to put him to death, said, That there was no means for his
liberty, unless he became a Christian: he to save his life was baptized, but
with much grief of mind, saying, That the immortal son was to be preferred
before mortal gods, but terrified with such imminent Lewis the 11 and Charles
Duke of Bourgongne, in the year 1475, he made the king to swear first by the
word of a king, then by the faith of his body, and by his creator, by the
faith and law which he had taken in his baptism, and upon the Evangelists and
the A new kind of oath.
Canon of the Mass, and in the end upon the true Cross. I omit to write what
he profited by this oath, and what succeeded. But the Earl of S. Paul would
not give any Philip Comines.
credit to all this, when as the king gave him a safeconduit, unless he would
swear by the cross of S. Lau, which was kept at Angers, the which he refused
to do, having resolved to put him to death, and fearing above all things this
cross, whereupon the lord of Lescut required him to swear before he would
come unto his service, and he kept Charles Regent of France, and the king of
Navarre, when as the Bishop of Lizieux said Mass in a tent pitched betwixt the
two armies, and received the oath upon the host: for better assurance of the
treaty, the Bishop divided the host in two, giving the one half to the king
of Navarre, the which he refused, excusing himself that he had broke his fast,
neither would the Regent take the other part, so as either suspected the other
of perjury. The Auntients used sacrifices with effusion of blood, with many
imprecations and execrations against the breakers of the league: and the kings
of Parthia and Armenia when they entered into any offensive and defensive
league, they tied their thombs, and drawing Tacit. Lib. 4.
forth the blood, they sucked it one after an other: as in the like case the
king of Calange In the history of the Indies.
at the East Indies, making an alliance with the Portugalls, drue blood from
his left hand and rubd his face and tongue therewith. But there is no assurance
in any oaths if If the prince be disloyal, his oath is not to be regarded.
the Prince be disloyal: and if he be just, his simple word shall be a law
unto him, and his faith an oracle. It is forbidden by the holy scriptures to
swear by any but by the name of the eternal God, for it is he alone that can
revenge the breakers of their faith and the scorners of his name, and not they
which have neither power nor care of humane things, the which the thirty
Ambassadors of Carthage feared when as the Romans had agreed to grant them a
peace, an ancient Senator (knowing the disloyalty of the Carthaginians) asked
them in open Senate, By what gods they would swear: The manner ^ to capitulat b
twixt the pi^ and the subie^
the treaty should be made with neighbor princes, to warrant the subjects, or
else speedily to depart the country. And if any one will object that the
subject ought not to Lewis the 11 gave a good testimony thereof to the Duke of
Nemours, to the Earl of S. Paul, to the Duke of Brittanie, to the Earl of
Armaignac, and to all his subjects that had rebelled, all which almost he put
to death; and the history of Flanders puts his own brother in the number,
affirming Meierus.
that he was poisoned. And not long since the younger brother to the king of Fez
besieged the king his brother with an army, and forced him to conclude a peace
with Henry the sixth king of England, having gotten the victory he made an
agreement with the king upon condition that after his decease the Crown should
come unto the house of York; and the prince of Wales, son to king Henry the
6 should be excluded, and in the mean time he should remain Regent of
England: but soon after being taken he was beheaded with his accord, being
crowned with a crown of white paper. You must not gall the Lion Francis the
first, and the Emperor Charles the fifth, was for the protection of Robert de
la March, whom king Francis received, as du Bellay has well observed. But a
wise prince may meditate an accord betwixt another prince and his subjects, and
if he finds that the outrageous proceeding In what case ^ foreign prince may
take upon him the protection of another princes subjects.
of a Tyrant against his subjects be irreconcilable, then ought he to take
upon him the protection of the afflicted with a generous resolution: as that
great Hercules did, who purchased to himself immortal praise and reputation,
for that he took upon him the protection of afflicted people against the
violence and cruelty of tyrants (which the fables call monsters) whom he went
through the world to conquer: wherein the ancient Romans did also exceed all
other nations. And without any more search, king Lewis the 12 received into his
protection the Bentiuoles, with the houses of Ferrara and Mirandula, against
the oppression of pope Iulio the 2: but he caused to be inserted into the
protection, That it was without prejudice to the rights and dignity of the
Roman church: and for the same cause king Henry the 2 took the protection of
the same Iulio the 3, and of many princes of Germany against the Emperor
Charles the 5 for the liberty of the Empire, and entertained the league of the
sea towns which the Emperor sought to break, and to change the Empire into
an hereditarie kingdom else he which persuadeth: another Princes subjects to
rebel under culour of protection (which should be as a holy anchor for people
unjustly tyranized) he does open the gate of rebellion to his own subjects,
and brings his own estate into danger, with an everlasting shame and dishonor.
And therefore in all societies and leagues among princes it is always
excepted, That the one shall not take the protection of another subjects,
whether the cause be just or unjust. The only reason which hindered the treaty
of peace betwixt king Antiochus the great, Ptolomie king of Egypt, was the
protection of Acheus, who of governor of Asia had made himself king, and had
withdrawn it from his sovereign prince, as Polibius says. And for this cause
Sigismond Augustus king of Polonia, to have peace with the king of Muscouie,
was forced to leave the protection of Rigie in Liuonia. And whatsoever some
say, that it is lawful for the vassal to free himself from the subjection of
his When the vassal may free himself from his lord.
lord, if he be ill entreated; it is to be understood of an vndervassall, which
has recourse unto his sovereign lord, and not of a leege vassal which holds
immediately, and without the means of any other vassal, who in some other
respect may be a sovereign: as the subjects of Guienne and of Poitou rebelled
justly against the king of England vassal to the king of France, for that he
denied them justice, and for that cause he was Coignet. And although 1561.
that he that is banished by his prince may be received into protection by
another prince, or into subjection, without any breach of the treaty (which
forbids the receiving of another princes subjects into protection) for that
those which are banished for ever, are no more subjects: but if those banished
men would attempt any thing against their ancient Lord, the prince which has
received them ought not to suffer them. And therefore the princes of Germany
sent Ambassadors to king Henry the 2, to require him not to receive Albert
Marquis of Brandebourg into his protection, being him to himself, as the
Romans did all Greece and Macedonie, which they delivered Agapet (who freed the
successors of Gautier d'Iuetot from the subjection of the kings of France, for
that king Lothair had slain him with his own hand in the Church, at what time
as he craved pardon of him) to give example to other princes not to use any
such cruelties to their subjects: and for the like cruelty Henry king of
Sweden was expelled his estate by his own subjects, in the year 1567. But it
was held very strange that pope John the 22 in the treaty made betwixt Philip
the long king of France and the Flemings, caused it to be set down, That if
the king did infringe the treaty, it might be lawful for his subjects to take
arms against him, to the which the Princes and Barons of France did oppose,
causing that clause to be razed; and it was more strange that it should Lewis
and Charles the bald brethren, the oath which either of them made was with this
condition, That if it chanced, which God forbid, that I should break my oath,
I then absolve you from the faith which you owe me. Lewis swear first in the
Roman tongue these words which follow, the which the President Fauchet, a man
well read in our Antiquities, did show me in Guytard an historian and prince of
Pro deo amur, and pro Christian poblo and nostro commun saluament did di en
auant, inquant des sanir podirmedunat, si saluerio cist meon fradre Karle, and
in adiudha, and in cad vna causa si com hom par dreit son fradre saluar did,
ino quid il un altre sifaret. Et abludher null played nunquam prindraij qui meon
vol cist, meon fradre Karle in damno sit: That is to say, For the love of God
and the Christian people, and for our common health from this day forward, so
long as God shall give me knowledge and power, I will defend my brother
Charles, and will aid him in every thing as any man by right ought to save his
brother, and not as another would do: And by my will I will have no quarrel
with him, if my brother Charles does me no wrong. King Lewis having made an end
of this oath, king Charles spoke the same words in the German tongue In God
est etc. Then both the armies subjects to the two princes swear thus, Si
Ludouigs sagrament que son fradre Carlo jurat, conseruat, and Carlus meo sender
de suo par no lostaint, si io retornar non luit pois, ne io veuls cui eo
retornar ne pois, in nulla adiudha contra Ludouig: That is to say, If Lewis
keeps his oath made with his brother, and Charles my lord for his part does
not hold it, if I cannot prevent it, I will not return with him in peace, nor
do him any obedience. The subjects of Charles swear in the Roman tongue, and the
subjects of Lewis in the Dutch. But to return to our purpose: it is dangerous
to take the protection of another, especially of those which are subject to
princes allies, but upon a just cause, so is it more strange to leave an
associat in danger. But it is a question, whether a prince may take the
protection of another prince unjustly If one that is in league may succor him
that is not allied against his associat, being wrongfully oppressed.
oppressed, without breach of the league: for it is most certain that we aid
private allies and common allies, if they be wronged by one of the allies: but
he that is not comprehended in the league, may not be defended against him that
is allied, without breach of the league: on the other side it is a thing which
seems very cruel, to leave a poor prince to the mercy of one more mighty
that does oppress him and seeks to take his estate from him.

The Senate of Rome was much troubled herewith, for that the Capouans being
assailed, and unjustly oppressed by the Samnites, had recourse unto the Romans,
who had a good desire to aid them: considering withal, that the Samnites would
be too mighty and insupportable, if they had once seized upon the Seigneurie
of Capoua, and that Tanta vtilitate (says Titus Liuius) fides antiquior fuit,
Faith was of more respect than so great a benefit. I will set down word by
word, the answer which was made unto the six ambassadors, the which deserves
to be graven in letters of gold, Legatis Campanorum auxilia contra Samnites
petentibus, Consul ex authoritate Senatus sic respondit: Auxilio vos Campani
dignos censet Senatus: sed ita vobiscum amicitiam iustitui par est, ne qua
vetustior amicitia ac societas violetur: Samnites nobiscum foedere iuncti sunt:
itaque arma Deos prius quam homines violatura, aduersus Samnites, vobis
negamus: Legatos sicut fas est, precatum ad Socios mittemus, ne qua vobis vis
fiat, The Consul with the authority of the Senate did answer in this sort
unto the ambassadors of the Campanois, demanding succors against the
Samnites. The Senate holds you of Campania to be worthy of succors, but it is
fit so to join friendship with you, as a more ancient league and society may
not be violated: the Samnites are linkt unto us in league, and therefore we
deny you arms against the Samnites, whereby we should wrong the gods rather
than men: but we will send ambassadors (as we may lawfully) to request our
associats, not to offer you any violence. The ambassadors of Capoua had a
secret charge, to offer the subjection of Capoua unto the Romans, in case they
should refuse to give them succors: who seeing themselves rejected, made this
offer* Quandoquidem nostra tueri non vultis, vestra certe defendetis: itaque
populum Campanum vrbemque Capouam, agros, delubra Deum, diuina humanaque omnia
in vestram P. C. populique Romani ditionem dedimus. Tum iam fides agi visa,
deditos non prodi, Seeing you will not protect us and ours, yet at the least
you shall defend your own: we yield therefore into your power O reverent
fathers, and of the people of Rome, the people of Campania, and the city of
Capoua, with their fields, churches, and all divine and humane rights. Now is
your faith engaged, not to betray them that A stranger is not to be succored
against an ally, unless he make himself a subject.
yield unto you. Whereby it appears, that the stranger is not to be succored
against the allie, unless he yield himself a subject unto him whose
protection he pretends: for in that case every one is bound to defend his
subjects against the injuries of the mighty. If the Athenians had made the
same answer to the Corcyrians, demanding aid against is united unto him by
an offensive and desensiue league. If it be offensive and defensive Henry king
of Sueden did upon the controversies he had with the king of Denmark, who
offered to refer his cause to Henry the second, king of France: the which
the king of Sueden refused, saying, That he was as great a king as the rest.
But the Romans, who exceeded all nations in riches and power, if they had any
controversy with their allies, they referred it to the arbitrament of their
common confederats, Romanus Legatus (says Titus Liuius) ad communes socios
vocabat. And if it be not lawful by the law of arms, to allow of the combat,
when there is any proof by witness or The Roman legate did appeal to their
common confederats.
otherwise, what an injustice were it, to suffer two princes or states to enter
into war, if a third may reconcile them, or else join with him that is
wronged. It were a simple part to suffer his neighbors house to burn, the
which he might quench with his honor. Moreover it may be doubted, whethet the
league be broken, if thou shall offer violence to any confederats father or
brother, being not comprehended in the league. If they be subjects, there is
no question: if they be absolute of themselves, it may be doubted; for that
the father and the son are held to be all one: but in my opinion there is
nothing done against the league, unless the fathers person were excepted in
the Leagues must be limited to a certain time.
and those which are governed Aristocratically, the which never die. For in
Monarchies Francis the first, where the time was limited for the kings life,
and five years after, and since it has always so continued: but that
condition did bind the Swissers, and not Francis his successor, who might at
his pleasure hold, or go from the league: for that an oath is personal, and to
speak properly, cannot be taken for the successor.

But some one will say unto me, That the first clause in all the ancient
treaties and leagues, which the Romans made with other states and Seigneuries,
was, That they should be perpetual. And therefore the Hebrews did call the
strongest and best assured Lots wife was turned into a salt stone, as many
believe. But in my opinion there is nothing more pernicious in treaties than to
make them perpetual: for he that feels himself any thing ouercharged with
the treaty: has reason to break it, seeing it is perpetual: but if it be
limited, he has no cause to complain. Moreover it is easy to continue
leagues and alliances already made, and to renew them before the time prefixed
be expired: as has been always done with the Cantons for these fifty
years: and although we were assured of a perpetual amity Cum Laurentibus
(inquit Liuius) renouari foedus iussum, renouaturque ex eo quotannis post diem
decimum Latinarum, Being commanded (says Liuie) to renew the league with the
Laurentines, it was thereuppon renewed every year after the tenth day of the
Latins. And the same author says, Adire iusst sunt Legati Romani Cretam, and
Rhodu^, and renouare amicitiam, simul, speculari number solicitati animi sociorum
ab rege Perseo fuissent, The Roman ambassadors were commanded to go to Creet
and Rhodes, to renew the league, and to discover if their confederats minds had
been corrupted by king Perseus. There was a league of perpetual friendship
made in the year 1336, betwixt Philip of Valois, and Alphonso king of Castile:
Treaties betwixt the kings of France and Spain
and afterward it was renewed betwixt king John and Peter king of Castile, in
the year 1352: and betwixt Charles the fifth, king of France, and Henry king
of Castile: and yet every one of these leagues was made perpetual for the
associats and their successors. As was also betwixt the houses of Scotland and
France, for these three hundred The league betwixt the French and Scots.
years, that they have continued in good and perpetual league and amity,
unto The treaty of Chambort.
of Chambort, made in the year 1552, betwixt the king of France of the one
part, and the duke Maurice, the marquess Albert, and the Lantgraue of Hesse on
the other; where it is said in the two and twentieth article, That if any of
the associats should make any peace or agreement, or have any secret practice
with the emperor, or his adherents, without the consent of his other allies, he
should be punished as a petiured, without all The princes of the empire in the
protection of the king of France.
remission, in the view of all the army. And yet within six months after, the
elector Maurice agreed with the emperor at a treaty at Passau, neither
aduertising king Henry (who was chief of the league) nor yet comprehending
him in the treaty. Against Albert exclaimed, saying, That it was a base and
villainous act, calling the duke traitor, and disloyal to his country, the
emperor, and the king of France. And yet he did worse than his companion: for
after that he had drawn great sums of money from the king, he turned to the
emperor, and made open war against the king: so as the imperial soldiers
called Maurice Bachelor, or Graduat, and Why Marquess Albert was called Doctor.
Albert Doctor, for the notable tricks which he played. And of late memory the
Seigneurie of Venice concluded a peace with Sultan Selim, so secretly, as it
was published at Constantinople, at the coming of the French ambassador,
before that any one of the confederats of the holy league was advertised
thereof, although it were expressly Veientibus pacem petentibus in annos centum
induciae datae, The Veientes requiring a peace, they had a truce granted them
for an hundred years. And in another place, Indutiae Veientibus pacem
petentibus Liu. lib. 1. Decad. 1. 7. lib. 2. 8. lib. 7. 9. lib. 9.
in annos 40 datae, A truce of forty years was granted unto the Veientes,
who demanded a peace. And in another place, Cum populo Cerite inducias in
centum annos factas, There was a truce made with the people of Cerites for an
hundred years. And in another place, Hetruriae populi pacem petentes in annos
30 inducias impetrarunt, The Metius Dictator of the Albanois, who was pulled in
pieces with four horses, and the city of Alba rased: the people of Veientes
were rooted out, having rebelled seven times against the articles of the truce:
the city of Carthage was burnt to ashes: the people of Capoua slain for the
most part, and the rest made slaves: the inhabitants of Corinth Titus Liuius,
Strabo, with infinite others, which were impossible to set down in particular,
which carry an everlasting testimony of Gods just judgments against
treacherous and disloyal princes, and faithless people, which mock at
oaths. As for treacherous and disloyal subjects, they were never unpunished,
In Veliternos veteres ciues grauiter saeuitum, quod toties rebellarent, muri
disiecti, Liu. lib. 8.
Senatus abductus, They punished the Veliternians (who were ancient citisens)
very severely, their walls were cast down, and their Senate carried away. And
after the second Punike war, the Roman subjects which had been traitors were
excepted, Perfugae (inquit Liuius) bello punico 380 Romam missi, virgis in
Comitio caesi, and de Saxo deiecti, Liuie) being sent to Rome, were whipped in
the open assembly, and cast down the rock. And if the enemy having given
hostages, did infringe their treaties, the hostages were publicly put to
death: as it happened unto three hundred hostages of the Volsques, which were
slain: and in like case the hostages of the Tarentines, Fugientes retracti, ac
virgis diu caesi, de Tarpeio deiecti Liu. lib. 35.
sunt, Fleeing they were fetched back, and being beaten long with rods, they
were cast from the mount Tarpeia (says Titus Liuius.) But since that they have
made a trade of the breach of faith, they have also made a conscience to put
hostages to death: as Narses, who pardoned the hostages of the Luquoies, having
broken their faith: and Charles duke of Bourgongne had no sooner set three
hundred hostages of the Leegeois at liberty Comines says) but they attempted
a new war against him.

The clause that hostages should be subject unto capital punishments, was
unknown to the auntients, for it was always lawful not only to kill hostages
that fled, but also if they that had given hostages had infringed their faith.
But since they have thought it fit to express those words in their promises,
least that hostages should plead ignorance of the law of arms, or that it
should seem too cruel that one should suffer for another offense. I will not
deny but the Romans have somewhat blemished the brightness of their ancient
integrity and justice, the which happened unto them not so much through their
own fault, as by the Grecians and Carthaginians, whose treachery Liuie writes
of the Ambassadors that were sent into Greece, when as they made report of
their charge in open Senate: he says thus, L. Martius and Attilius Romam
reuersi, nulla alia re magis gloriabantur, quam decepto Liu. lib. 42.
per inducias and spem pacis Rege, quae magna pars Senatus probabat: sed
veteres moris antiqui memores, nouam istam sapientiam improbabant, nec astu
magis quam vera virtute bellage ssisse maiores, denunciare bella, and saepe
locum finire, quo dimicanturi essent. L. Martius and Attilius being returned to
Rome, gloried in nothing more, than that they had circumuented the king with a
truce, and the hope of peace: the which the greatest part of the Senate did
allow of, but the most ancient (remembering their customs of old) did disallow
of this new kind of wisdom, for that the auntients did not make war by
Veteres, says Suetonius, bellum indicturi, renunciabant amicitiam, The
auntients when they Tacit. lib. 5. Liu. lib. 36.
would make war against any one, they renounced his friendship: a custom
which was observed among private men, even in the time of the Emperor Tiberius:
for Germanicus being grievously wronged by Piso governor of Soria, sent him
word that he renounced his friendship: and Henry the 5 king of England sent
word to Lewis duke of Orleance by his ambassador, That he could not defy him,
unless he renounced his friendship, and sent back the alliance. And at this
day those which be brethren in arms, Liuie, where he says, Phocenses cum
pacti essent nihil hostile se a Romany passuros port as aperuerunt, tum clamor
est sublatus a militibus, Phocenses nunquam fidos socios, impune eludere: ab
hac voce milites vrbem diripiunt, Aemilius primo resistere, captas, non deditas
vrbes diripi, The Phocenses when they had contracted that they would not endure
any hostile act of the Romans, they opened their gates; then began there a
cry among the soldiers, that the Phocenses being never faithful associates
did laugh at them unpunished: at this cry the soldiers spoil the town, at
the first Aemilius made resistance, saying, That they used to spoil cities
that Polibius who was a Greek borne, and governor to Scipio the Affrican,
speaking of the Greeks, says, That a word among the Romans was sufficient, but
in Greece for the lending of a hundred crowns they must have ten notaries, and
twice as many seals, and yet would they break their faith. But it is far
worse at this day, where there is no assurance neither in letters, seals, nor
safegards, yea ambassadors are not assured, for we have seen Rincon and Fregose
ambassadors to the king of France slain by the officers of the Emperor
Charles the 5, and yet no justice was done of them: whereas the Romans
delivered Minutius and Manlius to their enemies, and at another time Fabius
Apronius, to dispose of them at their pleasures, for that they had somewhat
wronged the ambassadors, the which is forbidden by the law of arms. If faith
be not kept with ambassadors, what shall we hope of others? yea some have
gloried in killing them, as Helene Queen of Russia, being entreated by her
enemies to make a league, to the end she might marry with their king, she
buried all the ambassadors alive* and before they were advertised thereof, she
sent them word that she would have ambassadors of greater worth, whereupon they
sent her fifty more of the noblest of the whole country, all which she caused
to be burned alive, and under promise of marriage she murdered five thousand
which she had made drunk. It is not needful here to rehearse Stephen Vauoide
of Valachia, to whom the Procope of Tartaria sent an hundred ambassadors,
threatening to waste all his country with fire and sword, if he sent not back
the Procopes son, whom he Tuca queen of Sclauonia did, who sent some to
murder the youngest of the three Roman ambassadors, having threatened her, the
which was afterward the cause of her ruin, and of her estate. But the fact of
the king of Mofcouie was most barbarous, who seeing an Italian ambassador to
put on his hat before he was bidden, he caused it to be nailed fast unto his
head; a most cruel and barbarous deed, yet was there an error in the
ambassador, who should Philip the young, king of Macedonie, seeing the Roman
ambassador question too boldly with him, he could not forbear to brave him
with reproaches. And Popilius the Roman Legate used Antiochus king of Asia with
greater presumption, making a circle with a rod about the kings Liuie says,
Obstupefactus est rex tam violento imperio, The king was amazed at so violent a
command: and yet he did what the Romans commanded, having tried their power.
Marius the elder used the like liberty toward Mithridates king of Pontus or
Amasia, who although he neither were ambassador, nor had any public charge,
yet he said unto the king, That he must obey the commandment of the people of
Rome, or be the stronger. Then did Mithridates find that true which was spoken
of the Romans, That they were of a freer speech than any other nation. And
sometimes too great liberty without any injury offends princes. For which
cause Marc Anthony caused an ambassador which was sent from Augustus to be
whipped, for that he talked too freely to queen Cleopatra. But those princes are
wisest, which having received any affront Charles earl of Charolois, said unto
the ambassadors of Lewis the eleventh, That his Chancellor had braued him,
but the king would shortly repent it; and so it fell out: for the same year he
imbarqued the king in a most dangerous war, with the hazard of his estate.
And therefore king Francis the first, doubting that he should hear something
of an herald which was sent from the emperor Charles the fifth, that might be
some impeach unto his majesty, he caused a gibe^ to be set up before the court
gate, when he heard that he approached, letting him understand, that he would
hang him, if he opened his mouth, for having given the emperor the lie, he
knew well that the herald could not bring Bartol, who says, That the peace is
not violated, if any one has undertaken that he shall not be wronged, and
yet his things are stolen away by him with whom he has made a peace: for that
there was nothing that did sooner move the ancient Romans to make war, than
for things taken away, and injuries done. M. Aurelius the emperor said well,
Putasne non aliter vim inferri quam si homines vulnerentur: vis est etiam cum
quod per Iudicem debuit, per te ipse arripis, Do thou think that violence
is not offered, unless that men be wounded. It is violence, when thou take
that of thine own authority, which thou should recover by law. But some
make breach of their faith, by a crafty interpretation of the law. As that
which Bartol proves, If by the truce it be lawful for a French man to pass
into England, upon condition, That if after the truce he be found within their
limits, it shall be lawful to kill him: if before the end of the truce he
depart out of England, and by a storm is driven back into England after the
truce expired: in this case he says, they may lawfully kill him. In my opinion
they may ransom him by law, but not kill him: for that he does nothing against
the truce, that by tempest

Finis Libri quinti.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF
CHAP. I. Of Censuring or Reformation, and wheher it be expedient to inroll and
number the subjects, and to force them to make a declaration, or give a
certificat of their private estates.
HItherto we have described at large the first part of the definition Census
in proper terms is nothing else but a valuation of every man's goods: and for
that we The commendation of censuring, or estimating the subjects estates.
number and qualities of the citisens, or the valuation of every man's goods; or
else for the well governing and awing of the subject. And calling to mind the
farthest bounds of antiquity, I do much wonder, how so goodly a charge, so
profitable and so necessary, has been laid aside so carelessly, seeing that
all the ancient Greeks and Latins did use it, some yearly (says Aristotle)
others from three, four, or from five years to five years, making an
estimation of every man's wealth and private estate: whereof Demosthenes having
made an abstract out of the public registers, Censors used by the Greeks and
Romans. Liu. ann^ 310* ab v. c.
so the Romans (who did imitate the Grecians) could well embrace this custom,
and bring it unto Rome: for which cause king Seruius is much commended in
histories. And although the people of Rome had disanulled and abolished all the
edicts and ordinances of their kings, after they had expelled them, yet this
law of censuring or surueying continued still, as the foundation of their
treasure, imposts, and public charges, etc. was continued in the Consuls
persons. But after that the Consuls were distract and drawn away for warlike
employments, they then created Censors, threescore and six years after that
the Consuls had executed it. L. Papirius, and L. Sempronius being the first
that were called Censores, and they held the office five years: but ten years
after L. Aemilius Mamercus limited the time of the Censors office to eighteen
months. And soon after, this custom was followed by all the cities of Italy,
and namely by the Roman Colonies, who brought their Registers and Inrollments
to Rome. Afterward this charge was still continued; and even Caesar the
Dictator took the pains to go from house to house to supply the Censors
charge, although he called himself Magister morum, or Master of the manners.
And as soon as the Emperor Augustus was returned to Rome, after his victory
against Marc Anthony, the Senate by a public decree gave him the office of
Censor, Caesar and Augustus were both created Ceniors.
calling him Prefectus morum, or Controller of manners, who thrice numbered the

Afterward it was discontinued under the tyranny of Tiberius and Caligula, and
revived again by Claudius the Emperor, which made the 74 Luster. It was left
again Lustrum.
under Neron, and continued again under Vespatian, who made the 75 Luster: and
then it left under the tyranny of Domitian, who called himself Perpetual
Censor, and yet made no survey. A hundred and fifty years after, or
thereabouts, the Emperor Decius caused the Senate to declare Valerian Censor,
with ample authority. Magistrum Census, or The master of inrollments, who kept
the public registers containing all testaments and public acts, with the
names and ages of every person; yet not with such dignity and power as the
ancient Censors. But it is certain, that all towns subject to the Roman
empire, had their Censors, even under Traian the Emperor, and that the
Senators of every ^owne were chosen by the Censors, as we may read in an
epistle written by Pliny they younger to the Emperor Traian. And (not to go
out of this realm) we read, that king Childebert, at the persuasion Maroueus
Bishop of Poitiers, made an edict, commanding all his subjects to be enrolled,
and their goods to be valued; the which is yet sometimes put in practice at
Venice, Genes, and Luques, whereas there be Censors created: and namely at
Venice in the year 1566 they made three Magistrates to reform the peoples
manners, whom they called, I Seignori sopra il ben viuere de la citta: The
Magistrates for the well living of the citisens: for that the name of Censor in
a free city abounding with all kind of delights, seemed harsh and severe.

Few years before the creation of this Magistrate, having set forth my book of
the Method of Histories, I did therein much marvel, that in so great a number
of officers, wherein the Venetians did exceed other cities, they had forgotten
Censors, Censors in effect created at Venice.
subjects of that state in such awe, as few offenses remain unpunished: so as
without doubt this commonweal will flourish, if not through arms and wealth,
yet by their virtues and piety, so long as they shall maintain the authority
of those Auntients. Whereby it does plainly appear, that the best and most
flourishing Censors not to be wanted in a well ordered commonweal.
cities could not long subsist without Censors: wherein many ignorant divines
abuse themselves, in thinking that David was grievously reprehended by God, and
punished, for that he commanded his people should be numbered; when as God
Number. 1. 2. 3. 4. 21. 26.
commanded Moses the Emperor of the Israelites to do it after their
departure out of Fgypt, and again before they entered into the land of promise;
and not only to number them, but to note every family, and to take the name of
every particular person before they had conquered any thing, the which he
should leave to posterity: but the fault which David committed, was in
forgetting Gods commandment, charging him, that when he did number the people
every one should offer unto God two groats of silver (as Joseph has very well
observed) being commanded in the text of the law, to exact that holy tribute
for an expiation of their sins, so often as he should please to have the
people numbered: then he adds, Least a plague should be among the people. But in
my opinion herein was the greater Leui (which attended the sacrifice) and the
tribe of Benjamin. And whereas the law commands every one to put half a
sickle, or two silver groats; that is done in my opinion, to abolish The
numbering of the people appointed by God.
the impiety of the heathen, who taking the number of their subjects, offered a
piece of silver for every one unto their gods: as also God commanded they
should sprinckle the blood of the sacrifice above, and of either side of the
altar, forbidding them expressly, not to offer any more blood unto their
devils, that he might call his people from the inhumane and hateful worship of
devils. And it seems that king Seruius had borrowed this ceremony from the
people of the East, when as he commanded a box to be set in Juno Lucinas
temple, into the which they put a denier for every one that was borne: and
another in the temple of Iuuenta, where they did also put a denier for every
one that had attained to seventeen years of age, at what time they put on a
plain gown without purple: and the third was in the temple of Venus Libitina,
into the which they put a denier for every one that died: which custom
continued inviolable, even when as the office of Censor was neglected.

We read, that the Athenians were enrolled in the public registers at the age
of The number of the Israelites.
five hundred and fifty, besides the tribe of Leui which made twenty two
thousand, from a month old upward, which was in all six hundred fifty two
thousand five hundred and fifty. And forty years after the number was taken,
when as all those which came forth were dead, except Moses, Joshua, and Caleb,
they were found Exodus 120
to be six hundred twenty four thousand seven hundred seventy three,
comprehending the Leuits, besides the women, slaves, old men, and youth under
twenty Titus Liuius speaking of the number of the citisens that were found in
Rome, says in his third book, Censa sunt ciuium capita 415 millia, preter
orbos orbasque, the number of the citisens is 415000 besides the blind. Florus
in his 59 book says, Censa sunt ciuium capita 313 millia 823 preter pupillos
and viduas, the citisens are numbered at 313823 besides widows and pupils.
Five years after he says, Censa sunt ciuium capita 390 millia 936, The number
of the citisens is 390936. And in the following survey, 394356. And in the next
inrollment 450000 and in the other after that 150000. I omit the former
surueyes, which are all greater than this last: but it seems the Citisens of
Rome were not excluded, as it may appear in that which I have noted, for that
there were none but Florus says in his 27 book, Censa sunt 137000 ciuium, ex
quo numero apparuit quantum hominu^ tot preliorum aduer sa fortuna populi
Romani abstulisset: The number of the citisens were 137000: whereby it appears
how many men the Romans lost in their unfortunate wars. And in the former
view he says, Censa sunt ciuium capita 270 millia: The check-roll of all the
citisens comes to 270000. as if he would infer, that the losses which they
had received against Hanibal, had carried away 133000 citisens: for if the
women had been comprehended which went not to the war, there had remained none
but women, for that they be always as many or more than men, as I have before
showed. And in Athens there was a survey taken, whereas the number of women was
greater than Pausanias says. But the scruple is decided by Titus Liuius, where
he says, speaking of the seventh inrollment, Ciuium qui puberes essent, supra
centum december millia erant: mulierum autem and puerorum, seruorumque and
mercatorum, and sordidas arts exercentium (siquidem Romanorum nemini
cauponariam, aut operosam artem tractare licuit) triplo plus quam turbae
ciuilis. The citisens of full age were above 110000 of women, children, slaves,
merchants: and of those which used base trades (for no Roman might be a
victualer or handycrafts man) the number was thrice as many as of the civil
sort: whereby it appears, that merchants, handycraftsmen, women, nor children,
were not registered: as for slaves they were not nu^bred among the citisens, but
among moveable goods, the which were commonly fifty for one:

The benefits which redounded to the public by this numbering of the people,
The profit that may be gathered by the numbering of the people.
were infinite: for first they knew the number, age and quality of the
persons, and what numbers they could draw forth, either to go to the wars,
or to remain at home; either to be sent abroad in colonies, or to be
employed in public works of A means to cut off suits.
for which cause king Frauncis the first commanded his chancellor Poyet, to
puplish an edict, inioyning all curats to keep a register of all such as
should be borne: but for that the registers are not kept as they ought, this
law is ill observed. And in regard of the quality, we see an infinite number of
suits touching the nobility, which should be avoided by this means: and the
suits of forgerie and falsehood, for the disguising The citisens estates are
known by the Censors.
and concealing of names of the parents, country, estate, and quality, of
every one, whether he be a citisen or a stranger, a bastard or lawfully
borne, a nobleman or a patrician, a plebeian or a nobleman, and of what name
and house he comes, for want of registers and censors can hardly be found out.

This appeared plainly, when as Pericles numbered the citisens of Athens, for
the prerogatives and privileges they had above strangers, where there were
found thirteen thousand three hundred and sixty citisens, and five thousand
strangers which carried themselves as citisens, and were sold for slaves by a
public decree. The citisens order is known.
Moreover, to order and govern the bodies and colleges of citisens according
to the estate and age of every person, as they did use in Rome and in Greece,
it is It expels vagabonds and idle persons out of an estate.
from the Bees, and to banish vagabonds, idle persons, thieves, cooseners, and
ruffians, which live and converse among good men, as woolues do among sheep,
spending their lives in theeuing, dising, robbing, drinking and whooring; who
although they walk in darkness, yet hereby they should be seen, noted and
known. And as Casiodorus speaks thus, Orbis Romanus agris diuisus censuque
descriptus est, vt possessio sua nulla haberet incerta, quam pro tributorum
susceper at quantitate soluenda, The Roman territories were divided, and every
private man's land laid out, that no man's possession should be uncertain, the
which he had taken for the payment of a certain rent or tribute. If then a
survey were taken of all the Roman empire, and the lands distributed
accordingly, that it might be known what burden every one A means to equal
the charges and imposts according to every man's estate.
was to bear in regard of the goods he inioyed; how much more necessary is it
now, when as there be a thousand sorts of imposts in every commonweal, which
the auntients did never know? This point is of such consequence, as it should
suffice, Frauncis the first, in the year 1534, and by another of his
successors: whereupon the three estates of Prouence (being grown into great
suits) were called before the Parliament at Paris, where a provincial decree
was made, That all men of what quality soever, should pay their charges and
imposts according to the register made in the year 1471, when as there were
three thousand houses charged with a soulz upon the pound, without Marill as
the kings advocate for the subsidy of Prouence.

By this means the poor men's just complaints shall be relieved, whom the rich
are accustomed to ouercharge, and to free themselves throughout all the realm
of France, as well as in Prouence and Languedocke: By this means, mutinies
(which A means to avoid concussion and favor in them that make division of
the subjects.
this means the concussions, malice or favor of the assessors and other
officers, who have charge to make an equal distribution of the tribute or
impost, shall be discovered, or at least the controversy shall be decided by
the Censors register: or else they might put in practice the custom of the
ancient Athenians, whereas if any one were ouercharged that had less wealth
than another, he might force him that was less taxed to take his charge, or
to change estates with him: as Isocrates, who lost against Lysimachides, and
won against Megalides.

By this means you shall know who be miserable, who prodigal, which be
banquerouts,

I omit a multitude of suits touching successions, divisions, and morgages, the
Liuius Drucius the Tribune, That he would make the lights of his house in such
sort, as no man should ouer-looke him: To whom Drusus answered, I pray you make
it in such sort A notable answer of a Tribune.
as every one may look into it and see mine actions. Velleius Paterculus who
writes the history says, that this man was sanctus and integer vitae, of a
holy and upright life. But the office of Censor is chiefly against the wicked:
And in old times every Roman kept a register of his actions and expenses, and
of all his goods: But upon the declining of the empire, when as vices began to
spring up, they neglected it, says Asconius, for that many were condemned by
their registers. And I find not that ever any but tyrants thieves and
bankerouts hated the office of Censor, and have hindered The Censor hate full to
the wicked
all they could the valuation of goods, as I have noted of Tiberius, Caligula,
Nero, and Domitian. It is therefore a mere mockery, to pretend that this would
be a means the wars, until they had first seen a declaration of the
debts, to the end they might

The ancient Greeks and Latins have always spoken of censuring, as of a
divine thing, the which has always preserved the greatness of the Roman
empire so long as Censors were in credit. Titus Liuius speaking of king
Seruius, who first ordained that every one should give a certificate of his
goods, says, Censuminstituit rem saluberimam The opinion of the auntients
touching Censors.
tanto imperio, He instituted the office of Censor, a wholesome thing for so
great an empire. But after that Censors were created in the Consuls place, and
that by little and little they began to take knowledge of the life and manners
of every Titus Liuius says, Hic annus Censurae initium fuit, a parua origin
ortae, quae deinde incremento aucta est, vt morum disciplinaeque Romanae penes
eam regimen, Senatus, equitumque centuriae, decoris, dedecorisque discrimen sub
ditione eius magistratus, publicorum ius, priuatorumque locorum vectigalia
populi Romani sub nutu atque arbitrio essent, This year was the beginning of
the Censors office, springing from a small matter, the which was afterward so
augmented, as he controlled the manners and discipline of the Romans, the
assemblies of the Senate, and of knights, also the distinction of honor and
infamy were subject to this magistrate; and the public The charge of the
ancient Censors.
by him. The Censors office then was to receive the number of the persons, and
the valuation of their goods, to be superintendant of the treasure, to farm
out the imposts, customs, and all the revenues of the commonweal, to reform
abuses, to place and displace Senators, to dismiss the men at arms, and to
censure the life and manners of every one. Plutarch speaks in a higher style,
tearming the office of Censor, Most sacred and mighty. It may be some will
say, that the charge was over great: yet two Censors were sufficient in so
great an empire. But their charges may be divided: for to place and displace
Senators, that charge was given unto the Censors, to ease the people, says
Festus: the which could not be done in a monarchy, The Censors reformers of
abuses.
whereas the prince makes choice of all magistrates, especially of his counsel.
Yet it were necessary, that the overseers of the treasure should be true
Censors, that is, men without blame or reproach: for you must always commit the
purse to the most trusty, and the reformation of abuses to the most upright.
As for the reformation of abuses, it is the goodliest thing that ever was
invented in any commonweal, and it has best maintained the greatness of that
empire: ^ for even as the Censors were always chosen out of the most virtuous
men of the commonweal, so did they strive to conform the subjects to the true
pattern of honor and virtue. This was done from five years to five years: and
after that they had settled the estate of the treasure, and farmed out the
revenues. And if they discontinued this charge (as Hannibal was retired into
the territories of Naples, then the Censors (says Titus Liuius) Ad mores
hominum regendos animum aduerterunt, castigandaque vitia* quae velut diutinos
morbos aegra corpora ex sesegignunt, nata bello erant, The Censors applied
themselves to reform men's manners, and to punish vices, the which had sprung up
by reason of the wars, as continual feauers do in sick and corrupt bodies.
And yet they dealt not with any abuses, but such as were not to be censured
Quis est (says Seneca) qui se profitetur legibus omnibus innocentem? vt haec
it a sit, auam augusta est innocencia adlegem bonum esse: quanto latius patet
officiornm quam iuris regula? quam multa pietas, humanitas, liberalitas,
iusticia, fides exigunt, quae extra publicas tabulas sunt! What is he that
professes himself an innocent by all laws? how strict is innocence, to be
good according to the law? how much larger are the rules of duty than of law?
how many things do piety, humanity, liberality, justice, and faith, challenge
at our The greatest viees are punished by the Censors.
hands, the which are not inserted in the public tables? It is manifest, that
the most detestable vices, and that most corrupt a commonweal, are never
called into judgment. Treachery is not punished by the law, being one of the
most abominable vices: But the Censors (says Tully) were not so curious of any
thing, as to punish perjury. Drunkenness, gaming, palliardise, and looseness
of life, are suffered with all impunity; and who can redress these disorders
but the Censor? We see most commonweales A necessary reason to confirm the
Censors office.
by the Censor. There is yet one special reason which shows that the Censors
office is now more necessary than ever: for that in old times the master of
every family had absolute command, the father over his children, the master
over his slaves had absolute power of life and death, without any appeal; and
the husband had the like authority over the wife in four cases, as we have
showed elsewhere: but all this now ceasing, what justice may we expect of the
impiety of children against their fathers and mothers? of the ill government of
married couples? of the contempt of masters? How many virgins do we see sold
and dishonored by the parents themselves,

I dispute not of the conscience to God, the which is the chiefest and most
principal thing that ought to be cared for in every family and common weal;
the which care although it has been always committed unto Bishops,
ministers, and other spiritual officers, yet the magistrate ought to have a
special regard that it be above all things held in reverence: for although the
law of God commands that every one appear before him at the three great
feasts of the year at the least, yet there are some which never go, and so by
this contempt of religion, has sprung up by little Legum metus non scelera,
sed licentiam comprimit, The fear of laws does not suppress the crimes, but
the liberty. There have been and are at this day infinite numbers, who
although they offend not the princes laws, yet live they most wickedly, and as
Lactantius said well, Possunt enim leges delict a punire, conscientiam munire
non possunt. Laws may well punish offenses, but they cannot fortify and amend
the conscience. And as for the bringing up of youth (the which is one of the
chiefest charges of a commonweal, whereof as of young plants they should have
the greatest care) we see it is neglected, and that which should be public,
is left to every man's discretion, using it at his pleasure, some in one sort,
some in another, the which I will not touch here, having treated thereof in an
other place. And for that Licurgus said, That thereon consisted the foundation
of a commonweal; he appointed the great Pedonome to be Censor of the youth,
and to govern them according to the laws, not at the parents discretion: for
as the Aristotle's opinion, should be all one: and so did the Atheniens decree
by a public edict, made at the request of Sophocles, knowing well, that in
vain were laws made, if youth (as Aristole said) were not instructed in good
manners. All this depends on the care and vigilancie of Censors, first to have
a care of the manners and behavior of schoolemasters.

I will pass over with silence the abuses which are committed in suffering of
commedies Commedies and plays pernicious to a commonweal.
and enterludes, the which is a most pernicious plague to a commonweal: for
there is nothing that does more corrupt the citisens good manners, simplicity,
and natural bounty; the which has the more power and effect, for that their
words, Aristotle did not without cause say, That they must have a care least
the subjects went to commedies: he had said better, That they should pull down
their theaters, and shut the commedians out of the city gates: Quia (said
Seneca) nihil tam moribus alienum, quam in spectaculo desidere: For there is
nothing more contrary to good manners, than to haunt plays. And therefore
Philip Augustus king of France, did by a public edict banish all players
Solon having seen the Tragedy of Thespis played, did much mislike it: Whereof
Thespis excusing himself, said, It was but a play: No (replied Solon) but this
play turns to earnest. Much more had he blamed Commedies, that were then
unknown: and now adays they put at the end of every Tragedy (as poison into
meat) a comedy or jigge. And although that comedies were more tolerable among
those that dwell in the Southern parts, being more heavy and melancholy

It is the proper charge of the grave and wise Censors, who will be careful
to entertain the honest Gimnasticall exercises, to keep the body in health:
and of music to restrain the appetites under the obedience of reason: I mean
music, which does not only signify harmony, but also all liberal and
honest sciences; Two means to maintain a city.
having a special care, that this natural music be not altered, nor
corrupted, as it is Plato and Aristotle said it was necessary) at the least
let not the Diatonie music (which is more natural than the Chromatique or
Enharmonique) be corrupted by other medlies: and that the Dorien songs, or of
the first tune (the which is proper to sweetness and seemly gravity) be not
disguised into many tunes, and so divided, as most part of musicians become
fools or mad men, for that they cannot taste of a natural music, no more
than a weak stomach corrupted with delicates, can digest good and substantial

They also complain of excess in apparel, and that the sumptuarie laws are
trodden under foot. It shall nueer be reformed, if therebee not Censors to see
the laws executed, as in old time the Nomophylaces, or Law keepers, did in
Athens. And therefore an ancient Orator said, That the Tribune which first
restrained the Censors authority, had ruined the commonweal: It was Clodius,
one of the wickedest men of his time, which law was six years after
disanulled by the law Caecilia.

Seeing then that to censure is so goodly, profitable, and necessary a thing,
let us now see, if Censors ought to have any jurisdiction: for it seems it
should be but a jest without some jurisdiction. Yet I say, that the Censor
ought not to have any The Censors ought to have no jurisdiction.
jurisdiction at all, to the end that his charge be not entangled with suits
and controversies. In like sort, the ancient Roman Censors had no
jurisdiction; but a look, a word, and a dash with a pen, was more bloody, and
touched more to the quick, than all the decrees and judgments of the
magistrate. When as they made their scrutiny or survey, you should have seen
four or fi^e hundred Senators, the order of horsemen, and all the people stand
trembling before them: the Senator fearing lest he should be put from the
Senate; the horseman from his horse, and rankt Titus Liuius does testify, That
66 Senators were rased at one time out of the register, and excluded the Senate.
And yet lest this great honor and authority of the Censors should make way to
a The Censors have no power not jurisdiction.
tyranny, if they were armed with power and jurisdiction, or if any should be
condemned without hearing; it was therefore well advised they should have
nothing but the censuring and reformation. And therefore Tully said* That the
judgment of the Censors did only make men blush: and for that it did but
touch the name, the Censors correction was called Ignominia, Ignominy; the
which differs from infamy, depending upon the Judge that has public
jurisdiction, and in causes that L. 1. de ijs qui n^tant infam.
make men infamous. And therefore the Praetor did note them as infamous, that
were cassiered with ignominy, the which had been ridiculous, if they had been
infamous. And yet the doubt which Lawyers have made, If ignominious men should
suffer as the infamous; shows plainly, that Ignominy and Infamy is not all
one, as many have supposed.

By the ancient custom of Greece, it was lawful to kill any one, or any of
his children that was noted infamous, as the Orator Libanius says in his
pleading for Halirhotius. Now although the Censor had rased any Senator out of
the Register book, yet if he would make petition unto the people he was
admitted, and sometimes absolved and restored: but if there were any accuser
that did second the A censure is no judgment.
were found guilty, and condemned by the people, or by Commissioners deputed
by the people, then was he not only ignominious, but also infamous, and
declared incapable ever to bear office: and therefore those which were
censured, they were not judged, but yet they were as a man may say, foreiudged:
and if the Censor were an eloquent man, he would oppose himself as an accuser
of those that would seek to be restored against his censure: as Cato did
against Lucius Flaminius, making an oration against his filthy and disordred
life, having rased him out of the register of Senators. But those that were
better advised, and had some hope of restitution, Vlpianus speaking of these
men) doubts whether they are to be admitted as witnesses. And for the better
confirmation hereof, Cicero brings in an example of Caius Geta, who was
excluded the Senate by the Censors, Pro Cluentio*
and yet afterward he was chosen Censor: and a little after speaking of
censuring, he says* That the auntients would have the Censors office to carry
a certain fear, and not a punishent. The which was partly the cause why the
Claudian law Constantine did tear the libels of accusation propounded against
the Surueilans or Overseers at the Council of Nice, saying, That he would not
judge them that were Censors of every man's life. And for the same cause
Charlemaine in his constitutions has made a Canon, That no prelate Caesarin
Coment*
and princes that would not obey their decrees, even so the ecclesiastical
censure amongst Christians, has not only maintained discipline and good
manners for many ages, but has also made Tyrants to tremble, and reduced Kings
and Emperors Ambrose, who did censure Theodosius the Great, and Nicholas 1
Pope, who censured Lothaire King of Italy: and Innocent, who did excommunicate
Lewis 7 King of France, to whom for three years space no priest durst
administer the Sacrament.

True it is, that the abuse of a censure of so great consequence, has made the
ministers, the discipline, and their censure to be contemned, the which
consisted in interdiction, suspension, and excommunication: for many upon
light causes, ipso facto, without judgment or sentence; and which is more,
they did excommunicate Corporations, Colleges, Universities, Emperors, Kings,
and Kingdoms, without distinction of age, sex, innocents, or mad men,
although since (but too late) they have somewhat corrected this abuse: but in
this kingdom it was decreed by the statutes of Orleance, that they should not
use any excommunication, but in crimes and public scandal. The Prelates,
Bishops, and Popes, have always pretended the censure of manners and religion
to belong unto them, as a thing whereof judges and magistrates Leui, above all
the tribes, and to the family of Aaron, of the which the Priests only were,
above all the Leuits, giving them the tenths of cattle, fruits, and of all
heritages, with great honors and privileges: and by an article of the law of
God it is said, That he that shall disobey the sentence (...). 17.
of the high Priest, shall be put to death. And they that shall abase the
estate of the Ministers, Bishops, and Ancients, and seek to take from them,
all ecclesiastical censure, with their goods and honors, to see them poor
and scorned, they contemn God, and regard not religion, the which is a matter
very considerable: and The poverty and contempt of the ministers makes
religion to be contemned.
it was partly the chief cause, why the chief Minister of Losanna forsook
the town, for that the heads of the Cantons could not endure that the Ancients
should have the censuring of manners: yet the one is most necessary in every
well governed commonweal, either to create Censors* or to submit themselves to
the censure of the Bishops.

The Seigneurie of Geneue reserues this prerogative to their Bishops,
Ministers, was rejected, and he condemned in a fine, decreeing, that he should
be seized on, and de Moulin was much disconte^ted against the consistory,
saying, That under color of their censure they attempted upon the temporal
jurisdiction, and yet he blamed it in the catholic church. But taking away
suspension, interdiction, and excommunication, the ecclesiastical censure is
of no force, and by the same inconvenience, good manners

The ancient Censors did set notes and marks upon the registers against those
that deserved it, to advertise their successors in their charge of those that
were so noted, if they did not amend. In my opinion that should suffice, and
not to proceed against them by any amercements, or to excommunicate them for
want of payment. I leave it to the wise to decide, whether it be better to
divide the temporal censure (touching manners and other things above specified)
from the ecclesiastical censure, or to join them together. But yet it were
better to allow both to the Bishops and Ancients, Cassiodorus. But for that the
Censors office was first instituted in regard of taxes, subsidies, and imposts,
and to make a stock for public necessities,

CHAP. II. Of Treasure.
IF Treasure be the sinews of a commonweal, as an ancient Orator said, it is
very necessary to have the true knowledge thereof, first Money the sinews of a
Commonweal.
to see by what honest means to gather money together; secondly, to employ it
to the profit and honor of the commonweal; and lastly, to spare and to
reserve some part for all needful events, least

Touching the first point. There are many craftsmasters in matters of imposts,
which know many means to raise up great sums of money, but they never had
the true knowledge of honor and honesty. But leaving these cunning
politicians I will follow those, who as they have had a great care of the
treasure, so have they sought by honest means to increase the revenues of the
commonweal, lest the city by want should be drawn into danger, and the
prince forced by unlawful means to suck the private wealth and blood of his
subjects, as it has happened to those that Licurgus Polib. l. 6. de milit. ac
domest. Romans disciplino.
had taught them, taking from them all use of gold and silver, inioyning them
to make money of iron, least that strangers should grow in love with the
Lacedaemonians country, or they with that of strangers, supposing thereby not
only to free his citisens from injuries, but also from foreign vices: But
they had no sooner past their frontiers but they fell to borrowing, some of the
king of Persia, as Lysander and Callicratides: some of the king of Egypt, as
Agesilaus, and Cleomenes, kings of Lacedemon. For which cause the Seigniorie of
Sparta having soon won all Greece, and gathered together a great mass of
treasure, they decreed, That all the War is not maintained by a diet.
decayed under king Cleomenes. Every commonweal therefore must provide to
have their treasure built of a sure and durable foundation. There are only
seven means in general for the making of a public treasure, in the which all
other are contained. The first is, by the revenues of the commonweal: The
second, by conquest Seven means to gather treasure.
from the enemy: The third, by the liberality and gift of friends: The fourth

Touching the first, which grows by the revenues, there is not any seems to
me more honest and sure. So we read that all the ancient monarchs and
law-giuers, which builded new cities, or transported new colonies, they
assigned (besides the streets, temples, theaters, and the possessions of private
men) certain places fit for the commonweal, and free to all in general; the
which were called Commons, and let out to private men for a certain time, or
for ever, paying a yearly rent into the Treasury or Revenues the chiefest
means to make a treasure.
Exchequer, to supply the charges of the commonweal. We read that Romulus the
founder of Rome and of the Roman commonweal, divided all the lands into three
parts; appoynting a third for the temporal of the Church, a third for the
rents of the commonweal, and the surplusage to be divided among private men,
the which at that time were three thousand citisens, every one of the which
having two iournies, The division of the lands about Rome.
or acres of land: so as of eighteen thousand iournies or acres of land, lying
in the territories of Rome, they reserved six thousand for the sacrifices, six
thousand for the revenues of the commonweal and intertainment of the kings
house, and six thousand for the citisens. Yet Plutarch sets down twice as
many citisens, and says that Romulus would set no limits of the territory of
Rome, lest it should be seen what he The first beginning of public rents.
had usurped from his neighbors, and that his successor Numa divided the
revenues to poor citisens: but the first opinion is the more likely and the
more common; for the division of two iournies or acres continued a long time,
as Pliny says, speaking to Cincinatus the Dictator, the which was two hundred
and threescore years after Romulus: Aranti sua duo iuger a Cincinato viator
inquit, vela corpus and audi mandata Senatus: Cincinatus plowing his two acres,
Passenger (says he) uncover thy body, and hear the commandments of the
Senate. And Denis Halicarnasseus holds the first opinion; he was in household
with Marcus Varro, the true Register of all Roman antiquities. But since by the
law Licinia, every citisen was allowed to have seven journies or acres of
land. If it be true which we read in Pliny, or Collumella: Post exactos Reges
Liciniana illa septem iugera, quae plebis Tribunus viritim diuiserat, maiores
questus antiquis retulere, quam nunc nobis praebent amplissima veruacta, After
the expulsion of the kings, those seven acres which the Tribune divided to
every one by the law Licinia, did yield our ancestors more profit, than now
our large fields. And the oration of Marcus Curious is well known, noting him
as a pernicious citisen that could not be contented with seven acres. In this
division Romulus did imitate the Egyptians, who in old time divided all the
revenues of Egypt into three parts: The first was for the sacrifices and
sacrificers; The second, to entertain the kings house, and to defray the
public charges; And the third for the Calasiris, the Ezechiel, in reforming
the abuses of the princes of the Hebrews, appointed certain lands for the
sacrifices, some common for the people, besides the revenues for the
entertainment of the kings house, and to serve for public expenses. To the
end (says he) that the princes shall no more grieve my people with exactions
and imposts. Although from the beginning of the Israelits kingdom, the kings
had some revenues; for the town of Ziceleg, with some land being given to
David by king Achis, continued for ever as part of the kings revenues, and was
never alienated. Of the regal revenues some are public, some are private, the
last may be sold and made away, the first The public revenues by nature are
inalienable.
revenues should be holy, sacred, and inalienable, either by contract or
prescription. In like sort, kings (especially in this realm) granting their
Letters pattents for the reunion of crown lands, declare, that they have taken
an oath coming to the crown, in no sort to sell or make away the revenues:
and although it were duly and directly made away, were it for ever, yet is it
always subject to be redeemed, and in such sort as the prescription of a
hundred years, which gives a just title to the possessor, does not touch the
revenues of the crown. The edicts, decrees, and Nulla preseriptia occurrit
Regi.
ordinances of this realm are notorious, not only against private men, but
even against princes of the blood, who have been put from the division of the
revenues, and the prescription of a hundred years. And this is not peculiar to
this realm alone, but common to the kings of England, Spain, Poland, and
Hungary, who are accustomed to swear not to alienate the revenues of the
crown. The which is also observed in popular and Aristocritall states: and
even at Venice the law allows no prescription (the which many would limit to
six score years:) nor yet the Cantons of the Swissers: for king Henry 2 having
requested the Siegniorie of Lucerne to engage themselves for a certain sum
of money, Hugo the chief magistrate made answer unto the Ambassador, That both
the Senate and Commons of Lucerne Themistocles and Cato the Censor, caused all
the public revenues to be seized on, the which had through tract of time, and
sufferance of magistrates been usurped by private men, saying in their
orations, Nec mortales contra deum immortalem, nec priuatos contra Plut. in
Catone Censorie, and Themist.
Rempub* praescribere posse, That mortal men could never prescribe against the
immortali God, nor private men against the commonweal. And therefore the court
of Parliament upon a civil request obtained by the kings Proctor general,
against a decree made in favor of the successors of Foelix of Nogaret, to whom
king Philip S. Omer, adiudging the possession of certain goods unto the king,
allowing the religious to relieve themselves by some other means, and to prove
it duly, by way of inquest, and for cause, which words (and for cause) are not
to be understood for the poor subjects of the country only, but generally
for all. And oftentimes the treaties made betwixt princes have no other
difficulties, but for the Henry 8 king of England in a treaty made with the
Pope and potentates of Italy, in the year 1527, caused this clause to be
added, That they might not give away any thing of the crown of France, for
the redeeming of king Frauncis: and upon this point the breach of the treaty
of Madrid was grounded, for that the ancient custom of this realm,
conformable to the edicts or ordinances of other nations, requires the consent
of the three estates: the which is observed in Poland, by a law made by
Alexander king of Poland, according to the disposition the common law, unless
the sale were made at such time as the enemy had invaded the country: L. si
secundum C. de (...) Reip.
that unto himself which belongs unto the public, no more than a husband can
his wives dowry, wherein the prince has less right; for the husband may abuse
the fruits of his wives dowry at his pleasure, but a prince may well use, but
not abuse the fruits of a public dowry: as the citisens that were in society
with the Athenians complained, that the public money was to be put in Apolloes
treasury, and not to be wasted by the Athenians.

Our kings have and do acknowledge, that the propriety of the crown lands is
not the princes: for king Charles the 5 and 7, would not have the crown lands
pawned, unless the Parliament at the instance of the kings Proctor had so
decreed, as we may see in the ancient registers of the court of Parliament,
and chamber of accounts; and the reason is, for that the revenues belong unto
the commonweal, as wise princes have always acknowledged: and when as king
Lewis the 8 died (having given much by his testament to poor widows and
orphans) he commanded all his jewels and moueables to be sold to perform
his legacies, least that any thing belonging to the crown should be sold, as
having no interest in it. And for this cause Pertinax the Roman Emperor caused
his name being written upon the Antonius Pius lived of his own inheritance,
applying nothing that belonged to the public, to his private use: whom king
Lewis 12 (called the father of his country) does seem to imitate, who would
not mingle his patrimony and revenues, with that of the public; The public
re^nues and the princes patrimony differ.
erecting the chamber of Blois for his lands at Blois, Coussy, and Montfort:
and yet many have erroniously confounded the public with the princes private
lands. Neither is it lawful for sovereign princes to abuse the fruits and
revenues of the crown lands, although the commonweal be in quiet and free
from all trouble; Pericles said to the Ambassadors of the confederats, That
they had no interest in the employment of the treasure, so as they were
maintained in peace: for it was contained in the treaty of aliance, that the
money which should be raised in the time of peace, should be gared in Apolloes
temple, and that it should not be employed but by a common consent. But there
is great difference betwixt the Treasury or Exchequer in a monarchy, and in
popular states: for a prince may have a treasury of his private patrimony, the
which was called Fiscus by the Auntients, and that of Asconius et vlp. in l.
2.. hoc interdictum. Ne quid in loc^ pub.
the public revenues Aerarium: the one being divided from the other by the
ancient By the edict of Francis 1, in the year 1544.
in fee with justice are sold for thirty years purchase, and those that have
dignities at fifty years and more: so as some with purchase of the public
lands, reap in one year more profit by the jurisdiction, than they paid for
the land. Others have paid The great prei^dice that comes by public sales.
nothing at all, taking the valuation of the revenue by extracts from the
Chamber of accounts, given in by the receivers in ten years, who oftentimes
have not received any thing, for that the profit of inferior justice is made
in the chief and regal court. As for sales, the purchaser has more profit,
than the interest of the money which they have paid can amount unto: as also
the receivers of the revenues

There are infinite more abuses which the commonweal sustaines by the sale of
their revenues, but the greatest is, that the money which is made is not put
out to rent (like unto those that think to be good husbands) but is most
commonly wasted and given unto them that have least deserved, and so for want
of money to redeem this land, the commonweal falls to decay: then do they
also sell the commons whereby the poor are relieved. It were more fit to sell
the waste lands of the commonweal, The waste lands may be sold.
the which no man will hire, and brings no benefit to the commonweal,
Aristotle commends them of Constantinople, who sold their lands for a
continual rent, the which is a mere alienation, and money taken before,
diminishes the rent: the which was expressly defended by an edict made by
Charles the ninth. And although that afterward he made an other edict for the
renting out of waste lands, and paying of fines, by the persuasion of such as
sought to make money: yet the Parliament of Paris upon the verification of the
said edict, decreed, That the rents should not be redeemed, and that there
should be no fine paid at the beginning; and for that the Commissioners for
this sale did sue unto the King 7. May 1566.
be received by the Receyuers of the revenues apart, to be employed to redeem
the revenues that were sold, imposing a quadruple penalty to be levied, as
well upon the receyuers, as of those that had gotten any assignation of the
said money. And it is not here needful to relate what losses the king and
commonweal have sustained by such alienations of waste lands. King Frauncis
the second coming In the year 1559
to the crown, commanded his Proctors and magistrates to redeem the public
revenues from private occupiers: wherein he complained, that the crown lands
and In the year 1572
no receipt made of any revenues, although there were six and thirty thousand
crowns a year in the receipt, when as king Frauncis died, as it appears by
an account of the treasure made in the year 1569: and by the same estate the
alienation of the revenues, What the alienation of the revenues of France
amount unto. A liver is two shillings.
impositions, and subsidies amounted to fourteen millions nine hundred sixty
and one thousand four hundred and seventy livers, fifteen soulz, and eight
deniers; not comprehending twelve hundred thousand livers for the fourth and
half The revenues of the realm of England. Herein the Author is deceeiued.
England, comprehending the land subsidies, taxes, customs, imposts, and all
other charges, amount to little more than sixscore and ten thousand pounds
starling a year, having a good part of the temporal lands of the church
annexed unto it, and yet the Queen does maintain her Court and the estate of
her realm very royally and redeemed the revenues.

True it is, that a settled peace for these fifteen years has much prevailed
for the maintenance of the state of England; and war for the ruin of
France, if God had not sent our King Henry 3 from heaven to restore it to his
first beauty. But we must observe that for the preservation of the revenues of
a commonweal, most In a popular state the revenues are ill husbanded.
that which is governed by few of the better sort; whereas the magistrates and
overseers of the treasure convert the public to their own private profit: and
every one strives to gratify his friends, or to purchase the peoples favor
with the preiudise of the commonweal: as Caesar did in his first Consulship,
who divided the territory of Capua among the people, and abated the rents of
the farms a third part, after that he had been well bribed. And ten years
after Quintus Metellus Tribune of the people, to win their favor, published
a law to take away the toles in all the ports of Italy. In like sort, Pericles
to have credit with the people of Athens, made distribution of great sums of
money, the which had come into the treasure. This Charles 9 if it were duly
executed.

The second means to gather treasure together, is by conquest upon the enemy
The second means to gather treasure.
to recover the treasure wasted in war: So did the ancient Romans; for
although the sack and spoil of towns forced, belonged to the Captains and
soldiers, yet Titus Liuius) and all the brass that was taken from the
Samnites, was carried to the treasury. And speaking of the Gauls beyond the
Alps, he says, That Furius Camillus carried into the Capitol 170000 pounds
of silver which he had taken from them: and that Flaminius caused to be
brought out of Spain of the spoils of Greece, the value of three millions and
eight hundred thousand crowns, besides silver, rich moueables, arms and
ships. Paulus Aemilius brought thrice as Caesar caused above forty millions
to be delivered into the public treasury, by the report of Appian. We may
see from the 33 book of Titus Liuius to the 34, infinite treasures brought to
the Treasury of Rome of the spoils of conquered nations. And although all
were not brought in by the Generals, yet fearing to be charged with
corruption, or to be frustrate of their tryumphs, they always delivered in
great sums: for Scipio Asiaticus was accused and condemned of corruption, in
a great fine, and yet he brought into the treasury above two millions of gold:
and Scipio the Affrican his brother, was also included in the accusation,
although he had brought above five millions of gold of his conquests into the
treasury, besides the value of ten millions and five hundred Antiochus was
condemned: by means of the victory they had obtained, and yet both of them
were exiled and died poor. And although that Lucullus was the first (as
Plutarch says) that enriched himself with the spoil of his enemies, yet did
he bring more into the Treasury than any of the rest, except Caesar: the which
I thought fit to observe, for that commonly we employ the treasure for the
charge of the wars, and yet in all victories and conquests there never comes
a crown into the Exchequer, and oftentimes the sack and spoil is given
before the towns be taken or yielded.

The Romans were not contented with their treasures and spoils, but they
condemned The punishment of the vanquished.
the vanquished to loose a part of their territories, the which commonly
Odocres king of the Herules. And soon after Hortarius king of the Lumbards
condemned the vanquished to pay him yearly the moytie of their revenues: as
also the Romans had done unto the Doriens long before. But William the
Conqueror, after he had conquered the realm of England, declared all the
country in general, and every man's inheritance in particular forfeyted unto
him by the law of arms, entreating the Englishmen as his farmours. Yet the
Romans have always showed themselves courteous and affable in that point,
sending Colonies from their city to inhabit the conquered countries,
distributing to every one a certain quantity: and by this means they freed
their City from The great benefit which grows by Colonies.
beggars, mutinies, and idle persons, and did fortify themselves with their
own men against the vanquished, the which by little and little did link
themselves in marriages, and did willingly obey the Romans, who by this means
also have filled the world with their Colonies, with an immortal glory of
their justice, wisdom, and power: whereas most part of conquering princes plant
Garrisons, which serve only to spoil and oppress the subjects. If our kings
after the taking of Naples and Milan had practiced this course, they had yet
continued in obedience to our kings. And it is no marvel if they revolt
against the Spanyard upon the first occasion, as Pessimus diutur^ custos est
metus.
well as the country of Flaunders has done, having nothing but Garrisons
there without Colonies. Yet we find, that Sultan Mahumet king of the Turks,
found The Turks order to make many, and for the war.
their fruits, the which he continued for ever. Amurath the first dealt more
mildly with the Timariots, giving them certain lands and rents, to some more,
and to others less, upon condition they should attend him in the wars when
they were called, with a certain number of horse: and if the Timariot chanced
to die, the fruits should acrue unto the Prince, until that he had advanced
some other, by way of gift. And generally the tenth of all successions belonged
to the prince (the which

The kings of Castile have done in manner the like at the West Indies, and
namely the Emperor Charles 5, having conquered Peru, gave the lands to the
Captains and Spanish soldiers by way of gift only; and being dead, they
returned to the The Emperors order at Peru.
Emperor, until that another were advanced in his place: taking moreover the
fifth of all the pearl and mines; so as every two years there comes clearly
into the kings treasury in Spain, near four millions of gold, the which is
called, The port

The third means to augment the treasure, is by liberality of friends or
subjects, be it by legacy, or by donation during life: the which we will
speak briefly of, for The third meones to gather treasure.
that it is uncertain, besides there are few princes that give, and fewer that
receive without requital: for if a prince gives to one that is more rich and
mighty, it seems it is for fear, or upon some bond, and sometimes he that
receives it, accounts it as a tribute. The Emperor of the Turks sets to the
view of all the world, as The magnificence of the Emperors of Turkey.
well those presents which are sent him from his friends, as those that come
from tributaries, to show how much he is feared of strangers, defraying the
Ambassadors charges with great bounty, the which never prince nor people did.
But we find that the Auntients used an other kind of bounty and liberality
than they do at this day: for at this day they give not often but to such as
are in greatness and prosperity, and the Auntients gave in adversity. When
as Hannibal had in a manner quite vanquished the Romans, and taken from them
almost all Italy, the king of Egypt sent the value of 400 thousand crowns to
Rome in pure gift; the which the Romans refused, giving great thanks to the
king. They did the like to Hierom king of Sicile, who gave them a crown of
gold waying 320 pound, and A good policy of the Rhodiots.
to beg, having small means, and it succeeded well: for king Hierom sent them

It was common to the kings of Egypt to glory in their bounty to others: for
Ptolomie the first, toward the city and inhabitants of Jerusalem, to whom he
sent the value of two hundred threescore and sixteen Joseph in anti^.
thousand crowns, to redeem a hundred thousand slaves of their nation; and
ninety thousand crowns for the sacrifices, besides a table of massy gold to
set in Gods Temple: and the great presents he gave to the 72 Interpreters,
which translated the Bible out of Hebrew into Greek. And as it was and will be
always tolerable for petty princes and small Siegniories to accept the
honorable gifts of great princes and monarchs: so was it convenient for the
Romans to refuse such liberalities (and to beg it had been infamous) and to
accept, by gift or legacy, great realms and royal successions; which they
gave them which had reigned peacefully Ptolomie king of Six kingdoms given to
the Romans by legacy.
Cyrene, Attalus king of Asia, Eumenes king of Pergame, Nicomedes king of
Bithinia, Coctius king of the Alps, and Polemon king of Pontus, left the
people of Rome heirs of their goods and kingdoms. As for gifts from the
subject, the which the ancients called oblations, there were few or none at
all: for charitable gifts which be Voluntary gifts of the subjects.
voluntary, are now demanded: and although the kings of Spain, England and
others use entreaties to obtain them, yet most commonly there is more force in
these requests, than in commissions and letters of commandment. I understand
by the word Gift, that which is liberally offered by the subject unto his
prince; as Coronarium, the which the Jews gave unto the Emperors, to be
maintained in the privileges of their religion; and the magistrates of the
towns and communalties of the empire: the which in time proved a forced
subsidy, until that this force was taken away, the gifts remaining voluntary
to gratyfie the Emperor, when as he had obtained any victory against his
enemies.

The like may be said of the imposts which in Spain they call Service, the
Service of Spain.
which was freely granted to the kings of Spain to entertayne their estate
more honorably; and since it was almost converted into an ordinary charge. We
find likewise that the kings of Persia contented themselves with the voluntary
gifts and Darius Histaspes (he that got the kingdom by the neying of his
horse) changed those kinds into coins of gold and silver, and the gifts into
tributes and necessary charges, appoynting Treasurers The revenues of the
realm of Persia under the first Darius.
and Receyuers in every government (which were 127 in number) to make a
division of the taxes and subsidies, which amounted then to fourteen thousand
five hundred and threescore Euboique talents, the which is valued at ten
millions one hundred fourscore and twelve thousand crowns. But this ancient
custom of Persia is maintained at this present in Aethiopia, whereas the
governors of fifty governments bring unto the Negus, king of Aethiopia, the
gifts and oblations of The custom of Aethiopia.
his subjects in grain, wine, cattle, handy works, gold and silver, without
any other Augustus having given by will the value of eleven millions and two
hundred thousand crowns to be distributed among the people of Rome, and the
legions; he withal protested, that he left not to his heirs but three
millions and seven hundred thousand crowns, although he showed, that he had
received from his friends not many years before his death, the sum of
thirty and five millions Cicero reproched Marc Antonie in open Senate, That he
had enriched himself by their testaments whom he had never known; and yet
Cicero confesses that he himself had gotten by testaments a million of
crowns. But tyrants took all without any distinction: for there was no better
means for any one to assure his testament, than to give somewhat unto the
tyrant: but if the testament were imperfect, the tyrant seized upon the whole
succession, the which is reproved by the law, for which cause the custom

The fourth means to augment and intertayne the treasure, is by pensions from
their alies, which are paid in time of peace, as well as in war, for
protection and The fourth means to gather treasure.
defense against their enemies; or else to have counsel, aid, and comfort at
need, according to the tenor of the treaty. I say, that a pension is paid by
friends and alies; for a sovereign prince which has capitulated with another
to pay him some thing yearly to have peace without any treaty of amity or
alyance, is a tributary: Who be tributaries.
as Amiochus king of Asia, the Seigniory of Carthage, the kings of Sclauonia,
and many other princes and states were tributaries to the Romans, the kings of
Arabia and Idumea to David, and the princes of Asia to the kings of Persia. And
for this The difference of a pension and tribute.
pensions, and their pay in time of war, and they to do him service in his
court for the guard of his person: which does show, that the Swissers and
Grisons are pensioners to the king, considering the mutual aliance, and the
service they owe for this pension. In like sort he is no tributary that
corrupts his enemies Captains, as Pericles did to the Lacedemonian
Captains, not (as Theophrastus said) to purchase a peace, but to defer the
war. But we may say, that the Cantons never made a more profitable league
for their estate, both to enrich themselves, and to train The Swissers
pensions came to 14000. pound sterling a year.
their subjects up in arms at another man's cost, and also to send swaggerers
and idle persons out of their country. By the account of him that paid the
Cantons, the ordinary and extraordinary pensions came yearly at the least to
six score or seven score thousand livers: and in the year 1573 they came to two
hundred eighteen thousand livers. The pensions that were paid to the German
Commanders 21800 pound.
the same year, amounted to six score and twelve thousand livers, besides
their 12300 pound.
entertainment in war.

It is necessary for great princes to give pensions to the Secretaries, spies,
Captains, Orators, and household servants of their enemies, to discover their
counsels Philip the first king of Macedon said, who by his gifts and
liberality subjected almost all Greece unto him. And the kings of Persia had
no better means to keep the forces of Greece out of Asia, than by goodly
pensions: for it is hard that he which receives should not do some service
Plut in Lisand* and Agesilao.
in requital of his money; for he is tied by bond, or forced through shame, or
moved with hope of a greater benefit, or with fear least he that had
corrupted him should accuse him: for princes do seldom give any great pensions
unto strangers, unless they first swear against their native country: as a
Germane prince said at Whereunto pensioners are bound.
a diet at Worms in the year 1552. There was the same year a prince, who
since is dead, the which offered to an Ambassador in his masters name, that for
two thousand crowns a year pension, he would discover unto him all the
secrets, practices, and negotiations of his country, and to employ all his
means to prevent any thing that might be done in prejudice of him that should
pay the pension. These men are much to be feared, especially in a popular
estate, in the which it is more easy for a few private men that govern the
commonweal to betray it, than in a monarchy, wherein the prince accounts all
that is public his own, and therefore has care of it as of his own. But
such rewards and corruptions can never be profitable to them that give it, if
it be not kept secret, the which is impossible, if there be many.

The kings of Persia and Macedone gave none pensions but a small number of
Orators and Captains of the Grecians: and the king of Egypt for seven thousand
crowns pension, which he gave to Aratus, had the whole estate of the Atheians
at his devotion. And therefore it seems strange to me, why our kings (besides
the ordinary pension of the Swissers) have given extraordinarily to about two
thousand of them which exceeded the rest in credit and dignity; as king Henry
the second did, the which were known by their names and surnames, and gave
their acquittances; beside the private pensions, the which were paid by roll,
and came yearly to 49299 livers: happily it had been better to have given the
moity of these pensions to few men of authority, and secretly without any
acquittance: for sometimes 4929 pound 4 shillings.
a pensionar had rather lose the greatest reward of any prince, than to give a
note of his hand for the receipt of the money: as that English lord Hastings, to
whom king Lewis 11 gave 2000 crowns pension, the bringer demanded an
acquittance for his discharge only unto the king as he said; whereunto the
lord Hastings answered, That he would receive his pension, but he would give
him no acquittance: the which the king demanded earnestly, to make use of it
in time, and to bring him in suspicion of a traitor to his country. There are
also somethings not only secret, but also dishonest, for the which pensions are
given, although some hold nothing foul nor unlawful that is done for the
benefit of his country; for my part I hold this fact no less odious, that
shall suborne the household servants of princes to murder their Pericles was
commended, who giving up his accounts, set down an article of ten thousand
crowns disbursed without warrant, showing neither acquittance nor cause of it:
the which the people allowed without any further inquiry, knowing well the
wisdom and loyalty of the man in the government of the commonweal. It is
most certain, that a secret pensionar giving Plut. in Pericl.
an acquittance, is always in fear to be discovered, whereby he shall
neither dare, nor be able to do any thing in favor of him that gives him a
pension. Besides, it is dangerous when pensions are given publicly, the
jealousy of such as have none will be a cause of quarrels and partialities, as
has oftentimes happened in Swisserland,

The fifth means to gather together treasure, is by trafike, which the prince
or the state uses by his factors; although there be few princes that do use
it: and by the The fifth means to gather treasure.
laws of this realm, England, and Germany, it is not lawful for the gentry
to trade in merchandise, else must he lose his quality: and by the law
Claudia, no Senator of Rome might have a vessel at sea containing above
forty bushels. Questus omnis (inquit Lauius) patribus indecorus visus est,
All gain (says Titus Liuius) was held unseemly Darius, Merchant, for that he
forced them to those charges, which at the first they gave him voluntarily. But
yet in my opinion it is more seemly for a prince to be a merchant, than a
tyrant; and for a gentleman to traffike, than to steal. Who is ignorant, that
the kings of Portugal being restrained within straight limits, and not well
able to maintain their estates, yet loath to oppress their subjects, have for
these hundred years traded without reproach, and to the great enriching of
their states? In the year 1475 they John bastard of The traffike of the kings
of Portugal
Portugal; and twelve years after the spices of Calicut, and of the East; and
continuing their course to the Indies, have so well traffiked there, as they are
become lords of the best ports of Affrike, and have seized upon the I Will of
Ormus in despite of the king of Persia: they have taken a great part of the
kingdom of Marocco, and of Guinee, and forced the kings of Cambar, Calecut,
Malache, and Canauor to do them homage, treating a league and commerce with the
great Cham of Tartaria: they have pulled from the Turks and Sultans of Egypt
the greatest riches of the Indies, and filled Europe with the treasures of the
East, passing eue^ to the Molucques: which the kings of Castile pretend to
belong to them, by a division made by pope Alexander 6, notwithstanding John 3
king of Portugal had paid unto the emperor Charles 5, and to give 100000 ducats
more that they might have free passage to those islands which; the K. of
Portugal would not yield unto, making acount of the profit he draws from thence
as of an infinite treasure, besides the gain that comes to his subjects, having
much impaired the wealth of the princes of the East, and of the Venetians, who
have endured so great a loss, as of all the calamities they endured during
their wars with king Lewis 12, they received no such loss as from the
Portugals, taking from them their gain of the Eastern parts. Neither does the
Trade of Merchandise ingrosse dishonor, or imbase the The Gentlemen of Italy
trade in marchandi^e.
the Signiories and nobility of Italy, neither did Tully disallowe of it, but
of such as sold by retayle, whom he termed Sordido. As for the traffic
which Princes practice upon their Subjects, it is no traffic, but an impost
or exaction: which is, to forbid them to trade, and to put his subjects corn
and wine into his receivers hands, to pay them at an under rate, and to sell
it unto strangers, or to the Subjects themselves, at his own pleasure. This
was one of the reasons The tyrannical and ba e traffic of king Alphonso.
which made Alphonso King of Naples most odious; for that he gave his Swine to
his Subjects to make fat, and if by chance they died, he made them pay for
them: he bought the oil in Apulia, and gave his own price; and the wheat in
grass, and sold it a gain at the higgest price he could, forbidding all
others to sell The most pernicious traffic.
use, there is not any more pernicious nor base, than the sale of honors,
offices, and benefices, as I have formerly said, the which may never be
tolerated, but in the extreme necessity of the Common weal, as the Venetians
did, having spent in seven years, that Lewis 12 made war against them, five
Millions of Ducats, whereof they had made 50000 Ducats of the sale of
Offices. The like reason moved King Francis 1 in the year 1527, to divide the
Civil from the criminal Magistrates, setting all Offices to sale to them that
would give most. The which was more soul and dishonorable in Pope Adrian, who
three years before, not only sold offices, but also benefices, as he did the
Bishopric of

The sixth means to increase treasure, is upon the merchandise that are brought
The sixth means to make money.
in, or carried out, the which is one of the antientest and most usual in
every Commonweal, and grounded upon equity; which kind of custom the
Latins called Portoria, as they did the tribute of the public farms
Decimas, and Scripturam, and it is reason, that he that will gain by another
man's subjects, should pay some right to his Prince or Common weal. Whereof
there be diverse kinds, the which were reduced within this Realm to one impost
of twenty Deniers upon the liver or pound, by an Edict made by King Henry the
2. Anno 1551. 1556.
and after revoked, lest the customs and imposts should be confounded, the
which might prove prejudicial. King Charles 5 abated the custom half, but
afterward he restored it, the which was the twentieth part of the price, or
five in the hundred, and so the ancient Romans took for custom of foreign
merchandise: but afterward the Emperors exacted the eight part, the which
they called Octuarium vectigal, as in our time they have demanded the twelfe
forty and five livers upon the measure, contrary to the Merchants rights. And
although the Salt of France be the best and most plentiful in all Europe,
wherewith the low Countries, England, and Denmark do store themselves, yet
is it far deerer to us, than to them: for since that the Store houses of Salt
were let out, and the officers of the Custom suppressed, the measure of Salt
Francis the 1. that they might bring commodities and money into this Realm,
rather than into Spain: notwithstanding since it has been very manifest,
that the stranger cannot be without the Salt of France: for Charles the 5.
having forbidden his subjects of the low Countries not to fetch any Salt in
France, the estates The mines of France are never wasted.
will never fail; whereas the Mines of metal, which grow in the bowels of
the Earth, are wasted in few years: yet strangers seek it in the center of
the earth to bring into this Realm, and to carry away commodities necessary
for the life of man: which a wise Prince should not suffer to be transported,
but for the ease of his subjects, and increase of his Treasure, the which
cannot be done without raising of the foraine custom: for the greater the
foreign custom shall be, the greater benefit shall come into the Exchequer:
and if the stranger fearing the impost, shall buy the less, then the subject
shall have it the better cheap; for all wares, the greatest treasures will be
where there are most things Agrippa said; and the country of Egypt has
neither Mines of gold nor silver, and yet both Affricke and Europe, are much
relieved with corn which grows there. If anyone will say, that by the
treaties of traffic betwixt Princes, they cannot raise a foreign custom, I
must answer, that this may take place among those which have treated with
that condition, but there are few of them; and yet it has never been much
regarded: for even in the low countries and in England, the french Merchants
were forced in the year 1557 to pay a crown upon every tun of wine that
Impost in Eng^and upon wine.
came into the port, and the subjects paid nine french crowns for the impost,
1565 there came in less than three months into the low countries a hundred
thousand pieces of cloth, accounting three karsies or three cottons to a cloth.
It is therefore expedient to raise the foreign customs to strangers of such
commodities as they cannot want, and by that means increase the treasure and
ease the subjects; and also to abate the custom of merchandise No raw stuffs
to be transported*
strange countries, and not to suffer any raw stuffs to be carried out of the
land, as iron, copper, steel, wool, flax, raw silk, and such like, that the
subject may have the benefit of the workmanship, and the prince the foreign
custom, as Philip king of Spain, had forbidden his subjects by an edict made
in the year 1563, to requite the queen of England, who had made the like three
months before, the like edict was made in France by King Henry the second in
the year 1552, concerning wools: but there was a Florentin, who having gotten
a pasport by a A trade forbidden to the subjects, and allowed to strangers, is
the ruin of a country.
courtiers means, carried away more wool at one instant, than all other
merchants The seventh means to make money.
is upon the subject, the which they must never use, unless all the rest
fail, and that necessity forces them to have a care of the Commonweal,
being suddenly The honestest means in time of public necessity to make money.
of the general, it is fit that every man strain himself; then are
impositions laid upon the subjects most just and necessary, and those charges
which are then imposed upon the citisens are religious and godly, without the
which the city were quite ruined. But to the end this extraordinary charge
imposed during the war, may not continue in time of peace, it is fit to
proceed by way of borrowing; for that money is easilier found, when as he that
lends hopes to receive both his money again, and thanks for his willingness.
For when as Hannibal was in Italy, and did besiege even Rome it self, the
senate having consumed Titus Liuius says; Senectatores prosequisque aurum,
argentum, aes in publicum conferunt, tanto certamine iniecto, vt prima inter
primos sua nomina vellent in publicis tabulis esse, vt nec Triumuiri mensarij
accipiendo, nec scribae referendo sufficerent. The senators bought their gold
and silver into the public with great contention, who should be enrolled, so
as the receivers were not sufficient to tell it, nor the registers to inroll
them. After the victory obtained against the Carthaginiens, the senate
Ceassing used in old old time*
means, than to make choice of those which are ablest to bare arms, which should
be armed and entertained at the charge of others, as the ancient Romans did,
so Liuius lib. 26.
as the common good and health of the citisents was defended by some, with the
wealth of others. This kind of tribute is called rash and extraordinary. From
hence these extraordinary charges first took their beginning, the which
afterward became ordinary. As we read that Denis the tyrant, sometimes sought
occasions of war, or of fortifications, to the end he might have cause to raise
new Detestable inventions of a tyrant.
imposts, the which he continued, after that he had treated with the enemy, or
discontinued the fortresses begun.

If my wishes might take place, I would desire that such detestable inventions
might be buried with the author. There be three kinds of tributes that be
levied Three kinds of impositions.
revenues that rise of jurisdictions, seals, coins, waights, and measure, as
the money that is received upon things sold, of what nature soever, or by
gifts, legacies, or successions, or by the sale of offices, or in manner of a
tax, be it in the regard of every man's person, (which kind of tribute is
called Capitatio by the Latins:) be it in respect of the moouable or
immoouable goods, and of fruits which grow above or within the earth, as mines
and treasures, or that which is gathered at ferries, or passages, the which is
rightly called Portorium vectigal, or of any other imposition that may be
imagined, how filthy and beastly soever, for tyrants always think the savor
of them sweet; as that tribute Vespasian, the which his son taking
unworthily, the father held the first money that he received next of that
tribute, to his nose, asking him if it smelt ill, and he denying it, Atqui
inquit e lotio est, But says he, it comes of the urine. Of which charges and
impositions, the most ancient are reputed revenues, as the foreign custom;
others are ordinary, as taxes; and the last are extraordinary, the which the
Latins called temerarium tributum, a rash tribute: as subsidies imposed upon
free towns and privileged persons, tenths, charitable gifts equivalent to
tenths, the which are levied by commission. And to speak properly, the taxes,
ayds, grants, tolles, and such like were mere Lewis the ninth, who first
levied the tax, as president le Maistre has observed: but he does not say,
that it was as a necessary subsidy during the wars; and that he made an
ordinary receipt thereof; but contrary wise adressing himself to Philip his
eldest son and successor, he uses these words in his testament, the which is
yet found in the treasury of France, and is registered in the chamber of
accounts: Fili, religiosus imprimis erga Deum esto: benignus and liberalis
aduersus egentes, legum ac morum huius imperij custos ^. Lewis his testament.
ac vindex acerrimus: a vectigalibus and tributis abstineto, nisi te summa vis
necessitatis ac vtilitatis publicae iustissima causa ad hoc impellat, sin
minus, tyrannum te potius, quam regem futurum putato, etc. Son, be first
deuote and religious toward Clotaire did exact the third part and revenues of
churches: and Chilperis the 8 part of every man's wine growing, and it seems
that the impost of the 8 part of the wine, the which now is imposed upon
vinteners, took his beginning from hence: and that Lewis the young during 4
years, took the twentieth part of his subjects revenues in the year 1167; yet
it is most certain temerarium tributum imposed by king Charles the sixth, for
it was decreed in our open Parliament, called by Philip of Valois in the year
1338, that no impost should be raised upon the people without the consent of
the three estates: and in stead of three hundred and forty thousand pounds
starling, which king Lewis the eleventh did levy the year that he died,
besides the ordinary revenues of the crown, the deputies of the three
estates held at Tours, offered unto Charles the eight, his son coming to the
crown, in manner of a benevolence for two years, the like grant that was
made unto Charles the seventh, and for his entrance a hundred thousand crowns
to be paid for once only, the Philip Comineus said in open parliament, in
the reign of Charles the eight, That no prince had power to lay any imposition
upon his subjects, nor No Prince can lay any subsidy upon his subjects without
their consents.
to prescribe that right without their consents. And we see in all commissions
sent out for the leuying of taxes, and subsidies, the king uses that ancient
protestation to free them, as soon as necessity would suffer him.

And although that Philip the long did exact but the fifth part of a penny upon
every The beginning of the custom of salt.
two shillings worth of salt that were sold, yet he publicly protested to
discharge the subjects of it. Philip of Vallois used the like protestation,
being forced by Liuius and Claudius censures; Liuius was called Salinator in
derision: but a peace being granted to them of Carthage, it was taken away
again: either for that there was nothing more necessary for the life of man,
or for that it was done without the peoples command. And for that the lightest
kinds of tributes and imposts seem heavy and burdensome unto the C. Manlius
the Liuius lib. 2.
Consul made a law with the authority of the Senate, (the Army lying at
Sutrium) that such as were made free, should pay the twentieth part of all
their substance into the Exchequer: with which tribute, although the citisens
were nothing oppressed, yet being understood, the Tribune made a defense upon
pain of death, That no man should attempt the like without the peoples
priuitie. And Augustus made the law Iulia, That whatsoever should come to any
one by inheritance, The tribute of the twentieth part most pleasing.
legacy, or gift for death, the twentieth part thereof should belong unto
Augustus exacted the twentieth part of all inheritances and legacies, Traian
therefore abrogated the said law Iulia, the which many have labored to revive,
changing the name of it: yet had they not then the hundred part of those
tributes, which since the necessity of some, and the covetousness of others
have invented. And when as Samuel prince of the Israelites spoke unto the
people, who demanded a King of him, he added Ergo inquit regem habituri estis
qui decimas fructuum, imperaturus est, Therefore said he, you shall have a King
which shall command The tenths of the subjects fruits was the first tribute.
the tenths of your fruits. Neither did Cipselus the first Tyrant of Corinth,
exact any other tribute of his subjects, but the tenths of their fruits: there
were then no taxes, subsidies, tolles, and a thousand such like. So the
greatest part of the Inuenters of these new Imposts have lost their lives; as
Philistus parasite to Dyonisius the tyrant, who being drawn out of the tyrants
castle, was slain by the people of Syracusa: and Parthenius or Proclerus, who
was slain by the people of Inuenters of new impositions most commonly slain.
Treues, for giving counsel to king Theodoret to oppress his subjects with
new subsidies: and of late days George Prescon Parasite to Henry king of
Sueden, was Achaeus King of the Lidiens, whom his subjects did hang by the feet
with his head downward into a river, for the subsidies which he imposed upon
his people: and Theodoric king of France lost his crown for it. How comes it
that the Netherlanders have revolted from the Spaniard, but for that the duke
of Alua would exact the tenth penny of every thing which was sold, whereby he
would have gathered an infinite treasor, or rather the wealth of all the
country, being most certain that one thing might besold often in a short
time, and well known that the merchandise sold in one day amounted to seventy
thousand ducats, as a Spaniard himself did write. Nero All Impositions are not
to be abolished.
the Emperor would have done, who having wasted all the treasure, sought to
abolish the tributes, whereof the Senate being advertised, they thanked him for
his good will to the people, yet they dissuaded him from doing it, saying it
would be the ruin of the Commonweal. Many seditious citisens, and desirous of
Lewis the 12, Abundance of gold and silver has made things dear.
from the new found Lands, namely from Peru, as all things are grown ten times
deerer than they were; as I have proved against the Paradox of Malestroit: the
which may be easily seen in the ancient customs and contracts of this
Realm, where we shall find the value of fruits and victuals to be ten, yea
twelve times less than it is at this day. We find in the Registers of the
chamber of Accounts, That the Chancellor of France in the time of S. Lewis, had
for the charges of himself, his horses, and servants, seven soulz Parisis
allowed him a day; the which is not eight pence halfe-penie of our money: and
if he Charles the 5. king of France paid but 31000 crowns for the county of
Anxerre: and that the duchy of Berrie was bought by Philip the 1 of Herpin,
for threescore thousand crowns: and the county of Venice and Auignon were
engaged for forty thousand Florins. To conclude, I have made manifest that
many Earledomes, Baronies, and great Signiories have been sold a hundred or
six score years since, twenty times better cheap than they are now, for
the abundance of gold and silver that is come from new found Lands: as it
happened at Rome, when as Paulus Aemilius brought such infinite store of gold
and silver from the realm of Macedon, Caesar brought the treasure and spoils
of Egypt to Rome, then did Usury fall, and the price of lands did rise: even
as it happened to the Spaniards after the conquest of Peru by Frauncis Pizara,
a small vessel of wine in that country cost 300 ducats, a Spanish cape of
Frizado a thousand ducats, and a Iennet six thousand; the which was by reason
of the abundance of gold and silver which they found at Peru, and brought into
Spain: and namely of the ransom The great treasure taken at thy Conquest of
Peru.
of king Atabalipa; who paid the value of ten millions, three hundred twenty
and six thousand ducats, besides twice as much that came to private men,
captains, soldiors, and even to the receivers themselves, as Augustus Zarata
master Charles the 6 in the year 1449, The Revenues of France under Charles 6.
and 9.
regard of the value of things) than the revenues of fourteen hundred thousand
pounds starling, the same year that Charles the ninth died, in the year one
The Lord of Ieinuisle in the life of Lewis. 9.
thousand, five hundred* seventy and four; and yet the people complained at
both times that they were oppressed with tributes. And the ransom which king
Lewis the 9 paid to the sultan of Egypt of fifty thousand pounds starling, was
not much less than that of king Francis the 1 of three millions of crowns:
and although that king John were set at the same ransom by the king of
England, yet was it held so excessive, as they were six years in leuying of
it; but Frauncis the same year a peace was concluded, sent his ransom into
Spain. We must judge the Charles the fair, son to Philip, not to be less,
than that of ten thousand pounds starling yearly, that was given first to
Henry, and then to Frauncis dukes of Aniou from king Charles the 9 their
brother. And much more honorable might they live with that pencion, which I
made mention of under Philip, than with that which Charles the 9 gave unto his
brethren. Nor the Dowries of 400000 crowns assigned to every one of the
daughters of king Henry the 2, were not so great as those of sixty thousand
crowns assigned to the daughters of France by the law of king Charles the 5.
The like may be spoken of other Strabo, that Ptolomie the piper, the last king
of Egypt of that race, did raise upon The revenues of Egypt under Ptolomie.
the country of Egypt the value of seven millions, and five hundred thousand
crowns a year, and sultan Solomon did levy but a hundred thousand ducats of
the same country, as appeared by an extract of the revenues made by Gritty a
Venetian, in the year 1520, when as the estate of the whole revenues The
Turks revenues.
came not to above four millions; for four years after he raised it unto six
millions, as Paulus Iouius says, and now he leuieth above twelve millions
yearly, for the great abundance of gold and silver, that is brought out of the
West and East; which sum notwithstanding may seem but little, for that we
read in Plutarch, that the dictator Silla did tax the charges of Asia the
less, before the conquests of Lucullus and Pompee, at twelve millions of
crowns, the which is not above the sixth part of the Turks empire.

Sometimes the bounty of the land, and the great trade, and oftentimes the
unreasonable greediness of princes to heap up treasure, make some richer than
others: It is well known that Charles the fifth gathered more revenues out of
the duchy of Milan; then king Francis the first, at the same time did levy in
this his realm, which flowed in all abundance; who does not know that he
commanded more out of the low Countries, than the revenues of England
Charles the ninth to increase his taxes) did pernitiously maintain in open
counsel, that Cosme duke of Florence did raise out of his estate six millions,
having The revenues of the Du^e of Florence.
but a small territory: the which was false, for he received out of the
estate of Florence, but twelve hundred thousand crowns, and out of that of
Sienna two hundred thousand at the most. But a new prince shall do wisely at
his first entrance, to cut off the extraordinary exactions of his predecessor,
or at the least a great part of them, as well in regard of his own duty, as
to get the good will of the people, if he be required; yea before he be
required, and not to imitate Roboam, who following the wicked counsel of
wicked men, did not only refuse the humble petitions of his subjects, but
vowed openly that he would be

It is an ordinary thing in changes from a tyranny to a popular estate, to
abolish Valerius, after they had expelled their kings: but every man was feign
to go to the war at his own charge* then afterward to pay the soldiors,
and afterward to tax themselves by the raising of new imposts. True it is,
that the Romans did therein show themselves very just: for at that time
there were none that bare the charges, but the noble and the rich, the poorer
sort went free; and now adays we see none but the poor pay, and the rich go
scot-free. The like was in Suisserland, and at Lindaw, after they had expelled
their Lords. Other do free the chife cities and great Lords, and charge the
The reuenewe^ of the Athenians.
720000 crowns. And when as Themistocles captain of the Athenians, demanded
the tribute of the Adriens, saying; That he would bring with him two Plut* in
Themist*
mighty gods, Force and Love: they answered, That they had two more mighty,
Poverty and Impossibility.

And commonly the greater cities lay the burden upon the champian country,
Aesops Ass, and the horse which would carry nothing; that is to say, the
nobility and the clergy, are forced some to carry the tenths and
extraordinary subsidies, others to sell their The French contemn the common
people.
nation the French, with whom, as Caesar says rightly: Nihil est plebe
contemptius, Nothing is more contemptible than the common people.

To remedy this inconvenience, the ancients did wisely order, That all charges
Taxes must be real to ea ^ the poor.
should be real, and not personal; as it is put in practice in Languedoc, and
since in Prouence by provision, according to the disposition of the laws, to
the end that the rich and the poor, the noble and the peasant, the priest and
the laborer* should pay the charge of their land that is to be taxed: the law
exempts neither bishop nor nobleman. In other governments, if there be a
clergieman, a noble man, a counselor, and a vigneron, the last paies for all,
and the others are free, Unjust distribution of subsidies in France.
not only for their sees, but also for other tailable lands. If then necessity
force the prince to raise some extraordinary imposts, it is needful it should
be such as every one may bear his part, as is the impost of salt, wine, and
such like things. And to take away occasion of seditions, which do often
chance for the impost of Charles the fifth, with the consent of the Not penny
farthing.
estates, for the freeing of king John, the which was 12 deniers upon every
liver, or two shillings of goods that were sold; the which was changed to an
equivalent, first in the country of Languedoc in the time of king Lewis the
eleventh, yielding for the said impost 6000 pounds starling yearly: and the
like has been also done in Auuergne for the salt, the which the country has
exchanged into a certain sum: and for the same reason the impost which was
taken upon all small wares, have been abolished in many Commonweales, for the
complaints, seditions, Iauelleur or Gabelleur.
and exclamations of the poor people against the toll-gatherers, who always
took more in the kind than they ought. But if any one shall demand of me,
which kind of imposts are most pleasing unto God, most profitable to the
Commonweal, and most desired of good men, for the relief of the poor: it is
that which is laid on those things which serve only to corrupt the subjects,
as all kinds of dainties, perfumes, cloth of gold and silver, silks, cipresse,
laces, What impost is most honorable, profitable, and necessary.
rich colors, women's painting, pearls, precious stones, and all kinds of
works of gold, silver or enamell, and such like things, which are not to be
forbidden: for such is the nature of man, as they esteem nothing more sweet and
goodly than that which is stricktly forbidden them; and the more superfluities
are defended, the Cato the censor was commended, for that he laid a great
impost upon the sale of slaves, that should exceed fifty crowns price, for
that such merchandise could not be warranted.

The emperor Augustus did more wisely, who to correct the disordinate The
wisdom of the emperor Augustus.
lust of his subjects, made laws for marriages, by the which he imposed a tax
Augustus purchased the commendation of a wise prince. For hereby he did both
punish whoredom, adultery, and sodomie, and also force every one to seek him a
lawful wife and children, taking away nothing of any man's present estate, but
only the tenth part of that inheritance which came unto him accidentally from
his friends, filling the treasury with money, and the Commonweal with good and
Justinian the emperor did unadvisedly blame, and likewise Constantin, who
abrogated the law for punishing them that lived unmarried, or that had no
children. But the emperors Honorius and Theodosius gave the privilege of
children to all subjects, which was to give way to adulteries and to all
detestable vices, causing marriages and the procreation of children to grow in
contempt, whereby the city grew bare of citisens, and the empire being found
in a manner wast, was seized on by a deluge of Goths, and other barbarous
nations of the North. These kinds of impositions which are invented for the
punishment of vice, seem not only just, but very profitable.

There was also another impost of ten shillings upon every suit in law that An
impost upon suits.
was not criminal, to punish those that were too apt to plead, the which many
Charles the sixth, when as an edict was made, to take away the ancient custom,
by the which no man was condemned to pay any charges that had lost his suit:
for in former The cause of many suits in France.
times they were not so apt to plead: and it may be* our ancient fathers*
knowing the dispositions of the French, had brought in this custom (although
it were unjust of itself) to divert the subjects from attempting of suits
rashly. And although the Romans in a free Commonweal could hardly bear any
imposition Charles the ninth, by the which, he that did attempt a suit against
any man, was forced to consigne two crowns into an officers hands; the which
he should receive again from the adverse party, if he did recover his suit,
or if he were vanquished, to loose them as a punishment of his rashness: but
the Romans took the tenth part in all civil causes, and the fifth in
criminal, as Pompeius Festus does witness: yet Marcus Varro writes, that
either of the parties did lay down five hundred asses, which coms to about 10
shillings of four money; and he which won, recovered his money which he had
consigned, and this was besides the thing Sponsio and sacramentum, and if any
one refused to consigne, he yielded to the other. The Hebrews did always
cause him that did willingly deny a debt, to pay it double, as we read in
their pandects. And although the consignations which were made in Rome upon The
extorsion of Caligula.
suits were diverse, yet the emperor Caligula extorted against reason, the
fortieth penny of all that was demanded by law, without any prefixion or
limitation, whether the cause were just or unjust. But of all merchandise which
tend to pleasure* lust, and pomp, the imposition is honest and profitable,
serving to no other end but to corrupt the simplicity of the subject, the
dearest of all (which is Amber gris) the which is valued but at twelve pounds
starling, should be prised

The law sets no impost upon merchandise, but upon spices, and such precious
Interdum and de vectigal.
merchandise, as are specially named, as skins of Parthia and Babylon, silks,
fine linen cloth, painting, Indian hair, wild beasts, and Eunukes. Such
impositions are always commendable, and far more supportable without
comparison, than that which is laid upon the ass, the ox, wine, and such
like. And all good princes have abhorred that impost which they called
Capitatio, for to lay a charge upon men's persons for their work, were to make
war to good wits, if they have not some great trade, and by that means have
gathered together great wealth, for the which they must bear some charge; the
which is not properly Capitatio, but with the weaker sort they must deal
mildly, especially with the husbandman, which does not till his own land.
Neither are those impositions to be allowed which employ all their studies to
invent new taxes and exactions, seeking by all means to incorage princes
thereunto; as that multiplier (whose name I concele for honors sake) who not
many years since at a parliament held at Blois, made a declaration, That the
king (besides al other ordinary charges) might with oppression or grieuance of
poor or rich, raise thirty millions: the king sent this man to the three
estates, to expound the heavenly gift of God.

And although we had many excellent wits and of great judgment, yet had he
abused many with his opinion, if we had not laid open his error and deceit. S.
Bernard, to S. John de Luz; and by this he concluded that France had forty
thousand leagues in square, and that every league contained five thousand
acres of ground, which amounted to two hundred millions of acres, of the which
he abated the one half for waters, ways and wast land, and of the rest he
would have the king take a soulz for an acre, the A soulz is not a penny
farthing.
which amounts to five millions: then he made an estimate of six hundred
thousand towns and villages, and in them twenty millions of fires, of the
which he would have the king take six pence of every fire, which comes to six
millions 625000 pounds starling.
and two hundred and fifty thousand livers. Moreover he made an account of
fifteen millions of all sorts of merchandise, of the which he took a soulz of
the merchant for every thousand livers, making the former twelve millions. And
upon the said six hundred thousand towns and villages, one with another eleven
soulz apeece, the which comes to twelve millions, and six millions and a
hundred of livers more, which then the four tenths came unto, all which make
thirty millions, besides the aids, taxes, customs, grants, imposts,
subsidies, and revenues of the crown, which came then to fifteen millions,
wherein his deceit was very apparent; first making France square, the which is
in form of a Lorange much less than a square; next he makes the fertile land
equal to that In France there are but 27400 parishes.
and four hundred parishes in France, taking the greatest town but for one
parish, and the smalest villages having a parish for another: and in truth the
number of parishes taken by king Henry the second in the year 1554, came but
to 24824 parishes, besides Bourgogne and Poictou, and the impost of three
pounds starling upon every parish, came but to threescore and fourteen
thousand four Ierosme Laski a Polonois, father to the Palatin Laski, whom we
have seen Ambassador in France, invented another manner of means than this
former, to increase the treasure, giving advise to raise three The advice of
Ierosme Laski for the heaping up of treasure.
imposts upon the subjects, and to make three mounts of piety (for so he
calls them.) The first was in taking the moitie of every subjects reuenews,
for once: the second was the twentieth part of his revenues yearly; and the
third was to have the eight part of things sold in gross, or by retaile. But
his advise was rejected as pernicious and most impossible: for in matter of
impositions there is nothing that does more kindle seditions, than to charge
the subject with many things at once, especially a warlike people, and bred up
in liberty, as those The mounts of piety ^n Italy honest and profitable.
mounts of piety in the cities of Italy are profitable, honest* and
charitable, and invented to ease the poor; and those of Laski do ruin them.
There are mounts of piety at Florence, Sienna, Luques, and other cities,
whereas he that has one daughter, the day of her birth he may put what sum
he will into the mount of piety, upon condition to receive ten times as much
to marry her withal, when she comes to the age of eighteen year; but if she
dies before, then does it accrue unto the mount, unless the father has other
daughters, to whom the portion shall come successively. Another mount of piety
is, for the lending of

Notwithstanding I find that the emperor Antonine surnamed the Pius or godly,
invented a better mount of piety, which was to deliver out the money that came
clear into the treasury, all charges paid for five in the hundred upon A
commendable institution made by Antoninus Pius.
good and sufficient caution. By whose example Seuerus restored the treasure
that was wasted, and the merchants and poor men gained much by traffic: and
the public in a great sum did also gain much: for if they lent a million,
at the years end they did get fifty thousand crowns for the public, and
private men got twice as much by traffic: and besides all this, the greatest
benefit that did arise, the public treasure was assured out of the paws of
thieves and horse leeches of the court. And for this reason only as it seems,
the emperor Augustus long before, was accustomed to lend the money which came
clear Tranquil. in August.
into the Exchequer, without any interest, giving good assurance of land; and
upon a penalty to forfeit the double, if it were not paid at the day: by this
means the A forfeiture of the double forbidden by the law. ^. pecun. de vsur.
particular. And here some one may object, that although Augustus did not lend
the public money for interest, yet he imposed a penalty of the double, if
it were not paid at the prefixed day, the which is greater than any usury and
therefore forbidden by the law. In my opinion, that penalty is then disallowed
by the law when we stipulate any thing fraudulently, and above the lawful
interest: but he that has taken the public money, and restores it not at the
appointed day, he commits theft; it is therefore the penalty of theft, and not
of usury.

Those princes therefore did wisely in old time, which provided for The ruin
of princes is to take up at interest.
but also lords and Commonweales, some more, some less: those which have been
held the most frugall, as the Venetians, borrow always at five in the hundred,
without any hope to recover the principal, or at fourteen in the hunded, so
long as the creditor shall live. The college of Saint George at Genes takes
money of all men at five in the hundred, and delivers it out again at the
highest interest to princes and merchants; whereby they are so enriched, as
they have redeemed the Isle of Corsica, and the lands

This means was also brought into France by the cardinal of Tournon, at such
time as he was in credit with king Frauncis the first, whom he persuaded (by
the instigation of certain Italians) that there was no other means The
original of the bank of Lion.
to draw the money from all parts into France, and to frustrate the enemy
hereafter, than to settle a bank at Lion, to take every man's money, and to
pay him eight in the hundred, so as in short time he should get into his hands
all the money of Italy and Germany: but in effect the cardinal sought to
assure an hundred thousand crowns which he had in his coffers, and to get all
the interest he could. Letters patents being granted, at the opening of the
bank, every man came running from France, Germany and Italy, so as king
Frauncis the first, when he died, was found indebted to the bank of Lion, five
hundred thousand crowns, the which he had in his coffers and sometimes more,
and a peace concluded with Henry his son grew most lamentable, for having
wasted his fathers treasure, and standing in need of money in the year 1554
borrowed at ten, twelve, and sixteen in the hundred, of the Caponyes, Albicis,
and the Foucquers of Germany, and when he was not able to pay the interest, he
promised the creditors interest upon interest. The emperor Charles 5 did the
like for his part; true it is, he paid but ten and twelve in the hundred. And
the same year Henry the eight king of England, borrowed a hundred thousand
crowns of the German merchants at twelve in the hundred: every one hoping to
draw money and wealth unto him by the desire of usury. And whereas our king
Henry the second thought to draw most money unto him Henry, all was filled
with the complaint of creditors: and such princes and Signiories as had money
in the bank at Lion, The Bashas of Turquie had money at interestin the bank at
Lion.
and nothing did more with hold the great Turk from succoring of the French in
their last voyage of Naples, under the duke of Guise, than the not paying of
four thousand crowns for interest to Rustan Basha, besides the ten thousand
which la Vigne the ambassador carried him in the year 1556, fearing to loose
his principal, as I have learned by letters and instructions from la Vigne,
for many did not buy rents for a certain sum of money, but would have the
interest pure and simple, and upon condition that they should have their
principal The policy of Italian usurers.
simply having them bound both body and goods, without making any mention of
interest, and yet by a verbal agreement, they promise sixteen or twenty in
the hundred; if he fail to pay the interest, they seize upon body and goods
for the principal: and although the interest be paid, if they have need of
their principal* they proceed by way of execution against the debtor, for he
has never any quittance nor witness for the interest which he receives.
Behold by what means they draw the money out of this realm.

There are other tricks which I forbear to touch, but for this cause king
Lewis the ninth in the year 1254, and Philip the Fair in the year 1300 did
banish all Ancient laws against* Italian usurers.
Bankers and Italian merchants out of France, confiscating their goods: and to
discover the debts that were owing them, it was decreed that the debtors should
be freed from all arrerages and interests, paying the principal to the
treasurers. And since, in the year of our Lord one thousand three hundred
forty and seven, Philip of Valois for the like cause did forfeit all their
goods: for it was verified by the process that was made, that for four and
twenty thousand pounds starling, they had in few years profited two millions
and four hundred and forty thousand pounds starling: and in hatred of such
usury the Lombards letters have been always taxed in the Chancery at double*
Henry the second reigned, he did owe more than his The debts of king Henry
the second.
predecessors had levied forty years before, for all charges: for by an
account made in the year 1560, king Frauncis the second, successor to Henry,
did owe two millions three hundred twelve thousand six hundred and ten livers,
eighteen soulz six deniers, of money lent freely, for the which he paid no
interest: and fifteen millions nine hundred twenty six thousand five hundred
fifty and five livers, 12 soulz and 8 deniers, for the which he paid interest:
and he ought more for arrerages seven hundred threescore and fifteen thousand,
nine hundred threescore and nineteen livers, four soulz, and four deniers:
besides the debt of Ferrara, and other debts for marriages, which came to eight
millions five hundred and fourteen thousand five hundred fourscore and twelve
livers, eighteen Francis 2, and Charles 9. Although the emperor Charles 5,
and his successor have run the same fortune, for that they took up at interest,
being indebted above fifty millions, for the which The debts of Spain.
all the lands, and reuenews of Naples and Milan were engaged to the Genewais
and other private persons, who now are called in question, for that they had
taken of the king of Spain in his necessity thirty and forty in the
hundred; and to effect it, they have caused the catholic king to be censured
by an admonition from the Pope, if he continued those excessive vsuries; who
embracing this occasion, defrauded his creditors of ten years interest. We must
not think that the Spaniards will suffer themselves to be easily gulled by the
bankers of Italy, as the theft, they have gotten an euocation of all their
causes to the privy council. Frauncis the first, who began to take up money
at intrest, having 1800000 crowns in his coffers, and peace within his realm:
no well advised prince will ever take that course, for thereby he shall ruin
the foundation of his treasure, if he will keep his faith and pay; but if he
will not, or cannot pay, then must he break and loose his credit, which is
the ruin of an estate: for he must borrow, levy taxes, impositions, and in
the end by slanders, and tyrannies forfeit his subjects goods. Then is it most
fit and necessary for a prince to borrow money upon interest of his allies and
subjects, if that he be in danger to loose his estate, by some general
revolt, or the conspiracy Means to assure the estate of a desperate prince.
of some great men against him* for extreme remedies are to be sought Eumenes
did, who borrowed a great sum of money at extreme interest, of those that had
conspired his death. Agrippa king of Judea, recovered his realm by the means
of his creditors, who troubled both heaven and earth for the assurance they had
to be paid: and this was also the chief means to restore Edward the fourth
king of England, being expelled his kingdom. But if the princes creditors have
assurance to be paid by his successors, or that they have lands in pawn, then
this course is unprofitable. I have set down the means which in my opinion
are profitable and honest to gather together treasure, the which is the first
point of this chapter: the second is how to employ the treasure of the
Commonweal well and honorably, the

In old time the first article set down in the expenses of the treasure, was
for alms deeds; the second for the kings house; and the third for reparations:
but the order is quite changed. As for almsdeeds, the wise and ancient
princes Means to employ the treasure.
of the Hebrews, have left this discipline to posterity, the which they
received from the holy Prophets, who said, That the surest preservation and
defense of treasure, were Alms deeds, and liberality to the needy; the which
they restrained to the tenth part of every man's goods, which should be
employed upon the ministers of the church and the poor. And if we will look
advisedly into Robert son to Hugh Capet, who gave the first example to his
subjects and successors to be charitable to the poor, feeding a The charity of
the kings of France to the poor.
thousand daily, giving them horses to follow the court, to bless him and pray
for him; and to speak truly, there was never king in this realm that reigned
longer and in greater peace. We may justly say of our kings, that there is no
race under heaven that has so entertained the greatness of their majesty in
arms and laws, and out of the which there has issued more princes* or that
have reigned Lewis the ninth, who has founded twenty eight hospitals and
colleges in this realm; and had commonly in his train six score poor folks,
and in Lent twelve score, feeding them with meat from his own table? he also
lived in great honor, being feared of his enemies, reverenced of his friends,
honored of his subjects: and after that he had reigned 44 years, he left five
sons, and four daughters, and a kingdom flourishing in arms and laws to
his successor, recommending unto him above all things to be devout to God, and
charitable to the James the fifth king of Scotland, who was called Rex egentium,
The king of the needy; who as he exceeded all the princes of his time in
bounty, so did he surmount all his predecessors in riches. And contrariwise we
see great families, states, realms, and empires come to poverty and ruin,
having contemned the poor, and abandoned the subject to the spoil of the
soldior, and the thefts of toll-gatherers: when as king Henry the second in
the year 1549, did exact that extraordinary tribute which they called
Taillon, he promised not to employ that money to any other use, than to the
entertainment of his men at arms, and not to confound it with the ordinary
receipts, that the subject might be freed from the spoil of soldiers. The like
was said, when Frauncis the first, the which should be levied upon walled
towns and their suburbs, which felt nothing of the oppression of the
soldier; but notwithstanding since they have made it equal to town, village,
and hamlet, in the year 1555, whereby the poor countreyman has been doubly
oppressed, for they pay, and are spoiled of all sides. And yet with all these
charges, they would hold themselves happy, if they might be freed in providing
corn and victuals for the soldiers at an vnder*rate, what may then be hoped
for in those cities whereas the soldiers rob and spoil the poor subjects
with all impunitie, The souldior must be paid to prevent all thefts and
insolences.
and insult more over the citizens than against the enemy? but for an excuse,
Cassiodorus said, Disciplinam seruare non potest ieiunus exercitus, dum quod
deest semper presumit armatus, A fasting army can never observe good
discipline, for what they want, they will presume to take by force: the which
cannot be done unless there be a great care had of the treasure. The kings
house therefore entertained, the soldiers and the officers paid, and due
rewards given to them that deserve them, it is great reason the poor should be
remembered. And if the treasury be well furnished, a part The benefit of
reparations and fortifications.
to the Commonweal. For by this means arts and artificers are entertained, the
poor people are eased, the idle are set to work, cities are beautified and
diseases expelled: finally hatred against princes (which does often times
stir up the subjects to rebellion) is quite suppressed, when as the
impositions which he has levied, redounds not only to the general, but also to
every private man's good. And therefore the emperor Alexander Seuerus was
accustomed to leave many

This which I have said is more expedient in an Aristocratia, or a Popular
state, than in a Monarchy; for that the subjects being many, are with more
difficulty maintained in peace and union by few commanders: unless the
multitude being employed in the public works, may make some gain, and not to
inure them to the distribution of corn and money, as they usually did in
Popular states, and especially the Tarentins: the which is not only the ruin
of the treasure, but likewise of the city. So Pericles was also blamed, having
first accustomed the Atheniens to these distributions: the which he did to
gain An infinite treasure in the city of Athens.
good artificers: yet durst he not attempt this before the city was in peace
and their treasure full, having then a hundred thousand tallents; that is to
say, threescore millions of crowns, if we may believe Demosthenes: which sum
because Demosthenes in (...).
it is unreasonable, it may be, we should read a hundred tallents, which make
threescore thousand pounds, for that we showed before, that the Athenians
(when as they had charged their allies with great tributes) did never leuy
above two thousand tallents yearly at the most, and in Pericles time they did
scarce exact a thousand tallents. And being accused by his enemies to have
misemploied Plut. in Pericle.
they were not well pleased with the walls, fortresses, and temples which he
built, he would take the charge upon himself, upon condition, that his name
should be graven thereon, and that it was his gi^t: but the people allowed the
charge, knowing well that all men in general, and every man in particular,
reaped profit and honor thereby, for that the merchant did gain in furnishing
of stuff; seamen, and those that brought it, for their carriage; and
artificers in working it; so as the profit was distributed to all sorts of
people, and the glory of their stately works, gave a perpetual testimony to
posterity of the greatness of this Commonweal. But the greatest benefit, and
which does most import Solon foreseeing, Idleness severely punished
he did inflict great punishments upon idle persons: and so did Amasis king of
Egypt, who condemned idle men to be put to death, if they had not wherewithal
to live, knowing the Egyptians to be the most ingenuous in the world, and the
most subject to mutiny, if they were not employed. We see Piramides built in
that country almost three thousand years since, lest the pleople should have
Augustus, who did justly vant, That he had found Rome built with brick, but
that he had left it built with marble: and in truth he employed four millions
and five hundred thousand crowns in building of the Capitol alone: he was
followed by the emperor Vespasian, who made great and excellent works
throughout the whole empire, rather to entertain the meaner sort, than for any
other end: for when as an excellent workman promised him to set up pillars in
the Capitol, of an excessive greatness, with small charge and few laborers; he
recompensed him very well, saying, Let me I pray you, A thousand millions of
crowns.
weal.

What shall I say of the emperor Claudius, who enjoying an assured peace,
caused the channel of Fucina to be made, to accommodate the city with good
waters, employing daily thirty thousand men for eleven years together. And
without search of ancient histories, it is well known that the signiorie of
Venice does entertain continual in their Arsenall, three or four thousand
persons which get their living by the labor of their hands, the which does
much A tyrant builds with the blood of his subjects.
blood of his subjects: and often times the subjects ruin the buildings of
tyrants, to deface their memory from off the earth, whereas they should by
virtuous Nero, which comprehended a great part of Rome, was contemned by his
successors, who would not vouchsafe to lodge in it, for the cruelty and
villainy of him that had built it; and soon after it was ruined* as being made
of spoils, exactions and confiscations, the which follow a prodigal prince at
the heels: for of necessity, of a prodigal he must become an oppressor, and
of an oppressor a tyrant.

There were never two tyrants more cruel and prodigal, than Nero and
Caligula; The strange prod^galitie of Nero and Caligula.
for the first, in fifteen years that he reigned, had given away the value of
fifty and five millions of crowns: and the last, in one year had wasted
threescore and seven millions, so as having not where withal to de^ay his
household Frauncis the first* that every year the generals of the treasure,
should send unto the treasurer, two briefes of the public revenues of every
province: the one by conjecture the first day of the year; the other a true
note of the year that was past: and in like case the treasurer should make two
briefs of the whole treasure in general, to the end that the king and his
counsel might Articles of parties casual in the year 1572.
made in the end of the year, it was found, that they amounted to two hundred
and fourscore thousand pounds starling, and yet it was verified* that there
was but fifty thousand pounds employed to the kings profit. Such was the
calamity of those times when as children and women ruled. But in my opinion,
the king had done better, if he had seen the general account of his reuenews,
A prince should have a list of matters of state and of his chief men.
end, it were expedient the prince had a brief register of affairs of state,
and a roll of the worthiest men of his realm, for there is no memory so
perfect, but may be confounded with the multiplicitie of affairs, whereby he
shall commit great incongruities in matters of state: for a brief note of
affairs shall put him Lewis the eleventh, who was held one of the most
politic princes of his age, yet he ran willingly into the snare of Charles
earl of Carolois, having forgotten that he had sent his ambassadors into the
country of Liege, to stir them to war against him: the earl advertised
hereof, detained him prisoner: the which had not happened, if he had kept a
register of his former actions. If any flatterers of the court will object,
That the register would be too great, that the prince should be too much
troubled, and that he could not live long: why then have those princes and
great monarchs which Augustus, Tiberius, Vespasian, Traian, Adrian, and the
Antonines, all Roman emperors and politic governors, who themselves made
registers of their own affairs, imitating the example of Augustus, who lived
74 years, leaving three Books written with his own hand; the first was The
diligence of Augustus.
his deeds and public actions; the second was his testament; the third was an
estate of all the Roman empire, wherein was contained a particular estate of
every province, what troops of soldiers, what treasure, what arms, what
shipping and what munition, with a diligence worthy of a great monarch: yet
for all this he did not omit to do justice ordinarily and to hear all
comers, Suetonius says, remembering that which Demetrius the Phalerien said
unto Ptolome Philadelph king of Egypt, that he should find goodly secrets in
books, which no man durst tell him. Vespasian in like sort, made an excellent
abridgement of the empire, and yet he lived 70 years.

The empire of Persia was greater than that of the Romans, stretching from
the farthest bounds of India, unto Hellespont, and the desert of Libia, having
under it 127 Provinces, and yet the kings of Persia carried with them
continually a register of their affairs of state and of their gifts: and when
as Darius Longuemain had escaped the conspirators hands, by the advertisement
which Mardocheus Mardocheus had received no reward for so great a service done
unto the king he caused him to be sent for, giving him great honors and
preferments. But without any further search, the king of Spain does usually
look upon a register of his affairs, carrying an abridgement of letters which
he writes to governors, captains, and ambassadors, if the matter be not very
secret. For the same cause Charles surnamed the wise, king of France, made a
Register of his privy council, and the first was Peter Barrier, who was not
busied (as at this day) with expeditions and acts of justice, but only to
inroll the affairs of state. But above all it is necessary for a prince to
have a register in his counsel, of gifts, Philip of Valois, of the which I
have formerly made mention, by the which the gift was revoked, if the donatarie
made not mention of the benefits granted to him and his Good ^s abrogated.
predecessors: the other is of Charles the eight, whereb^ all gifts above ten
pounds were of no force, if they were not verified in the chamber of accounts.
The first law was soon taken away by another, saying, That it was sufficient
by the Letters of gift, if it were derogated from the first decree. And as for
the Charles the eight, it is out of practice, under color of secret gifts and
pentions, the which must not be known: so as the ancient laws (decreeing, that
the articles set down in the chapter of expenses, shall not be allowed
without an order, a commandment, and a discharge) are now of little or no
force in that respect: for the treasurer is discharged, bringing the kings hand
only, without any mention of him to whom the reward was given, nor wherefore.
There was yet a law made by king Frauncis the first, and confirmed by his
successor, whereby it was decreed, There should be four keys to the place where
the treasure was kept, whereof the king should have one, and the rest should be
in Commissioners hands appointed by him: and the distribution of money should
be Henry the second by a special edict discharged the treasurers and
officers of the treasury, that afterward they might not be called to any
account. True it is, that one of these commissioners had given him at one time
a hundred thousand crowns, if the common report were true; the which was much
at that time, but little in regard of prodigalities practiced The reuocation of
excessive g^ is necessary.
of late. For after that king Frauncis the first had ordered it by sparing, all
the public treasure lay open to the spoil of great men and flatterers. But an
edict made in fraud should be no hindrance, but that such as had managed the
public treasure might be called to an account; as it was required at a
Parliament held at Galba did, who revoked Neroes gifts, leaving but the tenth
part to the donatorie; not that they should enquire too curiously of all gifts
bestowed by the prince, the which might prove very dangerous.

Charles the seventh did limit by a law, what sum of money the king might
take yearly to dispose of at his pleasure: which sum being very little,
seemed in those days exceeding great. There is nothing more profitable for the
prince, nor necessary for the subjects, than to have the rewards which they
give, known and examined by their officers: for that princes shall always
maintain their fafauors, giving liberally, and the officers shall be subject to
the hatred and dislike of Bounty not fit in a poor prince.
Frauncis the first, leaving a goodly kingdom, flourishing in arms and laws,
and in all arts and sciences, to his successor, with seuenteen hundred thousand
crowns in treasure, and the quarter of March ready to be received; yet did he
not give away the hundred part in rewards in 32 years that he had reigned, as
his son Henry did in two: for he had scarce closed his eyes, when as the
confirmation of offices (which is due to the king at his first coming to the
crown) whereof an infinite mass of money was then made, was given to one horse
leech in court. And although that Frauncis the father gave pensions to Germans,
English, An infinite mass of money given to a woman.
Italians, Suisses, Albaneses, Spaniards, and Grisons; yet all his pensions,
besides the Cantons were but 13000 pounds starling a year at the most, as I
have seen by an extract out of the chamber of accounts, the which was made the
The bounty of great King Frauncis.
year that he dyed: and in the same extract there is but 42769 pounds, four
shillings starling, which he gave in pension to his subjects, princes of

We have entreated of two points of this chapter: first how a Commonweal
should gather together, and then how they shall employ: the last point is, what
reserve they shall make for any necessity, that they be not forced to begin
war Re^nation of treasure.
by borrowing, or subsidies; whereof the Romans were very careful: for
although they had continual wars until Augustus time, after the defeat of
Marc Anthony, yet had they never touched the treasure which grew of the
Hannibal had reduced them The treasure of the Romans called Sanctius ac^arium.
to extreme want; then was there found four hundred and fifty thousand
crowns in their treasury, the which was one of the chiefest means to save
their estate.

The emperor of Turkey observes this order carefully, for besides the treasury
of ordinary receipts, which is in the princes Seraigle, there is another in the
castle of seven towers at Constantinople, where the ancient treasure is
reserved, The Turks treas^.
the which they meddle not with, if the necessity be not very urgent. Our
Ancestors were accustomed in time of necessity, when the treasure was wasted
to have recourse to the kings forests, where there was an infinite number The
means how to keep treasure.
a great part of their money into thick brickes. It is also said, that Charles
the fifth king of France, had caused the great Heart in the palace at Paris to
be made after the same form that they should cast one all of gold, of the
treasure which he had gathered together. And the better to assure it against
thieves, the ancients did lay their treasure in temples, as the Greeks in the
temple of Apollo, Delphique, and Deliaque: the Romans in the temple of
Saturn and Opis: the ancient Gauls in hallowed Lakes: the Hebrews sometimes
in temples, sometimes in sepulchers: for we read that the high priest and king
of the Jews, Hircanus, found great treasures in David's sepulcher. But seeing
there Morocco having moulten a great quantity of gould in form of a bowl,
pierced through with a bar of iron, they did hang it on the top of the
pinnacle of the great Church at Marocco. The ancient Egyptians fearing to give
occasion to their neighbors and enemies to invade their estate, and make war
against them for their treasure (as they did to king Ezechias, having showed
his treasures to the ambassadors of the king of Assiria) employed it for the
most part Isaie 30.
in building of their Pyramides, beautifying of cities, bringing of rivers, and
Deuteronomy. 17.
to oppress his subjects, or the enemy to invade the citisens; inuiting the
prince thereby to be charitable to the poor and needy: yet a mean is to be
used.

No man in my opinion will allow of the insatiable covetousness of John 22
Pope of Rome, in whose coffers they found (he being dead) twenty three
millions of gold, as many have written; or of Sardanapalus, who left forty
millions of crowns; or of Cyrus, who left fifty millions; or of Tiberius
Caesar, who had gathered together seventy seven millions, the which his
successor wasted in Darius Ochus the last king of the Persians, in whose
treasury Alexander the great found fourscore millions of gold. We read in the
holy scripture that David left sixscore millions, the which is the greatest
treasure that was ever 22. Paralip. (...). 1. The greatest treasure that ever
was.
heard of: but there is some question touching the valuation of their tallent;
for they write that he had gathered together a hundred thousand tallents of
gold, and a thousand thousand tallents of silver, which sum, if it be
accounted by tallents of Attica, although they be small it will seem
wonderful: our interpreters of the Bible do falsely think them Attike
tallants. I find Siclum in the scriptures to be taken two ways, the which the
Greeks call Statera, and the Latins Talentum, one way it is a pound of six
ounces, as in the first book of Paralip the Samuel, the 24 chapter. If David's
treasure be numbered by the sicle or tallent of half an ounce, the sum will
not seem great; if it be referred to six ounces, it will comprehend fifty
thousand pound weight of gold, and ten times as much in silver: but if it be
valued by the Attike tallent, the wealth of the Romans never came nere it; as
we may see by an extract out of the treasury under the empire of Traian, at
which time it was at the greatest; for the whole sum of their treasure (the
which was kept in Egypt) came but to 74 thousand tallents, the which amounts
The treasure of the Romans.
to 44 millions, and four hundred thousand crowns; unless they had another
treasury at Rome, as it is likely, (although it appear not by the extract)

But our kings of France have not offended in this point against the laws of
God, by heaping up of too great treasures, and it is not to be feared that they
will hereafter break it: for they which say, that king Charles the fifth left
in his treasury eighteen millions of crowns, are much deceived, for he found
the coffers Henry king of Castill being expelled his realm, maintained and
succored the kings of Scotland, against the kings of England, and reigned but
17 years, and yet he did not levy for all charges above 43756 pounds starling
yearly, comprehending the reuenews of the crown lands: although that in his
time the ayds and custom of 8 shillings upon every fire were laid upon the
subjects: and his successor forty years after did levy but 45000 pounds
starling: and Charles the seventh, the year that he The reuenews of France
under Charles the 5, 6, 7, Lewis the 11, and Charles the 8.
died, received for all charges and reuenews, but 170000 pounds starling, as it
appears plainly in the chamber of accounts, and yet had he imposed the tax in
form of an ordinary impost, the which at that time came but to 1800 pounds:
and twenty years after when as Lewis the eleventh died, the whole receipt came
but to 470000 pounds, the which was reduced to 120000 pounds, at the request of
the Parliament, held at Tours at the coming of Charles the 8 unto the crown,
Diminution of half the change at the coming of Charles 8.
besides the reuenews of the crown which amounted yearly by estimation to
100000 pounds: so as the whole reuenews when as Charles the eight died, came
not to above 250000 pounds. The like request was made unto king Charles the
ninth, by a parliament held at Orleans, at his coming to the crown: but the
Lewis the eleventh, who having put the nobility from him and discharged the
gentlemen of his house, used his tailor for an herald at arms, his barbar for
an ambassador, and his Physician for chancellor, (as Antiochus king of Syria
did his physician Apolophanes, whom he made president of his counsel) and in
mockery of other kings, he ware a greasy hat, and very course cloth in his
apparel: and even in the chamber of The baseness of Lewis the eleventh in his
apparel.
accounts, there is set down in a note of expenses two shillings for a new
pair Lewis the twelfe, by suppression without any disbursement. But there were
some good husbands which gave them afterward to understand, that the
suppression of offices was a decrease of parties casual, whereby the number was
afterward much augmented: And Balley president of the accounts told the king
boldly and plainly, being at S. Maur desfosses, that the suppression of those
officers which had Anno 1566. 20 May.
only, they had paid above threescore thousand pounds starling: but he does
not say that it is like unto cold water which increases the fit to him that
has a burning Fever: for it is well known that the king or people pay wages
to most of these officers after ten or twenty for the hundred, which was the
principal cause of the suppression of subalternall offices by a law made by
Frauncis the second. Moreover they set not down the prerogatives which belong
to the officers of the chamber of accounts, that is to say, their ordinary
wages, their The right of the offices of the chamber of accounts.
of herings, their rights at Twelfetide, their rights of the stable of virtue,
and of white salt, besides paper, parchment, pens, counters, purses, wax
candles, red wax, penkniues, bodkins, scrapers and strings: they did not show
also that the other profits of offices came to much more than their wages: they
will not confess that whereas there be now seven chambers of accounts, there
was then but one; and whereas now there be two hundred officers or thereabouts
in the chamber of accounts at Paris, there Erection of the chamber of accounts.
was wont to be but one Treasorer of France President of the chamber, and ^oure
masters of accounts that were Clarks, by an erection that was made at Viuiers
in Brie in the year 1319, afterward they added four lay men, which sufficed
for all that were Martin Durant, Syndic or Procurator of that country, to
present a request unto the king to be discharged of all officers of receipt, An
offer made by the estates of* ^anguedoc, to king Henry the (...).
making offer to bring all the money that was to be levied upon the subject
freely into the kings cofers, without any charge either for officers wages, or
for carriage: Maximinus Lullier, Provost of merchants at Paris, and President
of the chamber of accounts, said in open Parliament at Blois, That of the crown
there came not eighteen pence clear into the kings co^ers: the which seems
incredible, yet he was held a man most expert in accounts. We must then
conclude, that the subject was much oppressed by the polling of officers, seeing
they made these offers: which we Henry, but it displeased the flatterers in
court, and the officers of the accounts, so as it was rejected, for the
frivolous difficulties they made which had interest therein, the which is not
here needful to rehearse, so as it was concluded that receivers and
treasorers were necessary. Seeing then that accomptants and masters of
accounts is a necessary evil (as Alexander Seuerus said) The ^ewer there are,
the better shall it be for the Commonweal; for the kings treasure will still
decrease when it passes through the hands of so many officers. These were the
complaints and expostulations which the estates of France made unto king
Charles the 6 in the year 1412, A mean to make deceivers true and just.
charge, besides infamy and the loss of his goods, the which was a wise
course to assure their treasure. But it is a strange thing and very absurd in
this realm, to see so many men give money to their master to pick his purse.
The Emperor of Turkey does otherwise, for he never sels office, and for so
great an Empire there are very few The order of the receipt in Turkey.
Treasorers: the Collectors (which they call Protogeres) give the money unto
the Subachis (which are as it were the Viconts of Normandy, who in old times
had the same charge) then they deliver it to the Sangiacs (who are as it were
governors of the country) who convey it unto the Bellerbeis, and they send in
safety unto the Defrerderlers, which are two generals of the Treasor, the one
in Asia, and the other in Europe, who deliver it to the great Comptroller, and
he gives it to Casmander Baschi, great Henry the second in September in the
year 1554 Charles the 9, he commands all vassals which hold directly of the
king, to do homage and fealty unto the Treasorers of France, the which would
much discontent an infinite number of Dukes, Earls, Barons, and great
personages, who would not for any thing kneel before a base fellow that had
bought his office. Thus much concerning treasure, and for that it consists in
coin of gold, silver, copper and buillon, it is necessary to write something
thereof.



CHAP. III.
LOoking well into the best grounds, and strongest supports of a Commonweal;
in my opinion, he must exactly understand this point, that will wisely settle
an estate, or reform the abuses: for that there is nothing that does more
trouble and afflict the poor people, than to falsify the Coins, and to alter
the course thereof: for both rich, and poor, every one in particular, and all
in general, receive Dangerous to a state to alter the coin.
it breeds so many inconveniences. The Coin may not be corrupted, no not
altered, without great prejudice to the Commonweal: for if money (which must
rule the price of all things) be mutable and uncertain, no man can make a true
estate of what he has, contracts and bargains shall be uncertain, charges,
taxes, wages, pensions, rents, interests, and vacations shall be doubtful,
fines also and amercements limited by the laws and customs shall be
changeable and uncertain: to conclude, the estate of the treasure and of many
affairs both public and private shall be in suspense: whereof the Edict made
by Gratidianus the Tribune at Rome is a good argument, who (contrary to the
opinion of his fellow Tribunes) set a certain price of a kind of Victoriatus,
upon a penalty, whereby he purchased so great glory to himself and his
posterity, as they did erect his statues in every street, and offered
frankincense and wax unto them. And Tully says, Neminem vnquam multitudint ob
id vnum fuisse cariorem, Never any man (for that cause only) was deerer to the
people. The Prince may not make any false money, no more than he may kill or
rob, neither can he alter the weight of his coin to the prejudice of his
subjects, and much less of strangers, which treat with him, and traffic with
his people, for that he is subject to the law of nations, unless he will lose
the name and maiesti^ of a king, and be termed a counterfetter of money: as
Dante the poet called Philip le Bell, for that he did first among Lewis Hutin
not to abate the goodness of his coins. And for this cause Peter the 4 king of
Arragon did confiscate the estate of the king of Maiorque and Minorque, whom he
pretended to be his vassal, for that he had abated the coin: and yet the The
prince cannot alter his coin.
kings of Arragon themselves did err in that point, so as pope Innocent the 3
did forbid them as his vassals not to use it: whereupon the kings of Arragon
coming to the crown does swear not to change the weight and price of their
money, which has been allowed. But it is not sufficient to make such
protestations, unless the value and weight of money be ordered as it ought, to
the end that neither prince nor subject may Tacitus, who defended upon loss of
life and Covnes should be simple without any mixture.
goods, to mingle gold with silver, nor silver with copper, nor copper with
tin or lead. But we may except from this law the mixture of copper with
tin, which makes Archimides is much deceived, seeking to find out what the
goldsmith had stolen out of that great crown of king Hieron, and not to deface
the fashion, (for as then they had no use of the touchstone) he took two lumps
or masses one of Archimides error in trial of metals.
again with water, he put the crown into it, the which cast forth less water
then the mass of silver, and more then that of gold, whereby he coniectured
that the goldsmith had stolen a fifth part: but his judgment was uncertain,
for he supposed the mixture or allaie to be of pure silver, when as the
goldsmith to make the gold more firm, and to give it the better luster, makes
it most commonly of copper, being also of less charge, the which is much
lighter then silver, which makes the gold look paler; and so by consequence
copper has a greater body then silver in a mass of an equal weight, and
differs as much as thirteen do from eleven: and if the allaie or mixture were
of Francis the first published in the year 1511: yet notwithstanding all good
orders they make work at twenty, yea oftentimes at nineteen Carrats, so
metal, and such silver is called in this realm, the kings silver, in the
which the 24 part

And to the end the just proportion of gold to silver, observed in all Europe
and neighbor nations, (of twelve for one, or thereabouts) may be also kept in
the weight of money: it is needful to coin money of gold and silver of the
same weight of sixteen, two and thirty, and threescore and four pieces to the
Mark, without any alteration either in raising or abating; to avoid on the one
side the difficulty of stamping it, and on the other side the brittlenesse of
fine gold and silver, if the coin were lighter than one denier. Whereas on the
other side also, if they make any come weighing above Heliogabulus caused to be
made: and that which was coined with the stamp of Constantinople, weighing a
mark of gold, whereof the emperor Tiberius presented fistie to our king
Childeric. By which means neither chaungers, nor merchants, nor goldsmiths,
shall ever be able to deceive the common people, which is ignorant of the
bounty and weight: for they shall be always forced to give twelve pieces of
silver for one of gold; and every one of the pieces of silver, shall weigh as
much as the piece of gold of the same mark: as Henry the second) it is
needful that the stampes be diverse, and not alike as those of Henry the
second, made in the year 1551; and by reason of the payment of rents,
amercements, and the lords rights, according to the customs and ordinances;
the Soulz shall be of three Deniers weight of the kings silver (as it is said)
and of sixty three to the Mark: so four shall be worth a Liver, as it has
gone heretofore, the which is the iustest price that can be given: and every
piece may be divided into three, so as every one shall weigh a Denier, and
shall go for four small Deniers or Pence, and shall be called a common
Denier, to the end the Soulz may always be worth twelve Deniers: and that the
complaints of the lords for their rents and rights, being usually paid in
blanch, or copper Lewis* that is, sixty four to a Mark of the kings silver.
And as for other growing out of annuities, purchased for money, the rent must
be paid according to the value of the Soulz which it held at that time, when as
the rent was purchased; the which was but four Deniers an hundred years
since, and is now but the third part of the ancient Soulz: the which it will
be needful to put in use. Such was the Dram, or Groat of silver, used
throughout all Greece, which was the eight part of the ounce, which we call a
Gros, and of the same weight with the Soulz which Saint Lewis caused to be
coined, the which were called Gros Tournois, or of Tours, and Soulz Tournois:
By the which Soulz Tournois, or of Tours, all ancient contracts are ordered,
and many treaties Tacitus said, and of the Grecians, as we read in Pollux. For
the Dram, or Groat, is of the same weight with the Soulz Tournois. The
Venetians have followed the ancients, and have made the ounce of eight Groats,
or Drachmaes, and the Dram of 24 Deniers, and the Denier of two Halfepence,
or twenty four grains: as we use in France, from which order we may not
stray, as being most ancient in all Greece, and the Oriental regions.

True it is, that the ancient Romans having their ounce equal with the
Greeks, that is to say, of 576 grains, they divided it into seven Deniers of
their money, and their Denier was in value an Atticque Dram, or groat, and
three seven parts more. Wherein Dram Attica seven pence starling.
Buda was deceived, saying, That there were eight Deniers in the ounce, and
that the Romans Denier, or Penny, was equal with the Attique Dram, and the
Roman pound like unto the Attique Mine; being most certain that the Roman
pound had but twelve ounces, and the Greek Mine sixteen ounces, according to
the merchants pound weight within this realm: the which George Agricola has
well observed by the calcull of Pliny, Appian, Suetonius, and Celsus. But at
this day it is strange to see the great diversity of pounds and ounces in all
nations, nay in one and the same kingdom coin a third kind of money of copper,
without any other mixture, as they have begun, Malestroit: the which the
Chauncelour of England caused to be translated in the year 1569, hoping to
redress it. But it were far more expedient, to have no other coin but of
gold and silver, if it were possible to coin any money less than the The
French copy says 8000.
pieces, which they called Andegauenses: for that Rene duke of Aniou and of
Lorraine caused them to be coined, two hundred whereof make but sixpence; and
forty, one Soulz of our base money: and yet they are of reasonable fine
silver. But making it but half so little, it would be more firm, and of the
same hieght that I have spoken, and they may be cut and stamped at one instant.
For the price of copper being uncertain in all places, it is not fit to make
money of, the which must always be kept as certain as may be: besides, there
is no metal so subject to rust, the which does consume both the stamp and
substance: and contrariwise neither gold nor silver do ever rust. And as for
the price, we read, that during the Punike wars, the pound of silver was
worth Pliny says) which was after the rate of eight hundred ninety six
pounds of copper, for one pound weight of silver, the pound weighing twelve
ounces. Afterward the least coin, which was a pound of copper, was half
abated by the law Papiria, so as the price of copper was double that which it
was Fest. lib. 17. in verb. sestertius.
before: and when as silver came in great abundance, it was reduced to a
fourth, remaining in the same value, which was 224 pound of copper for a pound
of silver: the which is near the estimation of copper in this realm, whereas
one hundred pounds,

Some one may object, That the abundance of silver may also cause an abatement
of the price, as we read in Titus Liuius, that by the treaty made betwixt the
Aetolians and Romans, it was said, That the Aetolians should pay for ten pounds
of silver one pound of gold: and yet by a law made by Constantine, the pound of
gold is esteemed at 41 pound: for he would have them pay five Soulz of gold for
one pound of silver, making seventy two Soulz of gold in a pound; so as five
Soulz is just the fourteenth part of a pound, and two fifts more: and now the
price is twelve for one, or little less. 18. lib. 10. sh.
Mark of pure gold was esteemed one hundred eighty five Livers; and the 31.
sh. 6. d. starling.
Mark of silver fifteen Livers fifteen Soulz Tournois: so as for one Mark
of pure gold unwrought, they must have eleven Marks, five ounces, twenty
three Deniers, and five grains, of the kings silver unwrought. Toward the
North, where there are many mines of silver, and few of gold, gold is somewhat
deerer. The pope of Rome more greedy of gold than of silver, did value the
Mark of gold at 12 Marks and four fifts of silver: the which is at this
present the price of gold and silver, and was almost two thousand five hundred
years since. For we read in Herodotus, that the pound of gold was valued at
thirteen pounds of silver: and the Hebrews in Stater Doricus of the weight of
an ounce, was valued at a pound of silver, as Julius Pellux says. And in
Augustus his time, the king of the Indians, had the same estimation of gold to
silver, the which was then brought to Rome: and therefore he commended the
justice of the Romans; as we read in Plini^. Whereby we may conjecture, that
the price of these two metals holds in a manner throughout all Europe, after
the ancient estimation. But the value of gold was raised under the last
emperors, by reason of the spoil thereof Nero his great palace all guilt, the
which had galleries of one thousand paces long: and after him Vespasian, who
employed A wonderful mass to guild the Capitol,
seven millions and two hundred thousand crowns, to guild the Capitol. And
Agrippa covered all the temple Pantheon with copper, and then guilt it, to
keep it from rusting. And oftentimes silver is guilt, although of it self it
will never take rust. Doubtless we may well allow the holy ornaments to be of
gold, for that the law commands it: but to have vessels of gold, beds, books,
yea and their bridles guilt, argues the madness of frantike men: the which if
the prince does not punish very severely, the price of gold must of necessity
rise: whereof our nation did vehemently complain unto the prince, at the
estates held at Blois. Moreover silver having no hold, is little employed
Philip the Fair, who did impair the blanched money the one half, in the
year 1300, adding as much copper unto it, as there was silver: a while after
it was brought 8. lib. starling.
Livers Tournois, and had 1600 pieces for a Mark of copper. True it is, that
in the same year that Charles the seventh recovered his crown which had been
taken from him, he caused a new coin to be made in the month of October, the
which was strong and good, so as the Mark of silver was set at eight 16. (...).
Livers: but in the year 1453, ^e caused Soulzes to be coined of five Deniers
of Aloie, and since they have still decreased: so as king Francis the first, in
the year 1540, caused some to be coined of three Deniers of sixteen grains:
king Henry at three Deniers and twelve grains: so Charles the ninth brought it
to three Deniers, the estimation still continuing alike: for that the price of
the crown did arise. And in the year 1577, under king Henry the third, they
decrease almost half in weight, and a fourth part in goodness, from those of
Francis the first. Other princes have done no better; for the Crutzer of
Germany, which in old time was silver at eleven Deniers and four grains, is
now at four Deniers and sixteen grains: the Soulz of Wirtzburg, and the
Reichs groschem at six Deniers, that is half silver, and half copper. The
Scheslind, the Rape, the Denier of Strausbourg, at four Deniers and twelve
grains: the Rapephening at four Deniers three grains, and the Florines of
silver at eleven Deniers four grains: as also the pieces be of five and of A
Liver is two shillings starling
and the Liver of Paris, the which are all different, as we may yet see it in
the taxes of the popes chamber. And in Spain the Liver or pound of Barcellona,
Toledo, Naples, Palermo, and Mess^na, is an imaginary coin; it was in old
time the same Solidus, have within these fifty years set the Sun upon it,
tearming it erroneously Aureum Solarem: but the common people retaining their
old speech, call it yet the Crown Sold, of Solidus; the which in old time
weighted four deniers, as the Angel. But since princes by little and little,
and by grain and grain, have brought it to three deniers, the which is the
old Crown. And in the time of king John the old Crown being diminished by
little and little, as by the ancient Crown Sold of three grains, they did
coin Crowns of two deniers and twenty grains weight, of the same standard
with the ancient, the which they called Francs, on foot, and on horseback
(for then they called all French men Francs, as yet in all the East all the
nations of the West are called Franques) at which time the Crown of Burgongne,
Charles the eight, that the Franc Crown was diminished six grains in weight,
and three quarters of a Carat in finenesse: for the old Crowns were of twenty
three and three quarters of a Carat, and the Crowns with the Crown at twenty
three Carats. Afterward king Francis the first correcting somewhat the Crown
with a Crown, caused the Crown Sold to be coined at two deniers and sixteen
grains, and of the same goodness with the other, having an eight part of
Aloie put to it: the which continued unto king Henry, who added four grains
of weight unto it: and by Charles the ninth it was diminished five grains, in
the year 1561. But the old Crowns, or Ducats of Venice, Genes, Florence,
Sienna, Castile, Charles the fifth impaired the fioenesse of the Crowns of
Spain, of one Carat and three quarters, and three grains in weight, causing
them to be coined at twenty two Carats, and two deniers fifteen grains of
weight. The Crowns of Castile, Valencia, and Arragon, the which they call
Pistolets, giving an ill example to other princes to do the like: as the
princes of Italy did, who have caused some to be made at twenty two Carats
and under, weighing two deniers and sixteen grains, as be the Crowns of Rome,
Luques, Bologne, Salusses, Genes, Sienna, Sicile, Milan, Ancona, Mantoue,
Ferrara, Florence, and the new Crowns of Venice. True it is, that Pope Paul
the third, began to make Alexander Farneze legate and the Popes nephew, are
baser, and five deniers lighter in weight; the which brings an infinite loss to
the subject, and benefit to counterfeit coyners, myntmen, and merchants, which
draw the good money out of the country, and coin baser in another place. The
which is more ordinary in silver coin of high value, and above eleven deniers
pure, as the Royals of Castile, which hold all eleven deniers three grains of
pure silver: out of the which other princes heretofore have gained very much:
for being converted into French Testons out of ten 4. sh. 2. d. ob.
soulz and eleven deniers tournois: and for those of Lucerne, Soleure, and
Vnderuall, were but of nine deniers and eighteen grains, which is in the
whole mark 23 grains of pure silver less then those of France, the which
were worth 25 soulz tournois. And as for the weight, those of France are at the
least of 25 testons, and five eight parts of a teston to the mark, so as the
testons of Soleure, are lighter in weight three eight parts of a teston in the
mark, the which was worth four soulz three deniers tournois. And Billon.
fourteen livers seventeen soulz four deniers tournois, the mark of pure
silver, and the testons of France for that they were above ten deniers of fine
silver were valued for silver of high aloye, the which are worth after the same
proportion fifteen livers thirteen soulz tournois, the mark of fine silver;
and by reason of the difference of the bounty of the silver the said testons
were less then those of France 41 soulz eleven deniers tournois in the mark,
abating for every piece of the said testons one soulz eleven deniers. Those of
Berne for that they were of nine deniers twenty grains of 25. Millions of
Livers.
which are no more to be found, for that the refiners and goldsmiths found
profit in them, so as they which have great store of gold and silver plate, can
make more use of it* for having bought it dear from the goldsmiths, they are
loath to sell it with so great loss: and even king Charles the 9 lost much,
having exchanged his plate into coin, whereas before the standard of money
coined was equal with that of the goldsmiths, so as they could lose nothing in
plate but the fashion, the which continues yet as a proverb, Billon.
shall be also banished the realm: but so long as the Prince or Commonweal
shall coin base money, there is no hope that strangers subjects will ever
cease to counterfeit in private, or to receive all strange coins. There is also
another benefit both to the general and particular, which grows (as I have
said) by the defense of the mixture of metals, whereby they shall avoid
hereafter the loss of silver, the which is accounted for nothing in gold of 14
Carats and upward, and is lost for the charges of the refining, Esc^arcetes,
and ^blages.
the officers were paid their wages; for the abolishing whereof, Henry the 2
king of France ordained, that they should be paid by the receivers of the same
places: which decree although it were holy and good, yet was it afterward
disanulled by king Charles the 9, for that the chamber of accounts at Paris
gave the king to understand they must have more) in which place all the
refiners shall work* with a prohibition Juno only where they did coin three
sorts of money pure and simple, gold, silver, and copper, and there had three
masters of the mint, who caused it to be resined and stamped publicly in view
of all the world. And to the end that no man should be abused in the price of
the coins, there was also a place appointed where to take the essay or trial
of money, at the request of Marius Gratidianus. We read also that in this
realm by a law made by Charlemaigne, it was Philip the fair, Charles his
son, and king John had established many mints in this realm, and many
masters, provost and other officers in every mint, abuses have also multiplied.
But here some one may object, that the Persians, Greeks and Romans did coin
money of pure gold, silver and copper at the highest value that could be, and
yet did they falsify it, as we read in Demosthenes oration against
Timocrates. I answer, that it is impossible to purge the Commonweal clean of
these people, but for a thousand that are now you shall not then find ten, the
value of gold and silver being known to every Marc Anthony did, who coined
silver that was very base, it will be sooner rejected, besides the blame he
shall receive of all men, and the hazard of the rebellion of his subjects, the
which was great at such time as Philip the fair imbased the money. Whatsoever
the reasons be, it is most certain there were never fewer coyners of
counterfeit money than in the Romans time, when as they had no money either of
gold or silver but of a high standard; and therefore Liuius Drusus the Tribune
was blamed, for that he had presented a request unto the people to have an
eight part of copper mingled with the silver money, or as the mintmen say, they
should coin money of ten deniers and twelve grains fine: which shows that
even in those Vespasian, where there wants but the 32 part of a Carat but it
had been 24 Carats; the which is the purest and finest gold that can be seen.
But it suffices for the reasons that I have alleged, that the gold be of 23
Carats, and the silver at eleven Deniers and twelve grains pure. And let them
not excuse themselves that they cannot command the fire, and therefore they
demand a fourth or an eight part of alaie: the which is the cause of many
abuses. Yet some may say that it is more expedient to coin dobles and deniers
of baser silver, to avoid the heaviness of copper money. I say, that if it be
James Pinatel written to king Henry the 2, in the which are these words: Sir, I
thought good to advertise you that within these six months they have coined
in one of your mints, soulzes that are too base by four shillings in weight
upon every mark, and four soulz in the goodness of the metal: when i^ shall
please your Majesty I will show you the work, and I will acquaint you with
the loss which Pinatel (having gotten under hand a commission from the
generals of the mint, in the year 1552) caused Dobles and Deniers to be coined
at Villeneufue of Auignon, and at Villefranche of Rouergue, which Charles the
9, That he might make a great proffit of his mints for the ease of his people:
and in truth by his computation it was found that every mark of pure gold
wrought would yield unto the king sixteen shillings starling, whereas he
received but two shillings six pence, and four deniers: and for the mark of
silver wrought the king should get four shillings, whereas now he gained but
sixteen deniers being wrought in testons. He advised to coin money of the
kings silver of twelve soulz tournois current, and of thirty pieces to the
mark, of the weight of six deniers nine grains, the half and the quarters
after the rate; and of gold coins of 24 Carat, and one Carat of alaie, of
thirty pieces to the mark, and of the same weight with the silver of six
livers tournois. He would also have Billon.
fine, rating the mark at fourteen 28. sh. starling.
livers tournois. This was his advice, but it was rejected as it deserved, for
it is a very ridiculous thing to think that the king can draw so great a
profit from his mints, and yet ease his people, if that be true which Plato
says, That no man gains but another loses: and the loss by an inevitable
necessity fell upon the subject, seeing the stranger felt not of it. It is
very necessary that some great prince should mediate that by his ambassadors
with other princes, to the end that all by a general consent should forbid the
coining of base money, setting the value of gold and silver as it has been
formerlie said, and using the mark at eight gros or should not be subject to
bow and break, and the mark would continue for ever, we Francis de Foix that
great Archimedes of our age, who first discovered the true proportion of
metalls in weight and quantity. We will hold the same opinion of silver, which
has a greater mass than gold in an equal weight, and that gold is heavier
than silver in an equal mass, once more and four five parts, which is 1551
in comparison of 998, or of nine to five: and of copper to silver, as of eleven
to thirteen, or precisely, as 729 to 998, which approach nearer in weight and
substance than the rest, Pliny calls it Feoruminatio, and we, brazing or
soldring, the which the counterfetters of his time did use. The Seigneur of
Villemor, Commissarie of the wars, did show me an ancient medall of iron
covered with silver, yet the weight and the bigness does easily discover the
falsehood, if they look narrowly into it, for that silver is heavier than iron
in an equal mass, or less in quantity being of equal weight, as much as is
from four to three, or precisely from 998, to 634. And as for gold, it is
impossible that this ferrumination and soldring can any thing avail coyners,
seeing that gold is less of body than iron in an equal weight, or more
heavy in an equal mass, as much as is from six to nine, or of 1556 to 634.
It is not to be feared that quicksiluer can falsify these two metals,
although it approaches as near to gold in weight as three to four, or 1558 to
thirty marks of clippings upon a hundred marks of substance, whereas there is
Augustus time, the which is a little more then a single royal of Spain. And
if the alterations and changes which are made suddenly be hurtful and
pernicious, they may proceed by little and little, causing money to be coined
as I have said. Upon these difficulties (being deputed for the Province of
Vermandois, at a Parliament held at Blois) I was called with the first
President and three Generals of the mint, and Marcel Superintendent Billon.
to drink a troublesome potion to cure him. I confess that silver mixed will
come but to a moitie, being purified to eleven deniers, twelve grains; but it
will continue for ever if the standard be once settled as I have said, if it be
not done the Commonweal must needs come to ruin.

CHAP. IIII.
We have hitherto in my opinion discou^sed at large of all the parts of a
Commonweal, it remains for a conclusion to know the commodities and
discommodities of every kind of State, and then to make choice of the best, the
which was necessary to reserve unto the end, after that we had Cicero call it:
yet is it not so bad as Anarchia, where there is no form of a Commonweal,
Reasons for a Popular estate.
persons, and which reduces their civil constitutions to the laws of nature:
for even as nature has not distributed riches, estates and honors more to one
than to another, so a popular estate tends to that end, to make all men equal,
the which cannot be done, but by imparting riches, honors and justice equally
to al men without privilege or prerogative whatsoever; as Licurgus did, having
changed the royal estate into a popular, Reasons against a Popular estate.
estate; they have a goodly show, but in effect they are like unto spiders
webs, the which are very subtle and fine, but have no great force: for first
of all, there was never Commonweal where this equality of goods and honors
was observed, as we have showed before concerning goods; and as for honors,
they should do therein contrary to the law of nature, which has made some
more judicious and more ingenious than declared elsewhere. Whereof amongst many
others, Xenophon is a worthy witness: Xenophon (who was one of the greatest
captains of his age, and who then carried away the prize to have happily
joined the mannaging of affairs with arms and Philosophy) has given such a
censure of his Commonweal, which was the most popular, and amongst the popular
the most esteemed, and best ordered; or to speak more properly, the least
vicious (as Plutarch says;) What judgment would he have given of other
Democraties, and Ochlocraties? Wherein Machiauel is much deceived, to say, That
a Popular estate is the best: and yet forgetting his first opinion, in anther
place he said, That the only means to restore Plato, we shall find that he
has blamed a Popular estate, tearming it, A Fair where every thing is to be
sold. We have the like opinion of Aristotle, saying, That neither Popular nor
Aristocraticall A Popular estate condemned of many great men.
estate is good, using the authority of Homer, (...). And the Orator Maximus
Tirius holds, That a Democraty is pernicious, blaming for this cause the estate
of the Athenians, Syracusians, Carthagineans and Ephesians: for it is
impossible (says Seneca) that he shall please the people, that honors virtue.
And therefore Phocion (one of the wisest, and most virtuous men that ever was)
was always opposite to the people of Athens, and the people to him: and as on a
certain day the Athenians allowed of his counsel, he turned to his
companions, saying, Quid malu^ mihi accidit, vt populi sensus cum meis
congruerent, What ill have I done, that the people concur with me in opinion?
And how can a multitude, that is to say, a Beast with many heads, without
judgment, or reason, give any good council? To ask council of a multitude (as
they did in oldtimes in Popular Commonweals) is to seek for wisdom of a mad
man. The which Anacharsis seeing, and that the magistrates and ancients
delivered their opinions in open assembly, and then the people concluded; he
said, That in Athens wise men propounded, and fools disposed. And admit one
might draw a good resolution from a Caesar's Consulship, who to prevail in his
attempts (having terrified Bibulus his companion, and drawn his sword upon
him) he Solon, and of the twelve tables, the people must be assembeld three
times, before they should allow of any law that was published. Oftentimes it
chanced, that the flying of a bird on the right hand, or the crying of a rat,
or the falling sickness (it may be of some drunken man) hindered the assembly;
or at the least protestation of some stamering sooth-sayer, or the opposition
Cicero and Cato himself complained very much, for the power and favor of
competitors (which were always many in number) to have offices, and being
enemies one to another, hindered the assembly of the people, or troubled it
being assembled; and the magistrates which were in office supported them, to
continue their power: so as sometimes a whole year was spent without the
creation of a new magistrate: as it happened when as Pompey the Great was chosen
Consul alone. And therefore the Grisons, who maintain a Popular estate,
assemble the people but every two years at Coire, for the creating of new
magistrates, and The Grisons assembled every two years.
the making of new laws. For there is nothing more dangerous, nor more
contrary to a Popular estate, than to continue magistrates long in their
office. What is more absurd, Philip the first, king of Macedon, having invaded
and spoiled the confines of Attica, there was not any magistrate that durst
assemble the estates, the people came to the place of assemblies uncalled, A
multitude is amazed in danger.
whereas they found no man that durst speak unto them, as Demosthenes writes.
The Clement the seventh, all the people were so amazed, as they knew not what to
resolve: For by the laws of Florence, all the citisens should assemble before
the Town house, to resolve upon the articles propounded by the chief
magistrate, and then they were quite daunted. It is the weakness of a multitude
(says Titus Liuius) to wax proud, and to insult with all licentiousness in
prosperity, and to be dejected and amazed with any adversity. And how is it
possible that the sovereign majesty of an estate shall be maintained by a
multitude, guided by a magistrate, who oftentimes must keep them in awe by
severity, Et in qua regenda plus poena, quam obsequium valet (said Titus
Liuius) In the government whereof punishment more than obedience preuailes. So
Phocion, seeing that the Athenians would not give him audience, he cried out, O
fustuarium Corcyraeum, quou^s talento pretio sius, O scourge of Corfu, more A
multitude cannot maintain^ a majesty.
precious than any talent: Which shows the majesty does perish and decay in a
multitude, whereon the chief ground of a Commonweal consists. But passing on,
all men that have written of estates, do hold, That the chief end of all
Commonweales, is to flourish in piety, justice, valor, honor, and virtue; by
the which humane society is preserved. But a Popular estate has been always
opposite, and an enemy to all good men. For the preservation of a Popular
estate (if we shall believe Xenophon) is to advance the most vicious and
unworthy men to offices and dignities. And if the people should be so ill
advised, as to give offices of honor unto virtuous men, they loose their The
end of Popular estates, is to banish virtue.
power: for that good men would favor none but the good, which are always
fewer in number: and the wicked and vicious (which is the greatest part of the
people) should be excluded from all honor, and by little and little banished:
so as in the end wise men should seize upon the estate, and take that from the
people. The Athenians therefore (said Xenophon) gave audience to the most
wicked, knowing well, that they would speak pleasing things, and profitable to
the vicious, as most of the people be. I cannot Xenophon gives a true judgment
of a Popular estate.
(said Xenophon) but blame the Athenians, to have chosen the most vicious form
of a Commonweal: but having chosen it, I do much esteem them they do so
carefully maintain it, in rejecting, chasing away, and banishing the noble,
wise, and virtuous; Xenophons opinion, touching the Commonweal of Athens,
Marcellus the lawyer has of a strumpet, saying, That she has not well done
to have abandoned her honor; but having lo^t all modesty, it was not ill
done, to get what she could by her trade. So Xenophon concludes, That a Popular
estate is nothing worth, but to maintain it so being once settled, they must
banish all honor and virtue: that is to say, the greatest tyranny is not so
dangerous, as a Popular estate thus governed.

But there is yet one plague more capital in Popular estates, the which is,
Impunitie Impunitie of vice in a Popular estate.
to the wicked, so as they be citisens, that is to say, petty kings: and even
in the Popular Ne ciuis quisquam quantumcumque scelus sieve in deos, sieve in
homines admiserit, capite feriatur, That no citisen should die the death, what
offense soever he had committed either against the gods, or men. Therefore
Verres (omitting the rest) being accused and condemned of theft, and of a
hundred thousand concussions, extortions, and false judgments; was thought to
be severely punished, for that he was enjoined to depart out of Rome: and why,
for that Popular states would have their liberty defended with the lenity of
laws, and not with the sharpness of punishments. And yet they banished
Ruti^ius, Metellus, Coriolanus, the two Scipions, brethren, and Tully: as in
Ephesus they banished the virtuous Hermodorus: in Athens they expelled
Aristides the just, Themistocles The most virtuous are banished, and ^he wicked
escape, in a Popular estate.
died in exile, Miltiodes in prison, Socrates by poison. And although that
Phocion the most just and virtuous man of his age, had been chosen General
forty and five times, without any reproach or blame, yet (without any
accusation or information against him or his companions) a base pleader, of the
scumme of the people, steps up before the multitude, and demands, If they
would have Phocion and his companions put to death: wherewith all in general
did arise up, and holding up their hands, condemned him, not excluding any
slave, woman, nor stranger from this condemnation, for the which many ware
garlands of flowers. Which Phocion hearing, said, Me quidam a vobis damnari
facile patior: sed cur isti? For my part, I am contented to be condemned by
you: but why these men? To whom the people being mad, answered, Quoniam tibi
sunt amici. Neither was the fury of this mad people pacified, until they were
all without sentence, accusation, or cause, put to death. Neither is there any
hope, if a multitude begin once to insult over the good, that either shame or
reason shall reclaim them from their fury and madness. Yet notwithstanding
the wicked do commonly escape the peoples hands: which Demosthenes seeing, and
that they had absolved Antipaphon, a most capital offender, he proceeded, and
caused him to be condemned, and afterward put to death by a decree of the
Areopagits, little regarding the people, Mar^us durst carry bushels of silver
into the assemblies at Rome, to purchase the peoples voices: the like we read
of Pompey. It is no marvel then if we read of infinite corruptions and
concussions in Rome: but it was more foul and odious in Athens, whereas when
Stratocles and Damoclides entered into their offices, they did openly brag* That
they went to a golden harvest. If offices, laws, justice, and honors, were so
unworthily sold in these great Commonweales, being enriched with the spoils of
other people; what shall we judge of Popular Popular estates exceed in all
licentiousness.
who having expelled their prince Theagines, established a Popular estate so
licentious, as it was lawful for the poor to go and spoil the rich, as it
is in Plato. Even so we read, that the Swissers did long after they had
expelled the nobility. If they would have any one spoiled by the multitude,
they did set the picture of a man with boughs under him at his door, and then
was he presently stripped of all that he had, were he the richest or most
innocent citisen. And they which do so highly commend the Popular estate of
the Romans, should rather have extolled the worthy deeds of noble and valiant
men, than the cities form: they should set before their eyes the seditions and
civil Saturnine the Tribune, with a rabble of rascals, slaves, and artisans,
armed with staves and stones, to come into the open assembly of the people, and
to expel the honester party, and kill him that was chosen Consul by the
peoples suffrages. The which the Tribunes alone did not, being enraged against
the Consuls, but even the Consuls among themselves. How many murders of
citisens have been seen in the midst of the city, in the field of Mars, in
the court, in the temples of their gods, yea in Jupiters capitol, Tiberius and
Caius Gracehus, Drusus, Saturninus, and Sulpitius, Cassius made a proclamation,
That all the Latins, and Heniques, which had no houses within Rome, should
depart the city. Virginius his companion made a decree to the contrary, not
so much to cross his companions authority, but to set the citisens and
strangers together by the ears in the midst of the city. What was more
unworthy, or more contrary to civil society, than to see a citisen under an
innocent gown, to come armed to the assembly, to sue for offices, as if they
went to war, and oftentimes the contrary factions fell to blows. And Tully
says, Lapidationes in foro saepe vidi^us, non saepe* sed tamen nimis saepe
gladios, We have oftentimes seen stones cast in the assembly of the estates,
and swords drawn, not so often, but yet too often. And a little after,
Meministis (inquit) corporibus ciuium Tiberim compleri: cloacas refarciri, e
foro spongijs effundi sanguinem, You remember (said he) that the river of Tibe^
has been filled with the bodies of citisens, that the common priuies have been
stuffed full, and the blood sucked up in the market place with sponges. To
conclude, if we shall rip up all the Popular estates that ever were, we shall
find, that either they have had war always with the enemy, or within the
state: or else that they have been governed in show by the people; but in
effect by some of the citisens, or by the wisest among them, who held the place
of a prince and monarch. Whilst that the Commonweal of Athens did flourish,
it was governed by the Senate of the Areopagits: and when as their power and
authority was restrained, Pericles (says Thucidides) was a very Monarch,
although in show it were Popular. Peter Soderin (in an Oration he made unto
the people of Florence, to change the estate) said, That in the time of
Laurence de Medius, the Commonweal Pericles and Lau* rence de Medicis,
Monarchs of Athens, and Florence.
in show was Popular, but in effect a mere Tyranny, for that Laurence governed
all alone: but he does not say, that it was never more flourishing, and that
before they were never ten years free from seditions, and the most bloody
factions that ever were. In like sort the Popular estate of the Romans, which
had been afflicted with so many foreign and intestine wars, was it not
maintained and flourished both in arms, and laws, by the Senate, and was not
the authority thereof supported, by Menenius Agrippa, Furius Camillus,
Papirius Cursor, Fabius Maximus, Scipio, Cato, Scaurus, Pompey, and diverse
others? who maintained the beauty of the Senate, and restrained the people,
keeping Pelopidas, and Epaminondas, were as it were lords of the Popular estate
of the Thebans, after whose death the people found presently, that they had
lost their chief pilots: as it happened in the like case unto the Athenians,
after the death of Pericles, Then (said Plutarch) the people did A Popular
estate is preserved by a few wisemen.
float up and down, like a ship without a helm: and as every one would
govern and command, some to set sail, others to go to harbrough, a storm
came (says Polybius) and the ship perished. And although the Athenians, after
they had lost the soueraignrie of Greece, governed their city and territory
popularly, yet Demosthenes spoke plainly, and openly before the people, That
the estate of Athens was under the power of Orators and Pleaders, of whom the
captains depended, who had at the least three Corruptions common in Popula^
estates.
(says Plutarch) in all Popular estates. Liuius writes thus of the Popular
estates of the Tarentines, In potestate Iuniorum plebem, in manu plebis, rem
Tarentinam esse, The estate of Tarentum was in the peoples hands, and the
people in the power of the younger sort. And a little before the declining of
the Popular estate of Rome, Crassus, Caesar, and Pompey, whom they called a
triple head, governed and held all the Senate and people in their power and
subjection: but two of them being slain, the third became an absolute Lord.
Whereby we may gather, that a Popular command cannot subsist without a wise
pilat and governor, and leaving it to the most sufficient, in the end they make
themselves masters, and the people serves but for a mask.

But some one will say, Do we not see that the Cantons of the Swissers have
settled a The reasons why the Swissers* maintain their Popular estate.
goodly Popular estate, and have continued their government above three hundred
and fifty years, and by this means have not only preserved themselves from
tyranny, but have also chased away tyrants their neighbors? The answer
hereunto is double: First, the situation of the country, and the disposition
of the people agrees best with a Popular estate. Secondly, the most seditious,
and mutinous, go to the service of other foreign princes: and the rest of the
common people being more mild and tractable, are easily kept in awe. Moreover
all the heads of the Cantons and Popular states, having entered into an
offensive and defensive league, are strictly tied and united together; like
unto those that go by night, or that are in a slipperie or dangerous way,
holding Jews the 11 (being then but Daulphin) had the victory: then all the
nobility of the country, which had followed him, were banished, and the rest
retired themselves willingly, after the treaty of the ten Cantons, made in the
year 1510, and at the change of religion in the year 1529: so as there
remains but a very few at Berne and Zurich, whereas the estate is
Aristocraticall. And not only the Cantons, but also those Plato did wish, That
wives and children should be common to all, to the end that no man might say,
This is mine, or, That is thine: for those words of Meum, and Tuum (said he)
were the breeders of discord, and the ruin of states. By the which there will
grow many absurdities: for in so doing, a city shall be ruined, and become a
household (as Aristotle Bias.
lawmaker, being importuned by some one, to make his country a Popular estate:
Make it (says he) in thine own house. And if they say, That it is a goodly
thing so to unite citisens and a city, as to make one household of it, they
must then take away the plurality of heads and commanders, which are in a
Popular estate, to make a Monarch, as the true fathers of a family; and to cut
off this equality of goods, power, honor, and commandment, which they seek
to make in a Popular estate: for that it is incompatible in a family. But the
greatest inconvenience is, that in taking away these words of Mine, and Thine,
they ruin Taking away the propriety of goods, we overthrow a Commonweal.
every man that which is his own, and to forbid theft; as it is commanded by
the word of God, who will have every man to enjoy the propriety of his own
goods: and we may not say, that nature has made all things common, for the law
of the mother is not contrary to the commandment of the father (as Solomon
said) figuring by an Allegory the commandments of God, and the law of
nature. But the true popular liberty consists in nothing else, but in the
enjoying of our private goods sincerely, without fear to be wronged, in honor,
life, wife or family, the which even thieves and robbers labor to keep. And
as for the power of command, which popular men would make equal, there is
less reason than in goods: for discretion and wisdom is Wisdom is not
equ^ll in all men, to impart offices equally.
most sufficient magistrates, to command, and to administer justice. Moreover,
whereas there is no form of sovereignty, nor of a Commonweal, yet a^e the
people constrained to choose a magistrate or captain to command them, and to
do justice: as in the country of Gusula in Affrike, where there is neither
king, nor any form of a Commonweal, the people on their Fair day choose a
captain to do justice, and to assure the course of traffic. And on the
frontiers of the kingdom of Fez, the inhabitants of the mountain of Magnan
(who in like sort have no form of a Commonweal) if they see any stranger to
pass by, which seems to excel the rest in wisdom, him they stay by force,
to administer justice unto them. It is a maxim in Popular states, A rule in
Popular states.
That when as the persons are equal which are to undergo a charge, to cast
lots: and if one exceeds another, then they choose the most sufficient. And who
does not see the great difference among men, that some have less judgment
than bruit beasts; and others have such clear marks of divine light, as they
seem rather angels than men? and An error in equality.
yet those which seek equality, will have the sovereign power of life,
honor, and goods, given unto furious, ignorant, and mad men, as well as unto
judicious and wise men: for the voices in all assemblies are numbered, without
any due consideration of every man's worth: and always the number of fools,
wicked and ignorant men, does far exceed the good, if that be true which
Solomon says, That there is not one among a thousand: the which is confirmed
by the Poet,

A good man and a wise, one such as out of all mankind,
Though Apollo sought and searched himself, yet could he scarcely find.
And yet there is a natural reason, which does teach us, that the equality
they seek, does ruin the grounds of all love and amity, the which can hardly
subsist among equals, for that there are never more quarrels and dissentions,
than among them that are equal; either for that the one seeks to supplant the
other, or for that the one may live All nations have need one of another.
without the other. And it seems that God has imparted his benefits and
graces, to countries and nations, in such a measure, as there is no man but
has need of another: to Menenius Agrippa a Roman Senator, Equality and
friendship are incompatible.
did wisely show unto the common people, which were fallen from the nobility,
and did seek to equal themselves unto them in power and authority. Popular
governments in the beginning seem pleasing and goodly, contrary to
Monarchies: the which are like unto great rivers, which at their first springs
have small and weak currents, but increasing by their long course, their
streams grow bigger, and more rough, and run with A Popular estate a
pernicious tyranny, i^ not wisely governed.
prince, through a false hope of liberty, in framing of Popular states: the
which in effect is nothing else, but the most pernicious tyranny that can be
imagined, if it be not governed by wise and virtuous men. And therefore among
the Cantons of the Swissers (those which are best ordered) although they have
established a form of Popular Commonweal, yet they govern themselves
Aristocratically, having two or three General assemblies are dangerous in
Popular estates.
fall out commonly when they are altogether. But seeing it is not in the power
of good citisens, nor of wise politicians, to change a Popular estate into a
Monarchy: the chief grounds then of a Popular estate consists in the strict
observation of laws and ordinances, being of it self quite different and
disagreeing from the laws and order of nature, which gives the commauud unto
the wisest: a thing very incompatible with the people: for if a multitude
(being impatient of command) have not good laws and

Let us see now if an Aristocraticall government be any thing better than the
rest, as many hold opinion: for if a mediocratie be commendable in all things,
and that we Reasons for an Aristocraticall estate.
must fly all vicious extremes; it follows then, that these two vicious
extremes being

A man may also say, that the sovereignty should be given only to the most
rich, as The government of a Commonweal must be given to them that have the
most interest in the preservation thereof.
to them that have most interest in the preservation of the whole state.
Without doubt the most rich have the greatest interest, and bear a greater
charge than the poor, who having little to loose, abandon the Commonweal at
need. And therefore Q. Flaminius did wisely commit the government of the cities
of Thessalie, to the most rich, as commanders: so as by a necessary
consequence, the inconveniences which are incident Many commanders, cause many
factions.
of lords: for the more governors there be, the more factions will grow, their
consultations will be more hard to determine, and are sooner discovered. And
therefore those Those Aristocraticall estates most durable, that have fewest
lords.
Aristocraticall estates are more durable and assured, that have fewest lords:
as the Lacedaemonians, who had but thirty governors, and the Pharsalians
twenty; they did long maintain their estates, whereas others decayed soon.
It is not then the middle number betwixt one and all, which makes that
commendable mean, seeing that there be as many kinds of vicious Commonweales,
as of commendable and virtuous.

As for the other point, That they must give the sovereignty unto the most
worthy, It is true; but the argument makes more for a Monarchy, than for an
Aristocratie: for No council in any estate has any power to command.
Senate, the which is ordained to no other end, but to give council to them
that have the sovereignty, to whom belong the resolution and decision of the
council. But Plato had another argument for an Aristocratical estate, saying,
That it was very hard to find any one man so wise and virtuous, as was
requisite for the government of an estate, and by that means a Monarchy were
not sure. But this argument is captious, and may be Platoes argument captious.
used against himself: for if it be hard to find any one prince so wise as he
desires, how shall they find out so great a number as is needful in a
Seigneurie. And Peter Soderin Gonfalonier of Florence, speaking unto the people
against an Aristocraticall estate, he used the same argument which Maecenas did
before Augustus against Marcus Agrippa, The estate of few lords, is the estate
of ^ew tyrants.
saying, That the government of few lords, is the government of few tyrants:
and that it was better at all events to have but one tyrant. For if any one
will say, that among many there will happily be some number of good men, we must
then rather choose a Popular estate, for that in a great number there will be
found more virtuous than in a less. But both the one and the other is
unprofitable: for as well in all Aristocraticall and Popolar estates, as in all
corporations and colleges, the greatest part does still overrule In all
colleges, corporations, and states, the greatest number carries it.
for one tyrant there shall be a hundred which will cross the resolution of
the lesser but of the sounder part: as it is always seen as well in the diets
and assemblies of the princes of Germany, whereas the spiritual princes of
the empire, being the greatest number, have always crossed the princes
temporal: so as by their means the emperor Charles the fifth, caused the empire
to declare it self an enemy to the house of France, the which had not been so
in many ages: to the end the temporal princes should have no hope of any
succors from France in their necessities, whereinto they soon after fell.
And Anno. 1543. The princes spiritual of the empire, are more in number than
the temporal.
to make short, it has been always seen, that the more heads there be in a
Seigneurie, the more controversies arise, and less resolution. And therefore
the Seigneurie of Venice to avoid these inconveniences, commits all affairs of
state to the mannaging of a dozen persons, and most commonly to seven,
especially to keep their affairs secret, whererein consists the health and
preservation of an estate.

But let us suppose, that a privy Council in an Aristocraticall estate, be
so secret, as nothing is discovered; yet is it a difficult thing for few
commanders to maintain their estate against a multitude, which has no part
in honorable charges: for that most commonly the lords scorn and contemn the
popular, and the poor carry always The cause that does most ruin
Aristocraticall estates.
ambitious flies unto the multitude, and ruins the state: as I have noted
before of the Seigneuries of Genes, Florence, Cologne, Zurich, Strausbourg,
Lindaw, and the ancient Phocians, Samians, Therenecians, Amphipolites,
Corcyrians, Cnidians, Mytelenians, and Hostienses; in the which the multitude
has expelled, banished, spoiled, and slain the nobles. And what guard soever
they keep, yet do they live in continual distrust, and sometimes in such
fear, as they do not assemble together but in places of The commanders in an
Aristocraticall estate are in continual fear and distrust
strength: as in the city of Benize^e, lying in the realm of Telesin in
Barbary, all the lords and commanders keep themselves in forts, fearing the
people should mutine against Plutarch) to be surprised and slain by the
people: like unto the lords of the Samiens, who were all massacred by the
multitude, at such time as they were in council. So as in an Aristocraty the
lords dare not train the people up to arms, nor put weapons into their hands:
neither can they go to the war, but they are in danger to loose the estate,
if they be once defeated: neither can they assure themselves of strangers,
fearing they should be How the estate of Venice (...) been preserved.
Aristocraticall estate, impart some small offices unto the people, contract
alliances with them, borrow of them to bind them to the maintenance of the
state; and disarme them quite: and to make them more mild and pliable, they
give them full scope and liber^ie to all sorts of pleasures: and sometimes they
make their richest citisens bourgesses. If they have any war against the
stranger, they soon compound it at what price soever: and above all things
they labor to quench and pacify all partialities and hatred among the
gentlemen: so as the rich being drunk with delights, and the poor having
means to traffic, and to exercise themselves in mechanike arts, with the
commodity of the place, lying upon the sea, being by nature strong, they have
no great occasion, and Gianot. Donat. de Repub. Vene^.
Faleriennes, Topoliennes, Baiamontaines, and the cruel factions of the
Justinians, the Sceuoles, Seliens, Bassiens; the murder of eighteen dukes,
and of a great number of Senators, as we may read in their histories. Wherein
Paulus Iouius was deceived, who held, That the estate of Venice had continued
eight hundred years: and Paulus Manutius, and du Moulin, have erred more,
saying, That it had been of twelve hundred years standing: for it is well
verified by the ancient registers of their Seigneurie, that before Cebastian
Cian duke of Venice, in the year 1175, it was a mere Monarchy: and yet there
has not been any Aristocraticall estat, to our knowledge, that has so long
continued, but have been for the most part changed into cruel Tyrannies, or
bloody Popular estates, as we have showed elsewhere. And to make it more
apparent, I will produce for a new example the state of Genes, who having peace
with the Venetians, by means of the protection of France, soon after the
Adornes, and Fregoses, divided the state (the which at that time was
Aristocraticall) into two factions, whence ensued many murders of the chief
men: so as the people fell to arms, freed themselves Anno. 1506. The estate of
Genes, and the change thereof.
he were a Plebeian: and since they have published another law, prohibiting
the nobles to have above a third part of all other officers. And soon after in
a sedition they expelled all their gentlemen, choosing eight Tribunes, and after
they had rejected the protection of France, they chose a Dyer of silk for
their duke, whom king Jews the twelft caused to be hanged* after that he
had taken the city: but when as Andrew Doria revolted, and that he had power
to dispose of the state at his pleasure, he made choice of all such as had six
houses within the city, and of some others of name and mark, which were not
so rich, and divided them all into eight and twenty tribes, the Alberghi,
making them gentlemen, and giving them the government of the state, and
debarred the rest of the common people, only with this exception, To have
liberty every year to make ten of the Plebeians gentlemen, and to receive
them into the number of the nobility: the which notwithstanding was not well
executed. So of four and twenty thousand citisens, there were not above
twelve hundred, or thereabouts, that had any part in the state: and of this
number it was decreed, That every year there should be a great Council made
of four hundred, the which should choose the Duke and the eight Governors,
which they call the Seigneurie, to manage all affairs of state for the space of
two years that they should be in charge, unless matter were of great
importance, then to assemble the Senate of an hundred gentlemen. George. The
estate of Genes has continued in this sort 43 years, under the protection of
the house of Austria. From the year 1528, unto the year 1549, that John
Flisco being chosen duke of Genes after Benedict Gentil, would have made his
power perpetual, and to effect it, he labored to subject the Seigneurie of
Genes unto the crown of France, having already defeated Andrew Dories army,
and slain his nephew, he fell into the seal leaping from one gally to another,
the which overthrew Andrew Doria, the which was continued unto the year 1574,
that it was divided into two factions; the one of the ancient, the other of the
new gentlemen, who are yet at civil war: and the ancient seeing themselves
expelled by the new, have ceized upon the places of strength, and forts without
the city, being in danger to be quite ruined, or at the least to fall into a
Popular estate, as they did in the year 1506. The sedition happened for the
quality of their nobility: for after that Andrew Doria had settled the state
(as I have said) and excluded the Plebeians from being dukes of Genes, the
gentlemen of the ancient houses (which were but four, the Dorias, the
Spinolas, the Grimoaldes, and the Fiesques) The cause of factions at Genes.
caused their genealogies to be drawn and registered in public acts, dividing
themselves by this means from the Plebeians that were newly ennobled; who
disdaining thereat, and finding themselves the greater number and the stronger,
they have chased away the ancient houses, and if they be not soon reconciled,
the people in the end will expel them all.

I have showed before, that the great Council or Senate in an Aristocraticall
estate, ought to be perpetual, to the end there may be some firm ground, or
foundation whereon the annual change of all officers may rely. And as for the
Duke, it were strange if he should not ceaze upon the Sovereignty, having five
hundred men for his guard, seeing that he has two years to remain in charge:
considering the factions The ground and support of an Optimacie.
ground and support of an Aristocratie, consists in the mutual love of the
commanders: for if they agree and be of one mind, they will maintain
themselves, and govern much better than the people: But if there be any
factions among them, then there is no State so difficult to maintain, for the
reasons before mentioned; especially, if the Commanders be martial men: for
soldiers hate nothing more than peace. And we may not marvel if the
Aristocratie of the Venetians, Rhagusians and Luquois, have continued some
ages: for they are not given to arms, neither have they any thing in greater
recommendation than their traffic and commodity. And to conclude The best
kind of Optimacie.
briefly, there is no form of Aristocratie more perfect and goodly, nor more
assured, than whereas they make choice of men of virtue and reputation to
command; or at the least that they be not infamous: and if any one dies, to
substitute another in his place by election, as they do use at Geneua. If any
one of the Council of 25 dies, the most ancient of the 60 succeeds him most
commonly, although it be done by election: and the most ancient of the great
Council of 200 comes into the Council of 60, and the two hundred choose one of
the honestest Burgesses or citisens that is without reproach. Whereby few
command and govern the state, and yet every man hopes to attain unto it, not
by money nor ambition, but by honor and virtue. This may properly be called an
Aristocratie, the which is least subject unto dangers, and to the rebellion

Such a Seigneurie will observe the laws duly, and administer justice
uprightly: if they be contented with their estate, and seek not ambitiously to
wrest from another, as the Lacedaemonians did. For it is impossible that a
Seigneurie of few Lords and Commanders, should get and maintain a great
Empire, as a Monarke may: also the ruin and change of so great a Seigneurie is
not so much to be feared, as of a great and mighty Monarchy, which draws
after it the ruin of the greatest familes, and oftentimes of allies and of
neighbor States that are in his protection: Like unto a great building which
raised on high, blind the sight of others, and falling, ruins with her weight
those that are near it, with a fearful noise to them that hear it. Behold
the The discommodities of a Monarchy.
are to speak of a Monarchy, which all great men have preferred before all
other Commonweales: yet we find it is subject unto many dangers, whether the
change of the Monarke be from bad to good, or from good to better: although
there were no Plato lib. 4. de Legib. Mutati^nes in republica putat esse (...).
other thing but the change of him that has the Sovereignty: yet is it much
to be feared in all states: for we commonly see in the change of Princes, new
desseines, new laws, new officers, new friends, new enemies, new habits, and a
new form of living: for most commonly all Princes take a delight to change and
alter all things, that they may be spoken of; the which does many times cause
great inconveniences, not only to the subjects in particular, but also to the
whole body of the state. But if this were Isaie. cap. 5.
infant have a tutor by the appointment of his predecessor, or by the custom,
yet is it to be feared, that he will make himself absolute Lord* as Triphon
did, who cruelly The tutors to Monarchs do oftentimes make thmselues absolute
Lords.
slew his pupil the king of Siria, to make himself king. The which is more to
be feared, Lewis Sforce did, who by that means murdered the young prince, and
made himself duke of Milan. And although for the avoiding of this danger, they
give the government to the nearest of kin, and the nourishment of the infant
to the mother; yet have there been murdering mothers since, who have not only
sold and betrayed the state, but even the lives of their children, as the
mother of Charilaus king of Lacedemon did. And sometimes the tutor Plutar. in
Licur.
continues his government, and leaves nothing unto the king but the title, as
the duke of Northumberland did to Edward the sixth king of England: and Appelles
to young Philip king of Macedon, who could not enjoy his estate, until he had
slain his tutor. Po^ib. lib. 7.
And if the prince comes to the crown being young and out of government, there
is no Sovereignty alters the h^ mors of princes.
time lost to repeat examples, the which are too ordinary. To conclude, if the
prince and much more in a Popular: for the dangers which we have set down for
the most part cease, when as the Monarchy comes by right of succession, as we
will show hereafter. But seditions, factions, and civil war, are in a manner
continual: yea, Comparison of dangers.
sometimes greater for the attaining unto offices, in Aristocraticall and
Popular commonweales, than for the state in a Monarchy; the which admits no
sedition for offices, Commodities of a Monarchy.
but one alone: if they be two, or three, or more, no one is sovereign, for
that no one of them can give or take a law from his companion. And although we
imagine a body of many lords, or of a whole people to hold the sovereignty;
yet has it In Popular and Aristocraticall estates the lesser part is always
ouerruled by the g^eater, the which is contrary in a Monarchy.
although the wiser and the most virtuous be fewest in number; so as most
Liuie lib. 3. Lib. 2. Lib. 7. Lib. 4.
Aristocraticall commonweales, finding themselves embarked in any dangerous
war, either against the enemy, or among themselves, or in difficulty to
proceed criminally against some mighty citisen, or to give order for the
plague, or to create magistrates, or to do any other thing of great
consequence, did usually create a Dictator, as a sovereign Monarch: knowing
well that a Monarchy was the anckor whereunto of necessity they must have
recourse, Trepid^ patres, says Titus Liuius, ad summum anxilium decurrunt,
Dictatorem dici placet, The fearful fathers fly unto their last refuge, they
thought it best to name a Dictator. And when as Hanniball made all Italy to
tremble, Ad Dictatorem dicendum remedium iamdiu desideratum Ciuit as confugit,
The city fled Li^is lib. 22.
unto the remedy so long desired, which was to name a Dictator. And the reason
was, for that they held the Dictator for a god, and his commandments for
oracles, Dict^toris Edictum pro numine semper obseruatum, The Dictators Edict
was always religiously Lib. 6.
observed. And even the enemies besieging the city of Rome, abandoned the
siege, hearing that they had created a Dictator, Tantus erat Dictatoris terror
apud hosts, vt eo creato statim a menibus disceserint, So great was the fear
of a Dictator with the enemies, as he was no sooner created, but they departed
from the walls. For Lib. 5.
oftentimes even the Consuls and their commandments were neglected and trodden
under foot: and such as had offended retired to their companions, that is to
say, to the people, to whom they might appeal. The which Appius the Consul
seeing, he Li^e lib. 2.
said, Minas esse Consul^m non imperium, vbi ad eos qui vna peccauer unt
prouocare liceat agedum, Dictatorem a quo prouocatio non est creemas, They were
but the threats, said he, of Consuls without any commanding power, seeing they
might appeal unto them who had offended in the like manner, Go to then, let us
create a Dictator from whom there is no appeal. The impunitie of vices, and
the contempt of magistrates in a Popular estate, does sufficiently show that
Monarchs are necessary for the preservation of the society of mankind, seeing
that the Romans who for the error of one Prince, had all kings in hatred, made
a Dictator for the conduct of all their great affairs. So did the
Lacedaemonians in their extremities create a magistrate with power like unto the
Dictator, whom they called Harmoste: and the Thessaliens, him whom they called
Dionys. Hali^. lib. 6.
Archus: as in the like case the Mityleniens their great Aezimnere; to whom the
great Prouidador of the Venetians may be in some sort compared: finding by
experience that an absolute power united in one person, is more eminent and of
greater effect* and that the same power imparted to two, three, or many lords,
or to a whole communaltie, declines and loses his force, like unto a ^agot
unbound and divided into many parts. And therefore Tacitus says, that for the
execution of great exploits the power of commanding must be restrained to one
alone: the which is confirmed by Titus Liuius, who said, that three Tribunes
created with Consularie power, gave a sufficient testimony that the force of
command imparted to many, is fruitless: and especially in millitarie causes,
the which Hanniball did find, having against him an army of 60000 Plurium
(...) bell^ (...) vtil^.
men, commanded by two Consuls, Paulus Aemilius, and Terentius Varro, whom he
defeated: and Amurath against the Christian Princes at the battle of
Nicopolis: and the emperor Charles the fifth against the two commanders of the
protestants. And we may not marvel if the duke of Vrbin with a few hierlings
made head against so mighty an army, led by the chief commanders or
generals, the which depended not one of another, that is to say, Rance Vitelli,
and Laurence de Medicis: for even Leo writes in his history, that the people
of Affricke hold it for an infallible Maxim, that a prince An ancient opinion
of the Affric^.
which is but weak in forces, shall always defeat a stronger army that has
two generals. For whilst that Cleomenes king of Lacedemon did govern
absolutely alone, he obtained great and goodly victories, and was never
vanquished: but after that he Aristides the just, being chosen general with
Miltiades to command the army either of them Plut. in Aristid^.
his day, (as the Roman Consuls were wont to do) he resigned all his power
and authority to his companion, who gave the Persians a great overthrow. There
are a thousand such like examples, which do show us the necessity to have one
head or commander, not only in war (where there is greatest danger) but also
to obey one sovereign One sovereign commander most necessary.
prince in a Commonweal: for even as an army is ill led, and most commonly
defeated that has many Generals; even so is a Commonweal that has many
Aliud est consulere aliud imp^rare.
judgment, wisdom, and council then one alone; But there is a great
difference betwixt council and commandment: The advice and council of many
grave and wise men may be better than of one, as they say commonly that many
men see more than

If then a commonweal be but one body, how is it possible it should have many
One body cannot have many heads.
heads, but that it must prove a monster, as the emperor Tiberius said unto
the Senate, For always through jealousy one undid what another had made: and
all, as they said, The laws of honor are in greater recommendatio^ to a
Monarch than to a multitude.
name collectiue, and nothing in particular. And as for the troubles which the
government of a young king do cause, that happens rarely, and is more incident
at the election of magistrates: For at the choosing of a Gonfalonier of Genes for
two years Many governors hinder on^ another.
For if many wise and skillful pilots hinder one another in striving to govern
the helm; even so will many lords do, every one seeking to govern the
Commonweal, A Monarchy is natural.
guide us unto a Monarchy, whether that we behold this little world which has
but one body, and but one head for all the members, whereon depends the will,
moving and feeling: or if we look to this great world which has but one
sovereign God: or if we erect our eyes to heaven, we shall see but one sun:
and even in sociable creatures, we see they cannot admit many kings, nor many
lords, how good soever. Solomon emperor of the Turks used this example,
hearing the great cries and acclamations Anno. 1552.
of joy which the whole army made unto Sultan Mustapha his son returning
Sultan upon earth: Two days after he put Sultan Gobe to death, for that he had
wept for his brother; and Sultan Mehemet the third brother, for that he fled
for fear; leaving but one son living, to avoid the danger of many lords. We
also see that all nations of the earth from all antiquity, even when they were
guided by a natural instinct, had no other form of government than a
Monarchy, that is to say, the Assirians, Medes, Persians, Egyptians, Indians,
Parthians, Macedonians, Celtes, Gauls, Scythians, Arabians, Examples of the
greatest Monarchies of the world.
Turks, Moscouits, Tartars, Polonians, Danes, Spaniards, English, Affricans,
and Perusians, where there is no mention of any Optimacie, or Popular estate.
Yea all the ancient people of Greece and Italy, before they were corrupted
with ambition, had none but kings and monarchs, as the Athenians,
Lacedaemonians, Corinthians, Acheans, Sicyonians, Candiots, Sicilians,
Ethiopians, Latins, and Hetrusques, the which have flourished in arms and
laws, four, five, six, and seven hundred years; yea some have continued eight
or nine hundred years, others twelve or thirteen hundred years. And yet some
wonder that the Popular estate of the Romans* or the Seigneuries of Lacedemon,
and Venice, had continued four hundred years, or thereabouts, after they had
expelled their kings doubtless they have reason to marvel, to see two or three
Co^monweales Augustus his birth, it was found out by oracles, that nature
should soon bring forth a great Monarch Sueton. in August
of the Romans. For this cause the Senate decreed, That all infants should be
slain that were to be borne that year: but every one in particular did hinder
the carrying of this decree into Saturnes temple, for that every one (says the
history) did hope Augustus among his friends, being desirous to live at rest,
and to leave the state, after that he had p^t the navy of Mare Anthony to
flight: but it was resolved, That a Monarchy was the most safe without all
comparison, and the effects did verify it: for in former times the Romans
could not live ten years together without civil wars, or some sedition: and
Augustus maintained them quietly in peace almost fifty years, the which
continued long after his death. Experience is the mistress of all things, and
as the touchstone, resolves all doubts. Therefore the Capadocians having lost
their king, they were persuaded by the Ariobarzanes; finding the calamities of
Popular states* To conclude, if we seek authority, we shall find that the
greatest scholars that ever were, have held a Monarchy to be the best: as
Homer, Herodotus, Plato, Aristotle, Xenophon, Plutarch, Philon, Apolonius,
Saint Ierosme, Cyprian, Maximus Tirius, and many others. And even in the law of
God, it is said, When as the people shall choose a king, like unto other
nations, he shall not take a stranger: Whereby he not only shows, that God
approves a Monarchy, teaching a king how he should govern, but also that
other nations in those days had nothing but Monarchies, as Samuel says. He
also made Moses king over his people, for so he is called Sam. 1. 12. Deuteronomy.
33.
in the law of God. And although that God governed his people ^or a time
without a king, sending them always by an especial favor certain captains, as
princes and judges to free them from the subjection of their neighbors, whom
the holy Scripture calls Messies, and Saviors: yet was there never any
Optimacie, or Popular estate among them, Nehem. 10.
but contrariwise they were a long time without either prince or magistrate,
being guided Sam. 2. c. 12.
only by the grace of God, who for this cause is called their king. And after
their return out of Babylon, they were still subject to the kings of Persia,
or of Egypt, or of A Monarchy allowed by the law of God.
Syria: until that Judas Machabeus of the family of the Azmoneans, descended
from Aaron (having rebelled against Antiochus the Noble, king of Syria) brought
the office of high priest, and the sovereignty unto his house, who were
afterward subdued David; they busied not themselves in any thing else, but in
judging of causes of great consequence, as of the high priest, or of some
tribe, or of crimes of high treason, or of false prophets: and for this cause
they were only called Judges, whom by the corrupt Greek word they called
Sanedrim. The Caldean interpretor says, That although they had power to make
laws, even under kings, yet was it no sovereign authority. True it is, that
Rabin Magmon calling them Doctors or Informers, says, That they had also power
to create twenty three criminal Judges, whom they called Judges of souls;
and seven Judges for civil causes, whom they termed Judges of goods in every
city; and ten Judges for gouenment, among Joseph says, two Levites assistant
to every magistrate: and three other Arbitrators, whereof either of the parties
did choose one, and the two that were chosen did name a third. The which I have
particularly set down, to confute their opinion, which maintain with Joseph
the Historian, That the Hebrews Lib. ^. c. 6. antiq.
have used a kind of Aristocraticall government, taking the Senate of seventy
one for sovereign lords: all whom Herod, the eldest son of captain
Antipater put to death, for that they had condemned him, and had executed him,
but for the favor of Hircanus king and high priest, who gave him his pardon,
or at the least stayed the decree of the Senate; and afterward he murdered his
savior. Which shows plainly, that the Senate had no sovereign power, and
that it was no Optimacie: although that Josephus Joseph. de antiq. lib. ^4. c.
5.
brings in the Jews complaynig, Quod Hircanus and Aristobulus formam Reipub*
in regnum mutarent, That Hircanus, and Aristobulus, had changed the form of
the Commonweal into a Monarchy. In my opinion these reasons, with many others
(which are not needful to be here particularly expressed) are sufficient to
show, that of the three kinds of lawful governments, a perfect Monarchy is the
most excelleu^: and among the disordered, the Democratie the most vicious. A
lawful Monarchy (as a strong and able body) may easily be maintained: but
Popular states, and Aristocraties, as feeble and weak, and subject to many
infirmities, must be preserved by diet and good government. And for that it is
not always in the power of wise and politic statesmen, to choose the best
kind of government, nor to alter and change the worst, Dion did, who ruined the
Tyranny of Siracusa, suddenly to erect an Optimacie, by the council and advice
of Plato: and not able to effect it, he was slain: so as it became an estate
of a turbulent multitude, much more miserable without all comparison than any
tyranny. As also the Pithagorians did, who labored suddenly to change all the
Popular estates of Italy, into mere Optimacies, having not force sufficient
to effect A tyrant is insupportable that has escaped any ^nspiracie.
settle his tyranny. For a tyrant that has once escaped the hands of such as
had conspired against him, he becomes mad and furious, like unto a wild beast
that sees his own blood. We have too many examples, and without any further
search, we have seen Cosmo de Medicis (whom the banished men of Florence
called Tyrant, although he were esteemed of many others to be a good and a
wise prince) build forts, and increased his Monarchy with the ruins of such as
had conspired against his life and state, and yet never any one conspiracy
took effect. Besides, a Tyranny is much more insupportable, if the tyrant
has no large limits and great territories: for being poor and hungry, he
oppresses and deuours his subjects continually; and if he be cruel, he soon
attaines to his desire: whereas a rich and mighty Monarch has wherewithal to
glut his appetite, The subjects are happy under a great Monarch.
and if he be cruel he will stand in fear that some one in so great a
multitude will take revenge. Even then as the subjects are happy under a great
and mighty Monarch, if he have any spark of justice before his eyes: so a
small estate is best befitting

CHAP. V. That a well ordered Commonweal depends not either of lot, either
of choice, and much less of women; but by descent to be derived from a most
honounourable
IT is not enough to say, that a Royal and lawful Monarchy is What Royal
^onarchie is best.
better than either a Democratie, or an Aristocratie, except a man say also,
such a Monarchy as is by successiue right diuolued unto the next heir male of
the name, and that without partition. For albeit that the lawful Monarchy be
always to be preferred before other Commonweals, yet nevertheless so it is,
that amongst Monarchies that which comes by a successiue right unto the be
found, which have been so bold, as to publish books, and to maintain against
their This question was indeed then in Oxford disputed, and the right of
succession notably defended, and before election preferred.
being, That it were better to have kings chosen by election, than by
succession. Which new doctrine not a little troubled, not the queen only, but
even the nobility also of that kingdom, then there present. For why, from
such beginnings we see the subjects to proceed unto mutinies, unto rebellions,
and at length even unto open wars. And who is he that would not be moved to
hear the inuectiue speech of an eloquent man, detesting the cruelties, the
exactions, and rapines of a tyrant? who neither has the honor of God, neither
the truth, neither justice, in regard: who drives away the To possess the
people with ^n opinion, that have the^ king by election, is better than to have
him by succession, a thing most dangerous unto sovereign princes.
choice of a just and upright king, who above all things fears God, and
honors virtue: who regards the good, and chastises the evil: who unto the
honest appoints due rewards, and unto the wicked condign punishments: who
abhors flatterers, who keeps his faith and promise; who banisheth the
blood suckers and deuisors of new exactions out of the court, who spares his
subjects blood as his own, who reuengeth the wrong done to others, and
pardons the injury done unto himself; and who in brief more esteems of
religion and virtue, than of all other things in the world. And so having set
these praises, with the counterpoise of a tyranny repleat with Aristotle
himself is of opinion* That Monarchs should be created by election, calling
the people barbarous, which have their kings by right of succession. And for
which cause he deemed the Carthaginensians more happy than the Lacedaemonians,
for that these had their kings by succession Hercules, whereas the others Most
people to have had their kings by successi on, rather than by election,
contrary unto the opinion of Aristotle.
still had them by election and choice. But so he might call the Assyrians
barbarous, the Medes, the Persians, the Egyptians, the people of Asia, the
Parthians, the Armenians, the Indians, the Affricans, the Turks, the Tartars,
the Arabians, the Moscouites, the Celtes, the Englishmen, the Scots, the
Frenchmen, the Spaniards, the Perusines, the Numidians, the Ethiopians; and an
infinite number of other people, who still have, and always before had, their
kings by right of succession. Yea and we find in Greece (the country of
Aristotle himself) that the Athenians, the Lacedaemonians, Sicyonians, the
Corinthians, the Thebans, the Epirots, the Macedonians, had more than by the
space of six hundred years, had their kings by right of lawful succession,
before that Cicero says, humanity and courtesy to have taken beginning in
the lesser Asia, and from thence to have been divided unto all the other parts
of the world: and yet for all that the people Timondas, who was chosen king of
Corinth, and Pittacus of Nigropont. And at such time as the royal name and
line sailed, oftentimes the strongest or the mightiest carried it away* as it
chanced after the death of Alexander the Great, who was in right line
descended from Hercules, and the kings of Macedon, who had continued above five
hundred years: whose lieutenants afterward made themselves kings, Antipater
of Macedon, Antigonus of Asia the less, Nicanor of the upper Asia, Lysimachus
of Thracia: so that there is not one to be found among them, which was made
king by election. So that even Greece itself (the nurse of learning and
knowledge) should by this reason, in the judgment Aristoile, be deemed
barbarous. Howbeit that the word Barbarous, was in ancient time no word of
disgrace, but attributed unto them which spoke a strange language and not the
natural language of the country. For so the Hebrews called also the ancient
Egyptians, then of all nations the most courteous and learned, Barbarous, that
is to say, (...), for that they used the Egyptian tongue, and not the Hebrew.
Psalm. 113.


But in all Monarchies which go by election, there is one danger thereunto
always Great dangers incident unto an estate or kingdom, where the king or
other ^oueraigne prince, is to be chosen by election.
incident, which is, that after the death of the king, the estate remains a
mere Anarchy, without king, without lord, without government, still in danger
of ruin; as a ship without a master, which owes the wrack of it self unto
the first storm or wind that arises: thieves and murderers in the mean time
at their pleasures committing their The great disorders in Rome, in the
vacancie of the papacy, and before the new pope be chosen.
fifty sundry murders, and yet have always had the popes pardon therefore:
the popes at their first entrance into the papacy, still pardoning all men
their offenses whatsoever: and so murders and reuenges commonly referred unto
the popes death, remain then unpunished. So that in the year 1522, there were
two executed at Rome, whereof the one termed himself Pater noster, and the
other Aue Maria, who at diverse times had stabbed and murdered an hundred and
sixteen men, as was then proved. Clement the 5: yea and sometime 10 years, as
after the election of the duke of Sauoy surnamed Foelix. We read also
oftentimes two or three popes, and as many emperors, to have been chosen at
once; and the empire to have stood vacant a year or two together, yea whole
eighteen years, after that William county of Holland the emperor, was
slain. And albeit that the princes electors made offer Alphonsus the tenth,
yet so it was that he would not accept thereof, for the manifest danger that
he was to put himself into by taking upon him sueh an estate, exposed unto the
will and pleasure of the subjects, unto the envy of princes, and the violence
of murderers: all which time of vacancie the wicked nevertheless are out of
frame in all kind of loose liberty. Which in some sort to remedy, the
Polonians (who have their kings by election) double the penalties for the
offenses committed during the choice of the king, as I have learned of Zamoschy
now Chancellor of Polonia, but as then ambassador in France. So we read
also that during the elections of the Sultans of Egypt (before it was by the
Turks subdued, and by them unto their empire united) the poor subjects, and
the best towns and cities in

Now if some (to remedy the matter) shall say, That in the mean time there
might No less dangerous in the vacancy of a kingdom, to make choice of a
sovereign governor than of a king himself.
a governor be established: he is therein deceived, it being a no less hard
matter, to make choice of a lieutenant or governor, than of a king. But admit
he might so be made without any contradiction, by the consent of all the
estates to whom it belongs, to name their governor, yet who should be the
surety and warrant for his faith? Who should let him (having the power in his
hand) to invade the estate? who should disarme him being not willing thereunto?
We see how Gostauus father of John king of Sweden behaved himself, who of a
governor made himself a king, without expecting Pompey Columna, and Anthony
Sauelle, who ceized upon the Capitol at Rome, proclaiming unto the people
liberty. And in the time of such vacancie civil wars and dissentions are
impossible to be avoided, not only amongst the most warlike nations, but even
amongst the church men also: so that it was never Many popes flaine or
poisoned, about their election.
possible to provide so well, but that two and twenty popes had their heads
chopped off, and many more of them by strong factions driven out of their seats:
not to speak in the viz. in the year of our Lord 356, there were six hundred
persons slain in the very city of Rome, about the election of Damasus and
Vrsicinus, whether of them should be pope. Neither was that only done at
Rome, but almost in every town and city, Why the choice of bishops, and
ecclesiastical prese^ments was taken from the people.
which had in them any bishops, all places were so filled with so many of
Laodicia, that from thence forward it should not be lawful for the people, to
meddle with the choice of the bishops and prelates, or the bestowing of the
ecclesiastical preferments. Wherefore Athanasius, and Augustine, both bishops,
appointed whom they would have to succeed them in their bishoprikes, the one
at Alexandria, and the other at Hippona.

And yet there is another inconvenience also, not to be omitted, which is, That
kingdoms The public demaine most com monly dissipated or embeseled by princes
elective.
going by election, have nothing in them which at one time or other is not
subject unto all men's spoils: so that even the public demaines, and such as
before were common, and wherein every man had a common interest: we see them
in a little time converted even unto particular men's uses: so as we see it to
have happened in the demaine Peter at Rome, as also in the demaine of the
German empire. For the princes elect knowing well that they cannot long reign,
nor that they cannot leave unto their children any thing of the estate, more
than what they think they can by deceit and fraud purloine and hold, care not
to give any thing unto the magistrates their friends: or by open sales and
donations, to make their own profit of the public revenues and possessions.
So Rodolph the emperor for money exempted all the towns and cities of Tuscanie
from the fealty and obedience which they ought unto the German empire: Robert
also the emperor, gave three of the imperial towns unto his son: Henry the
first ceased upon Saxony: Frederick the second enfranchised Nuremberg: Otho
the third enfranchised Isne: Jews of Bauiere did the like for the town of
Egre: Henry the fist sold all he could: and Charles the fourth being not able
to pay the hundred thousand crowns which he had promised to every one of the
princes electors, sold unto them all the tributes of the empire, to have them
to choose his son Charles emperor, as he indeed was: but afterward again
thrust out even by the same princes who had before made choice of him. So that
the principal and strongest sinews of that Commonweal being cut in sunder,
the whole body of the empire became so weak and feeble, that Charles duke of
Burgundy doubted not to wake war upon the German princes. Nothing more
intolerable than a man of base degree suddenly mounted up unto great honor.


Another point there is also well worth the consideration, which is, That a man
of

But let us yet go further, for why these are not the greatest inconveniences.
For Another great inconvenience about the election of sovereign princes.
where the people is to choose their king, they must either make choice of a
stranger, or of a natural subject: Now if choice be to be made out of the
natural subjects, then No accord where every man would be a lord.
grace, it is impossible but that there should be great factions, wherein the
people should become partakers: or in case they were not equal, neither in
virtue nor wealth, yet so it is that they would presume themselves to be
equal, and never agree one of them to obey another, but wishing rather to
endure the command even of strange and wicked princes, than of another subject
their equal. As it happened in Armenia (as Tacitus reports) where the
nobility could endure none to be their king but a mere stranger. And of late
in Polonia Sigismundus Augustus the king being dead, and a controversy
arising amongst the nobility, every one of them longing after the kingdom;
Henry the king.

And in the remembrance of our fathers when as the Egyptian Sultans were
chosen by the voices of the pretorian soldiers or Mammalukes, and they not
able to endure one of them to be greater than another, had slain diverse of
their Sultans: they at last to stint the strife, by their common consent sent
their ambassadors unto Campson king of Caramania to become their Sultan, and to
take upon him the kingdom of Egypt being by them offered him. With the same
calamities the German princes also troubled, William earl of Holland, and of
Henry earl of Lutzembourg, one while also making choice of the king of
England, and another while of the king of Spain: yea, sometime such foreign
princes refusing that same empire so offered them: For so Alphonsus the tenth
king of Spain refused the imperial crown by the princes electors offered
him, which afterward stood empty above eighteen years, as we have before
said. Sigismund also The imperial crown of diverse* strange princes refused.
the first king of Polonia, refused the kingdom of Hungary, of Bohemia and
Denmark, being thereunto invited by the Estates. So also Jews the twelfth
refused the Seignorie of Pisa: and the ancient Romans (as says Appian) refused
diverse people A strange kingdom hard to be governed by lieutenants or
deputies.
For who is he so foolish that had not rather to look to his own things than
to other men's? and what nation or people can with patience endure to be
governed by deputies? so to have him whom they would not, and to want him whom
they made choice of. So Jews king of Hungary at the request of his wife
daughter to Casimire king of Polonia, took upon him the kingdom of Polonia
conferted unto him by the voices of the people: into which kingdom he was
invested, and received Casimire her father, for a space endured the woman's
sovereignty, but could in no wise endure her train of Hungarians. And so also
not long ago Henry, Charles the French kings brother called unto the kingdom
of Polonia, his brother being dead, withal speed returned unto his own
natural kingdom: howbeit the Polonians would by Henry, unto whom they had
given all the sovereign rights, whereunto they had not annexed any clause or
condition (when as question was of the kingdom of France to fall unto him)
that he should not in his absence by his deputies or lieutenants govern that
kingdom bestowed upon him: as has been always lawful for all princes to do.
For it is an old axiom, a donation once consummate and perfected not to admit
any more conditions. But admit both the kingdoms confine together, as does
Polonia and Hungary; what doubt is there but that he will, if he can, make one
kingdom of two? or change an Aristocratique estate into a right Monarchy:
Charles the fifth, who after the overthrow of the German princes had changed
the Aristocracie of the Germans into a kingdom, and had caused his son
Philip to be sent for out of Spain into Germany, to have made him king of the
Germans, had not Henry the second the French Charles the fifth about to have
made his son Philip king of Germany.
king most mightily withstood him, and so broken his designs. The occasion of
Julius Pflugius the Bishop is yet extant wherein he labors to persuade that
one thing especially, viz. that the most sure foundations of the German
empire might be laid. And in case that the prince cannot join the kingdom
which he has got by election confining upon him, unto his own natural
kingdom: yet will he so much as in him Ladislaus king of Bohemia, the son of
Albertus, and the emperor Frederick the third his nephew, Kingdoms electiug
oftentimes changed into hereditarie.
by the voice of the people chosen king of Hungary by a certain bond of
fealty, left that kingdom unto his nearest kinsmen all most hereditarie. And
albeit that Matthias Coruinus the son of the noble Huniades (Ladislaus being
dead without issue) by the voices of the people obtained that kingdom (they
always pretending that the right of the choice of the king belonged to them;
and that the succession of the next of kin was not to take place) yet for all
that Frederick his nearest kinsman was about both with his own power, and the
strength of the whole empire to have invaded that kingdom, and had undoubtedly
so done, had not Matthias by his promise put him in hope of the kingdom for
himself and his posterity: if he should himself die without issue, as by
chance he did. Howbeit, yet nevertheless that Matthias being dead, the
Hungarians made choice of another Ladislaus king of Bohemia and Polonia also:
without regard of the conuention and agreement before made with Frederick,
which was Dadislaus Maximilian the son of Frederick should succeed in that
kingdom, as indeed he did: But his nephew being left under age, and the
estates of the kingdom pretending them to have the right to make their choice
of his governors; against Frederick who sought to step into the government
of Hungary, and to take upon him the guard and protection of the young king his
nephew: the people of Hungary, yea, and the sister of Ferdinand (the young
kings mother) chose rather to cast themselves into Solomon the great Turks
lap, and so to betray both king and kingdom, rather The Hungarians for the
maintenance of their elective right now fallen into the perpetual sernitude
and sla^ ^f the Turk.
than to endure the government of the emperor Ferdinand in such sort, that
they for the maintenance of the right of their election, are now fallen into
the perpetual servitude of the Turk: having not only lost the right of their
election, which they so strive for; but in hazard also to loose their laws,
liberty, and religion: as the common custom of all strange princes is (as
much as in them lies) to change the laws, customs, and religion of the
people by them subdued, or oppressed, and to enure them, or otherwise to
enforce them to embrace and follow their fashions, manners, and religions: and
was as should seem the principal cause why God forbid his people to make
choice of a strange prince to reign over them.

And yet in matter of election the way being open to many competitours, if the
Princes by election created still to be in great danger.
matter be to be tried by force, always the most wicked and deceitful: or
else the most hardy and aduenterous, put all upon hazard to attain thereunto:
And if it hap the most virtuous to be chosen, his life is still in danger of
the competitours being of greater power: as in Germany it has been seen:
where within this 360 years, since that Monarchy fell into election, there
have been eight or nine emperors slain or poisoned, Diverse electiu^
emperors and princes murth^red, or else shamefully deposed.
and among others, William of Holland, Rodolph, Albert, Henry the seventh,
Frederick the second, Lewis of Bauaria, Charles the nephew of Henry, and
Gunther: besides all them who were most shamefully thrust out of the imperial
seat. And of 15 Sultans which were chosen kings of Egypt, there were seven of
them slain: namely, Turqueman, Melaschall, Cothus, Bandocader, Mehemet,
Cercasse, and Geapalt. And of the Augustus, there were seven one after another
massacred, poisoned, or strangled: and that three of them in one year,
oppressed only by the conspiracy of citisens. Yea, the pretorian soldiers
sometimes slew the emperors to have a new, only upon hope of gifts and
largesses. But still he of whom the Senators made choice, displeased the
legions and men of war: yea oftentimes every army created an emperor, in
such sort as that at one time there were thirty Roman emperors chosen in
diverse places, and among them one woman, viz. Zenobia: all the empire being in
civil wars and combustion who should carry away the state, no end thereof
being to be found until that the rest were by the power of one all oppressed.
Tiberius, Titus, Traian, No assurance in the estate where the succ^ssion is not
established.
Adrian, Antoninus Pius, Marcus Aurelius, and Commodus. But if any of the
emperors gave not order for the adopting of his successor, in case he had
himself no children, the commonweal always fell again into civil wars. And
for this cause the The great care the good Roman emperors had for the
certainti^ of the succession, lest after their death the empire should fall
into the dangers ensuing upon election.
emperor Adrian fearing lest the estate should fall into election, he himself
having no children, thought it not enough to adopt Antoninus Pius, but also
caused him to adopt Marcus Aurelius, and Aelius Vetus: following therein the
wisdom of Augustus, who to prevent the wars oftentimes arising about
election, adopted his two little nephews Caius and Lucius: who both dying
without issue, he adopted also his third Agrippa, and with him Tiberius his
son in law: yet with condition that he should first adopt Germanicus. And
they which were so adopted and appointed heirs of the empire, were called
principes iuuentutis, or princes of the youth: and afterward of the Germans;
reges Romanorum, or kings of the Romans: to the end that even in estates and
Monarchies going by election, there might yet be some certain successor. For
so Henry the third the emperor whilst he yet lived caused his son to be
chosen king of the Romans, and his grand child to be also by him adopted. And
Charles the fourth after that caused his son Wenceslaus by the electors to
be designed to the empire, but not without a great sum of money: unto whom
succeeded his brother Sigismund, who afterward adopted his son in law
Frederick the third; who again Maximilian his son to be adopted emperor.
Neither was it to be doubted but that Philip, Maximilian his son, should have
reigned over the Germans, had not his untimely death prevented his fathers
hope. And all be it that the estates and princes of the empire, the imperial
sea^e being as then vacant, had many great princes competitors in the same; yet
so it was that they deemed the grand child of Maximilian (Charles, then a very
young man, and nearest unto Maximilian in blood) by a certain successiue right
worthy to be preferred before the rest of the princes. And allbeit that Great
regard had of succession, even in kingdoms going by election.
the Bohemians, the Polonians, the Hungarians, Danes, and Tartars, will by no
means suffer the election of their kings to be taken from them; yet they
think that their kings sons ought still in their choice to be preferred
before all others, that so by Sigismundus Augustus king of Polonia and last of
the house of Iagellon, having but two sisters, assembled the estates of the
kingdom to consult concerning his successor; having before united the dukedom
of Lituania unto the kingdom of Polonia: whereunto for all that the estates
would not consent, fearing to loose their right of election; or that he should
have given them a king contrary to their good liking. And at the same time as
it were, the parliament of England was holden at London in October 1566, where
the estates preferred a request unto the Queen for the providing of a
successor unto the crown, to avoid (as they said) the evident dangers
whereinto the kingdom was like to fall, if it were not foreseen and provided
for; and that they were resolved not to speak of any subsidy, or other thing
whatsoever, Kingdoms going by succession how they sometimes fall into election.
in which case it is necessary to provide before that the matter so fall out,
whereas otherwise the estate is in great hazard to be quite overthrown: as it
happened unto the estate of Milan in the year 1448, after the death of Philip
Maria the last of the The duchy of Milan dismembered the line of the
visecounties of the house of Anglerie failing.
burnt the last dukes testament, chose twelve Senators; and after that having
made choice of Charles Gonzaga for their general, most cruelly butchered all
them which took part with Frances Sforce, who being a man but basely borne
aspired to the sovereignty, as having married the base daughter of Philip the
last duke, as also by the adoption which the duke had made of him. At which
self same time the emperor Frederick the third claimed that duchy, as a
fee deuolued to the empire for default of heirs males. And Charles of Orleans
on the other side claimed it as belonging unto him in Valentine, both the
natural and lawful sister of the last duke. During which quarrels the
Venetians (as their usual manner is) to fish in troubled water, without any
right at all, possessed themselves of Cremona, Laud, and Placence, all members
of the duchy of Milan. The duke of Sauoye took also Nouarre and Versel:
Sforce, Pauie, and Derthone: and the people of Milan unable now to manage
their estate at home, or to defend their territory abroad; and yet abhorring
the government of one, and not well knowing unto what Saint to commend
themselves, voluntarily submitted themselves with their city unto the
Venetians, by whom for all that they were rejected. So that in fine all the
Christian princes and states their neighbors, were up in arms and together by
the ears for the estate; and for all that the last Jews duke of Orleans and
Valentine his sister: neither in taking unto him Charles of Orleans his nephew,
and right heir of his dukedom so to have adopted him, and brought him up
near unto his person, but adopted Sforce who had married his base daughter,
being but the first gentleman of his house.

But the royal stock being extinct, the last thereof may by right adopt unto
himself Whether the last of the royal stock may by right adopt unto himself
his successor.
his successor, except the nobility or people claim the right of the choice
of their prince to belong unto themselves. For if the last prince of the blood
shall appoint no Charles the great being utterly extinct, when as the last
king of the Germans had adopted none to succeed him, Henry the Faulconer duke
of Saxony was by general consent of all men created emperor: wherein for all
that the German writers are at varience among themselves: one of them
thinking Arnulphus; and another Charles the son of Jews king About what time
the seven princes electors were first appointed for the choice of the emperor.
The error of the^ which have thought the kingdom of France to have in ancient
time gone by election, rejected.
of the Germans to have been chosen emperor, and that not by the voices of
the people, but of the fifty princes only: and that elective right to have
been at length conferred unto seven of them who were thereof called the
princes electors: and that to have happened about the year 1250. But let us
now come unto our own histories.

Now concerning the first line which is of the Merouignes; Agathius a Greek
author of great authority and antiquity (for he flourished about the year
500) writes the French nation having chosen the best form of a Commonweal
that was possible (that is to say the royal Monarchy) to have therein
surpassed all their neighbors: neither to have had any other kings but by the
right of succession. And the Theodebert the son of Theodoric and nephew ^o
Clodoueus, being yet under age and the government of his tutor, to have been
called unto the crown according unto the manner and fashion of their ancestors.
Cedrinus also another Greek author, and he also very ancient (who writ in the
year 1058 in the time of Philip the first the king of France) reports the
French men to have had no other kings, but by a successiue right, after the
ancient manner of their ancestors. Wherein he shows the aforesaid three lines
of the kings of France to have used the right of succession. And if so be that
first Charles, and after him Carlomaine the children of Pipin caused themselves
to be both chosen by the nobility (as indeed they were) yet was not that done
but only so by the power and favor of the nobility to assure their
Merouignes, as in like case some of them did also of the house of Capet, who
had thrust out them of the house of Charlemaigne. As for that which is reported
of Otho, him by the consent and voices of the nobility to have been created
king: he at the time of his death having called together the princes of the
kingdom, protested him to have so done, not so much that he himself might
reign, as to keep the kingdom and the Commonweal wherewith he was put in
trust, in safety unto Jews the Stammerer to whom he was appointed tutor.
Robert Otho his brother in chalenging the kingdom as it were in the right of
succession after him, was slain in the battle of Soissons. Rodolph also son
unto the duke of Bourgundie caused himself also to be chosen, to exclude
Charles the Harbert county of Vermandois had in favor of this Rodolpe
extorted his resignation of the crown. And after that Hugh Capet had wrested
the scepter out of the hands of Charles of Loraine, he caused his son Robert
whilst he himself yet lived, to be crowned; and he likewise his son also,
Henry the first; and Henry, his son also: and so until that one of the
daughters of Baldwin earl of Holland and regent of France, descended from the
eldest daughter of the aforesaid Charles of Loraine, and so lineally from
Charlemaigne, was married unto Philip the first, and was mother unto Jews the
Gross: whereby the secret grudgings and hatred of the people against the Capets
were appeased, and the fire of joy and bliss kindled, to see one of the race
of Charlemaigne, and so of the Arnulph, joined with the stock of Capets. And
if any conjecture there be, wherefore any man should think the kings of France
to have been by election created; it may best seem to be drawn from the
manner of the coronation of the kings: For before the king that is to crowned
take his oath, the two Bishops of Laon and The ancient manner of the coronation
of the kings of France.
Beauuois standing on both sides of the king, and lifting him up a little from
his throne, and then turning themselves unto the people there present, demand
of them whether they will have that man to reign over them or not: whereunto
they giving their consent, the Archbishop of Reims takes his oath. So that
they which write the kingdom of France to go by election, have had no further
regard but only unto the manner and form of the choosing of the king (if it
ought at all to be called a choice)

The title of the ancient written book of Rheimes is this, LIBER IVLIANI AD
ERRIGIVM REGEM: The book of Julian unto king Errigius: (meaning Errichius the
father of Philip the first) The words of the book are these, Anno 1058
indictione xij Henrico regnante xxxij, and iiij Call. Iunij, in die Pentecostes
Philippus rex hoc ordine in maiore ecclesia ante altar sanctae Mariae a
venerabili Archiepiscopr consecratus est incoata Missa antequam epistola
legeretur, Dominus Archiepiscopus ver^ ad eum, and exposuit ei fidem
catholicam, sciscitans ab eo vtrum hanc crederet, and defendere vellet: quo
annuente delata est eius professio; quam accipiens ipse legit, dum ad huc
septennis esset, eique subscripsit: erat autem prosessio eius haec: EGO
Philippus, Deo propitiante mox futurus rex Francorum, in die ordinationis meae
promitto coram Deo, and sanctis eius, quod vnicuique de vobis commissis
canonicum priuilegium, and debitam legem, atque iustitiam conseruabo, and
defensionem adiuuante Domino, quantum potero, exhibebo, sicut rex insuo regno
vnicuique Episcopo and ecclesi^ sibi commissae per rectum exhibere debet:
populo quoque nobis credito me dispensationem legum in suo iure consistentem,
nostra auctoritate concessurum. Qua perlecta posuit eum in manus Archiepiscopi,
ante stante Archiepiscopo Suessionensi, etc. Accipiens Archiepiscopus baculum
S. Rhemigij, disseruit quiet and pacifice, quomodo ad eum maxim pertineret
electio regis and consecratio, ex quo sanctus Rhemigius Ludouicum baptizauit
and consecrauit. disseruit etiam quomodo per illum baculum hanc consecrandi
potestatem and totum Galliae principatum Ormisdas papa sancto dederit Rhemigio:
and quomodo victor Papa sibi and ecclesiae suae concesserit. Tunc annuente
patre eius Henrico, elegit eum in regem post eum. Legati Romanae sedis, cum
idsine Papae nutu fieri licitum non esse dissertum ibi sit: honoris tamen and
amoris gratia tum ibi assuerunt: Legati Lotarius Sol; Archiepiscopi, Episcopi,
Abbates, Clerici; Dux Aquitaniae, filius, Legatus Ducis Burgundiae, Legati
Marchionis, and Legati Comitis Andegauensis: post Comites Vandensis,
Vermadensis, Ponticensis, Suessionensis, Aruer nensis, post milites and populi
tam matores quam minores vno ore consentientes laudauerunt, ter proclamantes:
LAVDMVS, VOLV MVS, FIAT. In the year 1058, the twelft of the indiction, of the
reign of king Henry the xxxij, the iiij of the Calends of June, on Whitsunday,
king Philip was in the great church, before the altar of blessed Marie, by the
most reverend Archbishop in this order crowned: Mass now already being begun,
and before the reading of the Epistle: the Lord Archbishop turning himself
unto him, declared unto him the Catholic faith, asking him whether he believed
the same, and would also defend it? Whereunto he granting, his profession of
the same was brought forth, which he taking read it, (being as then but seven
years old) and subscribed to the same, Philip, by the grace of God, by and by
about to be the king of France, upon the day of my inuesting do promise before
God and his saints, to keep canonical privilege, with due law and justice to
every one of you the committies: as also so much as in me lies by the help of
God, to defend you, as a king in this kingdom of right ought to do unto
every Bishop, and to the church committed to his charge: as also by our
authority to grant unto the people committed unto us, the administration of
our laws, standing in their full power. Which profession so read, he The
archbishops of Rheims pretend to have the choice of the French kings.
put it into the Archbishops hands, etc. (Here are twenty Bishops and many
Abbats by name reckoned up, and immediately aster) The Archbishop taking the
staff of Saint Rhimigius, calmely and quietly declared, How that unto him
especially belonged the Rhemigius baptized and consecrated king This Jews is
r^her to ^e calle^ C^o ioue^s, other^se in ^ntient ti^ called H^ndwich.
Jews: declaring also, how by that staff of Hormisdas the pope gave unto
Saint Rhemigius this power of consecrating the kings, with all the kingdom of
France: and how the Pope Victor granted the same also unto him and his
church. And so his father Henry consenting thereunto, chose him to be king
after him. The Legates of the Sea of Rome having there reasoned it, not to be a
thing lawful without the license of the Pope, were yet for love and honors
sake there present: as were also other ambassadors, as Lotarius Sol, with
other Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Clarks, the young Duke of Aquitane, the
ambassadors of the Duke of Burgundy, the ambassadors of the Marquess, the
ambassadors of the Earl of Angiers, after them the Earls We praise him, We
will have him: Let it be done. These things we have word for word written, the
which were never yet put in print. They therefore which think the kings of
France to have been in ancient time created by the voices of the people,
understand not the bishops of Rheimes to have affirmed, that to have been given
unto them by a certain singular privilege from the bishops of Rome: howbeit
that it can in no wise agree with the faith and obedience which the archbishops
of Rheims have used to give unto the kings of France. We read also, that
Charles (he which for want of wit was surnamed the simple) was crowned by Fulke
the archbishop Otho so chosen, prerended himself to be king: and unto whom
complaining of the injury done him by the archbishop in crowning of Charles:
Fulke answered, That he had made choice of Charles, according to the manner
and custom of his ancestors, who had not used to choose kings, but of the
royal stock and race of kings. Whose letters written unto that effect to Otho
are yet extant. Whereby it appears, that if ever any man had the right of
election, it belonged unto the archbishop of Rheims, or that at leastwise he
was in the possession thereof: and yet for all that, that he could not make
choice of any other king, but of the princes of the blood. But to show that the
right of the crown of France still descended unto the heir male Lotaire,
Jews, and Charles the Bauld, grounded upon this, That their father had given
the better part, and the regal seat of France, to Charles the Bauld his
youngest son: howbeit that all the three brethren were kings, governing their
divided kingdoms with royal sovereignty. And for that Henry the first, king
of France, the younger son of Robert, had been chosen by his father, and his
elder brother the duke of Burgundy rejected: he fearing least the children of
his elder brother, should in their fathers right lay claim unto the crown,
and so put all France into civil wars, as it had before been in the wars
betwixt him and his brother; to prevent the same, he caused his son Philip,
Jews the Gross being consecrated by the archbishop of Sens, in the city of
Orleans. Besides that the archbishops of Rheims foolishly pretend them to have
that from the pope: wherein the popes themselves have no right, no more than
they have unto the empire, which they have made subject unto their elections;
and by thrusting the sickle into another man's harvest (as says Albericus the
lawyer) have against all That the king never dies. Which ancient proverb How
it is to be understood. That the king never d^eth.
shows well, that the kingdom never went by election, and the kings thereof
hold their scepters neither of the pope, neither of the archbishop of Rheims,
nor of the people, but only of God alone. And I remember a lawyer, a most
famous pleader of his time, Vlpian, where he speaking of the Roman emperor
says, Lege Regia de eius imperio lata, populus ei and in eum omnem suam
potestatem Contulit, By a royal law made concerning his power, the people
conferred unto him and upon him all his power: whereat the kings people
suddenly arise, requesting the court in sull audience, That those words might
be rased out of the plea; showing that the kings of France had never received
their power from the people. Yea the court therefore sharply reproved the said
lawyer, causing the words, at the request of the Attorney general, to be
rased out of the plea, forbidding him any more to use such speeches: who never
after, as every man Rex est mortuus, or, The king is dead. And even he the same
man, presently after advancing a banner with the Lillies in it, the proper
arms of this nation, cries likewise, Viuat Rex N. eique vitam diuturnam ac
felicem Deus largiatur, God save king N. and grant him long and happy life.
The like manners and customs use the English, the Scots, and Spaniards, with
whom (as with us) the kingdom is by right of succession given unto the nearest
of kin. The like ceremonies are used also

But now those dangers which we have said to follow the election of a prince,
belong Election no l^sse dangerous unto the electors, than v^o the kings and
sovereign princes themselves so elected.
not more unto the kings and princes themselves, than unto them that choose
them: for if the king be to be chosen by the voices of the whole people, all
must needs be full of seditions, factions, and murders. But if the nobility,
or some other estate only, shall challenge unto themselves alone the right of
choosing of the prince, the rest of the estates will grudge and repine thereat,
that which is of right due to all, to be given to some few. Election of princes
b^tter to be made by some few, than by many.
yet could nothing be devised more commodious or expedient for the avoiding of
the factions of the seditious, and of civil wars, than to take from the
multitude of princes Albert of Austria, and Jews of Bauaria, who for the space
of eight years made most cruel wars, which of them should as emperor rule
and reign one of them over the other, all that while one of them still
spoiling and ruinating the towns, castles, and villages, of the others
fauourits and part takers. So in like manner the cardinals (who were but
twelve) after the death of pope Clement the 4, Gregory the tenth: and who for
that cause bound the college of cardinals unto most strait laws in the choice
of the pope, and yet could he not so provide, but that after his death, they at
once made choice of three popes, and oftentimes of two; insomuch that at the
last it was needful to shut them up, and to starve them with hunger, if within
a certain appointed time, they did not denounce him pope, who had at the most
two parts of the voices: which yet is more straightly kept in the choosing of the
Grand Master of the Knights of the order of Saint John: for they mure up the
twenty four electors, before nominated by the knight, without The strait
order observed in choosing the Grand Master of the knights of Malta
either meat or drink, who must choose one who is not of that number of the
twenty four, and that within a short time limited them. There have been seen
also such factions, suits, and murders, to have happened in this realm, about
the election even of the inferior bishops, as have oftentimes troubled the
state even of the most famous cities, and wherein he that was the most vicious
and ignorant most commonly carried away the matter: than which no greater cause
seems to have been, wherefore the voices for the choosing of bishops have
been taken from the colleges of priests and monks, and given to princes: as
the Chancellor Prat declared, at such time as question was in parliament, for
the verifying of the agreement made betwixt king Francis the first, and Leo the
tenth: For which cause also the bishops and abbats in Moscouie,

And yet nevertheless the only color that men have to maintain election, is
to Evil men more commonly preferred than the good, where men are by election
promoted.
say, That the more worthy men are so chosen to be emperors, popes, bishops,
and prelates. Wherein I refer them unto the histories of all ages, which will
say the contrary: and that there have seldom been more vicious and wicked
men, than were the most part of them who were by choice and election preferred;
which we need not now by examples to verify: but thus much only I say, that
if the right of succession had taken place, Nero, Heliogabalus, Otho,
Vitellius, and such others, the monsters of nature, had never come unto the
Roman empire: Augustus, Traian, Adrian, both the Antonines, with other the
emperors excelling in virtue and wisdom, who by adoption A good means, the
line of Monarchs failing, to prevent the dangers still attending upon election.
unto the estates: in this case it is much surer to proceed by lot, having made
choice of the most worthiest persons, or of such as be equal in nobility, or
in virtue, or in power, to the end that one of them may be drawn by lot,
rather than to enter into Samuel, when question was for the making of a new
king, caused all the people to be assembled, and the lot to be drawn for all
the twelve Tribes, which falling upon the Tribe of Benjamin, and lot cast also
upon the families of that Tribe, in the family of Cis Some kings first chosen
by lot, and yet their children to have obtained their kingdoms as by a
successiue right.
the lot fell upon Saul, whom Samuel by the commandment of God had before
anointed, to the end that the people should not think that the kingdom was
unto him by chance only fallen. But after that the Monarchy is once
established, men have commonly had regard unto the prerogative of successiue
right, without using either of Cambyses being dead without issue, used lot, or
rather the neying of an horse for the choosing of their king. Yet we see Darius
having once by lot got the kingdom, the sovereignty of the state to have been
afterward by successiue right derived unto his posterity.

Now it is not enough that successiue right take place in the descending of a
kingdom, The successiue right of the eldest son, common to al people
but that the nearest of kin unto the sovereign monarch succeed him also: my
meaning is, among the males, and those of his name, which is (to speak
properly) the elder, as the first descended of him. For so the order of nature
wills that the elder should go foremost next after the father, and that the
rest should every one of them Perseus, that by the right of nature common unto
all nations, and by the custom inuiolably observed in the kingdom of Macedon,
the elder was still to succeed into that kingdom. And for that reason (as
says Diodorus) Alexander the Great carried away the crown of that kingdom,
from the rest of his brethren. As the manner was also in the kingdom of
Parthia, where the eldest of the house of Arsaces their first king, and the
nearest of his blood succeeded: following therein (says Justin) the ancient
custom of the Parthies. In like manner amongst the Hebrews, the kingdom of
Judah was given to Ioram, for that (as says the Scripture) he Herodotus
himself (the most ancient of all the Greek historiographers) says, That
generally in all kingdoms the custom was, that the elder should by right of
succession have and enjoy the scepter and diadem: yea and more than four
hundred years before Herodotus (as says Coruinus Messala, in his book
dedicated to Augustus the emperor) Ilus as the elder brother, was preferred
unto the kingdom of the Latins, before Assaracus the younger brother. We read
them also of the West Indies (although men of all others most deuoid of
humanity) to have also used this same natural* law, for the eldest to succeed
before the younger. And that when Francis Pizarra General of the Spaniards,
conquering the kingdom of Peru, caused Attabalippa the king to be put to
death: all the people thereat rejoiced, to see him die that had caused his
elder brother to be slain, so to become king himself, contrary to the
custom of the country, and his fathers will conformable thereunto: who having
two hundred children, yet by his will appointed that Gaca his eldest son
should alone succeed him in his kingdom, without dividing of the same. And
albeit that the children were twins, yet so it is, that the prerogative of the
kingdom is to be kept unto him that is first borne, and so to be left,
witnessed by most manifest proof: least such like quarrel should arise for the
prerogative of birthright, as did betwixt James king of Scots, and the duke of
Albanie, being twins: which kingdom the duke complained to be wrongfully
taken from him: king James maintaining the contrary, for that he was the Great
troubles to have still arisen, where the natural successiue right of the
eldest has been violated, and the younger brother preferred.
of Alba, invaded by Aemulius, being of right due unto Numitor the elder
brother: and to Aristobulus king of Judea, thrust out of the kingdom by the
sentence and doom of Pompey the Great, to make an end of the civil wars and
seditions: the kingdom being so restored unto his elder brother Hircanus,
without respect to that which Aristobulus alleged, his said brother not to
have been fit to bear arms, neither yet to govern a kingdom. A reason and
color for which the fathers and fauourits have often time troubled the right of
their children, to set the crown due unto the elder, upon the head of the
younger. As did Ptolomey the first of that name king of Egypt, who contrary
Justin) preferred the younger brother unto the kingdom before the elder, which
was the cause that one of them slew the other. In which error Ptolomee
surnamed Physcon offended also, who persuaded by his wife Cleopatra, preferred
the younger brother before the elder: but was no sooner dead, but that the
people expulsed the younger, and restored the scepter unto the elder.
Anaxandrides also king of Lacedemonia, preferred Dorieus before Cleomenes his
elder brother, for that he was the more civil: and yet the history says,
that the people thereof grievously complained, as of a thing done contrary to
the law of nations. And albeit that king Pyrrhus said, That his will was, that
he of his children should succeed him, which had the sharpest sword; meaning
thereby the most valiantest of them: yet the people Atreus, Great murders and
civil wars to have ensued, for having preferred the younger brother before
the elder.
and Thyestes, who willing to prefer the younger before the elder, as the
fitter for the mannaging of the affairs of state, so filled and foiled his
house with most cruel and horrible tragedies. But more foolelishly do they,
which search into the natiuities of Alphonsus the 10, king of Castile, who by
this means would have preferred the younger brother before the elder: who for
the disgrace so offered him, slew his younger brother, and caused his said
father for grief to die in prison. In like case almost Gabriel the younger
son of the Marquess of Salusse, by the consent of his mother cast his elder
brother into prison, pretending that he was out of his wits: who yet breaking
out of prison, recovered his principality, and having chased out his brother,
coupt up his mother in the same prison, wherein he himself had but a little
before been shut up. And not to seek further from home, we have seen all
this realm on fire with civil wars, for that Jews the Devout, at the
entreaty of his second wife, had preferred Charles the Bauld, before Lothaire
his elder brother. Wherefore pope Pius the second did wisely, in rejecting the
request of Charles the seventh the French king, desirous to have preferred
Charles his younger son before Jews the 11 his elder brother: howbeit that
the king had reason so to do, considering that Jews had without any just
occasion, twice taken up arms against him, so to have taken from him the
crown, and to have plucked the scepter out of his hand.

Now it is so far from that the first begotten, or eldest son, should for
cowardice or want of courage, be imbarred to succeed unto the crown, as that
if he be miss shapen and deformed also, yet ought not the prerogative he has
unto the crown by his birthright for that to be taken from him. Howbeit that
it much concerns the Commonweal Lycurgus and Plato, would great regard to be
had, and especially Lycurgus, who willed the deformed children to be slain.
But the Deuteronomy. 21. The elder brother even by the law of God to be preferred
before the younger.
law of God has decided this doubt, commanding the younger not to be preferred
before the elder, for what love or favor soever. Which is not only to take
place when question is of the right of the elder, but also when the next heir
male of the fathers side is to succeed unto the crown, albeit that he be
deformed. For one ought not for one inconvenience to break so good a law, or to
open a gap so dangerous unto Monarchies: which to be so the estates and people
of Hungary showed by a most A notable example.
notable example: contrary unto the will and disposition of Ladislaus their
king, who having no issue, adopted Alme his brothers youngest son, so to make
him king after him, rejecting Coloman his elder brother, whom he in a sort
banished, sending him a great way off, to study in Paris: causing him also
afterward to enter into the orders of priesthood, and withal bestowing upon
him a bishoprike, so to take from him all the hope for him to succeed unto the
crown. For he was a man altogether deformed, goggle eyed, evil spoken, lame,
and crooked backed; and yet for all that Ladislaus being dead, the estates of
that kingdom drove out the younger, refusing to have any other king but the
elder brother, whom they called home, and by their ambassadors afterward
obtained of the pope, to have him dispensed with, and discharged of his orders,
and married also. In like case Agesilaus, a law dwarf, having by the means
of Lysander a prince of the Leotichides as Alcibiades his bastard, succeeded
into the kingdom, not as the kings son, but as next of the fathers side, and of
the blood of Hercules: his adversaries in vain complaining the kingdom to
hault. And howbeit that Lysander who had preferred Agesilaus to the kingdom
afterward did what he might to have abrogated the ancient royal law, and to
have published an edict whereby the nearest of blood should not have succeeded
into the kingdom, but that the most sufficient of the blood royal should
still be chosen; yet was there none found of his opinion. Whether a kingdom
ought to descend unto the younger son borne whilst his father was king: or to
the elder, borne before his father had obtained the kingdom.


Some there be which would adiudge kingdoms unto the younger being borne kings
sons, their elder brethren being borne before that their fathers were king: as
was judged for Xerxes, declared king against Artabazus his elder brother begot
by Darius Darius. But where the kingdom is descended by a lawful succession
from former ancestors, the eldest or nearest of the fathers stock is to
succeed, although he be borne before his father was possessed of the kingdom.
Whereby is understood what is to be judged of the question, which Bartholus
writes to have happened in his time; as whether Philip earl of Valois his son
borne before his father was king of France, should as king succeed him in the
kingdom; or else his younger son which he had after that he was king? Howbeit
that I John. But this same question might well have bin disputed in the time of
king Charles the second, who before he was king had his son Jews: who yet
without any question obtained the kingdom, although he had his brother Charles
borne whilst his father was king. For now question was of an ancient kingdom
deuolued unto the next of name: whereas otherwise the young son of a king
conquering a new kingdom should be preferred before his other brethren borne
before their father was a king. For as the children of base men are not
ennobled, being borne before their father was made noble; neither he to be
accounted a priests son, which was borne before his father was a priest: so
he also which is borne of a father before that he was king, not capable of the
kingdom Artaxerxes succeeded, although he was borne before his father was
king: as claiming the kingdom from his great grandfather. And albeit that his
mother Parysatis thrust all Asia into civil war to turn the estate unto her
best beloved son the young Cyrus, yet so it is that by the judgment of God he
was in battle by his elder brother overthrown and so slain. In like sort and
upon the same doubt which happened about the succession of the kingdom of
Hungary, Geica the elder brother borne before his father had obtained the
Demetrius reasoned in the Senate at Rome, his brother Antiochus king of Syria
being dead: for as (said he) the right of nations has before given the
kingdom unto mine elder brother, even by the self same right ought I now to
succeed him in the same.

But it may de doubted if the grandfather yet reigning, the eldest son shall
die leaving Whether the elder brothers son (his father being dead before he was
king) be^ to succeed into his grandfathers kingdom before his uncle, his
grandfathers younger son.
a son, the grandfathers nephew; Whether the kingdom be due unto the next
brother or to the nephew, who is one degree farther off. Upon which question
many have resolved it to be due unto the next brother. And indeed Scipio
Africanus willing as an vmpire to have appeased the like controversy betwixt
Corbis and Orsua the uncle and the nephew, for the kingdom of Numidia, and not
knowing what in this point to resolve upon, appointed the kingdom to be tried
by combat betwixt them two: they both of themselves refusing to have any other
god or man for judge but Mars: In which combat Corbis being both the elder and
the cunninger overcame his nephew, as Liuie writes. Which like kind of combats
betwixt the uncle and the nephew Liuius li. 38.
have ofted in ancient time been undertaken among the German princes: which
was the only cause that stirred up Barnard king of Italy to take up arms
against the emperor Jews the Devout; alleging that the empire of right
belonged unto him as the only son of Pepin the eldest son of Charlemaigne,
and not to Jews the Devout the younger brother of Pepin: howbeit that Jews yet
carried it away, though not so much by right as by force of arms, and so
prevailing against Bernard kept him The manner and order of the succession of
the kingdom of Moscouie.
shut up in perpetual prison. And even yet at this present the kingdom of
Moscouie is always given unto the younger brother, after the death of the
grandfather, without respect unto the children of the elder brother: and that
more is, the younger brother succeeds in the kingdom unto the elder brother,
although the elder brother being Basilius the Great, king of Moscouie succeeded
in the kingdom after his elder brother who had children. For which reason also
Henry of Lancaster the son of John of Gaunt deposed Richard the eldest son
of Edward the Black prince: alleging that his father being by death
prevented, he could not succed Edward his grandfather in the kingdom: which
yet was but an unjust quarrel picked. So in like case Robert of Naples the
younger brother, by the sentence of the Pope and of the college of cardinals,
obtained the kingdom of Naples: the son of the elder brother king of
Hungary being so excluded. An usual matter amongst the Vandals, as Procopius
writes: for so Honorius got the kingdom of Gensericus his grandfather,
howbeit that Gerso his eldest son dying had left sons;

And which I see to have been common even unto our ancestors also: for so
Gontran prevailed against Childebert the eldest son of Sigisbert in the
obtaining of the kingdom of France. So Mauld overcame Robert her nephew, the
son of Robert her elder brother, for the county of Arthoise, the Senate of
France desciding the matter; and so obtained her fathers whole inheritance.
Henry also son to Theobald earl of Champaigne in like suit overcome his
eldest brothers son. But when John Montfort in like suit for the dukedom of
Britain was ouerthrown, by his aunt the daughter of Vide of Britain; what by
right he could not, he by force obtained, not without a most cruel Robert the
son of Charles the second, by the judgment of the Pope obtained the kingdom
of Naples, Charles his nephew the elder brothers son, king of Hungary, in
vain reclaiming. Sanxius also the son of Alphonsus the tenth king of
Castile, his father favoring of him thrust his elder brothers sons out of
the hope of the kingdom. John also having slain Arthure, Godfrey his elder
brothers son, took upon him the kingdom of England. Unlike was the quartell
of Siluius, who after the death of Ascanius, in the right of his mother took
from Iulus, Ascanius his son, the kingdom of the Latins: For that Lauinia
had Siluius by Aeneas but not Ascanius. But not fewer, yea and I know not
whether more Lycurgus, he gave unto Charilaus his eldest brothers son, his
kingdom, which he might easily have taken unto himself, the child's mother
consenting thereunto. Arcus also the elder brothers son, after the death of
his grandfather obtained the same kingdom, his uncle Acrotatus yet living. So
also John the son of Ferdinand succeeded to Alphonsus his grandfather king of
Portugal, Henry his uncle being yet alive. And not long after Sebastian the
son of John the eldest brother took upon him the kingdom of Emanuel his
grandfather, and not Henry his uncle, Jews of Niuers also after the death of
his grandfather got the counties of the Low countries his uncle yet living and
looking on. But Robert the John Vaste the son of the earl of Foix, and the
heir of Francis Phebe, who being the son of the elder brother had got his
grandfathers inheritance, his uncle yet living. So also was it judged for the
dukedom of Britain against John Montfort. Others have left it as a thing
doubtful to be tried by combat. For as Scipio Africanus permitted the combat
betwixt Orsue and Corbis whom he could not by law appease: the same we read to
have happened first under Otho the Great, and after that under Henry the first
Agathocles king of Syracusa slew his uncle, going about to have taken upon him
his grandfathers kingdom.

Neither want there probable reasons on both sides. For the nephew it avails
Reasons for the succession of the nephew before his uncle.
that his father being dead he falls into the power of his grandfather, and
so is made his heir by the law of the twelve tables: and together with his
uncles is admitted into his portion of his grandfathers inheritance, he dying
intestat. And if the father substitute an heir unto his son, that
substitution cease if the son beget children, only upon the conjecture of
the fathers kind affection toward his son, as Papinian the lawyer has
answered. Yea, by the Roman laws, brothers sons are admitted unto

Neither yet for all this is the uncles cause on the other side altogether
without reason, Reasons for the succession of the uncle before his nephew.
if a man will but more nearly look into these matters, and without guile
interpret the law of the twelve tables. For why this law still admits the
nearest of kin or of an indivisible fee, by reason of that imaginary fiction
whereof we have Esaias. 3.
That Commonweal to be miserable and unfortunate, where children bear rule.

Howbeit that the old received custom of our ancestors, and judgments in
this Charles the Great, we shall scarcely, or else not at all, in the space of
twelve hundred years, find the uncle and the nephew, after the death of the
grandfather, to have met together as competitors in the succession of this
kingdom. We read it in the space of about five or six hundred years to have
happened once in England, once in Castile, twice in Portugal, and once in
Sicilia. Wherefore let the sentence as well of the ancient, as of the later
lawyers prevail for the nephew against the uncle: not only in direct, but even
in oblique, and collateral succession also. Which we have somewhat Villiers,
and Baynecourt, cosens germans, for the inheritance of Francis Bloqui, without
any regard unto the race of the elder ancestors, considering that they came
unto the succession of their chief ot head, and not by false supposall, or by
the way of representation.

And yet is it not sufficient, that the next heirs male of name succeed, but
it is needful also, that the kingdom, how great soever it be, with all the
sovereign rights thereof, be wholly given to one without partition: as
Gensericus king of the Vandales wisely appointed. For otherwise if a Monarchy
be divided, it is no more to be accounted That a kingdom how great soever is
not to be divided, but to be wholly given to one without partition.
a Monarchy, but rather a Poliarchy, or Monarchy divided into many Monarchies.
Which was not by the law Salique with us (as some suppose) provided for, or
fooreseene. For we find that Aribert, brother to Dagobert the eldest son of
Clotaire the second, was also king with his brother, one of them holding
nothing of the other. Clodoueus also the eldest son of Dagobert, was king of
Paris, and Sigebert his brother king of Metz. And after the death of Clodoueus
his four sons divided the realm into four kingdoms: for Childebert was
king of Paris, Clodoueus king of Orleans, Clotaire of Soissons, and Theodoric
of Metz. But the rest being dead, all in fine came to Clotaire, whose eldest
son Cherebert was king of Paris, Chilperic of Soissons, Gontran of Orleans,
and Sigebert of Metz, all kings: which multitude of kings were scarece ever
Hugh Capet, who ordained three kings of great consequence for the maintaining
of this Monarchy in the greatness thereof. First they excluded the bastards of
the house of Three things of great consequence ordained for the maintenance of
the kingdom of France in the greatness thereof.
France, from all entrance unto the kingdom, not allowing them so much as to
be accounted in the number of their natural children: that so from thenceforth
they might think of the begetting of lawful children, their base borne
children being now quite excluded from the crown. Howbeit that it was
permitted unto the bastards of other princes of the blood, and of other noble
houses, to be by their fathers avouched, and to bear the name, the arms, the
style and noble titles of their natural fathers: providing also better, by
taking away of the masters of the palace, whose power was now become Charles
the Simple, had part in the kingdom, and so after the manner of our ancestors
was called a king. True it is, that Theodoric the kings bastard was excluded,
for that he was begot of a bondwoman, who yet nevertheless demanded his part
of the kingdom, unto whom for all that answer was given, That he must first
be made a free man.

And as for dividing of a Monarchy, I have said, that being divided, it is no
more a A Monarchy divided, no more* to be accounted a Monarchy.
Monarchy, no more than a crown or robe divided into parts, is any more to be
acconnted a robe or a crown: the inuiolat nature of unity being such, as that
it can abide no partition. Neither find we the ancient kings of Persia,
Egypt, Parthia, or Assyria, Iosaphat king of the Jews having six sons, left
his kingdom whole and entire unto his eldest son Ioram, assigning unto the
rest certain yearly annuities, or pensions. The first that opened this
dangerous gap, was Aristodemus king of Lacedemonia, who yet divided not his
kingdom unto his two sons, Proculus and Euristhenes, but left the kingdom
undivided unto them both: and so thinking to have made them both kings, took
from them both all sovereign authority and power. After whose example the
kingdom of the Messenians, near unto the Lacedaemonians, was by the father
given undivided unto Leucippus and Amphareus, being brethren: the chief cause
why those two kingdoms To divide a kingdom, a thing dangerous
two kingdoms to be given unto two kings, than one kingdom to be given to
many: as it has sometimes happened, the father to have divided unto his sons
diverse kingdoms, before they were into one united: for so James king of Aragon
appointed Peter his eldest son to be king of Aragon, and James his younger
son to be king of Maiorque: howbeit that afterward the elder brother took
the younger prisoner, and in prison starued him, whom much less he would have
endured to have been partner with him in the kingdom, and so united both the
kingdoms into one. So it befell also the children of Boleslaus the second,
king of Polonia, who having divided the kingdom unto his four sons, and
leaving nothing unto the fifth, kindled such a fire of sedition, How the
division of kingdoms may be borne.
this division of kingdoms is well to be borne withal, when it is made by
him which has conquered them, who may give his conquests got by his own
prowess and valor, unto his younger sons, as he sees good, according to
their age or deserts: leaving yet still unto the eldest, the ancient kingdom
or territory: as did William the Conqueror, who left the dukedom of
Normandy, and the other countries which he had from his father, unto his
eldest son Robert Curteyse, who succeeded him not in the kingdom of England,
for that he was not the son of a king (as says the Norman history) but left
that kingdom which he had conquered unto William Rufus, which he had not as
yet united unto his other countries: leaving unto Henry his third son
nothing Robert the eldest brother, desirous also to have had the kingdom from
Henry the third brother, who after the death of William Rufus his brother, had
ceised thereon, in seeking too greedily thereafter, lost both the one and the
other: and being taken by the third brother (who now carried away all) was by
him cast in prison, and so deprived of his sight there miserably died. And
albeit That a new conquered kingdom with all the soue reign rights thereof, is
better left wholly unto one, than to be divided among^ many.
that this disposition of the Conquerours was right just, as grounded both
upon reason and authority, yet had it been much more saftie, to have left the
whole kingdom, and all the sovereign rights thereof unto one alone: as was
done amongst the children of Charles County of Province, and of Philip Valois
king of France, where the eldest had all: which is by far the surest for the
estate, without respect unto the other How the kings younger sons are
provided for in France.
and fees for the maintenance of the younger brethren of the house of France:
which have been again adjudged unto the crown, they which had them being dead
without issue: as was decided for the inheritance of Robert earl of Cleremont
brother to saint Jews, unto whom that inheritance was adjudged: his other
brethren Charles and Alphonsus earl of Poitiers both excluded. The like
judgment being also given against Charles, concerning the succession into the
inheritance of Alphonsus, dying also without issue: Charles his brother
enjoying no part thereof, the inheritance by a decree of the Senate, being
adjudged from him, and given unto the crown. For which cause the succeeding
kings better advised, and to the intent that the matter should be no more
doubted of, have provided, that in the letters patents concerning the lands and
pensions given unto their younger brethren, it should expressly be comprised,
that they dying without heirs male, those lands unto them so given should
again return unto the Jews duke of Aniou, king John his son. And albeit
that Renate the younger son of Jews the third, duke of Aniou, succeeded his
elder brother into the inheritance, yet was it rather by sufferance, than for
any right he had so to do as heir male. For otherwise the earl of Niuers
after the death of Charles duke of Bourgundie (his nie kinsman dead without any
heirs male) might justly have claimed the duchy, considering that in the
letters patents of Philip the Hardy, the dukedom of Bourgundie was given unto
him and to his children, as well females as males, without any exception of
sex. Yet pretended the earl no right thereunto, but the duke being dead, king
Jews the eleventh in his own right claimed the dukedom of Bourgundie. True
it is, that the French kings in that Philip of Valois obtaining the kingdom,
resigned the earldom of Valois unto his younger brother Charles. And Charles
the sixth the French king being dead, Charles of Angoulesme succeeded unto the
duchy of Orleans, and yet his sons son John of Angoulesme succeeded not
unto the said duchy of Orleans, Jews the twelft having got the kingdom,
annexing the same dukedom unto the crown. For they are deceived which write
Peter of Burbon, lord of Beauieu, to have succeeded his brother John into the
lands which he had received from the kings his ancestors, by lawful right
rather than by the grant and favor of king Jews the eleventh, whose sister
Anne the said Peter had married, whom Jews the twelft was content also, that
Susan of Burbon the only daughter of Peter of Burbon, marrying Charles of
Burbon, should hold such lands, long before given to the crown: but the said
Susan being dead without issue, those lands were forthwith ceized upon, and
again annexed unto the crown, namely the counties of Auergne, and Clermont,
and the dukedom of Burbon, howbeit that it was not in the letters patents
comprised: which thing is thought especially to have moved Charles of Burbon to
have entered into rebellion against the king. So also we find, that after the
death of John the third, duke of Alanson, the duchy of Alanson was at the
motion of the kings Attorney general ceized upon for the king; howbeit that
the duke had left two daughters his heirs, unto whom were reserved only the
lands by The reason why women inherit not land* by their ancestors descending
unto them, which lands sometime belonged unto the crown of France.
and Cleue, which indiuisibly belong unto the next of kin. And albeit that the
German princes do equally divide all the fees of the empire, excepting the
princes electors, yet is that contrary unto the custom and manner of their
ancestors (who as Tacitus writes) gave all their lands and inheritances unto
the eldest, and their mouables and money only unto the rest. And so we read
Abraham the Patriarch to have done, giving his whole inheritance unto his
eldest son, and money unto the rest, whom he

But happily here some man may say, it to be expedient if the Monarchy be great,
as Great kingdom and monarchies, not to be with any safety divided into many.
were those of the Persians, the Romans, the Frenchmen, and the Spaniards; and
that the prince or monarch have many children, or that there be many
competitors, that then the surest way is to divide it: so as did Augustus,
Marcus Antonius, Sextus Pompeius, who by lot divided the Roman empire, and so
of one great Monarchy made three. And this expediencie should seem unto me
good, if that princes after that they had bounded out their frontiers, could
bound out also their desires. But there are no mountains so high, no rivers so
broad, nor seas so deep, that were ever yet able to stay Sextus Pompeius, the
bonds of confederacy being in short time broken amongst the consederats.
Neither could Antonius endure the government of Augustus, neither Augustus the
government of Anthony, although he were a great way off from him* So that one
of the three being before slain, the other two could never be at quiet, until
they had one of them quite ruinated the other. And if at any time it have
happened, some of the emperors of the East, and of the West, in so great an
empire to have lived in peace, it was not long, but almost a miracle, neither
such as Othoman family, wherein many most horrible murders have been for the
empire committed, the parents not sparing their own children, neither the
children their parents: insomuch that within this two hundred years past, they
have not ceased still to kill one another, until there be but one of them left
alive. And in the Sovereignty admits no partnership.
little isle of Gerbe, six kings have in less time than fifteen years been
slain one of them by another, being not able to endure a companion or partaker
one of them with another in the sovereignty. And albeit that Galeace the
second, and Barnabas, two most Galeace only for the ambitious desire of
sovereignty, most cruelly slew his said brother, together with all his
children. So Abimelech the bastard slew threescore and nine of his brethren,
that he might all alone reign. And Berdeboc king of Tartarie with like
slaughter, and for like cause, slew his twelve brethren. Sephadin also caused
the ten sons of his brother Saladin to be all murdered, that he might
himself Alexander also most part of them slew one another, not sparing either
their parents, or children. For as for one brother to kill another, it was so
common a matter (as Plutarch writes) as that it seemed almost a miracle unto
the ambassador of Ptolomey, that Demetrius standing on the right hand of
Antigonus his father, with a boar spear in his hand, could abstain from
killing of his father. But yet greater was the cruelty of king Deiotarus, who
at one time slew twelve of his sons, for no other cause, but so the better to
assure his kingdom unto the thirteenth, whom he best loved* For always
amongst equals, the ambitious desires they have to be one of them greater than
another, still armeth them one against another: Whereas in a Monarchy, where
there is but one sovereign, and unto whom the princes Places of too much power
and command, not to be committed unto princes of the blood, or otherwise great
lords.
have been better advised, have not given unto their brethren, or the princes
of the blood, the places of lieutenants general of their armies, either of the
high constable: but rather unto some other of the meaner nobility, such as
were Bertrand, Gueschlin, Oliver Clisson, Simon earl of Montfort, with others
of like quality, men of great service, and under whom the princes of the
blood might march; and yet nevertheless without all hope of aspiring to the
sovereignty. So as did the ancient Romans, and Augustus, who amongst other
the secrets of his government, had this for one, Not to give the place of a
General, or of a Governor of the frontiers, and especially of Egypt, unto
any the noble Senators of ancient houses, but only unto men of meaner estate.
And albeit that the kings of the Northern parts have as it were always called
the princes of their blood unto their council; yet so it is, that other
Monarchs keep them back so much as they can: whether it be for the distrust
they have in them, or to keep their council in such liberty, as that it may
not be diminished by the greatness of the princes of the blood: or that it is
to take away the ambition and jealousy which is inevitable amongst princes of
the same blood, if the king shall chance to favor one of them more than
another. And although there be many princes near unto the Othoman blood, as
namely the Michaloglies, the Ebranes, the Turacanes; yet are they never of the
privy council, either yet admitted to any great place of honor, or command.
And in the Monarchy of the Aethiopians (which is one of the greatest, and most
auntientest A right strange custom used among the Aethiopians.
in the world) there is no prince of the blood, which comes near the court,
but are all trained up in all honor and virtue, within a most strong castle,
built upon the mountain Anga (one of the highest in all Affrike) kept with a
perpetual and strong garrison: from whence at such time as the king dies, he
which excels the rest in virtue, is from the mountain called unto the
kingdom. Which (as they say) was first ordained by one Abraham king of
Aethiopia, by divine revelation, to avoid the factions The Children of Israel
(assuredly supposing them to be of the blood of the Hebrews: beside that, the
Ethiopian language takes much of the Hebrew) to the intent the estate should
not fall into combustion, the kings line failing: or else for that the princes
of the blood should not at liberty seek to advance themselves by force: or
being advanced, should not seek to invade the estate. For a Master of the
forces, master of the estate.
man may hold it for a maxim, That in every Commonweal, if too much power be
given unto a prince or great lord of the blood, it is always to be feared,
least he should at one time or other ceize upon the estate; seeing that even
the basest companions Sultan Solomon made Abraham Bassa of a slave so great, by
heaping honors upon honors upon him, as that in fine fearing his power, he was
glad to cause his throat to be cut as he was sleeping, and afterward found
him be worth thirty millions of gold. But this is more to be feared in a
little kingdom or estate, than in a great: for that the subjects coupt up as
it were all in one place, are the more easily kept under by the power of the
stronger. So when James Appian prince of Sienna, too much favoring Peter
Gambecourt, a man of base degree, had made him too great in honor and wealth,
he was by him (before he was aware) thrust out of his estate. The like pranke
Calippus served Dion; Brutus, Caesar; Macrin, Caracalla; Maximinus, the
emperor Alexander; Philip, the young Gordianus: Agathocles a Potters son, of
a common souldior chosen a General, durst have slain all the nobility and
richer sort of the citisens of Syracusa, and made himself a king? Now if such
a base companion as he durst do so much, how much more warily is it then to be
foreseen, that too great a command or power be not given unto princes or
great men, either at home, or in service abroad? And this is it for which many
have holden, that by law the points reserved unto the majesty of a sovereign
prince, are never to be communicated unto a subject, no not so much as by
commission, to the intent that no gap by any way be opened for the subject to
enter

We have said also, that a Monarchy ought to descend unto the heirs male,
considering That a Monarchy, in the opinion of the author ought to descend
only unto the heirs male.
that the rule and government of women, is directly against the law of nature,
which has given unto men wisdom, strength, courage, and power* to command;
and taken the same from women. Yea the Genes. 3.
law of God has expressly ordained, That the woman should be subject unto the
man, and that not only in the government of kingdoms and empires, but also in
every particular man's house and family: he Esaias. 8.
threatening of his enemies, To give them women to be mistresses over them; as
of all miseries and calamities the worst. Yea and the law it self forbids
women all charges and offices proper unto men; as to judge, to sue, and other
such like things: and that not Martian, when as amongst all the goddesses only
Pallas had no mother, but was borne of Jupiters brain, to show that wisdom
proceeded not from women) but also for that men's actions are contrary unto
their sex, and to feminine modesty and chastity. Neither was there any thing
which more incensed the Senate of Rome, against the emperor Heliogabalus, than
to see his mother to come into the Senate, though she came but only to see, and
not to say any thing. Which was also thought a right strange thing to our
ancestors, that Maud, grandmother to This French opi nion is by the examples
of many worthy women, and experience of their most happy governments so fully
refelled, as that there needs no further reasons to be used, to prove the
contrary.
Philip the Long, should be assistant unto Robert Contie of Artoise, and
Margret County of Flanders, at the judgment of the County of Clairmont. Now
if it be an absurd and rediculous thing, for women to busy themselves in men's
public actions and Isabella queen of Castile marde Ferdinand king of Arrogon:
and in our time, betwixt Mary queen of England, and Philip prince of Spain,
whom they called the queens husband. And in like case in the matrimonial
contracts betwixt Sigismund archduke of Austria (who was afterward emperor)
and Mary queen of Hungary, whom the subjects in scorn called King Marie. In
which case the husband is chief of his family, and master of his domestical
household; and yet for all that in public affairs remains subject unto his
wife. For why, the public power (as says the law) is never bound unto the
domestical power. And for this cause the Consul Fabius caused his father (the
great Fabius) to alight from his horse to do him honor, as to the Consul in
public: who yet for all that by virtue of his fatherly power, might without
giving cause or reason why, have put him to death at home in his own house.
But if the queen shall remain unmarried (which is the most true woman's All
these dangers with many mo incident unto women's sovereignty, are and have been
right well avoided and prevented, by the wisdom of worthy women, who with no
less discretion* than many men, have maintained the majesty of their
sovereignty, with the reputation of their sex.
sovereignty) the Commonweal must needs so be in great danger: For that the
people being of a great and courageous spirit, will deem a woman's government
shall seek to be thereof revenged, which can hardly without civil tumult be
done. What* so is good in public, is always good in particular.
is a rule in policy, that whatsoever thing is found good, and sufferable in
public, the same is to be drawn into consequence and example in particular.
Which was the cause the Persian princes preferred a request unto Darius Memnon
(whom the holy Scripture calls Assuerus) That the disobedience of the queen
Vasthi his wife, should not remain unpunished, least her pride should give
occasion unto the other subjects wives to he disobedient unto their husbands.
For as the family is out of order, where the woman commands over the
husband, considering that the head of the family has lost his dignity to
become a slave: even so a Commonweal (to speak properly) loses the name,
where a woman holds the sovereignty, how wise soever she The evil examples
of some few ought not to be prejudicial unto others that be good.
be; but so much the more if she be unjust withal, and not able to rule her
own immoderat lusts and desires. I suppose there is none which knows not
what tragedies Ione queen of Naples (who of her unchastity was called Lupa,
or a she wolf) stirred up of her self, who most cruelly murdered three
kings her husbands, and was therefore her self also strangled, as she well
deserved. I speak not of the horrible and brutish lusts of Semyramis, the
first that by a strange means set foot into the Assyrian Monarchy. For having
obtained of the king, to have the sovereign command but for one day, she the
same day commanded the king himself to be slain. What should I say of
Athalia queen of Judah, who seeing her husband slain, put to death all the
princes Cleopatra flue her brother, that so she might alone enjoy the kingdom
of Egypt. There was also one Zenobia, who styled her self an empress
(together with the thirty* usurping tyrants) and was by the emperor Aurelian
overcome. And in like case did Hirene empress of Constantinople, coupt up at
last into a monastery her self. In brief I find no people to have liked of
the sovereignty of woman's government: howbeit that many have endured the same:
as did the Neapolitans the government of Constance, last of the race of the
Norman kings, that reigned in Naples. And after that of Ioland the daughter of
John Brenne, married to the emperor Frederike the second, who Manfred his base
son, whose daughter Constance marrying into the house of Aragon, kindled the
fire of the wars which continued two hundred years, betwixt the houses of
Aniou and Aragon; and could never be quenched but with the great effusion of
the blood of many most valiant and worthy men; and all for having* given an
entrance unto a daughter into the succession of the kingdom of Naples. But
when the college of cardinals saw the Christian Commonweal, and especially
Italy, to have endured so many and so great slaughters, in so long and such
mortal wars, and all for distaffe sovereignty; it was by them decreed, That
from that time forward, the kingdom of Naples should no more descend unto
women; as in the inuestitute made to Alphonsus king of Arragon, in the year
1455, and Ferdinand king of Arragon, in the year 1458, it is expressly set
down, That the daughters should not succeed unto the kingdom of Naples, so
long as there were any heirs male, either in the direct or collateral line,
even unto the fifth degree. But that gap for the succession of daughters being
opened in Italy, was afterward also put in practice in the kingdoms of
Hungary, and of Polonia, which fell to Marie and The kingdoms of Hungary,
Polonia, Sweden, Norway, and Denmark, Castile, Arragon, Nauatie, and England,
to have fallen into Gynecocraty, or women's sovereignty.
Hedwige, the daughters and heirs of Jews king of Hungary, and of Polonia;
which had never before been seen. At which self same time almost, Mary Volmar
(contrary unto the laws and ancient customs of the countries) succeeded into
the kingdoms of Norway, Sweden, and Denmark. The like example was after also
followed in the kingdom of Castile, whereinto Isabel of Castile succeeded her
father, having gained Socina the daughter of Alphonsus, to have before in like
manner brought the kingdom of Castile unto Sillon her husband: answer was
thereunto made by the subjects, That to have been done rather by force, than by
any right; and that from that time the estates of Castile had protested, That
it was contrary unto the laws of the country. Which hasted the marriage
betwixt Ferdinand and the said Isabella, so to keep the people under. And
albeit that Henry king of Castile, had by his last will and testament at the
time of his death declared, That the kingdom of Jews the ninth the French
king* in the right of his mother Blaunch of Castile; and that the barons of
Castile had writ unto the said French king, that he should come to take
possession of the kingdom: yet so it was, that he never durst undertake to
lay claim unto the same, howbeit that he had the consent of the nobility of
the kingdom by letters under their hands and seals, which are yet to be
seen in the records of France. Now by the same craft that Isabel had wrested
unto her self the kingdom of Castile, did Ferdinand the son of Leonore also
gain the kingdom of Arragon: as did also after him the earl of Barcelone,
having married Petronella the daughter of the king of Arragon. Which happened
also in the kingdom of Navarre, whereunto Henry the Large, earl of Champaigne
succeeded in the Ioane, married unto Philip the Fair the French king, brought
unto him the carledome of Champaigne, with the kingdom of Navarre: but the
heirs male of Philip the Fair failing, that kingdom of Navarre in the right
of three women fell unto the houses of Eureux, of Foix, of Albert, and of
Vendosme: so that this kingdom in less than four hundred years, was
transported into six strange houses, and unto seven strange princes, the
queens husbands. But yet by the way it is worth the noting, four women all of
one name to have opened the way unto women's sovereignty, in the kingdoms of
Hungatie, of Norway, of Sweden, of Denmark, of England, and Scotland. True it
is, that Maud daughter to Henry the first, king of England, before brought the
kingdom But what troubles ensued upon this intrusion of Stephen, and the
wrongful excluding of Maud, the Croni ^les will declare.
Stephen earl of Bolloine nephew o Henry, in the right of his sister Adela; in
such sort, as that a cousin descended of a daughter was preferred before the
kings own daughter: which daughters son yet succeeded king Stephen, in such
sort as that no woman's government seemed at all to have been. For which reason
Edward the the third, king of England, upon the difference which he had for the
crown of France, alleged the kingdom of France by the right meaning of the
law Salique, to belong unto him: saying, That law to stand in force and take
place, when the next heir male descended of the daughter (as was he from
Isabel sister to Charles the Fair) was preferred before him, Charles the fifth
marrying of his sister unto Christiern king of Denmark, and caused this clause
to be inserted into the matrimonial contracts: That the males failing, the
eldest daughter issuing of that marriage, should succeed unto the kingdom: yet
so it was nevertheless, that the estates of that country had thereof no
regard, for that the kingdom went by election: yea so far off was it, that
such the kings private agreement could take from the nobility of Denmark, the
power to choose their kings: or yet never any one of the Sigismundus Augustus,
excluded not only the kings sister, but even his nephew the king of Sweden his
son also, who gave a million of gold unto the Commonweal, to have his son
afterward chosen: how beit that their predecessors had before received Hedwig
the daughter of Jews: and that when as there was no heir male, neither in the
direct nor collateral line of the house of Iagellon, they nevertheless made
choice of Henry of France.

Now if the princess the inheritrix shall marry (which is necessary, so to
have an The inconveniences by the author supposed to ensue of a Gynecocratie,
or women's sovereignty.
assured successor) her husband must either be a stranger, or a subject: if a
stranger, he will instruct the people in strange laws, in strange
religion, in strange manners and fashions: yea and give the honorable places
and commands unto strangers also. But as for a subject, the princess would
think her self much dishonored, to marry her servant, seeing that
sovereign princes still make great difficulty to marry a subject. Join
hereunto also the jealousy that is to be feared, if she shall marry him
whom she best loves, rejecting the more noble and greater lords, who always
contemn them which are of base degree.

And not to speak of many difficulties which fell out about these matters,
even the very same, yea and greater too, presented themselves at the treaty
of the marriage Philip prince of Castile, and Mary queen of England: wherein
the first article contained, That no stranger being not a natural English man
borne, should be preferred to any office, benefice, or charge whatsoever. And
in the fourth article it was set down, That Philip prince of Castile should
not carry the queen his wife against her will out of the realm of England,
neither the children begot betwixt them two: the which articles were confirmed
by the estates of the land, the second of April, in the year one thousand
five hundred fifty three, where beside that which I have said, it was also
more solemnly provided, That the queen alone and of her self should enjoy all
the royalties, and sovereign rights of the said realms, lands, countries, and
subjects, absolutely; without that her husband should by the courtesy of
England Nouaile ambassador of France, who then was in England, that it was
also decreed, That no Spaniard should have the keeping of any fortresses or
strong holds belonging unto the Crown of England, either on this side, or
beyond the sea: neither that the Englishmen should by the Spaniards be
constrained to go unto the wars out of the realm.

And albeit that a most gallant and mighty prince flourishing with kingdoms,
wealth, Charles the fifth on the other side wisely foreseeing all things, and
fearing least some treason might be wrought against the prince his only son,
whom alone he had begot unto the hope of so great an empire, required to have
fifty young noble English gentlemen delivered unto him to be kept as hostages,
so long as his son Philip was in England: howbeit that as such distrust drew
after it the hatred of the English nation, so was also that article taken away,
and nothing thereof obtained.

For never strange prince can be assured of his life, commanding in a strange
country, The gre^e dangers strange prin ces commanding in a strange
country, are still exposed unto.
if he have not strong guards, for the assurance of his person, and sure
garrisons for the keeping of his castles and strong holds. For being master of
the forts, he must needs be also master of the estate: for the more assurance
whereof he must always advance strangers; a thing intolerable to every
nation in the world. Whereof we have a million of examples, out of which we
will remember but one of our own: what time king William reigned in Sicilie, in
the year 1168, the people of the kingdom of Naples were so incensed to see a
French man promoted to the honor of the Chauncellourship amongst them, as that
they conspired at once to kill all the Frenchmen that then were in the
kingdoms of Naples and Sicilie, as indeed they did. But if the domestical
Small occasions serve to stir up the natural people of any country against
strangers dwelling amongst them.
country, or pass himself in any insolence, dannger by and by hangs over
all the strangers heads, the least quarrel that may be serving to cut the
strangers throats, if they be not all the stronger. As it happened in Polonia
during the reign of the daughter of Cazimire the Great, king of Polonia, and
wife to Jews king of Hungary, chosen also king of Polonia, to the great
contentment of all the estates of that realm: and yet nevertheless for one
Polonian slain by an Hungarian gentleman, all the people of Cracouia ran
upon the Hungarians, and in that hurl slew them all, except such as by chance
saved themselves in the castle, who yet were there besieged together with the
queen: neither was there any means to appease the peoples rage, but that the
Mary the eldest daughter of Jews king of Hungary, had married Sigismund
archduke of Austria, who going about to take upon him the government, was by
his wives mother (a most ambitious woman) driven out of the kingdom: who not
able to endure to see him reign*, to be sure to shut him quite out, was about
by her ambassadors to have called in Charles the French king, and so to have
put the kingdom into the power of the French. Which the Hungarians perceiving,
sent for Charles the king of Naples, and uncle to Mary, Sigismund his wife, to
take upon him Sigismund returning with a strong army, put himself in full
possession of the kingdom, whereof he now disposed at his pleasure, and filled
all places with the slaughter of them which were of the faction against him.
But let us come to our own domestical examples, and unto those wounds which
but lately receeiued, bleed with the least touching, neither can but with most
bitter grief be felt. Frances duke of Alanson being sent for, came to take
upon him the government of the Low countries, Mary queen of Scots had married
Frances the Dalphin of France, and that the Frenchmen went about to dominier
over the Scots, they forthwith chose rather Marcus Aurelius? And yet when he
with too much patience bare with the wantonness of his wife Faustine (as some
of his friends thought) who for her too dissolute life *would have persuaded
him to have been divorced from her; Then must Antoninus Pius the father of
Faustine.

And yet there is another danger also, if the princess heir unto a
sovereign estate Neighbor princes jealous of the marriage o^ a soueraign
princess their neighbor.
be disposed to marry a stranger; which is, that the neighbor princes and
people also, as wooers, enter into diverse jealous conceits one of them against
another: and so striving for another bodies kingdom, oftentimes turn the
queen from marrying at all. Yea sometimes also seeking even by force of arms
to have her: as did the wooers of Venda queen of Russia, who having long
^ought who should have her, the victor thought at last by force to have
obtained that which he by long suit and entreatie could not gain: Women
commonly more curious in choice of their husbands, than are men in choice of
their wives.
after that they have seen them. For neither would Isabel queen of Castile,
marry Ferdinand before she had seen him: neither could Elisabeth queen of
England be by any man persuaded to promise marriage unto any man, but unto
himself present. And so it was answered unto Henry king of Sweden, seeking
the long embassage of John his Francis duke

Now if the law of nature be violated in the sovereign government of women,
yet much more is the civil law, and the law of nations thereby broken, which
will that the wife follow her husband, albeit that he have neither fire, nor
dwelling place. Wherein all the lawyers and divines in one agree; and that she
ought to reverence her husband: as also that the fruits of the wives dowry,
yea even of all the wives goods, belong unto her husband; not only such as
arise of the lands themselves, but even such as fall unto Isabella and Socina.
Moreover it is holden in law, That the wives vassal ought to succor the
husband before Ancaran the lawyer says to take place even in queens which
marry base men, no princes: of which opinion the rest of the lawyers are also.

All these absurdities and inconveniences follow women's sovereignty in
government, The beginning of women's sovereignty.
which thereof took beginning: for that they which had no male children, had
rather their daughters should succeed in their lands and fee, than such as were
not of their stock and house, and especially the heirs male failing, both in
the direct and collateral line: after which point so by them gained, they
began to succeed also unto lands and fees in the right line, and were preferred
before the males in the collateral line: which manner of inheriting was by
little and little permitted to be vnderstnod, and extended also unto Honors,
Dignities, Counties, Marquisats, Dutchies, Principalities, yea and at last even
unto Kingdoms. Howbeit that by the laws of Fees, women were excluded from all
succession in fee, although there were no heirs male either in De terra vero
Salica nullo portio haereditatis mulieri veniat: sed ad virilem sexum tota
terrae haereditas perueniat: In English thus* But of the land Salique no
portion of the inheritance shall come unto a woman: but all the inheritance of
that land shall come unto the male sex. And so also in the edict or decree of
Childebert king of France, is even the very same comprehended which is in the
laws Salique, where the nephews being in direct Representation is* when
diverse children together represent their dead fathers person, and so in his
right, together with their uncles succeed into their grandfathers inheritance
representation together called unto the succession of their grandfather, the
women are still excluded. And yet if there had been no law Salique, at such
time as contention was for the kingdom of France, betwixt Philip earl of
Valois, and king Edward of England: Philip alleging for himself the law
Salique, according to the law Voconia; and Edward defending his cause and right
by the ancient Roman laws, concerning inheritance: a decree was made by the
general consent of all the Senators and princes of France, Ne quis in ea
disceptatione peregrinarum legum auctoritate vteretur: sed legem quisque
Salicam pro suo iure interpretari studeret, viz. That Poor French shifts, for
the auouching and proof of the Salique law.
no man in that controversy should use the authority of foreign laws; but
that every man according to his right should interpret the law Salique. And why
so if there had Jews Hutin the king of France, the duke of Burgundy called
Jane the daughter of Hutin, unto the succession of her fathers crown and
kingdom: yet was it by the general consent of all the estates assembled in
parliament at Paris, resolved to the contrary, As that daughters should not
succeed unto the crown: and so the opinion of the duke was rejected. About
which time, or a little before, Baldus called the law Salique, or the custom
for the males only to succeed unto the crown, Ius gentium Gallo^, The law of
the French nation. Neither is it long ago, since that in a suit in the
parliament of Bordeaux, betwixt certain gentlemen about the right of their
gentry; a will was brought out, written in Frederike the second gave this
privilege as a singular benefit unto the house of Austria, That the line of the
males failing, the daughters or females might succeed. Which thing the emperor
could not do, without the express will and consent of the estates of the
empire. For which cause Othocarus king of Bohemia, being also of the house of
Austria, without regard of Frederikes grant, by right of kindred claimed the
dukedom of Austria, and levied a strong army against Rodolph, who by virtue of
Frederikes grant, claimed the dukedom as belonging unto himself. Which
privilege for women so to succeed, was afterward extended unto the princes of
the house of Bauiere also. Yet was there never M. Cirier Counselor of the
parliament, said to have been made with a great quantity of the salt of
wisdom, was not only alleged and put in practice, in the reign of Philip
Valois, and of Charles the Fair, against whom the daughters pretended no
claim unto the kingdom: but Clotha^re, Sigebert, and Childebert, who were all
preferred before the kings their predecessors daughters, who never laid claim
unto the crown. And that is it for which Baldus the notable lawyer, speaking
of the house of Burbon, holds, That the male of the ^ame blood and name,
being a thousand degrees off, should sooner succeed unto the crown and
kingdom of France, than any woman much nearer. Which is not only to take
place in kingdoms, but even in dukedoms and other principalities also, which
have the marks and rights of sovereignty belonging unto them. Which laws also
we see all people, excepting some few, to have always before embraced. And so
the princes of Sauoy, by the authority of this Salique law, have always
excluded the women from the government: for so we read Constance Peter of
Sauoy her uncle been excluded from the government: and that even by the
sentence and doom of the judges and arbitrators, chosen for the deciding of
the matter in the year one thousand two hundred fifty six. Yet doubt I not
but that many are afraid of women's sovereignty, who yet indeed doubt not to
show themselves most obedient unto women's lusts. But it is no matter (as old
Cato was wont to say) whether that the sovereignty it self be given to
women, or that the emperors and kings be themselves obedient unto women's
pleasures and commands.

Seeing then it appears plainly enough (as I suppose) the estate of a
Monarchy to be of all other estates most sure; and amongst Monarchies, the
Royal Monarchy Justice the foundation of all Commonweales:
ought to be governed, as whether by justice Distributive, Commutatiue, or
Harmonicall. For why, the fairest conclusion that can be made in this work,
is to conclude of justice, as the foundation of all Commonweales, and of such
consequence, as that Plato himself harh entitled his books of Commonweals,
Books of Law, or of Justice, howbeit that he speaks in them rather like a
Philosopher, than a Lawgiuer,

(*)

CHAP. VI.
LEt us then say in continuing of our purpose, that it is not enough to
maintain, that a Monarchy is the best estate of a Commonweal, and which in it
has the least inconvenience; except we also (as we said) add thereunto, a
Monarchy Royal. That a Royal Monarchy ought to be knit together with a
certains kind of mixture of the Aristocratike and Popular government, the
royalty yet s^anding whole and pure, without any mixture of those estates.
Justice Distributive, or Geometrical; and Commutatiue, or Arithmeticall:
which are proper unto the estates Aristocratique, and Popular. In which doing,
the estate of the Monarchy shall be simple, and yet the government so compound
and mixed, without any confusion at all of the three kind of Estates, or
Commonweales. For we have before The right division of rewards The definition
of Justice.
and punishments, and of that which of right unto every man belongs; which
the Hebrews Credata: for the difference betwixt this and the other Justice
given unto men by God, whereby we are justified, which they call Tsedaca. For
that by these, as by most certain guides, we must enter into this most
religious and stately temple of Justice. But this equal division which we
seek for, can in no wise be accomplished, or performed, but by a moderat
mixture, and confusion of equality, and similitude together, which is the true
proportion Harmonicall, and whereof no man has as yet spoken.

Plato having presupposed the best form of a Commonweal, to be that which was
composed of a Tyrannical and Popular estate: in framing the same, is contrary
unto himself, having established a Commonweal not only Popular, but
altogether also Plato having also (as some say) oftentimes in his mouth these
three words, (...) (...), which is to say, God always to be playing the
Geometritian: which Plato his style, howbeit that they be not in all his works
to be found.

Now certain it is, that Distributive, or Geometrical Justice, is most
contrary unto the Popular estate and government by Plato set down: the people
still seeking after nothing more, than for equality in all things; a thing
proper unto Commutatiue, or Arithmeticall Justice. Which was the cause for
which Xenophon ( Plato his companion, Plato covertly by Xenophon reproved, for
appointing his Commonweal to be governed by Geometrical Proportion.
and both of them jealous one of another glory) being of opinion, That
Commonweales ought to be framed, and the laws administered according unto
Arithmeticall proportion and equality, brings in Cyrus yet a boy, corrected
and chastised, for that he being chosen king, had changed but the servants
garments, appointing better apparel Cyrus is by his master taught, to give
unto every man that which unto him belongs, and to remember that he was a
Persian borne, and was therefore to use the Persian laws and customs, which
gave unto every man that which was unto him proper: and not the manners and
fashions of the Medes, who thought it meet, that to be unto every man given,
which was decent and convenient for him. Which writings of Xenophon, Plato
having read, and knowing right well that it was himself, and not Cyrus, which
had been corrected; forthwith reproved the Cyropaedia, without naming of any
party. This diversity of opinions, betwixt Xenophon and Plato (famous among
Aristotle said it ought to be done, but yet not naming either Plato or
Xenophon, who yet had both first touched this string.

But as for Harmonicall Justice, not one of the ancient writers either Greeks
or Harmonicall Justice of all others the best.
Latins, neither yet any other, ever made mention, whether it were for the
distribution of Justice, or for the government of the Commonweal: which for
all that is of the rest the most divine, and most excellent and best fitting a
Royal estate; governed in part Aristocratically, and in part Popularly. But
forasmuch as this point we hear speak of, evil understood, draws after it
a number of errors, whether it be in making of laws, Aristotle can no more be
maintained than the other; it is needful for us to borrow the principles of
the Mathematitians, and the Lawyers resolutions. For why, it seems that the
Lawyers for not regarding the Mathematitians, and Philosophers, as not having
judicial experience, have not declared or manifested this point, which is of
right great consequence (as I have said) and that as well for the
administration of Justice, as for the maintaining of the affairs of state, as
also of the whole Commonweal in general.

Now the Geometrical proportion is that which is made of an unequal excess
of Three kinds of proportion* Proportion Geometrical, 3, 9, 27, 81. Proportion
Arithmeticall, 3, 9, 15, 21, 27. Proportion Harmonicall, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12.
like magnitudes among themselves: but the Arithmeticall proportion is every
way both in progression, and excess equal: and the Harmonicall proportion is
of them both, by a wonderful cunning (confused and combined together) made,
and yet is unto them both unlike: the first of these proportions is semblable,
the second is equal, and the third is in part equal, and in part semblable;
as is to be seen by the examples in the margent set: where the proportion is
treble of 3 to 9, and of 9 to 27, and of 27 to 81: and the proportion
Arithmeticall following, begins of the same number of 3, and the same
difference of 3 to 9: but the difference of 9 to 15 is not like, but yet
equal: for betwixt these numbers there are always six differing. And the
proportion Harmonicall begins of 3 also, but the differences are not always
alike, neither altogether The difference betwixt Geometrical and Arithmeticall
proportion.
and Arithmetical proportion, is in this to be noted, That in the proportion
Arithmeticall are always the self same reasons, and the differences equal:
whereas in the Geometrical proportion they are always semblable, but not the
self same, neither yet equal: except a man would say, that things semblable
are also equal; which were nothing Solon did, who to gain the hearts both of
the nobility, and of the people of Athens, promised to make them laws equal
for all sorts of men: wherein the nobility and better sort of the people
thought him to have meant the Geometrical equality; and the common people,
the Arithmeticall; and so to have been all equal: Which was the cause that
both the one and the other by common consent made choice of him for their
lawmaker. Wherefore the Geometrical The Geometrical government of an estate.
government of an estate is, when like are joined with like: as for example, by
the laws of the twelve Tables, the Patricij, or Nobility, was forbidden to
marry with the comminaltie, and order taken, that noble men should marry none
but noble women: and they of the baser sort such also as were of like condition
with themselves, slaves also The government of an estate by Arithmeticall
proportion.
provided, that marriages should be made by lot; that law would be unto the
people most acceptable and pleasing, to make all equal: for that so the noble
and rich ladies should by lot oftentimes fall unto the poor and baser sort of
men; the slave might marry the prince, the base artificer might have to wife a
woman honorably descended, most unlike to his estate: So that by lot should
the Popular equality be preserved, agreeing with the Arithmeticall
proportion: but the wealth and dignity of the nobility Euripides says, A The
government according unto the Geometrical or Arithmeticall proportion
hurtful, the one unto the common people, and the other unto the nobility:
whereas the Harmonicall government preserves both the one and the other.
lawful equality to be most agreeable unto man's nature, (...). But both these
forms of government according to either Arithmeticall, or Geometrical
proportion, draw after them diverse inconveniences: For in the one the poorer
and vulgar sort are cast down, and in the other the nobility and richer sort
are contemned and disgraced. Whereas the Harmonicall manner of government, with
a most sweet consent, preserves both (so much as possibly is) not confounding
all sorts of people hand over head together. And not to go out of the example
by us propounded of marriages, he that would keep the Harmonicall government,
should not require in the marriages of the nobility, the noble descent too
far fet both on the one The wonderful curiosity of the Germans, in the
marriage of the nobility.
side and the other: as many of the Germans most daungerously do, who most
curiously search out their great great grandfathers fathers, of like nobility
on both sides, to join together their nobility in marriage: which is too
far to remove and seperat the nobility, not from the baser sort only, but
even from it self also; considering that they content not themselves, that the
gentleman be noble by the father only, as it suffices in the kingdom of
Polonia, by the decree of Alexander king of Polonia: or by the father, and the
grandfather, as is sufficient in this realm, by a law of king Frances the 1:
or by father, and mother, and grandfather, on both sides, as is set down by
the new decrees of the knights of Sauoy: but they will that the right gentleman
show that he is descended of two hundred and threescore noble persons, if the
interpretation that many Appius the Decemuir is said to have put into the
Twelve Tables, was at the motion of Canuleius the Tribune as dangerous,
repealed: for that thereby the subjects love was rent in sunder, and the city
by seditions overthrown: which tumults and seditions the law being once
abrogated, and alliances made betwixt the nobility and the comminaltie, upon
the sudden ceased: howbeit that noble women have seldom married from the
nobility, but noble men have oftentimes married with mean women: for that
nobility is still to be obtained from the father. And indeed it best
Harmonical proportion good to be in marriage observed, and so likewise in the
government of the whole Commonweal.
agrees with Harmonicall proportion, if a rich base woman marry with a poor
gentleman; or a poor gentlewoman with a rich common person: and she that in
beauty and feature excels, unto him which has some one or other rare
perfection of the mind: in which matches they better agree, than if they were
in all respects equal: as amongst merchants there is no partnership or
society better, or more assured, than when the rich lazy merchant is partner
with the poor industrious man; for that there is betwixt them both equality,
and similitude: equality, in that both the one and the other have in them some
good thing: and similitude, in that they both two have in them some defect or
want. And this is it for which the ancient Greeks aptly fained, Love to have
been begotten of Porus and Penia, that is to say, of Plenty and Poverty,
Harmonical proportion declared by the order to be kept in a feast.
quarrellers, wise men amongst fools; that so they may by their talk in some
sort as with a medicine be cured: so betwixt cauillers shall he set a quiet
man, and unto an old babbler join a still and silent man, so to give him
occasion to speak, and teach the other to speak less: by a poor man he
shall place a rich, that so he may extend his bounty unto him, and he again
for the same of the other receive thanks: so amongst Scipio blamed for having
used the Geometrical proportion in the placing of the Senators in the Theater.
cause men say, Scipio Africanus to have been blamed by the wiser sort of men,
and such Love the foundation of all humane societies, not to be preserved by
Geometrical, or Arithmeticall, but by Harmonical proportion of justice
societies, which are almost innumerable, rests in love and friendship, which
cannot long continue without that Harmonical and mutual concord which I have
already spoke of: and which cannot possibly either by Geometrical or
Arithmeticall Justice and government be done, for that the proportion both of
the one and of the other, is for most part disioyned and separat: whereas the
nature of the Harmonicall proportion always unites together the extremes, by
reason that it has accord both with the one and with the other: as by the
examples propounded we are taught.

Now the equal government and by proportion Arithmeticall, is natural unto
Popular The equal government of Arithmeticall proportion* b^st fitteth Popular
estates.
estates, who would that men still should equally divide estates, honors,
offices, benefits, common treasures, countries conquered: and if laws be to be
made, or officers ordained, or that judgment be to be given of life and death,
their desire is, that all the people should thereunto be called, and that the
voice of the greatest fool and bedlem should be of as great weight and force,
as the voice of the wisest man: in brief, the more popular sort think it
best, that all should be cast into lot and weight: as the ancient Greeks, who
in three words set forth the true Popular estates, (...), which is to say, All
by lot and balance: or else to measure all things by a most right rule, and
every way with Arithmeticall proportion equal. Which for that it is most
stearne and inflexible, is after our phrase called Right, and to do justice, is
said, To do Right: which manner of speech seems to have been taken from the
Hebrews, who The Book of Right, or as the Chaldean interpretor translateth it,
The Book of Rightnesse: either for that the way of virtue and justice has no
windings or turnings, nor suffers us this way or that way to turn out of the
right way; or else for that it is the self same unto all men, without respect
of any man's person, not to be moved with love or hatred toward any man. Such
an one as many have though Policletus his rule to have been, so straight and
hard, as that it might more easily be broken than bowed either unto the one
side or the other: unto the pattern and straightness whereof all artificers
directed their rules. Such is also the form of a Popular government, when all
goes by lot, and by strait and immutable

But now to the contrary, the Aristocratike government according to
Geometrical The Geometrical proportion best to agree with the Aristocraticall
proportion, is like unto the Lesbian rule, which being made of lead, was
every way so pliant and flexible, as that it might be unto every stone so
aptly fitted and applied, as that no part (so much as possible was) might
thereof be lost: whereas others, who were wont to apply the stone unto the
straight rule, oftentimes lost much thereof. So say

Wherefore a little to decline from that inflexible straightness of Polycletus
his rule, as also from the uncertain pliantnesse of the Lesbian rule, that is
to say, from the Arithmeticall, and Geometrical proportion of government of
estates; a certain third kind viz. the Law, Equity, the Execution of the law,
and the Office or Duty of the The Law. 4. The Execution of the Law. 8.
Equity. 6. The Office of the Judge. ^2.
Magistrate or Judge: whether it be in the administration of justice, or the
government of the estate: which have amongst themselves the same proportion
which these four numbers have, viz. 4, 6, 8, 12. For what the proportion is of
4 to 6, the same the proportion is of 8 to 12: and again the same reason is of
4 to 8, that there is of 6 to 12. So the Law also has respect unto Equity; as
has the Execution of the Law, unto the Geometrical or Arithmeticall
government alone, n^ fit mean ^o maintain a Commonweal.
does warm water from that which is most cold, or else scaulding hot. And so
in like case may we say, that if the prince, or the nobility, or the people,
all together having the sovereignty, whether it be in a Monarchy, in an
Aristocratike, or Popular estate, govern themselves without any law, leaving
all unto the discretion of the magistrates, A fit comparison
most unlike one of them unto the other, are of themselves apart unto men
deadly and Harmonicall Justice compounded of Arithmeticall and Geometrical
proportion of government, best for the preservation of a Commonweal.
dangerous; and yet being compound and tempered one of them with the other,
make oftentimes a right wholesome and sovereign medicine: so also these two
proportions of Arithmeticall and Geometrical government, the one governing by
law only, and the other by discretion without any law at all, do ruinat and
destroy estates and Commonweales: but being by Harmonicall proportion
compounded and combined together, serve well to preserve and maintain the
same.

Wherefore Aristotle is deceived, in deeming the Commonweal then to be happy,
Laws necessary for the good government of a Commonweal, although the prince
be never so wise or virtuous.
when it shall chance to have a prince of so great virtue and wisdom, as that
he both can and will with greatest equity, govern his subjects without
laws. For why, the law is not made for the prince, but for the subjects in
general, and especially for the magistrates; who have their eyes often times so
blinded with favor, hatred, or corruption, as that they cannot so much as see
any small glympse of the beauty of equity, law and justice.

And albeit that the magistrates were angels, or that they could not in any sort
be misseled or deceived, yet nevertheless were it needful to have laws,
wherewith as with a certain candle, the ignorant might be directed in the
thickest darkness of men's actions; Orpheus, nor Homer, nor Musaeus, the most
ancient Greek writers; neither No mention of law, before the law of God was
given.
any other which were before Moses (who was more ancient than all the Paynim
Law: kings by their hand, their word, and sovereign power, commanding all
things.

The first occasion of making of laws, was the changing of Monarchies into
Popular The first occasion of the making of laws*
and Aristocratique Commonweales: which they first did at Athens, in the time
of Draco, and afterward of Solon: and in Lacedemonia, in the time of Lycurgus,
who took from the two kings the sovereignty. Whose examples the other cities
of Greece and Italy set before themselves to behold and imitate, viz. The
Dorians, the Ionians, the Cretensians, the Locrensians, they of Elis, Crotona,
Tarentum, and Rome, with diverse other towns in Italy: in which cities the
people were ever at variance and discord with the nobility; the poorer sort
still seeking to be equal with the noble and richer: Laws hateful unto the
rich and mighty.
which could not possibly be, but by the equality of laws; which laws they
of the richer on the contrary side utterly rejected, seeking by all means to
be therefrom free and priuileged: as they who with their wealth and power
defended the Commonweal; and therefore thought it reason in honors and
preferments, to be above them of the inferior sort: who indeed having so got
the great estates and principal charges in the Commonweal, always favored
the richer sort, and them that were like unto themselves, still contemning and
oppressing the poor. Whereof proceeded the hard speeches and complaints of
them of the meaner sort: which that they might in the city of Rome have some
end, Terentius Arsa Tribune of the people, in the absence of the Consuls,
blaming the pride of the Senators before the people, bitterly inueyed Liuie to
set down the very speeches and complaints of the nobility, accounting Regem
hominem esse a quo impetres vbi ius, vbi iniuria opus sit, esse gratiae locum,
esse beneficio, and irasci, and ignoscere posse, inter amicum and inimicum
discrimen nosce, leges rem surdam and inexor abilem esse, salubriorem melior
emque inopi quam potenti; nihil laxamenti nec veniae habere simodum excesseris:
periculosum esse in tot humanis erroribus sola innocentia viuere: The king
(they said) to be a man of whom thou may obtain something where need is, in
right or wrong: favor to be able to do something with him, as desert also,
who knew both how to be angry, and to grant pardon: as also to put a
difference betwixt a friend and a foe: as for the law it to be but a deaf and
inexorable thing, whholsomer and better for the beggar than the gentleman;
Liuie. After that the laws of the Twelve Tables were made, where amongst
others there was one very popular, and quite contrary unto the command and
power of the nobility, and was this, Priuilegia nisi commitijs centuriatis ne
irroganto: qui secus faxit, Capital esto, Let no privileges be granted but in
the great assemblies of the estates: who so shall otherwise do, let him die the
death. By which strict laws the judges and magistrates for a time so governed
the people, as that there was no place left for pardon or arbitrarie judgment,
to be given according unto equity and conscience without law. As it also
happened, after that king Frauncis the first had subdued Nothing more contrary
unto the minds and proceedings of favorable or corrupt judges, than to have
their judgments bound unto the strictness of the law.
of causes, than unto the law. For which cause the estates of the country by
their ambassadors requested of the king, That from thenceforth it should not
be lawful for the Governors or Judges, to judge according unto arbitrarie
equity: which was no other thing, than to bind them unto the strict laws,
without turning either this way or that way, than which nothing can be more
contrary unto the minds and proceedings of favorable or corrupt judges. And
therefore Charondas the Carthaginensian lawgiuer (a man very popular) forbid
the magistrates in any thing, to depart from the words Francis Conan Master of
the Requests, being commanded to hear the aforesaid ambassador of the
Sauoyans, writes himself to have greatly marvelled, that they should request
so unreasonable a thing: as viz. That it should not be lawful for their
magistrates to judge according to the equity of the cause, but the strictness
of the law: and reprehendeth also D. Faber, for saying, That in this realm
there are none but the sovereign courts, which can judge according to the
equity of the cause: saying moreover, That he himself doubted not so to do,
when as yet he was the least judge in France. Howbeit that the ambassadors
thought their judges by the strict observing of the laws, to be better kept
within the compass of their duties, if the color of equity being taken away,
they should still The good conncell of Accursius unto unlearned judges.
judge according to the very law. Accursius not so elegantly as aptly unto that
he meant it, willed the unlearned judges, strictly to stand upon the very words
of the law: like unskillful riders, who doubting to be able to sit the horse
they are mounted upon, for fear of falling hold fast by the saddle.

But for the better understanding and explaining of this matter, it is to be
considered, that the word Equity is diversely taken. For Equity referred unto
a sovereign prince, is as much as for him to declare or expound, or correct
the law: but referred unto a magistrate or judge, is nothing else, but for him
to assuage and mitigat the rigor of the law: or as occasion shall require
aggrauat the too much ^enitie thereof: or else to supply the defect thereof
when as it has not sufficiently provided for the present case offered, that
How even the meanest judges may have power to judge according to the equity of
the cause without law.
courts only, but even the least judges of all have power to judge and
pronounce sentence according unto the equity of the cause; whether it be by
virtue of their office, or that the proceeding before them is by way of
request; or that the prince has sent them some commission, or other letters of
justice for such their proceeding, which they may either accept or reject:
following therein the laws of our kings, and the clause of the letters
carrying these words, So far forth as shall seem right and just: or that the
prince by his express rescript or edict commits any thing unto their
conscience by Wherewith we charge their conscience: as often times we see those
things which for the infinite variety of causes, cannot by laws be provided
for, to be by the prince committed unto the religion and conscience of the
magistrates, without any exception of such judges or magistrates: in which case
the least judges have as much power as the greatest: and yet nevertheless they
cannot (as may the sovereign courts) frustrat appeals, neither quite and
clean absolve and discharge the accused, but only until they be commanded
again to make their appearance in judgment, after the manner and form of the
Lacedaemonians (as says Plutarch) when they are any way attainted of crime:
neither can they also relieve, or hold for well relieved, a man appealing Many
things in judgments lawful for the greater magistrates or judges, which are
not lawful for the lesser.
from a judge royal: nor other such like thing. Neither is it any novelty,
many things to be in judgment lawful for the greater magistrates or judges,
which are not Hacanim, and corruptly Sanadrim) to judge of causes according
unto equity: but not for the other lesser judges also. The judgebound unto the
very words of the law, is not yet thereby embarred to use the equity of the
law or yet the reasonable exposition thereof


But now whereas by the orders and customs of all the cities of Italy, it is
provided, That the Judges may not swerve from the very words of the law,
excludes not thereby either the equity, or yet the reasonable exposition of
the law: as Alexander the most famous lawyer of his time, according to the
opinion of Bartholus, answered: who in that respect put no difference betwixt
the great magistrate and the little. For that to say That the magistrate ought
not to break the law although it seem unto him hard.
whatsoever. Howbeit yet that the magistrate must not so far bend the law, as
to break the same, although that it seem to be right hard: whereas it is of
it self clear enough. For so says Vlpian, Dura lex est: sic tamen scripta,
An hard law it is (says he) but yet so it is written. A hard law he called it,
but yet not an unjust law: for why, it is not lawful rashly to blame the law,
of injustice. But yet it is another thing, if the law

But forasmuch as that greatly concerned the rights of sovereignty, princes
afterward To whom it belongs to correct the law.
(the Popular estate being taken away) reserved unto themselves the expounding
and correcting of the laws, especially in cases doubtful, arising betwixt the
Law and Equity; about the true understanding and exposition of the law. And
therefore the Bartholemew, one of the Presidents of the enquiries in the
parliament of Thoulouze, in that The magistrate to be in the power of the law,
so as is equity in the power of the magistrate.
be by him deceitfully done, or in prejudice of the law. For why, it beseems
the judge always to perform the duty of a good and innocent upright man. For
where I say that cases forgotten by the lawmaker, and which for the infinite
variety of them, cannot be in the laws comprised, are in the discretion of
the magistrate, it is yet still to be referred unto equity, and that the judge
ought still to be (as we said) an upright and just man, not in any thing using
fraud, deceit, or extortion. Wherein Alexander the most famous lawyer seems
unto me to have been deceived, in saying, That the judge which has the
arbitrarie power to judge according to his own mind, may if he so please
judge unjustly: an opinion contrary unto the law both of God and nature, and
Luitprand king of the Lombards, it is set down, That the magistrate shall pay
forty shillings for a fine, if he judge contrary unto the law, the one half
unto the king, and the other half unto the party: but if he shall unjustly
judge in that belongs unto his place and office without law; he is not
therefore to be fined: provided yet that he have therein done nothing
fraudulently or deceitfully: as is yet also observed and kept in all the courts
and benches of this realm. Howbeit that the ancient Romans thus held not
themselves content, but caused their judges to swear, Not to judge contrary
Ne se paterentur sui dissimiles esse, That they would not suffer themselves to
be unlike themselves; as says Cassiodore. And in like case the judges of
Greece were sworn to judge according unto the laws: and in case there were
neither law nor decree, concerning the matter in question before them, that
then they should judge according unto equity, using these words, (...).
Whereunto that saying of Seneca alludeth, Melior videtur conditio bonae causae
si ad iudicem quam si ad ar bitrum quis mittatur: quia illum formula includit,
and certos ter minos ponit: huius libera, and nullis astricta vinculis religio,
and detrahere aliquid potest and adijcere, and sententiam suam non prout lex
aut iustitia suadet: sed prout humanit as aut misericordia impulit regere, The
estate of a good cause (says he) seems better, if it be referred unto a
judge, rather than to an arbitrator: for that the prescript form of law
encloseth him in, and prescribes unto him certain limits and bounds; whereas
the others free conscience, and bound to no bonds, may both detract and add
something, and moderat his sentence, not as law and justice shall require, but
even as courtesy and pity shall lead him. Which so great a power the wise
lawmakers would never have left unto Why so many things are by the wise
lawmakers left unto the conscience and discretion of the judge.
the judges, had it been possible to have comprehended all things in laws: as
some have been bold to say, That there is no case which is not contained in the
Roman law: a thing as impossible, as to number the sand of the sea, or to
comprehend that which How it comes to pass, that even contrary or most
unlike judgments may be given of the same or very like cases, and yet both
just.
to pass even contrary, or most unlike judgments to be given even of the
self same or very like cases, and yet both most just: as sometimes it
chances two travelers coming from diverse countries, to ariue at the same
place, by ways altogether That the reasons of laws and judgments ought not
to be unto them joined
to deceive the laws. And that is it for which the ancient laws and decrees
were most briefly set down, and as it were but in three words, which so cut
off all the deceits that could against the same laws be imagined or devised.
Wherefore it is a most pernicious thing, to gather together the decrees or
judgments of any court, to publish the same, with out having red them in the
records themselves, or knowing the reasons that induced the court to make the
decree, which the judges oftentimes cause to be recorded apart from the
sentence or judgment, least any should be thereby deceived. Howbeit Solon was
wrongfully blamed for making so few laws, yet Lycurgus nevertheless made Few
laws made by the ancient lawmakers.
fewer, yea so few as that he forbad them to be at all written, so to have them
the better remembered; leaving most part of causes unto the discretion of the
magistrates. As did also Sir Thomas Moore Chauncelour of England, leaving in his
Vtopia all penalties, excepting the punishment for adultery, unto the
discretion of the magistrates: than which More laws, more suits, and more fees.


Wherefore Plato in his books of Laws, forbids laws to be written
concerning the execution of the law, or concerning jurisdiction, traffic,
occupations, injuries, customs, tributes, or shipping. Which although we
cannot altogether be without, yet might we of such laws cut off a great part.
Which is also in this realm of France to be seen, which has in it more laws
and customs than all the neighbor nations; and so also more suites than all the
rest of Europe beside: which began then Charles the seventh (as I suppose) and
other kings after him, to the imitation of Justinian, commanded heaps of laws
to be written, with a whole train of reasons for the making of the same:
contrary unto the ancient manner of the laws and wise lawmakers: as if his
purpose had been rather to persuade than to command laws. And this is it for
which a certain crafty corrupt judge (whom I remember to have been banished
for his infamous and bad life) seeing a new edict or law (whereafter he still
gaped) brought to be confirmed, commonly said, Behold ten thousand crowns in
fees, or as some others say, Behold more suites and heaps of gold. The
Frenchmen much given to suits in law.
For why, the Frenchmen are so sharp witted in raising of suits, as that there
is no point of the law, no syllable, no letter, out of which they cannot wrest
either true or at least Ptolomais, of whom Suidas

Now certain it is, that of the multitude of laws, with their reasons annexed
unto The cause of the multitude of suits in France
them, and in this realm published since the time of Charles the seventh, is
come the heap of suites; not so many being to be found in a thousand years
before, as have been within this hundred or sixscore years, and yet all
forsooth full of reasons: howbeit that there is not one reason set down in all
the laws of Solon, Draco, Lycurgus, Numa, No reasons annexed unto the untient
laws.
nor in the Twelve Tables, neither yet commonly in the law of God it self. And
howbeit that some may say, That the infinite multitude of people which abounds
in this Caesar, and yet more than there was then about five hundred years
before, as he himself writes in the sixth book of his Commentaries. And
Josephus in the Oration of Agrippa, says, That there were above three hundred
nations in Gaul: And yet nevertheless Cicero writing unto Trebatius the
lawyer (then one of Caesar's lieutenants) merely says, him to have gained but
a few in France to his occupation. Wherefore they which have brought in such a
multitude of laws, as thinking thereby to cut up all deceit by the roots, and
so to restrain suits: in so doing imitat Hercules, who having cut of one of
Hydraies heads, see seven others forthwith to arise thereof. For even so one
doubt or suit being by law cut off* we see seven others Seneca thereof said
well, Nihil mihi videtur frigidus quam lex cum prologo: iubeat lex, non
suadeat, Nothing (says he) seems unto me more cold, than a law with a
prologue: let the law command, and not persuade: except the reason of the law
be from it inseparable. And howbeit that the Decemuiri, By laws to provide for
all inconveniences, a thing impossible*
or Ten Commissioners, appointed by the Romans to reform the laws, and to
establish new, had twelve tables comprehended whatsoever could by man's wit be

Yet such extraordinary power by the prince given unto the magistrates, whether
it Many degrees of extraordinary power, by the prince gran^ted unto the
magistrate.
be for judgment, or for mannaging of wars, or for the governing of a city,
or for any thing else doing, has many degrees: for either his power is given
him next unto the prince, greater than which none can be: or else power is
given him by virtue of his office, so that he may judge as he sees cause, or
else may judge in such sort as might the prince himself; which power little
differs from the highest, and such as can in no wise by the highest magistrate
unto another magistrate or Commissioner be given. But if in the princes rescript
or commission it be contained, That the appointed magistrate shall judge of the
cause in question according as reason, equity, religion, or wisdom, shall
lead him, or some other such mean of speech, in all these cases it is
certain, that his power is still limited and referred unto the judgment of an
honest man, and the terms Not lawful for any man in judgment to swerve from
equity and conscience.
indeed it is lawful for no man in judgment to swerve from equity and
conscience, and that injury like an Ape is always like unto it self, filthy
still, whether it be clothed in purple, or in a pied coat. And in judging it
is one thing to be freed from the law, and another to be freed from
conscience.

But if the variety of a fact in question be not known but unto the prince
himself, or Whether a prince or magistrate may be judge of a fact the truth
thereof being unto none other known but unto themselves alone.
magistrate alone; neither the one nor the other can therein be judge, but
witnesses only: as Azo (the great lawyer) answered unto the Governor of
Bolonia Lagrasse, who without any other witness had seen a murder done,
telling him, That he could not in that case be judge. Which self same
answer was also given unto king Henry the second of France, by the judges
who were extraordinarily appointed to judge of diverse causes at Melun, where
the king having himself taken an Italian (one with whom he was familiarly
acquainted) in a fact deserving death, committed him to prison; who soon
weary of his imprisonment, preferred a request unto the judges, That for
as much as he was not convict of any crime, neither yet so much as by any man
accused, he Cotellus chief judge of the court, with three other of the judges
went unto the king, to understand of him what occasion he had for the
imprisonment of the man, or what he had to lay unto his charge? Whom the king
commanded to be forthwith condemned, for that he himself had taken him in
such a fact as well deserved death, which yet he would not discover. Whereunto
the chief judge answered, Nos iurati sumus, nisi sceleris conuictum, and ex
animi nostri sententia damnaturos esse neminem, We are sworn (said he) to
condemn no man except he be of some capital crime convict, and according to
our conscience. With which answer the king (otherwise a most courteous and
gentle prince) much moved, for that the judges seemed to doubt of his fidelity
Anne Montmorancie Great Constable of France, perceiving the judges to be bound
by their oath, to judge but according unto the laws, and that in performing the
kings command they should rather seem manquellers and murderers, than upright
judges: taking the king a little aside, persuaded him to defer the execution
of the man until night, least the people might hap to be troubled with the
nouelty of the matter. And so the guilty party the night following was by the
commandment of the king thrust into a sack, and in the river drowned. Yea
the same king also in a civil cause, served but as a witness in the great
suit about the inheritance of George of Amboise, where he was before the judges
sworn as a private man, and his testimony Paulus Tertius was not without cause
blamed, for that he being Pope, had caused a certain gentleman to be put to
death, who had confessed unto him (being then a Cardinal) a secret murder by
him done: which thing yet the same gentleman afterward constantly denied him to
have either said or done. Howbeit it were much better and more indifferent, the
prince or the magistrate to judge according unto their consciences in civil,
than in criminal causes: for that in the one, question is but of men's good;
whereas in the other still men's fame, yea oftentimes their lives, and whole
estates is in danger: wherein the proofs ought to be more cleerer than the
day it self.

But yet the difference is right great, and much it concerns, whether the
magistrates in their judgments be bound unto the laws or not, or else be
altogether from the laws loose and free: for that in the one, question is only
of fact; but in the other, of law, equity, and reason, and especially when
question is of matter of great importance or consequence, and wherein the law
is to be expounded: which in ancient time was given in The exposition of the
law, to whom it was by the law of God reserved.
Rome unto the Great Provost, as we have before said; but by the law of God was
reserved unto the High Priest; or unto him that was by God chosen to be
sovereign judge of the people: or in their absence unto the Levites. Which
power in the latter times of the Jews Commonweal (and about two hundred
years before Christ, under the latter princes of the house of the Asmoneans)
was by custom, but not by law, Ammianus reports) still carried about his
neck a precious stone, hanging down unto his breast, with the picture of
Truth engraven in it. Which most ancient custom of the Hebrews, and of The
exposition of the laws, and the deciding of most high and difficult causes
both in Asia and Afrike, reserved unto the Maho^tan Priest.
the Egyptians, even yet continues in all Asia, and in the greater part of
Affrike also, viz. That the Priests should have Justice in their hand, and the*
Great Bishop the exposition of the Laws, and the deciding of the most high and
difficult causes. So the Nemophylaces, and in other places Thesmothetae.
Whereby it is to be understood, that such masters and interpretors of equity
when law ^aileth, ought still to be most wise and upright

And now verily if the laws of Arithmeticall Justice might take place but even
in Arithmeticall Justice unfit to be used even in private judgments.
private judgments only, as when question is of the exchange of things, then
no doubt should in such private judgments be seen, but all the question should
consist in fact only: so that no place should be left for the opinion of the
judges, neither yet for equity, things being holden and shut up within most
strict and strait laws: which we said could not be done, and if it could, yet
will we forthwith show the same to be most unfit and absurd. But yet first let
us show, that public judgments neither can nor ought to Geometrical pro
portion of justice in public or penal judgments, not to be admitted.
be handled or made according to the Geometrical laws or proportion of
Justice. Which never to have been before done, is manifest by all the laws
which carry with Draco, Solon, or of the Twelve Tables: as also by the laws
and customs of the ancient Saliens, Ripuaries, Saxons, English, and French
men, where almost all the penalties are pecuniarie, and the same fines most
often indifferently set down as well for the rich as for the poor, according
unto equal Arithmeticall Justice. All which laws were to be repealed if
pecuniarie amercements and fines were according to the opinion of Plato, after
the Geometrical proportion of Justice, to be of the offenders exacted. These
words also, Ne magistratibus mulctam poenamue lenire liceas, That it should not
be lawful for the magistrate to mitigat the fine or penalty: a clause most
commonly annexed unto all penal edicts and laws; were to no purpose, but to be
quite omitted, and the matter left unto That the party condemned not having
wherewith to pay the fine due for the fault by him committed, should satisfy
An objection against Arithmeticall proportion in exacting of fines.
the same with corporal punishment to be inflicted upon him, were also to be
abrogated and taken away.

But here perhaps some man will object and say, It to be great injustice to
condemn a poor man in a fine of 65 crowns, for a foolish rash appeal by him
made unto any the higher courts (as the manner with us is) and yet to exact no
greater fine for the same offense of the richest of all. For why, Geometrical
proportion of Justice, which exacteth sixty crowns for a fine, of him which
is in all but worth an hundred crowns, requires Demosthenes writes, and
which is yet used by the Roman laws: which draws Harmonical proportion of
justice best.
very near unto the true Harmonical Justice, if by the same laws it were
permitted unto the judges, or at leastwise unto the sovereign courts to
deminish also the fine, having regard unto the equality and condition of the
poor and simple, as they always do in the parliament at Roan. And whereas the
receivers of the fines requested of the the king, That it might be lawful for
the judges to increase, but not to diminish the fines imposed upon such as
should rashly appeal* Liso^res the President, and D, Amors the kings
Attorney, were deputed and sent from the parliament at Roan unto the king, to
make him acquainted with diverse things concerning the demaine, and general
reformation of Normandy (wherein I then was a party for the king) and amongst
other Claudius. In which doing the true Harmonicall Justice should be observed
and kept, which in part equal, in part semblable, are alike; there should be
an equality betwixt men of the middle sort of wealth, according to the
Arithmeticall proportion of Justice: and a Geometrical proportion also betwixt
the great lords and the poorer sort: Whereof the former should in this case be
left unto the disposing of the law, and the other unto the conscience and
discretion of the judges. For there is nothing more unjust, than the perpetual
equality of Nothing more unjust, than the perpetual equality of fines and
punishments.
fines and punishments. For proof whereof let the law but lately made by king
Charles the ninth concerning apparel, serve for an example: whereby a fine of
1000 crowns was imposed upon all such as should either much or little
transgress the same, without respect of any the offenders ability, age, or
condition: with prohibition for the judges in any sort to mitigat or lessen the
same. Which law concerning all men in general, and yet made by Arithmeticall
proportion of Justice, was shortly after by the iniquie of it self rent in
sunder, and by the magistrates themselves, as well as by other private men
neglected. Whereas the law of Philip the Fair concerning apparel was much
more just and indifferent, as near approaching unto Harmonicall Justice: and
appointing Geometrical proportion of justice not possible to be kept in the
making of penal laws.
penal laws particularly keep Geometrical Justice, in setting down the
penalties according to the equality of the offenses, and ability of the
offenders, shall never make penal law: For that the variety of persons, of
facts, of time, and place, is infinite and incomprehensible; and such as should
always present unto the judges, cases still much unlike one of them unto
another. So also the perpetual equality of penalties according Arithmeticall
equality in the appointing of penalties, unreasonable and unjust.
to Arithmeticall proportion, is as unjust and unreasonable, as if a Physician
should prescribe the same medicine to all diseases: as is to be seen by the
laws of the Romans concerning the charges to be bestowed at feasts and
banquets: whereby the morsels were equally cut unto all even alike, and the
penalty also equal without respect of rich or poor, of noble or base:
amongst whom yet it had been no hard matter to have kept the Geometrical
proportion, as nearest unto true justice, every man's wealth being with them
enrolled in the Censors books: whereas with us at this present it were a thing
most hard, or rather impossible so to do* as having no Censors, by whom men's
wealth might be reasonably known. But the Popular estate of the Roman
Commonweal still sought after the Arithmeticall equality of laws and
penalties. Which equality the estate being changed into a Monarchy, the
princes by little and little changed, Antoninus Pius unto the governor of one
of the provinces to be seen: who had in hold a noble gentleman convict before
him, for murdering of his wife by him taken in adultery: wherein he willed him
to moderat the penalty of the law Cornelia; and if the murderer were of base
condition, to banish him for ever, but if he were of any dignity or
reputation, that then it should suffice to banish him for a time.

Now it is a notable difference in terms of justice, that the quality and
condition of the person should in judgment deliver him from death, who should
otherwise have been condemned: for the murderer says the law, ought to be put
to death, i^ he be The quality and condition of the person to be in the
making o^ penal laws, and inflicting of punishments much respected.
not a man of some dignity and honor. And the Law Viscellia wills that the
stealers of beasts, if they be slaves, should be cast unto the wild beasts;
but if they were freemen, they should be beheaded, or condemned into the mines:
but if they were of any nobility, it should then suffice to banish them for a
time. In like sort also, that the burners of villages or houses should be
given unto the beasts, if they were men of base condition: but if they were of
any noble house, then to be beheaded, or else confined. And generally, the
slaves were ever more severely punished, than were men by state and condition
free: for these were never beaten with rods, or with small cudgels, whereas the
slaves were still beaten with clubs, or else whipped with whips made of small
coards. Howbeit that Plato says, That the free Citisen ought to be with
greater severity Valerius writes. And indeed amongst free borne men, the
Citisen is less to be punished than the stranger, the noble less than the
base, the magistrate less than the private man, the grave and modest less than
the vicious and dissolute, and the soldier less than the countreyman. We
must not (says Labeo the Lawyer) suffer a base fellow to enter an action of
fraud against a man of honor and Geometrical pr^ po^tion of punishing, common
almost unto all people.
must we think this Geometrical manner of punishing to have been proper unto
the Romans, or to any other people in particular only, but to have been
common almost unto all other people also, as namely unto the French, the
Saliens, the English, and the Ripuaries: and yet must we do as do the
barbarous Indians, which for the

Neither are we to stay upon the opinion of Aristotle, who would Geometrical
Aristotle his opinion concerning the execution of Geometrical and
Arithmeticall Justice, rejected.
justice to take place in bestowing of rewards, and dividing of spoils: but
Arithmeticall justice equally to be executed in the inflicting of punishments,
which is not Nobility in penalties to be inflicted, favored even for the
virtues of their ancestors: and the injuries unto them done, more severely
punished
the Orators, the Historiographers, and Poets in opinion agree, and have
always more easily punished the noble than the baser sort: (howbeit that the
most easy punishment of all may unto a noble man seem most great) that so
others may be the more enflamed unto virtue, and the love of true nobility,
when as they shall understand the remembrance of the infinite rewards of the
virtue of most famous men, and such as have well deserved of the Commonweal
being also dead, yet still to redound M. Aemilius Scaurus (as says Valerius)
saved his life even in flourishing time of the Popular estate: which respect of
nobility was yet much better kept after the change of the estate; for then
they began by little and little to behead the nobility with a sword, after the
manner of the Northern people, in stead that the Romans before used the
hatchet in the execution of all sorts of men. And for that the Centurion sent
to execute Papinian (the most famous lawier, Traian the emperors near
kinsman, and before proclaimed the defendor both of the emperors and of the
empire) had with an hatchet cut off his head, he was therefore sharply reproved
by the emperor Caracalla, Gouean the lawyer was deceived, who writes more
grief to have been in the execution with the sword, than with the hatchet, Men
die (says Seneca) more easily with no kind of death, than being beheaded with
the sword. And by the same reason and proportion of Justice, he that wrongeth
a noble man is more grievously to be punished, than he which wrongeth a common
person; and he which does injury unto a citisen, than he which does injury
unto a stranger. For in the laws of the Salians, if a Saxon or Frizlander had
any way wronged a free borne Salian, he was almost four times more grievously
fined, than if a Salian had wronged a Saxon or a Frizlander. So also by the
laws of Alphonsus the tenth, king of Castile, a Charles the Great, he that had
slain a subdeacon was fined at three hundred shillings, if a deacon at four
hundred shillings, if a priest*at five hundred, if a bishop at nine hundred:
which penalties (the authority of the bishops being increased) were doubled. I
here speak not of the equity or iniquity of these laws, but use them only
as examples, to show that Arithmeticall Justice by the laws of many nations,
neither has had, neither yet ought to have place, when question is of fines
and punishments; and that men of honor, and of mark, ought more easily to be
punished, and their injuries more severely revenged, Andrew Riccee a Polonian
writes it to be a great injustice, That the nobility offending are not
punished with the same punishment that the common people are; the rich as the
poor, the citisen as the stranger, without any respect of degree or persons:
than which nothing could be more absurdly written, of him which would take
upon him to reform the laws and customs of his own country and
Commonweal. The like complaint was against N. Memmius Master of the Requests
in court, for that he being by the king appointed judge in the trial of Vlmeus
the president, had suffered the man convicted of most capital crimes to escape
the punishment thereunto due, and yet had condemned his clearke to be hanged,
who had but done his masters commandment: Which king Francis understanding,
merirly said, Thieves by a wicked consent to relieve one another. Howbeit that
Memmius a man most famous not only in his issue, but also for his wealth,
honors, virtue, and deep knowledge in the law, is relieved even by the
equity of his sentence; whereby he deprived the said president of all his
honors and goods, and afterward having caused him to be most shamefully set
upon the pillorie naked, and marked in the face with an hot iron, to be
banished. But for that his clearke and domestical servant, and minister of
such his villainies, was but a base and obscure fellow, having neither goods nor
office to loose, neither much regard of his good name, he could not otherwise
worthily be punished than by death, Seneca (as we said) accounting heading for
the easiest: and the Hebrews in their Pandects, in the Hanging the most
shameful death, heading the easiest, stoning the most grievous.
Title of Punishments, appointing stoning for the most grievous, the second
burning, the third beheading, and the fourth strangling. Howbeit that they
deem him most infamous, and by the law of God accursed, which is hanged on the
tree.

and in this Bartholus (the famous lawyer) is deceived, saying, That the manner
and custom in France, was to hang the noble or gentlemen condemned: and that
that punishment was not there accounted villainous or infamous, seeing that in
his time (which was in the reign of Philip the Long, about the year of our
Lord 1318) the nobility of France was as famous and as honorable, as the
nobility of any place of the world. Yet true it is, that the noble man which
is a traitor unto his prince, deserves to be hanged; so to be more grievously
punished than the base companion, who offends not Noble man for treason
against their sovereign prince, why to be more severely punished than other
meaner persons.
so much as he, as not so straightly bound to preserve the life and estate of his
prince. For the more a man is obliged and bound in fidelity unto his prince,
the more grievously he is be punished above the common person: Viri fortes
(says Cicero speaking of Catilin the rebel) acerbioribus supplicijs ciuem
pernitiosum quam acer bissimum hostem coercendum putant, Worthy men (says he)
judge the dangerous citisen to be with greater punishment chastised, than the
cruellest enemy that is. And therefore Liuie says, the fugitive traitors
during the Carthaginensian war, to have been more severely punished, than
the fugitive slaves: and the Roman traitors more sharply than the Latins, who
were then still beheaded, but the Roman traitors hanged. Howbeit that in all
other offenses the Romans were more easily punished than others. For Scipio
Africanus Florius) caused the Roman soldier not keeping his rank, to be
beaten with a vine, but other soldiers with a trunchion or cudgel of other
sadder wood: the vine (as says Pliny) being the dishonor of the punishment.

Yet whereas we said, That the punishment of noble men ought to be more easy
than the punishment of the base and obscurer sort, that so others might be the
more stirred up unto virtue; it is a common opinion, and almost of every man
received: but not yet altogether true. For that in right Geometrical
proportion, the noble man for The noble man for his offense having lost his
honor and reputation, to be as grievously punished, as the common person that
is whipped.
his offense having lost his honor and reputation, is as grievously indeed
punished, as is the base companion that is whipped, who cannot indeed of the
honor and reputation which he has not, loose any thing: as children and women
are no less hurt with a soft Scipio commanding the Roman soldiers to be
beaten with the vine, even for the same cause for which he commanded the
Latin soldiers to be beaten with cudgels, followed therein the equality, or
rather the Geometrical proportion of punishment. For which cause Galba the
emperor caused the Gibbet to be painted white, and set higher than the rest,
to lessen the pain of a citisen of Rome, complaining that he should be
hanged as other thieves were: howbeit that he had poisoned his pupil. So if a
Physician or an Apothecarie shall poison a man, he is more grievously to be
punished than if another man had done it. And so in the same proportion of
justice, the judge which does injury, the He which offende^h in his own
vocation, or in such things as wherewith he is put in trust, to be therefore
more severely punished than other offending in the same.
priest which commits sacrilege, the notarie or register which commits
forgerie, the goldsmith which coyneth false money, the guardian which rauisheth
his pupil, the prince which breaks his faith and league; and generally
whosoever offends in his own vocation, and in such things as whereof he is
himself a keeper, ought to be therefore the more grievously punished than
others: for that his offense is therein the more grievous. And therefore Metius
the Dictator of the Albans, was by the commandment of Tullus Hostilius, with
four horses drawn in pieces, for having broken his faith with the Romans. And
Solon having caused his laws to be published, and sworn by all the Athenians,
appointed the Areopagits to be the keepers and interpretors thereof; and if
they should break the same, to pay therefore a statue of gold of the Aristotle
himself never so little a while been a judge, or looked into the laws of his
country, he would never have written, That the equal Arithmeticall Justice
were to be observed and kept in the inflicting of punishments: but that in all
things, and especially in matters of punishments, the Geometrical proportion
of Justice were much better and more tolerable; as nearer unto the Harmonicall
Justice which we seek after, being partaker of both. Neither by this
Harmonicall Harmonicall Justice to be indeed unto all men indifferent, howbeit
that at the first show it seem more favorable unto some than unto others.
proportion is more favor showed unto the noble than unto the base, howbeit
that unto many it seem contrary. For proof whereof, let it be, that a rich
man and a poor being guilty of the self same crime, the rich man is in show
more grievously fined than the poor: howbeit that in truth the one is not more
heavily fined than the other, but Fines oftentimes to be changed, according
unto the variety of times and places.
more plenty in one place than in another, and in this our age than in ancient
time, wise lawmakers have been constrained to change their pecuniarie
punishments or fines, according to the variety of times and places. In the
flourishing time of the Roman Commonweal, and namely under Traian the emperor
(who is reported to have extended the bounds of that great empire farthest) he
was by the law accounted a poor man, which was not worth fifty A crown was
then as much worth as the Ro^e noble is now. Who was by the ancient Roman
laws to be accounted a poor man.
crowns, that is to say a crown of gold. Which decision of the

But when the laws of the Twelve Tables were made, the poverty of men was so
great, as that he was accounted a right rich man, which was worth a pound of
gold. And therefore the Decemuiri by those laws set down a fine of twenty
five Asses, or small pieces of brass, for him which should with his fist give
any man a blow upon the face: which was an heavy penalty (as the world then
went) for that it was by Arithmeticall proportion indifferently exacted of all
men alike. But after that men's Neratius a rich fellow (as the time then was)
and most insolent The insolency of Neratius, the cause why the laws of
injuries were changed in Rome.
withal, took a pleasure to give such as he thought good, as he met them in
the streets, a good and sound buffet or box; on the ear and so by and by
commanded a slave, which carried a bag full of such small coin after him,
to pay unto him whom he had so stricken twenty five of those small brazen
pieces, the ^ine set down in the xii Tables: which was the cause that the law
was abrogated, and order taken, that from thenceforth every man should esteem
the injury unto himself done yet with power still reserved unto the
magistrate, to do therein as should seem unto him reasonable. Whereby it was
then plainly perceived and known Arithmeticall proportion not Demades the
Orator well knowing, Demades at Athens wilfully transgres^eth the law, and
pai^th the fine.
yet to make his plays which he gave unto the people more gracious, amongst
the Lex haec quia poenalis est annua esto, This law for that it is penal let
it be but for a year in force.

But beside these chaunges of penalties and fines, some others have been
constrained Penalties and fines sometimes changed into corporal and capital
punishments, and why.
to change such pecuniarie penalties or fines into corporal, yea even into
capital punishments also: and that especially when the country grows rich,
so that men begin Ne eorum a^geatur multitudo, Least the multitude of them
should be increased. An unjust law indeed, and the reason thereof foolish; and
such a law as by the antiquity of it self is almost grown out of use, for
that it has no distinction either of place, or of the equality of the persons
offending, or of the age, or of the sex, or of the time, or of the felony
committed; but punishes all felons alike. When as in all executions of
punishments, the lighter offenses are the more lightly to be punished, yea and
oftentimes also pardoned: as only Why women are more favorably to be punished
than men.
more favorably to chastise women than men: either for that their passions are
more vehement than men, or that for want of reason, discretion, and learning,
they are less able to govern their affections: or for that they be more
tender and dainty, and therefore have the sharper feeling of punishment than
men. Which being so, a man may deem the law of the Venetians unjust, which
for the first felony committed, condemns The iniquity of the Venetian law
in the punishing of women.
the woman to be whipped, and marked with an hot iron; and after that her hand
cut off: and for the second offense, to have her nose and lips cut off: whereas
the man by the same law, and for like fact, is to lose but one of his eyes and
his hand. By which strong and lusty. And in brief all laws carrying with
them penalties certain, and All laws carrying with them penalties certain,
which may not ^y the judge or magistrate be in some sort moderated or
aggrauated, to be unjust.
such as it is not lawful for the magistrate according to the exigence of the
cause, to moderat or aggrauat, are unjust. Wherein even the wisest and best
experienced may well be deceived, if they have not this Harmonicall Justice
still before their eyes. For where is there in the world so great wisdom, so
great justice, such a number of learned law yers, as in the court of parliament
at Paris? who yet without any restriction or limitation at all, published a law
against falsi^iers and forgers, made by king Francis the first, whereby
capital punishment was appointed for forgerie, whether it were in civil or
criminal causes, without distinction of forgers, ^udges, clearkes, notaries,
soldiers, or plain country men. Which law for all that by the wise
conniuence of that court is since grown out of use: howbeit that the penalty
thereunto annexed yet remains The false witne^* how he is by the law of ^od
to b^ punished.
other laws the best) commands the man convict of false witness bearing,
to endure so much loss himself, as he would have done hurt unto the other: as
if he would by his false witness take from another man an hundred crowns, he
should be forced himself to pay the self same sum: or if he went about by
his false testimony to take away another man's life, that he himselfelfe should
therefore loose his own life: Draco the Athenian lawgiuer, who being asked,
Why he appointed death as well for stealing of an apple, as for killing of ones
father: answered, That he would have appointed a more grievous punishment for
killing of a man's father, if he had known any punishment worse than death. But
Lycurgus left all kind of punishment, yea and that concerned every man else as
well in public as in private judgments, unto the discretion of the magistrates:
whom he doubted not to excel in all fidelity and integrity, so long as they
should keep his laws and customs: but yet happily fearing that in restraining
of the magistrates power unto the strait bonds of laws and penalties, should so
fall into such absurdities and difficulties of Neratius, who upon such a price
would soundly buffe^ and bastinado such as they liked not of, as they met them.
But how much more wisely did the emperor Adrian in like case take order,
appointing The wise law of Adrian the emperor.
him that went about to kill a man, although indeed he killed him not, to be
therefore worthy of death: and yet that he which had indeed slain a man,
without any purpose so to have done, should be therefore acquitted. For that
offenses are to be weighed Offenses how they are to be weighed and punished.
according to the will and purpose of the offender, and not according to the
event of the fact: howbeit that the purpose and endeavor is more easily to be
punished, than the effect and deed it self; and the conceit of a villainy
less than the villainy it self done: wherein all the divines with the lawyers
agree. Howbeit that in truth he more grievously offends against almighty
God, which persuadeth another man to do a villainy, than he which does it: for
that beside the wickedness first by himself conceived, he leaves also the
lively impression thereof engraven as it were in another man's heart: whereas he
which of himself does amiss, carried headlong with the force of lust or
anger, seems scarcely to have been willing to have done it: and he which
has against her will enforced an honest woman, whom he could not otherwise
persuade, Judges and Philosophers diversely do consider offenses.
consider of offenses, and Philosophers another: they punish such offenses and
transgressions only as are sensibly to be seen, and which a man may as it
were with his finger touch, and such as trouble the common rest and quiet: but
these men ( viz. the Philosophers) enter even into the most secret thoughts and
cogitations of men's minds: wherein Sir Thomas Moore, sometime Chancellor of
England, is also deceived, who makes the intent equal to the effect: and the
will unto the deed done.

But if an offense be not only intended, but effected also, and so the effect
joined Arithmeticall Justice not to be used in the punishing of offenses
unto the intent; we must not in the punishing thereof use Arithmeticall
proportion of justice: as in the law of Milan, he that shall without the city
steal the value of a Latro, understood him whom we call an Assasin, or
Murderer, which kills men upon the high way: but as for him which but
robs passengers, the law calls him Grassatorem, and wills him also to
be condemned to death, but yet not hanged as the murderer. Which we have
here Accursius and some other the learned lawyers, who call him also Latronem,
or a robber, whom the Latins call Furem, or a thief; making them as it were
all one: and having in part therein given occasion for men to punish thieves
with more grievous punishment than happily were meet and convenient, viz. with
death.

The like absurdity is seen almost in all the laws of Italy: as in that of
Venice concerning The unreasonable law of the Venetians for the punishing of
thef^.
theft, which wills to put out one of his eyes which shall steal any thing
worth above five pound, unto ten; and from ten unto twenty, to put out one of
his eyes, and to cut off one of his hands: and from twenty unto thirty to put
out both his eyes, and Equality of punishment for unequal offenses, the
occasion to ha^s the greater offenses committed.
and kill, to be but like: in which doing he has more surety to commit the
murder, as also more hope to conceal the same. So that where the punishment
for theft and murder is alike, there it is more saftetie to kill a man, than
simply to rob or steal. And yet more strange and absurd are the laws of the
Polonians, the Danes, the Swedens, and Moscouits, and especially the law of
Casimir the Great, king of Polonia, which for An unreasonable law for the
punishing of murder.
the fine of thirty crowns, acquiteth one gentleman that has slain another:
and if he have maimed him of an arm or of a leg, then to be acquitted for
fifteen crowns. Sigismund the first, and order taken, that the murderer
being apprehended, should beside the fine be also kept prisoner in the common
gaile for a year and six weeks. But that which was in that law worst of all,
and the head of all mischief, was, that after three years the offender might
prescribe against the murder by him committed, whatsoever it were: neither
could the lord which had slain his vassal K^eton) be therefore either ciuilly
or criminally called into question or sued. For a like edict or law made at
Milan (at such time as the Torresans held that Seigneurie) whereby it was
decreed, That a gentleman might for a certain fine be acquitted for the killing
of a base or common person: the common people therewith enraged, rise up all in
a mutiny, and having driven out the nobility possessed themselves of the
Seigneurie. As for the author of the law Napus Tarresan, he by them cast in
prison, there miserably died eaten up with lice, and that worthily, for having
therein so much contemned the law of God, which forbids to have pity upon
the wilful murderer, commanding him to be drawn even from his sacred alter
and put to death: yet leaving unto the discretion of the magistrate the manner
of his execution, according Hainou^ offenses to deserve more grievous
punishments.
punishment common to all murderers by Arithmeticall proportion of justice,
should so by Geometrical proportion be moderated, having respect unto the
circumstances of the place, of the time, and of the persons, which are infinite.
For men right well know, that he which wilfully kills a man (as lying in
wait for him) is more grievously to be punished, than he which kills a man in
his rage and choler: and he which kills by night, more than he which kills
by day: and he which poysoneth a man, more than he which kills him with the
sword: and the murderer by the high way worse than those: as also he that
shhall kill a man in a sacred place, more than in a profane: and before his
prince, more than in any other place: (which is the only irremissible Open
offenses to be openly punished.
to be punished, than such as are secret done: for that the evil example and
scandal

All these circumstances, with a million of others like of diverse sorts, cannot
all after one fashion be cut, or by the self same law be judged, according to
the unequal equality of Arithmeticall Justice: neither can they in special
laws and articles be all comprehended, were the volume of the law never so
great: so as is in Geometrical Justice requisite, which leaves all unto the
magistrates discretion, without any law at all. And yet for all that is this
Geometrical Justice less unjust than the other, which leaves nothing unto
the power and authority of the judge, more than the examination of the fact,
and the numbering of a sort of beans, as at Athens: or of tables of diverse
colors, Arithmeticall equality in the administration of justice, and the
punishing of offenses, the cause of great injustice*
with letters of absolution or condemnation set upon them, as at Rome: or of
certain balls and lots, as at Venice: without any power to judge at all. For
why, it is the law, and not the judge, which appoints the same punishment for
all: of which equality of justice arises the greatest injustice, some such
being condemned, as deserved much less than the penalty of the law being
equal unto all: and some others again acquitted, which deserved ten times more:
besides that, sometimes also diverse most unlike crimes some great, some less,
and some almost none at all, are under one law passed, and so with the self
same pain punished. As by seven articles of the Salique law, robbers,
poisoners, adulterers, burners of houses, and such as have slain or sold a
natural French man, or have dug up the body of the dead, are all condemned
in the self same fine That the punishment ought to be equal unto the offense
done.
God, set down in the laws of Solon, transcript into the laws of the Twelve
Tables, commanded by the Pythagorians, practiced by the Greek and Latin
cities, and for the antiquity thereof reverent; is yet by Fauorinus,
Aristotle, and many others, without just cause impugned; they too grossly
taking these words of the law, Atooth for a tooth, a hand for a hand, and an
eye for an eye. For who is so simple, as to think, that he How the words of the
law, A tooth for a tooth, a hand for a hand, and an eye for an eye, are to be
understood.
which has maliciously put out his eye which had but one, to suffer the like
if but one eye be therefore taken from him also? Wherefore he is to be quite
deprived of his sight, that is to say, requited with like; which cannot be, but
by putting out of both his eyes: except the blind man may otherwise be
satisfied. As was decreed by the people of Locris, at the request of one which
had but one eye, which his enemy threatened to put out, upon the penalty
therefore to loose another of his own. Wherefore then to render like for like,
is to make him also stark blind, who had made another man blind. So that to
requite like with like, is indeed nothing else, but to punish offenses with
punishments aunswerable unto them: that is to say, great offenses with great
punishments, mean with mean, and so little offenses also lightly: which they
also meant, A hand for a hand, a tooth for a tooth, and an eye for an eye. And
so the ancient Hebrews, the best interpretors of God his law, have understood
it, expounded it, and also practiced it: as is in their Pandects to be seen,
in the Title of Penalties. Yea Rabi Kanan denies the law of like punishment to
have any where in the cities of the Hebrews taken place, in such sort, as that
he should have an eye put out, which had put out another man's eye: but the
estimation of the eye put out, was usually by the discretion of the judges in
money valued. For proof whereof let it be, that before the law of like
punishment, there was a Exodus 21.
law, whereby it was ordained, That if two men fighting, one of them should hurt
another, but not yet unto death, he which had done Aristotle and Fauorin
devised, is but vain and deceitful. But Aristotle who so much blames the law
of like Arithmeticall proportion of justice not indifferent in punishing of
persons of con dition and quality far unequal.
punishment, is himself in such errors entangled as he sought to eschew. For
he says, Arithmetical proportion of justice not to be admitted even in mere
civil cau^.
sum of their debt unequal, are of the goods of their broken debtor to be
paid by proportion Geometrical: as if thirty crowns be made of the goods of
the broken debtor; he of the two creditors to whom there is but an hundred
crowns due, shall Aristotle, is always by Arithmeticall proportion to be
ordered: which is not only in this case here propounded Aistotle impugned for
saying, no regard ought to be had, whether the offender we^e before the offense
committed, good or bad.
false, but even in all other also, wherein question is of that which unto
every man properly belongs, as we shall forthwith declare. Yet where
Aristotle says in punishing of offenses no regard ought to be had, whether the
offender were before good or bad: it sufficiently shows him to have had no
knowledge of the order and manner of judgments, or of judicial proceedings.
For why, nothing is more diligently enquired Aristotle's time, not only enquired
after the whole lives of them which were accused (as yet they still do) but if
their good deserts were greater than their offenses, they fully acquitted them
also: as Xenophon writes. And for the same cause the thief taken in the third
theft, is almost every where condemned to die, howbeit that the third theft be
much les^e than the first: and so he also which has the more often offended,
is more severely to be punished than he which has more seldom gone astray.
Wherein Aristotle is again deceived, in that he deemeth a stolen thing ought
by Arithmeticall proportion to be made even with particular interest of him
from whom it was taken or stolen. Whereas the laws of Solon, the laws of the
Twelve Tables, and the emperors by their laws, condemn him which has stolen
any thing, to restore the double or the treble, yea and sometime four fold the
worth of the thing stolen, beside the perpetual infamy thereof ensuing. Yea
the law of God wills, That for an ox stolen, restitution should be made
^iue ^old unto him from whom he was so stolen: both for that a more profitable
beast is not by God given unto man, as also for the necessity there is to
leave such beasts often times in the field: where they roaming up and down, have
for their more assurance the greater penalty set upon them being stolen: and
hereunto some other people have joined corporal punishment, yea even unto the
pain of death.

And not to speak of criminal causes only, but of mere civil causes also,
one in the Arithmeticall Justice to fail even in mere civil causes.
self same fact gains the cause, and in another place loses the same: one
has interest for his debt, and another has nothing: and amongst them which
shall in the same case have interest, some one shall pay ten times so much as
another: which for that they be matters common unto all such as have any
experience in judicial causes, there need not many examples; one therefore
shall suffice for the manifesting of the matter. A Lapidarie breaks a diamond
which he by covenant should have enchased in a ring; he is bound to pay the
price of the stone be it never so great, yea although he therein have used no
fraud or deceit, but even for that only that he took it upon him to do it as
a workman: whereas yet had he been a man of another condition or occupation,
he should not have paid the price of the precious stone so broken, except he
had before

Now all the laws both ancient and new, with the common course and experience
Harmonicall Justice to have place when question is bu^ of priua^ men's right and
interest as well as when question is of penalti^ and fi^es.
of judgments, teach us that Harmonicall proportion of justice ought as well
to take place when question is but of private men's right and interest, and so in
pure civil causes, as well as when question is of penalties and fines: as also
that Arithmeticall equality and proportion is therein most of all unjust. And
therefore Justinian the emperor publishing the law concerning usury, ordained,
That the nobility should not take above five in the hundred, the merchants
eight in the hundred, corporations and colleges ten, and the rest six in the
hundred: and particularly that none should exact of the husbandman above five
in the hundred. Which law let it seem in Aristotle his judgment again a
certain of the other subjects compared among themselves, and with their
Charles the ninth at the request of the people: whereby the debtor condemned
for money too long detained, is bound to pay after eight in the hundred
interest unto merchants, and unto other less; but unto husbandmen, persons
hired, and all sorts of laborers, the double of the money due: both the chief
points of which law is now grown out of use, howbeit that it was with the
greatest consent of the courts published. For why, that which concerns every
private man's right and interest, consists in matter of fact, and not in matter
of law; as Paulus the lawyer most wisely answered, which his one reason has
even by the root overthrown all the long discourses of all the interpretors,
so diverse and so Justinian the emperor had thought himself to have been able
to have comprehended under That which touches every private man's right and how
far it concerns him, is not possible to be set down in law, but better to
be left unto the discretion of the judge.
one law. And therefore that which touches every private man's right and
interest how far it concerns him, is by our laws wisely left unto the
discretion of the judges, for that it can no more certainly by positive law be
defined or set down, than can the great Ocean sea into a small channel be
enclosed or shut up. But yet the inequality is much greater in the law of
Venice, which forbids to take interest either in commodities or in money,
above six in the hundred: which although it be a thing tolerable, and is
called of the Latins Vsura ciuilis, or, Civil interest: yet is that law not
so long ago made, now again grown out of use, and not either publicly or
privately kept: for that

And howbeit that in the particular contracts and conuentions, and exchange of
Arithmetical proportion of justice not always observed even in particular
contracts and conuentions, wherein it is yet best of all to be liked.
things, that Arithmeticall proportion of equality be best to be liked; yet is
it not even therein always observed and kept, the very country men and
laborers, by a certain natural reason well deeming, that they ought
oftentimes to take less for their hier of the poor than of the rich, howbeit
that they take as great pains for the one as for the other. So the Surgeon
which takes of the rich man five hundred crowns to cut him of the stone,
happily takes of the poor porter no more but five: and yet for all that in
effect takes ten times more of the poor man than of the rich: For the rich
man being Harmonicall proportion to be used by the judges even in taking of
their fees.
easily pass over, who for adiudging the lawful possession of a litigious
benefice, having for his own fees set down thirty crowns, whereas his
duty was but three, and appeal therefore by the party grieved made unto the
higher court; was thither sent for; where he being by Ranconet President of the
court hardly charged for the wrong by him done: answered, That it was a good
fat benefice that he had given sentence for: and that forasmuch as he did many
such things for poor men without any fee at all, that it was but right and
reason that the richer when they came should make him an amends therefore in
paying of him deeper fees. Whereunto the President pleasantly* said, Him in so
doing to serve them as his Tailor did him, who took of him twice as Ranconet
unjust: every corrupt judge so without any proportion at all, extorting from
all men, what he saw good. For that such the suit may be for a slight matter
but often crowns, as that therein oftentimes more pains is to be taken by the
judge than in a suit of ten thousand crowns: the merchant so still gaining by
the rich, what he loses by the poor.

Wherefore both in making of laws, and in deciding of causes, and in the whole
Arithmetical proportion most necessary to be observed in the whole government
of the Commonweal.
government of the Commonweal, we must still so much as possible is, observe
and Lycurgus in the inheritances of the Lacedaemonians, and with us in the
country of Caux. Less unjust, and yet unjust too, is the law which gives all
the noble man's inheritance unto his eldest son; and an annuitie of the third or
of the fifth part unto the younger brethren, for them to have during their,
lives as they do at Amboise and Aniou; and yet dealing therein more favorably
with the women, who hold that unto themselves in propriety, which the younger
brethren have but for term of life. Neither is the custom of the Germans
much Tacitus makes mention, divide the inheritance equally amongst their
sons, making the eldest and the youngest both equal in the succession of
their inheritance, according unto Arithmeticall proportion, without any
difference of persons at all. But how much more uprightly and justly has the
law of God dealt herein? which following the Harmonicall proportion Harmonical
proportion of justice even by the law of God observed in the conferring of
inheritance, and inflicting of punishments.
of justice, gives only unto the sons the land, and unto the daughters part
of the mouables, or money to marry them with; to the end the houses should not
by them be dismembered: and amongst the males allotteth two parts unto the
eldest, and to the rest every one of them a part: and the father dying without
heirs male, the same law commands the women to divide the inheritance
indifferently amongst them, and any thing unjustly, which unto us is a certain
argument drawn from the law of God, The Aristocratique and Popular estates,
not to be maintained by Geometrical or Arithmeticall justice, without a
mixture of Harmonicall justice also.


And albeit that the Popular estate more willingly embraces the equal laws
and Arithmeticall Justice: and the Aristocratike estate contrariwise loves
better the Geometrical proportion of justice: yet so it is, that both the one
and the other are for the preservation of themselves constrained to intermingle
with themselves the Harmonicall proportion. Whereas otherwise the
Aristocraticall Seignorie excluding the common people far from al estates,
offices, and dignities, not making them in any sort partakers of the spoils of
their enemies, nor of the countries conquered from them; it cannot be that the
estate can so long stand, but that the common people being never The estate of
Venice Aristocratique, and the government for most part Harmonicall.
and the other unto the Popular estate: so that a man may well say, that the
estate of that Seignorie is pure and simply Aristocratique, and yet somewhat
governed by Proportion Harmonicall, which has made this Commonweal so fair
and flourishing.

Now we have oftentimes said, and must yet again say (for that many have upon
That the estate of a Commonweal may be of one sort, and yet the manner of
government of another.
this rock suffered shipwreck) that the estate of a Commonweal may
oftentimes be the same with the government thereof, but yet more often quite
different from the same. For the estate may be Popular, and yet the government
Aristocraticall: as in Rome after the kings were driven out (we said) the
estate of that Commonweal to have been Popular, for that then all the
sovereign rights were in the power of the whole people in general; and yet
the manner of the government of that city and Commonweal to have been from
the Popular government most far different. For that the Senators alone
enjoyed the great benefices, honors, dignities, and places of command: all
the ways and entrances thereunto being by the nobility holden fast stopped up
against the comminaltie, yea and that so straightly, as that it was not lawful
or got to be partakers also in the greatest benefices, honors, offices, and
places of command,

Now as the Aristocraticall estate founded upon Geometrical proportion, and
governed The Royal estate Harmonically governed, to be the fairest, the
happiest, and most perfect.
also aristocratically, gives unto the nobility and richer sort the estates
and honors: and the Popular estate contrariewise grounded upon Arithmeticall
proportion, and governed popularly, equally deuideth the moneys, spoils,
conquests, offices, honors, and preferments unto all alike, without any
difference or respect of the great or of the little, of the noble or of the
base and common person: So the royal estate also by a necessary consequence
framed unto the harmonicall proportion, if it be royally ordered and governed,
that is to say, Harmonically; there is no doubt but that of all other estates
it is the fairest, the happiest, and most perfect. But here I speak not of a
lordly monarchy, where the Monarch, though a natural prince borne, holds
all his subjects underfoot as slaves, disposing of their goods as of his own:
and yet Numa; or by divine lot, as was Saul; or that he have by strong hand and
force of arms, as a conqueror got his kingdom, as have many; or that he
have it by a lawful and orderly succession, as have all (except some few) who
with no less love and care favors and defends his subjects, than if they
were his own children. And yet such a King may nevertheless if he will,
govern his kingdom popularly and by equal Arithmeticall proportion, calling
all his A Royal estate, and yet governed Popularly and according to
Arithmeticall proportion.
few or rather no such monarchies indeed. So the King may also govern his
estate or kingdom Aristocratically, bestowing the honorable estates and
charges therein with the distribution of punishmehts and rewards by
Geometrical proportion, making still choice of the nobility of some, and of
the riches of others, still rejecting the base poorer sort, and yet without any
regard had unto the deserts or virtues of them whom he so preferred; but only
unto him that is best monyed or most noble. Both which A Royal estate governed
Aristocratically, and according to Geometrical proportion.
manner of governments, howbeit that they be evil and blameworthy, yet is
this Aristocratique and Geometrical proportion of government much more
tolerable and more sure, than is that popular and turbulent government,
scarcely any where to be found, as nearer approaching unto the sweet
Harmonicall government. For it may be, that the king to assure his estate
against the insurrection of the base common people, may have need to strengthen
himself with the nobility, which come nearer unto his quality and condition,
than does the base artificers and common sort of people, unto whom he cannot
descend, neither with them well have any society at all, if he will in any good
sort maintain the majesty of his royal estate and sovereignty, as it seems
he must of necessity do, if he shall make them partakers of the most
honorable

But it may be, and commonly so is, that the prince gives all the greatest
honors Geometrical proportion in distributing of offices, not good.
and preferments unto the nobility and great lords, and unto the meaner and
baser sort of the people the lesser and meaner offices only; as to be
clearkes, sergeants, notaries, petty receivers, and such other mean officers
of towns, or of some small jurisdictions. Wherein he shall so keep the
Geometrical proportion, and Aristocraticall government. Patricij, to sue for
the Tribuneship, but that first he must renounce his nobility, and become a
commoner: for as then the Consulship belonged only unto the nobilie, and the
Tribuneship unto the comminaltie. Which power The reasons why the Consuls and
Tribunes were always at discord in Rome.
betwixt the nobility and the people, until that the Consulship, the
Censorship, the Pretorship, and the chief Benefices, excepting some few, were
communicated unto the people also. Whereas might it with the same moderation
have been lawful for the nobility to have obtained the Tribuneship also, yet
so as that the number of the commoners in that society of the Tribunes might
yet still have been the greater, and Diapente, or a fifth: and again the
proportion of the first unto the third, and of the second unto the fourth, is a
Diapason, or an eight: and the proportion of the second unto the third, a
Diatessaron, or a fourth: which with a continual proportion joining the first
with the last, and Marius; or else by their eloquence, as did Cicero; or by
both together, as did Cato the Censor. Which yet was a matter of such
difficulty, as that Cicero boasts of himself unto the people, That he was
the first new man (now they then called him a new man, who the first of his
house and family had obtained honors) who of them of his rank had obtained
to be Consul: and that the Cicero his time aspired unto those so great
honors, the nobility of great and ancient houses commonly still enjoying of
them. The Royal estate governed H^rmo nically, the s^rest and most perfect.


Wherefore it becomes a good governor in a Popular or Aristocratique estate,
and especially a wise king in his kingdom, to use Harmonicall proportion in
the government thereof, sweetly intermingling the nobility with the
comminaltie, the rich Titus Flaminius Justice better administered by magistrates
of diverse sort and condition, than by men all of one estate and degree.
the prerogative and right of them of their own estate and such as themselves
were: As in our sovereign courts, and in other corporations and societies
also, by our customs composed of men of all sorts, we see justice and right to
be commonly better, and more uprightly unto every man administered, than if
they wholly consisted of noble men, or of commoners, or of clergy men, or of
any one estate alone.

But now in civil societies there is no mean better to bind and combine the
little ones with the great, the base with the noble, the poor with the rich,
than by communicating of the offices, estates, dignities, and preferments, unto
all men, as well the base as the noble, according unto every man's virtues and
deserts, as we have before declared. Diverse sorts of deserts, and that
virtuous men only are not to be preferred unto the honorable places and
charges of the Commonweal.
for that such virtuous and devout men are always in number much fewer than
the evil and wicked, by whom they might easily be overcome and thrust out of
their government. Whereas in coupling the poor virtuous men (as I have said)
sometime with the noble, and sometime with the rich, howbeit that they were
deuoid of virtue; yet so nevertheless they should feel themselves honored,
in being so joined with the virtuous, mounted unto honorable place. In which
doing all the nobility shall on the one side rejoice to see even bare
nobility rspected, and a place for it left in the Commonweal, Michael D' l'
Hospital, and Bertrand Guescheling: who both of them, with many others, for
their noble virtues were worthily exalted even unto the highest degrees of
honors. But all the subjects grieve and take it in evil part, when as men
neither for the honor of their house, nor for any their virtues noble, but
rather for their loose and lewd lives infamous, shall be placed in Unworthy
persons not always to be excluded from certain offices and places of command
in the Co^monweale.
citisens or subjects to be altogether kept from all offices and places of
command (a thing which can in no wise be) but that even they such unworthy
persons may be sometimes capable also of certain offices; provided always
that they be in number but few, that their ignorance or wickedness may not
take any great effect in the estate wherein they are. For we must not only
give the purse unto the trustiest, arms unto the most valiant, judgment unto
the most upright, censure unto the most entire, labor unto the strongest,
government unto wisest, priesthood unto the deuourest, as Geometrical Justice
requires (howbeit that it were impossible so to do, for the scarcetie of good
and virtuous men:) but we must also, to make an harmony of one of them with a
fifth; three to four, a fourth; two to four, an eight; Diapason: which
contains the whole ground and compass of all tunes and concords of music,
beyond which he which will pass unto five, shall in so doing mar the
harmony, and make an intolerable discord. So may one say of a point to a
line, as also of the plain superficies, and of the solid body also of any
thing. Now the sovereign prince is exalted above all his subjects, and exempt
out of the rank of them: whose majesty suffers no more division The order
of the three estates in a well ordered Commonweal.
orderly disposed as they are, and as they always have yet been in every well
ordered Commonweal, viz. the Ecclesiastical order first for the dignity
which it bears: and the prerogative of the ministry and function thereof
toward God, being yet composed both of noble and of base. Then after them
follow the Martial men, in whose protection all the rest of the subjects in
some sort rest: which order and estate is also composed both of the noble and
unnoble. And in the third and last, are set the common people of all sorts and
vocations, as scholars, merchants, artificers, and laborers: every one of
which estates having part and interest into the offices and honorable The well
ordered Commonweal in some sort figure deuen in the nature of man himself.
with their sovereign prince. Which is also declared, and in some sort figured
even in the nature of man himself, being the very true image of a well
ordered Commonweal: and that not in his body only, which still has but one
head, and all the rest of the members aptly fitted thereunto; but even in his
mind also, wherein Understanding holds the chief place, Reason the next, the
Angry Power desitous of revenge, the third, and brutist lust and desire the
last. Whereof the mind or understanding like unto Jonas the last, and Psalm. 49.
without understanding, that is to say, without a prince, are in some sort able
to maintain and defend themselves, though not long: being indeed about to
become much more happy if they had a soueraigue prince, which with his
authority and power might (as does the understanding) reconcile all the parts,
and so unite and bind them fast in happiness together: for why no government
is more happy or blessed, than where the reasonable soul of man is governed
by wisdom, anger and desire of revenge by true valor, lust by temperance;
and that understanding bearing the rule, and as it were holding the reins,
guides the chariot, whereafter all the rest follow whether soever he will lead
them: for so all honesty, all the luster of virtue and duty shall every where
flourish. But when the power and command of understanding beaten One
sovereign prince always most necessary in a Commonweal
no power but from it: so also is one sovereign prince in every Commonweal
necessary, from the power of whom all others orderly depend. But as there
cannot be good music wherein there is not some discord, which must of
necessity be intermingled That the bad are to be mingled with the good, for
the making of a good Harmonicall proportion in a Co^monweale
to give the better grace unto the Harmony (which the good Musician does, to
make the consent of the fourth, the fifth, and the eight, the more pleasing and
tunable, some discord running before which may make the consent much more sweet
unto the ear; as do also cunning cooks, who to give the better taste unto
their good meats, make the difference known (even by the pointing of the
finger, and the sight of the Themis three daughters, viz. (...): that is to
say, Upright Law, Equity, and Peace: which are referred The three daughters of
Themis to represent the three proportions of Justice.
unto the three forms of Justice, Arithmeticall, Geometrical, and
Harmonicall: howbeit that peace which shadoweth forth Harmonicall Justice, is
the only scope and sum of all the laws and judgments, as also of the true
Royal government: so as is Harmonicall Justice the end both of Arithmeticall
and Geometrical government

But these things thus declared, it remains for us to know (as the chief
point of The world to be made and governed also by Marmonicall, and not by
Geometrical proportion, contrary to the opinion of Plato.
this our present discourse) Whether it be true that Plato says, God to
govern this world by Geometrical proportion: For that he has taken it as a
ground, to show that a well ordered Commonweal ought (to the imitation of the
world) to be governed by Geometrical Justice: Which I have showed to be
contrary, by the nature of the unity, Harmonically referred unto the three
first numbers: as also by the intellectual power, compared unto the three
other powers of the soul: and by a point compared to a line, a plain
superficies, or other solid body. But let us go farther, for if Plato had
looked nearer into the wonderful Fabrike of the world, he should have marked
that Timeo, viz. The Great God of nature to have Harmonically composed this
world of Matter and Form, of which the one is maintained by the help of the
other, and that by the proportion of equality and similitude combined and
bound together. And for that the Matter was to no use without the Form, and
that the form could have no being without the matter, neither in the whole
universal, neither yet in the parts thereof: he made the world equal to the
one, and semblable to the other: equal unto the matter whereof it is made, for
that it comprehends all: and semblable or like unto the form, in such sort
as is the Harmonicall proportion composed of the Arithmeticall and Geometrical
proportions equal to the one, and semblable to the other, being one of them
separate from another imperfect.



And as the Pythagorians sacrificed the great sacrifice Hecatombe, not for the
sustendure of the right angle, which depends of the two sides (as many
think) but for having in the selfsame figure found the equality and
similitude of two other figures, the third figure being equal unto the first,
and like unto the second: so do we also owe the immortal everlasting sacrifice
of praise and thanksgiving unto almighty God, for that he has by an admirable
bond of Harmony, bound together this world of matter and form, equal to the
one, and like to the other: equal indeed to the matter, so that there is
nothing thereof wanting, or yet superfluous: ^en. 1.


And as for the motion or moving of the celestial Spheres, we see that God
has made one motion equal, which is the swift motion of the superior Sphere:
and another unequal, which is the motion of the Planets (contrary unto the
former:) and the third the motion of Trepidation, which contains and binds
together both the one and the other. And so if we should enter into the
particular nature of other worldly creatures also, we should find a perpetual
Harmonicall bond, which unites the extremes The Harmonical bond wherewith the
world and the parts thereof are indissolubly bound and united together.
Which coherence is neither agreeable unto Arithmeticall nor Geometrical, but
even proper unto the Harmonicall proportion only: wherein the sweetness of
the consent consists in tunes aptly mixed together: and the harsh discord,
when as the tunes are such as cannot fitly be mingled together. So we see the
earth and stones to be as it were joined together by clay and chaulke, as in
mean betwixt both: and so betwixt the stones and metals, the Marcasites, the
Calamites, and other diverse kinds of mineral stones to grow: So stones and
plants also to be joined together by diverse kinds of Coral, which are as it
were stony plants, yet having in them life, and growing upon roots: Betwixt
plants and living creatures, the Zoophytes, or Plantbeasts, which have
Amphibia, or creatures living by land and water both, as does the Beuer, the
Otter, the Tortoise, and such like: as betwixt the fishes and the fouls are a
certain kind of flying fishes: So betwixt men and beasts, are to be seen
Apes and Munkies; except we shall with Plato agree, who placed a woman in the
middle betwixt a man and a beast. And so betwixt beasts and angels God has
placed man, who is in part mortal, and in part immortal: binding also this
elementarie world, with the heavens or the celestial world, by the aethereall
region. And as a discord sometimes (as we said) gives grace unto the sweetest
Harmony* so God also has here in this world Pharaoes heart, which the wise
Hebrews expound to be the enemy of God and Nature, says thus unto him,
Excitaui ego te vt demonstrarem in te ipso potentiae meae vim ac decus, vt toto
terrarum or be gesta mea omnium vna commemoratione praedicarentur, Pharao, the
worker and father of all mischief, whom the sacred Scriptures declare by the
name of Leuiathan: and yet in this all the divines agree, this of all others
the greatest enemy of God and man, to be still by the beck, word, and power
of God, kept in and restrained: and all the force and power of those mischiefs
and evils by him and his wrought (which we so much both fret and marvel at,
and without which the power of the good should neither be, neither yet be at
all perceived) to be shut up within the bounds of this elementarie world: and
above Augustine speaking, says well, Qui Deum immortalem vllum mali dedecus
perpessurum negat, nisi maius bonum consequi certo sciret, Who denies that the
immortal God would ever suffer any evil or wickedness to be done, but that
he most certainly knows a greater good to ensue thereof. Wherefore as of
Treble and Base voices is made a most sweet and melodious Harmony, so also of
vices and virtues, of the different qualities of the elements, of the contrary
motions of the celestial Spheres, and of the Sympathies and Antipathies of
things, by indissoluble Almighty God in the government of the world, to be of
all worldly princes imitated in the government of their estates and kingdoms.
Wherefore what the unity is in numbers, the understanding in the powers of
the soul, and the center in a circle: so likewise in this world that most
mighty king, in unity simple, in nature indivisible, in purity most holy,
exalted far above the Fabrike of the celestial Spheres, joining this
elementarie world with the celestial and intelligible heavens; with a certain
secure care preserves from destruction this triple world, bound together with
a most sweet and Harmonicall consent: unto the imitation of whom, every good
prince which wishes his Kingdom and Commonweal not in safety only, but
even good and blessed also, is to frame and conform himself.

Laus Deo vni and trino in secula seculorum. Amen.
Imprinted at London by Adam Islip. 1606.


