THE MANNERS, LAWS, AND CUSTOMS OF ALL NATIONS. Collected out of the best
Writers by IOANNES BOEMVS AVBANVS, a Dutchman. With many other things of the
same Argument, gathered out of the History of Nicholas Damascen. The like also
out of the History of America, or Brasill, written by John Lerius. The faith,
religion and manners of the Aethiopians, and the deploration of the people of
Lappia, compiled by Damianus a Goes. With a short discourse of the Aethiopians,
taken out of JOSEPH SCALIGER his seventh book de Emendatione temporum.

Written in Latin, and now newly translated into English. By ED. ASTON.

AT LONDON, Printed by G. Eld and are to be sold by Francis Burton. 1611.

TO HIS TRVLY HONORED FRIEND, SIR WALTER ASTON OF TIXAL, IN the County of
Stafford; Knight of the honorable order of the Bath.
HONORED SIR.
SEeing that it is an usual and commendable custom amongst all writers, to
dedicate their works (once brought to perfection) to some worthy personage or
other, to whom they are most devoted, under whose patronage and protection they
may better pass without controulment. And having now at last (more for the
benefit of such as are unskillful in the Latin tongue, then any private respect
of mine own, other then my recreation) translated these several writers into
our vulgar language, by whose travels, and endeavors, the manners, fashions and
forms of government of foreign and remote nations are plainly discovered; to
each studious and judicial reader, to the deserved commendations of the
Authors themselves, the expelling of barbarous ignorance, and the enriching,
and inlightning of the Christian world, with the knowledge of all parts
thereof. And withal deliberatly weighing with my self, to whom (amongst so
many worthies of our days) I might direct, and consecrate these my labors, of
whom I might conceive some hope of acceptance, and a willingness to support
the burden of my weak building. I could bethink my self of none so fit, nor
so worthy, as your self (right worthy Sir,) both in regard that the manifold
favors bestowed upon the poor house from whence I had my being, by you, and
your memorable Auncesters, and the taste that my self have had of your good
will to all your welwishers, and for that also the variety of matter herein
contained, may happily yield some delight, if you vouchsafe to peruse it,
imboldneth me humbly to presume, in these rude and rugged lines, to manifest my
ardent devotion and affectionate zeal I owe, and of duty ought to owe, unto
your honored self. And though the meanness of the gift, through the indigested
phrase and ill composture, can no way merit the least place in your good
likeing, yet was the poor man's sacrifice, made with salt, as acceptable to the
Roman gods, as the rich man's incence, and Sineta's cold water, proceeding from
a willing heart, (having no better means to show his duty and devotion) as
highly regarded, and as bountifully rewarded by King Artaxerxes as the richest
presents the Persians did offer him. Accept then (I beseech you) these my poor
presentiments, and by your accustomed favor, so to give life to them, and me,
that they may pass (under your protection) free from detraction, and my self
be incoraged to proceed to other enterprises, for the advancement of your fame,
and attayning to my self the expected end of al my labors, which is, to be
enrolled in the Catalogue of your welwillers.

Thus craving pardon for my presumption, I humbly take my leave,

And rest ever truly devoted to your honored name. ED. ASTON.

To the friendly Reader.
IF the reading of Histories be so necessary, and benefic al to al sorts of
people, as they be rightly termed, by some the mirrors, and masters of our
life, showing, and teaching us by the laws and governments of other nations
and commonweals, what orders and institutions are fittest to be ordained,
and observed in our own for the establishment of perfect peace, maintenance of
divine worship and exercise of moral virtues.

I doubt not (good courteous Reader) but the commendation of this Work, and
other Histories of like argument, expressed at large by the Author in his
preface, will pass so current with thee, as thou will willingly conclude with
him, That there is nothing more pleasant, more profitable, nor more praise
worthy, then truly, legendo, aut peregrinando, either by reading or traveling,
to know and understand the situation, laws, customs, religion, and form of
government of each several Province in the world. And seeing also that
(besides our sloth and home-lou'd idleness) there be so many rubbes, and
impediments to hinder and deter us from travel, as it is, in a manner,
utterly neglected, and we thereby deprived of the one half of our
understandings: how much more industrious ought we to be, (for supply of that
defect) to busy our selves in reading the reports of such Writers, (both
an^ient and modern) as have spent most part of their times in that kind of
exercise, and do (as it were) proffer us their hands to lead and conduct us
through each several country.

In which rank, mine Author, and those ancient and famous writers, out of
which this collection is gathered (though it cannot be denied but that there
has been ^uch alteration of stares since their days, as there is almost no
one country in the world that does wholly retain the self same customs and
ceremonies by them described) are not in the meanest regard, nor their sayings
in any wise to be contemned, in regard of the number of late writers, who
though some of them have been men of that fame and repute, and withal so
perfect and absolute in their relations, as they have come far nearer unto
the truth of our present estate, yet is there no reason that a multiude of
Mandiuels that wander abroad in this pampletting age in the habit of sincere
Historioghraphers (like Asses in Lions skins) should dazell and dim the glory
of the other, or cancel and deface their opinions so autenticke and anciently
received. For mine own part I must confess my insufficiency, truly to
discern betwixt the one and the other, yet thus much I may presume to say in
the behalf of mine Author, that (to my weak understanding) in all the course
of his books, he inforceth no untruths to make them seem probable, nor mere
probabilites for true, but relates things doubtful as he found them written by
others, and so leaves every man to his discretion, to give credit as he sees
cause: And although he makes mention of some ceremonies and customs used in
certain countries, which seem so absurd, monstrous and prodigious, as they
appear utterly void of credit yet is there no cause that that should distaste
any one, considering that (as he well notes in the conclusion of his third
book) all people are not endued with like ciuility, and that there is as great
difference in men's livings as in their colors.

The pleasure which I took by perusal of these several collections, and the
profit that I conceived might thereby redound both to my self and others,
together with the approbation of my endeavors and commendation of the works
by some worthy, and worthily respected friends, whose Judgments do far
exceed mine own, encouraged me to undergo the business, and to proceed in
that I had already begun with more alacrity, which after much labor I have
now at length finished, and suited in this ragged livery, and made him to
speak in a phrase though not eloquent, yet I hope plain and intelligible. And
albeit a tale may be much improued by a formal manner of telling, yet gold is
more esteemed of for his goodness then for his color, and the worthiness of
the work ought to be of more regard then the elegancy of the phrase, the one
being the substance, the other but the shadow.

As for the nice curiosity of such word-weighing Crittickes, as will sooner
find two faults in another, then amend one in themselves: I little esteem,
either of them or their censures. But if (for want of other matter to quarrel
at) any Momus should accuse my pen for mercenarie: I protest, I may truly
answer them with the very words of mine Author, that what I have done, was not
Spe lucri ulsius, neo popularis aurae ambitione, verumenimuero tam libero, and
plane otioso studio, quam rei ipsius mira dulcedine at que vtilitate.

If I have omitted or misconstrued any abolete words or sentences for their
harshnesse and ill coherence, or erred in setting down the true quantity of
weights and measures, (for avoiding whereof I have most commonly used the
Latin words themselves) or in describing the disguised apparel of sundry
people, as namely those rude savages called Tovovpinambaltii, being so
different from all other nations, as (keeping the sense (I could hardly adapt
them to our own English phrase, or if I have showed my self too affectionate
in the commendation of our own country, in my enlargement added to the chapter
of England, where I supposed mine Author was too sparing: or (to be short) if
in the confession of the Aethiopians faith, or the Epistles written from
Prester John to the Pope, and kings of Portugal, or in any other place, or by
any other means, I have ought mistaken, or squared from the true meaning of
the writers: Be pleased (courteous and friendly Reader) in humanity patiently
to pass them over, and impute such errors and escapes, rather to the want of
knowledge of the truth, than want of will to express the truth.

And so concluding (with this one only advertisement that if in the whole
course of these books, thou meet with any thing that, in thy opinion, does
overmuch exalt the ceremonies of the Church of Rome, thou will consider, that
the Author was an absolute Papist, as well thou may perceive, and therefore
of likelihood would by all means he could, advance and make the best of his
own Religion: nor did I think it the part of a Translator, by marginall notes
to suppress his opinions, but in this place rather to forewarne thee, which
(as the Proverb says) does fore-arme thee, how to give credit in those cases.
I commit these my labors to thy favor able consideration, and thy self to
Gods holy protection: Resting thine in what he is able,

ED. ASTON.

THE AVTHORS PREface to the Reader.
THE most famous and memorable laws, customs, and manners of all nations, and
the situation of each several Country, which Herodotus the father of
Histories, Diodorus Siculus, Berosus, Strabo, Solinus, Trogus Pompeius Ptolomy,
Pliny, Cornelius Tacitus, Dionysiuss Afer, Pomponius Mela, Caesar, Josephus,
and of later Writers, Vincentius, Aeneas Syluius, (who was afterward Pope Pius
the second) Antonius Sabellicus, Johannes Nauclerus, Ambrosius Calepinus,
Nicholas Perottus in his books entitled, Cornucopiae, and many other famous
Historiographers, have confusedly, and (as it were) by parts commended unto us
in their Commentaries: I have (good diligent Reader) as my leisure would serve,
collected, abridged, digested, and compacted together in this The cause why he
writ this book.
short and compendious Breuiary: wherein you may easily find what ever you
have occasion to look for; which I have effected, not in expectance of gain,
nor affecting popular praise, but freely, and without other recompense, then
the pleasure and profit the thing it self brings with it. And herein I have
expressed as well the customs of ancient time, as those which be in use at
this day; as well the good as the bad, in differently: that both lying open
before thine eyes, by their examples thou may follow and imitate in the
course of thy life, those which be honest, holy, and commendable, and avoid
those which be dishonest and shameful. And hereby thou shall perceive (good
Reader) in what perfection and happiness we now live at this day, and how
fimply, rudely, and uncivilly our forefathers lived, from the Creation of the
world to the general Flood, and for many ages after. When as they, using no
money, no merchandise, but equalling one benefit with another, had nothing
proper to themselves, but sea and land as common to all, as the air and
firmament. No man then gaped after honor and riches, but every one contented
with a little, lived a rural, secure, and idle life, free from toil or
travel, accompanied with one or more wives and their sweet children, having no
other house than the heavens, the shadow of a tree, or some homely cabin:
their meat was then the fruit of trees, and milk of beasts; their drink
water, and their clothing, first, the utmost rind or broad leaves of trees,
and afterward the skins of beasts vnhandsomly stitched together. They were
not then enclosed in and immured in walls, nor defended with ditches, but
wandering abroad at their wills, with their cattle, not then compassed in
enclosures, reposed their bodies where ever night took them, sleeping joyfully
and securely without fear of thieves or robbers, whereof that age was ignorant.

All which things afterward crept in and insued of men's variable wills,
emulation and dissonant desires, when fruits gotten without labor being
insufficient to sustain such multitudes, and other things growing defective,
and for the repelling and repressing the often incursions and fierce assaults
of beasts and foreign The cause why people inhabited near together.
people, they were constrained to gather themselves into multitudes, to join
their forces together, and to apportion themselves certain limits and
territories wherein to live; where (joining and uniting their houses for
neighborhood) they began to live a more civil and popular kind of life, to
fence and fortify themselves with walls and trenches, and to ordain laws, and
elect magistrates for the maintenance of peace and tranquillity amongst them:
And then they began to provide for their maintenance, not only by husbanding
their grounds, or following their flocks, but by sundry other exercises, and
new invented arts, to pass by sea with their nauies into foreign nations:
first, for transporting of companies to inhabit newfound countries, and then
for traffic and trading one with another: to train up horses for the cart,
of copper to make coin, to cloth themselves more curiously: to feed more
daintily, to have more humanity in their speech: more civility in their
conversation, more state in their buildings, and in all points to be more mild,
more wise, and better qualified: and laying aside all gross barbarism, and
beastly cruelty, abstayning from mutual slaughter: from devouring of humane
flesh, from rapine and robbery, from open and incestuous coupling of children
with their parents, before indifferently used: and from many more such
enormities, applied their reason and strength to recover the The earth
recovered from her first rudenes and barren nesse, and made fertile.
earth, which (being then either ouergrown with thick woods, ouerrunne with
wild beasts, or ouerflowed with standing waters) lay rude, barren, desert,
unfrequented, and inconvenient for man's dwelling, and (with their industry and
labor) playning and purging it from heaps of stones, roots of trees, and
superfluous waters, made it fertile and very delightsome to behold. And
allowing the plains and champion grounds for tilling, and the lesser hills
for vineyards, did so manure and dress the earth, (with instruments made for
the purpose) as it brought forth both corn and wine in abundance, which
before yielded nothing but acornes and wild apples, and those also sparingly
produced.

The valleys they beautified and adorned with most delectable gardens, and well
watered meadows, leaving only the tops of mountains for woods, and
assigning so much soil for the increase of fruit, as they scarce left
sufficient for fuel and fodder. Then they began to people all places more
plentifully, to erect new buildings, of ferme houses to make hamlets, of
boroughes great cities, to build temples in valleys, towers on mountain tops,
to encompasse their fountains with hewed marble stones, and inuironing them
with plants on all sides for shadow, derived their running waters thence into
their cities, through pipes and conduits: to search deep in the ground for
water, where naturally it was wanting: to hold in and restrain the streams
and violent rivers, with dams and banks of earth, which before would often
flow at large, to the great destruction of the Inhabitants, and (that they
might be passable, and no hidderance or impediment to men's business) to build
over them strong and stately bridges, upon bending Arches or Pyles fastened
and firmly rampered in the ground, to cast down Rocks in the sea, which
whilome were wont to be dangerous for sailors, to make havens, inroades, and
harboroughes both in Islands, and on the Continent.

To dig Dockes and Rodes, wherein ships might rest in security, free from
danger of wind or weather. And so diligently to deck and garnish all things
both by land and sea, that the earth (as now it is) compared to his former
filthiness and deformity, may be thought to be an other earth, different from
that it was before, and not much unlike that most delectable garden, out of
which our unfortunate first founders Adam and Eve were eiected The earth
compared to Paradise.
for transgressing the divine commandment.

Moreover, many most noble Disciplines, and liberal Arts, were by men found
out, which (that they might remain to all posterity) were by diverse
Characters, and new-inuented notes of letters, committed to books and tables,
and did so far exempt and advance them beyond all humane condition, as they
might have been thought rather to lead the most blessed lives of deified men,
then men indeed.

Had not Satan the Prince of the world, and enemy of mankind, (by sowing his
most pestilent Cockles amongst the good corn) confounded their most entire and
happy estate. For he seeing the multitude of people increase, and the pleasure
of the world held in better estimation, stirred up with envy, first found them
guilty to themselves for committing damnable sins, and afterward made them
with curiosity to affect the knowledge of future and heavenly things, from the
obscure answers of Oracles: And to the end he might abolish all knowledge, of
one true and only God, and The true God forgotten.
trouble all mankind with some notable evil: he taught them the profane
worship of false gods and goddesses, causing them to commit idolatry, and do
reverence unto them, making the Delphian Temples in one place, the Euboian in
another; in another the Nasamonian, and the Dodoman oaks (by his devilish
inspiration) to utter forth Oracles. By which means he procured that divine
honors were attributed to Saturn in Italy, to Jupiter in Creet to Juno in
Samos, to Bacchus in Thebes and India, to the Sun and Moon, (under the names
of Isis and Osyris) in Egypt: to Vesta in Plurality of gods, and which god was
worshipped in each several country
Troy: in Affricke to Pallas and Triton: to Mercury (under the name of Teutas)
in France and Germany: to Mynerua in Himettu^ and Athens: to Apollo in
Boeotia, Rhodes, Chius, Patura in Lycia, the lesser Phrigia and Thimbra. To
Diana in Delos and Scythia; To Venus in Cyprus, Paphos, Gnydos, and Cythera: to
Mars in Thrace, to Vulcan in Lipara and Lemnos, to Priapus in Lampsacus near
Hellispont, and to others in many other places, whose names (for their rare
inventions and great benefits bestowed upon their people) were then most fresh
in memory.

Moreover also, after Christ Jesus, the true Son of the living Jesus Christ
reduced the world from error.
God, appearing in flesh, and pointing out to the erring multitude the perfect
pathway of salvation, by his word and example, exhorting to newness of life,
to the glory of his heavenly father, and sending his Disciples forth into all
the world, by their wholesome doctrine and preaching, had confounded their
damnable idolatry, and spread abroad a new religion, and new institutions of
life, yea and prevailed so much, as being received of all nations in the world,
there could nothing more be desired for the obtaining of true felicity: when
Satan returning into his former malice, and going about to circumuent, and get
again his habitation in men's curious hearts, which before (by the coming of
Christ) he was forced to forsake, reduced some into their former errors, and
so corrupted and blinded others with new heretical opinions, as it had been
better for them, never to have tasted the truth, then so suddenly and
maliciously to forsake the known way of salvation. For now at this day all the
people of Asia the less, Armenia, Arabia, Persis, Siria, Assiria and Media,
and in Afric, the The large Countries of the Mahometans.
Aegiptians, Numidians, Libians and Muritanians. In Europe, all those of
Greece, Misia and Thrace, utterly abiecting Christ, observe and with all honor
and devotion adore, that most accursed and Epileptical Makomet and his damnable
doctrine. The Scythians (which at this day be called Tartars) a very large and
populous nation, dee, some of them worship the Idols of their Emperor Cham:
some the stars, and some others the true and only GOD, at the preaching of
Saint Paul: the people of India and Aethiopia, which be under the government
of Prestor John, hold the faith of Christ, but in a manner that is far
different from ours. But the sincere and right belief of our Savior Christ,
wherewith (by his special grace) the whole world was once illumined, is
retained only in Germany, Italy, France, Spain, England, Scotland, Ireland,
Dacia, Liuonia, Prussia, Polonia, Hungaria, and of the inhabitants of the Isles
of Rhodes, Scicilia, Corsica, Sardinia and of some few besides. So far has
that most cruel enemy of mankind prevailed, by bringing in such diversity of
manners, such hateful and damnable superstitious abuses in ceremonies and
sacred things, that whilst every nation contendeth by strongest arguments to
prove that the GOD which they worship and adore is the true and great GOD, and
that they only go the The diversity of worshipinge is the seminary of
distention.
way of eternal happiness, and all others the by-path that leads to
perdition.

Whilst also every sect indeauoureth to advance and set forth themselves, it
insueth that (each one persecuting other with mortal enmity and deadly hatred)
it is not only dangerous to travel into foreign nations, but in a manner
utterly bard and prohibited, which I persuade my self is the cause, that the
names of bordering nations being scarce known to their neerrest neighbors,
whatsoever is either written or reported of them, is now accounted fabulous and
untrue: the knowledge whereof The Greek Philosophers first glory.
notwithstanding has ever been reputed so pleasant, so profitable and so
praiseworthy, as it is most manifest, that for the love and desire thereof
only, without other cause at all, very many forsaking father and mother, wife
and children, country and kin (and that which is more) neglecting their own
health, have adventured through great difficulties and dangers, care and
troubles, long and tedious iourneies into foreign nations, only to furnish
themselves with experience. So as it is undoubtedly true that not in these
days only, but almost from the beginning of the world, All those have bin
generally esteemed men of greatest authority, wisdom and learning, and by open
consent have been elected and chosen Masters and Governors, Counselors and
Judges, Captains and Controllers, who having The law-giuers first authority.
sometimes traveled strange countries, have known the manners of many people
and cities, for ever as those ancient Philosophers of Greece and Italy, which
were first founders of sundry sects wherein they instructed their Disciples and
Scholars, as namely Socrates, of the Socratick sect, Plato, of the Academicke,
Aristotle, of the Peripatick, Antisthines of the Cynick, Aristyppus, of the
Cyrenaicke, Zeno of the Stoicke, and Pithagoras of the Pithagoricke. As also
those old law-giuers Minos and Rhodomanthus to the men of Creete, Orpheus to
those of Thrace, Draco and Solon to the Athenians, Licurgus to the
Lacedaemonians, Moses to the Jews, Zamolxis to the Scythians, and many others
which we see have set down to their people diverse prescript ceremonies and
civil disciplines: invented not of those several sects, disciplines and laws,
within their city walls, but learned and brought them from the Caldeans
themselves (being the most wise men of the world) from the Indian
Philosophers, the Brackmans and Gymnosophists, The Caldeanes the wisest men in
the world.
and from the Aegiptian Priests, with whom sometimes they were conversant. To
conclude, we plainly perceive that those most renowned worthies, Jupiter of
Creete (who was reported to have measured the world five times over) and his
two sons of like disire and success, Dionysius, surnamed Bacchus, and
valiant Hercules and Theseus his imitator, Jason with the rest of the Greeks
which went with him for the golden Fleece, wether-beaten Ulysses and Aencas the
outcast of Troy, Cyrus, Darius, Xerxes, Alexander the Great, Hanibal the
Carthaginia^, Mithrydate king of Pontus (expert in the language of fifty
nations) the great Antiochus and innumerable other Roman Princes and
Governors, the Scipios, the Marii, the Lentuli, Pompey the Great, Julius
Caesar, Octauian Augustus, the Constantines, Charles, Othones, Conrades,
Henry's and Frederickes, have by their warlike expeditions into foreign
nations, purchased unto themselves an everlasting fame and immortal memory.
Wherefore seeing there is so great pleasure and profit in the knowledge of
countries, and of their manners, and also seeing it is not in every man's power,
nor yet lawful for many causes, for every one to travel and behold lands far
remote: thou may (good gentle reader) as well by reading comprehend and
understand, the most renowned customs of al nations, and the several sytuation
of each country, expressed in this book, and that as readily, and with as much
pleasure, as if, taking thee by the hand, I should lead thee through every
nation one after an other, and faithfully relate unto thee, in what place, and
under what kind of government, each nation have lived heretofore and now do
live.

Nor would I have thee distasted or carried away, for that by some too severe
reformer, it may be objected and laid in my teeth, that I have produced for
new and for mine own, a matter written long ago, and heretofore handled of no
less then a thousand Authors, and that I have used only their words without
alteration: But if thou diligently mark my purpose, thou shall find that (in
imitation of that liberal houshoulder, to whom Christ in the Gospel compared
every learned scribe) I have presented thee (my kind guest) with some things,
as well out of mine own brain, as wholly extracted from the hidden treasure of
my books, and not only with borrowed and unknown stuff, but with sundry new
dainties of mine own devising.

Farewell, and what ever thou find herein accept in good part.

To the Reader in commendation of this work.
NOt Soline, Pliny, Trogus, nor Herodotus of worth,
Not Strabo best Geographer that Cretish Isle brought forth:
Not true historian Siculus, nor yet Berosus sage,
Nor any other writer else within this latter age:
Not Siluius (after Pius Pope) the second of that name,
Nor yet Sabellicus (whose works deserve immortal fame)
In volums large do touch so near the state of the viniverse
As does the Author of this book in sewer words rehearse:
For here each part of Asiae soil distinctly you may find,
The Arabians, Persians and the Meades, the Scythians and the Inde,
The Sirian and Assirian, and all the Parthians race,
The Getes and Dacians (Europs Scythes) the people ecke of Thrace:
The Sauromates, and those which in Pannonia do remain
The German, the Italian the French and those of Spain:
The Irish and the British Isles (of Islands all the best,
And Affricke nations al (which first old Affrican possessed)
The Aethiops and the Carthage men, and those of Aegipt-land,
And all the people that do dwell, on the dry Libian sand.
And many more inhabitants of diverse Isles beside,
And where the sect of Mahomet most chiefly does abide:
What ample large and spacious lands do honor Christ their head,
And through what kingdoms of the world his faithful flock are spread.
FINIS.
The manners, laws and customs, of all Nations. LIB. 1.
The true opinions of Divines, concerning man's original. CAP. 1.
WHen the divine Majesty (upon the first day of Creation) had finished this
great Why the world is so called.
and wonderful Architecture of heaven and earth, (which of his beauty and
elegant form, is called the world,) and all things contained within the
compass thereof, upon the sixth day he created man, of purpose that he might
have all other things in full fruition, and be Lord and Governor over them,
and making him the noblest of all other Creatures, he endued him with
celestial understanding, and named him Adam, of the red The original and
appellation of Adam.
earth or claye whereof he was framed. And to the end he should not be alone,
the Lord (casting him into a dead slumber) took a ribbe from out his side, and
framing woman thereof, gave her unto him as his wife and companion, and placed
them in the pleasantest part of all the earth, watered on all parts with most
pleasant rivers, and delectable fountains, which place for the ever fresh and
pleasant aspect, was of the Greeks called Paradise, Paradise.
wherein for a space they lived a most blessed life, free from all evil, the
earth producing all things of her own accord: But no sooner had they
transgressed the commandment of their maker, but that they were expelled from
that most sacred seat and happy habitation, and thrust into the earth to till
the same, out of which they were taken, The fertilnesse of the earth why i^ was
restrained.
which being, then for a curse, restrained of her former fruitfulness, and
bringing forth nothing willingly, they got their livings with sweat and
sorrow, their bodies being become subject to heat and cold, and all kind of
infirmities; Their first begotten son they called Cain, the second Abell,
after whom they had many other children. So Cain the first begotten of Adam.
that the world growing richer in age, and the earth more inhabited, as the
multitude of people increased, so did wickedness wax more rife, and men
growing worse and worse, accounting injury for innocence, and the contempt of
Gods majesty for piety, were come to that height of iniquity, that God in all
the world scarce finding Noah only, (whom for the reparation of mankind he
thought fit to be preserved with his household) sent the general deluge, The
general deluge, and how long it continued.
which drowning all the world, destroyed the fowls of the air, and all living
creatures breathing upon the face of the earth, some few seed pares only
excepted, defended by the Arc from the force of the flood. After the rage of
the waters had continued for five months space, the Arc rested upon the hills
of Armenia, and Noah and his company going Noah sent his children and kindred
to inhabit other countries.
forth into the earth, (by Gods special grace and assistances) in short time,
the almost, extinguished estate of all mortal creatures was repared. And Noah,
because all parts of the earth might be re-peopled, sent his sons, nephews,
and kinsfolk, with their companies to dwell, some into one country, some into
an other. Into Aegipt (according to the opinion of Berosus) he sent Esennius
with the Colonies of Cham: Tritamen into Lybia and Cyrene, and Iaphet Priscus
Attolaa, to enjoy the rest of Afric. Into East Asia he sent Canges, with
some of the sons of Gomer Gallus, Sabus, surnamed Thurifer went into Arabia
foelix: Arabus ruled in the deserts of Arabia: and Petreius in that part of
Arabia called Petreia. Chanaan he placed in Damascus in the confines of
Palestine: In Europe he made Thuysco King of Sarmatia, from the river of
Tanais, to the river of Rhene, to whom were joined the sons of Istrus, and
Mesa, with their brethren, who had the government from the hill Adulas, to
Messembria Pontica. Under whom Tyrus, Archadius and Aemathius governed in
Italy, Gomerus in France: Samotes possessed that part of France betwixt the
rivers Garunia and Sequana, and Iuball was Lord of the Celtibers.

That short and untimely alienation of the children The cause of the variety of
toungs and manners.
from their progenitors, (of whose life and manners they had little taste) was
cause of all the diversity which insued; for Cham, being constrained to fly
with his wife and children, for scorning and deriding his father, seated The
exile of Cham.
himself in that part of Arabia, which was afterward called by his name,
where he left no religious ceremonies to his posterity, as having received
none from his Father: whereof insued, that, as in tract of time, diverse
companies being sent out of that coast, to inhabit other countries, and
possessing diverse parts of the world, (for the rejected seed did exceedingly
increase) many of them fell into inextricable errors, their languages were
varyed, and all knowledge and reverence of the true and living God, was utterly
forgotten and abolished, in so much as many of them might well be said to live
a life so uncivil and so barbarous, as hardly could there Men lived like
beasts.
any difference be discerned betwixt them and brute beasts.

Those which went into Egypt, admiring the motion and brightness of the
heavenly lights, and ascribing a certain Godhead to the Sun and Moon,
began to worship The Sun and Moon worshipped.
them for gods, calling the Sun Osyris, and the Moon Isis, the Air they
reverenced under the name of Jupiter: the Fire of Vulcan: the Sky of Pallas:
and the Earth of The Moon called Isis, the Sun, Osyris: the Air, Jupiter;
the Fire, Vulcan; the Sky, Pallas; and the Earth, Ceres.
Ceres, giving divine honors unto other things likewise, under diverse other
names and appellations; Nor did that black cloud of darkness, hang only over
the land of Egypt, but what countries soever were first inhabited by the
offspring of Cham, were utterly ouer-whelmed in ignorance of true piety, and
wholly inthralled in Satan's slavery. Neither was there ever land the mother of
more Colonies, then that part of Arabia, wherein cursed Cham Arabia, the mother
of many Colonies.
and his crew remained; so great was that destruction which the untimely
banishment of one man brought to all mankind.

Whereas on the contrary part, the issue of Sem and Iaphet, The issue of Sem
and Japhet.
being lawfully instructed by their parents and elders, and contented to live
in their own limits, wandered not abroad into all parts of the world as those
others did, Why the worship of the true God remained with so few.
which is the cause that the desire of the truth, I mean the worship of the
true God and godliness, was (until the coming of the Messiah) privately
practiced in one country only.

The false opinion of the Ethnicks concerning man's original. CAP. 2.
BUT the ancient Philosophers, (being void of The twofold opinion of the
Philosophers concerning the world.
knowledge of the true Godhead, have written long sithence many Histories of
Nature,) have otherwise thought of man's original: for some of them were of
opinion, that the world was without beginning, and incorruptible, and that the
stock of human kind has been for ever. Some others supposed both world,
and worldly men to have beginning, and to be likewise subject to corruption,
for, (say they) at first the nature of heaven and earth being mingled together
and vnseperated, had one only form or Idaea, out of which chaos each body
being separated from other, the world attained this shape it now carries: the
ayrie being in continual motion, the firye part thereof, for his lightness,
required the uppermost seat, and by the same reason, the Sun, and all other
stars obtained their courses; That part which was mixed with moisture, by
reason of his weight, remained still in Light things tend upwards, and heavy
things downwards.
his propper place, which being than mingled together, of the moist part
thereof was made the sea, and the harder part became earth, though then soft
and slimy; which afterward growing harder and thicker by the heat of the
sun, the force of the heat by little and little swelling and puffing up the
superficies, or uttermost part thereof, The natural creation of living
creatures.
there were in many places diverse humors congealed together, wherein appeared
certain putrifactions covered with thin skins or filmes, as we may perceive
by experience in the fennes and standing waters of Aegipt, when as the heat of
the air upon a sudden warmeth the cold earth: so that heat abounding in
moisture, caused generation, and a certain winding air incompassing the
moisture, preserved that from danger by night, which by day was made solid by
the heat of the sun: so as in the end those putrifactions being brought to
perfection, and, as it were, their time of birth drawing near; the skins
wherewith they were covered, being burned and broken, they brought forth the
forms of all creatures: of which, those that did most participate of heat,
took their place in the uppermost region, and became flying fowls, those
which were most near unto the nature of the earth, became serpents, and other
earthly creatures, and those of the watery condition, were allotted the Element
of the same nature, and were called Fishes.

But when the earth (with heat and wind waxing every day dryer then other)
surceased from bringing forth the greatest sorts of creatures, those which she
had already produced, brought forth others of the same kind, by mutual
commixtion one with another.

And in this manner did those Philosophers affirm, The barbarous manner of
living of the first people.
that men had their beginnings likewise, and that they, (seeking the fields for
such food, as herbs and fruits of trees did naturally yield them) lived a
wild, uncivil, and brutish kind of life.

And being much annoyde with beasts (the better to resist them) partly moved
with fear, and partly for their The diversity of toungs how it came.
common profit, gathered themselves into companies, and joining their forces
together, sought out fit places for themselves to dwell in. That the sound of
men's mouths being first confused, and disordered, by little and little became
a distinct and intelligible voice, and gave unto every thing his proper name.
And that men being placed and dispersed into diverse parts of the world, used
not all one, but diverse languages, and for every language diverse caracters of
letters. That the first company of men gave beginning to every country wherein
they lived. And that those men which were first so procreated (being utterly
void of succor and aid of any thing, and not knowing how to gather the
fruits of the earth, and to lay them up and keep them, to serve their
necessity, lead so hard a life at the first, as many of them perished in
winter by cold or famine, who afterward growing wiser by experience, found
them out holes and caves in the Men made wiser by danger.
ground, both to avoid the extremity of cold, and to preserve fruits to
defend them from famine. And having found out the use of fire and other things
profitable, and all other commodities of man's life being made manifest unto
them: and finally making necessity the mistress of Necessity the the
mistress of labors.
their labors, they commended to their memories the knowledge of all things;
to whom were given as helpers, hands, speech, and excellency of mind.

Now those which (attributing nothing to Gods providence) were of opinion, that
man had this manner of The first men were the Aethiopians.
beginning, did hold also, that the Aethiopians were the first of all mortal
men, using this conjecture for their reason, that the country of Aethiopia, by
reason of the vicinity and neerenesse of the heavens, did before all other
lands begin to wax warm, the earth from the beginning lying long soaked in
water: whereof it happened, that of that first temperature of heat and
moisture, man himself being first begotten, would with a better will hold that
place wherein he was borne, than to go seek strange countries, all other
places being utterly unknown unto him.

Wherefore beginning there, (yet first speaking a word or two, in general of
Affricke one of the the three parts into which the world and this my present
work is divided) we will first speak of the situation of Aethiopia, and of
the customs and orders used in that country, and afterward we will treat of
all other lands in order as they lie, with what diligence we may.

Of the situation and perfection of the world. CAP. 3.
Our Ancestors (as Orosius reports) were of The earth divided into three
parts:
opinion, that the circle of the whole earth, enclosed within the borders of
the Ocean, is in the form of a Triangle, and that there be three parts
thereof, Affricke, Asia and Europe. Affricke is divided from Asia by the river
Nilus, which running from the South into Aethiopia, and passing Afric divided
from Asia.
by Aegipt, makes it exceeding fruitful by his ouer-flowing, and discharges
himself into the sea, in no less then seven sundry places.

The Mediterranean sea deuideth Europe from Afric, Europ divided from
Affricke.
which (according to Pomponius Mela) making breach into the earth from the West
Ocean, about Gades Island and Hercules pillars, is not there in breadth above ten
miles over. Asia is separated from Europe by the river Tanais, Asia divided
from Europe.
which flowing from the North almost into the middle of the poole of Maeotis,
meets there with the sea, called Pontus, which parts the rest of Asia from
Europe; Affricke is bounded upon the East with the river Nilus, and upon all
other parts with the sea, it is shorter then Europe, The situation and
quality of Affricke.
and brother when it joins to the sea, and fuller of hills, and holding on a
crooked course toward the West, by little and little growing sharper and
narrower, is then the narrowest when it is nearest to an end. As much of
Affricke as is inhabited, is wonderful fertile, but the greatest part thereof
lies desert, being either covered with dry barren sands, forsaken for the
vicinitie of the Sun, or annoyde with sundry sorts of hurtful creatures.
Upon the North it is compassed with the Lybian Sea, with the The incommodities
of Afric.
Ethiopian on the south, and with the sea Atlantic on the west. The whole
country of Afric was inhabited from the beginning, but of four sundry sorts
of people whereof two (as Herodotus writes) were borne and bred in that
country, Afric inhabited by homebred people and strangers.
and the other two were strangers: the homebred and natural countrymen are the
Carthagenians and the Aethiopians, the one inhabiting in the north of Africa,
and the other in the south. The strangers be Pheniceans and Grecians. The
ancient Aethiophians and Egiptians (if all be true which they report of
themselves) were at first rude and barbarous, and feeding commonly like brute
beasts with herbs and wild flesh, using neither manners, laws nor
government, but wandering and straying abroad without consideration or regard,
and utterly destitute of any certain habitation, reposing themselves
wheresoever they were benighted: But afterward being made more civil and
humane, by Hercules (who is said to have brought Colonies The people of Afric
made more civil by Hercules.
into that Country) and making themselves houses of those ships wherewith
they had before sailed into Libia, they began to dwell and inhabit together.
But of this we will speak more at large hereafter.

The soil of Affricke is unequally inhabited, for the The quality of the
soil of Afric.
South part thereof, by reason of the exceeding heat, lies for the most part
desert, and that part which lies next unto Europ is very populous, the
fruitfulnes of their ground The fruitfulness of the ground.
is admirable and wonderful, as yielding to the husbandman, in some places a
hundred fould increase.

It is strange that is reported of the fruitfulnes of Mauritania The wonders of
Afric.
in Affricke, that there be Vines bigger then two men can fatham, and clusters
of Grapes of a cubite in compass, that there be stalks of wild Parsley,
wild Fennel, and thistles of twelve cubits in length, and of a wonderful
thickness, much like unto the Indian Cane, the knots or joints whereof will
fill eight bushels, there are also herbs called Sperage, of no less notable
bigness: Their Cipres trees, about the hill Atlas be of an exceeding height
without knots, and with a bright leaf: but of all, their Cytron tree is the
most noble, and of the Romans accounted most dainty. Affricke breeds
Elephants and Dragons, which lying in wait for other beasts kill all they can
catch, What kind of beasts are bred in Afric
as Lions, Libards, Bufles, Goats and Apes, whereof there be great store in
many places.

There be also beasts like Camels and Panthers, and beasts called Rhizes,
which be like unto Bulls. And (according to the opinion of Herodotus) that
country breeds horned Asses, besides, Dragons, Hyaenaes, Porcupines, wild
Rams, and a kind of beast begotten betwixt the Hyaena and the Wolf, (which
is somewhat bigger then the ordinary kind of Wolves) Panthers, Storckes,
Egles, Estridges, and sundry kinds of Serpents, but especially the Cerastes
which has a little body, and horns like a Ram, and the Aspe which is little
likewise, but very venomous, against whose mischief the Ratte a very little
creature, is by nature opposed for a remedy.

Of Aethiopia, and the ancient customs of that Country. CAP. 4.
EThiopia is divided into two regions, whereof one lies in Asia, the Two
Aethiopias.
other in Affricke: That in Asia is now called India, and is washed on One
Aethiopia is now called India.
the East with the red and Barbarian Sea, and lies Northward next unto Libia
and Aegipt, upon the west it has the inner Libia, and upon the south it
joins to the other Aethiopia, which is bigger and more southward. This
Aethiopia in Afric, is so called of Aethiops the son of Vulcan, who
governed there (as Pliny is of opinion) or else of the Greek word (aitho)
which signifies to burn, and (ops) which is the countenance, because that
country is parched and burned, by reason of the neerenesse of the sun: for
the heat there is exceeding great and continual, as being directly under The
quality of Aethiopia.
the Meridian line. Toward the west it is mountanous, full of sand and gravel
in the middle, and desert in the east. It contains many sorts of people of
diverse and monstrous countenances, and horrible shapes. They were thought to
be the first people that lived, and that they The Aethiopians were the first
people.
being in that country naturally bred, continued freemen, and were never
subject to slavery: the gods were there first honored, and sacred ceremonies
ordained: they had The gods first worshipped in in Aethiopia.
a double use of letters, for some letters were called holy, and were only
known to the Priests, and the other served for What letters the Aethiopians
used.
the common people, nor were there forms of letters such as thereof could
sillables be framed, but either like some living creature, or the outward
parts of men's bodies or resembling sundry instruments of worke-men, and every
figure or form of letter had his proper signification, as by the Hawke was
signified swiftness, mischief and craft by the Crocadile, watchfulness by
the eye, and so like-wise of other things. Who-so-euer of their Priests was
most troubled with vain visions, him they accounted the most holiest, and
creating him for their King adored him as though he were either a God, or at
the least given them The election of their Kings.
by divine providence, and yet his supreme authority exempted him not from the
obedience of their laws, but that he was to do all things according to their
ancient customs, and not to reward or punish any man himself, but upon whom
soever he intended to take punishment, to him he sent the executioner, to
present him with the sign of death, which was no sooner viewed by him to whom
it was sent, but forthwith (who ever he were) he would go home to his own
house, and there procure The obedience of the Ethiopians.
his own death: for so great honor and affection did the subject bear to his
sovereign, that if it happened at any time by an accident the King to be
weakened or faint in any one part of his body, all his friends and followers
would of their own accord weaken that part in themselves, accounting it an
odious thing, that their King should be lame or blind of one eye, and all his
friends not to be in like manner blind and lame also.

Their custom was also (as is reported) that their King being dead, all his
friends would willingly deprive themselves of life, accounting that death most
glorious, and the surest testimony of true frindshippe: The people by reason of
the neerenesse of the heavens went for the most The apparel of the Ethiopians
party naked, covering only their priuities with sheeps tails, and some few
clothed themselves with skins, some of them also wore breeches made of
hair: their greatest employments were about their Cattle: their sheep be
very little and of a hard and rough fleese: Their exercise.
their Dogs be little likewise, but very sharp and eager: Millet and Barley
are their cheifest grains, which serves them both for bread and drink, and
they have no kind of fruits unless it be Dates, and those be very rare also:
Many of them lived with herbs and the slender roots of reeds, they eat
also flesh, milk and cheese: The Isle of Meroe was once the head of the
kingdom, the form thereof is like unto a sheeld, and it lies along Meroe was
once the Kings seat.
by the river of Nylus, for the space of three thousand stadia.

The Sheapheards that Inhabited that I Will were great huntsmen, and the
husbandmen had mines of gold: Herodotus says, that those people of Aethiopia,
which be called Macrobij, esteemed more of brass than of gold, Gold accounted
baser then brass.
for their gold they put to such base and vile uses, as the Ambassadors of
Cambyses King of Persia, being sent thither, saw diverse offenders fettered in
prison in chains of gold. Some of them sow their ground with a kind of
pulse, and some others plant the Lote tree, they have Hebon wood and Pepper in
great abundance, Elephants they hunt and eat, they have also Lions,
Rhinocerots, (which be enemies to the Elephant) Basilisks, Libbards, and
Dragons, which winding and intangling themselves about the Elephants, destroy
them by sucking out their blood. There is found the Iacint stone, and the
Chrisophrasus, (which is a green stone mixed with a golden brightness) there
is Cynamon gathered likewise: Their weapons were bows made of wood that was
parched in The Ethiopian armor.
the fire, and four cubits in length; their women were good warriors, the most
of them having their lips thrust through with a ring of brass. Some of the
Aethiopians worshipped The religion of the Ethiopians.
the Sun at his rising, and inueighed bitterly against him at his going
down; many of them cast their dead bodies into rivers, some other put them
into earthen vessels or glass vessels, and kept them in their houses for the
space of a year; during which time they reverenced them very religiously,
offering unto them the first fruits of their increase.

Some say, that thee that did most excel others in comeliness of body, skill
in breeding cattle, strength and riches, him they elected for their King. And
that they had an ancient law, that the Priests of Memphis, might when The
authority of the Priests.
they pleased, deprive the King of his life (by sending unto him the messenger
that carried the sign of death) and ordain an other to reign in his steed.
They believed that there was one immortal God, and that he was maker of Their
gods.
the world, and governor of all things, any other God they esteemed mortal,
who was their uncertain King, as is said. And he that best deserved of their
city, him next unto their King they reverenced as God. And such was the state
of Aethiopia at the beginning, and for a long continuance, these their customs
and manners of their nation. But at this day, as Marcus Antonius Sabellicus;
(out of The new customs of the Aethiopians or Indians.
whose history we have taken most matters, which we treat of both in this
and the books following) says, that he had intelligence from some that were
borne in those countries, that the King of Aethiopia (whom we call Pretoian
or Presbiter Joan, or Joan, and they Gyam, Prestor John King of that Aethiopia
which is in Asia.
which in their language signifies mighty,) is so potent a Prince, that he is
said to have under him as his vassalls threescore and two Kings. And that all
their great Bishops and states of all those kingdoms, are wholly guided by him,
at whose hands the order of Priesthood is obtained, which authority was by the
Pope of Rome given and annexed to the Majesty of their Kings, and yet he
himself is no Priest, nor never entered into any holy orders. There be a great
number of Archbishops, and every one of them, (who ever has the least) has
twenty Bishops under his jurisdiction. The Princes and other Bishops of great
dignity, when they go abroad have carried before them, a cross, and a golden
vessel filled with earth, that the sight of the one may put them in mind of
their mortality, and the other of our Saviors passion.

Their Priests are suffered to mary for procreations sake, but if they bury one
wife, it is utterly unlawful for them to Their Priests marry once and no more.
mary an other. Their Temples are very large, and far richer then ours, and
for the most part builded up to the topp arch-wise. They have many religious
houses and families of holy orders, as Antonians, Dominicks, Calaguritans,
Augustines, and Macarians, who be all arrayed by permission of their
Archbishops, with apparel of one color: Next unto Almighty God, and his
Mother the blessed Virgin Mary, Saint Thomas surnamed Didimus, Saint Thomas
held in great reverence.
is chiefly honored in that country. They hold an opinion, that their great
King whom they call Gyam, was engendered of King David, and that the race of
that one family has continued ever since, he is not black as most of the
Aethiopians are, but rather white. The city Garama is now the Kings seat,
which consists not of Bulwarks and houses with strong walls, but of tents or
tabernacles made of fine flax or silk, imbrodered with purple, and placed in
decent and seemly order.

The King according to his custom, lives for the most part abroad, not
containing himself within the circuit of the City, above two days together,
either because they account it absurd and effeminate, or that they are
prohibited by some law.

They have in readiness upon any little occasion ten The power of the
Ethiopian Kings.
hundred thousand men, well instructed in feats of arms, five hundred
Elephants, besides an infinite number of Horses and Camels.

There be also throughout the whole kingdom certain stipendary families, the
issue whereof have a gentle incision made in their skin, and be marked with
a hot iron with the sign of the Cross. In wars they use bows, spears,
cotes of male, and helmets: the order of Priesthood What weapons be used in
their wars.
is in greatest dignity, next unto whom are the sages or wizards, whom they
call Balsamati and Tenquati. They esteem much also of innocence and honesty,
accounting them the first step to wisdom, the Nobility are the third in honor
and dignity and the stipendary the last: the Judges discern of causes of life
and death: but refer the decree to the Prefect of the city, who is called
Licomagia, who always representes the person of the King: written laws they
have none, but judge according to equity and right. If any man be convicted of
adultery he shall pay for his The punishment for adultery.
punishment the fortith part of his goods, but the adulteress shall receive a
domestical revenge by her husband, for he shall punish her whom it does most
concern. The husbands assign dowers for their wives, requiring noe portion
with them. There women are attired with gold Husbands assign dowers for their
wives
(whereof that country does much abound) pearls also, and silk, both men and
women wear garments down to the feet, with sleeves, and not open in any
place, all colors are alike unto them, except black, which is there used
only for mourning garments.

They bewail the dead for the space of forty days. The second courses in
their greatest banquets consist of raw flesh, which being finely minced into
small pieces, and strawed over with sweet spices, they feed upon most
hungerly: woollen cloth they have none, instead whereof they are clothed either
with silk or flax: they use not all one language, but diverse, and
distinguished by diverse names. They exercise themselves either in husbandry or
about cattle, they have every year two haruests and two summers. All the
people of Lybia from this Aethiopia or India, to Mahomet worshipped in Libia.
the utmost part of the west, honor the impiety of Mahomet, and live in the
same kind of religion, that those Barbarians practice, which are now in
Aegipt, and be called Moors (as it is thought) of their wandering or straying
abroad: for that country of Libia also was no less hateful than the Sarasins,
in those accursed times, wherein was the greatest alteration in human
matters, the manners of people, love of devotion, and names of all Nations,
being for the most part changed.

Of Aegipt and the ancient customs of that country. CAP. 5.
Egypt a region in Affricke, or (as some will have it) next adjoining to
Affricke, The denomination and description of Aegipt.
was so called of Aegiptus the brother of Danaus King of Argyues, before which
time it was called Aeria: This country (as Pliny in his first book
witnesses) joins Eastward to the red sea, and to Palaestyne; upon the West
it has Cyrene, and the residue of Affricke, and extends from the South to
Aethiopia, and from the North to the Egyptian sea. The most famous cities of
that country, were Thebes, Abydos, Alexandria, Babylon, and Memphis (now called
Damiata) and the great city Cayrus or Alcir, which is the Soldans seat; In
Egypt (as Plato reports) it does never rain, but the river of Nylus
ouer-flowing the whole land once every year, after the summer Solstice makes
the whole country fertile and fruitful: Egypt of many is accounted amongst the
number of Islands. The river Nylus so dividing it, that it proportioneth the
whole country into a triangular form; insomuch that of many it is called
Delta, for the resemblance it has unto that Greek letter. The Egiptians were
the first that fained the names of The Aegiptians had their beginning from the
Aethiopians.
twelve gods, they erected Altars, Idols, and Temples, and figured living
creatures in stones, all which things do plainly argue that they had their
original from the Aethiopians, who were the first Authors of all these things,
(as Diodorus Siculus is of opinion). Their women were wont in times past to
do business abroad, to keep tauernes and victualling houses, and to take
charge of buying The Aegiptian women do the offices of men, and men the offices
of women.
and selling: and the men to knit within the walls of the city, they bearing
burdens upon their heads, and the women upon their shoulders: the women to
piss standing, and the men sitting; all of them for the most part ryoting and
banqueting abroad, in open ways, and exonerating and disburdening their
bellyes at home. No woman there takes upon her the order of Priesthood of
any god or goddess.

They enter not into religion to any of their gods, one by one, but in
companies, of whom one is their Bishop or head, and he being dead, his
son is elected in his steed: The male children aid and succor their
parents by the custom of their country, freely and willingly, and daughters
are forced to do it, if they be unwilling.

The fashion of most men in funeral exequies is to rend the hayres off their
heads, and to suffer their beards Their manner of funerals.
to grow vncutte, but the Egyptians did let their locks grow long, and
shave their beards short, they kneaded Circumcision used by the Egiptians.
their Dowe with their feet, and made mortar with their hands. Their custom
was (as the Greeks were of opinion) to circumcise themselves and their
children: they write their letters from the right hand to the left; and men
wore two garments, the women but one: they had two sorts of letters, the one
profane, the other holy, but both of them derived from the Aethiopians. The
Priests shaued their bodies every third day, least they should hap to be
polluted with any filthe, when they did The cleanness of the Priests.
sacrifice: they wore paper shoes, and linen vestiments ever new washed, and
alleagded that they were circumcised, for no other cause, but for cleanliness
sake, for that it is better to be clean then comely. The Egyptians sowed no
Beans, nor would eat any that grew in other Beans an unclean grain with
the Egiptians.
countries; and their Priests were precisely prohibited the sight of them, as
being an unclean kind of grain. The Priests washed themselves in cold
water, thrice in the day time, and twice in the night. The heads of their
oblations they eat not, but cursing them with bitter execrations, either sold
them to strange Merchants factors, or if none would buy them, they would throw
them into the river of Nylus.

their sacrifices were with oxen and calves that were very clean.

It was not lawful for the women to do sacrifice, no though they were
consecrated to their God Isis: They lived of meat made of a certain corn
which they call Wheat, and drink wine made of Barley, for grapes there The
Aegiptians wine.
are none growing in that country. They eat raw fish dried at the Sun, and
some powdered in brine, and birds also, but altogether raw, but the richer sort
feed upon Quails and Duckes. When many are assembled together at meat, and
that they be arose from dinner or supper, one of them caryeth about, upon a
little Beer or Chest, the picture of a dead body, either made of wood, or else
much resembling a dead corpse, in painting and workmanship, of a cubite or two
cubits long, and showing it unto every one of the guests, says unto them: In
your drinkings and meriments behold this spectacle, for such shall you be when
you are dead. Young people bow and give place to their elders when they meet
them in the way, and arise from their seats to such as come to them, wherein
they agree with the Lacedaemonians. Those which encounter in the The Aegiptians
salutations.
ways salute one another with congee below the knee: They are clothed (as I
have said) with linen garments fringed about the legs, which they call
Cassilirae, over which they we are a little short white garment like a cloak,
VVollen garments contemned.
as it were cast over the other: for woollen garments are so contemned, as they
are neither worn in temples, nor serve for winding sheets. Now, because all
those famous men which have heretofore excelled in any one kind of learning
or mystery, and which have constituted and left behind them laws and
ordinances for other nations to live by, went first unto the Egyptians, to
learn their manners, laws and wisdom (in which they excelled all nations of
the earth) as Orpheus, and after him Homer, Musaeus, Melampodes, Dedalus,
Licurgus the Spartane, Solon the Athenian, Plato the Philosopher, Pythagoras of
Samos, and Zamolzis his disciple, Eudoxus also the Mathematitian, Democritus of
the city of Abdera, Inopides of Chios, Moses the Hebrew, and many others, as
the Aegiptian Priests make bragges, are contained in their sacred books, I
think it very convenient to spend some little time further in describing the
manner of living of the Aegiptians, that it may be known what one or more
things, every one of those worthy men, have taken from the Egyptians, and
transported into other countries, for Many ceremonies used in Christian
religion, borrowed from the Egiptians.
(as Phillippus Beroaldus writes upon Apuleus Ass) there be many things
translated from the religion of the Aegiptians into the Christian religion, as
the linen vestments, the shauing of Priests crowns, the turning about in the
Altar, the sacrificiall pomp, the pleasant tuning notes of music, adorations,
prayers, and many other more like ceremonies.

The Egiptian Kings (as Diodorus Siculus writes in his second book) were not
so licencious as other Kings, whose will stands for a law, but followed the
institutions and laws of the country, both in gathering money, and in their
life and conuersations. There was none of any servile condition, whether he
were bought with money, or borne in that country, that was admitted to wait
and attend What servants attended upon their Kings.
upon the King, nor any other, but only the sons of the worthiest Priests,
and those above the age of twenty years, and excelling others in learning, to
the end that the King being moved at the sight of his servants, both day and
night attending upon his person, should commit nothing unfit to be done by a
King, for seldom do the rich and mighty men become evil if they want
ministers to foster them in their evil desires. There were certain hours
appointed every day and night, wherein (by the permission of their law) the
King might confer with others. The King at his rising receaueth all the letters
and supplications that be sent or brought unto him, and then pausing and
considering a while what is to be don, he gives answer to every suter in order
as they came, so as all things be done in their due and convenient time. This
done after he has washed his body in the company of his greatest states, and
put on his richest robes, he sacrifices unto his Gods: There custom was that
the chief Priest, when the sacrifices were brought before the Altar, and the
King standing by, prayed with a loud voice The Priests prasied the good Kings
dispraised the bad.
in the hearing of the people for the prosperous health and all good success of
their King that maintains justice toward his subjects, and more particularly
to relate his virtues, as to say that he observed piety and religion toward
the Gods, and humanity to man, then to call him continent, just, and
magnanimous, true, bountiful and brideling all his affections, and besides,
that, that he laid more easy punishments upon offenders, then their crimes
required, and bestowed favors beyond men's deseruings, and holding on this
prayer, at length he pursues the wicked with a curse, and freeing the King
from blame, lays all the fault upon his ministers, which persuade him to do
evil: Which done he exhorts the King to lead a happy life and acceptable to
the Gods, and also to follow good fashions, and not to do those things which
evil men persuade him to, but such as cheefely appertain to honor and
virtue. In the end after the King has sacrificed a bull to the Gods, The
Priest recyteth out of their sacred books, certain decrees and gests of
worthy men, whereat the King being moved rules his kingdom holily and justly
according to their examples.

They have there times appointed and prefixed not only when to gather riches,
and to judge acording to their ancient laws, but also when to walk, when to
wash, when to lie with their wives and when every thing else is to be done:
They used but simple diet as having nothing The Egyptians simple diet.
upon their tables but Veale and goose, they were also limited to a certain
measure of wine that would neither fill their bellies nor intoxicate their
brains. In a word the whole course of their lives, was so modest and so
temperate as they seemed, to be guided rather by a most skilful Physician for
the preservation of their healths then by a lawgiver.

It is strange to see after what sort the Egyptians lead their lives, for they
lived not as they would themselves, but as the law allowed them; but it is much
more admirable to see how that their Kings were not permitted to condemn
others, nor yet to inflict punishment upon any offender, being moved thereunto
either through pride, malice, or any unjust cause whatsoever: but living under
a law like private men, thought it no burden unto them, but rather esteemed
themselves blessed in obeying the law: for by those which follow their own
affections, they supposed many things to be committed, that might breed unto
themselves both danger and damage: for though they know they do amiss, yet
notwithstanding they persist still in error, being overcome either with love,
or hate, or some other passion of mind, whereas those which live with
understanding and advise, offend in few things. The Kings using such The Kings
safety much regarded.
justice to their subjects, did so purchase the good wills of them all, as not
only the Priests, but all the Egiptians, were more careful of their
Sovereign, then of their wives or Children or any other princes else: and when
one of those good Kings die all men bewailed him with equal sorrow How the
Egyptians be wayle their dead Kings that were good.
and heaviness of heart, and renting their clothes and shutting up their
Temples, frequented not the market, nor observed solemn feasts, but defiling
their heads with earth for the space of seventy and two days, and girding
themselves about the pappes with fine linen, both men and women walked about
together, by two hundred and three hundred in a Company, renewing their
complaints, and in a song renumerating the virtues of their King one by one,
during which time they abstayned from flesh of beasts, from all things boiled,
from wine and all sumptuous fare, and also from all manner of ointments and
bathes, yea their own propper beds, and all women's company, bewayling for
those days as much as if they had buried their own children, In which mean
space all things being provided for the funeral solemnities, upon the last day
they How their Kings be buried.
enclosed the corpse in a coffinne and placed it at the entrance of the
Sepulcher, where usually was made a brief narration of all things done by the
King in his life time, and every one had then liberty to accuse him that would:
the Priests stood by, commending the Kings good deeds, and all the multitude of
people that were present at the funerals, applauded his praise worthy actions,
and with bitter exclamations rayled against his misdeeds, whereof it happened
that most Kings (through the opposition of the people) wanted the due honor
and magnificence of Burial, the fear whereof constrained them to live justly
and uprightly in their life times: and this for the most part was the manner of
living of the ancient Kings of Egypt. Egypt is divided into many parts,
every part whereof The ancient government of the Egiptians.
is called by the Greek word (Monos) and is governed by a Praetor or Mayor,
who has rule over all the people of that Province: The Aegiptians divide their
tribute, or custom money which is paid them by forrainers in three parts: the
greatest part whereof belongs to the college of Priests, which are of great
authority with the inhabitants, both in regard of their service to their gods,
as also for their doctrine, wherewith they instruct others, and part of this
portion they bestow in ministering their sacrifices, and the rest to increase
their private estates, for in no case would the Aegiptians have the worship of
their gods omitted, nor do they think it fit, that they that be ministers of
common council, and profit, should want things necessary to live upon: for the
Priests in all weighty businesses be assistant to the King, both by their
labor and council, as well in regard of the knowledge they have in the
stars, as by their sacrifices, foretelling things to come. Moreover they show
out of their sacred volumnes the acts and gests of worthy men, by which the
Kings may know in their designs, how things are likely to succeed, and it is
not so with the Aegiptian Priests, as it is with the Greeks, that one man, or
one woman should have charge of their sacrifices, but there be many that be
conversant about the worship and honor of their gods, which leave the same
charge of holy mysteries to their children: they be all of them freed and
discharged from tribute, and possess the second place of honor and estimation
after their King.

The second portion of the tribute money comes to the Kings, which serves
them for the wars, for their maintenance, and also to reward valiant and worthy
men for their prowess and good service, by which means it comes to pass,
that their own people are vexed with no kind of tribute: The Captains and
Soldiers have the third part, to the end that having such wages, they might
have more ready and willing minds to undergo all perils and dangers of
warfare.

Their commonwealth also consists of three sorts of common people, of
husbandmen, shepherds and craftsmen. Their commonwealth consists of three
sorts of people, husbandmen, shepherds and laborers.
The husbandmen buy their ground at an easy rate of the Priests, of the King,
or of the Soldiers, and apply their husbandry without intermission, all their
time from their infancy, by which means they are far more expert in
husbandry then others, both for the precepts they receive from their parents,
as also by reason of their continual practice. The sheapheards likewise
receiving the charge and skill of keeping cattle from their fathers, follow
that kind of exercise for all their life long: And arts and sciences amongst
the Aegiptians are most exquisite, and brought to the highest strain of
perfection, for the Egiptian tradesmen, (without intermedling in public
affairs) exercise no other labor but such only as is either permitted by the
law, or taught by their fathers, so as neither the envy of the teacher, nor
civil hatred, nor any other thing whatsoever, can hinder them from that course
of life they have entered into.

The Egiptians censured not of things at hap hazard, but with reason and
discretion, for they esteemed things How their judgments were given.
rightly done to be very beneficial for man's life, and that the only way to
avoid evil, was to punish the offenders and to succor the oppressed, but that
the punishment due for an offense should be forborne in regard either of
meede or money, they held to be the utter confusion of their public life, and
therefore they settled the best and choicest men of the most famous cities, as
at Heliopolis, Memphis, and Thebes, and set them as judges over the rest, which
sessions of Judges were thought to be nothing inferior to the Judges of
Areopagus in Athens, nor to the Senate or council of the Lacedaemonians,
established long time after them: when these Judges (being thirty in number)
were assembled together, they made election of the worthiest man amongst them,
to be their chief Judge or Justice, in whose absence the whole company
assembled, appointed an other Judge to be his substitute: These Judges were all
maintained at the Kings cost, but the chief Judge was far better allowed
then the rest, who always had hanging about his neck in a chain of gold,
bedeckt The chief Judge wears the sign of Truth about his neck.
with diverse precious stones, an Image which they called Truth: and when they
were set in Judgment, the Image of Truth being laid before them by the chief
Judge, and all their laws (which were contained in eight volumes) placed in
the middle of the Judges: their manner was, that the accuser should set down
his accusation in writing, and the manner of the injury, or loss, committed and
done, and how much he esteemed himself damnified: then was there a time
allotted for the accused to answer his adversaries accusations by writing, and
either to purge himself that he did not the injury, or to auerre that what he
did was justly done, or that the wrong or loss he did was not of such value
as was supposed: after this the plaintiff replied, and the defendant made
answer to his replication. So as the pleading of both parties being twice
heard, after the Judges had examined and reasoned of the matter in
controversy, the chief Judge turning the sign of Truth toward him that had
truth of his side, pronounced the sentence, and this was the manner of their
Judgments. And now because occasion is offered to speak of the Institution of
their laws, I think it not impertinent to our purpose, to make mention of the
ancient laws of the Egyptians: that thereby we may know how far they
excelled others both in order and vtility. And first of all, perjured persons
The laws of the Egiptians. against periurd persons.
were punished with death, as those which had committed a double offense, both
in violating their duty toward the gods, and in breaking and abolishing faith
and truth amongst men, which is the chiefest bond of human society: if a
Traveler find one that is set upon with thieves and robbed and beaten, or
suffered any other injury, and does not set to his helping hand to aid him (if
it lie in his power) he shall dye for it, but if he could not assist him,
then ought he to make the thieves known, and to prosecute the injury with his
accusation; which if he do not he shall be whipped with a certain number of
stripes, and be bard from all sustenance for three whole days together:
Against salse accusers.
he which accuses an other falsely, and is called in question for it, shall
undergo the punishment provided for false accusers: and all the Aegiptians
were at certain times constrained to give up their names in writing to the
Presidents and Governors, and what trade of life they exercised, in doing
whereof, if any say untruly, or lived by unlawful gain, he was punished with
death: if any one kill either freeman or servant willingly, he shall dye for
it by the laws: which regarding not the quallity of the estate, but the
heynousnesse of the deed, and the evil mind of the dooer, deliver men from
evil, so as by revenging the death of servants and slaves, freemen may live
in more security.

The pains of death were not afflicted upon fathers which A law against
parents that murdered their children.
had slain their sons, but they were enjoined to stand for three days and
three nights about the dead corpse (the public watch standing by to see it
done) for they thought it unjust to deprive him of life that was author of his
sons life: but rather that he should be afflicted with continual grief and
repentance of the fact, whereby others might shun the like offense. To
Paracides was imposed a most exquisite A law against Pariacides.
and extreme punishment, for the law was, that the living body and the dead
corpse should be bound together joint by joint, upon sharp Pikes or stakes, and
burned upon a heap of thorns, adiudging it to be the most heinous offense
that could be amongst men, for one to do him to death violently, of whom he
had received life. If any woman great with child were adjudged to dye, her
death was deferred till she was delivered, for they thought it mere injustice,
that an infant which committed no evil should perish with the guilty, or that
two should be punished, whereas but one offended. Those which in Offenders in
the wars punished with shame.
wars did either break their array, or would not obey their Leaders and
Captains, were not punished with death, but with the reproach and ignominy of
all men, which disgrace after they had blotted out by their virtue and valiant
acts, they recovered their former estate and dignities, and that law brought it
to pass in continuance of time, that men accounted that dishonor to be the
greatest evil could hap unto them, and much more grievous then death. Those
which revealed any secrets to their enemies, had their toungs cut out; and
those which clipped money, or counterfetted any false coin, or altered it
either in weight or fashion, or stamped it with letters, or defaced the
letters, or forged any false deeds, were punished with the loss of both their
hands: for they thought it fit, that that part of the body should suffer
punishment during life, that was chief instrument in the offense, and that
others also being warned by their miseries and calamities, might abstain from
the like lewdness. There were very sharp punishments inflicted upon those
that had abused any woman, for he which defloured a free A law against adultery
and fornication.
woman had his members cut off, for that under one fault he had committed three
hanous offenses which were injury, corruption of blood, and confusion of
children; he that was taken in wilful adultery had a thousand stripes with
rods, and the adulterous woman had her nose cut off, by which disgrace her
beauty was blemished, and she punished in that part of her face which did most
addorne it. It is reported that Bocchoris was the maker of those laws which
partaind to civil conversation amongst men, which laws Bocchoris their law
maker.
allow that if one lend money without specialty, and the debtor deny that he
borrowed any, the creditor must stand to the debiters oath: for an oath is held
of great moment as being a religious act: and certain it is that those which
often swear do abrogate their faith and credits, and therefore they will
swear but seldom, least they loose their reputations and names of honest men,
moreover the same lawe-maker (concluding all faithfulness in virtue) judged,
that men ought by good means to accustom themselves to honesty, that they may
not be thought unworthy of trust, for he thought it wrong to those to whom
money was lent without oath not to perform their faith by swearing, whether
the goods be their Men's bodiesnot liable to their debts.
own or not: The usury which was agreed upon by writing, forbad that the
double forfeture of the thing lent should be exacted: and all payments were
satisfied by the debitors goods, but his body might not be delivered to the
creditor, for they thought fit that only their goods should be subject and
liable to their debts, and their bodies addicted to the Cities, whose aid and
assistance they had need of, both in wars and peace; neither was it thought
fit that the soldiers which ventured their lives, for their countries safty,
should be thrust in prison for interest: which law is supposed to be
translated by Solon to the Athenians, and by him called Sisachthia, providing
that men should not loose their lives for the Citizens usury: more-ouer the
particular law and toleration for thieves amongst the Aegiptians, was, that
those that did steal should bring their names in writing to the chief Priest,
and instantly disclose the theft, or robbery unto The law against thieves.
him. In like sort they which had their goods taken from them, must write unto
the chief Priest, the time, day, and hour that he was robbed, by which
means the theft being easily found out and discovered, he which was robbed
should loose the fourth part of that which was stolen, which fourth part shall
be given to the thief, and the rest restored to the owner: For the lawgiuers
opinion was that seeing it was impossible that theft should altogether be
prohibited, men should loose rather some portion of their substance, then all
that was taken from them.

The manner of their marriages is not all alike with Their marriaages.
the Aegiptians, for it is lawful for the Preests to marry but once, but the
rest may marry as often as they will, according to their desire, and ability; and
there are no children accounted bastards, noe though they be begotten of such
bond-seruants as be bought with money, for they hold that the father is the
only author of their childrens birth, and the mother to be but the receptacle,
and to yield norrishment The small cost bestowed in bringing vpchildren.
to the infant.

It is most incredible to see with what small and easy cost the Aegiptians
bring up their children, for the norish them with the roots of bulrushes, and
other like roots, raked and roasted in hot embers, and with herbs growing
in fennes and moorish grounds, sometimes boyld, sometimes broyld on the
coals, and sometimes raw. They never wore shoes, but go for the most part
naked, by reason of the temperature of the country: so as all the cost that a
father bestows upon his child till he be of full age, exceeds not twenty
Drachmas. The Priests instruct children both in that learning which they call
holy, and in the other which appertained to knowledge and common instruction,
and they be very intentive, and exceedingly bent to the study of Geometry and
Arithmatick. They suffer them not to use either wrestling or music, supposing
the daily use of wrestling to be unsure and dangerous, and that thereby their
bodies are made more feeble and weak, and music they condemned as utterly
Music disalowd of the Egiptians.
unprofitable and hurtful in making their minds effeminate: They cure their
diseases either by fasting or vomitting, which they use either daily, or every
third day, How the Egiptians cure the diseased.
or fourth day, for they are of opinion, that all diseases had their beginning
from surfeiting, and that therefore that is the best physic to recover
health, which takes away the cause of the disease: Soldiers and travelers
are cured for nothing, for the Physicians live of the reuenews of the
commonwealth, and therefore are forced by the law to cure the diseased, after
the strict form set down by the best Physicians and most approved writers:
And the Physician that follows the rule of that sacred book, though he
cannot cure his patient, yet is he blameless, but if he cure him by any other
means then is set down in that book, he shall dye for it: for the maker of
that law was of opinion, that there could not a better course of curing be
found out, then that which was invented, and observed for long time by ancient
Physicians.

The Aegiptians worship diverse creatures beyond all measure, not only while
they be living, but when they be The Aegiptians worship diverse sorts of
creatures.
dead also, as Cattes, Rattes, Dogs, Hawks, the birds called Ibis, Wolves
and Crocadiles, and many more of like kind: neither be they ashamed to
profess open honor unto them, but account it as commendable and lawdable for
them to do it, as to do their service to the gods, in so much as they will
go about into cities and other places, carrying with them Images of those
beasts, vaunting and glorying what creatures they have adored, at the sight
whereof, all men in manner of supplyants, do reverence unto the Images. When
any of these beasts die, they wrappe the carcass in linen cloth, and annoint
it with Salt, beating their breasts with bitter exclamations, and annoynting it
again with the Iuise of Cedar tree, and other odoriferus ointments, that it
may keep the longer, they bury it in their hallowed places. He that willingly
kills any of those creatures, shall have judgment of death for it: but if a
man kill the Ibis or the Cat, either willingly or at unawares, the whole
multitude fall upon him, tormenting and killing him without mercy or judgment.
The terror whereof inforceth the beholders to lament his death, and to auerre
that the beast was killed without any fault of his own. These beasts be kept
with great cost and charge within the circuit of their Temples, by men of no
small account, eating fine flower and porredge made of Oate-meale, which in
their banquets are mingled with milk: They give them Geese also daily both
sodde and broylde: and catch birds for those which eat raw flesh. To conclude
they be all nourished with marvelous great charge and diligence: and their
deaths as much bewailed of the people as the deaths of their own Sons, yea
and their funerals are far more sumptuous than their ability can afford; in
so much as when Ptolomaeus Lagus was governor of Egypt an ox dying for age
in the City of Memphis, he which had the charge of keeping him bestowed a
great sum of money upon his burial, which was given to him to defray that
charge, besides fifty talents of silver which he borrowed of Ptolomy.

These things which we have spoken of, perhaps, will seem strange to some, but
no less strange will it seem to any that shall consider the ceremonies of the
Aegiptians in the burial of the dead: for when one dies there all his The
strange kind of burials amongst the Egiptians.
near friends and kinsfolks defile and spoil their heads with earth, and go
round about the City wayling, until the dead body be buried, in which Interim
they nether wash themselves nor drink wine, nor eat any meat but that which
is very vile and gross, nor yet wear any good apparel: They have three
forms or kinds of burial, for some be buried sumptuously, some indifferently,
and some basely: In the first manner of buryall is spent and laid out one
talent of silver, in the second twenty minae, and some small cost is bestowed
in the last. Those which have charge of the funerals (which course of life
decendeth from their ancestors as by Inheritance) bring the funeral expenses
in writing to the houshoulders, demanding at what rate they will have the
funerals performed, and the bargain being made, and concluded betwixt them
the body is delivered unto them to be buried, at the charge agreed upon: And
then the Gramarian (for so he is called) the body being laid in the ground,
marketh and assigns out a place about the flanck how far from the left part
the incisition must be made, after that, he which is called the breaker up or
vnboweler, opens his side with a sharp Ethiopian stone, so wide as by the
law is permitted, which done he instantly runs away as fast as he can, all
the standers by following after, cursing him, and throwing stones at him, for
they esteemed those men worthy of hate, which had mangled or misused the body
of their friend: but those which have charge and oversight of the body, which
they call Salitores, they account worthy of honor and estimation, this done
they carry the dead corpse into the Temple before the Priests, who standing by
the dead body, on of them plucketh out of the hole, or wound in his side all
the entralls, except the kidneyes and heart, al which an other washes away
with red wine, compounded with odoriferous spices and perfumes, after that they
annoint the whole body, first with juice of Cedar tree, and other precious
ointments for thirty days space and more, and then they rub it over with mirhe
and cinnamon and other like stuff, whereby it is not only preserved the longer
but yields a sweet savor also: the body being thus dressed, they deliver it
to the dead man's kinsfolk, every part of him, yea the heaires of his brows
and eye lidds, being so preserved, as the form of his body remains whole, as
though he were not dead but a sleep: before the body be interred the funeral
day is declared to the Judges and the dead man's friends saying, that upon that
day the dead body is to pass over the fens: the Judges being above forty in
number assemble them selves together, and sit upon a round scaffold, beyond the
poole, then is there a ship provided for that purpose, and brought thither by
those to whom the charge is committed, and before the body be laid in the
coffin, every one has liberty that will to accuse the party deceased, and if
he be proved to be an euillliuer, the judges proceed to sentence, whereby
they adiudge that his body shall be deprived of Sepulture: and if any one
accuse him unjustly, he shall be severely punished: but if no one accuse him,
or that it is evident that he was accused falsely and of malice, his kindred
leaving off their mourning, fall to praising him, yet speaking nothing of his
stock and parentage, as the Greeks are accustomed to do, (for the Aegiptians
account themselves all noble alike,) but beginning at his childhood, they
recite his bringing up and education, the beginning of his life and learning,
and from that ascending to his man's estate, they remember his religion and
devotion toward the gods, his Justice, his Continency, and all his other
virtues, and then inuocating the infernal gods, they beseech them to place him
amongst the Saints, to which request all the multitude make answer, extolling
the dead-mans worth and renown, as if he should live for ever below amongst
the blessed: which done, each one buryeth his friends in his own proper
sepulcher, and those which want sepulchers, bury them in the strongest walls of
their house, setting the chest wherein the body lies on the one end. But those
which are forbidden buryall, either for usury, or some other offense, are
buried at home without a coffin, whom his posterity (growing of better ability,
and satisfying for his misdeeds) do afterward bury very solemnly.

The Egyptians custom is to give the bodies of their dead parents as pawnes
to their creditors, and those children The bodies of dead parents given to
their creditors.
that redeem them not, shall be disgraced and want sepulture themselves: one
may justly marvel to see, how the authors of all these ordinances, did not
only provide for things profitable for man's life, but also regarded those
things which appertained to the honor and buryall of dead bodies, in so much
that by this means, men's lives were disposed as much as might be to good
manners.

The Greeks, which by their fained fables, and Poetical fictions, far
exceeding truth, delivered many things of the rewards of the godly, and
punishment of the wicked, could not with all their writings draw men to virtue,
but were rather derided and contemned themselves: But with the Aegiptians, due
punishment being rendered to the wicked, and commendation to the just, not in
show, but in substance, they did every day admonish both the good and the bad,
what things were profitable for them, for they saw before their eyes, that to
every one, according to his deeds was given a remembrance of his merits or
demerits, which was a cause that all men immitated the best course of life, and
strove to do well: for those are not to be esteemed the best laws whereby
men become rich, but whereby they prove honest, and wise. And thus much of the
Aegiptians: and now of the residue of the people of Affricke.

Of the Carthaginians and other people of Affricke. CAP. 6.
OF the Carthaginians there be many and sundry nations: The Adrimachidae
(which be a people of middle Libia) border upon Egypt, and use the same
customs the Aegiptians The Adrimachidae.
do, they are attired like other Carthaginians, the wives wear upon each of
their legs a bracelet of brass, and suffer their locks to grow long: They
take the vermin from out their heads and kill them with their teeth and then
throw them away, which no other Carthaginians do but they only.

There is none but Vergins given to the King in marriage, and of those which
like him best he takes his pleasure. The Nasamons (a great and stout nation
and spoylers of such ships as they find entangled in the sands,) The Nasamons
in the Summer time leave their flocks by the seaside and go abroad to gather
dates at places where be great store of date trees and those very fair and
fruitful, where plucking off the fruits from the trees, before they be ready,
they dry them and ripen them at the Sun, and then steep them in milk and
eat them. They have many wives a piece with whom they lie openly in all men's
sight, almost in the same manner that the Massagetae do (which be a people of
Scythia in Asia:) The manner of the Nasamons, is, that when one first marries
a wife, the Bride lies The Masagetae.
with all her guests one after another to perform the The Nasomans and their
marriages.
act of generation, and every one as they play their part, present her with
some reward or other, which they bring with them for that purpose: Their
swearing and divination which they use, is by those men which were accounted
the best and iustest among them while they lived, and when they swear the tuch
the tombs of those men, and divine nere unto their monuments, where when they
have finished their prayers they fall a sleep, and what vain dream soever is
represented unto them in there sleep, that they firmly believe to be
revealed unto them by those men, and so put it in practice accordingly. When
the plyght How the prophesy.
their trothes one to another, each one takes a Cup from the others hand and
drinks all that is in it up, but if they have no drink, then they take
dust from the ground and lick that up: The Garamantes (which be people of
middle Lybia also, and dwell above the Nasomons) The Garamantes.
abandon the sight and conversation of all other people: weapons for war have
they none, neither are they so hardy as to defend themselves if they be
assaulted: and about the sea coast, toward the sun setting, dwell the Macae
(which be a people in Arabia-foelix) and border The Macae.
upon the Nasomans: these people shave the crowns of their heads round, and
suffer all the rest of the hair to growlong. And in their wars, in steed of
Armor, they wear the skins of such Estridges as keep in caves under ground.

The Gnidanes (be a people bordring upon the Macae) the women whereof have the
skirts of their garments The Gnidanes.
guarded and trimmed with welts made of beasts skins, which (as is reported)
are given unto them by those men which have lain with them (for every one
which lies with a woman there, must give her one of those gardes) and she
which has the most welts upon her garment is accounted the best woman, as
being beloved of most men. The Machliae (which be a people inhabiting The
Machlyes and Auses.
about the Moore in Affricke called Triton) wear long hair upon the hinder
parts of their heads: and the people called Auytes upon the forepart. The
Virgins of this country upon the yearly feast of Minerua, and in honor of that
goddess, divide themselves into two parts, and fight one side against the
other (without any cause at all given) with stones and clubs, alleging, that
in so doing, they observe their country guise, in honor of her whom we call
Minerua, and those virgins which dye of their wounds, they call false virgins:
but she that best bestowed her self in the fight, is preferred before all the
other virgins, and adorned with Greekish armor and a crest or plume made of
metal of Corinth, and so placed in a Chariot, and carried in triumph round
about the fenne. The men accompany with women confusedly like beasts without
respect of kindred or blood, and when a woman has nourished her child that he
is lusty and strong with whom he dwells and is maintained (for the men meet
together every third month to choose their children) his son he is ever after
reputed. The Atlantes (so called of the hill Atlas near which they dwell,)
have none of them any proper The Atlantes.
names. They curse the son at his vprising, blaming and reprehending it
because his heat destroys both them and their country, they eat no flesh
nor are troubled with any dreams or visions.

The people of Affricke called Pastoritij, live of flesh and milk, and yet
abstain from the flesh of kine, because the Aegiptians do nether eat swines
flesh, nor rear any kine: The Pastoritij.
And the women of Cyrene think it unlawful to strike them, by reason of Isis
the God of Aegipt, in whose honor they Celebrate both fasting and feasting
days, but the women of Barcas do not only abstain from flesh of kine, but
from swines flesh also: and these women when their children be of the age of
four years, singe the veins upon the crowns of their heads, and their
temples with wool that is new shorn, to the end that they should be never
after offended with fleme or rume, descending from their heads, by which means
they say they be very healthful: when they sacrifice for their first fruits,
they cut off the ear of a beast and cast it to the top of a house, and after
break his neck; and of all the Gods they only do sacrifice to the Sun and
Moon: All the people of Affricke bury their dead as the Graetians do, the
Nasomones excepted, who bury them sitting, for there when one begins to
yield up the ghost, they cause him to sit, least he should die with his face
upright: Their dwelling-houses are made of young sprouts or sprigs of lentish
trees, wound and wrethed one about another.

The Maxes wear their hear upon the right side of their heads long, and shave
the left side, They paint their bodies The Maxes.
with red led or vermilion, alleging that they had their beginning from the
Troyans.

The women of Zabices which border upon the Maxes, The zabices.
play the wagonners in the wars.

The Zigantes (where Bees make great abundance of The zigantes.
honny, and much more is reported to be made by art) be all of them dyed with
red lead, and eat Apes and Munckies, of which they have great store, living
upon hills. All these people of Libia live a rude, and Savage kind of life, All
these people of Libia be Sauadge people.
and for the most part without doors, like beasts contented with such food as
they find abroad, eating nothing that is tame and bred at home, and having no
other garments to cover their bodies but goats skins: Their greatest Potentates
have no cities, but turrets standing near unto waters, wherein they lay up
such things as they leave for their provision: They swear their subjects once
every year to their allegiance, and obedience to their Prince, and that they
shall be loving to their equals and persecute al such as refuse to be under
their government, as thieves. There weapons are answerable to their country and
their customs, for they themselves being light and nimble of body, and the
country (for the most part) plain and even, do neither use swords nor knyues
nor any other weapons in their wars saving only every one three darts and a
few stones in a letherne budget; and with those they will fight and conflict,
both when they encounter, and in the retraite; being by practice made perfect
to throw therein stones and darts right at a mark. They observe neither law
nor equity toward strangers.

The Trogloditae (which the Greeks call shepherds, because they live by
cattle) elect their King from out the The Trogloditae.
people of Aethiopia: wives and children they have in common, the King only
excepted, who has but one wife, and every one that comes to him, presents
him with a certain number of cattle. At such time as the wind stands in the
East, about the canicular or dog days, which season is most subject to
showers, they eat blood and milk mixed together, and boiled: and when their
pastures be parched, and burned away with the heat of the Sun, they go down
into the moorish grounds, for which there is great contention amongst them.
When their cattle be either old or diseased, they kill them, and eat them; for
of such consists their chiefest sustenance.

Their children be not called after the names of their parents, but aftet the
names of Bulls, Rams, or Sheep, and those they call fathers and mothers,
because their daily nourishment is yielded by them, and not by their natural
parents. The meaner sort of people drink the juice of Holly-tree, or sea-rush;
and those of the better sort the juice that is strayned out of a certain
flower which grows in that country, the liquor whereof is like unto the
worst of our Must.

They never continue long in one place, but remove and flitte often into
diverse Regions, taking with them whither soever they go their flocks and
herds of cattle: they be naked on all parts of their bodies but their
priuities, which be covered with skins. All the Trogloditae circumcise their
privy parts, like the Egyptians, excepting those which are lame: they remove
often into strange Countries, and are never cut or shaven with razour from
their infancy.

Those Trogloditae which are called Megauares, use for their armor, round
shields made of raw ox hides, and clubbes studded with iron, and some use
bows and lances. They have little regard how they bury the dead, for they use
no other ceremonies in their funerals, but wrappe the dead corpse in Holly
twigges, and then binding the neck and legs together, put the carcass into a
hole, and cover it over with stones, setting upon the heap of stones a Goats
horn in derision, and so depart from it, being never touched with any grief,
though he were never so near a friend.

They contend and fight amongst themselves, not (as the Greeks do) for anger
or ambition, but only for their victuals: and in their conflicts they first
throw stones, till some of them be wounded, and then taking their bows in
hand, (wherein they be very expert) they fight it out, till some of them be
slain.

And the ancient and grauest women give end unto those controversies, who
pressing boldly into the middle of the multitude without any danger, (for it is
not lawful to hurt them by any means) the men forthwith cease off their
strife. Those which for age be unable to follow their flocks, tie their own
necks to an ox tail, and so strangle themselves to death.

And if any be unwilling to dye, he is forced to it by his fellows, but first
he shall have warning thereof, and this kind of death they account a great
benefit unto them: those also which be sick of fevers, or of any incurable
disease, are served in like sort, for they account it the greatest misery that
may be, for any one to enjoy his life, that can do nothing worthy of life:
Herodotus writes that the Trogloditae make them hollow Caves in the ground to
dwell in, and that they have no desire to possess riches, but rather addict
themselves to wilful and voluntary poverty: that they only are delighted and
glory in one kind of stone, which we call Hexacontalithus (which is a little
precious stone with diverse corners): that they eat the flesh of Serpents: and
that they speak not any intelligible language, but in steed of speech make a
kind of noise or howling, rather then speech.

In that Aethiopia which lies above Aegipt dwell another kind of people,
which be called Rhisophagi: these The Rhisophagi
barbarous people live only upon the roots of weeds, which when they have
clean washed, they bruise and tear a pieces with stones, till they wax soft
and clammy, and then make it into cakes like unto tiles, and bake them against
the sun, and so eat them: and this kind of meat is their only food all
their life time, for they have great abundance thereof, and it is very
pleasant and delectable in taste, so as peace is there perpetually maintained,
and yet they fight notwithstanding, but it is only with Lions which ranging
out of the deserts to shun the shade, and to prey upon other lesser wild
beasts, destroy many Aethiopians coming forth of the fens: and surely that
nation had been utterly destroyed by Lions, had not nature afforded a defense
against them: for at such time as the Dogge-starre arises and appears in
their Horizon, the wind being calm, there flies into those parts an
innumerable multitude of Gnatts, which offend not the people, because they fly
from them into the Fennes and moorish grounds, but do so annoy the Lions with
their stings, and terrifying them with their humming and bussing, as they
compel them all to depart out of those Regions.

Next unto these are the Ilophagi and the Spermatophagi; the Spermatophagi live
without labor, by gathering The Ilophagi and Sparmatophagi.
the fruits which fall from trees in Summer time; and when fruits are gone,
they eat a certain herb which they find growing in shadie places:
wherewith they be succourd in their need. But the Ilophagi, their wives and
children feed themselves by clyming into Tree tops, and plucking off the
tender buddes from twigges and branches, which is their only sustenance, by
continual use and practice whereof, they grow so expert in clyming, that (a
thing strange to be reported) they will skippe and hoppe from tree to tree
like birds or squirrells without danger, and trusting to their lightness and
nimblenesse of their bodies, ascend to the very top of slender branches: and if
at any time their footing fail them, yet will they claspe their hands about
the twiggs, and so save and defend themselves from falling, and though by some
mischance they should fall, yet receive they no hurt, by reason of the
lightness of their bodies: These people go always naked, and have their
wives and children in common: They fight one against another, only for places
to live in (being weaponed with staves,) and domineere and exult greatly over
those they vanquish.

They die for the most part by famine, whem their sight fails they are
deprived of that sense wherewith they sought their food. In an other part of
the region dwell those Aethiopians which be called Cyneci, they be few in
number, but of a different life from all the rest, for they inhabit the
wood-land, and desolate country, The Cyneci.
wherein be but few fountains of water, and they sleep upon the tops of trees
for fear of wild beasts: Every morning they go down armed to the river
sides, and their hide themselves in trees amongst the leaves, and in the heat
of the day, when the Beefes and Libbards, and diverse other kinds of wild
beasts, go down to the rivers to drink, and that they be full and heavy
with water, these Aethiopians descen'd from the trees and fall upon them and
kill them with staves baked at the fire, and with stones and darts, and then
divide them amongst their companies and eat them: By which cunning devise they
devour many of those beasts, and sometimes (though but seldom) they are
foiled and slain themselves.

And if at any time their cunning fail them, and that they want beasts to
eat, they take the hides of such beasts as they have eaten before, and
plucking of the hairs lay the hides in steep, and then dry them before a
soft fire and so dividing to every one a share, satisfy themselves with that.
Their young boys (under the age of fourteen years) practice throwings at
marks, and they give meat to those only which touch the mark, and therefore
being forced thereto by famine, they become most excellent and fine darters.

The people called Acridophagi border upon the desert, the men be something
shorter, or lower of stature, The Acridophagi.
then other Aethiopians, being lean and marvelous black.

In the spring time the West and South-west winds, blow an infinite number of
slies called Locustes out of the deserts into their Country, which be
exceeding great, but the color of their wings is foul and loathsome: These
Aethiopians (as their custom is) gather out of places there-abouts great store
of wood and other sorts of fuel, and lay it in a great large valley, and
when, at their wonted time (as it were) a whole cloud of Locusts be carried
by the winds over the valley, they set fire on the fuel, and with smoke
stiphle and smother to death the Locusts which fly over it? so as they fall
down unto the earth in such abundance as are sufficient to serve the whole
country for victuals: and these being sprinkled with salt (which that
country plentifully yields) they preserve for a long space, being a meat
very pleasant unto they taste. And so these Locusts be their continual
sustenance at all seasons, for they neither keep cattle, nor eat fish,
being far remote from the sea, nor have any other maintenance whereof to
live.

They be nimble of body, swift of foot, and short of life, so as they which
live the longest exceed not above forty years, their end is not only
miserable but also incredible, for when old age creeps and comes upon
them, there does certain lice with wings of a horrible and ugly shape,
ingendring in their bodies, know out, and devour their bellies, guts and
intralls and in a small time their whole bodies: and he which has the disease
does so itch and is so allured to scrach as he receives thereby at one and the
same time both pleasure and pain, and when the corruption comes forth, and
the lyce appear, he is so stirred with the bitterness and anguish of the
disease as he teareth his own flesh in pieces with his nails with great
wayling and lamentation; for so great is the number of those vermin issuing
out of the wounds, heap upon heap, running as it were out of a vessel full
of holes, as they cannot be overcome, and by this means they die a very
miserable death, the cause whereof is either the meat they live upon, or the
vnholesomenesse of the air. Upon the utmost parts of Affricke toward the
South dwell a people, which the Greeks call Cinnamimi, but of their
neighboring Barbarians they be called wild or vplandish people: These have
The Cinnamini
very great beards; and for the defense of their lives, breed up great number
of Mastiues and wild dogs; for from the Summer troppicke to the middle of
winter, an infinite number of Indian Beefes come into their country, the cause
of their coming is uncertain; whether it be that they fly from other wild
beasts which pursue them, or for the want of feeding, or that they do it by
instinct of nature (all which are wonderful) but the true cause is unknown:
from these the people defend themselves with their dogs, their own forces
being insufficient to withstand them, and kill many of them; some whereof they
eat fresh, and some others they powder up for their provision afterward; and
with these dogs they take many other beasts in like sort.

The last people, and the utmost toward the South be the Ichthiophagi, which
inhabit in the gulf of Arabia, The Ichthiophagi.
upon the frontiers of the Trogloditae, these carry the shape of men, but live
like beasts: they be very barbarous and go naked all their lives long, using
both wives and daughters common like beasts: they be neither touched with any
feeling of pleasure or grief, other then what is natural: Neido the discern
any difference betwixt good and bad, honesty and dishonesty.

Their habitations are in rocks and hills, not far from the sea, wherein
they have deep dens, and holes, the passages in and out being naturally very
hard and crooked.

The entrances into these holes, (as if nature had framed them for their use,)
the Inhabitants damme up with a heap of great stones, wherewith they take
fishes as it were with nets; for the flowing of the sea (which happens every
day twice about three of the cloak and nine of the Cloak) surrownding the
borders near unto the shore, the water increasing very high and covering all
places, carries into the continent an innumerable company of diverse sorts of
fishes, which seeking abroad for sustenance at the ebbing of the sea are by
those stones stayed upon dry land, those do the inhabitants make have to gather
up, and taking them lay them upon the rocks against the noone Sun, till they
be scorched with the heat thereof; and when one side is scorched enough, they
turn the other: when they be thus broyled against the Sun, they take all
the meat from the bones and put it into a hollow stone and mingling therewith
the seed of holly tree, bake it therein, and make them a most pleasant meat,
for the meat being so mingled they fashion it into Cakes like long Tyles, and
drying them a little against the Sun, sit down and eat them with great
pleasure, and not a proportioned quantity thereof, but every one as much as
they can eat. This meat they have always in a readiness, as it were out of
a storehouse, the sea affoording it in abundance in steed of bread, whereof
the land is barren: But when by the raging of the sea, those places which be
near unto the shore, be drowned for diverse days together, so as they fail
in their faculty of fishing (at which time they suffer great penury of
victuals) then they gather certain great shell-fishes, and bruising their
shells in pieces with stones, feed upon the meat which is within, being
very like unto Oysters. And when this raging of the sea, by force of the
winds, is of so long continuance, as that they can find none of those
shelfishes, then they betake themselves to fish bones and sharp finnes,
which are reserved for a time of need, the tenderer and newest sort whereof
they know with their teeth, and bruise the harder with stones, and so eat them
like unto brute beasts: they eat commonly a great company together (as I have
said) and cheer one another with an untuneable song, and after that, the men
accompany with women, each one with her he first lights upon: and being
void of all care, by reason of the abundance of meat which they have in
readiness, bestow themselves in this manner four days together, and upon
the fifth day they flock together in troops to the rivers to drink, making a
disordered and confused noyce as they go.

This their gooing to drink, is not much unlike the going of neat to water:
when their bellyes are so full of water as they are scarce able to return
back they eat no more that day, but every one being full of water, and
strouting out as though he would burst, lies down like a drunken man to
sleep. Upon the last day they return again to their fishing, and so passing
over their whole lives with such simple and slender diet, they sildome fall
into any disease, yet they be shorter lived then we, for their uncorrupted
nature accounts it their chiefest felicity and summum bonum to appease
hunger, expecting pleasure from no other thing: and this is the manner of
living of those people which dwell within the gulf.

But those which dwell without the gulf, live far Men free from all passions
of the mind.
more strangely, for they never drink, and are naturally void of all passions
of the mind; And being, as it were, rejected by fortune from all places fit
for habitation, and cast into deserte and desolate countries, endeavor
themselves wholly to fishing.

They desire nothing that is moist, and eat their fishes half raw, not that
they would thereby avoid thirst, but in a savage manner, contented with such
food as fortune affoordes them, supposing their greatest happiness to consist
in wanting nothing they desire, or is fit for them.

They be said also to be endued with such extraordinary patience, as if one
should draw his sword Patient people.
and strike them, they would not seek to avoid the stroke, but willingly
suffering themselves to be injured and beaten, they do nothing but only
look back upon him that struck them, without showing the least sign of
anger, or compassion of their own misery. Speech they have none, but in liew
thereof, make signs with their fingers, and by nodding their heads, what
things they want, and what they would have.

These people do generally love peace, not doing any thing to annoy others,
which kind of life though it be strange and admirable, yet has that nation
for a long time retained it, being either thereunto accustomed by continuance
of time, or else compeld by necessity. Their places of abode be not like the
Ichthiophagi, which dwell within the gulf, but in diverse fashions, for some
have their lodgings in hoales, situate to the North pole, wherein they be
defended from the heat of the Sun, both by the shade and the soft wind, and
cool murmuring air: for those places which lie opposite to the South, are for
heat like unto fornaces, therefore impossible to be dwelt in.

Those which dwell against the North pole, make them houses (to avoid the
heat) of Whales crooked ribs, The Amazons most warlike women.
(whereof there be many in that sea) set hollow one against an other, and
covered over with rett or sea-weed, necessity compelling Nature to find out
Art for her own defense: and this is reported to be the life of the
Ichthiophagi, which dwell without the gulphe.

It remains to say somewhat of the Amazons (which in former time were said to
dwell in Libia:) their women were hardy, strong, and valiant, and lived not
after the manner of other women, for their custom was for a certain space, to
exercise themselves in feats of arms, for preservation of their Virginity,
and the time of warre-fare once ended, then to couple themselves with men in
marriage for cause of procreation, the women only did govern and exercise all
public offices, and the men took charge of things within doors like our
women, making themselves vassals and slaves unto women, as being very expert in
the wars, in government, and in all public businesses, whereof the men
themselves were ignorant. When an infint is borne, he is given to the father to
be nourished and brought up with milk and other things answerable to his age:
and if it be a man child, they either banish him, or kill him forthwith, or
else break his right arm so soon as he is borne, thereby to make him unfit
for the wars: But if it be a woman child they singe off her breasts in her
infancy, alleging that great breasts would hinder them in the wars, and
therefore of the Greeks they be called Amazons, because they want their
breasts: they be said to inhabit the Isle Hesper, which is so called, as being
situated toward the West, this Isle is in the Moore called Triton, which
joining to the sea, is also called Tritonia, of a river that flows into it:
It bordereth upon Aethiopia, and the hill Atlas, the greatest mountain of all
that country: It is very large, and produces diverse sorts of trees, upon the
fruit whereof the Inhabitants live.

There be many Goats also and other cattle, whose Milk and flesh they feed
upon. They be altogether destitute of Corn, nor do they know the use thereof
if they had it.

FINIS. Lib. 1.
THE SECOND BOOK.
Of Asia, and the most famous Nations thereof. CAP. 1.
ASIA an other part of the tripartite world, is so called of Asia the daughter
of Oceanus and Tethis, wife of Iapetus, Asia why so called.
and mother to Prometheus, or (according to the opinion of others) of Asius the
son of Manaeus Lidus.

It is situated in the East part of the world, and is bounded upon the West
with two rivers, Nilus and Tanais, the Euxine sea, and part of the
Mediterranian sea, and upon the other three parts with the Ocean, which upon
the East is called Oceanus Eous, upon the South Indicus, and North Scithicus:
The hill Taurus (in a manner) deuideth the whole continent in the middle, which
lying directly East and West, leaves one part thereof toward the North, and
the other toward the South, which two parts are by the Greeks called the
Inner Asia, and the utter Asia.

This hill in many places is three thousand stadiae in breadth, and as long as
all Asia, being about forty and five thousand stadia, from the uttermost edge
of the sea beyond Rhodes, unto the furthermost parts of India and Scythia
toward the East. Asia is divided into many parts, whereof some be bigger,
some lesser, and every part is distinguished from other by a peculiar name: but
so large and wide is the whole compass of ground, contained under the name of
Asia, as it alone is thought, to comprehend as much land as all Affricke and
Europe, the other two parts of the world: The air is there very temperate, and
the soil fertile, and therefore it abounds with all kind of cattle: It
contains many Provinces and regions.

Upon that side which bordereth upon Affricke, lies Arabia, which is
situated betwixt Iudaea and Aegipt (and according to Pliny) is divided into
three parts, one part whereof is called Petrea, or stony Arabia, which upon the
North and West joins upon Syria, and is enclosed with Arabia deserta on the
one Arabia divided into three parts.
side, and Arabia foelix on the other, Panchaia, and Sabaea are also by some
supposed to be comprehended within the compass of Arabia. Arabia is so called
of Arabus the son of Apollo by Babylo: the people whereof be scattered and
dispersed wide and broad, and are much different one from an other, both in
their customs, and their apparel: the heir of their heads they never cut,
but tie it up with fillets and head-laces, and their beards they shave close to
the skin: they transfer not their arts and occupations from one to another,
as we do, but there, each one exercises his fathers trade and course of
life, and the Noblest man has the government over all the rest: all things
they possess go in common to their The Arabians lie with their own mothers
and daughters.
whole kindered, and one wife serves all that family, for he which first
enters into the house and sets his staff at the door, lies first with
her, but she sleeps all night with the eldest, by which means they be all
brothers one to another, they lie also with their own mothers, and sisters
without any respect at all.

And yet the adulterer is punished with death, and the lying with one of
another kindred, is adultery, but all those which be of one house or kindred,
be termed legitimate.

They celebrate their feasts for almost thirty days together, wherein two of
their kinsmen that be good Musicians, give their attendance in turns, first
one, then an other. Their cities and towns live peaceably and quietly
together without walls, and fortresses for defense: they use oil made of the
grain Sesamina, and are very rich and abounding with all other things. Their
sheep be of a white fleece, and their neat of a tall stature, but horses No
horses in Arabia.
they have none, the want whereof is supplied with great store of Camels. Gold,
silver, and many sorts of sweet and odoriferous ointments are peculiar to that
country, Brass, Iron, Cloth, Purple, Saffron, Pepper, and all works engraven
in mettell or stone, are brought thither from other places: their dead bodies
they account more abject and vile then dung, and the carcass of their King they
bury in a dunghill; they be very careful to preserve their reputations and
promises with men, and they confirm their leagues of friendship in this manner
following. When a peace and agreement is concluded betwixt two, a third man
standing in the middle betwixt them both, strikes them upon the palm of their
hands, about the longest fingers, with a sharp stone till he draw blood, then
taking a little flock from each of their garments, he annoynteth with the
blood seven stones, which be laid before them for that purpose, in doing
whereof he inuocateth the names of Dionisyus and Urania: this done, he which
is the mediator for the peace, and atonement, (the friends of both parties
being present) causes the stranger (or the Citizen (if the matter be betwixt
citizens) to put in sureties to continue that truce, and the league the
parties, which contract the friendship, think fit and just to be observed.

Their only fuel is the branches of Myrrh, the smoke whereof is so noisome
and hurtful, as it would breed incurable diseases, if they prevented them
not, by burning a sweet incense or gum called Storax: the smell whereof
allayeth the contagion of the smoke. The Priests first slay the beasts they
intend to sacrifice, and then go to gather Cynamon, strictly observing, that
they gather none before Sunne-rising, nor after the Sunsetting: and when they
have appeased their gods with the sacrifice, he which is chiefest amongst
them, divides the heap of branches which they have gathered that day, with a
forke consecrated for that use, then do they dedicate a part of those branches
to the Sun, which (if the division made were equal) will be inflamed with the
beams of the Sun, and take fire and burn of their own accord. Some of
those people which live hardly, feed upon snakes, and be therefore called
Ophiophagi: they be neither vexed with care, nor troble of mind. The people
called Nomades, have great store of Camels, which serve them both in their
battles,, and to carry burdens. The people called Debae be some of them
shepherds, and some exercise themselves in husbandry, the country abounds with
gold, insomuch as they find oftentimes amongst the clods of earth, certain
round balls of gold as big as acorns, of which they make themselves jewels and
brooches, very pleasant to behold, and wear them about their necks and arms.
They sell gold to their neighboring nations for three times the price of
brass, and twice the price of silver: both for the small account they make of
gold, and for the great desire they have to traffic with other people.

Next unto these be the Sabaei, which be rich in Frankincense, Myrrh, and
Cynnamon: Some hold, that there be Balm trees growing in the confines of this
country, it abounds with sweet Canes, and odoriferous Dates: there is also a
serpent bredde in that country, of an handbreadth in length, whose sting or
biting is deadly, and he lies altogether under the roots of trees. The
exceeding smell and sweet savor of things growing there, breeds a stupiditie
and dullness in their senses; which they cure with the perfume of a certain
lyme or pitch, called Bitumen, and the beard of a bucke Goat. All matters in
controversy are there referred to the King. Many of the Sabaei are husbandmen,
and some of them are wholly occupied in gathering spices, which grow upon trees.
They use traffic into Aethiopia with ships covered with lether, their fuel
is the bark or rind of Cynamon, which is of the nature of wood.

The Metrapolitan and chief city of this kingdom, is situated upon an hill,
and is called Saba: their Kings are of one kindred, and reign by succession,
to whom the multitude yield honors indifferently, as well to the bad, as to
the good. They never dare venture out of their Court, or chief city, fearing
lest they should be stoned to death by the common people, by reason of an
answer which they received long since from one of their Oracles. At Saba, where
the King keeps his Court, be silver jewels, and pots of gold of all sorts,
the beds and three-footed stools have silver feet, and all the household
stuff is sumptuous and rich beyond credit. The porches and galleries also be
underpropped with great pillars, the heads whereof are silver and gold, the
roofes and doors being set with golden bosses, intermingled with precious
stones, do manifest the sumptuous decking of the whole house: for here one
place shines with gold, another with silver, another with precious stones, and
Elephants tooth, and with many other ornaments besides, of great worth and
estimation: these people have for many ages flowed in perpetual felicity: for
they be utterly void of ambition and desire to possess other men's goods,
which brings many to ruin.

The people called Garraei be no less rich then these, The Garraei.
for almost all their household stuff is of gold and silver, and of Iuorie,
whereof they make the thresholds, roofes, and walls of their houses.

The people called Nabathaei, of all men be most continent, The Nabathaei.
in getting riches they be very industrious, but much more careful in keeping
them: for he that diminishes his private estate, has public punishment.
And on the other side, he is honored and exalted, that increases his
patrimony.

The Arabians use in their wars, swords, bows, lances, and slings, and many
times axes also. That accursed stock of the Sarrasins, which were the greatest
scourges that ever happened to mankind, had their beginning in Arabia, and (as
it is very credibly thought) a great part of the Arabians, became followers of
the Sarrasins sect, and took their name. Yet now they have betaken them to
their old names again. The Arabians that dwell about Egypt, live for the most
part by stealing, trusting in the swiftness of their Camels.

The manners and customs Of Panchaia: and of the manners of the Panchaians.
CAP. 2.
PANCHAIA is a Region of Arabia, Diodorus Siculus calls it an Island of
Panchaia abounds with Frankincense.
two hundred Stadia in breadth, and that there be in it three stately Cities,
that is to say, Dalida, Hyracida, and Oceanida, the whole country is fruitful
enough, living only where it is sandy. It abounds with wine, and with
frankincense, of which there is so great store, as is sufficient to serve all
the world for sacrifices: it yields much myrrh also, and other odoriferous
spices of diverse kinds, which the Panchaians gather, and sell to the Merchants
of Arabia, of whom others buy them, and transport them into Phaenicia, Syria,
and Egypt; from whence they are conveyed into all parts of the world.

The Panchaians use Chariots in the wars; for so they have bin always
accustomed: their commonwealth is divided into three degrees of people: first,
the Priests, who possess the prime place, to whom the artificers are added:
the husbandmen have the second, and soldiers the third, to whom the shepherds
be annexed. The Priests be governors and rulers over all the rest, to whom the
deciding of controversies, and arbittement of all public affairs, and
judicial causes are committed, (punishment of death only excepted.) The
husbandmen employ themselves only in tilling, and manuring the ground; the
increase whereof goes in common to all. Out of the husbandmen there be ten
elected by the Priests, which be most expert and industrious in husbandry, to
be Judges over the rest, as well for the exhortation of others, in the art of
husbandry, as for the distribution of their fruits. The shepherds likewise
bring all their increase, as well of such things as appertain to sacrifices,
as of all things else, to the public use, some by number, and some by weight:
in doing whereof they be marvelous precise: and no one there possesses any
thing in private to himself, but only their houses and gardens: for the
Priests receive all the custom and tribute-money, and all other things else
whatsoever into their custody, making division thereof, as occasion requires:
whereof two parts is ever due unto themselves. The Panchaians be clothed in
soft garments; for the sheep of that country differ much from others in
softness and finenesse of wool, both men and women wear ornaments of gold,
adorning their necks with chains, their hands with bracelets, their ears with
eare-rings, like the Persians, and their feet with new shoes of diverse
colors. The soldiers are maintained only to defend the country from
foreign invasions: the Priests live more sumptuously, and in far greater
delights then others, wearing for the most part fine lightlinnen vestiments
down to the foot, and sometimes garments made of the best and purest wool.

Upon their heads they have myters wrought and imbrodered with gold: and in
stead of shoes, sandals of diverse colors, wrought very artificially. They
wear ornaments of gold also (like women, excepting eare-rings) and be for the
most part continually conversant about the service of their gods, reciting
their worthy and memorable deeds, in lauds and hymns. They derive their
pedigree from Jupiter Manasses, alleging, that when he was conversant Jupiter
was banished into Panchaia.
with men, and governed the whole world, he was banished into Panchaia. The
country abounds with gold, silver, brass, tin, and iron, of which it is not
lawful to carry any out of the Island: neither is it tolerable for the Priests
to stir out of their holy Temples; for if any of them be found abroad, it is
lawful to kill them. Many oblations of gold and silver, which were long since
offered and dedicated to their gods, they preserve in their temple, the doors
whereof are of a very curious building, beset with gold, silver, and yuorie.
The bed for their god is all of gold, being six cubits in length, and four in
breadth, and of a rare and wonderful workmanship: In like manner, the table for
their god (which is placed near unto his bed) is equal unto it, both for
state, quantity and cost. They have one great and magnificent temple, which is
all erected of white stone, The great Temple in Panchaia
underset with great pillars, and carved columns, the length thereof is two
acres, and the breadth answerable to the length: It is adorned with goodly
Idols of their gods, composed and framed with admirable art and cunning. The
Priests that have charge of the sacrifices, have their houses about the temple:
and all the ground round about the temple, for the space of two hundred Stadia,
is consecrated to the gods, and the yearly reuenew thereof spent in sacrifices.

Of Assyria, and how the Assyrians live. CAP. 3.
ASsyria a country in Asia, is so called of Assure the son of Sem (as Saint
Augustine is of opinion.) It is now called Syria, and has upon the East,
India, and part of Media, upon the West the river Tygris, Susiana upon the
South, and the hill Caucasus on the North. They have seldom any rain in
Assyria, but what grain soever the country affords, is obtained by the
waterings and ouerflowings of the rivers, which they do not naturally of their
own accords, as in Egypt, but by the labor and industry of the inhabitants:
and yet by this ouerflowing the ground there is so exceeding fruitful, as it
yields two hundred, and in the most fertile soil, three hundredfold
increase: the ears of their wheat and barley being four fingers in breadth,
and their pulse and millet in height like trees. These things though they be
certainly known unto them to be true, yet Herodotus would have them sparingly
reported, and with good deliberation, as being scarce credible, especially if
the relation be made to those which never saw them.

They have great store of Dates, of which they make honey Honey and wine made of
dates.
and wine, they use boats in their rivers made in fashion of a round shield,
not severed with fore-decke and stern, The Assyrians botes.
as other boats be, but made (beyond the Assyrians in Armenia) of willow, or
sallow tree, covered over with raw lether. The Assyrians wear two linen
garments, one Their apparel,
hanging down to the foot, and the other short, over which they wear a white
stole. Their shoes be such, as the Thebans were wont to wear: they suffer
their hairs to grow long, and trim them with head-tyres: when they go into
public places, they annoint themselves with ointments: every one wears a
signet-ring on his finger, and a scepter in his hand, in which is set an apple,
a rose, or lilly, or some such like thing: for they hold it base and indecent,
to carry it without such a sign or cognizance in it.

Of all their laws which were in force in that country, this seems most
worthy to be remembered: That the maids, as soon as they were mariageable, were
(once every Virgins that be mariageable be sold to their husbands.
year) brought into a public place, and there offered to be sold to such men,
as had any disposition to marry: and first, the fairest and most beautiful
virgins were set to sale, and after them, those which through defect of their
beauties, or their bodies, were not only not vendible and marketable, but
which no man would marry gratis, were married away with that money, the fair
ones were sold for.

Herodotus says, that this custom was heretofore observed in Venice in the
confines of Illiria (as he heard it credibly reported by others.) And Antonius
Sabellicus in like manner affirms, that whether this custom be yet observed
in that country, he is not very certain: But sure I am (says he) that in
Venice (which at this day for riches, is the most flourishing state of the
world) amongst other good orders of their city, it was ordained, that bastard
virgins that were gotten out of wedlock, and fondlings that were exposed and
laid abroad to the adventures of the world, should be brought up in some close
place, at the common charge of the city, and there instructed in some hard
discipline, until they were mariageable, and that then those which were most
beautiful, and well brought up, should be married without dowry, either unto
such as had escaped some great peril, or some dangerous disease, or broken
their vows: and that some Freemen also regarding their modesty and beauty,
would marie them without dower, and ever those which were most beautiful, were
married with less portion then the foul ones, although they were as well
brought up as the other.

An other law of the Babylonians being very profitable and worthy to be
remembered was this, seeing they excluded A law excluding Physicians and how
they cured the sick.
all Physicians from amongst them, it was ordained, that he which began to be
sick, should ask council of those concerning his disease, that had suffered
the like infirmity themselves, and that had tried some medicine for the
recovery of their healthes: some others write that their custom was to bring
the sick persons into a public place, where the law commanded them, and that
those which once had been sick themselves, and were recovered should go and
visit the diseased persons, and teach them by what means they were cured.

The Assyrians bewail the dead, as the Aegiptians do: and when one has lain
with his wife all night, neither of them touches any thing before they have
washed themselves. The custom heretofore amongst the Babylonians was, that the
women would once in their life times lie with strangers, besides their husbands:
the manner whereof was thus: They would come a great company of them together
very reverently and solemnly unto the temple of Venus, each one having her head
bound, and wreathed about with garlands, and then the stranger with whom she
desired to lie, laid under his knee, as he kneeled in the Temple, such a sum
of money as he thought fitting, which being consecrated to Venus, he leaves
behind him, and rising up, takes the woman into a place a little distant from
the Church, and there lies with her: There were some families among the
Assyrians which lived only upon fish, dried at the sun, and bruised in a
mortar, which being molded and laid together, and sprinkled with water, they
made into lumps, like loaves, and drying them at the fire, used to eat them in
steed of bread.

They had three head officers amongst them, one of The officers amongst the
Assyrians.
such as had been soldiers and were put to their pension: an other of the
nobility and elders, and the King which was head over them all: They had their
south-saiers likewise, which were called Chaldei, which were like unto the
Priests of Aegipt, and sacrificed to their gods: These Chaldei spent their
whole lives in the study of Philosophy, they were great starre-mungers, and
sometimes by their diuinations, sometimes by their holy rimes, they would
defend men from misfortunes. They could truly and faithfully interpret
Augurations, Dreams and Prodigies, not learning their instructions in such
things of masters and tutors, as the Greeks did, but receiving the^ from
their parents as their inheritance. The children were taught and excercised in
learning at home, that by the continual care of their parents, they might
better profit themselves. They Chaldei were not variable and doubtful in their
opinions of natural causes, as the Greeks were, where every man was of a
several mind, and every writer yielded reasons, repugning one an other, but
they all by one general and uniform assent, supposed the world to be eternal,
and that it neither had beginning, nor shall have end, and that the order and
ornament of al things is established by a divine providence: That the
Celestial bodies be not moved of their own accord, or by some accidentary
motion, but by a certain law and immutable decreee of some godhead: They
mark by long observation the course of the stars, by whose speculatio^ they
prophesied of men's future fortunes: They imagined the planets to be of great
power, and especially Saturn, supposing the sun to be of most beauty, and of
greatest virtue, and that Mars, Venus, Mercury and Jupiter, were to be observed
more then the rest, for that they having each one his proper and peculiar
motion, foreshewed things to come, and were the true interpreters of the gods:
And of this they were so fully persuaded, as they called these four stars al
by the name of Mercury: They foretold many things to come both hole-some and
hurtful, by winds, shewers, heat, comets, eclipse of Sun and Moon,
earthquakes, and by sundry other signs and prodigies besides: And they
imagined that there were other stars subject and inferior to these planets, of
which some wandered in our Hemisphere, and some in that which is under us:
besides this they held the like error that the Aegiptians did, and fained to
themselves twelve gods, attributing unto each of them a month and a sign in
the Zodiake: They prophesied of many things that should happen to their Kings,
as foreshewing to Alexander the victory he should have in the fight with
Darius: to Hircanor, Seleucus and to other successors of Alexander: and many
things after that to the Roman successors, whose events proved true. They
write also of four and twenty other stars, whereof twelve be beyond the
Zodiake, toward the North, and the other twelve toward the South, of which,
those which appear to our view, they suppose to have dominion over the living,
and the other to pertain to those which be dead: These things and other
circumstances have those Chaldeans set forth to men's sight, as they have noted
by long observation, alleging that this their doctrine has continued for the
space of three and forty thousand years, from the first invention thereof to the
reign of Alexander: which allegation of theirs were a very gross and impudent
fable, unless we should interpret, that the time of each year were but a
month, as was amongst the Aegiptians.

Of Iudaea and of the customs, laws and institutions of the Jews. CAP. 4.
PAlestine which is also called Iudaea, is a particular Province of Syria,
sytuated The limmits of Palestine.
betwixt, Caelosiria, and Arabia Petrea, upon the West it is washed with the
Aegiptian sea, and upon the East with the river of Jordan: This land, the
books of holy Bible, and Josephus their imitator, called Canaan, a land
abounding with many riches, as having Iudaea, or Palestine called also Canaan.
plenty of fruits, famous waters; and being well furnished with balm: It is
situated in the very middle of the world, and is therefore very temperate,
neither to hot nor to cold, which for the temperature of the elements the
Israelites, or Hebreues (being a very ancient people, and with whom alone from
the first Creation of mankind the knowledge and worship of the Heavenly and
true God, and the first form of speech remained) esteemed to be that which was
promised by God to their Canaan promised to Abraham and his seed.
fathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; a land flowing with milk and honey.

And therefore in the fortith year after the children of Israells departure
out of Aegipt, under the conduct of their valiant captain Joshua; they obtained
the dominion thereof by force of their arms vanquishing and expelling one and
thirty Kings, which reigned in that The Israclites laws ordained by Moses.
Contry: The Israelites retain, and live under those laws, which they received
from Moses their first captain, and although for many ages before Moses days
they lived without written law, with great devotion and sanctity, obtaining the
truth by divine Oracles, and by the acuteness and magnanimity of their minds,
and understandings, yet that great divine Moses, thought that no City could
long continue in safety, without the practice of law and equity.

And therefore when by rewarding the good, and punishing the wicked, he had
sufficiently exhorted his people to embrace virtue and eschew vice, he proposed
unto them other laws and ciuel ordinances, founded upon those ten chief heads
and grounds of laws, pronounced by God himself in mount Sina, and written in
two Tables; of which laws (being so many, as they alone would be sufficient
matter to fill a whole volume) I will only touch those which be most worthy of
remembrance, and they that desire to know the rest, let them read Josephus and
the books of the Bible.

First Moses ordained, that young children as soon as Moses laws.
they were able to conceive, should be instructed in the laws, seeing they
contained in them the best kind of discipline: That whosoever blasphemed the
name of God, should hang all a whole day, and be cast out at night without
burial: That no sacrifice should be solemnized with money gotten by whoredom:
That there should be 7. chief governors in every city, which were most noted
for Justice and wisdom, and that two of the leuitical Priests should sit in
judgment with them, and if in discerning controversies, the Judges would not
condisce^d to that which was right, the whole matter should be decided by the
discretion of the Priest and Elder: That the testimony of one man should not be
current to convince an other of any crime, nor yet of two, unless their
honesties were approved, but the testimony of three should stand, and yet
neither slave nor woman should be sufficient witness, because in one the
baseness of his fortune, in the other the weakness and lightness of her
sex, might rightly be suspected: that the fruit of trees new set or planted,
should not be meddled withal before the fourth year, and that then they
should pay for tithes the tenth part of the increase: That neighbors and
strangers should have some part also, and that the residue should remain to
him that planted them. That they should sow clean seed upon their grounds and
not mingled, because the land would not like with seed of two sorts: That
travelers should not be restrained and interdicted from fruits, but that
they might gather as much as they pleased and their present necessity required,
and that if they were ashamed to take it the owners should offer it unto them:
That the woman that gained unlawfully, or married her self to an other,
besides her lawful husband should not be regarded as a wife: That she that
was supposed to be a Virgin, and was found defiled in her body with any man,
and convicted of the crime, should either be stoned to death, or burned alive.

If one deflowred a Virgin espoused to an other man, though she consented, yet
both parties should suffer extreme punishment, and if he ravished her
forcibly, that then only the author of the injury should be punished: That,
if a man die and leave no children behind him, his widow should marry the
brother of her deceased husband, and by that matrimony bring forth issue to
succeed them in their stock: but if the brother refused to marry her, he
should show the cause of his refusal before the elders, and if his cause were
approved good, he should have liberty to marry whom he pleased: That they
should bewail and lament for the dead, for the space of thirty days, and no
more, which time he thought sufficient for a wise man to lament the loss of
his friends: That the son which was injurious to his parents should be hanged
without the City: That the enemy that was slain in battle should not want
burial: That if a creditor receive a pledge or pawn of a poor man, he
should restore it again before night: That if one buy one of his kindred as a
slave, the bond-seruant should be free the sixth year after: That he that
found gold or silver, should make proclamation thereof by the mouth of the
Crier: That if cattle went astray, they should either be brought back to the
right owner, or else kept till the right owner were known: That no Israelite
should make or temper any poison, nor buy any that was made elsewhere: And that
he which mingled poison, to the end to poison an other, being convicted of the
offense should drink the same poison himself: That he which wilfully and
wrongfully pulls out an other man's eye, should be punished with the loss of
an eye: That if a bull kill a man with his horn he should be stoned to death,
and his flesh cast aaway and not eaten: That a thing committed to an other to
keep, should be kept warily as a thing holy: That the son should not be
punished for the fathers offense, nor the sons offense be imputed as a fault
in the father: And these were the domestical laws ordained by Moses, and in
warfare these following: That before war were offerred, the goods wrongfully
taken away should be demanded again, by Ambassadors and Heralds, and if they
were not restored, that then (if they pleased) they might war lawfully: That
the whole charge and government of the wars, should be committed to him that
most excelled others in strength and wisdom: that the strongest soldier of
all the camp should be sent as Ambassador: That if the enemy were besieged,
their fruit trees should be spared, for the trees themselves (if they could
speak) would certainly reprehend and reprove him that destroyed them. That
the conqueror might kill all such as were rebels, but the rest which he
overcame and vanquished should be made tributary and pay yearly pensions: That
during the time of war no woman should touch her husbands priuities, nor no man
his wives: that it should be utterly prohibited for the Israelites to eat
blood: That those which were either infected with leaprosie, or which had
caused any fluxure of their natural seed should be expelled the city.

Menstruous women, in like manner, were kept out of the city, for seven days
after the beginning of their disease, and might return in the eight: and so
many days were they forced to absent themselves, that had their houses defiled
and polluted with any dead body: That the Priest should sacrifice tow evve
Lambs for him whose natural seed flovved from him in his sheep, and that the
party should be washed in cold water: and by the same sacrifice was he purged
and hallowed that had lain with his wife at unlawful and prohibited times:
That a woman after she was delivered of a child, if it were a man child, should
be restrained from coming to the Church for the space of forty days, and if
it were a woman child, for the space of eighty days.

That he that supposed his wife to be unchaste should for a certain measure of
barley meal called assarim, and, that then the wife being placed at the posts
of the temple, should swear after the Priest, whether she had defiled her
chastity or no; and if she swore false, she should dye for it, having her
right hamme disioynted, and her womb putrified, but if she were chaste and
swore truly, she should be delivered of her child in the tenth month, without
harm of her womb, and that then the Priest of God blotting out her name from
out the scedule, should give her drink out of a pot with a wide mouth. That
the pains of death should be inflicted for adultery, incest, and the sin of
Sodom. That the Priest that was lame or weakened in his body, should be
forbidden to ascend the Altar, and that he should be maintained
notwithstanding with the holy oblations. That if the Jews attained to the land
of Chanaan, they should suffer their grounds to lie lea and vnplowed every
seventh year: that such fruits as the earth did naturally produce, should
every fortith year, (which was called the year of Iubily) be common, as well
to strangers and forreners, as to their own kindred; and that, in that year,
money which was owing should be released and forgiven, slaves and bondmen made
free and infranchised, and possessions gotten with small cost, restored to
their first owners. With these institutions and ordinances both for home and
abroad did Morses instruct the Israelites, not long before his death, adding
more-ouer a solemn prayer for the good success of those that observed and
fulfilled his laws and ordinances, rightly, and as they ought, and bitter
execrations, and curses against the transgressors and offenders thereof.

And last of all, he bound the people with an oath, that they should for ever
observe and keep those divine, and human laws which he had instituted and
ordained, and that if any one did violate them, they should not suffer him to
go unpunished: And now seeing it is manifest that there was never any people
more ceremonious and religious then the Israelites, I think it worth while,
briefly to express the manner of their sacrificing, as it was first ordained.

The Jews had two sorts of sacrificing from the beginning, The manner of the
Jews oblations.
the one whereof was done by the better sort of people, and that they called
Holocaustus (that is a sacrifice laid whole on the Altar) and was done in this
manner, he which intended to do sacrifice either with Ox or Lamb, or what
thing else he meant to offer (for the beast which he sacrificed must be a
male beast, and of one year old,) brought the beast to the Altar, and then the
Priest pouring forth and sprinkling the blood of the sacrifice upon the Altar,
and cutting the oblation in pieces, burned it whole upon the Altar.

The other sort of sacrificing, was for the common people, wherein they offered
beasts of above a year old, the blood whereof being shed, and the kidnees,
fat and suet, set on fire on the Altar, the hearts and right legs were
given to the Priests, and the residue, they, for whom the sacrifice was
solemnized, did eat within two days after. Those which were poor might offer
two Pigions, or two Turtle Doves, whereof the one served for a whole burnt
sacrifice, and for the other, the Priests did cast lottes. He which offended
unawares, did sacrifice for satisfaction of that sin a Yew Lamb of an year
old, or else a Kidde, and those which were guilty of any secret fault in
themselves, were (by the very letter of the law) to be purged by offering up
a Ram. The flesh of which oblations, whether they were public or private,
the Priests did eat in the Temple: one measure containing a peck of the finest
flower, was allowed for the oblation of a Lamb, for a Ram two, and for a
Bull three: There was also allowed Oil, which was powered upon the sacrifice:
A Lamb was publicly sacrificed every morning and evening, and upon every
seventh day, which was called their Sabbath, and which (by their law) they
held most holy, there were double sacrifices offered upon their Altars: In the
beginning of the month were offered for reconciliation, two Oxen, seven
yearling Lambs, one Ram, and one Kidde, to which were added two Kiddes more,
the one whereof was sent out of the bounds of the City, and there offered as a
satisfaction for the sins of the multitude, and the other was burned skin
and all in the purest place of the suburbs of the City.

The Priests gave a Bull sanctified for that purpose, and a Ram for a whole
burnt sacrifice. There was also other sacrifices mingled with ordinary
ceremonies, and holy days, such was the fifteenth day of the month (which the
Macedons called Hyperueretheus:) and upon the return of Autumn, they fixed
their Tents or Tabernacles, and keeping that day holy, offered yearly whole
burnt offerings, the dooers thereof upon the month Xanthicus, which is
April, carried in their hands the boughs of Myrrh, Willow, Palms, and Peach
tree; where-vppon the year took his beginning upon the day of the full
Moon, the sun then entering into the sign Aries.

And because at that time the people of Israel were delivered out of the land
of Egypt, they sacrificed the mystical Lamb, and celebrated the feasts of
unleavened bread, or sweet bread, in the full Moon, some few days after: upon
which days were ever burned, for a whole burnt sacrifice, two Bulls, one
Ram, and seven Lambs, whereunto was added one Kidde, for satisfaction for
their sins: in the second day of Sweete-bread, were offered the first parts
of their fruits, and a measure of Oil, and in the beginning or springing of
their fruits, a Lamb for a whole burnt sacrifice. Their days of Penticost
also were certain, which time they called Asarthan, that is to say
Quinquagesima, or the fifteeth day: and then they offered leauened bread made
of dry meal; two Ewe lambs, two Calves, and two Rams for a whole burnt
offering, and two Kiddes in recompense of their misdeeds: The The opinion of
Heathen writers concerning the Jews.
Heathen writers disagree from the Ecclesiastical, concerning the Jews, and
Moses their Captain: for Cornelius Tacitus, in the one and twentieth Book of
his Diurnalls, attributing the departing of that people out of the land of
Aegipt, not to Gods divine will and power, but to necessity, writes thus of
them. The scabbe and noisome itch beginning in Aegipt, says he, Boch^ris the
Aegiptian King desired a remedy in the Temple of his god Hamon, where he was
admonished to purge his kingdom, and to banish those people (meaning the
Jews) which were hateful to their gods, into other countries: Whereupon they
being expulsed, and a great multitude of them which had the scabbe least
sitting together in waste and desolate places, most of them being almost
blind with weeping, Moses, one of those which were banished among the rest,
admonished them not to expect any help of gods, or men, but only to rely
and commit themselves wholly to him as their guide and Captain, whereunto they
assented and agreed, and so being utterly ignorant what would become of them,
took their journey at adventures, wherein above other things they wanted
water, and that they watching all night in the open fields, not far from
destruction, saw a flock of wild Asses going from feeding, and sitting down
upon a rock ouer-growne with thick woods, these Moses pursued and took, and
thereupon and to the end that he might for ever be assured of that people, he
gave unto them new laws and ceremonies, contrary to all other nations: for
those things which we hold for holy, they account as profane, and allow of
those things which with us are poluted.

They hollowed and worshipped within their houses the picture of a beast, the
sight whereof expelled both thirst and error, and sacrificed a Ram in despite
of the god Hamon: they offer also an Ox in derision of the god Apis, which the
Aegiptians worship under the form of an Ox: They abstain from Swines flesh
for avoiding the scabbe, because that beast is dangerous for that disease.

They rest upon the seventh day, because that day brought end to their
labors: and yielding to slothfulness, the seventh year also is spent in
Idleness, the honor whereof is by others attributed to Saturn, by reason of
hunger and fasting: their bread is altogether unleavened: these laws how ever
they were brought in, are there defended: and though mercy and firm faith are
in great request amongst them, yet they carry deadly hatred against all other
nations. They be separated in their banquets, and severed in their beds: They
are much given to lust and yet they abstain from the company of women of other
nations, but hold nothing unlawful amongst them selves.

They ordained circumcision of their priuities, that by that difference they
might be discerned from others, and the first lesson they learn is to
contemn the gods: The souls of those which were slain in battle or by
punishment, they suppose to be eternal.

They have the like regard of Hell and persuasion of Heavenly things: on the
other side the Aegiptians worship diverse beasts and wrought Idols, but the
Jews in their hearts and minds acknowledge but one only God, accounting those
profane which feign or pourtray the images of their gods in the form of men.
These and many other things has Cornelius Tacitus and Trogus in his Three
sects of the Jews,
seven and thirty book, written of the Jews. Three sects of the Jews were
severed and distinguished one from another by their usual manner of living,
which were the The Pharisees,
Pharasies, the Sadducees and the Esseians: The Pharasies lived very austerely
and sparingly, instituting new traditions, by which they finished and abolished
the traditions of Moses: They carried in their forheads and upon their left
arm certain frontlets and papers, wherein was written that decalogue, which
the Lord said, thou shall have, as it were, hanging betwixt thine eyes, and in
thy hand, and these they called Philacteries of the Greek word Philatein,
which signifies to fulfill the law.

These also fastened the edges of their vestures to the rest of their garments
with thorns, that being pricked therewith as they went, they might remember
Gods commandments.

They thought all things to be done by GOD and by destiny, and that to do or
neglect things that were lawful and just, consisted in the will of man, but
yet that in all things fate was a furtherer, whose effects they essteemed to
proceed from the motion of the Heavenly bodies.

They would never contradict their elders nor superiors: They believed the
general judgment, that al souls were incorruptible, that only the souls of
the good did flitte and remove into other bodies, until the resurrection and
last judgment, and that the souls of the wicked were detained and imprisoned
in everlasting dungeons: and these were called Pharisees, because in their
habits and livings they differed from the common disposition of other men.

The Saduces denied fortune and destiny, saying that The Saduces,
God saw all things, and that it was in the will of man to do either good or
evil; they denied that the souls after this life suffered either punishment
or pleasure: they denied also the resurrection of the dead, supposing their
souls and bodies to perish together, nor did they hold that there were any
Angels, and yet they received the five books of Moses; they were severe
without measure and nothing sociable amongst themselves, for which severity
they named themselves Saduces, that is to say just.

But the Esseians lived altogether a monastical life, utterly The Esseians.
despising wedlock and the company of all women, not because they thought it
fit by forbidding carnal copulation, to destroy the succession of mankind,
but that they should beware of women's intemperance, suppo, sing no woman to be
faithful and true to her husband. They had all things in common; ointments
and bathes they accounted a reproach, and esteemed a deformity in their
trimming, to be an ornament unto them, so as they were always arrayed in
white garments: they had no certain city, but dwellings in every place: They
spoke no profane words before the sun rising, but prayed for his rising, and
after that, workt unto the fifth hour, then washing their bodies in water, they
eat together with few words: They accounted an oath as perjury, and allowed
none to be of their sect under a years probation: and after the first years
trial, when they were admitted, they tried their manners other two years
also, in which time if they were found in any sin, they would drive them away
from them, that eating grass like beasts, they might repent till their deaths.
When ten of them sat together no one would speak if nine of them were
unwilling, they would not spit in the middle, nor on the right side: They
observed their sabbath so religiously, that upon that day they would not so
much as purge their bellyes: They carried with them a wodden Pickax, wherewith
they dug a hoale in the earth in some secret place to ease themselves in,
and covered themselves diligently with their long garments, least they should
do injury to the divine lights, for which cause also they filled the hole
again presently. They were long of life, by reason of the simpleness of their
diet, for they lived for the most part with Dates, they had no use of money,
and they adjudged that death the best which happened to a man for Justice sake.
They hold, that all souls were created from the beginning, and incorporated
for a time in men's bodies, and that the good souls after they departed from
the bodies, lived beyond the Ocean, where joy is reserved for them, and that
the evil souls are assigned boystrous and stormy places toward the East:
Some of them could foretell things to come, and some used the company of wives,
but very moderatly, for they supposed, that if they should altogether abstain
from women, the whole stock of human kind would perish. There dwell in
Syria at this day Greeks, which be called Gryphoni, Iacobites, Nestorians,
and Sarasins, and two people of the Christian Religion, which be the Syriani
and the Marouini; the Syrians sacrifice as the Greeks do, and were some times
obedient to the Church of Rome, but the Marouini agree with the Iacobites, and
use the same language and writing the Arabians do. These sundry sorts of holy
men inhabit the hill Libanus, the Sarrasins dwell about Jerusalem, they be
valiant in war and expert in husbandry. The Syrians be unprofitable people,
and the Marouines most valiant men, though they be few in number.

Of Media, and of the manners of the Medes. CHAP. 5.
MEDIA a region in Asia, is so called (as Solinus reports) of Medus the son
Media, why so called.
of Medea, and Aegeus King of Athens, and the people thereof be called Medi:
But Josephus is of opinion, that they be called Medes of Medeus the son of
Iaphet.

This Region (according to Ptolomeus) is bounded upon the North with the Hyrcan
sea, upon the West with the great Armenia, and Assyria, with Persia upon the
South, and on the East with Hircania and Parthia. Their chiefest exercise, and
which is almost peculiar to that nation, is shooting and riding: Their Kings in
ancient time were of great authority, their head attires, their round caps, and
their garments with sleeves, removed with the Empire and government unto the
Persians. It was proper to the Median Kings to have many wives, which custom
was shortly put in practice amongst private men, in so much as it was not
lawful to have less then seven wives. In like manner it was thought fitting
for women to have many husbands, and to have less then five they deemed a
misery. The Medes make leagues and confirm friendship after the manner of the
Greeks, and also by striking their arms about the shoulder blade, and then to
lick up each others blood. That part of Media which is toward the North, is
barren, and therefore they make them a kind of paste of Apples, dried and
bruised in morters, bread of roasted Almonds, and wine of the roots of herbs,
and live for the most part upon the flesh of wild beasts.

Of Parthia, and the manner of living of the Parthians. CAP. 6.
THe Parthians which were banished out of Scythia, and obtained this country
The confines of Parthia.
by deceit, called it after their names Parthia: It has upon the South
Carmania, on the North Hyrcania, on the West Media, and Aria on the East: The
country is full of woods and hills, and very barren of fruits: The people
during the time the Medes and Assyrians possessed the Empire, were accounted
base and of no credit nor estimation, but when the kindome of Media was
translated to the Persians, this people also as a barbarous nation without
name, was a prey unto the vanquishers, and lastly became subject to the
Macedonians: but in tract of time they grew of such virtue and valor, and were
so prosperous and successful in their designements, that they governed not
only the countries near adjoining, but making war against the Romans,
(which then were conquerors of all Countries,) overthrew them with great
destruction and slaughter of their men. Pliny reckons fourteen kingdoms
under Fourteen kingdoms under the Parthians.
the government of the Parthians: Trogus attributes unto them the Empire of
the East, as if they had made division of the whole world with the Romans:
This people after their reuolting from the Macedonian Empire, were governed by
Kings, which were all called Arsaces of Arsax their first King, next unto the
Majesty of their Kings was the order and government of the people, out of
which were elected both Captains for the wars, and Governors in time of
peace.

They have a mixed language borrowed of the Medes and Scythians, and compounded
of them both: at the first their habites were answerable to their ability, and
after their own country fashion, but waxing richer, they were as curiously
clothed as the Medes, their weapons were after the custom of their own
country, and like unto the Scythians.

Their armies consist not of freemen, as in other nations, but for the most
part of slaves, which sort of base people do daily increase, for they be all
bondmen borne, and no power of manumission permitted them, yet be they brought
up with as great care and industry as if they were freemen, and taught both to
ride and shoot, and every one, as he is in riches, traineth up and sets
forth with the King, when he goes into the wars a great company of horse
men according to his ability, in so much as when Antonius made wars upon the
Parthians, and the Parthians incountring him with fifty thousand horsemen,
there were not found in all that whole troop above eight hundred freemen:
They cannot endure the single combat, nor to remove the assault from Cities
besieged, but their chiefest fight is with their horses running forward, or
turning backward, and sometimes also they feign themselves to fly, that
thereby they may wound those which unwarily pursue them: The sign of battle
is not given them with a trumpet, but with a Timbrill, or Drum, neither can
they endure long fight, for surely they were not to be resisted, if their
courage and continuance were answerable to the assault and first brunt of the
battle, and oftentimes they will leave the battle in the very heat of the
conflict, and shortly after return again and begin a fresh, so as when the
enemy thinks himself most secure, he is oftentimes in greatest danger: The
munition for their horsemen are Brigandines, or coats of maile imbrodered,
and with such be their horses harnessed likewise. In times past they had no
other use of silver nor gold then in their weapons: All of them have many
wives, being moved thereunto with the pleasure of the variety of women, nor is
there a more grievous punishment for any offense, then for adultery, and
therefore they forbid their wives not only to banquet with other men, but even
the very sight of them also. There be some of opinion, whereof Strabo is one,
that if the Parthians cannot beget children of their wives themselves, they
will give them in marriage to their friends, thereby to raise them issue to
succeed them. They eat no other flesh but what they get by hunting, and they
be ever carried on horseback, for they ride to their banquets, they buy and
sell, confer together, and execute all public and private offices on
hors-back. And this difference in the dignities and degrees of the people is
very singular and worthy to be noted, that those which be of a servile and
base condition, go ever on foot, but the better sort of people and freemen
ride continually.

The flesh of their dead bodies instead of burial is commonly rent in pieces
and devoured, either of byrds or dogs, and they cover the bones, when they be
bare, with earth. They have their gods in great reverence and regard: they be
of a haughty and proud disposition, sedicious, deceitful, and malepart, and
very violent in all their actions, but yet women be somewhat more courteous
then men, they be always busied either in external or civil broils: They
be naturally slow of speech, and far more apt for action then utterance.
They will neither brag of their prosperity, nor despair in adversity: they
obey their Princes for fear, not for shame; they be much given to lust, and
of a sparing diet, and there is no trust nor confidence to be reposed in their
words nor promises, but so far as is expedient and behouefull for themselves.

The manners and customs Of Persia, and of the manners, laws, and ordinances
of the Persians. CHAP. 7.
PERSIA a country in the East, is so called of Persis the son of Jupiter and
The Confines of Persia, and why so called.
Danae, of whom also Persepolis the Metrapolitan and chief City of that
nation, takes his name, and the people thereof be called Persians: This
country (as Ptolomeus writes in his fifth book) is bounded on the North with
Media, on the West with Susiana, on the East with the two Carmanias, and on the
South with the Persian sea. Their chief towns were Aximia, Persepolis and
Diospolis. The Persians believe in Heaven, and in Jupiter: they have the Sun
also in great veneration, whom they call Mitra, and worship the Moon, Venus,
the Fire, Earth, Water, and winds, as gods and goddesses: They have neither
Temples, Sanctuaries, nor Idols, but do their sacrifices The Persian gods.
without doors, in some high place, with great reverence and devotion, having
the host for sacrifice brought to the Altar, with a crown or garland on his
head: they sacrifice to their gods nothing else but the heart of the oblation,
neither do the gods (as they suppose) require more at their hands, and yet the
custom of some in that country is, to put the Intralls of the sacrifice into
the fire also: when they sacrifice, they make a fire of dry wood, the bark or
rind being first pulled of, and then casting upon the wood some sweet tallow
or suet, and infusing a little oil thereon, set it on fire, not blowing with
their mouths but with bellows, for if any presume to blow the fire with his
mouth, or throw therein any dead carcass, or any other filthy thing, he dies
for it. The Persians neither wash themselves in water, nor piss, nor spitte
into it, nor throw any dead carcass into it, nor profane it any other kind
of way, but worship it most religiously, and that in this manner. When they
come to a lake, river, or brook, they make a little ditch or pond, severed
from the other water, and there they kill the sacrifice, having special
regard that none of the other water be touched with the blood, least all
should be polluted: this done, and the flesh laid upon a mirtell or laurel
tree, the Priests or Magi make a fire with little twiggs, and therewith burn
the sacrifice till it be consumed, and then sprinkling and infusing it with
oil mingled with milk and honey, they pray for a long space together, not to
the fire, nor water, but to the earth, holding in their hands all the while a
bundle of Myrtle rods. They create their Kings out of one family, and he which
is not obedient unto the King, has his head and arms cut off, and is cast out
without burial. Polycritus reports, that all the Persian Kings have their
houses builded upon hills, and that there they hide all the treasure, and
tribute which they exact of their subjects, for a monument The Persians create
their Kings all of one family.
of a well governed state: And that of the people that dwell upon the sea
coast, they exact silver, and from the inhabitants of the middle part of the
land, such other commodities as the country affoordeth, as color, medicines,
wool, or such like, and sometimes cattle also: It is not lawful for the King
to put any man to death for one only cause, nor for one Persian to commit any
heinous offense against another of his own family or kindered: The Persians
have many wives a piece, and keep diverse concubines besides, for increase of
issue, and the Kings reward those most liberally, that have begot most children
in a year, nor be their children once brought into their fathers sight,
before they be five years of age, but all that while are brought up with
their mothers, chiefly for this cause, that if any of them in those years of
education, should miscarry and dye, their loss should be no grief or
molestation to the father. They celebrate their marriages all at one time of the
year, that is, in the vernall Aequinoctium, and the Brides-groome eats
nothing the first night he lies with his wife, but an Apple or the marrow of a
Cammell. The Persian children from the first year of their age to the four
and twentieth, practice nothing but riding, shooting, throwing the dart, and
chiefly to learn to speak the truth. Their schoole-maisters are men of great
continency and severity, and such as sometimes in rhyme, sometimes in prose,
rehearse unto them (for their instructions) tales and histories, containing the
commendations of their gods, and the deeds of worthy men. They have a place
appointed them to practice in, whether they are summoned by the sound of some
wind instrument at usual hours, and their teachers are often demanded and
examined by others, how their children do profit. They practice running also,
choosing one of the Princes sons to be their Captain and guide, and the
field wherein they run their races, is at the least thirty stadia in length,
and that they may the better endure both heat and cold, they often exercise
themselves in swimming and wading over great waters, insomuch as they will eat
their meat and go about their husbandry, and other business, with weapons in
their hands, and wet garments on their backs: their meat is the gum, or
turpentine that issues out of Fur trees, Acornes and wild Pears, but that
which they usually eat after their running and other exercises of their bodies,
is a kind of heard bread, and salt herbs called garden Cresses, and flesh
either broyled or boiled, and their usual drink is water: They hunt always on
horsbacke with darts, bows and slings. In the fore-noone they either plant
trees, dig up roots, make weapons, or practice fishing: their children be
addorned with gold and many other dainties. The stone Pyropus (which is a kind
of Carbuncle stone of a fiery redness) is with them in great estimation, and
therefore they apply it not to any dead body, nor yet the fire, for the great
honor and reverence they yield unto it: from the twentieth year unto the
fiftith, they be soldiers and follow the wars: they have no use of
pleading, neither do they buy or sell any thing: They be armed in the wars
with a kind of target in form of a wheel, and besides their quiver of arrows
they have weapons called sangars, and short swords, caps with high crowns, and
on their breasts rough brest-plates full of skales: The Princes wear a kind of
garment that is three double about their shoulders, and cotes with sleeves
hanging down to their knees, the outside whereof is of diverse colors and
the lyning white: In the Summer time, the Persians be clothed in purple, and in
winter in changeable colors: The head attires for their Priests or Magi be
like unto Bishops miters: The common people be clothed with two coats,
hanging down to the middle of their legs, and a great bundel of linen cloth
bound about their heads: Their beds and pots be trimmed with gold and silver:
They consult of no serious matter but when they be half drunk, esteeming that
consultation to be more firm the^ that which is with sobriety, and
deliberatio^; kinsmen and equals salute one an other with a kiss, and the
baser sort of people reverence their betters by bowing their bodies unto them.

They bury their dead bodies in the earth, annoynting them first with wax, but
their Priests or wisemen they cast out without burial to be devoured of birds;
their custom was also for sons to lie with their own mothers, and these in
times past were the manners and customs of the Persians. Herodotus also
recites more of their manners, very worthy of remembrance: as, that it was held
a horrible and heinous offense, to laugh, or spit before the King: That they
scoffed at the Greeks, who were of opinion that the gods took their original
from men: That whatsoever was unlawful to be done, was by them thought
unfitting to be spoken: That it was a vile thing to be in debt, but to lie was
most abominable: That they did not bury their dead bodies, before they were
pulled in pieces by dogs, and (which in the opinion of other nations was
thought most absurd) that parents being brought to poverty, might get money
by being Pandars to their own daughters, which custom was allowed amongst the
Babylonians also.

The Persians at this day being overcome by the Sarrasins, and infected with
the madness of Mahomet, live altogether in darkness: It was once a warlike
nation, and had for a long space the government of the East: but now for want
of exercise in arms, it fails much of his ancient glory.

Of India, and of the monstrous and prodigious customs and manner of living of
the people of India. CAP. 8.
INDIA, a Country in the East, and the utmost bound of all Asia, is so vast and
The description and bigness of India.
large a country, as it is thought to be the third part of the whole world:
Pomponius writes, that it is as much in compass by the sea shore as a ship
will sail in forty days and forty nights with a full wind: It is called
India of the river Inde, where it finisheth his course upon the West part, and
beginning at the meridionall sea, stretches out unto the uttermost part of the
East, extending Northward to the hill Caucasus: It contains sundry sorts of
people, and has such great abundance of Cities, and walled towns Five
thousand Cities and (...) walled towns in India.
therein, as some are of opinion, that there is no fewer then five thousand,
nor may it seem strange, that it has so great numbers of people and Cities,
considering that the Indians of all other people never departed from their
native soil. The most famous rivers in that Country are Ganges, Indus and
Hypanis, but the greatest of them is the river Ganges: The Country by reason of
the Western winds is most wholesome: they have two haruests in the year, and
the wind blows Easterly all winter: wine they have none, although there be
that affirm, that the Musican soil yields some wine: in the South part of
India is great store of Narde, Cynamon, Pepper and Sugar-cane, as in Arabia,
and Aethiopia: It produces Ebon-trees, Parrots and Unicorns: and abounds
with precious stones, as Berrils, Chrysophases, Adamants, Carbuncles,
Lychnites, Pearls and Unions: There be two Summers, as it is said: the winds
be gentle and calm, and the air temperate: they have plenty of ground and
abundance of water, and therefore some of them, and namely the Musicans, live
till they be a hundred and thirty years of age, and the people called Seres be
longer lived then they: All the Indians wear long locks, and colloured, either
The long lives of the Jndians.
blew or yellow. Their trimming is for the most part with precious stones, and
they be not clothed al alike, but some in woollen and some in linen garments:
some go altogether naked, some cover only their priuities, and many of them
have for their apparel the barks or rines of trees, made flexible and bending
toward their bodies: Their bodies, for the most part be black, for by the
disposition of the seed generatiue, they be of such how in their mothers
wombes, as those be which begot them, and their seed of generation is black
like the Aethiopians: they be tall of stature and very hardy and valerous: they
be very frugal and thrifty in their living: They be curious in their apparel as
I have said, and abstain greatly from theft: they use no written The Jndians
have neither written laws nor learning.
laws, nor know any letters, but administer al things by help of their
memories: and by reason of their simple and thristy manner of living, all
things succeed very prosperously with them: They drink no wine but in their
sacrifices, for their usual drink is made of Ryce and Barley, and their meat
for the most part is thin Rycepottage: That there is great simplicity in
their covenants, and contracts, may well be gathered by this, that the people
be not litigious nor given to quarrelling, for they have no laws to recover a
thing committed or left in an other man's keeping, neither do they need
witnesses or seals, but credit one an other simply without intent of fraud or
guile. In so much as they will leave their houses when they go abroad with the
doors open and no body in them: All which be manifest signs that they be
marvelous just and continent: no man there may be admitted to live alone, and
to dine and sup when he pleases himself, but they ought to eat and drink
all at one hour, for such things they conjecture do best dispose them to
social and civil conversation. They exercise their bodies by rubbing the^ with
combs made of sweet wood for the purpose, and addorne themselves with
Ebon-wood: In making their tombs and sepultures, they be very sparing, and in
their apparel marvelous costly and curious, for besides gold, precious stones
and very fine linen cloth, or cambricke, wherewith they be arraied, they carry
about with them fans or shadows, to preserve their beauties from the sun. For
they are so desirous to seem fair, as they do al things that appertain to
the beautifying of their faces: truth and virtue are with them much esteemed,
and they yield no more honor to old men then to others, unless they excel
others in wisdom: They have many wives, some whereof they buy of their parents
for a yoke of oxen, some they marry for obedience sake, some for cause of
procreation, and some for pleasure and voluptuousness, and unless their
husbands enforce them to live chaste, it is lawful for the^ to play the harlots
at their pleasure: No Indian does sacrifice or burn incence with a garland upon
his head, neither do they cut the throats of the sacrifices, but strangle the^
to death, that their offerings to their gods may be whole and not maimed: he
that is convicted of false witness bearing, has the utmost joints of his
fingers cut off, and he which depriueth an other of any member, is not only
punished with loss of the like member, but has his hand cut off besides, and
to deprive an artificer of hand or eye is death: the body of their King is
committed to the keeping of hyreling women, who only have Their Kings are
committed to the keeping of women.
the custody and charge of him, and none else do ever come into his presence,
and if any of these women kill the King when he is drunk, for her reward, she
shall marry his successor, and their sons do ever succeed them in their
Kingdoms: It is not lawful for the King to sleep in the daytime, and he is
constrained to change his lodging at certain hours in the night, for fear of
treason. If he be not in camp, he oftentimes goes abroad, and sits in
Judgment and hears causes: and if it be at such a time as his body is to be
rubbed with a rubbing comb, he has three to rub his body and hears causes
all the while: He issues forth also sometimes to do sacrifice, and sometimes
to hunt, and then he is compassed about, and enclosed with a great troop of
women, after the manner of Bacchus, his guard remaining without the Court gate,
and the way into the house is covered with cords, and snares, and if any one
offend with any of the women which stay at home, he shall die for it: The King
when he hunteth has going before him, drums, timbrils and little bells, and
when he hunteth in parkes and enclosed grounds, he is assisted with two or
three women armed, and when in forests and open fields, he shoots from an
Elephant: some of the women ride in chariots, some on horseback, and some on
Elephants and in that manner they make wars: also they be excercised in all kind
of weapons, but therein they much differ from our women. There be some writers
that affirm that the Indians worship shewry Jupiter, the river Ganges, and the
spirits of men deified, and that when the King washes or shaueth his beard,
they celebrate that time very solemnly, and sending great gifts, strive one to
an other, who shall show the greatest pomp, ioylity and magnificence: The
whole people of India were heretofore The people of India once divided into
seven orders.
divided into seven orders, the first whereof was the order of Philosophers,
who though they were fewest in number, yet in honor and dignity with their
Kings, they excelled all others: These Philosophers were freed from The first
was the order of Philosophers.
all labors, they served no man, nor were served of others, and for that they
were beloved of the gods, they received of private men al things necessary for
them to do sacrifice, and to bury the dead bodies: There were great Prophesiers
and negromancers, and therefore had many gifts and honors bestowed upon them,
for that by their knowledge the Indians received great commodity, for they
would assemble themselves together in the beginning of the year, and then
foretell of drought, rain, winds and diseases, and other accidents, the
knowledge whereof was exceeding profitable unto the people, so as both the King
and people hearing what occurents were likely to happen that year, might
thereby the rather avoid future evils, and follow such courses as by
probability might prove good, and no other punishment was inflicted upon any of
those Philosophers that prophisied falsely, but only that he was put to
perpetual silence: The second order is of husbandmen, The second order of
husbandmen.
which are the greatest in number, and be freed from the wars, and from al
other employments whatsoever, and bestow there whole time only in tilling the
grownd: no enemy does either wrong them, or rob them, but esteeming them to be
ever busied for their common good, sorbeare to do them any injury or damage,
by which means the husbandmen, living void of fear, and tilling the land in
security, their labors yield them great plenty of increase: they come not at
all into the Cities, but live altogether in fields with their wives and
children; They pay tribute unto their Kings (for all India is governed by
Kings) and it is not lawful for any private person to possess any grownds
without tribute, and besides this tribute they yield unto their Kings the fifth
part of the increase of all their fruits.

The third order consists of shepherds of all sorts, which live neither in
Cities nor villages, but in tents and The third order is of sheepheards.
tabernacles, and practice hunting and fowling, whereby the country is free and
safe both from ravenous birds and wild beasts, for by this exercise they make
all India more civil, abounding otherwise with many and diverse sorts both of
birds and beasts, which would be much hurtful to the husbandman: Artificers
supply the forth Artificers the fourth order.
place, whereof some are occupied in making weapons and armor, some in making
instruments for husbandry, and some in providing things necessary for
themselves: these be not only free from tribute, but have all their bread
corn allowed them by the King.

Soldiers be the fifth in order, but the second in number, they be excercised
in all manner of warlike discipline, The fifth of of soudiers.
and be wholly devoted to arms, and both they their Horses and Elephants, be
wholly maintained at the Kings cost and charge.

The sixth order is of Tribunes, or Protectors of the commons: Whose special
office is to spy and inquire, Tribunes in the sixth order.
what things are done throughout all India, and to make report thereof unto the
King.

In the seventh rank be those which be of the common The common Council the
seventh order.
Council, they be the fewest in number, but in Nobility and understanding
they exceed all the other Orders: out of this Order be elected the Kings
Counselors, which are to govern the commonwealth, and to discern and judge
in doubtful matters: Princes moreover, and captains are chosen out of this
company. The commonwealth of India being thus distributed into these seven
Orders, it is not lawful for a man of one Order, to marry a wife out of
another Order: neither is it lawful for any one to alter his function; as for
a soldier to become a husbandman, or for an artificer to play the Philosopher.
There be also certain Presidents or head Officers appointed amongst the
Indians, to defend and protect aliens and strangers from injury, and
oppression: and these (if any strangers be sick) are to procure Physicians to
cure them, and if they dye, they must bury them, and give their money and goods
to their nearest friends: The Judges determine controversies, and punish
offenders: there be none of the Indians of servile condition; for it is
ordained by a law, that none of No slaves amongst the Jndians.
them shall be servants; and so all being freemen, are worthy of equal right
and honor, so long as they neither go about to excel others, nor to iniure any
man, but settle themselves to endure all chances of fortune alike. For it
seems a ridiculous thing, that laws should be ministered to all alike, and
that their fortunes should not be alike also.

But now because there be sundry sorts of people in India, which by reason of
the spatiousnesse and large extent of the Country, differ both in form and
language: all of them therefore do not live in that civil manner, as I have
here declared.

but some are of a more barbarous and rude behavior, of which sort some be
situated toward the Sunrising, and be much given to breeding cattle, or
other such like course of life: and some live altogether in moorish grounds,
and feed on raw fishes, which they take by going out in botes made of Canes or
Reeds, that be so great, that a boat is made of the space that is betwixt two
joints of the reed. These Indians wear garments made of flags or sedge, that
grows in rivers, which they plat together, and make in fashion of a matte,
and wear them as an armor for their bodies.

Next unto these Eastward, be certain Indians, which The Padae kill their
friends when they be sick.
be heards-men, or breeders of cattle, and be called Padae, they feed on raw
flesh, and are said to live in this manner: when any citizens, either man, or
woman is sick, their most nearest and familiar friends kill him, alleging,
that his languishing in sickness would make his flesh corrupted and
unwholesome for those which should eat it: and although he deny himself to be
sick, yet they will not pardon him, but kill him forth with, and feed upon him:
and in such manner as men are used by men, be women that be sick dealt
withal by women, that be their nearest friends: And such also as live in
health till they be old, be then killed and eaten by their friends: and
therefore, both for this cause, and for that they be killed when they be sick,
there be very few of them that live till they be old. Another sort of Indians
have a custom different from those which I have spoken of, for they kill no
creature, they neither sow nor plant, nor provide houses, but live only by
herbs: They have a certain grain much like unto millet, which naturally
springs out of the earth in a husk or codde, which they gathering, cod and
all, boil them and eat them: when any of them falls sick, he goes into
some desert place, and there lies down, and whether he languish or die, no
one regards him: and also these Indians which I have spoken of, accompany
with women in the sight of all people, after the manner of beasts.

In India be certain Philosophers called Gymnosophists, The Cymnosophists.
which (as Petrarch writes) inhabit the uttermost and shadie parts of the
region, and going ever naked, which is the cause they be so named. And wandering
all abroad in the wilderness, do there teach Philosophy: abiding in one place
from the Sunne-rising, till his going down, ever fixing their eyes, and
beholding the circle of the brightest star: seeking out some secrets in the
fiery globe. They will stand upon their feet all day long, upon the hot
sands, without show of any grief at all, patiently enduring both the cold of
the snow, and the heat of the Sun.

Amongst whom be people called Brachmans; who (as Didimus their king writ to
Alexander king of Macedon, when he was minded to make war upon them) do live
very uprightly and simply. They be not allured with delectations of any
novelties, nor desire any thing else, but what the law of nature inforceth
them: their diet is nothing dainty, not such as to satisfy their luxury, is
sought out in all places, but such as the earth produces without labor or
toil furnishes their tables with wholesome and unhurtful diet, by which
means they be very healthful, and unacquainted with the names and nature of
sundry diseases. No one imploreth help of another, where no one lives to
himself, but all in common. They have no superior, but be all equals, and
therefore void of envy and emulation: for the equality of poverty makes them
all rich: conde^nations they have none, because they do nothing worthy of
correction: nor be they led by any law, for that they commit no crimes: only
this one law is general to them all, not to transgress the law of nature,
which nourishes labor and industry, exercises no avarice, and flies
idleness: They give not their bodies to lust, thereby to weaken them, and they
possess all things they desire not, esteeming covetousness to be a plague
and scourge most cruel, which impouerisheth all those she lays hold on, and
finding no end of obtaining, the more rich she grows, the more is her
beggerie. The Sun yields them heat, the deaw moisture, the rivers assuage
their thirst, and the earth affoordeth them beds; where carke and care
approach not near their couches, nor be their minds wearied or vexed with vain
cogitations. Pride has no power amongst them, being al men of one condition:
nor is any one oppressed with other bondage, but only this, that their bodies
prostrate themselves to do service to their souls. They make neither lime nor
brick wherewith to build them houses, but rather choose to inhabit in holes
dug in the earth, or under the hollownes of hills, where they neither fear
force of winds, nor rage of tempest: but suppose that the couerings of houses
are not so sure a defense against showers, as their holes, whereof they have a
double use; for they serve them for houses while they live, and for burial
when they die. Costly apparel they have none, but cover their members with
rushes, or to speak more truly, with shamefastness. Their women be not
adorned to please others, neither do they affect more beauty then they be
borne with: the men accompany with women, not for lust, but for love of
increase.

They have no war, but continual peace, which is confirmed not by force, but
by friendship: the father follows not his son to his sepulcher, nor is
there any monuments made for the dead, nor the ashes of their burned bodies
enclosed in costly coffins, which things they account as a punishment, not as
an honor unto them.

These Brachmans (as is said) be not oppressed with any pestilence or other
diseases, because they defile not the air with their beast-like acts: but with
them, nature is ever agreeable to the season, and the Elements hold on their
course without offense: a sparing and moderate diet is their purest Physic,
which is a ready medicine, not only to cure, but to prevent all diseases
whatsoever. Pastimes and Enterludes they affect not, but when they would view
any spectacle, they remember the monuments of things done, and bewail them as
most ridiculous.

They be not delighted (as many of us be) in old wives tales, but in the goodly
order of the frame of the world, and the disposition of natural things: they
have no traffic into other Countries, nor do they study the art of Elo
quence and Rhetoric, but have one simple and common Dialect amongst them,
teaching them only to speak the truth. They frequent neither Court nor
Schools, whose doctrine, being repugnant, defines nothing certain and stable.
Some of these people account honesty their Summum bonum, and some pleasure.
They kill no harmless beast to perform their divine Ceremonies, saying, that
God accepts not of sacrifices made with the blood of things polluted, but
that he is rather delighted in the unbloody sacrifice, and appeased by prayer,
for they hold that God is like men in this, to be delighted in his own likeness.

In India also be a people called Catheae, the men The people called Cathiae.
of that country have many wives, who (when their husband is dead) appeal to
the judgment of certain grave Judges, and plead their deserts toward their
deceased husbands, and she that by the sentence of the Judges is approved to
have been most officious and dear to her husband in his life time, goes away
rejoicing at her conquest, and attiring her self in her best apparel,
ascends the pyle, and lays her self down by the body of her husband,
embracing and kissing it, and contemning the fire, (when it is put to the pyle)
in respect of her chastity, she is there, with the carcass of her dead husband
consumed to ashes, and all the other wives survive with shame and infamy.
Their children be not brought up in their infancy according to the will of
their parents, but at the discretion of such as are publicly enjoined to that
business, who by their office are to look into their features and dispositions,
and if any be found slow or dul-spirited in their nonnage, or decrepit or weak
in any part of their bodies, they suffer them to live no longer, but kill them
outright. They marry their wives, not by wealth or Nobility, but by beauty:
and not so much for pleasure, as for procreation of children.

In some part of India is a custom used, that those that are not able, by
reason of poverty, to place their daughters in marriage, should bring them in
the prime and flower of their age into the common marketplace, playing before
them with pipes, and other instruments of music, where the multitude being
summoned and assembled together the maid coming near unto them, first
uncovers the hinder part of her body, up to the shoulders, and after that
the forepart, and then if any one conceiueth liking of her, she is given him
in marriage. Megasthenes writes, that upon certain hills in India, be a manner
of people with heads like dogs, armed and fenced with nails, and Monstrous and
prodigious people.
clothed with beasts hydes: they have no humane voice, but a sound like the
hoarse snarling or barking of dogs. Those which live about the river of
Ganges, eat no meat at all, but live only by the smell of wild apples. And
when they travel into other places remote, they take of those apples with
them, that the smell of the apples may preserve their lives: but if at any time
their bodies receive any noisome or stinking air, they die instantly: and some
of these people were said to live in Alexanders camp. We read of some people
in India that have but one eye, and of othersome that have such long ears, as
they hang down to their heels, and that they may lie down and infold
themselves in either of their ears, by the hardness whereof they pull up trees
by the roots: that there be some also that have but one foot, and that so
broad, as when they lie with their faces upwards, the shadow of their foot
defends them from the heat of the Sun. You may read in Ctesias the Cnidian
Physician, of certain women, that bring forth children but once in their life
time, and that their childrens heads become hoarie or gray, as soon as they be
borne: and that there is a kind of people whose hairs be hoarie or gray in
their youth, and wax black in their age, and yet they live longer then we do.
It is said also, that there is another sort of women, which bring forth
children when they be five years of age, and live not above the age of eight
years. There be some people that have no necks, and have their eyes in their
shoulders, and besides those which I have already spoken of, there be certain
wild people living in woods, with heads like dogs, and their bodies covered
with rough hair like bristles, and make a very hideous and terrible noise: but
these things and others of like kind, which are spoken and written of India,
and of the sundry sorts of people therein, (because he that should give credit
unto them, behooued to be of a very strong belief) are to be reported more
sparingly, lest those which read foreign writings, should be more nice,
unless they be moved thereunto with great earnestnes, to give credit to those
things, which are in a manner apparent before our eyes.

The Cathaeians do now inhabit that part of India, which The Cathaeians
lies betwixt Gedrosia, and the river Indus, which by them is now called
Cathaia. The people be of the Scythians race, in whom may be perceived great
alteration of manners, from that the Scythians were in the beginning, if all be
true which Armenius Aitonus reported of them in his History: For (says he)
they be very wise, and report of themselves, that of all men they only see and
discern with two eyes, and that all other people be altogether blind, or of
one eye at the least. The quickness of their wits is great indeed, but
their boasting and ostentation is greater.

They be generally persuaded, that they excel all men in the subtlety and
knowledge of arts: they be naturally white and pale of complexion, with little
eyes and no beards, they use letters in form like unto the Romain letters:
some of them be blinded in the folly of one superstition, and some in another;
but all be void of the true religion: for some adore the Sun, some the
Moon, some Idols made of metal, and many of them an ox: through which
diversity of false worshipping, monstrous superstition is dispersed throughout
the whole nation. They have no written laws, nor know not what faith is, and
though they show great wit in their works, yet have they no knowledge thereby
of divine matters. They be a timorous kind of people, and fear death greatly,
yet they make wars, but it is with more policy then fortitude. They use
darts in their wars, and other sorts of weapons, which to people of many
other nations be unknown. They have paper money foure-square, and stamped with
the Kings Image, which when it waxes old, they change with the king for coin
that is new stamped: their household stuff is of gold, silver, and other
metal. They have very little oil, and with that the kings do only use to
annoint themselves. And thus much of the Indians, now will we speak of the
Scythians, which be next unto the Indians.

Of Scythia, and of the barbarous manners of the Scythians. CAP. 9.
SCythia, a country in the North, was so Scythia, why so called.
called of Scytha, the son of Hercules, (as Herodotus reports:) but according
to Berosus, it was so called of another that was begotten of Scythia, of old
Araxis, who was the wife of Noa. These people at their first original
possessed but a small portion of ground, but afterward by their virtue and
valor, increasing by little and little, and subduing many nations, they obtained
in the end great glory and government: for first they being few in number, and
contemned for their baseness, contained themselves about the river Araxis, but
after they had gotten them a valiant Prince to be their king, they amplified
their possessions: so as now they enjoy all the vplandish, and hilly Countries,
unto Caucasus, and all the champion ground unto the Ocean, and Maeotis poole,
and other places even to the river of Tanais; from whence Scythia stretches
out in length toward the East, the hill Imaus lying in the middle, and
dividing it into two parts, makes thereof as it were two Scythias, whereof one
is called Scythia within the hill Imaus, the other, Scythia without Imaus.

The Scythians were never invaded, or at the least never vanquished by any
foreign government: for they forced Darius king of Persia most shamefully to
retire and fly from Scythia: they killed Cyrus with all his host, they
overthrew the Captain of Alexander the Great, with all his Company: and as
for the Romans, they might well hear of them, but they never felt their
forces. The people be of great strength of body, and very rude both in their
wars and works.

The Scythians at the first were not distinguished into Companies, nor severed
one from another, for that they neither possessed any grounds, nor had any
seats or houses to dwell in, but wandered through wilderness and desert
places, driving their flocks and herds of beasts before them, and carrying
their wives and children with them in carts. They were subject to no law, but
lived justly one with another of their own accords, and no offense throughout
their whole nation was accounted more heinous then theft, because their cattle
lay abroad in all men's sight, not enclosed with walls or hedges. They used
neither gold nor silver: milk and honey was their usual meat: they defended
their bodies against the extremity of cold with the skins of myce or rattes,
and other wild beasts. And the use of wool and woollen garments was unknown
unto them.

This was the manner of living of most of the Scythians, but not of all: for
many of them, as they be far distant from others in dwellings, so be they as
different in their manner of living, as maintaining customs peculiar to
themselves; of which hereafter we will relate in particular: for as yet we
shall speak of such customs as be general to them all.

Most of the Scythians delight in humane slaughter, for The Scythians delight
in humane slaughter
the first man a Scythian takes in the wars, his blood he drinks, and of
all those which he slays in battle, he presents the heads to the King:
for the heads being cut off, how ever he took them, he shall be partaker of
the prey, but not otherwise. And he cutteth off the head round like a circle
about the ears, and then shakes out al which is within the skull: after this
he pulls off the skin from the body, and mollifying it with his hands,
like the hyde of a beast, uses it as a mantle, and hangs it at his bridle
raines, triumphing and glorying of such a prey. And he which has the most of
those mantles, is adjudged the worthiest man. There be many also which sow men's
skins together, like beasts skins, and thereof make them short garments or
cloakes, and wear them. Some others flea the right hands of their slain
enemies, and with the same make couerings for their quiuers: and many flea the
whole bodies, and stretching out the skins upon blocks of wood, carry them
about upon their horses: the heads being cut off in this manner, as I have
said, they cover the utmost side of them with Ox leather, and those which be
rich, guild them within with gold, and so use them for pots to drink in.

And such men of estimation as give intertainement to strangers, will show unto
them, that those were the heads of such men as they had vanquished in the
wars, bragging thereof as a point of great manhood. Once every year all the
Princes and governors of the region, fill a pot full of wine, of which all the
Scythians which have slaughtered any of their enemies, do drink, but they
which have done no notable exploit, taste not thereof, but sit by without honor
or regard, which among them is the greatest ignominy that may be. And those
which have committed the most slaughters, shall drink of two pots which they
have there ready provided for the purpose. Their gods which they worship and
adore, are the virgin Vesta as principal: next unto her, Jupiter and Tellus,
(for Tellus they suppose The Scythian gods.
to be the wife of Jupiter) after these they honor Apollo, Venus, Mars, and
Hercules: but they think it not fit to make Idols, Altars, or Temples, to any
of these gods or goddesses, but only to Mars, to whom they sacrifice every
hundredth captive, to the rest of their gods they sacrifice beasts, and
especially horses. Hogs are in no account amongst them, neither breed they
any throughout the whole region. When the King punishes any man by death, he
spares none of his male-children, but slays them all, but he hurts no
womankind.

When the Scythians confirm friendship, or make a league or peace one with
another, they put wine into a great earthen pot, and then cutting some part of
their bodies which make the peace, with a knife, or with a sword, they mingle
their blood with the wine: after that, they dip their swords, arrows, axes,
and iauelins into the cup, which when they have done, they vow friendship one
to another with many protestations.

And then is the wine drunk up, not only by those which make the league, but
all their followers and partakers, which be of most dignity and estimation,
drink of it also. The manner of burial of Kings which is used of the people,
that inhabit about the river of Gerrus, where Borysthenes is now nauigable, is
in this manner: when their King is deceased, they dig a great foure-square
hole in the earth, and there lay him for a space, after that they take the dead
body and bowell it, and ceare it with wax, and fill it full of ozier branches
bruised, a sweet perfume called red Stirax, the seed of percely, smallage, and
annis-seeds, and so sow it up again, and then putting the carcass into a cart,
they convey it into another country, where it is used as before, and so
interred.

But the Scythians cut off their dead kings ears, clip his How the Scythians
bury their kings.
hair round, cut his arms about, wound him in the forehead and nose, strike
his left hand through with a dart, and then carry the carcass into another
nation, which is under their government, the people whereof attend upon them
unto another country. And when they have beheld all nations, and the kings
corpse with them, they leave it to be buried of those people that inhabit the
uttermost parts of their kingdom; who when they have put it into a coffin and
laid it upon a bed, they stick down certain spears, and laying him upon the
spears, cover him with a coat: then do they strangle one of his strumpets
which he loved most dearly in his life time, one groom, one cook, one
horse-keeper or muletor, one sergeant; one butler, or cupbearer, and one horse,
and bury them altogether, with golden cups, and the first fruits of all their
increase in the spatiousnesse of the Tomb or Sepulcher And when he has lain
there a year, they take the most near of the kings household servants: (and
all the Scythian servants attending on the king he free borne, and by him
commanded to serve: and no servant bought with money does minister to the king.)

And after they have strangled fifty of these menservants, and as many of the
best horses, the men's bowels being first taken out, and their garments
stretched abroad, and sowed together, they set up, round about the circuit of
the Kings tomb upon arched work, those fifty horses, and the servants
sitting upon their backs: so as they may seem afar off to the beholders,
like a troop of horsemen keeping their dead King. And this is the manner and
custom of interring and sepulture of their Kings in Scythia.

Private men also observe a certain custom in their burials: for when one
dies, all his neighbors laying him in a cart, carry him about to his
friends, and each one of his friends receiving him, makes a banquet, as well to
his neighbors and kinsfolk, as to the rest which accompany the coarse. His
body being thus carried from place to place, for the space of forty days,
is then interred, his head being first emptied and clean washed: above the
body they set three sticks bending one toward another, upon which they set
woollen cappes, as many as they can, and then they put the carcass into a chest
or coffin, made of one tree like a trough, and set it under the cappes, and so
fill up the coffin with bright stones.

The men of Scythia do never wash themselves, but their wives infusing water
upon their bodies, rub them against a rough stone, with Cypress, Cedar, or
the wood of Frankincense, and after their bodies are rubbed, and begin to
smell, they besmeare their faces over with medicines or ointments; these
ointments make them to have an odoriferous sme^^ And the next day after, they
remove those medicines, and make their faces clean and bright again.

Their manner of swearing and ministering an oath to others, is by the Kings
throne, whereby if any one be convinced of perjury, (by the Deuinors which
make trial thereof, with willow rods or wands) he is put to death without
delay, and forfeiteth all his goods to those which proved him perjured.

The Massagetae, a people of Scythia in Asia beyond the The Massagetae
Caspian sea, in apparel and living be very like unto these Scythians, and
therefore supposed of many to be Scythians indeed: They fight both on foot and
horseback, and in both sorts of fight be almost invincible. Their weapons be
darts and spears, and a certain sword or weapon which they usually wear
about them, called a sangar, they use gold in their belts, sword-hangars, and
head attires, and in guilding their pottes: they put upon their horses
breasts, brest-plates of gold, their bridles and trappings be all of gold, and
their speeres be poynted and their quiuers trimmed with Brass, for of Iron and
silver they have no use. Every one has his wife, and they accompany with women
openly, which is used by no other Scythians, but only they, if they be justly
accounted Scythians: for when any one there lusts after another woman, he
hangs his quiver at his chariot, and lies with her without shame. The people
have no time prefixed them how long they shall live, but when one waxes old, his
friends assemble together, and sacrifice him with certain sheep, and boiling
the flesh together make a banquet thereof. And this kind of death they account
most blessed: but they eat none which die by any disease, but bury them in the
ground, esteeming them damn^^, because they could not be sacrificed. They
neither sow nor plant any thing, but live of beasts and of fishes, which the
river Araxis affoords abundantly: their usual drink is milk. Of the gods they
worship only the Sun, to whom they sacrifice horses, thinking it fit to
sacrifice a beast of the greatest speed, to a star of the swiftest course.
The people called Seres in Scythia, of all The Seres in Scythia.
others live most courteously and quietly among themselves, they avoid the
company of all other men but themselves, and despise the intercourse of
merchandise with other countries: for their merchants have no communication for
buying and selling with strange Merchants, but only set down a price upon
their goods, and deliver them by rack of eye, without buying any thing of
others: with the^ is neither, whore, adulterer, nor thief brought to trial:
neither is any man there put to death at any time: but the fear of their laws
with the^ is of more force, then the constellatio^ of their natiuities. They
inhabit in the very beginning of the world, and that they may the better live
chastely, they be neither afflicted with canker or corruption, nor with hail or
pestilence. When a woman is conceived with child, no man requires her company,
nor till she be purified: no one eats unclean flesh: they know no
sacrifices, and all men judge of themselves according to justice and right:
wherefore they be not chastised with such punishments, as are inflicted upon
men for their offenses, but living a long space yield up their breaths without
sickness.

The Tauro-Scythians (so called of the hill Taurus about The Tauro-Scythians.
which they dwell,) sacrifice al those which suffer ship wrack unto a virgin
which they worship as a goddess: as also all the Greeks which be brought
thither, in this manner.

After they have finished their prayers, they cut off his head whom they mean
to sacrifice, and (as some say) throw his truncke headlong down a Rock (for
their Temple is situated upon a steep Rock) which done they nail the head
upon a cross or gybbet. Some agreeing that their heads be fastened to a
cross, as is said, do notwithstanding deny that their bodies be thrown
headlong down a Rock, but affirm that they bury them in the grownd.

The spirit or goddess to whom they doe-sacrifice, they term to be Iphigenia
the daughter of Agamemnon. Every one likewise cutteth off the heads of his
enemies, which he takes in the wars and carries them home to his house, and
fixing them upon poles sets them upon the highest part of his house, and for
the most part upon the funnel of the chimney, and the reason why they set them
so high, is for that they say the heads be the keepers and watchmen over the
whole house: these people live by rapine and stealth, and by the wars. The
Agathirsi be a very The Agathirsi.
exquisit and well addorned people, their garments for the most part be of
gold. Their women be common to them all, so as they be all cosins and
kinsfolk one to an other, there is neither envy nor strife amongst them, but
in their living they much resemble the Thracians.

The Neury use the Scythian customs: these in the Summer before Darius
expedition, were constrained (for The Neuri.
the multitude of serpents which engendered in their soil) to alter their
seat: they persuades themselves so firmly, as they will swear it to be
true, that for certain days every year they become Wolves, and again after
a while return into their former habit and shapes.

The Anthropophagi (that it is to say eaters of man's flesh) use the most savage
and rudest manners of all men: The Anthropophagi.
they have neither laws nor ordinances to live under, they exercise themselves
about cattle: there garments be like the Scythians, and they have a language
proper to themselves.

The Melanchlaeni go all of them in black attire, The Melanchlaeni.
(which is the cause they be so called) and as many of them as feed only on
human flesh, live after the manner of the Scythians.

The Budini be a great and populous nation, there Bodies be redish or yelowish,
and their eyes gray like Cats: The Budini.
The City Gelon (the people whereof be called Gelloni) is the chief city of
their Nation: They solemnised certain feasts every third year in honor of
Bacchus. They were once Greeks, but being removed from thence they seated
themselves in this Country, and their language they now use is a mixed speech
betwixt the Scythian and Greek tongue: The Budini differ from the Gelloni both
in life and language, for the Budini being borne in the Country, breed up
cattle and eat such fruits and herbs as the country naturally produces, but
the Gellony excercysing husbandry live upon corn, and plant orchards, and
gardens, and be nothing like the Budini, either in color or countenance: The
country is well stored with trees, and out of a great and huge poole which they
have, they take Ottors, Beuers and many other wild beasts, of whose skins they
The Lyrcae.
make themselves clothes. The Lyrcae line only by hunting which is on this
manner, they clime up into the tops of trees (which be very plentiful in that
country) and there lie in wait for wild beasts: each huntsman has his dog and
his horse, which be taught to couch down low upon their bellies, the better to
intrappe the wild beast, and after he which is in the tree top has spied the
beast and stroke him with a darte, he leaves the tree and pursues him on
horseback, with his dog, until he have taken him.

The Argyphaei inhabit under the bottoms of high The Argyphaei.
hills, they be a kind of people that be balde from their birthes, both men
and women, they have flat nostrells, a great chinne and a speech peculiar to
themselves: They be apparelled like the Scythians, and live by fruits of
trees, little caring for cattle, whereof they have no great store: They lodge
under trees, and in the Wintertime they wear white caps, but none in the
Summer: There is none that will wrong them, for they be accounted a sacred
people, possessing no weapons of defense: They determine such controversies as
arise amongst their neighbors, and whosoever flies unto them is in safety.

The Issedones were reported to use this custom, when The Issedones.
any man had his father deceased, all his kinsfolk presented him with beasts,
which when they had killed and cut in small pieces, they chopped his dead
father that invited them to the banquet in pieces also, and mingling all the
flesh together made thereof a solemn feast, then would they take the dead man's
head and flea it, and put out all the brains within the skull, and covering it
with gold, use it as an Idol doing unto him yearly ceremonies and sacrifices:
these things did the son to the father, and the father would do to his son
as the Greeks celebrate the days of their nativity.

These people also be accounted just, and that the wives be of equal
strength with their husbands: And such heretofore were the manners of the
Scythians: but afterward being subdued by the Tartarians, they followed their
fashions, and live now like unto them, and be all called by one name
Tartarians.

Of Tartaria, and of the customs and power of that people. CAP. 10.
TARTARIA (which according to Vincentius is also called Mongal) is situated
The situation of Tartaria.
in the North-east part of the world, and has upon the East the land of the
Cathaians and Solangans, upon the South the Sarrasins, the Naymans upon the
West, and is compassed on the North with the Ocean sea: it is called Tartaria
of the River Tartar which runeth through it, and the Country for the most part
is very Tartaria why it is so called.
mountanous and full of hills: as much of it as is Champion, is so mingled
with sand and gravel, as it is very barren, but only where it is watered
with running waters, which be very rare and geason: And for this cause it is
much of it desert and vn-inhabited with people.

There be no Cities or great towns in the whole country, but only one called
Cracuris: and wood is so scarce in most places there, as the inhabitants be
constrained to burn and boil their meat with horsdung and beasts dung. The
weather there is very intemperate and most strange, for in the Summertime they
have such horrible and terrible thunders and lightnings, as many men die for
very fear: it is even now marvelous hot and by and by there will be extreme
cold and snowes: and the storms and winds oftentimes be so boisterous, as
people be not able to ride against them, but that they blow men down from
their horses, pull trees up by the roots, and do the people many and great
damages: It never raineth there in Winter, and but seldom times in Summer,
and then so small a rain as it scarce moystneth the earth.

The Country otherwise abounds with all kinds of Tartaria abounds with
cattaile.
beasts as Camels, Oxen and such like, and laboring beasts and Horses in such
abundance, as it is thought that all the residue of the world has scarce so
many besides. Tartaria was first inhabited of four sundry sorts of people,
Four sorts of Tartarians.
one sort whereof were called Iecchamongall, that is to say great Mongals, the
second Sumongall which is watery Mongals, and those called themselves also
Tartars of the river Tartar, near which they dwelled, the third were called
Merchat, and the fouth Metrit, they had all like form and lineaments of body,
and spoke all one language.

The ancient Tartarians were of a rude behavior, and lived without manners,
laws or other ornaments of life, and being of an obscure name, and very
basely esteemed of amongst all the Scythians, followed their cattaile, and
paid tribute unto them for their dwellings.

Shortly after, this people being divided as it were into certain tribes or
kindreds, were first ruled by captains, who had the sole government over them,
they paying tribute notwithstanding to their next bordering neighbors the
Naymans: But when by a certain Oracle they had elected and created Canguista
their first King, he taking Canguista first King of Tartaria.
upon him the Empire, did first abolish the worship of all evil spirits and
false gods, and made an Edict that all the Nation should worship the true God,
by whose providence he would have all men think, that he received his
Kingdom. He commanded likewise that all that by their age were able to bear
arms, should be ready to attend the King at a certain day, where when they
were assembled, the army was distributed in this manner. First that the
Decurions which were captains over ten soldiers, should obey the
centurions, which were captains over an hundred foote-men, the centurions
should be obedient to those which were Captains and Coronels of a thousand
men, and those again should be at the command, of those which were governors
of ten thousand: and then to try the strength of his Empire, and to have
experience of his subjects hearts, he commanded that seven of those Princes
or Governors sons, which ruled the people before he was ordained King,
should be slain by the hands of their own fathers.

This command of the King the fathers fulfilled (although it seemed very bitter
and cruel) both for fear of the multitude, and also for religions sake, for
they verily believed that the God of Heaven was first author and instituor of
their Kingdom, and that if they should not perform his command, they should
not only transgress and violate the law of a King, but the law of God also.
Canguista being thus fortified, and putting confidence in his power, first
subdued by battle the Scythians, which were next unto him, and made them
tributary, and with them, all those to whom the Tartarians themselves before
that time paid tribute: from thence going forward to people more remote, he
had such prosperous and happy success in the wars, as he subdued with his
forces all Kingdoms, Countries and Nations from Scythia to the Sun rising,
and from thence to the mediterranean sea, and beyond, so as now he may justly
be said, to be Lord and Emperor of all the East: The Tartarians of all men be
most deformed in body, they be for the most part little men, having great eyes
standing far out of their heads, and so much covered with eyelids, as the
sight or opening of the eye is marvelous little: their faces be broad and
without beards, except that they have some few straggling hairs upon their
upper lips and chinnes, they be all of them commonly slender in the waste, and
shave all the hinder parts of their heads from one ear to the other, and
up to the crown, they wear the rest of their hairs long like unto our
women, of which long hair they make two strings or cords, bynding or winding
them over both their ears, and in this manner be all Tartarians shaued, and
all those people also which live amongst them.

Moreover they be very nimble and active of body, good horsemen, but bad
footmen, and they never go afoote, but the poorest of them, whither ever he
has occasion to go, rydeth either on horse or oxe-backe; their women ride
also upon geldings, and such as will not strike or kick: their bridles be
richly decked with gold, silver and precious stones.

They hold it a glorious thing to have little belles hanging about their horse
necks, they have a very ill favored and clamerous kind of speech: for when
they sing they howl like Wolves, and when they drink they shake their heads,
and they drink very often and for the most part until they be drunk, for to
be drunk they account a great commendations unto them.

They neither dwell in Cities nor Towns, but in the fields under tents and
Tabernacles, after the ancient custom of the Scythians. They be (for the
most part) all shepherds and heardsmen: In Winter they lie in the plain and
champion grounds, and dwell upon the hills in Summer, living there upon the
profits of the pastures; They make themselves mansion places in manner of tents
or pauillions, either of little sprouts or twigges, or else of cloth sustained
up with small timber, in the middle whereof they make a round window, which
serves both to give light and to let out the smoke, and they make fires for
all uses, the men take great delight in shooting and wrestling. They be
wonderful good huntsmen, and be armed from the top to the toe when they go
a hunting, and when they see any wild beast, they presently enclose him in
round about on every side, and stopping and hindering him with darts, kill
him and so take him by that means: bread they have none, and therefore they
have no use of bakeing, neither do they use any towelles, napkins nor
tableclothes: They believe that there is one God, and that he is the maker and
author of all things visible and invisible, yet do they not worship him with
any ceremonies or religious rites, but rather making themselves certain
Idols, either of cloth or of silk in the form of men, and placing them upon
each part of their Pauilions, pray unto them to be defenders of their Cattle,
and giving them great reverence, offer unto them of the milk of al their
sheep and Cattle, and before they begin either to eat or drink any thing,
they set part thereof before those Idols: what beast soever they kill to eat,
they lay his heart in a platter all night and in the morning boil it and eat
it, they worship also and do sacrifice unto the Sun, the Moon, and the
four elements, and most religiously adore Cham their King and Lord, esteeming
him to be the Son of God, and to him the do sacrifice and attribute so much
honor, as they suppose him to be the worthiest man in all the world, nor will
the suffer any one else to be compared unto him: all other people they do so
much contemn and despise, and think themselves so far excelling others in
wisdom and goodness, as they scorn to speak unto them, but drive them from
them with rebukes and disdain.

They call the Pope and all Christian men dogs and Idolaters because they
worship stocks and stones, they be much given to Diuilish and Magike arts,
and observing dreams have their wise men to expound and interpret them, who do
ask and receive answers of their Idols, for they persuade themselves that
GOD has conference with their Idols, and therefore they do all things by
Oracles, they observe certain times, and especially when the change of the
Moon is, yet they do worshipppe nor honor no one time before another,
either by Feasting or Fasting, but esteem of all alike.

The Tartarians be so much given to coueteousnesse and avarice, as when any
one of them sees a thing, that he has a desire to, if he may not have it by
the good will of the owner, he takes it by force, so it be not belonging to
one of their own country men, supposing it lawful so to do, by the
commandment and ordinance of their Kings, for they have this power given them
by Canguista and Cham their first Kings, that what Tartarian soever, or
Tartarian servant, shall find upon the way any horse, or meet any man or
woman not having the Kings pasport, or letters of safe conduct, he may
challenge them to himself and ever after use them as his own.

They will lend no money to those that want, but for an excessive and
intolerable gain, as taking a penny for ten pence for every months use,
and usury upon usury if the payment be deferred, and they molest and grieve
those which be tributary unto them, with such payments and exactions, as it
was never read of any nation that did the like, It is incredible to be
reported how they covet and extort, as if they were lords of all, but give
nothing, not so much as an alms to beggars, yet in this they are to be
commended, that they exclude and put back noe guest that comes to them to
dinner or supper; but rather inuit them and give them to eat very courteously
and charitably.

They be of a very unclean diet, for they have neither table-clothes nor
napkins as is said, neither do they wash their hands, bodies nor apparel.
They make no bread for they eat none, neither do they eat herbs or any
kind of grain but the flesh of all beasts, as dogs, cattes, horses and
rattes, and to show their barbarous cruelty and desire of revenge, they
sometimes roast or broyle the bodies of their captive enemies upon the fire,
and in their sollemne bankets tear and devour them with their teeth like
wolves; and saving their bludds, power it into a pot and drink it, and
sometimes also they drink milk, the country yields noe wine, but what is
brought to them from other places, and that they drink most greedily, they
eat the vermin from one another heads, or other places, in eating whereof
they use to say these words sic inimicis nostris faciam, this will I do unto
our enemies.

It is accounted a great offense, that either meat or drink should be
spoiled, and therefore they throw not their bones to dogs before they have
taken out the marrow, they be so sparing and niggardly as they will eat no
beast while he is whole and sound, but when they be lame or begin to languish,
either through age or some other infirmity.

They be exceeding frugall and thrifty and content with a little, insomuch as
they will drink in the mornig a bole or two of milk, and sometimes neither
eat nor drink more of all the day after. The men and women be almost
apparelled alike, for the men wear How the Tartarians are apparrelled.
shallow Miters upon their heads, made blunt before, and a tail or labell
hanging down behind, of a hand breadth in length, and as much in breadth; and
that they may stay upon their heads, and not be blown of with the wind, they
have strings sowed to them about the ears; and those they tie under their
chins. The married women wear upon their heads a certain round cappe, made
like a basket of a foot and a half in length, and plain upon the top like
a barrel, wrought either of party-coulered silk, or of Peacocks feathers, and
adorned about with great store of gold and precious stones, upon the rest of
their bodies they wear such garments as their abilities be able to afford
them, the richer sort of women go in Purple and silk, and their husbands
likewise: their coats be of a very strange fashion, for the slitte or hole
whereby they put them off and on is upon the left side, and buttoned with
four or five buttons. In the Summer they wear black garments, and in Winter
and rainy wether, white, and their clothes come down no lower then their
knees: they wear garments also made of skins, but not as we do with the
hayrie side inwards, but with the flesh sides toward their bodies, and the
hayrie sides outward, showing the hair for comeliness and decency: maids by
their apparel can hardly be discerned from married women, nor the married
women, be distinguished from the men, for there is no great difference betwixt
them, either in habit or behavior, for all wear breeches alike. When they
prepare themselves to the wars, some of them cover their arms (which
otherwise be naked) with iron plates lincked together with Letherne thongs,
and some with diverse foldes of Lether, with which also they make defenses for
their heads: shields they have none, and but few of them either lances, or
long swords: yet they have swords, but not above the length of ones arm, and
made with an edge upon the one side like back-swords wherewith when they fight,
they strike with that side which is sharp, they be very light and perfect
horsemen, and marvelous good archers, and he is accounted of the greatest
courage and valor which is most obedient unto government.

They serve in the wars without wages, and be very subtle and cunning both
in the wars and other businesses, and ready to take upon them any charge, or
to undergo any matter of importance whatsoever, the Captains and governors
enter not into the battle themselves but standing aloof incourrage and
exhort their soldiers diligently, foreseeing and considering what is necessary
to be done, and to the end their army may seem the greater, and more terrible
to the enemy, they bring their wives and children into the army with them, and
sometimes the images of men set fast upon horses, nor do they think it a
disgrace for them to fly if it be either behouefull, or necessary: when they
shoot they disarme their right arms, and then their darts fly with such
vehement forces, as they will perce any kind of armor: they begin the battle
in order, and keep their array in retyring even, then destroying and slaying
with their darts their enemies which pursue them, and if they perceive the
number of those which pursue them to be but small, they suddenly return into
the battle, wounding with their darts both men and horse, and even then they
get the greatest conquest, when they were thought to have been conquered: When
they intend to invade or make war upon any country, they divide their army
into sundry companies and give the assault on every side, so as they can
hardly be incountred or resisted, nor any of the inhabitants escape; and by
this policy they have always the victory in their own own hands.

And they use their victory very proudly and cruelly sparing neither old men,
women, nor children, but put all to the sword without difference, artificers
only excepted, which they reserve to work for them. They divide them to be
slain by the Centurions, assigning to every servant for his part of the
slaughter, ten, or more, or less, as the number of the Captives be, which
when they have butchered with Axes, like Swine, for a greater terror to others,
they take every thousand Captive, and turning his head downe-wards, hang him up
by the heels upon a stake made fast in the ground, in the middle of those
which be slain, as if he should then admonish and advise his friends, whilst
the most of those murderers, approaching to the slain bodies, do with their
mouths swill up the blood which springs from their green wounds.

They keep their faith and promise with none, how ever they be obliged unto
them, but rage toward their own subjects in this manner, and far more
grievously: It is lawful for them to deflowre as many young Virgins as they
will or can get, and those which be any thing beautiful, be carried away
with them, and constrained to serve continually in extreme penury of all
things. The Tartarians of all men be most incontinent, for although they may
marry as many wives as they will, or as they be able to keep, and that they
be not forbidden marriage with any degree of affinity, or consanguinity
(mothers, daughters, and sisters only excepted) yet be they exceedingly given
to the sin of Sodom, accompanying both with their own sex and with beasts,
as vilely as the Sarrasins, without either difference or punishment: They
account not the woman which they marry for their wife, nor yet receive her
dower before she has had a child, and if she be barren it is lawful for
them to put her a way and to marry another. And this is strange, that although
many women have but one husband, yet they never fall out for him amongst
themselves, although one be preferred before another, and he sleeps now
with one, and by and by with another, and every one of these wives have their
abiding place by themselves, and every one keeps her own family. They live
most chaste from other men's wives, for as well the men as women which be taken
in adultery, suffer death by their law: those men which be not trained up in
the wars, keep Cattle in the fields, practice hunting and wrestling,
without doing any other domestical business but commit all to women upon
whose care it rests to provide all things necessary both for victuals and
clothing.

This nation observes many superstitions, for to put a knife into the fire, or
at the least to let it touch the fire, or to pull flesh out of a pot with a
knife, is held a great offense, moreover they cut nothing with a hatchet near
unto the fire, least they should hurt it any manner of way, for they honor the
fire most religiously, persuading themselves that therewith all things ought
to be purified and cleansed.

They greatly abhore to lay either their body or arms, when they sleep or
take their rest, upon a whippe wherewith they drive their horses, (for spurs
they use none) or to tuch their darts with a whip; and young men do not only
avoid the killing of birds, but the taking of them also: they will not beat a
horse with his bridle nor break one bone with an other, nor yet spend either
meat or drink out of measure and especially milk, noe one dare piss within
his pauillion or mansion house, for if any one do it abstinately, he is put to
death without mercy, but if necessity constrain one to do it, as oftentimes
it happens, then the tent or pauilion wherein it was done, and all things
within it, ought to be purged and cleansed, on this manner: First they make two
fires three paces distant one from another, betwixt which they fasten two
forkes or iauelins upright in the ground, by each fire one, then drawing a cord
from the one fire to the other, they carry forth through the middle of the
iauelins, as it were through a gate, all things which are to be purified, two
women (to whom the business is committed) standing upon the other side, one
over against an other, casting water upon the stuff, and muttering out
certain verses to themselves.

No stranger is admitted into the kings presence, of what estate or dignity
soever he be, and be his business of never so much importance, unless he be
first purified: he that spurneth with his foot at the threshould of the
pauillion, wherein the Emperor, or any Prince dwells, is slain in the very
place: moreover if any one bite a bit of any thing which he cannot swallow
down, but is forced to vomit it up again, all the people fall upon him, and
digging a hole under his pauillion drag him through it, and so kill him most
cruelly, there be many other such frivolous things which they account as sins
that cannot be purged, or appeased, but to kill a man, to enter upon another
man's possession, to take other men's goods violently, without right or equity,
and to neglect the commandments of God, they account as little or no offenses.

They believe that after this life they shall live eternally in an other world,
but what that world is they cannot describe, and that they shall there be
rewarded according to their merits. When any one is sick, and draws near
unto death, they set a spear at the tent door, wherein he lies, with a
black cloth at the end of it, to the end that those which pass by, seeing it,
may forbear to enter in, and no one dare come in though he be called, if he
see the spear: but when the sick person is dead, all his family meeting
together carry the coarse privily out of the tent, into a place (chosen before
for the purpose) where is made a great large pit, in which pit they build a
little pauillion, and set in it a table furnished with diverse dishes of meat,
then setting thereat the dead corpse attired with rich and gorgious garments,
they forthwith cover them altogether with earth, he has also one laboring
beast, and one trapped horse buried with him: The great men choose out one
servant in their life time, upon whom they set their own mark, with a marking
iron, to be intombed with him when he is dead, and this they do, that they
may make use of them in an other world. After all this, the man's friends that
is dead take an other horse, and killing him, and eating his flesh, and then
filling the hide full of hay, and sowing it up again, they set it upon four
stakes upon the topp of the Sepulcher, to show that there the dead man lies,
which done, the women burn the horses bones for the expiation of the dead man's
ghost. But the richer sort cut the horse hide into slender thongs, and
extending them in length, measure out therewith a circuit of ground round
about their dead friends Sepulcher, believing that the dead man shall obtain
so much ground in an other world, as by his friends shall be measured out unto
him, with those thongs: all these ceremonies performed, upon the thirtith day
they leave of their mourning.

There be some Tartarians which be a kind of Christians but very bad ones, and
these to hasten their fathers deaths Some Tartarians are Christians, but very
bad ones.
when they wax old, cram and feed them with fat meat, and when they be dead
burn them, and gathering up the ashes as clean as they can, esteem them as a
very precious relicke, seasoning their meat daily therewith. Now with what
pomp and iollity the Tartarians after the death of their King, elect and
appoint another in his room, because it is ouer-troublesome to be writ at
large, and perhaps as tedious to be read, I will unfold in few words: the
Princes, Dukes, Barons, and all the people of the kingdom, How the Tartarlans
elect their Kings.
assembling themselves together in a place in the open fields, fit and
accustomed for that purpose, place him to whom the kindome is due, (either by
succession or election) in a throne of gold, and all of them prostrating
themselves before him, cry out with a loud voice, and with one consent, in this
manner. We wish, will, and command thee, to be our governor, to whom he
answers; If you will have it so, I must needs be content, but then be you
ready to do what ever I command, to come when I call you, to go whether I send
you, and who ever I bid to be slain to do it without fear, and to give and
commit all the whole kingdom into my hands: and when they have answered, we
are ready and willing: he says again unto them; you shall hereafter stand in
as much awe of my word, as of my sword, at which speech the people give a great
applause: then the Princes taking him from his Kingly throne, and causing him
to sit down humbly upon a cloth laid upon the ground, say thus unto him;
look upwards toward heaven and acknowledge God, and behold downwards the
cloth, whereon thou sit, if thou govern well, thou shall have all things
according to thine own desire, but on the other side, if thou rule naughtily,
thou shall be so humbled and spoiled of all thou have, as thou shall not have
left thee so much as this little cloth, whereon thou sit: which said they
give unto him that wife which he loves best, and lifting them up both together
upon the cloth, salute him as Emperor of all the Tartarians and she as
Empress, then is he forthwith presented with gifts from all people, over whom
he is Emperor, and all those things which the dead King lest behind him, be
brought unto him likewise, of which the new Emperor gives unto each Prince
some, and commands the rest to be kept for himself, which done, he
dissolueth the company: all things be in the Kings hands and power, no man can
or dare say this is mine, or that is his, nor no one may dwell in any part of
his dominion, but where he is assigned; the Emperor himself distributeth a
proportion of land to the Dukes, the Dukes to those which be Captains of
thousands, the Captains of thousands to the governors of hundreds, the
governors of hundreds to the rulers of ten, and the rulers of ten, distribute
to all the rest. The seal which the King uses has this inscription, Deus in
coelo and Chuichuth Cham in terra: the strength of God, and Emperor of all men.
He has five very strong and puissant armies, and five Dukes by whom he makes
war with all that refist him, he never speaks with the Legates or
ambassadors of other nations, nor admits them into his presence, unless
both they and their gifts (for without gifts they dare not come) be first
purged by certain women asfigned to that business: he answers in the middle
of the people, and all men to whom he speaks ought to listen unto him,
kneeling upon their knees, when and how long soever his speech be, and so
diligently to attend his words as they misconster not his meaning in any point,
for it is not lawful for any to alter the Emperors words, nor in any sort to
contradict or gainsay the sentence he pronounces: he never drinks in any
public assembly, nor yet any other Tartarian Prince, unless some do sing and
play unto him upon a harp before he drink, and men of great worth when they
ride, are shadowed with a certain fan or curtain, fastened to a long spear
and carried before them, which custom is said to be used also by the women: And
these were the customs and manner of living of the people of Tartary, about two
hundred years sithence.

The Georgiani (whom the Tartarians overcame much about that time) were
worshippers of Christ; observing The Georgians a kind of Christians.
the custom of the Greek Church, they dwelt near unto the Persians, and
their dominion extended a length ways, from Palestine to the Caspian hills:
they had eighteen Bishoprics, and one Catholic or universal Bishop, who
was instead of a Patriarch: at the first they were subject to the Patriarch of
Antioch, the men be very warlike, their Priests heads be shaven round, and the
laymen four square; some of their women were trained up in the wars, and
served on horseback. The Georgians having disposed their armies, and entering
into the battle, were wont to carouse a gourd as big as ones fist, filled
full of the best wine, and then to set upon their enemies with greater courage:
The Clergy be much addicted to usury and symonie; there was mutual and
perpetual enmity betwixt the Armenians and them. The The Armenians were
Christians likewise, till they were vanquished by the Tartarians
Armenians were Christians also, until the Tartarians, after they had subdued
the Georgians ouer-came them likewise, but they disagreed in many things from
the faith, and approved fashion of the true Church: they knew not the day of
our Lords nativity, for they observed no feasts, nor no vigils, nor yet the
four Ember weeks, they feasted not upon Easter Eve, alleging that Christ
rose from the dead, about the evening of that day: they would eat flesh upon
every Friday, betwixt the feasts of Easter and Penticost, yet they fasted much,
beginning their fast so strictly and precisely in Lent, as they would neither
use oil, wine, nor fish, upon Fridayes and Wednesdayes throughout the whole
Lent, holding it a greater sin to drink wine on those days, then to lie
with a strumpet in a brothell house: Upon Mondayes they abstained wholly from
all meats, upon Tuesdayes and Thursdayes they did eat once, and received no
sustenance at all upon Wednesdayes and Fridayes, but upon Saterdayes and
Sundays they would eat flesh, and refresh themselves well. They would not
celebrate the office of the Mass throughout all Lent but upon Saterdaies and
Sundaies, nor upon Fridayes throughout the whole year, for thereby (as they
were of opinion) they brake and violated their fasts: Infants moreover of the
age of two months, and all others whatsoever were indifferently admitted to
their communion, and they put no water into the Sacrifice. In the use of Hares,
Bears, Choughes, and such other like creatures, they imitated the Jews, as
well as the Greeks, they celebrated their Masses in glass and wodden
Chalices, and some having no paraments nor Priest-like vestiments at all, some
of them also wore Miters belonging to Deacons or Subdeacons: both Clergy and
Laymen, allowed of usury and Symony, as well as the Georgians: the Priests
exercised themselves in Diuinations and Negromancie, they used more drinking
then lay men, and all of them had, or might have wives, but after the death of
one wife, as well laymen as the clergy men were prohibited to marry again,
the Bishops gave liberty to any to put away their wives that were sound in
adultery, and to marry an other: they believed not that there is a purgatory,
and obstinately denied that there was two natures in Christ. The Georgians
report, that they erred in thirty articles from the right path and diameter of
Christian religion.

Of Turcia, and of all the manners, laws and ordinances of the Turks. CHAP.
11.
THat country which is now called Turcia or Turkey, has upon the East the
greater Armenia, The limits of Turkey.
and extends to the Cilicke sea, upon the North it is bounded with the Euxine
sea: Aitonus calls it Turquia, it consists of many Provinces, as Lycaonia,
wherein Iconium is the chief town; Cappadocia, where Cesaria is chief city
of the Province; Isauria where Seleucia is head; Licia now called Briquia:
Ionia now called Quiscum, wherein stands the city of Ephesus, Paphlagonia
where Germanopolis, and Lenech where Trapezus be chief cities: All this vast
country which is now called Turcia, is not inhabited by one only people, but
by Turks, Greeks, Armenians, Turkey inhabited by people of sundry nations.
Sarrasins, Iacobitans, Nestorians, Jews and Christians, all of them for the
most part, living after the laws and institutions, which that false Prophet
Mahomet a Sarrasin, ordained for the people of Arabia, in the year of Mahomet
his parentage.
our Savior Christ 631. This Mahomet some say was an Arabian, some a Persian,
but whether he was it is doubtful, but his father was certainly a worshipper
of evil spirits and his mother an Ismaelite, and therefore not ignorant in the
true law: now whilst his father and mother instructed him in both their laws,
they distracted the boy, and made him doubtful and wavering betwixt both, so
as being trained up in both religions, when he grew of man's estate, he
followed neither of them, but being a very crasty fellow, and of a subtle wit,
and long conversant with Christians, he framed and invented out of both those
laws, a religion most dangerous and pernicious to all mankind. First he
affirmed, that the Jews did very ill in denying that Christ should be borne of
a Virgin, seeing that the Prophets, men of wonderful sanctity and integrity of
life, and endued with the spirit of God, did long before prophecy and soreshew
that it should be so, and that he was to be expected: on the other side, he
condemned the Christians folly, in believing that Jesus the dearest friend of
God, and borne of a Virgin, would suffer reproaches and punishments of the
Jews: Martinus Segonius Nouomontanus has written thus of the Sepulcher of
Christ our King and Lord. The Sarrasins and Turks (says he) (by the ancient
preaching of Mahomet) laugh the Christians to scorn, which attribute any honor
to that Sepulcher, affirming that the great Prophet Christ proceeded from the
spirit of God, that he was void of all earthly blot or sin, and that he he
shall come to be judge of all people, but that they may approach unto his true
Sepulcher, they utterly deny, because his glorious body, conceived by the
divine spirit, was altogether impassible: thus much has Segonius written, and
more to the same purpose, which the Mahometans are wont to cast in our teeth,
with as much folly as impiety: when that false Prophet Mahomet had infected his
people and nation, with these pestilent evils, he made and established a law,
and (least by men of understanding it might be resisted and abrogated) he
ordained a capital punishment against the breakers thereof, commanding and
decreeing in his Alcaron, that no one should presume upon pain of death to
dispute thereof, by which ordinance and decree, it appeared most evidently,
that in that law was no sincerity, which as a hidden mystery he covered and
sealed up so closely, that all men were forbidden to meddle with it, so as the
people should not by any means know what that was which he had done. In the
doing Sergius the Munck a helper of Mahomet.
whereof, and in settling his new sect, he chiefly used the council and help
of Sergius a Monk, and a Nestorian heretic: and to the end his law might be
more populer and better esteemed of all nations, he took something Mahomets
laws compounded of diverse sects.
out of all sects, of every nation, holding first that Christ is much to be
praised, and affirming him to be a man of great sanctity, and of singular
virtue, and that he was of more then human condition, calling him sometimes
the word, sometimes the spirit, and sometimes the very soul, life, or breath
of God, and that he was borne of a Virgin: then did he greatly extol the
Virgin Mary, assenting to the miracles written by the Evangelists, so far as
they disagreed not from his Alcaron. The Gospels he said were corrupted by the
Apostles Disciples, and therefore ought to be corrected by his Alcaron, and the
more to win and allure the minds and affections of the Christians unto him, he
would needs be baptized by Sergius, and then to procure the good will of other
sects, he denied the Trinity with the Sabellians, affirming with the Manechees,
that there were but two persons in divinity: he denied that the Son is
equal to the Father with Eunomius; with Macedonius he held that the holy Ghost
is a creature: with the Nicholites, that it is lawful for one man to have many
wives, and he allowed of the old Testament, although (said he) it is faulty in
many places: with these circumstantiall tales, he covered an incredible
allurement wherewith men's minds be sonest intysed, which was, the giving to
his people free liberty and power to pursue their lusts and all other
pleasures, for by these means, this pestilent religion has crept into
innumerable Nations, so as now how few the number of true believers is, in
respect of the great multitude of misbeleeuers, may well be gathered by this.
That not all Europe profess Christ, but the greatest part thereof, together
with all Asia and Affricke, believe in Mahomet and his accursed religion.

The Sarrasins which first embraced the impiety and madness of that false
prophet Mahomet, inhabited in that part of Arabia which is called Petrea, there
where the land upon the one side joins to Iudaea and Aegipt, and they be
called Sarrasins of a place called Sarracus near unto the people called
Nabathei, or (as they themselves would have it) of Sara the wife of Abraham,
whereupon they yet persuade themselves, that of all men they be the ligitimate
and sole successors of the divine promise. Some of them were husbandmen, some
followed their flocks, but the greatest part were soldiers, and being hired
and retained by Heraclius to serve in the Persian wars, and finding
themselves deceived by him, after he had obtained the victory, they (incenced
with ire and ignominy) departed thence into Syria, having a Mahomet for their
captain and councellor, where they won Damascus, and then, their army and
provision necessary for the wars increasing more and more, they made wars
upon Aegipt and brought it to subjection, after that they subdued Persis,
Antioch and Jerusalem, and so augmenting and increasing every day both in fame
and force, void of all fear of any that could resist them, the Turks, a
cruel and barbarous nation of Scythia, being by their neighbors expulsed
from the Caspian hills, descending by the narrow passages of the hill Caucasus,
first into Asia the less, and after that into Armenia, Media and Persis, by
their force and arms brought all those people under their subjection and
government, when the Sarrasins to defend the confins of their Country, went
forth to meet the Turks, but being not able to make their party good and to
encounter them, they were in very short time brought to such desperations, as
they were contented the Turks should reign with them in Persia, so as the
would embrace the faith of Mahomet: so as whether nation had the greater loss
can hardly be judged, either they that departed from such a Kingdom, or those
which for desire of rule were forced to receive so pestilent a religion.

And both Nations being thus bound with the bonds of one religion, were for a
space so confounded in name, as there was no difference betwixt Turks and
Sarrasins, yet now the name of Turks is only known and the other utterly
abolished and forgotten: There be diverse sorts of horsemen that serve in the
wars amongst the Turks: As first the Thimarcini, which be such The manner
of the Turks warfare.
as dwell in Cities and pay tribute, and are to the number of fourscore
thousand: and these by the Kings leave and permission possess (in the nature
of pay or wages) towns, villages and castles, each one as he deserves, and
be ever ready at the call of the Sensachus (that is he, that is captain of
that Province to whom they pay tribute:) they be now divided into two armies,
one in Asia, the other in Europe, under the conduct of two great captains,
whereof one governs in Asia and the other in Europe: Which captains in their
Countries speech be called Bassaes: the other sort of soldiers be natural,
and are called Aconiziae: These serve in the wars without wages, and always
go before the company of footmen for prey, yielding the fifth part of their
prey unto the King, in the name of the chief captains or generals part of
the booty, and of these there be about the number of some forty thousand.

The third sort be the Charrippi, the Spahiglani and the Soluphtari, the best
of which be they Charippi, and the most famos soldiers in dignity; these
continually attend upon the King, and be about eight hundred in number, all
elected out of the Scythians and Persians, and of no other nation else, and
these are to fight venterously, in the presence of the King when need requires.

The Spahi and Soluphtari, are such as at the first when they were children
attended upon the King to do some vile and dishonorable business, but when
they once become to be of man's estate, the King gives them power to marry
wives, so as they growing greater by their wives dower and by their wages, do
for the most part execute the Office of Orators, garding and attending upon
each side of the King, when he goes abroad, and of these there be a
thousand and three hundred: out of this order be elected, for the most part,
all the chief Governors, and men of great authority and dignity.

There be three orders of footmen, first the Ianizaries, Three sorts of
footmen.
who while they be young under the age of twelve years, be elected out of the
whole Empire by the Serchers, Inquisitors or Muster-maisters, and for a space
trained up in military discipline in public places of exercise, and then
sent into the wars clothed in short garments, and round cappes, turning
upwards, and armed with shields, swords and bows, these defend the camps and
besiege Cities, and are more in number then twenty thousand.

The Asappi be of the second order, which be footmen armed with a light armor,
they use swords, shields and long spears, and wear red caps to distinguish
them from the Ianizaries, these gal the enemies horses in battle, and the
number of them is answerable to the greatness of the army, and at the least
4000. of them go with the King, and it is decreed that their wages shall
surcease, when the wars are ended. The regal army consists of two hundred
thousand fighting men, but the company of footmen, which be either voluntaries,
or such as have bin dismissed from the wars, and be sommoned to serve again,
serve without wages, and with these be mixed slaves, pages, skullions and
drudges, carpenters, pioners and victuallers of the camp. These make ways
even and plain in rugged and rough places, build bridges over rivers and
pooles, erect Rampires and Bulwarks against the enemy, and make all others
things ready, which be profitable for the assaulting and conquering of Cities:
Usurers, Bankers, Exchangers and Brokers that sell garments for soldiers, and
an infinite rabble of such like people, follow the camp also, least any thing
should be wanting that is necessary for the soldiers.

But their is no one thing so much to be admired and wondered at in that
people, as their celerity in action, their constancy and perseverance in
dangers, and their obedience of government: for they loose their lives for the
least offense that is: they will swim deep rivers and whitlepits, clime the
steepest hills, and when they be commanded run headlong through thick or thin,
rough or smooth, not so much regarding their lives as the will of the
commander: they most patiently endure both watching and want, their is no
sedition, no tumult, no clamors or outcries raised in their armies, and in the
night time there is such continual and hushed silence in their camps, as they
will rather suffer captives to escape, then to have any tumults or hurly burly
raised amongst them.

Of all men now living the Turks make wars most orderly, so that it needs
not seem strange to any, what the cause should be that has raised them to
this height at this day, that about two hundred years since there was no
nation like them. For it may be truly said of them that they be an
invincible Nation, unless they be vanquished by some great plague or
pestilence, or else by civil dessention amongst themselves.

The soldiers be attired very comely, wearing nothing that is indecent or
dishonest: in their saddles and bridles is neither curiosity nor superfluity,
and none of them go armed but when they be in fight, and at other times they
have their armor carried after them in cariages. They use no Standards or
Ensigns, but Lances, upon the tops whereof hang down certain threeds of
diverse sundry colors, by which each captain is known of his company, yet
they use drums and physes to summon and incite them to fight: the battle
finished, all the army is set in readiness, and viewed by the Register (who is
one of the noble men) that they may know, who and how many were slain in the
fight, and for the ordaining of others in their places.

In all their assemblies and banquets they pray for the soldiers, but more
devoutly for such as were slain in defense of their country, esteeming those
happy and blessed, that died not at home, amidst the sorrow and lamentations of
their wives and children, but abroad amongst the outcries of their enemies,
clattering of armor, and shattering of spears.

They describe, extol and chaunt out the victories of their ancestors,
thinking thereby to make their soldiers more forward and courageous: Their
buildings and dwelling houses be made for the most part of timber and mortar,
and very few of stone, unless the houses of great men, Bathes and Temples,
which be commonly builded of stone, and yet there be some of the Plebeians, or
common people, of such exceeding wealth, as some one alone is able of himself
to furnish and set forth a whole army, but being (as indeed they are) very
frugal, and shunning all sumptuousness, they cherish humility, and patiently
endure this voluntary poverty. And for this cause they utterly renounce all
pictures, and so much abhor and detest the caruing of Images, as they term
Christians Idolaters, because they be delighted in these things, contending
that they affirm the truth in saying so: They use no seals at all to their
letters, neither the King nor no man else, but give credit so soon as they
hear the name of him that sent it, or view the style of the writer, neither is
there any use of belles, no not so much as any of the Christians that dwells
amongst them are once permitted to use them. They play at no game for money or
any thing else, but persecute all gamesters with many ignominies and
reproaches, no man of what dignity, estate or condition soever he is of,
desires to sit upon any stool, form or seat, to sustain him from the
ground, but disposing and placeing his body, and garments, in comely and
decent order, sits him down upon the ground, as children do: The table
whereupon they eat their meat, is made (for the most part) of an oxe-hide, or
of a stagges skin undressed and the hair on, being made round and some four
or five handful in breadth, and with many iron rings sowed unto the sides
thereof, through which they put a leatherne thong, by which devise, it is
opened, shut and carried like a purse.

No one does enter into any house, Church or other place wherein they may sit,
but they must first put off their shoes, for they account it dishonest and
indecent, for any one to sit with his shoes on, and therefore they use such
manner of shoes as they can easily put off and on.

The places wherein they sit either in their houses or Churches are covered
with course woollen blankets, or else with mats, and sometimes by reason of the
baseness and uncleanness of the places, they be borded or plancked. Both men
and women wear long and large garments, made open with a slit before, that
they may the better cover, and bend themselves when they purge their bodies of
their natural excrementes, in doing whereof, they be very precise that they
turn not their faces toward the Sun rising, which way the do turn
themselves when they pray, they be very careful likewise, that in doing
thereof, no one see them, least their shameful and unclean parts should be
discovered, the men make water as the women do with us, bending themselves,
for if any man does piss standing, he is of all men held either for an Idiot
or an heretic: They be compelled by a law, to abstain from wine as the
nurse, garder, or seminary of all sin and filthiness, yet they eat grapes
and drink Must.

They abstain likewise from all swines flesh and swines blood, and from all
carraine, and things that die Friday a solemn holy day with the Turks.
of themselves, eating all other things that be to be eaten and man's meat,
the Turks keep Friday holiday with as much devotion and religion, as we do
our Lords day, or the Jews their sabbath.

In every City is one principal Church, into which upon that day in the
afternoon, all people assemble themselves to prayer, and prayer being
solemnly ended, they have a sermon, wherein they acknowledge one God and that
there is none like or equal unto him, and that Mahomet is his faithful
Prophet.

All the Sarrasins or Turks ought to pray every day five times, with their
faces toward the Sun rising, and before they go to prayer to have their
bodies perfectly clear, and decently to wash both fundament, yard, hands,
arms, mouth, ears, nostrils, eyes and the hairs of their heads, and last of
all their feet, and this they ought to do more strictly and precisely, after
their companying with women, and purging their bodies, unless they be either
sick or traueling, but if at any time water be wanting to wash in, which
happens but very seldom, or never (for that in every City be baths for
that purpose) then they supply the want thereof with the dust of clean and
fresh earth: and he which is defiled with any pollution, permits no one (as
much as is possible) either to speak unto him, or yet to see him before he be
washed and made clean: they fast five weeks in every year very strictly,
neither eating nor drinking any thing of all the day before Sunne-setting, nor
accompanying with women: but from the Sun going down, until his rising the
next morning they spend the whole time at their pleasures, in eating, drinking,
and venerie: upon the sixtieth day from the beginning of their fast, they
celebrate their Passe-ouer, in memory of the Ram, which was showed unto
Abraham for a sacrifice in his sons stead: and in memory of a certain
night, wherein they dream their Alcoran was given them from heaven.

The Turks ought once every year also to go to the Temple which is in Mecha,
both for the profession of their religion, as also to yield the annual honors
due unto Mahomet, whose sepulcher is there kept and worshipped.

The Sarrasins force no man to forsake their faith, and Religion, neither will
they persuade any one to theirs, although their Alcoran command them, to
afflict, and by all means to prosecute their adversaries in Religion and their
Prophets. Whereof it comes to pass, that in Turkey dwell people of all Sects
and Religions, and every Sect does sacrifice unto his God, according to their
own customs.

Moreover; there is no great difference betwixt the Priests, and the
lay people, betwixt their Temples, and their ordinary habitations and dwelling
houses: for it is sufficient for the Priests to know the Alchoran, and what
things appertain to prayer, and the worship of their law, without spending any
time in meditations, or obtaining of learning, neither do they take upon them
the cure of souls, or care of churches: Sacraments they have none, they make
no observation of Relickes, sacred Vessels or Altars, but possessing wives,
children and families, apply their time like laymen, in husbandry,
merchandise, buying and selling, hunting, and such like labors and exercises,
to get their living: there is nothing unlawful for them to do, nor any thing
prohibited: they be freed from servitude and exactions, and be reverenced and
honored of all men, as those that understand the ceremonies of their law,
govern their churches, and be able to instruct others. They have many and great
schools, wherein, be great multitudes instructed in the civil laws ordained by
their kings for the government and defense of their kingdom, of whom some be
afterward made rulers of Churches, and some of other secular offices.

In that sect be diverse sorts also of religious persons, of which, some living
in woods and deserts, fly the fellowship and conversation of all men: some
other living in cities, practice hospitality toward poor travelers,
allowing them house-room and lodging at the least, if they have not meat to
refresh them, for they themselves live by begging. There be some others
likewise, that wandering through the cities, carry wholesome and fresh water
in certain bottles, giving thereof to drink to every one that demands. For
which religious act, if any one give them any thing, they will receive it,
though they desire nothing at all, carrying such boast and ostentation of
sanctity and religion, both in their words and deeds, manners and behauior, as
they may rather be thought Angels then men, and every one carries a certain
badge or sign, whereby he may be discerned of what profession he is of. The
Sarrasins or Turks be very strict obseruers and maintainers of Justice: for he
that sheddeth another man's blood, shall have the like punishment himself: he
that is found in adultery, shall (together with the adulteress) be stoned to
death without mercy or delay: there is an express punishment also for
fornicators; for he that is found guilty of fornication, shall suffer eight
hundred stripes with a whip: A thief for the first and second offense shall
suffer the like punishment; for the third fault he shall have his hand cut off,
and his foot for the fourth: he which iniureth another shall make him
satisfaction according to the quantity of the wrong done. In case of extortion
of goods and possessions, it is ordained by a law, that the thing required
shall be proved by witnesses, and that the defendant shall purge himself by
his oath. They admit no witnesses, but such as be honest and fit persons, and
whose testimony may be taken without oath. There be throughout the whole
nation diverse Inquisitors or searchers, who finding out those that neglect the
form of prayer, to which they are all enjoined, afflict and punish them, by
hanging about their necks, a table or paper with many fox tails, and so
leading them throughout the city, dismiss them not, until they have paid a
certain sum of money for there liberty. And this ignominy and reproach is
accounted an extreme punishment: no one that is of full age, may live
unmarried, and every one may have four lawful wives, and (mothers and sisters
only excepted) may marry whom they list, without respect of kindred, and
besides the four lawful wives, they may have as many concubines as they
please, or be able to maintain: and as well the children that be borne of their
concubines, as of their lawful wives, shall equally inherit their fathers
goods, only this is observed, that one son shall have as much as two
daughters: no one may keep two or more wives in one house, nor yet in one
city, for avoiding of scolding, contention, and unquietness that would be
amongst them: but in every city they may keep one, and the husbands have
liberty to be divorced from their wives three sundry times, and so often to take
them again: and the woman divorced may stay with her husband that receives
her again, if she please. The Turkish women be very decent in their apparel,
upon their heads they wear myters, set upon the top of their veiles, wherewith
their heads being bound in a comely fashion, one side or edge of the veil
hangs down upon the right or left side of their heads, wherewith if they go
from home, or come into their husbands presence at home, they may foorth-with
cover or mask their whole faces, but their eyes: for the wife of a Turk dare
never come where a company of men be gathered together: neither is it lawful
for them to go to markets to buy and sell. Likewise in their great Temple, the
women have a place far remote from men, and shut up so close, as no one can
come to them, nor hardly see them. Which closet is not allowed for all women,
but only for the wives of noble men or head Officers, and that only upon
Friday, at their noone-tide prayer, which they observe with great solemnity
(as is said) and at no times else. There is seldom any speech or conference
betwixt men and women, in any public place, it being so out of custom, as if
you should stay with them a whole year, you should hardly see it once, but for
a man to sit or ride with a woman, is accounted monstrous: married couples do
never dally or chide in the presence of others, for the husbands do never
remitte the least jot of their authority over their wives, neither will the
wives omit their obedience toward their husbands. The great Lords that cannot
always tarry with their wives themselves, depute and set Eunuchs to be keepers
over them, which observe and watch them so warily, as it is impossible for them
to talk with any man but their husbands, or to play false play with their
husbands.

To conclude, the Sarrafins yield so much credit to Mahomet and his laws, as
they promise assured happiness and salvation to the keepers thereof: to wit, a
paradise abounding with all pleasures, a garden situated in a pure and
temperate Climate, watered on all parts with most sweet and delectable waters,
where they shall enjoy all things at pleasure; dainties of all sorts to feed
them, silks and purple to cloth them, beautiful damfels ever ready at a
call to attend them with silver and golden vessels, and that Angels shall be
their cuppe-bearers; and minister unto them milk in golden cups, and red
wines in silver.

And on the other side, they threaten hell, and eternal damnation to the
transgressors of his laws. And this also they firmly believe, that though a
man have been never so great a sinner, yet if at his death, he only believe
in God and in Mahomet, he shall be saved.

The manners and customs Of the Christians, and of their original, and
Customs. CAP. 12.
CHRIST Jesus (the true and everlasting Son of God the Father omnipotent, the
second Person in the holy, indiuidual, coequall, and eternal Trinity, by his
incomprehensible decree and mystery hidden from the world, to the end that he
might raise and reduce us miserable, and unfortunate wretches, lost and
forlorn by the disobedience of our forefathers Adam and Eve, and therefore
for many ages exiled and excluded out of the heavenly country, and in heaven
to repair the ancient ruin of Lucifer, and the Angels for pride expelled
thence, (for supply of which vacancie we were chiefly created,) was, one
thousand, six hundred and ten years since (by the cooperation and working of
the holy Ghost) conceived man, and borne in Iudaea of the blessed Virgin Mary,
being of the house and lineage of David: from the thirtith year of whose age
unto the 34. (at which time through the envy and hatred of the Jews, he was
crucified,) he trauersed over all the land of Iudaea, exhorting the Jews, from
the ancient law of Moses; and the Gentiles, from the profane worship of Idols,
unto his new doctrine and religion: those followers which he could get, he
called his disciples; out of which, electing twelve, and appearing unto them
alive after his death, (as he had foretold them he would) he gave them
commission, that as his Legates and Apostles, they should go into all places of
the world, and preach to all people such things as they had seen and learned
of him. Simon Peter (who long before was by Christ ordained chief head and
ruler of his Church after him, when (after the receiving of the holy Ghost) the
Apostles went some to one people, some to another to preach, as they were
allotted and sent) came first to Antioch, where consulting and erecting a
Church, or chief seat or Chair for the practice of Religion: he, with many
other of the Apostles which often repaired unto him, celebrated a Council; in
which, amongst other things, it was decreed, that the professors and imbracers
of Christ's doctrine, and true religion, should after him be called Christians.
This chief Chair of the Church being afterward translated from Antioch to
Rome, he and his successors were very careful and vigilant to reduce the
Christian religion (being as yet indigested, unpolished, and little practiced)
and the professors thereof into better order and uniformity Out of the law of
Moses, (which Christ came not to abolish, but to fulfill) out of the civil and
politic government of Romans, Greeks, and Egyptians, and out of both sacred
and profane rites, laws, and ceremonies of other nations, but most especially
by the wholesome doctrine and direction of Christ Jesus, and the inspiration of
the holy Spirit: when they had undertaken this business, and saw that not only
among the Hebrews, but in all other nations else, the people be divided into
religious and laity, and that all of them by an excellent subordination, are
in dignity and degrees different one from another: as that the Emperor of Rome
was Monarch of the whole world, and that next unto him were Consuls,
Patricians, and Senators, by whose direction and advice, the state and
commonwealth was well governed. Again, that in every other country of the
world were Kings, Dukes, Earls, Presidents, Lieutenants, Deputies, Tribunes of
soldiers, Tribunes of the common people, Praetors, Captains, Centurions,
Decurions, Quaternions, Sheriffs, Treasurers, Ouer-seers, Portars,
Secretaries, and Sergeants, and many private people of both sex. That in the
temple of the fained gods, the king was chief sacrificer, and that there were
Arch-Flammins, Proto-Flammins, Flammins, and Priests. That also amongst the
Hebrews the High Priest was chief sacrificer, under whom were inferior
Priests, Levites, Nazareans, Extinguishers of lights, Exorcists, Porters,
Clerks, and Singers. That amongst the Greeks were Captains of thousands,
Captains of hundreds, Captains of fifty, Governors over ten, and rulers over
five: and that besides these, as well amongst the Greeks as Latins, there were
diverse sorts of conuents, and religious houses both for men and women, as the
Sadduces, Esseyes, and Pharisees, amongst the Jews: the Salij, Diales, and
Vestales amongst the Romans. All the holy Apostles, (as Peter, and those which
succeeded him in the chair of Rome) agreed and established, that the
universal, Apostolic, most holy, and high Bishop of Rome should ever after be
called the Pope, that is to say, the father of his country: and that he should
proceed and govern the Catholic Roman Church: as the Emperor of Rome was
Monarch over the whole world, and that as the Consuls were next in office and
authority to the Emperor, and were ever two in number, so should there be
four Patriarchs in the Church of God, that in degree and dignity should be
next unto the Pope: whereof one was seated at Constantinople, another at
Antioch, the third at Alexandria, and the fourth at Jerusalem. That the
Senators of Rome should be expressed by Cardinals, that such Kings or Princes
as governed three Dukedomes, should be equalled with Primates that should
govern theree Archbishops, and that the Archb. or Metrapolitans should be
compared to Dukes: that as the Dukes had Earls under them, so should Bishops
be under the Archbishops.

That Bishops likewise should be resembled unto Eatles, their Assistants and
Suffragans unto Praesidents, and Provosts unto Lieutenants: Arch-priests should
supply the place of Tribunes of the soldiers: for Tribunes of the people were
ordained Chancelors, and Arch deacons were put in the place of Praetors: for
Centurions were placed Deanes, parish Priests for Decurions and other Prelates,
and Ministers for Advocates and Atturneys: Deacons represented the Aediles,
subdeacons the Quaternions, Exorcists the Duumuiri, hostiarii or dore-keepers,
the treasurers, readers, singers, and Poets, the Porters of the Court, and
Acolites, and Priests, Ministers, the Secretaries and Taper-bearers: decreeing,
that all these sundry Orders of Church Officers should be called by one
general name, Whereof the Clergy be so called.
Clerks, of the Greek word (Cleros) a lotte, or chance, whereby at first they
were elected out of the people for Gods part, or portion of inheritance. This
done, they ordained, that seven sorts of these Clerks should be of more
special name and note then the rest, as having every one his peculiar
function, habit and dignity in the church, and that they should be already to
attend upon the altar, when the Bishop of Rome does sacrifice, to wit, the Pope
himself, Bish. Priests, Deacons, Subd. Priests, and singing men.

The office of Bishops, is to give orders, to veil virgins, to consecrate
Bishops, to confirm children by imposition of hands, to dedicate Temples, to
degrade Priests from their functions, and to put them in again upon their
reformation, to celebrate Councels, to make Chrismes and vnctio^s, to hallow
vestiments and Church vessels, and to do any other things which meaner Priests
may do as well as they, as to cathechise and baptize, to make and consecrate
the Sacrament of the Altar, and to communicate it to others, to pronounce
absolution to the penitent, to restrain the stubborn, and to preach, and
declare the Gospel of Christ.

The crowns of their heads must be shaven round like the Nazareans, and they
ought neither to wear locks, nor long beards: they are bound to perpetual
chastity, and they have the command and pre-eminence over other priests: their
livings and maintenance ought to be only of first firuites, tithes, and
oblations: nor may they meddle or busy themselves in worldly matters, their
apparel and conversation should be decent, comely, and honest, and they are
tied only to serve God and the Church, and to occupy and employ themselves
seriously in reading the holy Scriptures, that thereby they may perfectly know
al things which belong to Christian Religion, wherein they are bound to instruct
others.

There be diverse conuenticles, and houses of religious persons, both men and
women, as Benedictines, Friars preachers, Franciscans, Augustines, Bernardines,
Antonians, Ioannites, Carthusians, Praemonstratentians, Carmelites,
Cistertians, and many others, every one of which Orders, have distinct habits
and customs different one from another, by the rules which they have privately
set down, and prescribed for themselves to live under. And all of these
profess perpetual chastity, obedience, and wilful poverty, and live for the
most part a solitary life: for which cause they were called Monks, as men
living a monastical kind of life. Some of these Orders have for their heads
and governors of their houses and societies, Abbots: some Prouosts, and some
Priors, but the Bishops be only subject to the Bishop of Rome: most of these
Orders we are hoodes or cowles, though not all of one color, and abstain
wholly from flesh. Bishops when they offer up the sacrifice of the Mass, were
commanded by that sacred Synod, to be attired in holy vestures; which for
their perfection are borrowed out of the law of Moses: and of these garments be
15. to wit, the Sandals, the Amice, the long Albe that reaches down to their
anckles, the Girdle, the Stole, the Maniple, the purple Coat with wide
sleeves, the Gloves, the Ring, the Linen garment called Castula, the Napkin or
Sudary, the Pall or Cope, the Myter, the Crozier staff, and a chair standing
nere the altar for him to sit in: of these 15. church-ornaments, six were made
common, as well to other inferior Priests, as to Bishops, that is to say, the
Amice, the long Albe, the Girdle, the Stole, the Manuple, and the Castula:
besides these 15. sundry sorts of garments, the Pope (by the donation of the
Emperor Constantine the Great) wears in the celebration of the Mass, all the
Robes used by the Emperors of Rome, as the scarlet coat, the short purple
cloak, the scepter, and the triple Diadem, and with these he is arrayed in the
Vestry: when he says Mass upon any sollemne festival days, and from thence
goes to the Altar attended with a priest on his right side, and a Deacon on
his left, before him goes a Subdeacon, with a book in his hand shut, two
taper-bearers, and one with a censor burning incense: when he approaches nere
to the Altar, he puts off his myter, and kneeling down with his attendants
upon the lowest step, pronounces the Confitcor, or public confession of
sinners, and then ascending up to the altar, he opens the book and kisseth
it, and so proceeds to the celebration of all the ceremonies belonging to
that sacrifice, the subdeacon reading the Epistle, and the deacon the Gospel.

Bishopps, and all other eminent Priests, be likewise bound to praise God
every day seven times, and to use one certain order and form of prayer, and
not only to do so themselves, but to give commandment to all inferior Priests
whatsoever, under their charge and jurisdiction to do the like, as to say
Euensong in the afternoon, Compline in the twy-light, Mattins in the morning,
and their hours at the first, third, sixth, and ninth hour of the day, and
that all this (if it be possible) should be done in the Church, humbly kneeling
or standing before the Altar, with their faces toward the East: The Lords
prayer, and the Apostles Creed were then used to be said, as they are now at
this day.

Saint Hierome (at the instance of Pope Damasus) distributed and digested the
Psalms by the days, assigning to every hour his proper Psalms and their
number, as nine at nocturns upon holy days, and 12. upon working days, for
the lauds at Mattins five, five at euen-song, and at all other hours three:
and it was chiefly he, that disposed and set in order the Gospels, Epistles,
and all other things which as yet be read out of the old and new Testament,
saving only the hymns. Damasus dividing the Quire of singing men into two
parts, appointed them to sing in course the Anthemes written by S. Ambrose
Bishop of Millaine, and added Gloria Patri to the end of every Antheme. The
Toletan and Agathon Councels allowed the lessons and hymns which be read
before every hour: The prayers, grails, tracts alleluias, offertories,
communions in the Mass, anthems, versicles, tropes, and other things sung and
read to the honor of God in the office of the Mass, as well for the day as
night, were penned by S. Gregory, Gelasius, Ambros. and diverse others of the
holy Fathers, not all at once, but at diverse times.

The Mass (for so is that sacrifice called) was celebrated at the first in
that simple furniture and plain manner, as it is now used upon Easter Eve.
Pope Celestinus added the Priests manner of entrance to the altar, the Gloria
in excelsis was annexed by Telesphorus, the hymn which begins et in terra, was
composed by Hillarie Bishop of Poictiers, and was afterward by Symachus
ordained to be sung.

The salutations taken out of the book of Ruth, which the priest pronounces
7. times in the Mass, by saying, Dominus vobiscum, were appointed by Clement
and Anacletus: Gelasius disposed the rest to the offertory, in the Order they
be now used, except the Sequentiae which are said after the Mass, and these
Nicholas added, and the Apostles Creed which Damasus annexed unto them out of
the Constantinopolitan council. The Sermon which is preached to the people, by
the priest or deacon standing in a pulpit, upon holy days, was rather used by
tradition, after the examples of Nehemias or Esdras then instituted by any
other, in which Sermon the people that be present at Mass, be admonished to
communicate, as in duty they are bound, and that they should embrace mutual
love, that they should be purged from their sins, and not be polluted with
vices, when they receive the Sacrament of the altar: and for that cause he
concludes his Sermon, with the public confession of sinners: he declares
moreover unto them the contents of the old and new Testament, and puts them
in mind of the ten Commandments, the twelve Articles of our belief, the seven
Sacraments of the Church, the lives and Martyrdomes of Saints, the holy days,
and fasting days instituted and ordained by the Church, the vices and virtues,
and all other things necessary for a Christian to know.

Pope Gregory added the Offertory to the Mass, and Leo the Prefaces, Gelasius
and Sixtus the greater and lesser Canons, and Gregory the Lords prayer out of
the Gospel of Saint Matthew: Martial, Saint Peter's Disciple, instituted, that
Bishops should give the benediction: and Innocentius, that inferior Priests
should offer the Pax: Agnus Dei was adjoined by Sergius, the Communion by
Gregory, and the Conclusion, in these words, Ite, missa est, Benedicamus
Domino, or Deo gratias, was invented by Pope Leo.

The twelve Articles of our Faith, which the holy Apostles The Creed.
have commanded every one, not only to acknowledge, but most constantly to
believe, be these following: The first, that there is one God in Trinity, the
Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth: the second, That Jesus Christ is
his only begotten Son our Lord: the third, that he was conceived of the holy
Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary: the fourth, that he suffered under Pontius
Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried: the fifth, that he descended into hell,
and the third day rose again from the dead: the sixth, that he ascended into
heaven, and that there he sits on the right hand of God the Father
Almighty: the seventh, that he shall come again in glory to judge both the
quick and the dead: the eight, that there is a holy Ghost: the ninth, that
there is a holy Catholic Church: the tenth, that there is a Communion of
Saints, and remission of sins: the eleventh, that there is a resurrection of
the flesh: and the twelfth, that there is an eternal life after death in
another world.

The ten Commandments which were written with the finger of God, and
delivered by the hands of his The 10. Commandments.
servant Moses, to the people of Israel, and which he willed us to observe and
keep, be these following. The first, to believe, that there is one God: the
second, not to take the name of God in vain: the third, to keep holy the
Sabbath day: the fourth, to honor our fathers and betters: the fifth, to do no
murder: the sixth, not to commit adultery: the seventh, not to steal: the
eighth, not to bear false witness: the ninth, not to covet other men's goods:
and the tenth, not to desire another man's wife, nor any thing that is his.

The seven Sacraments of the Church, which be included The seven Sacraments.
in the last five Articles of our faith, and which the holy Fathers have
commanded us to believe, be these following: First, Baptism, and this
Sacrament heretofore (as it was established by a canonical sanction) was not
ministered unto any, (unless upon very urgent necessity) but unto such as were
aforehand well instructed in the faith, and sufficiently catechized and
examined thereof seven sundry times, to wit, upon certain days in Lent, and
upon the vigils of Easter, and Penticost, being the usual times for
consecration in all Parishes. But this Sacrament being above all the rest most
necessary unto salvation, and least any one should depart out of this life,
without the benefit thereof, it was ordained, that as soon as an infant was
borne, he should have Godfathers procured for him, to be his witnesses or
sureties, and that then the child, being brought by his Godfathers before the
church door, the Priest, (standing there for the purpose) should demand of the
child, before he dippe him in the holy Font, whether he will forsake the Devil
and all his pompes, and whether he steadfastly believe all the Articles of the
Christian faith, and the Godfathers affirming on his behalf, the Priest
blows three times in the Infants face, and when he has exorcized and
catechized him, he does these seven things in order unto the child: first, he
puts hallowed salt into his mouth, secondly, he annointeth his eyes, ears,
and nostrils with earth moystened with his spittle, thirdly, (giving him his
name after which he shall be called) he marketh him with the sign of the
cross upon his breast and back with hallowed oil: fourthly, inuocating the
name of the blessed Trinity, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, (in whose name
all other Sacraments are ministered) three times, he dippeth or ducketh him into
the water, or else powers water upon him three times in form of a cross:
fifthly, (dipping his thomb into the holy Chrysme) he signeth his forehead with
the sign of the cross: sixthly, he covers him with a white garment: and
seventhly and lastly, puts into his hands a burning candle.

It was ordained by the Agathon Council, that Jews before they were baptized,
should be instructed in the Christian faith nine months, and fast forty days,
and that they should refuse all their substance, make free their bond-seruants,
and put from them their children, (if they had any such) as were circumcized
after the law of Moses: and for those causes it is no marvel, that the Jews
be so hardly induced to receive the Sacrament of Baptism.

2. The second Sacrament, is Confirmation, which is given only by the Bishop
in the Church before the altar, to children of fourteen years of age or
upwards, and if it may be, while they be fasting; in this manner: All the
children which come to be confirmed, being there present with their
godfathers, the bishop (having said a prayer over each of them) dips his
thombe into moist Chrisme, signing every one of their foreheads with the sign
of the cross, In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost, and for their better remembrance, and to the end they should not require
this Sacrament again, he gives every one a blow upon his right cheek, and
then the Godfathers (for fear least the moist unction should run off or be
wiped away through negligence or carelessenesse) bind their foreheads with a
linen cloth, (which they bring with them for that purpose) and that cloth they
may not put off until the seventh day after. And such force have the holy
fathers attributed to this Sacrament, as if a man dislike of his name he took
in his Baptism, in taking of this Sacrament he may have it changed into an
other name by the Bishop.

3. The third Sacrament is the Sacrament of holy orders, which in the primitive
Church was likewise ministered by the Eishop, and that only in the month of
December, but now it is ministered at six times in the year appointed for that
purpose, that is to say upon the Saterdaies of al those 4. feasts called Ember
weeks, which were ordained for that end, upon the Saturday called (Sitientes)
which is the Saturday before passion Sunday, and upon the eve of the blessed
Passover: and then to men only, and to such whose condition of life, bability
of body, and quality of mind is sufficiently known and approved: There be
seven orders of Priests or (according to some) nine, all of which (as the holy
fathers have ever bin of opinion) have imprinted in their hearts, by their holy
orders, such special caracters of grace, as they be ever after held holy and
sanctified: which be singing men or organists, doorekeepers, readers;
Exorcists, Priests, Ministers or Acolits, Subdeco^s, Deacons, Priests and
Bishops, and yet it is held to be but one Sacrament, not many, by reason of the
final office, which is to consecrate the Lords body: Every one of these nine
orders of Priests has his peculiar office in the Church, and ornaments allowed
him by the Toletan council, to distinguish him from the rest, for the door
keepers, or sextons are to defend and keep the Churches, and to open and shut
them, and therefore a key is given unto them when they be ordained: to the
readers that have power to read the old Testament, and holy histories, is given
a book; the office of Exorcists is to dispossess such as be possessed with
evil spirits, and have a book given unto them, wherein be contained those
exorcismes for a mark to signify that office. The office of the Acolites is
to set the candlesticks upon the Altar, and to light the tapers, as also to set
in readiness the vyoles or pots of water, and to carry them away when mass is
done, and therefore be they manifested by carrying a candlestick with a taper
in it, and an empty vial or cruet. The Subdeacons are to take the oblations to
handle the chalice and patin, and make them ready for the sacrifice, and to
administer wine and water to the Deacons in the vials, and therefore the Bishop
gives them a chalice and a patin, and the Archdeacon, cruets full of wine and
water, and a towel. The Deacons proper function is to preach the word of God to
the people, and to be assistant to the priests in the holy mysteries of the
Church, and to them is given the book of the New Testament and a stole cast
cross over one shoulder like a yoke. The power of the priests is to
consecrate the Lords body, to pray for sinners, and (by enioyning them penance)
to reconcile them again unto God, and therefore is he honored with a chalice
full of wine, a patin with the host upon it, a stole hanging on both shoulders,
and the linen garment called Castula. What is given to Bishops at their
consecrations, you have heard before, and they be ever ordained and
consecrated, about three of the clock on the Lords day at the celebration of
the office of the mass, before the reading of the Gospel, by three other
Bishops whereof the Metrapolitan to be one, who do it by laying there hands,
and a book upon his head: In the primitive Church there was little difference
betwixt Bishops and other priests, for all of them by common consent did join
together in the government of the Church, til such dissentions grew among them,
as every one would call himself not of Christ, but rather of him by whom he
was baptized, as one of Paul, an other of Apollo, a third of Cephas. And
therefore for the avoiding of schisms, and maintayning an uniformity in the
Church, the holy fathers though it necessary to establish a decree that al
which should ever after be baptized should he called by one general appellation
Christians, of Christ, and that every Province should be governed by one
Priest, or more, according to the quantity and bigness, who for their gravity
and reverence should be called Bishops, and they should govern and instruct
both lay people and clergy that were under their charge, not after their own
wills and pleasures as was used before, but according to the prescript rules,
canons and ordinances of the Church of Rome and holy Councels, and then by the
permission and furtherance of good and holy Princes, all Kingdoms throughout
the Christian world were divided into Diocesses, the Diocese into Shires and
Counties, and they again into several parrishes, which good and godly
ordinance both for clergy and laytie, is yet of that validity and estimation as
the people of every village yield there obedience to their parish Priest, the
parish Priest to the Deane, the Deane to the Bishop, the Bishop to the
Archbishop, the Archbishop to the Primate or Patriarch, the primate or
Patriarch to the Legate, the Legate to the Pope, the Pope to general councels,
and general councels only unto God.

4 The fourth Sacrament is the most wholesome Sacrament of the body and blood of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and every priest that is duly called and
ordained according to the rules of the Church, and intends to consecrate, may
(by observing the usual form of words used in the consecration) make the true
body of Christ of a piece of wheaten bread, and of wine his right and perfect
blood. And this Sacrament the same Lord Jesus Christ in the night before he
suffered his bitter passion, did celebrate with his disciples, consecrating it,
and ordaining that it should ever after be celebrated and eaten in remembrance
of him. It behooves every one that receives this Sacrament to be strong in
faith, that he may believe and credit these thirteen things following: First
that he believe the transmutation or transubstantiation of the bread and wine
into the body and blood of Christ: Secondly that though this be done every day,
yet is not the body of Christ thereby augmented: Thirdly that the body of
Christ is not diminished, though it be eaten every day: Fourthly that though
this Sacrament be divided into many parts, that yet the whole and entire body
of Christ remains in every little particle: Fifthly, that though it be eaten
of wicked and malicious men, yet is not the Sacrament thereby defiled: Sixthly,
that to those which receive it worthily, and as they ought, it brings
salvation, and eternal damnation to those which receive it unworthily:
Seventhly, that when it is eaten it conuerteth not into the nature and property
of him that eats it, as other meat does, but rather conuerteth the eater
into the nature of the Sacrament rightly, that being eaten it is taken up into
heaven without hurt: Ninthly that in every little form of bread and wine is
comprehended the great and incomprehensible God and Man Christ Jesus: Tenthly
that one and the same body of Christ is received and taken at one moment in
diverse places of diverse men, and under a diverse form: Eleuenthly, that the
substance of the bread being turned into the true body of Christ, and the
substance of the wine into his blood, the natural accidents of bread and wine
do yet remain, and that they are not received in form of flesh and blood:
Twelfthly, that unto those that eat it worthily, it brings twelve great
commodities, which are expressed in these verses following.

Inflammat, memorat, substentat, roborat, auget
Hostin spem, purgat, reficit, vitam dat, and unit,
Confirmat fidem, minuit, fomitemque remittit.
The effect whereof is, that the host inflameth, remembers, sustaineth,
strengthens and augmenteth our hope. It purges, refreshes, quickneth and
unites: It confirms our faith and mitigateth and utterly quenches in us all
concupiscence.

Lastly, that it is wonderful good and profitable for all those for whom the
priest specially offers it as a sacrifice, be they living or dead, and that
therefore it is called the communion or Sacrament of the Eucharist: In the
beginning of Christian religion, and yet in some places, there was consecrated
at one time such a loaf of bread, as being afterward cut into small mamocks
by the priest, and laid upon a sawcer, or plate, might well serve all the
communicants that were present at the sacrifice, and at that time did
Christians communicate thereof daily. And afterward they were limited to
receive it only upon sundaies, but when the Church perceived that this
sacrament was not taken every sunday so worthily and with such due observation
as was sitting, it was ordained that every Christian man of perfect reason and
understanding, should with all diligence he could, and with his best
preparation both of body and soul, receive the same thrice a year, or at the
least every year once at Easter, as also when he found himself in any danger
of death, as a ready preparatiue against al perils, by which name it is often
called.

5 Matrimony (which is a lawful conjunction of man and wife, instituted and
ordained by the law of God, the law of nature, and the law of nations) is the
fifth Sacrament: and the holy fathers in Christian piety have commanded, that
but one marriage shall be solemnized at one time, and that it shall not be done
in secret, but publicly, either in the Church or Church Porch, but most
commonly in the Church Porch, where the priest meeting the parties that are to
be married, first asks of the man, and then of the woman whether they be
willing to be contracted, who answering that they are content and agreed (which
is a thing most necessary in that Sacrament) he takes them by the right hands,
and joining them together in the name of the blessed and indeuided trinity in
unity, the Father Son, and holy Ghost, he admonishes and exhorts them,
that being ever mindful of this union and holy communion they never after
forsake one an other, but to live in mutual love, honor and obedience one to an
other, that they should not desire one an others company for lust, but for
procreation of children, and that they should bring up their children honestly,
carefully, and in the fear of God, this done he marries them with the ring,
and sprinkleth holy water on them, and then putting on his stole which is
thither brought him, he leads them into the church, and causing them to
kneel humbly before the Altar, there blesses them (if they were not blessed
before) the woman when she is married has her hair tied up with a red fillet
or headband, and a white veil over it, without which veil or head cover, it
is never lawful for her after that time to go abroad, or to be in the company
of men: There be twelve impediments that hinder marriage before it be
solemnized, and dissolve it after it is contracted, that is to say, the error
or mistaking of either party, the breach of some condition, kindred, a manifest
offense, disparity of religion, violence or forcible rauishment from their
parents, holy orders, breach of reputation, public defamation, affinity, and
dissability to perform the act of matrimony.

6 The sixth Sacrament of the church is penance, which is given by Christ as a
second repair of our shipwrake, and every Christian man is bound undoubtedly
to belceue, that this Sacrament consists of these four things, to wit,
repentance for sins past, cannonical confession, absolution, and satisfaction:
for he that will be partaker of this Sacrament must first of al repent and be
sorrowful in his very soul, that through his grievous and heinous sins he
has lost that purity and innocence which he once had, either by the Sacrament
of Baptism, or by this Sacrament formerly received, and his grief must be so
hearty and effectual, as he must thereby assuredly hope to be reconciled
again unto God, then must he humbly acknowledge, and make verbal recital
unto some reverent priest his confessor (as unto the vicar and minister of God)
of al thse sins and offenses, as were causers of the loss of that innocence,
and stirred up the wrath of God against him, and then let him firmly believe,
that such power and authority is given by Christ unto his priests and ministers
on earth, that they can clearly absolve him from al such sins as he confesses
and is heartily sorry for. Lastly for a satisfaction and amends for all his sins,
let him with alacrity and cheerefulnes undergo and do whatsoever his confessor
shall enjoin him, believing most steadfastly that he is absolved from al his
sins, as soon as the priest has pronounced the words of absolution.

7 The seventh and last Sacrament is the Sacrament of extreme unction, which
is ministered with oil, which for that purpose is yearly consecrated and
hallowed in every Diocese by the bishop himself upon the thursday before
Easterday as the holy Chrisine is consecrated by the priest. This Sacrament
according to the council of the holy Apostle Saint James, and the institution
of Pope Felix the 4. is ministered only to such as are at the point of death and
of full age, and not then neither, unless they desire it, and by the prescript
form and repeating of the words of the Sacrament, and often invocation of the
Saints those parts of the body being anointed which are the seats of the five
senses, seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling and touching, and are the chiefest
instruments in offending, as the mouth, eyes, ears, nose hands and feet; the
holy fathers have bin ever of this opinion, and firm belief, that he which is
so anointed and receives it worthily, is not only thereby remitted and purged
from al his light and venial sins, but is either suddenly restored to his former
health, or else yields up his spirit in more tranquillity and peace of
conscience.

The festiual days which were commanded to be observed in The festival days
which were commanded to be observed in the Church throughout the year, begin
with the The festival days, throughout the year.
Aduent of our Lord Jesus Christ: In which by the institution of Saint Peter
(in the month of December,) the continual exercise of fasting and prayer was
commanded for full three weeks and a half together, before the feast of the
Nativity of our Lord, with us called Christmas, which with all joy and
solemnity is celebrated all the last eight days of December. The year is
divided into 52. weeks, the weeks into twelve months, and every month (for
the most part) into thirty days: upon the first day of January the Church
celebrateth the circumcision of our Lord, according to the law of Moses: Upon
the third day after is represented unto us, how our Savior Christ, by the
adoration of the three Kings, and his being Baptized of John in the river
Iordane, laid the foundation of the new law: upon the second of February is
showed how his imaculate mother, showing her self obedient to the ceremonies
of the Jews, presented her son Jesus in the Temple, and was purified, in
memory whereof there is on that day a solemn procession used by the Church,
and all the tapers and wax lights be then hallowed: Upon the 25. day of March
is represented unto us the Annuntiation of the birth of Christ to the Virgin
Mary, by the Angel; and how he was conceived in her womb by the inspiration of
the holy ghost, at which time is commended unto us also the remembrance of the
forty days, which our Savior, when he lived here on earth amongst us,
vouchsafed to fast, willing us likewise to fast that time after his example,
and then to celebrate his passion and death, which willingly he offered
himself to suffer, to enfranchise and redeem us from the thraldom and
slavery of the devil. Upon the last day of which feast (which often falls
out in April) is solemnised the greatest of all feasts, how Christ having
conquered death descended into hell; where after he had overcome the Devil he
returned alive again to his Disciples and in a glorified body appeared unto
them. In May is solemnized his Ascension into Heaven, by his own virtue in the
sight of al his Disciples, at which time by the ordinance of Saint Mamertine
Bishop of Vienna it was instituted that throughout the whole Christian world
Pilgrimages and processions should be used upon that day from one Church to an
other. In June, and sometimes in May is the feast of the coming of the Holy
Ghost, who being before promised was on that day infused upon all the Disciples
of our Savior Christ appearing unto them in the form of fiery tongs; by
virtue whereof they spoke and understood the languages of all nations. The
eight day after is the feast of the blessed Trinity, and then out of the first
decretal of Pope Urban the sixth, the feast of Corpus Christi was instituted and
with great solemnity generally celebrated the fifth day after Trinity Sunday,
as a perpetual memorial of the most wholesome Sacrament of the body and blood
of Christ, by him bequeathed unto us in his last supper, under the forms of
bread and wine, and continually of us to be seen and eaten after his
departure: upon the fifteenth day of July we are put in mind (by a new
festiuity) of the departure of the blessed Apostles according to their several
alotment, the twelfth year after the assention of our Lord into heaven, to
preach the Gospel unto all nations of the world: The death of the Mother of
Christ is celebrated the fifteenth day of August and her nativity the eight of
September: How, being presented in the Temple, she continued in the daily
service of God, from three years of age till she was maryageable, is showed
the one and twentih day of november: upon the eight day of December the Church
reuerenceth her immaculate conception of her long barren parents. And the
second of July how passing over the Mountains she visited her Cousin
Elizabeth. There are likewise holy days dedicated to the memory of the twelve
Apostles, of whom some were martirs, some confessors, and some Virgins, as
namely the twenty four of February to Saint Mathias, the twenty five of April
to Saint Mark the Evangelist, on which day Saint Gregory ordained the
litanies, called the greater litanies, to be said. To Saint Philip and Jacob,
the elder, the first of May, to Saint Peter and Paul, the twenty nine of June,
the twenty four day of which month is dedicated to the nativity of Saint John
Baptist, the twenty five of July to Saint James the younger, to Saint
Bartholemew the twenty four of August, to S. Matthew the twenty one of
September, the twenty eight of October to S. Simon and Jude, the last of
November to Saint Andrew, the twenty one of December to Saint Thomas, and the
twenty seven of the same month to the Evangelist Saint John, the next day
before Saint John's day is dedicated to Saint Seeuen, the first Martyr and the
next after to the blessed Innocents: the tenth of August to Saint Lawrence: the
twenty three of April to Saint George: To Saint Martin and S. Nicholas only
of all the confessors are dedicated particular feasts, to the one the sixth of
December, to the other the eleventh of November: the twenty five of november to
Saint Katherne the Virgin, and to Saint Mary-Magdalen the second of July. They
have likewise appointed one day to be kept Holy and dedicated to all the
blessed Angels, in the name of Saint Michells feast the Arch-Angell and the
first of November, as a general feast and common solemnity to all the Saints
and elect of God.

Furthermore upon every seventh day, called by the name of Sunday, they have
commanded all Christians, (as the Jews did on their Sabbath) to abstain from
all servile labors, which day they must only spend in the service of God, and
hearing of Mass in the Church, to hear the Gospel and precepts of faith
explained and taught by the Priests in their Sermons, and to pray and make
satisfaction to God for all such offenses, whereby we have cause to fear that
we have in the other six days any way prouooked the wrath of God toward us.
In times past every fifth day was in this manner kept holy, but least we should
seem to lean unto the custom of Idolaters, who on that day did sacrifice to
Jupiter, it was otherwise determined. Moreover the Priests and people did use
every Sunday and Thursday, before Mass, to go on procession about the Church,
and then the Priests sprinkled holy water upon the people, and this ceremony
did Pope Agapite institute, in remembrance of the Ascension of Christ in that
glorious day of his resurrection, which is celebrated with a perpetual
festiuitie, Sunday after Sunday, as it were by so many Octaues all the year
about. All the Clergy and people by the institutions of the Church, were wont
to watch all those nights which went before the principal solemn feasts, but
in respect of sundry enormous scandalls and crimes committed in the dark, by
lewd people, under pretext of watching, that use was taken away and
prohibited, and instead thereof the day immediately before every such solemn
feast, was commanded to be fasted, which fasting days do yet retain the
name of Vigils.

The ancient Fathers have determined, that the Church shall represent unto us
four things in her yearly service, from Septuagesima sunday (so called of the
seauenty days included between that and Easter) the Church represents unto
us, the fast of our Lord Jesus Christ, his passion, death and burial, and
besides these, the miserable fall of our forefathers, as also those gross
errors of mankind, through which being drawn from the knowledge and worship
of the true God, they have fallen to the profane worship of Idols, and
malicious devils, together with the slavish, and intolerable servitude, which
the people of Israel were subject unto under Pharoa King of Egypt, for which
cause the books of Exodus and Genesis are read in the service of the Church,
which all that time wears a mourning habit both in her service and
ceremonies: from the Octaues of Easter, till the Octaues of Whitsuntide, the
Church celebrateth the Refurrection and Ascension of Christ, and the coming of
the Holy Ghost, and withal the redemption and reconciliation of mankind, to
God the Father by his son Christ, of all which the Reduction of the children
of Israel to the land of Promise was a figure; wherefore the books of the New
Testament are then read, and all things express mirth and rejoicing. From the
Octaues of Whitsunday till Aduent (which is twenty weeks and more) we are
appointed to celebrate the miracles and conversation of our Savior Christ,
whilst he lived amongst us in the world, as likewise that long peregrination
of mankind, from generation to generation, since the redemption of the world,
even to the last day thereof; Wherefore in respect of the multitude of
uncertainties, through which we are tossed like a ship in the raging sea, the
Church exceeds neither in joy nor sadness, but to the end that we should
walk warily, and be able to resist all turbulent storms, she reads for our
instruction and hartning, diverse books of the New and Old Testament.

Moreover, from the time of Aduent to the feast of the Nativity we are put in
mind of the time betwixt Moses and the coming of the Messiah, in which
interim mankind being assured of their salvation by him, out of the law and
Prophets, did with most ardent desire expect his coming and future reign over
them, for which cause they have caused the Prophets to be read, and this time
to be fasted, that the Church being instructed in the one, and exercised by the
other, should both worthily and joyfully as it were with one continual
solemnity, celebrate the nativity of Christ her Savior (which always falls
the week after Aduent) till Septuagessima, receiving him into the world with
all devotion, and with condign joy and exultation, accepting the first
appearance of their salua^tio^. The Oratories or Temples which are usually
called Churches, they would not suffer to be erected without license of the
Bishop of the Diocese, whose office is (after all things necessary for the
buildings be prepared, and the place where it shall stand agreed upon) to
bless the first corner stone of the foundation, to put on it the sign of the
cross, and to lay it Eastward toward the Sun rising, which done, it is
lawful for the workmen to lay on lime, and to go on with their building.
This Church is to be built after the form of man's body, or of a cross: The
Quire in which the high Altar is to be placed, and where the Clergy do sing
(whereof it is so called) must represent the head, and it is to be built
toward the East, and to be made rounder and shorter then the rest of the
building, and because the eyes are placed in the head, it is therefore to be
made more lightsome, and to be separated from the body of the Church, with
bars as it were with a neck: adjoining hereunto, must stand a steeple, or
more properly two, on either side one, instead of ears, and in these ought
bells to be hanged, to call and summon the people by their sound to divine
service. The lower part of the building must be every way so disposed, as that
it may aptly express and represent the arms and feet, and the rest of the
body, with a convenient length and breadth. There ought to be also a private
room with partitions, which is usually built under one of the Turrets, having
a door opening into the Quire, in which the holy Vessels, ornaments and other
necessaries belonging to the Church may be kept: This private room is called
the Vestery. There must be two rows of pillars, upon the tops whereof the
roof must rest and be supported; and the Altars must lean to the lower parts.

The Altars are always to be decently covered with two linen clothes, having
a cross set upon them, or a shrine, containing the Relics of Saints, two
Candlesticks on each end, and a book. The walls both within and without must
be fretted and carved with variety of sacred Images: In every parish Church
there must be a hollow Font stone, in which the hollowed water to baptize
withal is preserved and kept. Upon the right side of the Altar must stand a
Pix or Custodia, which is either set up against the wall, or carved out of it,
in which the blessed sacrament of Christ's body, holy oil to anoint the sick,
and Chrisme for those which are baptized, is to be kept fast shut up:
Furthermore in the midest of the Church must be placed a pulpit, out of which
the Curat on festival days teaches the people all things necessary to
salvation: The Clergy only are permitted to sit in the Quire, and the laity
in the body of the Church, yet so divided, as that the men take place on the
right side, and the women on the left, both of them behauing themselves
modestly and devoutly, and diligently avoiding whatsoever is opposite to good
manners and Christian religion: In the Primitive Church the manner was both for
men and women to suffer their hair to grow long without cutting, and to show
their naked breasts; nor was there much difference in their attire. Saint Peter
the Apostle did first command, that men should cut their hair, and women
should cover their heads, and both should be apparelled in distinct habites:
That there should be laid out to every Church a piece of ground, in which the
bodies of Christian people, deceased, should be buried, which piece of ground
is called the Churchyard, and is hallowed by the Bishop, and has all the
privileges belonging to the Church it self.

The funerals of the departed are not solemnized in all places alike; for some
wear mourning apparel seven days together, some nine, others thirty, some
forty, some fifty, some an hundred, and some for the space of a whole year.
The Toletan Council has decreed, that the dead body shall be first washed and
wraped in a shroud or searcloth, and so carried to the grave with singing by
men of the same condition, as Priests by Priests, and lay folks by lay folk,
and that a Priest should go before the coarse incensing it with Franckincence,
and sprinckling holy water on it, and that it should be laid in the grave
with the face upwards, the feet to the East, and the head to the west, the
Priest using certain imprecations all the while the Sexton is covering the
dead body with earth. And to show that a Christian is their buried their must
be erected at the gate a cross of wood with a wreath of Iuy cypress or bays
about it. And these be the institutions of the Christian religion.

The end of the second book.
THE THIRD BOOK.
Of the most famous countries of Europe the third book. CAP. 1.
NEXT unto Asia order induces me to speak of Europe, the third part of the
world, which is so called of Europa the Europe why so called.
daughter of Agenor King of Phaenicia, who was ravished by Jupiter and brought
into Creet.

It is bounded on the West with the Atlanticke sea, with The limits of Europe.
the British Ocean on the North, on the East with the river Tanais, the poole
of Maeotis, and the sea called Pontus (which is the Sea between Moeotis and
Tenedos) and The commendations of Evrope.
with the Mediterranean Sea on the South.

The soil of Europe is of diverse sorts and qualities, very aptly befitting
the virtue and disposition of the people of each several Province, every one
transferring the commodities of their own countries unto other nations: for
Europe is all habitable, some little part only excepted, which (by reason of
the extremity of cold) can hardly be endured, which is that part that is
nearest unto the river Tanais, and the poole of Meotis, as also those that
dwell upon the banckes of Borysthenes, which live altogether in Chariots.

That habitablest part of the Region which is also extreme cold and
mountanous, is very hardly inhabited, and difficult to dwell in, and yet all
the difficulties and extremity thereof is well mitigated and appeased by honest
and good governors, even as we see those Greeks which dwell upon mountains
and rocks, live indifferently well, by reason of their great care and
providence of Civility, Arts, and understanding how to live.

The Romans also receiving unto them many people out of those cragged and
cold countries, (or unfrequented for other causes) which naturally were
barbarous, inhumaine and insociable, have so reclaimed them, by mingling them
with other people, as they have learned those rude and sauadge people to live
together soberly and ciuilly.

The Inhabitants of so much of Europe as is plain and has a natural
temperature, are apt to live orderly; for those which dwell in temperate and
fortunate Regions, be quiet and peaceable, but the rough and difficult places
are inhabited by quarrellous and cumbersome people, and yet all of them
participate their commodities one with an another, some helping and furnishing
others with weapons, some with fruits, and some with arts and instructions of
manners; the inconveniences and hindrances which happen to those that use not
this reciprocal aid is most apparent, for that the other by means of this
mutual intercourse of commodities are of sufficient power and puissance to
carry weapons, wage war, and defend themselves, so as they be never
vanquished, unless by a greater number. And this commodity also is incident
and natural to all Europe, as that it is plain and even, and distinguished
with hills, whereby it is in all parts limited, well ordered, civil and valiant:
and (that which is more) well disposed to live in peace and tranquillity: so as
what first by the Grecian forces, next by the Macedonians, and lastly by the
Romans, no marvel though it has atchiued great conquests and notable
victories, by which it plainly appears, that Europe is sufficient of it
self, both for war and for peace, as having a competent and sufficient number
of able fighting men, and husbandmen and Citizens enough besides.

Evrope moreover abounds with the best fruits and those which be most
profitable for man's life; and all manner of mettells whereof is any use,
besides odors for sacrifices, and stones of great worth, by which commodities,
both poor and rich have sufficient means to live: It yields also great
store of tame Cattle, but very few ravenous or wild beasts.

And this is the nature of Evrope in general, the first Particular part
whereof Eastward is Greece.

Of Greece and of Solons laws which he made for the Athenians and which were
after established by the Princes of Greece. CAP. 2.
GReece (a country of Europe) was so called of one Graecus, who had the
government of that country: It begineth at the The description of Greece.
straights of Isthmus, and extending north and south, lies opposite to that
part of the Mediterranean sea which is called Aegeum, on the East, and on the
West to the sea Ionium: as the hill Apennyne deuideth Italy in the middle, so
is Greece separated and divided with Mountains called Thermopilae, the tops
of the hills stretching Thermopilae.
in length from Leucas and the Weasterne sea, toward the other sea which is
Eastward.

The utmost hills toward the west be called Oeta, the highest whereof is
named Callidromus, in whose valley there is a way or passage into the Maliacan
gulf, not above threescore paces broad, through which way, (if no resistance
be made) a whole host of men may be safely conducted: but the other parts of
those hills be so steep, craggy and intrycate as it is not possible for the
nimblest foote-man that is to pass over them: there hills be called
Thermopilae, of the piles or banks that stand like gates at the entrance of
the hills, and of the hot waters that spring out of them: by the sea side of
Greece ly these regions, Acarnania, Aetolia, Locris, Phocis, Baeotia and The
Region of Greece.
Eubaea, which are almost annexed to the land: Attica and Peloponesus run
further into the sea than these other countries do, varying from the other in
proportion of hills: and upon that part which is toward the North it is
included with Epirus, Phirrhaebia, Magnesia, Thessalia, Phithiotae and the
Malican gulf.

The most famous and renowned city of Athens, the nurse of all liberal
sciences and Philosophers, (than the Athens, and why so called.
which there is no one thing in all Greece of more excellency and estimation,)
is situated betwixt Achaia and Macedonia, in a country there called Attica, of
Atthis the Kings daughter of Athens, who succeeded Cecrops in the kingdom and
builded Athens.

Of this Cecrops it was called Secropia, and after Mopsopia of Mopsus. And of
Ian the son of Xutus, or (as Josephus writes) of Ianus the son of Iaphet,
it was called Ionia: and lastly Athens of Minerua, for the Greeks call Minerua
Athenae: Draco was the first that made laws Dracoes laws to the Atheninians.
for the Athenians, many of which laws were afterward abrogated by Solon of
Salamin, for the too severe punishment inflicted upon offenders: for by all the
laws which Draco ordained, death was due for every little offense, in such sort
as if one were convicted but of sloth or Idleness, he should die for it, and
he which gathered roots or fruits out of an others man's grounds, was as
deeply punished as those which had murdered their parents. Solon divided the
city into societies, trybes or wards, according The city of Athens divided
into societies by Solon.
to the estimation and valuation of every ones substance and reueneus, In the
first rank were those whose substance was supposed to consist of five hundred
medimni: those which were worth three hundred medimni, and were able to breed
and keep horses, were counted in the second order, and those of the third
degree were equal in substance to the second, the charge of keeping horses
only excepted: And of these orders were all magistrates and high officers (for
the most part) ordained, and, those which were under these degrees were in the
fourth rank, and were called mercenary, and were excluded from all offices,
saving that they might have the charge of pleading and decyding causes: This
institution of civil government, Seruius Tullius is supposed to have followed
and imitated at Rome.

Moreover Solon appointed a Senate or Council consisting of yearly
Magistrates, in Areopagus: (though The councellin Areopagus.
some have reported that Draco was the founder of that assembly) And to the end
that he might take away all occasion of civil dissension, that might happen
at any time afterward, and that the inconsiderate multitude should not trouble
the judicial sentences, by their doubtful acclamations, (as usually they
did,) out of those four trybes that were then in Athens, he made choice of
four hundred men, an hundred out of every trybe, giving them power to approve
the acts and decrees of the Arreopagites, if they were agreeable to equity, if
other-wise to council them and annihilate their doings: by which means the
state of the city (stayde as it were by two sure anchors) seemed secure,
immovable and of likelihood to continue: if any were condemned for parricide,
or for affection and usurping the chief government, they were excluded (by
Solons law) from bearing rule, and not there only, but all those also were
barred and prohibited to bear offices, that if any sedition were set a foot
in the city, stood neuter, and took nether part: for he thought it an
argument of a bad Cittyzen, not to be careful of the common good and peace of
others, when he himself has settled his own estate and designs in safety:
Amongst the rest of Solons acts this is most admirable, whereby he granted
liberty that if any woman had married A strange law for women.
a man unable to beeget children, she might lawfully, and without
controulement, depart from him and take unto her any one of her husbands
kindred whom she liked best.

He took away all use of mony-dowries from amongst them, so as a woman might
take nothing with her from Money dowries forbidden.
her fathers, but a few clothes and other trinkets of small worth, signifying
thereby, that marriages should not be made for money, but for love and
procreation of children, least their evil life might be a blotte and skandall
unto them after their deaths.

If any man slaundered his neighbor, either at the solemnization of their
divine ceremonies, or at their sessions and public assemblies, he was fined
at four drachmas: Against slaunderers.
He granted power and authority unto Testators, to dispose and bequeath
legacies of money, and goods amongst whom they pleased: whereas before (by the
custom of the country) they were not to bequeath any thing from their own
families, and by this means friendship was preferred before kindred, and
favor before allyances: Nevertheless this was done with such caution and
provision, that noe one could grant such legacies, being moved thereunto
either through their own frantic madness, or by the subtle and undermining
persuasions of other, but merely of his own accord and good discretion.

He forbad all mournings and lamentations at other men's funerals, and enacted
that the son should not be bound to relieve his father, if his father had
not brought him up in some art, or profitable occupation: nor that bastards
should nourish or relieve their parents, and his reason was this, that he
which forbeareth not to couple with a strumpet, gives evident demonstration,
that he has more care of his own sensual pleasures then of the procreation
of children, and thereby he becomes unworthy of reward or relief of such
children, if the fall into poverty.

Besides these, Solon judged it meet, that the adulterer The punishment for
adultery.
apprehended in the deed doing, might lawfully be slain: and that he that
forced and ravished a freeborn Virgin, should be fined at ten Drachmas. He
abrogated and took away their ancient custom of selling their daughters and
sisters, unless they were convinced of whoredom: and amongst others of his
acts and decrees, these are likewise to be found: that whosoever was victor in
the games of Istmos, was rewarded with an hundred Drachmas: and he that got the
best in the games of Olimpus, had five hundred: He that killed a Dogge-wolfe,
had five Drachmas out of the common treasury: but he that killed a Bitch-wolfe
had but one: for the reward due for slaying the Dogge-wolfe was the worth of
an Ox, and the price of a sheep for killing the shee-Wolfe: and their ancient
manner was to persecute these kind of beasts, as enemies to their cattle and
grounds.

He ordained that the children of such as were slain in the wars, should be
brought up at the common charge, A law for the maintenance of soldiers
children.
(that men by that means, being assured that their children should be cared
for, though themselves miscarry, might be more thoroughly encouraged to fight,
and behave themselves valiantly and venterously:) commanding also, that those
which lost their eyes in the wars, should ever after be sustained by the
common purse: and withal A law for the benefit of Orphans and Wards.
he very worthily provided, that the ouersee-ers or they that had the ward of
Orphans should not keep together in the same house with the childrens
mothers, and that none should be gardians that might by possibility inherit
the Orphans goods, if they should hap to die during their nonage and wardship.
Furthermore he forbad all Iewellers to reserve in their custody the stamp or
seal of any ring, after they had sold it. And that he which puts out an
others eye should loose both his own eyes: adiudging it also a capital
offense for any one to take up that which is none of his own and keep it to
himself.

Furthermore he established that Princes or rulers being found drunk, should
be punished with present death: aduising the Athenians likewise, to reckon and
account their days according to the course of the Moon.

Of all fruits and commodities, he only permitted wax and honey to be
transported out of Attica into other countries: and he esteemed no man meet or
worthy to be made free of the City, unless he were an artificer and would
with his whole family come dwell at Athens, or such as were doomed from their
native soil to perpetual exile and banishment: These laws being engraven and
recorded in wooden tables, were by Solon established to continue for a hundred
years, presuming that if the City were so long inured with them, they would
ever after remain without alteration: but Herodotus is of opinion that these
laws which Solon made for the Athenians, were enacted but for ten years
continuance.

Now that these laws might be esteemed more sacred and be more carefully
observed and kept. Solon, after the manner of other law-giuers which fathered
their statutes and decrees upon some one god or other, as Draco had done before
him, avouched that Minerua was the author and inuentor of his laws, and so
caused both the Senators and people to swear themselves to the performance
thereof, at a stone which stood in the Senate House.

The Athenians were not strangers at the beginning, The original of the
Athenians.
nor was their City first inhabited by any rabble of wandering people, but in
the same soil they now inhabit, their were they borne, and the self same
place which is now their seat and habitation, was also their original and
foundation.

The Athenians were the first that taught the use of clothing, and of oil, and
of wine, instructing those Their inventions.
which formerly fed upon acornes, how to plow, plant, sow and gather fruits:
In a word, Athens may justly be termed the temple and sanctuary of learning,
eloquence and civil conversation.

The three laws which Secrops enacted against women, The three laws made by
Cecrops against women.
(for the appeasing of god Neptunes wrath, for that by women's suffrages Neptune
was scorned, and Minerua preferred before him) were then in force and observed,
which were these. First, that no woman should enter into the Senate House.
Secondly, that no child should be called after his mothers name, and the third
that no one should call women Athenians, or women of Athens, but women of
Africa.

Those which were slain in the wars (according to How the Athenians bury
those which are slain in the wars.
Thucydides) were buried in this manner following. First they pitched up a
tent, or pauillion three days before the funerals, wherein were put the bones
of those which were slain, every one laying some thing (what he thinks
fittest) upon his dead friends relikes, thereby to know him again, then were
the bones of al those which were slain of each several tribe, enclosed in
chestes, or coffins made of cypres tree, and every coffin carried by a several
coach, or carre belonging to the tribe, whereof the dead parties were: after
this there was an empty bed, or hearse brought with them, purposely for such as
were missing, and could not be found amongst the slain bodies, which done, all
those which were present, as well Citizens as strangers, indifferently,
conveyed them forth, and interred them in a public monument, or sepulcher
near unto Calistus tomb, in the suburbs of the City (the women all the while
weeping and lamenting the loss of their friends) which is the usual place for
burial of all such as perish Marathron is a city not far from Athens.
in battle: unless they were of the City of Marathron who for their
singular and extraordinary valor and prowess were intombed in their own City.

When they were thus interred, some one choice Citizen, esteemed for his
wisdom, and by reason of his dignity and worth fit for such an employment, was
elected and assigned, to pronounce a funeral oration, or sermon, in the due
commendation of those which were slain: which being ended every one departed
to his several home.

And this was there usual form of burial of such as were slain in the
wars.

Of Laconia and of the customs and ordinances of the Laconians or
Lacedaemonians. CAP. 3.
LACONIA (a Province in Peloponesus) is also called Ocbalia, and Lacedemonia,
of Lacedemon the son of Jupiter and Taygete, by whom a famous and mighty City
was builded in that country, and called after his name Lacedemon: This City
was likewise called Sparta of Spartus the son of Phoroneus, and was the
Palace or Court of Agamemnon.

When Lycurgus that famous Philosopher, brother unto Lycurgus law given to the
Lacedaemonians.
King Polydictes, governed in Laconia, (as tutor or protector unto his brother
Polydictes son) he altered the state of that City and Country, and adorned
them with wholesome laws and good ordinances, the people whereof before his
time were the worst mannered, and had the Eight and twenty Elders elected,
Democratia.
least government (both in their own cariages and toward strangers) almost of
all the people of Greece, as using no commerce, custom nor conversation with
other people.

Lycurgus therefore courageously taking the matter upon him, abrogated and
disanulled all their ancient laws, ordinances and customs, and in their
steed instituted laws more civil and much more lawdable: And first he elected
certain of the most ancientest, wisest and sagest men of all the commonwealth,
to consult and advise with the Kings (whereof there were ever two created) of
all matters of state and government, which were chosen of purpose to be
Arbitrators and indifferent vmpires betwixt the power of the Kings, and the
force of the multitude, to the end that neither the one should rebel through
contumacie and stubbornness, nor the other oppress by reason of their
government and greatness: of these Seniors or elders (according to Aristotle)
there were eight and twenty, who were ever assisting and aiding the Kings,
carefully providing that neither the government of the people should be of two
great force, nor that the Kings should tyrannize over the commons, and that all
the rest of the multitude should be made acquainted with whatsoever was decreed
by this order.

Many years after this, unto the government of the Olygarchia or government of
the Tribunes,
people was added the power and authority of the Ephori, or Tribunes (which
were Protectors of the liberties and benefits of the commons against the power
of the Nobles) which kind of government in the Greek tongue is called
Oligarchia, that is the government of a few: and this manner of government was
purposely ordained as a bridle, or restrainte unto the administration of the
Kings and Elders when they seemed over violent and outrageous toward the
commons, and was annexed unto the other, in the hundredth year after the death
of Lycurgus, when Theopompus reigned in Lacedemonia.

One institution ordained by the Olygarchia, or Protectors of the commons, was
the division of their grounds, for those Protectors persuaded the multitude of
the commons, that every one should yield up all the grounds they formerly had in
their possession and occupation, and that the^ to each one should be distributed
an even and equal portion. For their opinion was that every Citizen should
contend to excel others in virtue and understanding, and not in riches and
ryoting. The whole land was therefore divided into nine and thirty thousand
parts, the fields adjoining The division of their land by the Olygarthy.
to the City and belonging to the City into nine thousand, and the rest of the
land which lay in the country, and was occupied by farmers, was three times as
much and more: so that every portion was such as would yield seventy measures
of corn caled Medimni yearly to a man, and to a woman twelve. Lycurgus was
once in a mind to make like division of all moveable goods, but fearing the
envy that for that cause might ensue (for many seemed to take it
discontentedly) he forbore to do it, The use of money prohibited and iron
money made.
yet he utterly took away all use both of silver and gold from amongst them,
and brought in iron money, and stamping it cross wise like the letter X
commanded that it should be of little value, whereby all occasion of stealing
was avoided: and to the end that the iron, whereof that money was coined,
should not be desired for other purposes, he caused it when it was burning and
glowing hot, to be quenched with vinegar, that being thereby mollified and
softened, it might serve to no other use: This done he rejected all arts, as
things mere unprofitable and frivolous, which were then easy to be rejected,
for the use of silver and gold being once prohibited, the artificers departed
thence of their own accord, considering that iron coin would stand them in no
steed in other places.

After this (that he might utterly extirpate and root out of the City all
ryotting and excess) he instituted public feasts, wherein he commanded that
both poor and rich should sit and eat together in one place, and at one
table, without difference or exception of persons: And if any came to that
diet, in that public place, so gallant and gorgeous that his queasie stomach
would not serve him to eat with such companions, or that he would not be
pleasant at his meat, he was chidden and reviled of all those that sat at the
Table with him, as an unthrift, and a waster, by which ordinance all pomp and
sumptuousness was utterly avoided: at this institution the great and welthy
men began to grudge and repine, and were so much incensed against him, as in
a rage they violently rushed upon him and struck out one of his eyes with a
staff, whereupon he ordained that no Spartane whatsoever, should ever after
that time come to meat with any staff or other weapon. This their manner of
dyeting together, they called (Philias) which is as much to say as friendship,
for doubtless it was an argument of public friendship and great humanity, and
might well be termed (Phiditia) that is fellowship, or fraternity: besides
that by this their dyeting together, they were very much given to sparingnesse
and parsimony.

Those which by reason of their sacrifycing, or hunting were absent from their
meals, were permitted to dine and sup at home, but all others ought to be
there present, all excuses set apart, and every one allowed for the upholding
and maintaining of this common diet, yearly, a certain measure full of fine
meal or flower called Medimnum, eight measures called (Corus) full of wine,
five pounds of cheese and two pound and a half of figs.

Children also frequented this common banqueting place, as the school or
university of temperature and all civil discipline, for there they accustomed
to commune and confer together soberly ad discreetly, their they learned to
jest and bourd pleasantly and merrily, and to quippe and taunt one an other
without scurility or offense.

The Spartans in their wiuing, and accompanying with women (by reason of their
continual wars) regarded not chastity, so much as procreation and increase
of issue, and the husbands were so loving and Men called their wives their
mistresses.
obsequious to their wives, as they would call them their mistresses.

Maids practiced and exercised themselves in running, wrestling, throwing
stones, slinging and darting, that Maids exercises.
(flying and shunning idleness, and all womanish niceness) they might be
thereby more strong and lusty, and better able to endure the pains of
childbearing: in doing which excercises, they went naked like boys in sight
of all men, and would dance and sing at solemn feasts in the presence of
young men: which nakedness was neither inconvenient, nor dishonest, for they
were covered with shamefastness, without the least touch of impudency or
wantonness: and hereof insued a towardness and natural aptness in the women
of Laconia, for any action: They which lived single and were never married,
were excluded from those public games and exercises of naked virgins, and (the
more to disgrace them) were constrained to go naked themselves about the
market place in the winter season, least they should have as much honor, and
estimation with young men as those had which were married.

The marriageable virgins were married, or rather stolen away perforce, and the
bride being conducted into her chamber, sheared the hair of her head close to
the skin, and then the bridegroom going in to her, vnlooseth her girdle, and
accompanies with her in the night time only, without once seeing her in the
day time, before he has got her with child. The care and regard of their
children and issue was committed to worthy men, and it was lawful for any old
man (for cause of increase and procreation) Old men that had young wives
permitted young men to lie with the^.
to bring some young man that was honest and well thought of, to lie with his
wife, and if she conceived with child by the stranger, he would repute it as
his own child, and bring it up as his own, nor was it accounted a shame for
any to persuade such old men that had chaste wives, and fit to bring forth
children, that they might be with them to bring forth seed out of so good a
soil: for they laughed at the folly of some people, that would put their mares
and bitches to couple with the best makes they could get, (of their kind)
sometimes for hire, and sometimes for love and favor, and to keep their wives
so warily under watch and ward, that none might lie with them but themselves:
whereby their issue be either mad and distracted, or otherwise very weak and
feeble, unfit for any exercise.

Parents might not be allowed to educate and bring up their own children
themselves; but so soon as they were borne, they were brought into the
streets amongst the people, unto a certain place there called (Ieschen) where
they were nourished, until they were of some stature, and then the forms and
lincaments of their bodies, were perused by certain ouer-seers, and whosoever
was allowed by these ouer-seers, had assigned unto him one of those 9000.
portions of ground, into which the soil belonging to the city was divided: but
those which were weak and deformed, wear brought unto a steep rock not far
from Taygetum, called Apotheca, where they were thrown down headlong as
unprofitable for the commonwealth. The women used not to wash their children
with water, but with wine, by the application of which liquour, it is most
certain, that their bodies would be weakened and made feeble, if they were any
wise subject to the falling evil, nor would they apply any thing to them, to
strengthen and keep their natural heat, nor wrap them in swathing clothes,
or use them to whittles, or rattles, but brought them up in solitary and dark
places, and therefore (by reason of this severe education) many people of other
nations would have their children nourished and brought up by Lacedemonian
nurses.

These children when they accomplished the age of seven years, began to
exercise themselves in the company of their equals, and to get such learning
as was necessary for them, attaining to all other disciplines by their own
industry and indeauor, they were shorn and shaven to the skin, and went
barefooted, and bare legged, and when they were twelve years of age, they
allowed them one cote, but they were prohibited bathes, and all things else
that might nourish their natural heat: the beds whereupon they took their
rest, were made of reeds, wherein (in the winter time) they accustomed to put
a kind of thistles which they called Licophona's. There was one created and
ordained to be governor and tutor over the children, whom they called Iren:
this Iren taught them of the bigger sort, to get and provide wood and fuel,
and the lesser sort to steal and carry it away, to intrude themselves into the
company of their betters, when they were at their bankets, and from thence to
filtch and purloine what they could get, and those which were apprehended and
taken in the deed doing were whipped and driven away, not for because it was an
offense to steal, but for that they did it not warily and advisedly. Some he
would command to sing, some other to propose subtle and witty questions, the
answerers whereof must be both sharp and sudden, and if any were found
negligent in performing their exercise, the Iren would bite them hard by the
thombe in the way of correction. Moreover, they were taught to use grave
speeches, but such as were mixed with some mirth: and in few words to
comprehend whole sentences, in such manner as it was an usual proverb to say,
That it is more easy to play the Philosopher, then to imitate the concise
manner of speaking of the Lacedaemonians.

It is worth the labor to express and set down the exercises of each
several age, and what contention and emulation was amongst them, who should
most excel in virtue. The whole people were distinguished into three companies
or quires, according to their ages, and first, the troop or assembly of old
men, (when in their solemn sacrifices they began to sing) pronounced with a
shrill voice these words following, We were once young and lusty, to whom the
young men following after, make this answer, And we now are young and lusty,
and thereof you shall make trial if you please. And lastly, the Quire of
children coming hindermost, pronounce and say, We shall once be as good as you
and better.

Plutarch reports, that a certain modulation and measure in music, which was
observed and practiced by the Laconians, continued until his time, and which
they were accustomed to sing to their fluites or pipes, when they set upon
their enemies. Thucidides also (the reporter of this Laconian institution) has
written, that those musical songs, and harmony set unto their flutes, were
used in the wars, but he denies, that they were used in any ceremonies of
Religion, or for the performance of divine service, nor yet thereby to
encourage men's minds, or to incite and provoke them to fight, (as the horns
and trumpets were wont to do amongst the Romans) but that at their meeting
together, they might enter into the battle by little and little, as it were,
with equal and measured paces, and not to suffer their orders and ranckes to
be broken or scattered.

There is a verse extant of the Lacedemonian Poet, whereby it appears, that
the Spartans used not only the fluite and pipe in the on set of their battles,
but the musical sound and consent of the harp also. Which custom may seem
to be derived from the Cretans.

Herodotus writes, that Haliattes King of Lydia, in the wars he made
against the Milesians, had not only pipers and minstrels in his camp, to
delight his ear, but (a thing unfit to be reported, because it seems somewhat
incredulous) the daintiest fare that could be gotten by any possible means
whatsoever. The Romans (besides the noise of horns and trumpets) began
their battle with exceeding great clamor and showting of soldiers, which is
far different from that which Homer writes of the people of Achaia: For they
(says he) guarding and defending their forces, enter into the battle with
quietness and silence.

The Frenchmen (as Polybius and Liuie report) use dancing, tripping of the
toe, and shaking their sheelds over their heads: and there be some barbarous
people that enter into battle with howling and crying: by which variety of
customs we may gather, that but few other nations follow and imitate the
Spartans in their consorts and symphony in music, which they use in their
wars.

Moreover, the Spartans fashion was to keep their hair and beards long from
their youth, according to that memorable and worthy saying of the Lawgiver
himself, which was, That men's bodies be much more beautiful and comely, when
their heads be thick grown with hairs, and smoothly combed, then otherwise
they would be, if their hair were shaggie, rugged, vncombed, and neglected.

The King when he begins battle, sacrifiseth a shee-goate to the Muses:
They use one certain and strict kind of living, both at home, and in the
wars: For they held, that they were not borne only to themselves, but for
the good of their Country: They practiced no gainefull and commodious arts,
but were wholly employed in the study of matters belonging to martial
discipline; spending their spare time in sollemne banquettings, by which means
it came to pass, that (as Plutarch has very well noted) the Spartans never
would; or if they would, yet they knew not how to live privately, with a
selfe-regard, but were wholly devoted to the common good of their country.

The Spartanes as they differed from all other nations The manner of electing
officers.
in many other things, so did they in giving their voices for electing of
Officers: For there were a few picked out from the rest to undergo this
business, who were enclosed in a Chamber next adjoining to the Councel-house,
where they should neither see nor be seen of any, and then as the names of
the Competitors were particularly drawn out one after another, and at
happe-hazard they did diligently mark and observe the applause and assent of
the people unto every name, advisedly noting and setting down in a table, who
had the greatest applause, and who the least, which being afterward openly
read, it was thereby known which of the competitors had the most voices.

Furthermore Lycurgus was the first that (remoouing all superstition) permitted
the Citizens to bury the dead bodies in the city, allowing the^ plots of
ground about the Temples, wherein to erect their monuments: but it was not
lawful for any one to engraue or imprint the name of either man or woman upon
their sepulcher, but the names of those only which were manfully slain in the
wars: nor to lament for those which were dead above the space of eleven days.

The citizens moreover were restrained from traveling into other countries,
lest they should bring into their city strange customs and manners: and all
strangers and travelers which arrived there, were barred and excluded from out
their city, (unless their presence were profitable to the commonwealth;)
lest (as Thucydides says) foreign nations should learn, and be partakers of
the Laconian discipline, which may justly be termed a very inhumane part; or
else (as Plutarch writes) lest by the mutual concourse and passage too and
fro of strangers, new speeches and languages might creep into the city, from
whence might proceed new judgments, and dissonant desires, which to the
commonwealth would be matters most pernicious and dangerous. Young men he
allowed to wear but one coat throughout the whole year, nor might any one go
finer, or fare more daintily then others did. He commanded, that nothing should
be bought with ready money, but by exchange of wares and commodities: and that
children (when they were of the age of twelve or fourteen years) should not
be suffered to come into the marketplace or chief part of the city, but
were brought into the fields, to the end they should not spend the prime of
their youth in luxury and wantonness, but in labor and painfulnesse,
ordaining that they should have nothing laid under them to sleep upon, and that
they should eat no pottage nor gruell, nor once return into the city before
they were men.

He ordained also, that maids should be married without portions, to the end
that none should covet wives for their wealth, and that husbands might carry
the more severity over their wives, when they could not vpbraide them with the
greatness of their portions, and how much they were advanced by them: that men
should be esteemed honorable, not for their riches and greatness, but for their
age and gravity; for old age was held in more reverence and reputation amongst
the Spartans, then in any other country besides.

To the Kings he granted power over the wars: to the Magistrates, judgments
and yearly successions: the keeping and custody of the laws to the Senate,
and to the people, power and authority both to elect the Senate, and to create
Magistrates whom they pleased.

Now for because these new laws and institutions (all former customs being
dissolved and abrogated) seemed very harsh and difficult, he fained, that
Apollo of Delphos was the author and inuentor of them, and that from thence (at
the commandment of that god) he brought them to Sparta, thinking thereby,
that the fear and reverence of religion, would vanquish all rediousnesse and
irkesomnesse of using them. And finally, (to the end his laws might remain
and continue to all eternity) he bound and obliged the citizens by an oath,
that they should alter none of those laws which he had made and established
for them, until he himself returned back unto them; alleging, that he
intended to go to Delphos, to ask counsel of the Oracle there, what he should
alter or add to his laws, which done, he took his journey to Creete, and
there lived in perpetual exile, commanding, when he lay upon his Lycurgus
exild himself voluntarily.
deathbed, that as soon as he was dead, his bones should be cast into the
sea, lest by any chance they might be conveyed to Lacedemon: whereby the
Spartans might suppose themselves absolved and released from that oath which
they had taken, not to alter those laws before his return unto them.

It is not amiss in this place to describe, and set forth, what honors and
dignities the Spartans were wont to give to their Kings. And first, they had
two Orders or Estates of Priests, attending upon them to do sacrifices, one of
the Lacedemonian Jupiter, and the other of the celestial Jupiter: and their
law of arms was, that upon what people or country the Kings intended to make
wars, it rested not in the power of any of the Spartans, to prohibit or
gainsay it: for if they did, they offended so haynously, as they would hardly
purge themselves: that in their marching and setting forward to the wars, the
kings should go foremost, and be last in the retraite. And that they should
have an hundred choice and select men to be their guard: that in their
expeditions and setting forward on their voyages, they might have what beast
they would for sacrifice, and that they might take to themselves the hides and
skins of the beasts that were offered. And these were their privileges in the
wars. And the honors and dignities attributed unto them in time of peace,
were these, when in their Commonwealth, any banquets were made for the death
of any great man, the Kings should sit down first, and be first served, and
that they two alone should have betwixt them twice as much meat, as all those
that sat with them, besides the skins of all beasts sacrificed. Moreover, in
the Kalends of every month, they had each of them a beast given them from out
the revenues of the city, to be sacrificed to Apollo, a measure of fine
wheat flower called Medimnum, containing six Modia, and a measure of wine,
called a Laconian quart.

In the beholding of single combats, the Kings preceded and governed certain
places, having for their assistants what Citizens they pleased: And each king
might choose two Pitheans, which were such as were wont to be sent to Delphos
to ask counsel of the Oracle, and these did commonly diet with the Kings. The
Kings allowance when they came not to meals in the usual place, was, two
measures full of fine flower called Chaenices, or Chaeniae, (which is much
about half one of our peckes) and a measure full of wine called Cotyla, that
is as much as Sextarius, (which is about a pint and an half English:) but
when they were present, they had double in quantity as much of every thing as
all the rest that sat with them.

The Kings were to determine who should be husbands of orphane maids, whose
parents were deceased, whether he to whom the father bequeathed her, or he on
whom the mother bestowed her: they had power also over common ways, and over
such as made adopted sons against the kings minds: they had seats in the
Council or Senate House, (which consisted of 28. Senators,) wherein they
might sit at their pleasures: but if they would not come thither, then two of
the Senators which were most near and dear unto them, represented their
persons, and had power to pronounce to voices or suffrages for the Kings, and
two other for themselves. And such were the honors and dignities given to the
Kings, by the Commonwealth of Sparta, while they lived, and when they were
dead, these following.

First, certain hors-men proclaimed and divulged the Kings death, throughout
all Laconia: the like was done also by certain women which walked up and
down about the city, striking and beating upon pots or kettles: which done,
there must of every house two, (one man and one woman, and both freeborn) be
stained, soyled, and defiled with weeping and lamenting, which if they refused
to do, they were severally punished.

The Lacedaemonians used the same orders in their Kings Funeralles, as the
barbarous people of Asia did: for in this manner did most of those barbarous
people bury their Kings.

The death of the King being thus divulged, the citizens of Sparta summoned
all their friends and kinsfolks out of all the Country of Lacedemonia to the
funeral. And after many thousands both of them and of their servants, as also
of the Spartans themselves, were there assembled, (both men and women mingled
together:) they lamented and wept, beating and striking upon their forheads,
and roaring, and howling most bitterly, concluded their lamentation with this
saying: That this last deceased king was the best of all their kings. And if
any of their kings were slain in the wars, they fashioned and pourtrayed an
image like unto him, and (laying it upon a bed very richly furnished) spent
some ten days in the interring thereof, during which time there was continual
vacation and ceasing from prosecuting laws, and exercising justice in places
judicial, nor was there any Sessions of Magistrates or Officers in all that
time, but continual lamentation and bewayling. And in this the Lacedaemonians
agreed with the Persians: for when the Lacedemonian King was dead, he which
succeeded him, pardoned and released every Spartane of all his debt, what ever
it was, that he owed either to the King or Commonwealth. And so likewise in
Persia, he which was newly created king, remitted and forgave unto all the
Citizens their tribute which they owed.

In this also the Lacedaemonians imitated the Aegiptians: for in Lacedemonia, as
well as in Aegipt, both Cryers, Minstrels and Cooks succeeded their fathers in
their arts and occupations,; so as a Cook was begott by a Cook, a Trumpetter
by a Trumpetter, and a Crier by a Crier. Nor did any intrude themselves into
another man's function or calling, but perseuered and continued in their fathers
trade and vocation.

Of the I Will of Creete, and of the customs most common amongst the Cretensians.
CAP. 4.
CREETE, (which is also called Candy The discipline of Creete.
) is an Iland-situated in the Mediterranian sea, and very famous and renowned
for having in it an hundred Cities. This Island (as Strabo writes) is
compassed upon the north with the Aegean and Creetish sea, and with the
Libican or Africane sea upon the South: it lies toward Egila, and Cythera
upon the west, and has upon the East the I Will Carpathus, which lies in the
midst betwixt Rhodes and Creete.

The whole Island contains in length two hundred and seventy miles, and
fifty miles in breadth: and the circuit or compass round about the Island,
is five hundred, eighty and eight miles. The most renowned Cities of Creete,
be Gortyna, Cydonea, Cnossus, and Minois or Minon, which is the Kings seat:
And of all the hills in the country, the hill Ida is most famous, as being
of an exceeding and wonderful height, the length whereof (as Apollodorus
says) is two thousand, and three hundred Stadia, and five thousand and more in
compass: but Artimedorus says: That it is not so much in compass by a
thousand stadia.

In Creete live no noisome or offensive creatures, No venomous creatures in
Creete.
there be neither Serpents, nor owls bredde, and if any be brought thither
from other places they dye instantly. There be abundance of Goats, but few or
no Dear at all: it yields great store of the best and daintiest wines, and
produces an herb called Diptamus (which is a biting and drawing herb, and
by us called Dittanie, Dittander, or garden Ginger:) and the Alunosa, which
being eaten, is a present remedy against extreme hunger. It brings forth
also the poisoned and venomous Sphalangi: and a precious stone called Idaeus
Dactylus.

It was first called Cureta, of the Inhabitants of Curetes, and now by
contraction, Creete: Some others say, it was called Creete of one Cres, (who
was son unto Jupiter king of the Curetes) and some, of Crete the Nymph, who
was daughter to Hesperides.

The people (at the first) were very rude and barbarous, till Rodomanthus
reduced them to more civility and better manners, after whom succeeded
Minois, who adorned and furnished them with more equity and justice. Plato
says, that the Lacedaemonians and other ancient cities of Greece, derived
their laws and ordinances from Creete.

But the good estate of that nation, was overthrown and turned vp-side down,
first, by the government of Tyrants, and afterward by the robbery and wars
of the people of Cilicia: For the Cretans were very studious in diverse
sciences, and desirous of liberty, which they esteemed their Summum bonum, and
supposed they possessed all such things as were not subject to the wanton
lusts, and unlawful desires of Tyrants.

They had a great care, provident respect, and regard of Concord and Amity, as
they be mortal enemies to Discord and Sedition, which are the nurses and
fosterers of Covetousness, and insatiable desire of riches: and therefore the
people of Creete in ancient time, lived very moderately and sparingly: their
children frequented those meetings and assemblies, which they called Greges.
And their young men (when they came to man's estate) haunted and celebrated
public feasts, practicing feats of arms, for the good and general
commodity of the Commonwealth, and exercising and inuring their bodies (in
their youth) to all kind of labor and extremity whatsoever, as heat, and
cold, storms and tempests, both by sea and by land, to run through thick
woods and uneven paths, to provoke and stir up brawles and contentions in
places appointed for their exercises: To be skillful and experienced in
shooting and darting and usually to practice and frequent a certain form of
dancing in armor and weapons, invented by Pyrrhus, and therefore called the
Pyrrichan dancing or vaulting, in which dancing they used to bow and bend their
bodies, the better to shun and avoid weapons and wounds: Their garments were
short Clokes or Cassockes, and soldiers shoes; and they esteemed of weapons
and armor, as most rare and precious gifts.

Moreover, they were so skillful and expert in seafaring matters, as that it
was an usual Proverb, if one dissembled, that he knew not that which he
knew right well, to say, No more is a man of Creete acquainted with the Sea.

All Marriages were made and solemnized betwixt equals: and it was lawful and
tolerable for Virgins to choose and elect them husbands out of that troop of
young men: But the custom was, that their husbands should not take them from
their fathers houses, before they were fit to govern an house, and play the
good hous-wiues at home: And their dower was, (if they had any brother) the one
half of the patrimony.

Children by their law were instructed in learning, singing and music, and
brought to the Feasts called (Syssitia) where men were assembled, and there
made to sit down upon the ground, apparelled in base attire, and to fall
out and brawle amongst themselves; and the boy of the best courage was made
captain over the whole company: And every one as he was of power, got the
most companions upon his side. Then would they go a hunting, and practice
running. And upon certain days, the whole company of children were put
together, and taught to sing to the pipe and harp, as is used in wars.

Some report, that the custom of this countrey-people was, to note their
luckie and fortunate days with a white stone, and their dismal and unhappy
days with a black, though other-some ascribe this custom to the Thracians.

Of Thrace, and of the barbarous manners of the people of Thrace. CAP. 5.
THRACIA (which is now called Romania) is a Region of Europe, and accounted as
part of Scythia: It lies next unto Macedonia on the one side, having upon the
North the river Ister, the seas called Pontus and Propontis upon the East, and
the sea Aegaeum on the South. It was once called Scython: and after that
Thracia, of Thrax the son of Mars, or else of the peoples rudeness, and
barbarous manners: for the Greek word ((...)) signifies rudeness and
inciuilitie.

This Country (as Pomponius writes) has neither fruitful soil nor
temperate air, unless in some places nearest unto the sea side: for it is
marvelous cold and hardly brings forth any fruit that is planted or sowed:
for there be few trees which yield any increase at all, and though they have
many vines, yet the grapes never ripen and come to perfection, unless they be
covered with leaves, to keep the air and cold from them.

The Cities of Thrace which heretofore were of greatest fame and renown, were
Apollonia, Aenos, Nicopolis, and Bizantium, (which was afterward called
Constantinopole, of the Emperor Constantine) who reedified and enlarged it,
making it the chiefest seat of his most glorious Empire, and the head City
of all the East) Perinthos also, Lysimachia, and Calliopolis. The chiefest
rivers are Hebrus, Nessus, and Strymon, and the greatest and highest hills,
Haemus, Rhodope, and Orbelus.

The country is very populous, and the people very fierce and barbarous, in
such manner as if they were all subject unto the government of one man, or
that they were all of one mind, they were then (as Herodotus the father of
Histories, is of opinion) a people invincible, and the most valiant of al
Nations: but because this is too hard a matter to be hoped for, and too
impossible to be expected, therefore be they weak and of little force.

In Thrace be many and diverse Regions, distinguished by several names, but all
of them endued with like manners and opinions: the Getae and Transi only
excepted, and the people that dwell above Crestonae: of which three sorts of
people, the Getae are of opinion, that they shall never die, but that (after
their departure out of this life) they go instantly unto Zamolxis their god:
This Zamolxis was once the Disciple of Pythagoras, who (upon his return into
Thrace) perceiving how rudely, uncivilly, and sottishly the Thracians lived,
(he himself being formerly instructed of the manner of government in Ionia)
taught and furnished them with manners, laws, and civil institutions, and
after persuaded them, that those which kept and observed his laws and
ordinances justly, and as they ought, should after their deaths come unto him
into a place, where he would stay for them, and that there they should ever
live and enjoy his presence and all other things that good were, by which
means (having settled in them a conceit of his godhead) he withdrew himself
from their sight, and (vanishing away they knew not whether) left the^ in a
great desire and longing after him. And unto this Zamolxis their god do the
people as yet send messengers, the manner of which superstition is thus, first
they elect by lot one to undergo that business, and (putting him into a ship
furnished with five watermen or owers) they instruct him in those things which
they chiefly want, and which he shall desire of their God and so send him away:
Then do they give charge unto the mariners, that some of them shall hold three
darts or iauelins upright, and the rest to take the messenger that is sent to
Zamolxis by the legs and arms, and to hoise and toss him up upon their
pikes or iauelin points, and then if he die suddenly they imagine that their god
is appeased and well pleased with them, but if he die not instantly, but
languish and linger long, then they accuse the messenger as a wicked and lewd
fellow. Whom after they have accused and blamed they forthwith send an other,
giving unto him the like charge unto the first.

These Thracian Getae when it lightens and thunders, shoot arrows and fling
darts up toward heaven menacing and threatening, as it were revenging
themselves of God, and for that they believe that there is no other God in deed
but theirs.

The Trausi agree with the Thracians in all other things, saving only
concerning their birthes and deaths: wherein this is their order. As soon as
a child is borne into the world, presently all his kinsfolk and friends flock
about him, bewayling greatly his nativity, and saying, that seeing he is borne,
he must of necessity suffer and endure all human and worldly calamities, and
again, when one is departed out of this life, they commit him to the ground
with great joy and exultation, showing what and how many evils he has
escaped, to live for ever in eternal happiness.

But those which dwell beyond the Crestonae have many wives a year, and when a
man dies, there is great controversy amongst his wives (all their friends
being accited to give their judgments of the matter) which of those wives was
best beloved of her husband, and she that is adjudged to have been dearest
unto him in his life time (which she esteems a great honor unto her) is
both by the men and women, adorned and gallantly decked up and so brought unto
her husbands tomb, and there killed by one of her own dearest friends, and
interred with her dead husband, all the other wives lamenting, and accounting
that a great cross and disgrace unto them.

All other Thracians in general sell their children openly, nor be virgins
there restrained from accompanying with their nearest kin, no not with their
own fathers, but may lie with whom they please, and yet husbands be very chary
of their wives chastity, for they buy them of their parents with great sums
of money, and the sign them in the forheads with certain marks, which kind
of marking is held a very generous and worthy thing: but to be without those
marks is an argument of ignominy and baseness: where diverse maids are to be
married, those which be most beautiful be first taxed and prized, and being
once prized their parents will not by any means give them in marriage for
less money then they were rated at: and when all the fairest be bought, then
those which be deformed be sold at more easier prices, so as in conclusion all
go away.

In their banquets both men and women sit round about a fire, whereinto they
cast the seeds of certain herbs, which grow in those parts, the very smell
and savor whereof does so stop and stifle them, as their senses be dulled, and
they as pleasant and iocund as if they were merry drunk. To live idly, and
by theft, they account an honest course of life, but to labor and husband the
ground, they hold base and ignoble. The gods which they chiefly worship and
religiously adore, be Mars, Bacchus, Diana and Mercury, but they swear only by
Mars, accounting him as the author, and orignall of their race.

The people of Thrace exceed all other men in bigness and stature of body,
their eyes be gray, their looks grim, frowning and menacing, their speech
terrible, and themselves long of life. Their buildings be very low and base,
and their diet is nothing dainty: they have no vines, but great store of
apples: the King is elected as well by the voices of the commons, as by the
nobility: and they elect such a one as is of approved good manners, singular
clemency and (by reason of his age) of very great gravity, and one that has no
children, for he which is a father, is not admitted amongst them to be a
governor, be his life and conversation never so vprigh^ and lawdable, and if
at any time in all his reign, he chance to have a child, he is therefore
deprived of his government: For by no means will they admit that their
Kingdom should become hereditary: and though the King be never so just and
rightful. Yet will they not allow him the whole power in his own No King
admitted that has children because their Kingdom shall not be hereditary.
hands, and to rule as he list himself, but he must be assistwith forty
Rectors or Judges, to the end he should not be sole Judge in capital causes,
and if the King himself be found faulty of any offense he is punished with
death, yet not with such a death as any one shall lay violent hands upon him,
but (by the common consent of all) he is deposed The King that offends is
famished to death.
from his Kingly authority, and then famished to death, whom (when he is dead)
the great men bury on this manner.

First they lay forth his body upon the ground for the space of three days,
and then fall to banqueting and slaying of all sorts of beasts for sacrifices,
which done they weep over him, burn his body and bury his bones in the
ground, and lastly upon his monument they proclaim and set out combats of all
sorts, and especially the Monomachia, which is the single combat or fighting of
two hand to hand.

The armor and weapons which (as Herodotus writes) they used in the wars
against Darius, were helmets made of foxes skins, soldiers coats, and
short cassockes over them, and upon their legs they were buskins made of
fawnes skins, their weapons wore darts, targets, short poyniardes and bows,
wherein they be so skillful and expert as they allege that they were the
first inuentors of that weapon: Their language and the Scythians is al one.

Pliny writes, that all Thrace was once divided into fifty Stratageas, which
are counties or captainships: that part of Thrace which was once called Getica
(where Darius the son of Hydaspis was wel-nigh overthrown) is now called
Valachia of the Flacci a family of Rome. For the Romans after they had
overcome and utterly vanquished the Getes, sent thither a Colony under the
conduct of one Flaccus, whereupon the country was first called Flaccia, and
afterward by corruption Valachia, which opinion carries more likelihood of
truth, for that the Roman language is yet spoken in that Country, but they
speak it so corruptly, as a Roman can scarce understand it, the Roman
letters also be there used, saving that the form or fashion of the letters is
somewhat alterred, their rites and ceremonies of Religion do jointly agree,
cohere, and are all one with the Greeks.

The Daci afterward possessed this Country, of whom for a certain space it
was called Dacia, but now it is enjoyed by the Almaines, the Siculi, and the
Valachians.

The Almaines or Teutones were a very valiant and hardy people, sent thither
out of Saxony, by Charles the Great, who in their own natural language and
dialect were called Seibemburges, of the seven Cities which they inhabited. The
Siculi or Sicilians were an ancient people of Hungaria, and such as (abandoning
their own Country) first came thither from out of Scythia, and seated
themselves in that Country.

Of the Valachians were two sorts of people, and of two sundry factions, the
Dragulae and the Dani, otherwise called Davi (for there do some Greek writers
report, that the Getes and Daui, were the names of servants, which in times
past came thither from other places.

The Dragulae being neither equal nor matchable to the Danes, nor able to make
their party good with them (not much above a hundred year since) brought the
Turks into that country, by whose force and arms the Dani were almost utterly
killed and vanquished, had not that valiant man John Huniades brought aid unto
them, who rescuing them, and recovering the land again from the enemy, took
seizure thereof for himself: the chief exercise of the Valachians is
husbandry and keeping of cattaile, which argues and declares the original of
that people: They pay tribute to the Kings of Thrace, and but once to every
King, and then (by the Kings declaration) each family gives him an ox in the
name of a tribute: and the number of families in Valachia, is said to be above
sixty thousand: Those which be commanded to go to the wars and refuse to
go, are punished with death.

Valachia upon the West bordereth upon Transiluania, and runs Eastward into
the Euxine sea, upon the North-east and North it joins to Russia, and upon
the South it is washed with the river of Ister, about which whatsoever those
wandering people be that therein inhabit, the air is very intemperate and
cold, and their winter in a manner continual, the soil in Valachia was
heretofore very barren, yielding them but slender sustainance, and their chief
defense against rain and ill wether, was either reeds or leaves, they would
go over great pooles and waters upon the Ise, and their victuals was such wild
beasts as they could catch: mansion houses or set places of abode they had
none, but rested where ever they were weary.

Their diet was very vile and base, by reason of the horrible intemperatnesse
of the air, and they went always bare-headed.

Of Russia or Ruthenia, and of the latter manners and customs of the Russians.
CAP. 6.
RVSSIA (which is also called by two other The division and bounds of Russia.
names Ruthenia and Podolia) is divided into three parts (viz) Russia Alba,
Russia superior, and Russia inferior. That part which extends in lengthwise
toward Sarmatia or Poland, is bounded North with the river Peucis, toward the
East lies the river Moscus, and Westward are Liuonia and Prussia, the
furthest parts of Germany.

The bounds and limits of the Ruthenians or Roxallanians (for by that name they
be also called) at this day, is the space of eight days journey over, from
the river Tanais to the North Ocean, and from the German Ocean (which they
call the Balthean sea) to the Caspian sea, is the space of above ninty days
journey.

The country is so fertile and fruitful, as though the soil be but rudely
and vnhusbandlike tilled, and corn thrown upon it will yield increase three
years together, One seed time yields three haruests.
and that without plowing the two latter years, for the corn which shedeth at
reaping, will be seed sufficient to yield an other harvest, and the second a
third likewise: and the grain which it produces grows up a full perch in
height; There is such great store of Bees in Russia, that Russia abounds with
Bees.
for want of hiues and hollow trees, they build in rocks and holes of the
earth, there is great store of the bast Meth and wax, which is, carried thence
into diverse other countries in great abundance.

The Russians store not their ponds and pooles with fish, because (as they say)
fishes do their naturally breed, and multiply by the influence of the
heavens. In a certain lake there called Katzibe (when the wether is dry) is
salt gotten, for which there is much war betwixt the Russians and the
Tartarians, and it is very strange which is reported, that in the Country of the
Chelmenses, if the arms and branches of pine trees, be cut off from VVood
turned unto stone.
the trees, and lie upon the ground for the space of two or three years, they
will be hardened and turned into stones: there is also good plenty of chalk.

And toward the river Tanais and Maeotis poole, grows great store of sweet
cane or reed, called Callamus Aromaticus, or Callamus Reuponticus, and many
other herbs and roots which be not found in other places.

There chief City and Kings seat is called Moscouia, it is seitutated upon
the river Moscus, and is fourteen miles in circuit: coin or stamped silver
they have none in that City: and in the middle of the market place, stands a
foure-square stone, upon the top whereof, he that can clime up and ascend,
and in performance thereof, be not violently thrust down by others, obtains
the principality and government of all the City: whereupon oftentimes arise
great contentions and debate amongst the people, each one indeauouring to
supplant his corriuall, that himself may ascend: The Country is so populous
and strong, that not long since, in a certain warlike assembly in the Kings
camp, were numbered and reckoned a hundred and twenty thousand horsemen, every
one whereof were able to lead an army.

In their wars they use bows (which weapon by long usage is most familiar
and proper to that nation) and lances of twelve foot long: their horsemen
which serve in complete armor, wear iron brest-plates upon their brigandines
or cotes of maile, with the belly or middle standing out: In steed of helmets,
they have hattes made sharp upon the crown, and this kind of horsemen be
more serviceable and in greater request in the wars, then footmen.

Some foote-men fight with a certain weapon called Scorpio, because it is like
a scorpion, wherewith they shoot small arrows or quarrels (it is the same
which the Italians call Balista, and with us a Crosse-bow, Stocke-bow, or
Tiller) some others do use for to shoot leaden bullets out of brazen pieces,
after the manner of the Almaines.

The Russians cannot endure for to have their Governors called Kings, but
Dukes, as being a name more The Russians cannot endure to call their Governor
a King, but a Duke as a name more popular.
popular, and he that is Duke has the dominion and government over the whole
nation, betwixt whom and the Nobles, there is no difference in their apparel,
saving that the Duke wears a cappe somewhat higher then the rest: Their
garments be of all colors saving black: and both men and women are
apparelled in fine linen cassockes or shirtes, hanging down to their knees.

This garment they trim and garnish round about the neck with gold and
read silk, it is wide and loose and but little differente from those which
the Grecians wear: the like also is worn by the Turks and all the Northern
people, but that the Ruthens garments have wider sheeues, and be hemmed or
guarded with gold about the breasts and shoulders, and edged or welted round
about the skirtes with Otters skin.

None but only the wife, lamenteth and bewaileth the death of her husband, and
then is her head covered with a white linen cloth, hanging down to her
elbowes: the richer sort of people have a banquet made them upon the forteeth
day after the funerals, in remembrance of him that is dead, but the poorer
sort be feasted five times within the forty days: the days of their
deaths be likewise observed, wherein they celebrate yearly feasts. And those
which survive keep a register of all their friends which be dead, to the end
they may know upon what days the obites and Annual feasts are to be
celebrated, for every one that is departed: the dead bodies be buried and
interred with weeping and lamentation.

The women usually hang at their ears pearls and precious stones, which in
men is not so commendable but only while they be children, and then it is
decent enough: a woman that has had two husbands may be thought chaste, but
she that has been thrice married, is condemned as lewd and lascivious, and
yet it is no impeachment to men's credits though they have had three wives.

Maids before marriage suffer there hair to hang down behind them, but when
they be married they cover it carefully, and men cut theirs short, round
about their ears, esteeming all trimming of there hairs to be a reproach unto
them.

This Nation is generally addicted to venery and drunkenness, for to be
drunk they hold a glory unto them, and esteem of lust and lasciviousness as
of a thing lawful, and commendable, so as the marriage bed be not defiled.
Usury also is there very common and usual, and not held to be deceit in any
one, not so much as in the Clergy.

A great part of the Russians be bondmen and servile, Many Russians make
themselves bondmen.
and that willingly, for many of them, and those sometimes of the better sort,
set to sale themselves, their wives and children, other, for because they may
thereby live more idly, or enjoy greater pleasure.

The inferior priests wear black copes (after the manner of the Gretians) and
the better sort of them wear white, having hanging at their breasts, tablets
or bullions, wherein be written the decalogue or precepts of the law divine.
The holy Virgins, or Nuns (whereof there is but one family or order, which is
the order of Saint Anthony the Abbot) by the ordinance of the same Saint
Anthony their author and first founder, be apparelled in black stoles.

The Russians have a speech peculiar to themselves, but whether it be the
Scythian tongue or no I am not able for to Judge, their letters are not much
unlike the Greek caracters: they do for the most part learn music and
gammer after the Greek manner, and have all other arts in contempt.

Touching matters of faith, they believe as the Greeks do, use like
ceremonies in their service, and like honor to the Saints. There be twelve
men chosen and elected for to do Justice and determine controversies, whereof
one first searches out the quality of the crime, and then makes report
thereof to his fellows, and sometimes to the Duke himself. And if the matter
be of greater weight or difficulty, then can well be discerned and decided by
that council, or that it rests doubtful, so as the accused cannot be
convicted, then the defendant is enforced to try the matter with the plaintiff
by combat, and he which is vanquisher shall have double the value in money of
the vanquished as the wrong supposed to be done, was valued at.

They be very much given to husbandry, they plow with horses, and their soil
is very fruitful of all things but wine, there drink is a kind of beer or
ale made of millet and barley boiled together, which kind of liquor is most
commonly drunk in all the Northern parts. They make oil of hempe-seed,
poppie and nuts: olive trees they have none, nor is the iuse or liquor thereof
brought thither from other countries, Russia breeds many sorts of wild
beasts, whereof diverse be of rich furs, and highly commended of ancient
writers: there is great store of fish, amongst which, is a most excellent one
called Seldis, which is taken in a lake called Pareslacus, and is very like the
fishes that be caught in the lake Benacus (which is a lake near Betrona in
Italy.)

In Ruthenia be seven famous lakes, and nine great rivers, one of which is by
some coniectured to be the river Borysthenes by reason of the wonderful
things they report of the bigness and nature thereof.

Of Lithuania, and of the manner of living of those people. CAP. 7.
LITHVANIA joins upon the East unto Poland, it is nine hundredth miles about,
and the greatest part thereof is either moors, fennes or woods, which is the
cause that it is very hard Lithuania is full of moors and fennes.
and difficult to come unto, and in a manner inaccessible, all the whole
country being ouerflowed with moorish waters.

There is no other fit or convenient time for merchants, strangers, to trade
and traffic in this Country, but in winter, only then the fennes being all
congealed, and frozen together, and the ice of an exceeding thickness and
covered with snow, every place is passable, and all the whole country being of
a sea, they can find no more certain way to any place, but as they be guided
by the stars.

In Lithuania be very few towns, cities or villages: the inhabitants
chiefest wealth is cattaile, and skins of diverse kinds of wild beasts, as
of the Harmoline and Zobelline, whereof there be great plenty in that
country: Of wax and honey there is great abundance, but they have no use of
money. The women have their chamber-mates and friends by their husbands
permission, and those they call helpers or furtherers of matrimony, but for a
husband to commit adultery is held disgraceful and abominable: Marriages
there be very easily dissolved, by consent of both parties, and they marry as
often as they please.

This people is so different from all other nations in their manner of living,
as they hold with the absurd opinion of Aristippus, which is, that honesty
consists not by nature but by custom: Wine is very scarce and geason amongst
them, the want whereof is supplied with milk, by reason of the great
abundance of beasts, and there bread is brown, being neither sifted nor
boulted, they speak the Slauonian language as the Polonians do, which
language is common to many other nations besides, whereof some follow the rites
and ceremonies of the Roman Church, as the Polonians, the Dalmatians, the
Croatij and the Carni: some others the Greek Church, as the Bulgarians,
Ruthenians and most of the Lituanians, and some again hold certain opinions
differring from both Churches, as the Bohemians, Morauians and Bosnienses, of
which some follow the opinion of John Husse, and many others the sect of the
Manachies: and there be some which as yet continue still in their paganism
and superstitious blindness, by worshipping of Idols, and such be many of the
Lithuanians.

Ierom of Prage who (in the time of Pope Eugenius the forth of that name)
preached the gospel in the country, and was the first that acquainted us with
the manners and ceremonies of that people (before that time utterly unknown
unto us) reported that diverse of the Lithuanians (amongst whom he first
arrived) had certain serpents every household one, to whom they sacrificed as
to their house-hold-gods, and that he wrought so far with the worshippers of
them, that they destroyed and killed them all, one only excepted, which could
not be burned: some others worshipped the fire, and from it received their
diuinations, and many others the Sun, in the form of a huge iron mallet,
accounting that to be there guide, and giving it to name Magnus.

These people be oftentimes subject to the King of Poland: the chief City of
the Region is called Vilna, it is a Bishops seat, and as big as all Cracouia
with the suburbs: the houses whereof join not together, but stand one a good
distance from an other, as they do in the Country, having orchardes and
gardens betwixt them.

There be in it two very strong castles or holds, one situated upon a hill,
and the other lower upon the plain or champion ground: This city of Vilna is
distant from Cracouia, the chief city of Poland, one hundred and twenty miles.

About the City there are certain Tartarians have places assigned them for to
dwell in, who tilling and manuring the ground after our manner, do labor and
carry commodities from one place to an other.

They do speak the Tartarian tongue and worship the Religion of Mahomet.

Of Liuonia, Prussia, and of the soldiers called Mariani in Spain. CAP. 8.
LIVONIA (now professing the true and sincere religion) joins Northward unto
Ruthenia, and the borders of Sarmatia, or Poland. The Tartarians a people of
Scythia, have made often incursions, into that Country: The people of Liuonia
were first made pertakers of the Christian religion, by soldiers of Spain
called Mariani of Marianus, whereas before they acknowledged and adored no
other god, but evil spirits.

There has been very much controversy and wars about the possession of that
country, sometimes one, sometimes an other getting the upper hand and
government.

It is environed upon the West part thereof with the Sarmatian sea, and with a
gulf of an unknown bigness, the mouth whereof Westward is not very far
from Cimbrica Chersonesus, the which is now called Dacia or Denmark: about
this gulphe Northward there does dwell or inhabit a sauadge and wild kind of
people, which (being void of any language used in other lands) do exchange
there Merchandise by signs and beckes: Prussia (the inhabitants whereof be
called Pruteni) pertaketh now with Germania and Sarmatia, which countries it
incountreth upon the West.

This land (if Ptolomeus report a truth) is washed with the famous River
Vistula, from the City Tornum to Gedanum, where it falls into the Baltean
sea, it lies beyond Germany, and reaches from the river Vistula, to the
Sarmaticke Ocean.

Upon the East and South, is the Province of the Massouitae, (the inhabitants
whereof be Polanders) and the Saxons upon the West: Prussia is an exceeding
fruitful country, well watered, and very populous. It is pleasant withal,
and abounding with cattle, there is very good fishing, and much hunting.
Iornandes writes, that this land was inhabited by a people called Vlmerigi, at
such time as the Goths removed from the Island of Scandinavia, into the
continent and maine land: And Ptolomeus reports, that the Amaxobij, the
Aulani, the Venedes, and the Gythones, dwelt near the river Vistula or Wixell.

The people of this Country were worshippers of evil Spirits, until the time
of the Emperor Frederick the second: and than our Ladies soldiers, which be
also called Deiparini, or Mariani, after they had lost the town of Ptolomais
in Siria, returned into Germany, and being men of haughty and noble spirits,
and very expert in feats of arms; and to the end their courages should not be
danted, and they out of use by overmuch idleness, they came unto the Emperor,
declaring unto him, that the people of Prussia which border upon Germany, were
utterly ignorant of the Christian Religion, and that they made often incursions
upon the Saxons, and other their bordering neighbors, stealing from them
whole herds of cattle: showing him moreover, that they had a desire to
suppress that barbarous nation; whereunto the Emperor consented, and gave the
kingdom to his two brethren, as their lawful inheritance, if they could
conquer it by arms: the Dukes and Governors of Massouia, (which before had
proclaimed themselves Lords of that land) surrendered their estates and titles
forthwith to the Emperors brothers; which gift was thankefully taken by the
Emperor himself, who commending his brothers intent, gave unto them what
letters and commission they desired, signed with the golden seal. These
breethren providing themselves for the wars, in a short time brought under
their subjection, all the Countries which were under the Prussian government,
on each side the river Vistula; who being conquered by battle, willingly
submitted themselves to their subjection, and embraced the true faith, and
Christian Religion therewithal, exchanging their speech for the Almaine tongue.
Nere unto the river Vistula grew an Oak where the victors achieved the
conquest, and there they first erected a Castle, which shortly after (as many
things in time grow great of small beginnings) grew up into a great town,
and was called Maryburge: it is now the chief city of the Country, and his
seat which has the government of that whole order of soldiers; which holy
order of warfare, had his beginning from the Almaines, and there is none but
Almaines, which enter into that order or bond, and those too must be nobly or
worshipfully descended: at their entrance into that order, they are enjoined to
be always in readiness to fight against the enemies of the holy Cross of
Christ: they be clothed in white cassockes, with black crosses sowed on them,
all of them suffering their beards grow long, but only such as be Priests, and
are employed in their services. The soldiers in stead of the Canonical
hours, repeat the Lords prayer, for they be altogether unlearned, yet be
they very rich, and their power as great as if they were Kings. They have many
conflicts with the Polonians, for incroaching upon the Confines of their
country, in which sometimes they have the better, and sometimes the worse, and
they will never refuse to submit all their forces to the hazard of the wars,
what ever the event or success be.

There is a little Region bordering upon Prussia, and Samogithia.
Lithuania, called Samogithia, it is closed and environed round about with
woods and waters, and is fifty miles in length: the people thereof be very
tall, and of a comely stature, and yet very uncivil, and of rude behavior:
they marry as often as they will, and without respect of kindred or blooud: for
the father being dead, the son may marry his stepmother; and one brother
deceased, his other brother may marry his wife. Money they have none; their
buildings be base and low, and their houses for the most part made of hemp
stalks and reeds, and fashioned like boats or helmets, upon the ridge or
tops whereof is made a window to give light to the whole house, and in every
house is but one fire, which is ever burning, both to dress their meat and
drink, and other necessaries belonging to their bodies, as also to expel the
violence of cold, which is there very vehement and extreme, a binding frost
continuing for the most part of the year. These houses have no chimneys in
them, for all the smoke goes out at the window.

The people be much inclined to divination and witchcraft: the god in whom
they repose most confidence and trust, and which they especially honor and
adore, is the Fire, which they persuade themselves to be most holy, and
everlasting, because it is fed with continual fuel, and there was a fire
kept ever burning by the Priests upon the top of a high hill near unto the
River Meuiasa.

Vladislaus King of Poland, (who first reduced that nation to the Christian
Religion) quenched that fire, and overthrew the turret wherein it was kept,
together with all the woods, which the people of Sarmatia held to be as holy as
the fire, and worshipped them with as much devotion, and Religion, esteeming
and accounting them to be the dwellings and habitations of the gods, according
to the saying of the Poet:

The gods inhabited and kept the woods. Nor did they worship and reverence
the fire and woods only, but every other thing likewise, which usually
remained and abidde in the woods, as birds, and wild beasts: and if any one
violated and contemned their witchcrafts and Invocation of devils, their heads
and feet would incontinently close and shrink together, by the deceit and
illusion of their evil spirits. Within the woods each family had a place or
hearth, wherein they kept a fire for all that family; in which fire their
custom was, to burn their dead bodies, with their horses, saddles, and best
garments: firmly believing, that in that place those which be dead and burned,
meet together in the night, and therefore they made them settles or benches to
sit upon of Corcke tree, and placed them in readiness, the best mead, and a
kind of meat made of paste like unto a cheese, for them to eat.

Every year upon the first day of October all the people of the whole
country assembled and met together in those woods, and there (using all kind
of devotion) celebrated a sollemne Feast, each family feeding in his own
cottage, upon the daintiest fare, and most delicious viands they could get. At
which feast they sacrificed by the firesides, unto all their gods, and
especially unto one who me they called Percumo, which in their language
signifies thunder.

Their language is all one with the Lithuanians, and the Polonians, for the
Priests preach unto the people in the Polonian tongue: they observe the
Customs of the Roman Church, although there be some Ruthens toward the
South, and Muscouites which dwell far north, which observe the Ceremonies of
the Greek Church, yielding their obedience to the Bishop of Constantinople,
and not to the Bishop of Rome. Upon the North side of this Country lies
Muscovia, it is five hundred miles in compass, rich in silver, and upon all
sides so guarded, environed, and defended with such strong holds, as not only
strangers, but their own native contrymen, be interdicted and prohibited to
pass in and out at their pleasures without the Dukes letters of safe conduct.
The country is even and plain, no hills but great store of woods and marish
grounds: it is watered with many great rivers, as Occa, Volha, Dzuvina,
Boristhines and Dinaper, and therefore affoordeth as many fishes and wild
beasts as Lithuania, from which it differs not much, neither in customs nor
situation, saving that it is somewhat colder, because more Northward, and
therefore be their cattle little and small, and for the most part halting and
lame of their lims.

The Metrapolitane and chief City of the Region, is Moscua, it is twice as
big within the compass of it, as Prague in Bohemia, the building is of
timber as all their other Cities be, it has many streets and lanes, but
they stand straggling with broad fields betwixt them, the river Mosca runs
through the middle of it, and divides it into two parts, and in the midst of
the City stands a castle or tower, builded upon level ground, wherein be
seventeen turrets, and three bul-warkes or Blocke-houses, so strong and so
stately, as there be but few such to be found: within this Castle be
seventeen Churches, whereof those three which be dedicated to our blessed
Lady, Saint Michael, and Saint Nicholas be walled about with stone, but the
rest be made of timber: there is also in it three large and spacious Courts,
for Noblemen and Courtiers to spend their time in, a stately and beautiful
palace also for the Duke to dwell in, builded after the Italian fashion, but
not very large.

The Country contains many famous Dukedoms, out of which, upon any
occasion, in the space of three or four days, they will get together in a
readiness two hundred thousand able men: Their usual drink is water and
mead, and a certain leauened or sour liquor, which they call Quassatz: they
plow with wooden ploughes, and harow their ground with branches of trees, or
thorns. Their corn (by reason of continual cold) ripeneth but slowly, and
therefore they dry it in hot houses, and so thresh it.

Against the extremity of cold, they use diverse spices, and make a kind of
water to drink of oats, honey and milk; so strong, that they will sometimes
be drunk with it: Wine and oil they have none; and to avoid drunkenness,
the Governor of the country forbids the drinking of all strong drinks,
upon pain of death, except twice or thrice in a year, and then it is
tolerable for them to be drunk.

They have silver coin of two sorts, a bigger, and a lesser, it is not made
round, but somewhat long, and with four corners: This coin they call
Dzuvingis.

They speak the Slauonian language, and in religion follow the Greek Church:
Their Bishops be under the Patriarch of Constantinople, and by him be
confirmed. They be all Christians saving the Kosannenses, which worship
Mahomet, like the Sarrasins: there dwell some Scythians also toward the North,
which speak their own language, and worship Idolles, and one Idol above the
rest, which they call Zlota baba, that is to say, the image of an old woman
made of gold: this Idol they do so highly reverence and adore, as every one
that passes by it, falls down and worshippeth it, offering thereunto a
hair from their garments, if they have nothing else to offer.

And although the Slauonian tongue be generally spoken throughout the whole
nation, yet is there so great difference in their speech, (it being so mixed,
confounded and corrupted with other languages) as they can hardly understand
one another.

In the time of Idolatry they had one high Priest or Bishop which they called
(Criue) his dwelling was in the city Romoue, so called of Roma. And this
custom was general to all the whole nation, not only to sell their servants
and slaves, like beasts, but their sons and daughters likewise, yea and
sometimes themselves, suffering the^ to be carried into other countries, in
hope of better means to live: for in their own, their diet was gross and bad.

Of Polonia, and of the latter customs of the Polonians. CAP. 9.
POLONIA, a vast country of Europ, is so called of his plainness and
eeuennesse, for (Pole) in the Slauonian tongue, which is spoken by the
Polanders, signifies plain, level, or eeuen: it is otherwise called
Sarmatia: Upon the West it bordereth upon Slesia, upon Prussia and Massouia
upon the North, upon the East lies Ruthenia, and Hungaria on the South.

The hill Carpathus (which is there called Crapack) divides the Country into
two parts, whereof that part which is next unto Saxony and Prussia, is called
the greater Polonia, and the other the lesser, lying over against Russia and
Hungaria.

The whole kingdom is divided, as it were, into four several and distinct
Provinces, all which the king visits every year, in course one after
another, and each of them maintains the king and his whole court for three
months together, but if he stay longer then three months in any one part of
the kingdom, it is at their choice whether they will yield him any further
maintenance or no.

The kings seat is the great and famous city Cracouia, where is preserved
and kept all the wealth of the kingdom and all the other cities are mean and
simple in comparison of it: most of their houses be made of rough stone, rudely
compacted and heaped together, without mortar or clay, and dawbed with mudde:
the country is full of woods, and thickets, the people be prudent and wise,
courteous toward strangers, and exceeding great drinkers, (as most of your
Northern people be) yet is there small store of Wine, as having no Vines in
all the whole country: instead whereof they drink a kind of counterfeit Ale
made of Wheat and other grain, for the soil is very fertile, and affoordeth
great store of wheat, it is also very commodious and fit for feeding,
yielding large grounds for beasts to pasture in. There is very good hunting, as
namely of wild horses, which have horns like Hearts, and the wild Bull, which
the Romans call Vrus: metal mines there be none but only of Led, but
Salt is there dug out of the ground in such abundance, as no one thing
yields more custom to the King then that does: and there is so-great store
of honey both in Poland and Russia, that they have not spare places sufficient
wherein to keep it, for all their trees and woods be covered black over with
Bees. The form of their letters is much like unto the Greek Character, their
ceremonies of religion are indifferent betwixt the Roman and the Greek
Church, and both men and women in their apparel do much resemble the Greeks.

Of Hungaria, and of the institutions and manner of living of the Hungarians.
CAP. 10.
HVNGARIA is the same which was once called Pannonia, although it was not so
The limits of Hungaria.
large and spacious a country when it was so called, as now it is, all betwixt
the the river Laytha and the river Savus, is known by the name of the
inferior or lower Pannonia. Hungary beyond Danubius reaches unto Poland and
comprehends all the country which was inhabited by the Gepidae and Daci, so
as the limits of the Empire is now far larger then the name of the nation.

This land (as ancient writers report) is divided into nine parts or
divisions, which in the German tongue be called (Hagas,) every one whereof
is compassed and enclosed with walls, made of blocks or piles of oaks, beech
or fyr tree fixed fast in the ground, twenty foot high and twenty foot
broad. The soil is full either of hard stones or stiff clay, and all the
valleys be covered over with turfes, upon the borders or marches of the land,
be many trees or shrubes planted and set, which being cut up and cast away
will not-with-standing bear leaves and flourish.

Every one of these nine circles or divisions of ground, be twenty German
miles distant one from another, although they be not all of one length, but
some one shorter than other some, and in every part of them be Cities,
Castells and Villages, builded in such good order and uniformity, as a man may
be heard speak from one Castle Town or village to another.

Their buildings be compassed and enclosed with strong walls, but their gates
be over narrow for them to go in and out at their pleasure, to steal and
filch from others. Every one of those Circles or enclosed portions of ground
called hagges, were wont to give signs unto others of every accident, by the
sound of a trumpet.

The Pannones (long since called Paeones) were first that inhabited that land,
after whom it was possessed by the Huns a people of Scythia, and after them by
the Goths, which came out of the Islands of the German ocean: when the Goths
were gone it was possessed by the Longabards, which came from Scandinauia an
island of the Ocean also; And lastly by the Hungarians, who came from out the
other Hungaria in Scythia, which is not far from the head of the river of
Tanais, and is now called Iuhra: This Scithian Hungary is a miserable could
country, as being situate wholly under the Frigid zone, it is trybutary to the
Duke of Muscouy: the tribute which the inhabitants pay is neither gold nor
silver, (for thereof they have none) but rich Skins and furs of sundry wild
beast as of Sabells and such like.

They neither plow nor sow, nor have any kind of bread, but live only upon
flesh of wild beasts and fish, and drink water: and their lodgings be cabbins
made of twigs and bows, in groves and thick woods: whereupon it insueth that
men living in woods with wild beasts, wear neither linen nor woollen garments
but skins only either of hearts bears or wolves. Some of them addore the Sun,
some the Moon and other Stars, or what ever first comes to their view; they
have a proper and pecular language to themselves.

They fish for coralls that grow in the sea, and fishes called Balenae of whose
skins they make coaches and purses, They have exceeding fat Bacon whereof they
sell much to other nations. Upon that side of this Hungary in Scythia which is
nearest unto the Ocean, be sundry little hills or cliffes, upon which certain
fishes called Mors or death fishes, making offer by means of their teeth, to
clime to the top of the rocks, when they be almost at the highest their
hold fails them and they fall down and kill themselves with the fall. These
fishes do the Inhabitants gather up and eat, reserving their teeth which be
very white and broad, which they exchange with strange Merchants for other
commodities, of these fish teeth be made very good knives hafts.

But Hungaria in Europe has upon the west Austria and Boemia, upon the South
that part of Illyria which is next to the Adriatticke sea; upon the East lies
Seruia (once inhabited by the Triballii and Misii) and now of many called
Sagaria) and upon the North and Northeast, Poland and Muscouie. The chief
City and Kings seat is Buda, so called of Bada the brother of Attila: the
soil of the country (so much thereof as is errable) is very fertile, and there
be many veins of gold and silver. It is strange that is reported by the
Inhabitants, that there is a river in Pannonia, whereinto if Iron be
oftentimes dipped, it will be turned into Copper. The men wear garments that
be made hollow about the shoulders, and linen coats or shirts under them,
the collers whereof appear about their necks higher then their uppermost
garments, and be wrought with silk and gold: They be indifferent what manner
of stockings they wear, for that they ever have buskins over them. They be
very curious in anointing and trimming of their hair, and they ever go in
linen hatts, which they sildome put of, or once remove from their heads,
unless when they sit still and be idle: but women's peticotes be made more
straiter to their bodies then men's coats be, and reach higher toward their
chinnes to cover their necks and breasts, over which they wear gowns, and
their faces be masked with linen Veales richly wrought and imbrodered, so as
you can see no part of them but their noses and eyes: Their heads be covered
with linen kerchers or coyfes set with pearls and precious stones, and they as
well as men wear buskins that come up to the calves of their legs. Their
time of mourning in Hungary is for some a year, and for some two, and they
shave of their beards all but the upper lip: They judge of matters concerning
the true religion according to their law: but in disciding of other matters,
their course is (if the matter in question be difficult or doubtful, and
cannot other wise be determined) that the plaintiff or defendant shall fight it
out by combat in the presence of the King or his deputy, who is to judge of the
victory, for of his trial by batell death does not always follow, for it is
conquest sufficient for one, if his enemy either faint, or fight unwillingly or
fly out of the lists appointed for the combat: The horsemens fight in Hungary
is first with lances and then with swords, and foot soldiars fight naked on
all parts but their priuities; They have a proper speech but not much differing
from the Boemian language, and though they have a form of letters of their
own, yet use they altogether the Roman character. They be a cruel kind of
people, very hardy and valiant in war, and much more fit to fight on foot than
on horseback: They be under the government of a King or rather a Duke, that
has Kingly authority: They use barbed horses in the wars, but wear light
armor themselves, and they fight one after another, and not all together. And
surely there is no one Christian country in the world that has held wars so
long against the Turk, as the Hungarians have don; the other Hungary in
Scithia which is the mother of this Hungary, is almost like unto this in
language and manners, saving that the people be more barbarous and live still
in Idolatry.

Of Boemia, and of the manners of the Boemians. CAP. 11.
BOHEMIA is a country on the North side The limits of Boemia.
of Germany, and included in the limits of Germany, it has upon the East
Hungaria, Bauaria on the South, Noricum on the west, and Poland on the North:
It is (in a manner) as broad as it is long too, and about three days journey
either way, being on all sides compassed and environed with the Hircanian
wood, as with a natural wall. Through the middle thereof runs the river
Albis, and an other river called Multauia, upon the banckes whereof stands
that goodly City Praga, the chief and Metropolitan City of the whole nation:
The country affoordeth great store of Wheat and Barley, and abounds with all
kind of victuals, both flesh and fish, Oil there is none, neither there nor
in any other part of Germany, nor does it yield much Wine, but great store of
Beer, and that of the best of any other country, which for the goodness is
carried thence as far as Vienna in Austria.

The Boemians notwithstanding they be hemmed and compassed round about with
Germans, yet do they not speak the German language, it being expelled
thence by the coming of the Dalmatae, for their Chronicles report (as
Volateranus affirms) that two brethren borne in Croatia, departing thence,
and seating themselves one in Boemia, the other in Poland, altered the
countries both in their names and languages, and yet there be many in Boemia
at this day, that observe and retain both the language, and ancient customs
of the Germans: for in their Sermons the German tongue is spoken, and the
Boemian in their funerals. And Friars Mendicant of all others only, had power
heretofore when there was any Friars there, to preach and instruct the people
in what language they listed. The people be very licencious, as having no
strict laws nor statutes to restrain them, but every one does what best
pleases himself, without controulement, for they have rejected the authority
and rites of the Roman Church, and received the Waldensian doctrine, which
they defend tooth and nail: This doctrine not many years since was first
preached by one Hus, and by him generally received, whereby the traditions of
the Roman Church, are at this day there, utterly neclected and derided, for
this is now their practice of religion: First they esteem of the Bishop of
Rome no otherwise then of other Bishops, denying him to be of any more
reverence and authority than other Bishops are, holding also that there is
no difference among Priests, and that it is not the dignity of Priesthood that
makes one better, but his deserts and well living. That souls as soon as
they be departed out of the bodies, go instantly either to perpetual pains,
or eternal pleasures. And that there is no Purgatory at all, to purge and
purify them of their sins after this life. To pray for the dead they account
foolish and absurd, and a thing invented only for the profit of Priests.

The Images of our Savior Christ and of his Saints, they utterly abandon and
contemn, and deride and scoff at the Benedictions and hollowings of Water
Palms, or any other things whatsoever: They hold that the religion and
practice of Friars mendicant, was invented by the Devil: and that the Priests
ought to be poor and not to possess money nor substance, but to live only of
the alms of the people: that every one has free power and liberty to preach
and expound the word of God: That no mortal sin is in any sort to be
tolerated, although by the committing of that sin a greater inconvenience
may be avoided, and that he that is convinced of deadly sin, is not worthy
to possess and enjoy any secular office nor Church dignity, nor is fit to be
obeyed: confirmation and extreme unction they exclude from the number of the
Sacraments, and esteem of auricular consession as frivolous and vain, and
that it is sufficient to acknowledge their sins unto GOD secretly in their
chambers.

That Baptism is to be ministered with water only without any commixtion of
holy oil: That Churchyards are vain and superfluous, and invented only for
coueteousnesse, and that no one place is fitter for buryall than other, (for
that the whole world is the universal Temple and open Sanctuary of God,) And
that those which build and erect Churches, Monasteries and Oratories do go
about to restrain and limit Gods power and Majesty: That Preests Vestiments,
Ornaments for the Altar, Palls, surplices, Chalices, Patines and such other
like vessels, are trifles and trash of no moment, and that the Priest has
power to consecrate the body of our Lord at all times, and in every place, and
to minister it to those which desire it, and that it is sufficient only to
prouonce the words of consecration.

That we ought not to pray to Saints to be intercessors for us unto Christ, and
that it is lost time that is spent in singing or saying the Canonical hours.
That no days should be kept holy from labor, but the Lords day only; that no
feast days should be celebrated in honor of the Saints, and that (by the
institutions of the Church) fasting is of no merit, The report also is, that
the Boemian Priests do minister the Sacrament of the body of our Lord, unto
infants and to all others indifferently, under both forms, which is a greater
sacrifice than that which is used in the Church of Rome, and one George
Poggebratius is saidt o be the Author of this Ministration: One Picardus
coming out of France, infected this nation with this monstrous and abominable
madness, for he having intised a great number of the baser sort both of men
and women, to be his followers, instructed them to go naked, and (as the
author of all licentious living) called them Addamites, by whose instructions
venery was openly practiced without difference of kindred or alliance, and many
other most horrible offenses: some of which sect are said to remain as yet,
for there be some Bohemians (which be therefore called Gruebenhamer) which
choose out for the excercising of their religion, vautes and hollow caves in
the ground, and when their Priest (according to their custom) has pronounced
this part of Genesis crescite et multiplicamini et replete terram, that is,
increase and multiply and replenish the earth, instantly they put out all their
lights and fall to their lechery in the dark, every man with the woman he
first lights upon, without respect of age or kindred, and when they have
finished their busiesse they light their lights again, and go every one into
his own place and so be their ceremonies ended. This execrable custom of
that damnable sect, is not much different from those feasts called Bacchanalia,
which are first celebrated in Hetruria and afterward in Rome, by women in the
night time, who having pampered themselves with wine, and banketting,
accompanied with men in secret corners without difference or respect either of
kindred or age, whereby grew such confusion, as oftentimes the mothers were
defiled by their own children, and many other enormous villainies were
perpetrated and done, which they took their beginning as from the warehouse of
all wickedness. The ringleaders of this preposterous celebration were first
cut of at Rome, when Quintus Martius, Philippus and Posthumous Albinus were
consulls (as Sabellicus reports in his first Aenead and seventh book) but
this irreligious impiety and horrible heresy of the Boemians, could not be
extirpated and rooted out, in the reign of four Kings, Veneceslaus,
Sigismundus, Albertus and Vladislaus although they opposed themselves against
it with all their force and power.

Of Germany and of the customs of the Germans. CAP. 12.
GERMANY is the largest nation of all Europ, it lies far North, and is
divided The ancient limits of Germany.
from France with the river of Rheyne, from Rhetia and Pannonia with the river
Danubius, from Sarmatia and Dacia with certain hills, but more with the fear
which one nation has of the other, and upon all other sides it is enclosed
with the ocean: But the limits of Germany at this day exceed these bounds and
extend further, comprehending under that name Rhetia, Vindelitia, Norica and
the upper Pannonia, the Alps, part of Illiria and even to the gates of the
City of Trent. All the country of Belgia in like sort, (which was heretofore
under the French government) and all about the river of Rheyne, are united to
the Germans, embracing both their law and language, and forgetting, or not
daring, or else scorning to call themselves French: The Heluetians likewise by
little and little have almost lost both their name and speech, and become
perfect Germans, and Germany challenges as her own, a great part of
transalpine France: besides all these the soldiers of Germany have (within the
space of three hundred years) brought under their subjection the Prutenia
barbarous and cruel nation, waining them from the worshipping of Idols, to
their own language, and the Christian religion: this country therefore as now
it is, compared unto what it was before, it will appear that it has added
more to it self from foreign nations, then was formerly comprehended in his
own limits.

All Germany was once divided into two parts, whereof Germany divided into
superior and inferior.
that part which is nearest unto the Alps, was called the higher Germany, and
the other the lower which lies northward and toward the Ocean: this partition
does yet continue, and the higher part is now called Alemania (as some think
of a certain lake or river called Alemanus) and each of these parts consists
of sundry Provinces, for the higher Germany (going upwards from the river
Moganus, which runs along by Franconia) contains Dauaria, Austria, Styria,
Athesis, Rhetia, Heluetia, Sueuia, Alsatia, and the Province of Rheine, unto
the city Mentz in Almania. The inferior or lower Germany has in it Franconia
(a good part whereof toward the South is held to be in high Germany) Hassia,
Lotharingia, Brabant, Gelderland, Zeiland, Holland, Frysland, Flanders,
Westphalia, Saxony, Dacia, Peninsula, Pomerania, Liuonia, Prussia, Sletia,
Morauia, Boemia, Mysnia, Marchia, and Thuringia.

Germany (although some part thereof seemed better than other) was first (as
Cornelius Tacitus writes) for the most part either ouer-growne with woods, or
rouer-flown with waters, being more base and barren to wards France, and more
subject to storms and tempests toward Noricum Styria, and Pannonia, so that
it yielded neither fruit nor grain, only it bred good store of cattle, but
such as were both little and low: gold and silver it affords none, and
therefore as a poor and base county, it was despised and very little regarded.
But surely Cornelius was either much deceived, or else the country is much
altered from what it then was, for Germany at this day, is so pleasant and so
plentiful of all things, so beautified, strengthened and addorned, with famous
Cities, strong Castles and stately buildings, as it is nothing inferior either
to France Spain or Italy, for the heavens smyle upon them, the fields affords
them store of fruits, the Sun solaceth him self amongst her hills, she
has whole mountains of vynes, woods at will, and all kind of grain in
abundance, being watered on all sides with Rhene, Danubius, Moganus, Albis,
Neccharus, Sala, Odera, and with many other great and famous rivers and
brooks: there be fountains like-wife of sweet waters, hot bathes and mines
of Salt, and it is equal to any other country for all sorts of metals yea
all Italy, France, and Spain, store themselves with silver and other mettalls
out of Germany: and there is some gold gotten, so as if those old writers were
now living, and beheld the present estate of Germany, as now it is, they would
doubtless think it strange and wonder to see such alteration, to perceive
each place so wholesome and convenient to dwell in, the air so temperate, the
soil so fertile, such abundance of wine, and all kind of grain, such
planting of trees, such beautiful buildings of Cities, Temples and
Sanctuaries, such advancement of religion, such ciuility amongst citizens,
decency in apparel, experience in feats of arms, such furniture and
provision for wars, and such store of all manner of ornaments, besides the
extraordinary sincerity and perfection of the Peers and Nobility, if (I say)
they beheld and marked all these things well, I am of opinion they would not
condemn the ground as barren, rude, ill favored, or little beholding to the
heavens, yea they should see how true that saying is; That good things are
spoiled for want of workmanship and well husbanding: the air is there more
calm and temperate in winter, then in other countries, and therefore it
produces more excellent fruits, yet be their summers more intemperate,
through which intemperature many of those fruits be oftentimes corrupted and
spoiled, besides there be many venomous beasts, and other, creatures
pernicious and hurtful to the inhabitants, and yet for all this, is it hardly
to be judged, what Province may be compared unto it, much less preferred
before it.

The reason why this country assumeth the name of Germany, is, for that there
is such a sympathy and concordance Germany why so called.
amongst all the people, both in the disposition of their bodies, their manners
and courses of life, as all of them agree and live together like brothers and
equals. It was first called Teutonia of Tuisco the son of Noe, and Alemanin,
of Mannus his son, who were said to be the first authors and original of
that nation: though some be of a contrary opinion, and affirm, that Germany
was first inhabited by such as were there bred and borne, and not by such as
were brought from other places; of which opinion is one which has written thus.

Well situated toward the North, does lie the Germaires soil,
A people famous through the world, that never fell the foil
Of foreign foes: no heat nor cold, nor pains can them molest,
For that they scorn to spend their time in idleness and rest.
Borne certes in that land they were, with first that were alive:
Nor but from Demogorgons loins can pedigree derive.
Those did the Greeks Adelphi name, whom Latins Germans call:
Because in unity and love, they live like brethren all:
A name which unto noble hearts does yet grea honor yield,
Large lims has la^ish nature lent, their huged trunkes to weld,
Unto their bodies answerable, that be both tall and straight:
Their necks and all their body else is Alablaster white,
Their eyes their hairs and bushie locks of yellow coulor be,
In temperature their members all and bodies do agree:
What inwardly is thought or meant, their outward voice forth shows
Their toungs be traitors to their hearts, their secret to disclose.
Their speech is not effeminate but lostie big and strong,
So that their valiant warlike hearts, may known be by their tongue,
They love to wander much ahroad, to hunt and eke to ride,
And some by Arts and Sciences, their livings do provide,
Some Bacchus tender budding sprouts do wind on naked piles,
And some do till the fertile earth that barren was ere wh^les,
Some men in travel much delight their youthful days to spend,
And other to Mineruaes laws their course do wholly bend.
Or hoysing up their sails aloft do cut through foreign floods,
And store their wants with sundry sorts of far-fetcht strangers goods.
If foreign foes be wanting, then within themselves thcile iar,
A light occasion will suffice to stir them up to war,
And all the while that cruel Mats does bloody flag display,
They hold it then no injury to ravish, filch and prey.
Some in Hircinian woods delight to hunt the tusked Bore,
And some the brazen-footed Heart with yelping Hounds to gore,
Through forests, woods and mountains some pursue the cruel Bear,
And some with Eaulcons talents seek the silly birds to tear:
And pluming of their feathers clean disperse them in the air.
No enterprice so doub^full is, but they will hazard all.
Nor can the fear of grifley death th^i^ valian^ minds appall,
If wrongs be done, they seek revenge: but fo their countries good,
Or kin or friends, they will not stick to spend their dearest blood.
The^ constant be in Christ his faith, and him do duly serve:
Nor from sincere religion, do sela or never sw^rue,
Their dealings honest, true, and just, all lying they detest,
And evermore their tongue declares what is hidden in their breast.
The Germans before they began their battles, used to chaunt forth a song or
holy hymn, in honor of Hercules, holding opinion that he was once in that
country: when they joined battle they would cry out with a most grievous and
clamourous noise, not so confused and dissonant, as terrible to their enemy.
Their eyes be (for the most part) blew, their looks stern, and their hair
red or yellow, they be tall of stature, and naturally very sudden and
headlong in all their enterprises, but they cannot away with much labor and
toil, nor can they endure heat and thirst, so well as the Frenchmen can, but
cold they can endure passing well. Of gold and silver they made no account, for
the plate and Jewels of silver which were sent them from foreign Princes, they
esteemed as base and vile as earthen vessels: But since by traffic and
trading with other countries, the use thereof has crept in amongst them. And
there be some hold opinion, that there is neither silver nor gold gotten there
as yet, and but small store of Iron, which was the cause that they used no
swords in the wars, but long Spears or Iauelins with short Iron pikes, being
a very fit and handsome weapon to fight withal both aloof and near at hand.

Their horsemen fought with shields and those short spears, and footmen with
stones and darts, and both of them naked, or in little short gabberdines or
cassacks: the soldiers were distinguished and known one from an other by the
color of their shields, which were painted with select and curious colors,
and but few of them wore either privy coats, helmets, or head-peeces. Their
horses were neither well shapt nor speedy paced, nor could they run the
ring, or career like Italian horses, but only straight forward: he that lost
his shield in fight was severely punished, for he was utterly excluded from
their sacrifices, and not admitted to come into the Senate or Council house,
and many were so deeply touched with that indignity, as they would violently
procure their own deaths, rather then endure such disgrace.

Their Kings were elected for their worth and Nobility, and their power and
authority was not altogether free, but limited and restrained: the worthiest
soldiers, and men of greatest valor, and such as could effect more by their
good examples, then by all their force and authority, were ordained leaders and
conductors of their armies. There was none had power to chastise, beat, or
punish an other, but the Priests only, for they held that reuengment belonged
only unto the gods, whose ministers the Priests were. They would pourtray the
Images of their gods, and carry them with them into the wars, as a special
encouragement to fight. And their friends and kinsfolk likewise were placed
near unto the battle, that in their presence they might either atchieue a
glorious victory, or end their days with honor: and their parents, wives and
children were eyewitnesses of their valor and prowess, and ever as any of
them that fought were wounded, they were brought unto their mothers and wives,
and other friends that were lookers on, who were ever ready and willing to
heal and cure them, and to supply the soldiers with victualles, exciting and
encouraging them to fight manfully: through which exhortations (as some have
written) the battle has renewed and begun a fresh, when the soldiers were
almost spent and wearied out: for they esteemed their women to be of great
sanctity and providence, and therefore their Councels were not to be
contemned, nor their aduises despised. Upon certain days they used to
sacrifice men unto Mercury, and beasts to Mars and Hercules, and they were
generally given to sorcerie and witchcraft.

Trifling and petty causes were managed and decided by the Rulers and
Magistrates of the cities; but all great businesses and difficult affairs,
were handled by the whole body of the city in general. They would never begin
any business, but when the Moon was either in the change or in the full, and
they reckened their computation not by the days, but by the nights.

They came armed into the Councell-house to decide controversies, and to
maintain the right of causes, and he upon whose side the sentence passed,
and was conmended, had a Iaueling shaken and brandished against him; which
manner of sentence giving, they accounted to be most honorable, and again
those whose causes were naught, were condemned by the Judges frowns and stern
looks.

All traitors an^ turne-coates, and such as fled to the enemy, were hanged:
Sluggards, dastards, and such infamous persons, and those that had any noisome
disease, were laid upon a hurdle, and dragged till they were dead.

No Magistrate would execute any public or private business, but when he was
armed: there was great emulation amongst them about their diet, and they were
incredibly given to affectation, for he carried the greatest credit and
estimation amongst his friends and neighbors, that was best attended and
accompanied with young gallants, when he went abroad about any business. If
the Prince that was General or Leader of the army, departed out of the field
without victory, he lived in discredit and infamy all his life time after,
for the Prince fights only for victory, and the other Noblemen for the
safety of the Prince.

They would oftentimes take occasion to make wars without cause given, only
because they could not endure to live quietly and peaceably. For they held it a
point of sloth and sluggishnesse, to get their living by their labors, if they
might get it by wars, though it cost them their lives: if they had no wars,
the valiantest men of them all, spent their times wholly in eating, drinking,
and sleeping; committing both houses and husbandry to the care and guidance of
old men and women.

So as it seems strange to see two such contrary dispositions in one people,
to be both lovers of idleness, and yet enemies to peace and quietness. Their
dwellings were in villages, and every one in several houses, their apparel,
short cassockes, or soldiers coats, buttoned together with claspes, or pinned
with thorns, and the richer sort were known and distinguished from others by
their clothes: for they wore their coats so close to their skins, as you might
plainly perceive the perfect proportion of each lim and member, and the self
same fashion of apparel which served men, was worn by women likewise.

Most part of the Germans which dwelt toward the East and North side of the
country, contented themselves with one wife a piece, some few excepted which
had many; and the wife was not endowed by the husband, but the husband by the
wife; nor was their dowers of such dainties as were only fit to make them fine
and gay, but of such things as they had most use of, as yokes of oxen, horses,
with their furniture, shields, swords, Iauelings and such like.

The women were wonderful chaste and modest, and their looks nothing want on to
procure allurements: they frequented no banquets nor common feasts, so as
(though the nation were very populous) there was few women found offending in
adultery; but if any were thereof convicted, her own husband would pull her
headlong out of his house stark naked, before her neighbors and friends, and
whip her round about the town, nor was there any place for pardon for such
lascivious strumpets, no not their youth, beauty, nor riches could any whit
privilege them, or reconcile them to their husbands. It was not tolerable for
any one to scoff at vice, for thereby they thought they both corrupted others,
and were corrupted themselves. And as every woman had but one body and one
life, so should she have but one husband, nor ought she to have any idle
cogitation or wanton desire, as if she more regarded the act of matrimony,
then her husbands love: so as more good was done by their manners and examples,
then in other places by wholesome and strict laws. Young men were not very
prone to lust, and especially when their youthful days drew to an end, and
maids were not married til they were of good years, that they might be more
strong and able to bear children.

Murder was punished with a certain number of cattle, The punishment for
murder.
which the murderer must give to all the dead man's friends as a satisfaction
for his death: They were very desirous to diet together, and to keep good
hospitality, accounting it an dishonest and indecent part to forbid any one
their houses or tables. Rewards were willingly taken and given, nor would they
vpbraide any one with that they had given, nor think themselves in any matter
beholding for what they received.

They would spend whole nights and days in drinking Drunkenness a
commendation amongst the Germans
and carowsing, esteeming and accounting it a credit to be drunken: and
oftentimes after their gluttony and gormandize, they would brall and fall out
one with another, exchanging ill words, and sometimes blows, whereof
oftentimes insued mayming and murder. They consulted of all serious matters,
touching both war and peace, amidst their banquets, deeming their judgments
more acute, and themselves more careful at that time, then at any other, and
more fit to undergo any notable enterprise.

The people were plain and simple, without craft, dissimulation or cunning,
and easily drawn to lay open and discover the very secrets of their hearts:
They would call to mind the day after, what they had done before, considering
of the matter more deliberatly, when they knew not how to alter it, showing
then what their intent was, when they could not be deceived.

They drunk a corrupt drink made of barley, in stead of wine, but those which
dwelt nere unto great rivers had wine brought them out of other countries:
their meat was simple and gross, as wild apples, new dow, thick milk, or
clottered Cream: but their drink was much more immoderate: They delighted to
behold and see young men naked, amongst swords and spears, and other military
weapons belonging to war, and to see how finely and nimbly they could deliver
themselves out of the danger of them, the often practice whereof made them
skilful, and their agilitie and skill was a great ornament unto them. They were
so exceedingly given to dicing, as when they had lost all that ever they had,
they would adventure their own liberties upon one chance at dice; and if they
The Germains were great dicers.
lost, they would willingly become slaves, and suffer themselves (though never
so strong and lusty) to be bound and sold like beasts. They divided the year
into Winter, Spring, and Summer, making no recknning of Autumn, by reason of
their scarcity of wine and fruits.

In their Funerals they made little show of sorrow, by weeping and outward
lamentations, but the dolor and grief of their hearts continued long, and
women only bewailed the dead, it being enough for men to remember them. And
these in times past were the customs of the Germans, and their manner of
living.

But how much they be altered from what they then The later manners of the
Germans.
were, (as well as other nations) may be gathered by this their present
estate: for now the whole state and condition of the Germans, consists of
four sorts of people: the first sort or Order is the Clergy, which be of two
sorts likewise: that is to say, secular Priests, and religious persons; The
Germains divided into four sorts of people whereof the first is the Clergy.
both of them being endowed with great and large rents, revenues, and riches,
and held in great honor and estimation wirh the people, both for that they
offer sacrifice unto God, extol the praises of the Saints, and have cure of
souls; as also for that they understand the Scriptures and holy Writ, be able
to interpret and expound them, and lead a single life; for those which have
not all these good parts in them, are despised and contemned of the vulgar sort
of people: And every order of religious persons, have their garments made of
their own fashion, very decent and comely: The secular, or lay-Priestes wear
loose Coats, for the most part black, or russet, and linen myters on their
heads, not very high crowned, but sticking close about their ears. And when
they go abroad, they cast about their necks, for decencies sake, a broad
lace, either of silk or linen, which hangs down on each side their
shoulders: Upon their shoes are pumps: they wear Pantofles or Sandals,
putting them off ever when they come home.

Most of them live very idly, bestowing little time in obtaining learning,
but spending all the after-noones in gaming and drinking. The inferior
Priests, if any one iniure them, complain unto their Bishop, and sometimes
to the Court of Rome: whereby they work their own security, and condign
punishment is inflicted upon the offenders.

The second estate or condition is of the Nobility, whereof The second order is
of the Nobility.
there be many degrees; as Princes, Earls, Barons, and Knights, which is the
lowest degree of that Order: the Princes excel all the other degrees, as well
in dignity and blood, as in power and strength, as having very large lands and
ample possessions.

The Earls, Barons, and other Nobles live dispersed abroad in the country,
some in one place, some in another, flowrishing like so many flowers in a
green field. But that which is very strange and worthy to be observed in the
Nobility, is this, that both Princes and Earls acknowledge a sovereignty: and
yield their obedience unto the Emperor; so often as necessity, or the Emperor
himself requires it: and yet the Knights say, that they be exempted, and that
they will not serve any one, nor suffer those which be under the^ to serve, but
for wages and stipend, yet notwithstanding they acknowledge and say, that the
Roman Emperor is their Sovereign Lord and Governor. The Nobility in
general, think it a great discredit unto them, and a blemish unto their
kindred and house, to exercise merchandise, or any mechanical art, or to take
a wife from among the common people, or that is their inferior, or to live in
a strange city like townsmen: for they (skorning all company and commerce
with citizens) live freely with their wives and families, in stately castles,
strong holds, and beautiful palaces, situated some upon mountains, some in
woods, and some in champion countries. Some of the Nobles frequent the Courts
of Kings and great Princes, and follow the wars, and some others live at
their own houses upon their Rents and revenues.

They be much given to hunting, affirming, that by continual custom, and
their ancient liberty, they only are allowed to hunt, and all other
interdicted and deprived of that pleasure; for, for a private man to hunt
either hares, ro-buckes, kids, hynd-calues, or stagges, in some place is
punished with the loss of his eyes; and in some other places with the loss of
his head: but it is lawful for every one that can, to take such wild beasts
that be noisome and hurtful.

Moreover, they fare daintily, and be sumptuously clothed, as well men as
women, both at home and abroad, being decked and adorned with gold, silver,
and silks of sundry colors: When they walk abroad they are attended with a
troop of their friends and familiars, and they may easily be known and
discerned from the common people, only by their gate, it is so grave and
demure: They never go far from home but on horseback, for to take a journey
on foot they account a great dishonor unto them, and a plain demonstration of
poverty: but if they stand in want of any thing, they will strain courtesy
to take it from others, either privily or by force. They seldom go to law with
any one for injuries done unto them, but rather gather a troop of their
friends together, and revenge themselves, either by fire, sword, or rapine:
thereby compelling the wrong-doers to make what satisfaction they think good.

They be proud, turbulent, and covetous, practicing how to get Church-mens
goods by deceit, and wracking their slaves and clownes of the country, with an
unrelenting authority. It is almost incredible to be spoken, how they vex,
pill and poll those miserable and unfortunate caytiues, and surely Germany were
an hundred times more happy, if those Centaures, worse then Dionysius and
Phalaris, were either utterly expelled the land, or at the least, their tyranny
and power so restrained and abridged, as they might be enforced to live private
like unto the Nobility in Heluetia. The 3. estate or order of the Germans, is
of citizens and townsmen: and of these, some be only subject The third order
is of citizens.
to Caesar, and some to other Princes and Prelates of the church. Those which
yield obedience to the Emperor, have many privileges, laws, and customs
common to themselves: and every year (by the voices of the citizens) is one
chief magistrate elected; who for his year has a soueraign authority over
them all, and he of himself has power to punish any one of the same order
with death.

When an offense is committed, the offender is brought before the magistrates
elected, where being set in council, the accuser is called for, who having
set down his accusation, the defendant has free liberty to plead for
himself; and when both parties be heard, at large, the Judges proceed to
sentence, which is not by any course of law (for that these manner of
magistrates be ignorant of the laws) but as they be induced by reason, and as
the custom has been afore-time in like cases: the like form of Judgment is
used in civil causes likewise, saving that in civil and criminal causes, the
party accused may appeal unto Caesar, which offenders in other causes may not
do.

In every Imperial City be two sorts of Citizens, the Citizens divided into
two sects.
one of Gentlemen, the other of Plebeians: the Plebeians or comminalty of the
city, be occupied in trading and keeping shops, but the Gentlemen (which be
also called Patritians) live only upon their patrimony and revenues, in as
good fashion as the Nobility or Knights of the country do, if any of the
comminalty wax so rich, that he (either by custom or commerce) will intrude
himself into the society of Gentlemen, he is (notwithstanding his wealth)
discarded their companies, whereof it proceeds that each of these orders of
Citizens, have for many years, continued in there own estate without
alteration. And yet for all this the administration and government of their
commonwealth, is commune and permitted as well unto the Plebeians as
Patritians, so as the communalty is no way in subjection to the gentility, but
every one has his own substance in safety, with free liberty (not
transgressing their laws) to live as they list: and Justice is ministered (for
the most part) throughout all the whole country, by men which have little
learning or none at al, for in every City (and in many towns likewise) be
elected 12. Judges, which be such as be most notorious for uprightness and
integrity of life, not respecting whether they be learned or no, which twelve
must of necessity take upon them the office of Justice and Judgment, for which
they expect no other wages nor reward, but only honor, and they be so
diligent in performing their duties therein, that (for the common good) they
will not stick to neglect al private affairs and business whatsoever (be
they never so urgent) to observe the times appointed for Judgment and hearing
of causes. And they be all of them sworn to minister Justice unto every one,
according to right and equity, from whose sentences in times past, they would
never appeal, esteming it a great indignity unto them, to contradict the
decrees of such men as executed their offices gratis, but now adays appeals
be usual, which were the more tolerable a great deal, if the Judges to whom
the appeals be made, would in their Judgments observe the customs of the
former Judges, but their doings are so little regarded, that their sentences,
though never so just and upright, be retracted and wholly altered, only because
they seem to repugne their written laws, whereby the Judges of the former
rank, are undeservedly taxed of ignorance, their good endeavors reproved,
and blemished, and the parties to be relieved oftentimes oppressed: which
kind of Judgment, how corrupt it is, themselves may easily perceive.

Furthermore the Citizens live and accord together very familiarly and
friendly, meeting and assembling themselves, sometimes in public places,
sometimes in private houses, where they spend their time, some in buying and
selling, some in conferrence one with an other, some in feasting and
banqueting, and some in gaming and disporting, in all which sundry actions can
hardly be discovered any deceit or contention.

They be very courteous and affable, for at all times and in all places, be
they men or women, so often as they meet together, so often do they salute
one an other. Upon working days they be very frugall and sparing, both in
their diet and apparel, but upon festival days they will go more gallantly
and far more daintily. Those which labor eat four times a day, and playmen
but twice; the men's apparel for the most part is woollen, and the women's
linen, and each of them so much differrent one from an other, both in color
and fashion, as you shall hardly find one man or one woman apparelled like an
other, for they be so new fangled as they will fall into every new fashion,
imitating the Italians, but more usually the French men, from whom now of late
years, the men have gotten their broad nosed shoes, their coats with wide
hanging sleeves cut, and wouen cappes (which they call Pyrethia) And not long
since, they wore shoes with sharp snoutes, short coats cloose to their
bodies, and hoods with tails or flappes behind: This sparingnesse in apparel
heretofore used by men, is now descended unto women and by them practiced, for
whereas they were wont to wear many kerchers upon their heads, which made
their heads seem great, by reason of their many folds of linen, they now
wear but one only: They be also more modest in all their other clothes then
heretofore, they have been in a manner utterly rejecting gold, silver and
pearls, and all sumptuous garding of their garments with rich furs and
silks.

I need not speak of their long trains carried up behind them, which (though
they were common) be now only worn of the Nobility, and the women be now so
decent and comely clothed, as they cannot justly be reprehended for any thing
they wear, saving that some women's gowns be over wide and to much hollowed
about the neck.

In their funerals and celebration of their friends obites, they be attired in
black, and their time of lamentation is thirty days, within which space they
do sacrifice for them three times, the first day, the seventh day and the
thirtith day.

They be so devout and religious a people, that every artificer before he begin
his work, will go to the Church and hear mass, yea both men and maid
servants be by their masters compelled thereunto, for they hold it a beastly and
hateful thing, for any one to neglect his service to God, either for
idleness, or for any business whatsoever. In giving alms they be very
charitable, for there is almost no City but it has in it a covent of Mendicant
Friars, and a common house to relieve and harbor poor Pilgrims and strangers.
There be also sostred and brought up many young youths that have left their
own countries and fathers houses, to attain learning in Germany, of which
sort of striplings and young students, you shall see so many in one City as you
will think it strange how they should be maintained; And these be only
nourished and brought up, by the alms and charity of the Citizens, and go
singing from house to house for victuals, whereof they have enough given them,
for because they frequent the Church daily, and help the Priests to singe
mass, and be afterward made priests themselves.

In every parish is one public house or free school, wherein as well these,
as the Citizens sons, be brought up in learning, their masters and tutors
be such as be both learned and virtuous, who chastise those which be shrewde,
or neglect their learning, sometimes with words and sometimes with stripes.

Their dwelling houses for the most part be joined together, and builded
according to every man's ability, some high, some low, but al aptly and
conveniently disposed for their trading, the rich men's houses be builded
stately with lime and stone, and poor men's with timber and mortar, and all of
them covered either with tile or slate, which whether it be done for state, or
to prevent danger of fire I am not able to say.

In Saxony and diverse other places besides, they cover their houses with
smooth shingles, which makes their building seem more base and more subject
to burning: The streets (for the most part throughout all the Cities of
Germany) be paued with flint stone, and upon the gates of every City stand high
turrets or watch-towers, wherein (in the day time) be placed certain skouts,
to give notice unto the warders below, by the sound of a trumpet, of all
horsemen they perceive coming toward them, to the end, that having warning
aforehand, they may be more provident to provide for the safety of the city:
Their cities (for the most part) be defended both naturaly and artificially,
being situated either upon the tops of hills, or by winding rivers, such as be
situated upon the plain ground, be compassed and immured with strong walls and
trenches, and defended with innumerable towers and bulwarks: the fields also
about many of their cities be so enclosed on all sides with deep and large
ditches, as they serve for a sufficient defense against the invasion of
foreign enemies.

The fourth last and lowest estate of the Germans, be The fourth order is of
husbandmen.
of such as dwell in country villages, and follow husbandry, and be therefore
called clownes or bores, whose estate and condition of all others is most hard
and miserable, for they live basely by themselves, utterly separated from all
other sorts of people, so as they have no fellowship with others, but their
own families and their cattaile. Their dwelling houses be low cottages made of
timber and clay, and covered with straw, their bread is mean and course, their
meat either oatmeale pottage or sodden beans or pulse, and their drink is
either water or whey: their apparel a Canuas frocke (such as our Carters use
in England) high shoes or startvps and colored caps.

These clownes be a very turbulent, toylsome and beastly kind of people, they
carry into Cities near adjoining them, all their fruits and increase that
arriseth from their corn and cattaile (other then what their Landlords have,
for they themselves do scarce taste of any fruit of their travail that good
is) where they sell them, and make their provision of such things as they have
need of, for amongst them dwell few artificers or none at all. Every village
has a Church in it, whether in the forenoone upon holy days, all the people
resort to hear service, and in the afternoon, some of them meet together in
one place or other, where they fall to chopping and chainging, or conferring of
other busnesse, the youth fall a dancing after the minstrels, and old men a
tippling in tavernes: and none of these clownes will go abroad amongst other
people, but with weapons about them, for they have their swords ready at all
assaies: Every village chooses out two or four of the most substantial men
amongst them, whom they call their masters, these be indifferent men to decide
contentions and controversies growing by contracts, and have the disposing and
ordering of their little commonwealth next unto their Landlords, for it is
they that have the sole government and authority over them all, other then what
is by them permitted to these chosen praefects, which in their vulgar tongue
they call Sculteti. These clownes live in great drudgery and slavery under
their Landlords, for they plow their grounds, sow their seeds, get in their
harvest, provide them fuel, repair their houses, skoure their ditches, and
maintain their fencing: in a word, there is no slavery whatsoever, but is
wholly imposed upon those bores, nor dare they for their lives once refuse to
do any thing their Landlords command them, for if they do they shall be
soundly punished, and yet there is no one thing that oppresses them more
nearly, then that the farms they possess be none of their own, but that
(notwithstanding they be every way else slaves unto their Landlords) they must
pay unto them yearly a great part of their corn and grain for rent: And
these be generally the manners of the Germans at this day and this their
course of life.

Of Saxony and how the Saxons lived in times past and how they now live. CAP.
XIII.
SAXONIA (a particular Province of Germany) is bounded upon the West with the
river Visera or (as The limits of Spain.
some will have it) with the river of Rheine, upon the North with Dacia and the
Baltean sea, with Franconia on the South (against which lie opposite a
longth-wise Boiarie and Bohemia) and with Prussia on the East within which
bounds and limits how many sundry sorts of people, distinguished by sundry
names, be at this day comprehended, and included, may easily be understood by
the precedent description of Germany, all which are said to live under the
Saxon law.

This country was named Saxony of a people called Saxons, who (according to the
opinion of some writers) Saxony why so called.
were the remnant of the Macedonian army, which followed Alexander the Great,
and at his death were disperced into all parts of the world. Some others
affirm that they were wandering Britans, and such as had no certain
habitations, and that they forsook their native soil to seek them better
seats, and getting shipping and arryuing in Germany, expelled thence the
Thuringij and possessed their land. For at the first the people of Saxony were
turbulent and troublesome, il and overthwart neighbors unto all those which
dwelled near unto them, yet were they at home peaceable and quiet, and
marvelous vigilant and industrious for the good of their country and
commonwealth, besides that they had a very provident care and extraordinary
regard, for doing any thing that should be a touch or debasement to their
stocks, or against their honors, holding it a stain and pollution to their
blood to marry with women of other nations, or with any inferior to themselves,
and indeuouring their uttermost to make themselves a people proper and natural
without mixture of other nations, and only like unto themselves; whereof
insued that though the number of them were great, yet in their external
habites, in the stature and proportion of their bodies, and color of their
hair, they were almost all alike.

The Saxons were divided into four sorts or differences The Saxons divided
into noblemen freemen, libertines and slaves.
of people, which were noble men, freemen, libertines (that is such as had
been slaves, and obtained their freedom and manumission) and bound-men or
slaves, and to the end that each of these orders might remain in his own
Estate, it was established by a law, that no man of one estate, should marry or
take to wife a woman of an other, but that the Nobility should match with
nobility, the freemen with freemen, the manumitted with those which were
manumitted and the slaves with slaves: the penalty for the transgressing of
which law was present death. They had many good and wholesome laws for the
punishment of malefactors.

They were upright in condition, sincere in life, and of uncorrupted and
irreprehensible manners, doing nothing but what was profitable, honest and
agreeable to the laws of nature: all which had been sufficient for their
saluations, if withal they had known and believed in the true and everliving
God. But they were great Idolaters, worshipping trees, and fountains of water,
but more especially a huge stock of wood set up an end, which they accounted
for a god, calling it in their language (Irminsaul) that is to say a universal
and general pillar or colume, whereby all other things are sustained and held
up: Mercury also they observed and honored as a god offering unto him upon
certain days human sacrifices, nor Merccury observed as a god by the Saxons,
did they hold it fit or lowable (by reason of the great dignity and divinity
of their gods) to include them in Temples and Churches, nor to figure them in
the proportion of men, but they consecrated unto them, woods and groves,
calling them after their names, and they never perused those secret and
mystical places, but with great devotion and reverence: Witchcraft and socery
was much in practice amongst them. Their manner of taking advise whether a
thing were to be done or not done, was thus, first they would cut from a
fruit tree, diverse little sprigs or young sprouts, marking and distinguishing
them each from other, with certain notes or differences, and so cast them
suddenly and at adventures upon a white garment.

And then (if the consultation were general for them al) the priest, if
private, the goodman of the household, lifting up his eyes toward heaven, and
praying to their gods, takes up those branches one by one, and lays them
down again three sundry times, and ever as he takes them up, he expounds
and interprets what is to be done, according to the note or imprese written
upon them; and then if the priest or good men of the house forbid it to be
done, they advise no more of the matter that day, but if they allow it, the
people were so strong of belief as they would put the project in practice
what ever they event proved: they gathered and coniectured of many things by
the chirping and flying of birds, and oftentimes made experiment of
forewarnings and admonitions of horses, which (to presage of things to come)
were nourished and kept in those woods and groves dedicated to their gods.

These horses were white and never did any manner of work, and (being coupled
together and set before the holy Chariot) they were attended and followed
either by the priest, the King or chief ruler of the city, who diligently
marcked and observed their neying, whynying and stoming, and this manner of
prediction or foreshewing of things to come, was of all others in greatest
credit and estimation, both by the Princes, priests and people, for they held
them to be the ministers of the gods, and partakers of their divine councels.

They used also an other sort of sooth-saying or witchcraft, whereby to know
aforehand what success they should have in the wars, which was in this
manner: when they took a captive of any nation against whom the waged
battle, they compelled him to fight with one of their own people, and as the
victory went betwixt them two so would they judge of the ensuing wars. The
Emperor Charles the Great was the first, that by continual wars, compelled
this impious people to admit the Christian religion, which both they and all
other Germans do now most religiously adore.

In Saxony be many sumptuous and Princely palaces, and magnificent and stately
Temples, Churches and Monasteries, as one in Alberstandium consecrated to our
blessed Lady, whereinto never enters any profane or unhallowed person, but
only such as be professed in Religion A Temple in Alberstade de dicated to
our Lady.
and to the service of God, except upon Ashwednesday, and then is there one of
the people brought into the Church, who must ever be such a one, as in the eye
of the world is of most wicked and abominable life and conversation, this man
being brought into the Church all in black, and his head covered, is placed
where he may hear mass, which being duly solemnised, he is cast out of
the Temple, and enforced to wander up and down the city barefooted, all the
time of Lent, visiting all the Churches one after an other, during which time,
he is maintained by the priests, and by them brought again into the Church
upon Easter Day, where (having first an alms given him which he offerreth with
great devotion to the Church) after the consecration of the oil, he is
expiated and hallowed by the whole Clergy, and so dismissed. This man they
commonly called Adam, comparing him for his innocence, unto Adam our first
father and founder, who was void of all sin, and by him they suppose their
city to be purged and purified.

The soil of Saxony is very fruitful of all things but wine, and has diverse
mines of silver and basse: toward Gosleria, and in many places besides be
brine-pits, and fountains of salt water, whereof they make a fine white and
most delicate sault, which yields them a large commodity yearly.

They have great store of barley and wheat, whereof they make very fine white
bread, and a kind of ale or The Saxons immoderate drinkers.
beer to supply the want of wine, which they drink so immoderatly and out of
measure, as when they be at their feasts and bankettings, and that their
ordinary cups and drinking glasses will not hold sufficient for them to carouse
at one draught, those which do give attendance at the table, will set before
them a great paile full of that drink with a dish in it, wishing every one to
be their own skinkers and so to drink what they please, and it is almost
incredible to report how much of that liquor those immodest and druken people
will devour and swallow up at one sitting, vtging and enforcing one an other
to drink, till they be worse then brutish swine, not thinking they have
enough, when they are so drunk as they lie wallowing in their own vomit, but
even then they will stick close to it night and day, until they be sober
again, and he which drinks most, and out sits them all, is not only
highly extolled and commended of the rest, for that notable exploite, but also
in sign of victory and triumph, has given him a garland or nosegay made of
roses and sweet flowers, or else some other reward for which they contended.

This their wicked and beastly custom of drinking, is now (the more pity)
disperced over all Germany, so as all of them in general, do now drink
strong wines as liberally, as the Saxons do their ale, to their inspeakeable
hindrance and hazard of their healthes, in such sort, as (not content to do
ill themselves) if any stranger or other come into the room where they be
drinking, they will rise up and reach him their cups, persuading him very
earnestly for to sit down and to bear them company, accounting him their
enemy if he look for much bidding or inuiting, or refuse to drink, without
showing just cause, which hateful disorder is oftentimes the cause of
bloodshed and murder.

These quaffing Saxons fare very hardly and sluttishlie, for their usual meat
is small guts or chitterlings dried, raw onyons, fat bacon and salt butter,
and they sees their meat upon sunday to serve them all the week after.

They feed not their young children as we do, with pap or pottadge made of
milk and flower, but with more solid and stronger meats, which is first
champed or chawed in the nurses mouth, and so given the children to swallow
down, which kind of diet when they be young makes them more strong and
lusty, and better able to endure extremities.

The Saxons have a peculiar language to themselves, but in their apparel and
other things, there is no difference betwixt them and the Germans.

Of Westphalia, and of the manner of Judgment ordained for the Westphalians by
Charles the Great. CAP. 14.
WESTPHALIA is comprehended and included within the bounds and limits The
bounds of Westphalia.
of Saxony, having upon the East the river of Rhene, Visurgus or Visera upon
the West. Frizland and Holland upon the North, and upon the South the hills of
Hassia, which Ptolomeus calls Obnobij; out of which hills springs the river
Amasis, which running by the two renowned cities, Padeburne and Monasterium,
divides the Province as it were into two parts, and so passing by Frizland is
carried into the sea.

There is also the river Sala which is famous for the notable overthrow of
Drusus, son in law to Augustus: This country (as Strabo writes) was first
inhabited by a people called Dructerij, and (as others write) by the Sicambry:
This people being subdued by Charles the French King, surnamed Charles the
Great, was by him induced, or rather enforced to embrace the Christian
religion, whereto they Secret Judges ordained by Charles the Great over the
VVestphalians.
were hardly drawn; and being a mutinous and rebellious people, ever when they
rebelled, they would return again to the worshipping of Idols, nothing
regarding the true faith, nor their oaths whereby they were obliged to observe
and keep it, which when Charles perceived, to the end that he might bridle and
restrain their temerity and rashness, with fear of corporal punishment, he
ordained secreat Judges, and gave them full power and authority to execute
Judgment at their pleasures, without trial or purgation, upon all such as had
either violated their oths, abrogated their faith, or otherwise committed any
notable villainy: In choosing of which Judges he had a special care and regard,
to elect just and upright men, that the guiltless and innocent might not be
punished without cause. This law and manner of execution thereof, struck a
great terror into the Westphalians, and at length enforced them to continue in
the faith, seeing before their eyes both noble men and mean men hanged and
trust up in trees without any accusation or trial at all, and understanding
that they were executed either for breach of their faith or some such other
heinous offense. This kind of Justice or martial law, is yet in force and is
called, Iudicium vetitum, or Iudicium occultum, a hidden or secret sentence,
and the Judges or executioners of that law, be called Scabini, who be now
grown so presumptuous and insolent, as they would challeng and usurp the like
liberty and jurisdiction over all Germany.

They have secret customs and hidden laws, known to few more then
themselves, whereby they doom men to death, and it is very hard to find out
their manner of proceedings, for neither fear nor reward can allure any one of
them to reveal their secrets.

The mayor part of those Scabini be not discovered what they are, but go up
and down the country (like Promooters) noting men's faults, and accusing them
for their offenses in places of Judgment; and arraiging them (as their custom
is): which done the malefactors be condemned, and their names inroled in a
catalogue, and so delivered to the Junior Scabini, to whom the execution
belongs, by which means many evil doers loose their lives, that never knew
of their condemnations.

But this their manner of Judgment, is now much altered and degenerated from
his first perfection, for sometimes very base and mean persons be admitted
into that office, and those whose power and function was only to find out
offenders, and punish misdeameanors, do now busy and occupy themselves in all
other ordinary businesses. The country of Westphalia is cold, and very bare of
wine and al kind of grain, their bread is brown and course, and their drink
or beer made of barley, for the wine which is brought unto them by the river
of Rhene, is marvelous dear, and therefore little used, unless of the
wealthier sort of people. The natural inhabitants be both warlike and witty,
whereof insueth this proverb. That Westphalia breeds more flatterrers then
fools, it is under the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Colen.

Of Franconia and of the nature and customs of that Country. CAP. 15.
FRANCONIA, or East France is a Franconia why so called.
part of Germany, and situated in the very heart and middle of the country, it
was so called of the Sycambrians, who expelling thence the Alani in the reign
of the Emperor Valentinian, were after called Franci. It is environed on the
south with Sueuia and Boioaria, with the river Rhene on the west, upon the east
lies The bounds of Franconia.
Bohemia, and Hassia, and Thuringia, (two Provinces of Saxony) upon the
North. This country is on all sides so enclosed with huge thick woods, and
cragged mountains, as the passage into it is both dangerous and difficult, yet
within it is very even ground, garnished and adorned with an innumerable sort
of Cities, walled towns, and fortified Castles and Villages. It is environed
round about with the Hyrcanian wood, which with his high hills incloseth and
defends it on all sides like a natural wall; and through it run Sala,
Thuberus, Neccharus, and the nauigable River Moganus. These Rivers pass by
many wide and large Valleys, upon the banks whereof on both sides be planted
great store of vineyards, which yield wines so rare, and of so great worth, as
they be transported into other countries far remote.

The land is fertile enough, and not sandy and ouergrowne The fertility of
Franconia.
with Fearne, as (Aeneas Syluius reports) saving that part of the country
which is now called Norica, or in some places near unto rivers.

It yields great increase of barley, wheat, and all other kind of grain and
pulse, and no one part of Germany affoordeth so many and so great Onions, Rape
roots, and Rape stalks as this does: besides, about Babenburge grow such
great store of Lycoras roots, as they be carried away by cart loades.

It is full of gallant meadows, and goodly Orchards, very populous and
abounding with beasts, there is much fishing by reason of the multitude of
Rivers, and better hunting, for the great store and variety of wild beasts:
for the Princes preserve them of purpose in woods and forests, making them
stables and dens to lie in, and to defend them from winters boisterous and
cold storms, allowing them meat also if need be, and no private man may be
suffered to take or hunt any of these beasts.

The whole country of Franconia is under the dominion The Princes of Franconia.
of five princes, whereof two be secular or lay Princes, that is to say, the
Burgraue of Norinburg, and the Count Palatine of Rhene, and the other three be
ecclesiastical Governors, to wit, the Bishops of Babenburg, Herbipolis, and
Magnus.

The Bishop of Herbipolis holds his Duke-dome, by The Bishop of Herbipolis,
one of the Princes of Franconia.
having a naked sword, and an ensign or flag placed before him upon the
altar, while he is at Mass. And the first day that he enters into the
Metrapolitan or chief city, and takes upon him the Episcopal seat, he is
usually attended with a great troop of gallant and excellent hors-men: and
when he is admitted and entered into the city, he lights off his horse in
the very gate of the city, and there disrobeth himself of his uppermost
garment, and puts on a poor and base coat, and girdeth himself about the
wast with a cord: and in this humble manner bare headed and bare handed, he
goes up into the palace, unto the Canonical or Regular Priests, who after
they have done their fealty unto him, exalt and install him in his seat, but
before his instalment, he is conducted to the picture of some devout Bishop
that is dead, where he is seriously and earnestly admonished to follow and
imitate his examples, who being elected of a poor student, did notwithstanding
govern the State of the Church uprightly, and as it ought. And none of the
lineage of either Dukes or Earls may possess this Cathedral sea, but only
such as be of the inferior Order of Nobility: not for that it is not
sufficient to maintain a Prince, (for the possessions and revenues be very
large and great) but because none may enjoy the Bishoppricke, but only such as
be canonical or regular persons, which are for the most part of the meanest
degree of Nobility. To be Bishop of Herbipolis, is a title of marvelous
great dignity and honor: and when a Bishop is new created, the custom is,
that at his first entrance into his Bishoppricke, he should progress over all
his dominion, and visit all the towns and villages which pay him tyth, and in
every town he brings out into the streets whole hogsheads of wine, with
dishes for every one to drink that will.

The Franconians do nothing differ from the rest of the Germans, either in
their apparel or shape of their bodies: They be very laborious, and none of
them given to idleness, but the women as well as men plant in vineyards, and
yet (by reason of their poverty) they sell their wines, and drink water
themselves: Beer they cannot endure nor will have any brought unto them, yet
in Herbipolis upon fasting days, those which will drink no wine, may buy it
in dockes and roades without the city, to drink in stead of water.

The people be insolent, arrogant, and proud, contemning all others in respect
of themselves, and so much given to cauilling and brawling, as no stranger can
endure to stay with them, unless he can flatter and dissemble, and behave
himself discreetly and soberly: but those which can endure their floutes and
taunts, and pocket up their injuries with patience, may safely dwell with them:
for such they account and esteem honest and sufficient men, and permit them to
marry wives, and enter into consanguinitie with them, by which means many
Suevians, Bavarians, and Hassians do dwell, and continue in Franconia.

They be very devout, and religiously given, and yet subject to two horrible
and execrable vices, which are, swearing and filching: for they will glory and
vaunt themselves in blasphemy, and horrible profanation, and account
stealing, a thing honest, commendable, and lawful, because long used as a
custom. They observe many strange ceremonies, which I will here set down for
the more credit and better approbation of such things as be written and
reported of them by strangers.

In the nights of those five days of Aduent, which go immediately before the
day of our Lords Nativity, all the children of the town, both men-children,
and women-children, go up and down the streets from one house to another,
knocking and beating at every ones door, wishing them a happy and prosperous
new year, and showing them in a song, that the birthday of our Savior Christ
is nigh approaching, and every household gives them either apples, pears,
nuttes, or money, or some other thing that they can best spare.

But with what joy and exultation, the birthday of our Savior Jesus Christ is
solemnized in their churches, both by Priests and lay people, may be understood
by this Ceremony following: for then they place upon the Altar the image of a
young child, in representation of the new birth of the babe Jesus; which done,
the young men and maids dance and hoppe round about the Altar, and those
which be married, and old folks sing a song or hymn: which kind of ceremony
is not much unlike to the triumph and exultation, which (as Poets feign) was
used by the Coribants in a cave in the mountain Ida, about the image of their
god Jupiter. In the Kalends of January (which by their computation is the
beginning of the year) is a sollemne meeting of friends and kinsfolks
together, who joining their hands, and lifting them up to heaven, with one
heart and consent, pray for a prosperous and happy new year, spending all
that day in pleasant congratulation, meriments, and drinking. Which done they
send new years gifts to their friends which be absent, which gifts, the
Romans in their Feasts dedicated to Saturn, (which were solemnized about
that time) called Saturnalitia, and by the Greeks, they be called Apophoreta,
that is to say, presents or things given to guests to be carried away with
them.

This custom and ceremony of theirs, was described by the Author of this
book, in these verses following: O Christ the Word of Father dear, etc.

In honor of thy blessed birth we celebrate eight days:
All which we spend in holy hymns, and chanting forth thy praise.
And following thy examples true, we gifts do often send
Fat Capons, Hares, or some such thing unto each loving friend:
Fine wafers stamped with Images and Pictures rarely signd:
Or basket full of Oranges, does argue friendly mind:
Ten Oranges that plumde and topt be with green boxen crest,
And spices rare of sundry sorts in honor of this Feast.
Upon the Feast day of the Epiphany of our Lord commonly called Twelfte-day,
every family makes a cake of flower, honey, ginger, and pepper, and therewith
they elect and choose them a King, in this manner following: the good-wife of
the house kneadeth and makes the cake, and in the moulding she puts a
penny into it, without consideration into what place of the cake she puts
it, but even at adventures, then does she rake away the fire and bake it upon
the harth, and when it is baked, she breaks it into as many pieces, as there
be men in the whole household, and so distributeth unto every one apart,
assigning one part thereof unto Christ, another to our blessed Lady, and three
portions more to the three Wisemen, for, and in the name of an alms. And in
whose part soever the penny is found, him do the rest set in a chair, and
lifting him up on high three times, with great iollity and mirth, they salute
him as their king: and all the while he is lifted up, he has in his right
hand a piece of chalk, with which he makes a great many crosses upon the
roofes of their chambers and parlours; and these crosses they have in great
estimation, thinking, that by them they escape many dangers.

And there is no house throughout the whole country of Franconia, especially
if it be a dwelling house, but in some one of these twelve nights which be
betwixt the Nativity of our Lord, and the Epiphany, it is perfumed either with
Frankincense, or some other sweet smelling perfume, against the deceits and
illusions of Devils and Sorcerers.

It were in vain to mention in particular, in what manner of Epicurisme, the
Franconians spend the three days next before Lent, if you knew what general
and wilful madness possessed all the rest of Germany at that time, (wherein
the Franconians do equal them,) and in what licentious manner all of them then
live, for all those three days the Germans practice nothing else, but
eating, drinking, and playing, plying it so lustily, as though they should
never eat or drink more, or, as if (with the Epicure) they should say, I will
take my pleasure, I will eat and drink my belly full to day, for to morrow I
shall die.

Every one will invent some new device or other to delight their minds and
senses withal, and to hold them in admiration, and to the end they should not
blush, nor be dashed out of countenance, in acting their apish toys and
interludes, they mask their faces, and change their habites, the men wearing
women's apparel, and the women men's, some represent Satyrs, and some play the
devils part, being made black with woade or ink, and clothed in loathsome
apparel like Devils indeed. Some others go stark naked, imitating the Priests
of Pan, of whom (I think) the Germans have learned that yearly custom of
doting and unnatural madness. This their manner of reuelling differs not
much from the Feasts called Lupercalia, which the noble young Roman gallants
were wont to celebrate in the month of February, in honor of the Licaean Pan.
For as those Roman youths went round about the City naked, and their faces
besmered with blood, lashing all they met with cords and whips, in rude and
barbarous manner most loathsome to behold, even so the Germans strike those
they meet, with bags stuffed full of sand or ashes.

There is a strange custom used in many places of Germany upon Ash Wednesday:
for then the young youth get all the maids together, which have practiced
dancing all the year before, and carrying them in a cart or tumbrell, (which
they draw themselves in stead of horses,) and a minstrell standing a top of it
playing all the way, they draw them into some lake or river, and there wash
them well fauouredly.

What the reason of this ceremony is, I cannot perceive but as I conjecture,
they imagine the doing of this, to be a purgation and satisfaction to God, for
practicing such light and wanton behavior, upon Sundays and Holidays,
directly against the Canons and precepts of the Church.

In the middle of Lent, at which time they be commanded by the Church to
rejoice, the youth of Germany where the Author of this present Work was
borne, make an Image of straw, resembling the picture of Death; and hanging it
upon aspeare, carry it up and down the streets, with great showting and
exclamations, and many give them good intertainment, offering them such things
as they usually eat, as peason, milk, and mellow pears; and when they be well
refreshed, they return home again: but some others on the contrary part, give
them John Drums intertainment, reuiling and beating them away from their
houses, deeming the picture of death to be ominous and a foretelling of their
deaths indeed. The like custom to this, is used by the Franconians, and at the
same time: for there the young men take an old cart wheel, and cover it all
over with straw, and then (being a great troop of them together) they carry it
to the top of a high hill, where, after they have sported themselves most part
of the day, unless the cold drive them soon home, in the evening they set it
on fire, and set it going down the hill burning, being a sight able to
astonish the beholders, that know not what it means: for it tumbleth into the
valley all of a flaming fire, with such a pudder, as if the Sun or Moon
should tumble down from heaven.

Upon Easter day, some one of the wealthiest amongst them, causes certain
cakes to be made, and gives one or two of them to the young men, and as many
to the maids, and when they be all met together a little before night, in a
plain meadow, in the presence of an infinite number of spectators, those which
be most nimble of footmanship, run for those cakes, the young men against
young men, and the maids against maids.

Then have they their solemn ceremonies at the dedication of their parish
Churches, which (by the Institutions of the Church) ought to be solemnized by
all the parishioners, once every year, with great joy and banqueting: to which
solemnization come many young men out of other parishes, not for any devotion
they bear unto the Churches, but only to dance, drink, and revel, for their
manner of coming argues little devotion, but rather an intention to brawle
and quarrel, for they come all well weaponed, and Minstrils playing before
them, and oftentimes they fall out and go together by the cares, and part
with cracked crowns. The like kind of meetings and assemblies we have in many
places of England, which we call wakes.

Upon Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday in Rogation week, or cross week, (when
as general Letanies and Processions are used to be said over all the
Christian world) there meet together at one Church in most parts of Franconia,
many crosses (for by that name be the whole company of parishioners called
that go the preambulation with the Procession, and have a banner with the
sign of the cross carried before them) and when many several crosses or
companies be met together in one Church, they sing not altogether, but each
several company has a several quire, and a several place to sing by
themselves.

The young men and maids be arrayed in their holy day apparel, with wreaths
or garlands of flowers about their heads, and willow staves in their hands: The
Priests and Ministers of the Church stand by giving diligent ear to their
singing, and which of the Quiers they think have song sweetest, and made the
best melody, they adiudge that the other Quiers shall give unto them certain
bowls of Wine.

And upon Whitsunday this is their order: every one which has either a horse
of his own, or can borrow one, do meet in one place, and ride together, to
view the bounds, and limits of their fields, having with them a Priest, with
the body of our Lord Jesus Christ put in a pursse, and hanging at his neck, and
all the way as they ride they sing and pray, beseeching God of his great mercy,
to defend and preserve their corn, and to send such temperate and seasonable
wether, as they may receive the fruits of the earth to their comfort and
sustentation.

Upon Saint Vrbins day, all the Vintners and masters of Vineyards, set a table
either in the market steed, or in some other open and public place, and
covering it with fine napery, and strawing upon it green leaves and sweet
flowers, do place upon the table the Image of that holy Bishop: And then if
the day be clear and fair, they crown the Image with great store of Wine,
but if the wether prove rugged and rainie, they cast filth, mire, and puddle
water upon it, persuading themselves that if that day be fair and calm, their
grapes (which then begin to flourish) will prove good that year, but if it be
stormy and tempestious, they shall have a bad vintage.

Upon Saint John Baptists day at night, in every village and street in Germany
be common fires, (or as we call them here in England bone-fires) about which
all the people gather together, both men, women and children, dancing and
singing, and using many other superstitions, as wearing upon their heads
garlands made of Mugwort and Veruin, and flowers in their hands wreathed and
pleated together in fashion of a spur, (which wreathes they call military
spurs) and they dare not look upon the fire, unless they look through
those spurs, firmly believing that by that means their eyes be preserved all
the year after from all pains and diseases, and every one as he goes away,
throws the garland he wore about his head into the fire, using this
coniuration, Go thy way and burn, and all my ill luck perish and burn with
thee. The like fashion is used by the Bishop of Herbipolis servants and
courtiers, for they cause a great fire to be made before the tower, which
stands upon a hill above the city of Herbipolis, and throw into the fire
many wodden hoopes bored full of holes, which when they be all of them on a
red fire, they put crooked sticks into the holes of the hoopes, and cunningly
and forceably hoyse them up into the air a great height, so as they flying
from the top of the hill over the river of Moganus, which runs under the
hill, seem to be fiery Dragons, to those which never saw the like before.

At the same time of the year their manner is to make earthen potts, with so
many holes in them as they will hardly hold together, and these potts do the
maids buy and cover them round about with red Rose leaves, and then put
Candles into them, and hang them upon the tops of the houses, instead of
Lanthornes: the young men at that time bring into their villages each one a Pine
tree, with all the little shootes and undermost branches lopped off, and
garnishing and triming the vpmost boughs with little hoopes, garlands, glasses
and glittering rays or plates of gold or copper they set their trees fast in
the ground, where they must stand all summer, resembling many poles in England.

In Autumn when their Grapes wax ripe, they gather not their Grapes one, one
day, and an other an other day, but all the owners of a Vineyard are appointed
to pull their Grapes all at one time, to continue pulling till they have all
done that Vineyarde, for they have not power to pluck them when they please
themselves, but when they be allowed by those to whom the tithe is due: And
these tithe-maisters appoint such a hill of Grapes to be got such a day, and
such a Vineyard such a day, and their tithes be ever brought by the owners of
the Vines, into the valley at the hill foot; but those which neglect to gather
their Grapes at the time appointed, ought and are enforced, whether they will
or no, to carry the tithe into the Lords Wine Press, at their own cost and
charge: But about the city of Herbipolis, the owners of tithes be more
precise, for they (distrusting that the Vine masters will not tithe truly) set
a boy over every one of them, to mark their manner of tithing, and to see that
their master have his due, and when harvest is done, and all the Grapes
gathered, all those boys meet together in the field, and every one being
covered all over with straw, and a Torche or two in his hand, they kindle
their Torches a little before night, and so come singing with their Torches
burning into the city. And in this sort they say they burn and make clean
Autumn.

The Franconians celebrate the feast days of the two pillars of the Church
Saint Martin and Saint Nicholas, with great joy and triumph, but after a
diverse manner, for the one is solemnized in Churches and Altars, the other in
victualing houses and tauernes: and there is (...) throughout all the whole
country be he never so needy, or never so niggard, but upon Saint Martins day
he will have some roste meat, or boild meat, and it be but Hogs intrailes, or
Calves intrailes, and glut themselves with wine, for then they taste of their
new wines, from which till that time they have abstained; and all their
households drink wine with them: and upon this day in Herbipolis and in diverse
other places besides, is much wine given to the poor for charity: then have
they their public shows and pastimes, as to have two or three Boares put into
a place together, and to behold them fight and tear one another with their
tuskes, till their guts traile about their heels, dividing the flesh when
the Boares be dead, some to the common people, and some to the Magistrates.

But upon Saint Nicholas day, all the young fry and Scholars, choose out three
amongst them, one to represent the person of a Bishop, and the other two
Deacons, he which is elected in the place of a Bishop, is solemnly upon that
day conducted into the Church by all his Schoole-fellowes, decked and trimmed
with a Bishops Miter, and all his other ornaments, and so sits in place of
authority, as Lord and Protector over them all the while Mass is in saying,
and when the sacrifice is finished, he chooses out a few of them from amongst
the rest, and he and they go singing up and down the town from house to
house, collecting and gathering money, and alleging that the money they got
by this means, is not taken as an alms or benevolence, but given franckly for
the maintenance of the Bishop.

Upon Saint Nicholas Eeue Parents will advise their children to fast, and the
more to incite them there unto they persuade them, that if they set their
shoes under the table over night, what so ever they shall find in them in the
morning, is sent them from that bountiful Bishop Saint Nicholas, which causes
the children to fast so truly and so long, as their parents be feign to
compel them to eat for being sick with over long fasting: and these be the
most usual customs of the Franconians; these their annual ceremonies.

Of Sueuia, and how the people of that country lived heretofore, and how they
now live. CAP. 16.
SVEVIA a Province of Germany, is at this day limited and bounded upon The
limits of Sueuia.
the East with Baioaria, upon the West with Alsatia and the river of Rhene, it
has the Alps upon the South, and Franconia on the North. Sueuia (as Antonius
Sabellicus is of opinion) was so called of a certain people called Sueui, who
departing from that part of Scythia, which is now called Liuonia and Prussia,
obtained this country to dwell in: which opinion Sueuia, why so called.
of Sabellicus, Lucan seems to confirm, where he says: He brought the
yellow Sueuians from the utmost Northern coast: Before it was named Sueuia, it
was called Alemannia, of the lake Lemannus which is also called Lausanensis.
Sueuia is the utmost part of all Germany, and is watered with two notable
rivers Rheine and Danubius, whereof the one running slowly falls into the sea
Westward, the other running a contrary course, passes by many regions, and
falls at length into the sea called Pontus.

The country is some part of it plain and even, and some part cragged and
mountanous, and all of it fertile and fruitful, saving lakes, mountains and
woods. There be great store of woods, and therefore very good hunting, and
especial good fowling, by reason of the multitude of rivers and lakes: Of
cattle there be great abondance, and plenty of all kind of grain, it is
also full of gallant and flourishing valleis, watered and manured with brooks,
rivers and running waters, some running one way, some an other, ouer-flowing
and fatting the soil: all which disburthen themselves either into Rhine or
Danubius. The land is very wholesome and healthful, and well replenished with
stately cities, towns and castles, aspiring towers likewise, walled and
fortified both by art and nature: and for the advancement of Christian
religion, it is sufficiently furnished with beautiful and rich temples, parish
Churches and Chapels, Bishops Palaces, Colleges, and monasteries, containing
sundry orders of religious persons, both men and women: upon the hills be
mines of Silver, Iron, and diverse other metals: it is very populus, and the
people very hardy, strong and valerous; they be tall of stature, yellow haird,
fair and welfauoured, and marvelous ingenious, so as Plutarch concludes them
in a word, for the most famous people of all Germany.

The glory and fame of this people grew once to that height, as they obtained
the Empire and government of the world, and in that honor and renown
continued for one age, but afterward being destitute and deprived of their
Princes, I know not how it came to pass, whether by the fickleness and
variety of fortune, or by their own folly and sloth, but their government
ceased, and their power and strength in short time became so weak and feeble,
as they could hardly hold their own and defend themselves, much less extend
their fame to her former greatness, in such sort as noe one considering their
present estate, would think that ever they had been Lords and Governors of
the world.

Julius Caesar in the fourth book of his commentaries, writes of this people
thus. The Sueuians (says he) the worthiest and warlikst people of all
Germany, are said to have a hundred Cities, great Burrowes or towns, out of
every of which hundred cities and towns yearly is furnished and set forth to
the wars a hundred thousand armed men, well appointed, These hundred thousand
men wage wars abroad, and be maintained by those which remain at home, and at
the years end return home again to husbandry, and send forth as many more of
those which were at home, so as going to the wars and remaining at home in
course, they be all well excercised is husbandry and skillful in feats of
arms, and having noe grounds nor possessions private to themselves, they yield
reciprocal Maintaynance one to another, for it is not lawful for them to
remain and abide in one place longer than one year.

Their usual food is bread, milk and flesh, they be much given to hunting,
as well for their daily exercise and liberty of life, which they much regard,
(for they be never from their infancy under the rule and correction of any or
constrained to do any thing against their wills,) the practice of hunting also
makes them more feerce and courageous, and their bodies more strong and able
to endure all extremities, as (although they dwell in a very cold clymate) they
will wash and bath themselves in cold rivers, and wear no other garments but
skins, and those so little, as the most part of there bodies be stark naked,
if any merchants traffic thither, it is more to buy such things of them as
they have got by the wars, than for any great desire the Sueuians have of
their commodities: besides they have great store of laboring beasts, more than
they have use for, which the French men much desire, and pay dear for them,
and those beasts which with them be naturally froward, ilfauored and almost
good for nothing, by much use and handling be made fit and able both to draw
and carry, or to be employed in the wars: for their horses be so well mand
and taught, as when the skirmish is at the hottest, their riders for their
better adrantage, will oftentimes skippe of their backs and fight on foot,
and find their horses again in the very same place they were left, when they
have occasion to use them: nor do they esteem any one thing more ilde or more
ilbeseeming them, than to ride upon horses that be harnessed, or have saddles
on their backs, by continual use whereof (though they be but few) they dare
and boldly will adventure to encounter with a troop of armed men and harnessed
horses, though the number of them be very great.

The Sueuians will suffer no wines to be brought unto them, supposing that the
drinking of wine makes men more effeminate, and less able to endure labor:
they hold it a general commendations to them, to have their There may no,
wines be brought into Suevia,
feelds and territories of their cities large and wide, signifying thereby
that their forces be not able to maintain such a multitude of cities, for
which cause in Sueuia the feelds be said to extend a thousand and six hundred
paces from their cities on every side.

Cornelius Tacitus writing the situation of Germany, and the manners of the
people, speaks thus of the Sueuians, The Germans (says he) have
distinguished the greatest part of Germany, by sundry names and nations,
although they be al called by one general name, Sueuians, and the property of
that people is to plat their locks, and then to knitt and bind them up on a
knot, by which mark and token the Sueuians be discerned and known from other
Germans, and the Freemen from slaves: There use is to turn up their curled
locks, until they wax so old that their hair grow white, and oftentimes
they will bind it on a knot upon the crown of their heads, in doing whereof
the better sort of people be most curyous.

They observe a certain time by tradition from their fathers, (which ceremony
they esteem so reverent as they dare not omit it) that all the people of one
stock or kindred, assemble themselves and meet together, in a certain wood
(consecrated and made holy after their fashion) there to do sacrifice, which
(as a most barbarous and horible ceremony and detestable sacrifice) is ever
solemnized by killing of a man: This wood, or holy grove they reverence
another way also, for there is none of them will adventure to go into it,
unless he be bound hand and foot with a cord, that they may perceive the
power of their Gods, and if any of them happen to fall, it is not lawful for
him to be taken up, or to re-enfore himself to rise again, but he must be
rolled or tumbled thither upon the ground: And all this their superstition
tends to no other end, but to know thereby the original of their nation,
where God the governor of all things is, and of all inferior things that are in
subjection, and yield obedience unto that God. Some of the Sueuians as
Cornelius also reports do sacrifice unto Isis: And as for all their other
customs, though heretofore never so peculiar, they be now common to all the
rest of the Germans: But so it is, that at this day, not only the manners of
the Sueuians, but almost of all other nations else, be changed and turned
clean topsie turuy, and (that which is most to be lamented) alterred from
better to worse, for now most of the welthiest men of all Sueuia be merchants,
and a great company of them compact and confederate themselves together, every
one disbursing a sum of money to be employed in Merchandise, wherewith they
do not only buy up and get into their hands spices, silks and other things
of great value, which be brought thither by sea from foreign countries, but
sometimes also they will deal with things of small worth, as spoones, needles,
spectacles, and puppets, and many such like tryfles and trinkets, engrossing up
much wine and grain likewise, which manner of traffic is not to be
commended, for it is not only grievous and hurtful to crafts men and husband
men (who be constrained to sell their wares and commodities to these grypers,
(as I may term them rather than Merchants,) before they can make the best
profit of them, when need shall afterward enforce them to buy the same of
them again for dubble the price,) but prejudicial also to all the whole
country in general.

For whereas the people were wont to make their provision of such things as
they wanted, from their neighbor Princes, at the cheapest rate, they have so
fed and bribed those corrupt Princes and governors of the contry, that nothing
shall be bought but of themselves, either in Stutgardia, or in other places
where they keep Marts and faires. And yet those rich men do not traffic
themselves but by their servants and common factors, who gathering in the
moneys disbursed with the increase, yield an account thereof, at such time as
they be called thereunto, rendering unto every man truly and faithfully his
own money, and his part of the gain.

The common people of Sueuia do most of them practice dressing of Toe and
spinning, which manner of work Much cloth made in Sueuia.
they apply so busily, and use so generally, as in the winter time in some
parts of Sueuia, you shall not only see maids and women, but men and boys also
with Spindles and Distaffes in their hands: They make a kind of cloth, the
warpe whereof is linen, and the oofe silk, which they call (Pargath) and an
other manner of cloth which they call (Golsch) and that is all linen, of these
manner of clothes they make great abundance, for it is known to be true,
that the Vlmenses only do make every year a hundred thousand of these
clothes, and if so many be made in one part of the country, which is but a
handful in respect of the whole, one may easily conjecture that the number
which is made in the whole land is almost infinite. These clothes be carried
to nations far from them, and especially twice a year to Franckford Mart,
from whence the people of Sueueland receive great custom and tribute. Moreover
(as evil things be oftentimes mingled with good, and no one thing is perfect
in all points) the Sueuians be marvelous lecherous people, the women as
willing to yield as the men to ask, yea both sides be apt to slide, but slow
to repent; and surely I think, that this vice is generally favored, both in
Sueuia and throughout all Germany, for neither there nor in any other part of
Germany, is any punishment inflicted, nor any one excommunicated by the
Ecclesiastical censure, either for open fornication, adultery, nor yet for
rauishing of women: And thereof arises this Proverb, that Sueuia only is
able to yield whores enough for all Germany, as well as Franconia affendeth
good store of thieves and beggars, Boemia heretics, Bauaria pilferers and
slaves, Heluetia Butchers and Bawdes, Drunkards in Saxony, periurers in Frisia
and Westphalia, and gluttons about the Rheine.

Of Bauaria and Carinthia, and of the laws and customs of those people
heretofore, and how they live at this day. CAP. 17.
BAVARIA, a Province of Germany, is so named of a people called Auarij Bauaria,
why so called.
by putting thereunto the letter B, who being a remnant of the Huns, expelled
thence the Norici, and possessed their country. It is also called Boioaria of a
people of Cisalpine France called Boij, who were once said to inhabit those
parts, before which time it was called Noricum.

Upon the East thereof lies Hungaria, and Sueuia upon The bounds of Bauaria.
the West: Italy joins unto it upon the South, and Franconia and Boemia upon
the North. The famous river: Danubius coming from Sueuia runs through
Bauaria, and under the name of Bauaria at this day, is comprehended Austria,
Stiria, and Cari^thi^, the people whereof be all a like both in life and
language: whereas heretofore it contained noe more than that only which was
called Noricum. That good and holy King Lucius King of Britain, was the first
that instructed them in the Christian religion, and after him Saint Rupertus,
and lastly they were confirmed in the faith by Boniface Bishop of Moguntinum.

Bauaria is divided into four Bishops seas, that is to say, Saltzburga,
Patauia, Phrisinberge and Ratisbon, it has in it more famous Cities than are
in any one province of Germany besides, the Metropolitan whereof is Saltzburge
heretofore (as is surmised) called Iuuania: Schiren was once the Dukes seat,
but now it is translated to Bauaria heretofore governed by Kings but now by
Dukes.
Monachium.

This land before it was reduced into a Province, was governed by Kings of
their own nation, until the reign of Arnolphus the Emperor: And as all the
Kings of Parthia were named Arsaces, and the Aegiptian Kings Ptolomies, so was
every king of Bauaria called Cacannus but after it was subued by Arnolphus and
annexed to the Empire the government was committed to Dukes, which manner of
government remains still: and all the Dukes for many successions together,
have been elected out of that most worthy and renowned family of the
Agilolphingij.

The manners and customs of that people may be understood, The laws used in
Bauaria which they received when they received Christianity.
by the laws which were given them when they first received the right faith of
Christ, which were these following: first that if a freeman borne would bestow
any thing toward the maintenance of the Church, whether it were lands money or
goods, he should make a deed thereof in writing, and seal and subscribe it
with his own hand and seal, and put to the names of six witnesses to
confirm it, and then deliver it as his deed in the presence of the Bishop,
by which act both he himself, and all his posterity were utterly bard for
ever after to enjoy or repossesse the same again but by permission of the
Church: And whatsoever was so given to the maintenance of Gods holy Church, was
committed to the Bishops custody, and by him defended and protected: If any
one wronged the Church or any thing thereunto belonging, he incurred the
judgment of God, the displeasure of holy Church, and was constrained (either by
the King or Prince for the time being) to render restitution, and forfeted
three ounces of gold besides, but if he denied the fact, he was brought before
the Altar and there in presence of Priest and people, swore and deposed what
wrong he had done and of what value: He that persuaded another man's servant
to run away from his Master, (were he man-seruant or maid servant) was
enforced to fetch him again, and to put an other into his place as a pledge
till he came, and was fined at fifteen shillings besides.

If a servant did privily burn any Church goods, he had his hand cut off, and
his eyes pulled out, that he might never after see to commit the like villainy,
and the master of such servant made good the value of that which was burnt:
But if a Freeman committed such a fault, he restored again the full value of
the loss, and forfeted for his folly three pound; and if he denied the fact,
he was to purge himself by the oaths of twenty four men; who standing by
the Altar before the defendor of the Church, laid their hands upon the holy
Evangelist, and swore whether they thought him faulty or not.

If an offender took sanctuary for refuge he was secure, nor was it lawful
for a Master to fetch his servant thence, otherwise to hurt him, for if he
did, the Judge would compel him to pay forty shillings to the Church, as a
recompense for infringing his privileges: He that injured any one that was in
any inferior order in the Church, made satisfaction with twice the value of
the injury done, which was paid over unto his parents or nearest friends: But
if the wrong were to one of an higher order, he paid three times the value.

He that killed a Priest, forseited and paid forthwith to the Church where he
was Minister, three hundred pieces of gold, and he that killed a Deacon, two
hundred; and if he were not able to pay such a sum of money; he was
delivered both himself, his wife, and children into bondage and servitude, and
detained in slavery, until he could make shift to pay the money. No one might
offer violence to a Bishop although he did him wrong, but might make his
complaint, and commence his suite before the King, Duke, or commons, whether it
were for homicide, fornication, or consenting to the enemy; and if it was
proved that he would have brought in enemies to invade the country, or sought
the spoil of those he ought to preserve, he was either deposed or banished.

He that contrary to the laws of the Church, married a recluse or Nun out of
her Cloister, was compelled to restore her thither again, and to leave her
where he found her: and the Bishop (by the Dukes assistants) would thrust her
into the Nunry again whether she would or no, and the man (if there were no
hope of his amendment) was banished the country.

It was not lawful for either Priest or Deacon to keep in his house any
strange woman, lest by often company and familiarity with her, he might hap
to be polluted, and so offer an unworthy sacrifice unto God, and the people be
plagued for his offenses. If any difference or controversy arose betwixt
Priests, Deacons, or other Clergy men, the Cannon law committed the deciding
thereof to the Bishops: farmers, husbandmen and servants paid tribute and tyth
to the Church, every one according to his ability, as every tenth bushel of
grain, every tenth perch of land, every tenth faggot, the tenth part of their
honey, and for every four pullets fifteen eggs. They were bound also to bring
stone, timber, and lyme for the reparations of the Churches, but yet with this
special care, that no man should be taxed more then he was well able to endure.

If any one were false unto his Duke, and by treason procured enemies into the
Province, or betrayed any City, and was thereof convicted by three witnesses,
all his goods were confiscate to the Duke, and the Duke had power to use him at
his pleasure: but to the end that no one should be overthrown or spoiled by
another envy or malice without cause, there was this provision made, that the
accused might challenge the single combat with one of his accusers; and if he
overcame the other he escaped free, and forfeited nothing. He that killed his
Duke, was killed himself, and all his goods confiscate for ever without
redemption: and he that stirred up sedition against him, forfeited to the Duke
600. shillings. When an army was conducted into the enemies land, the
soldiers had no cause to fall out amongst themselves for provision; for every
one might take what would serve his turn: but he which wrangled without cause,
was forced either to yield himself to the law of arms, in that case provided,
or suffer fifty stripes with a truncheon before his Lieutenant. And the
Lieutenants and Governors were to have a special care every one with in his
limits or county, that the soldiers did not spoil and prey upon the enemy,
before they were commanded by the Duke: for if any fault were committed through
their negligence, they were to make it good. If a freeman damnified, or
wronged another, he was constrained to make good as much as the party was
hindered, and was amerced besides at 40. shil. but such offenses were death in
servants, and their master made restitution for them, because they forbad them
not the committing of such crimes. If a servant stole or purloyned any thing
from the soldiers in the camp, and was thereof convicted, he lost his hand for
that offense, and his master notwithstanding restored the value of the goods
stolen: and a freeman for such a fault, was mulcted at forty shillings over
and above the due restitution of the thing stolen.

If any one were commanded by the king or duke to kill another, and he did it,
the king or duke which commanded him, ought for ever after to defend and
protect him from danger: and if the king or duke which was his protector died
his next successor did take upon him the like warrantie and protection of that
man. If the Duke were so stubborn and rebellious as to contemn and despise the
decrees of the king, he was deprived of his Duke-dome, and was utterly void of
all hope ever to recover his former estate and dignity. If the Duke had a son
so froward, foolish, or arrogant, as (through the counsel and abetting of lewd
and evil persons) he went about to depose his father from his government, so
that his father were yet well able to govern, to conduct an army, to get up
upon his horse, and to carry arms, and was neither deaf nor blind, and well
able to perform the kings command, he was dis-inherited, and for ever after
incapable of the Dukedom; or, (if his father pleased) he was banished to
perpetual euile for offending his father in so high a degree against the law.

He that by rashness, indiscretion, or drunkenness bred a scandal in the
Dukes Court, forfeited forty shillings, and was for ever after liable to make
good the value of the inconvenience that arose of that ill example: but a
servant for such a fault lost his hand.

If any thing were found in the Dukes Court, and taken up, and concealed one
night unrevealed, it was accounted theft, and such an offender forfeited into
the Dukes Exchequer fifteen shillings, because the Dukes house was accounted a
public house.

He that detracted, or by his ill speeches depraved the Dukes government, was
punished at fifteen shillings: and forced to finish and make perfect all that
he was commanded to do, that all pleas or suites might be dispatched and ended
every fifteenth day, in each several County of the country; for the doing
whereof, all the freemen assembled together, and they which neglected the
meeting, forfeited fifteen shillings: the Judge (to the end he might do
justice, and judge uprightly) had a book of the law lying open before him,
which served as a rule and pattern whereby to judge of all controversies.

And if the indictment were without partiality, and that he judged uprightly
without respect of persons, or rewards, he then had, and enjoyed to himself
the ninth part of the composition, but if the judgment were partial, or
smelled of briberie; he forfeited the double value of that which by his false
sentence and corruption, was paid, and was fined moreover at forty shillings.

He which killed the Duke, paid either unto his friends or unto the king for
composition, 1460. shillings, whereof his friends had six hundred. And it was
ever observed, that the composition for the death of the Duke, was three times
as much as for the death of any of his friends.

The Agilolsingi (out of which family the Dukes be ever created) had the fourth
part of the composition, and then the Huosi, the Trozzi, the Sagavi, the
Hahilingi, and the Aennonni had the one half of that which remained. He that
killed a freeman, paid (either unto the Duke or unto his parents that was
slain) 8. pounds, he that put out a free-mans eye, or cut off his hand or
foot, paid 40. shillings: he that lamed him paid 12. shillings, and for a maim
20. shillings, for a wound 3. shillings, for striking out a cheek tooth, or
grinding tooth 12. shillings, and for every other tooth 6. shillings. They were
very strictly forbidden to molest or hurt strangers, in so much as he which
injured any of them, paid unto the party grieved the double value of the wrong
sustained, and besides forseited 8. pounds into the Dukes Exchequer: and he
that slew a stranger, forfeted an hundred pounds in gold. If a servant molested
or sold a freeman, and were complained of to the Judge, he escaped not without
some great punishment, as the loss of hand or eye. Libertines which had bin
manumitted and made free, had more easy compositions by the one half, then
those which were freeborn. All incestuous marriages were there utterly
prohibited, so as it was not lawful for any man to marry his first wives
mother, his sons wife, his daughter-in-law, his step mother, his brothers or
sisters daughter, his brothers wife, or wives sister: and those which offended
in any of these points, all his goods were confiscate by the Judge.

he that profaned the Lords day with any manner of work, after the first
warning and admonition, had fifty lashes upon the back with a whip, and if he
offended again the second time; he forfeited the third part of all his goods,
and for the third offense he lost his liberty: for it is fitting, that he
which will not be free upon that day, should be a slave for ever after. A
servant for laboring upon the Lords day was beaten, but if he held on his
course without amendment, his right hand was cut off. And a stranger for the
like fault, having been warned aforehand, paid 12. shillings. He that detained
a freeman against his will in servitude and bondage, or forcibly took away his
inheritance or goods, was forced to restore what ever he violently took away,
and forfeited forty shillings besides. If any one lay with another man's wife
that was a freewoman, he paid unto her husband 7. pounds for amends, and if
he were taken in the deed doing and slain, his death was not to be revenged.

He that committed fornication with a freewoman by her consent, and refused to
take her to his wife, paid 12. shillings. If a servant offered violence to a
freewoman, his master delivered him to the woman's father to be punished, who
might justly kill him if he pleased. He that ravished or stoale away a
freewoman, without her parents consent and her own, forfeited 11. shillings,
and if she that was stolen away were manumitted, he forfeited 8-shillings, but
if she were a servant, the forfeiture was but 4. shillings. If a freeman put
away his wife being a freewoman without just cause, he paid unto her parents
40. shillings, and duly repayed unto the woman her dower and full portion, she
brought with her, according to the family out of which she came. If a freeman
were troth-plight to a freewoman, and afterward forsook her and married
another, he paid unto the wenches parents 24. shillings, and brought twelve men
to swear with him, that he forsook her not for any fault of hers, nor for any
malice he bore to his parents, but only for the great love and affection he
bore unto the other. He which stole away another man's wife, restored her
again, and paid eight pounds unto her husband for amends. If a bondwoman
gave a potion to a woman that was with child, to procure an abortiue, she had
two hundred lashes with a whippe; and if she were a freewoman that tempered
the poison, she lost her freedom, and became a slave for ever. If a woman
with child were stricken and brought forth an abortiue, and died her self of
the blow, he or she that struck her, was reputed and taken as an homicide, and
if the woman lived, and the abortiue not living at the time of the stroke
given, the party that gave the blow, paid her twenty shillings: but if the
abortiue had life, the forfeiture then was fifty Weregelds, three shillings,
and a Tremissis. If a Freeman stole any thing out of the Dukes Court,
Churches, shoppes, worke-houses or Mils, which be public places of resort, he
was constrained to swear what the value of that was which he stole, and was
forced to restore nine times the worth, or else to fight hand to hand with the
party grieved, or his champion. If a thief were taken stealing in the night
and slain, his death was not revenged: and he that allured, persuaded, or
enticed another man's servant to steal from his master, or otherwise to wrong
him, and was thereof detected, was condemned as a thief, and paid nine times
as much as the master was damnified: the servant also restored what he took
away, and was openly whipped besides, with two hundred stripes, but the master
suffered no prejudice.

And all felons for all thefts whatsoever, were brought before the Judge, and
suffered such punishment as the law ordained in such cases: but they first made
composition and satisfaction out of their own goods, unto those they had
wronged sundry times, before they were adjudged to die for stealing. He that
bought any thing in the Province, was first diligently to enquire, whether it
was stolen or no: for he which bought stolen goods was bound to restitution,
and forfeited twelve shillings into the Dukes Exchequer. The same penalty was
inflicted upon him that took any stolen goods committed to the charge or
custody of another. And no man could make composition with a thief, but
before the Judge: for he which did it in hugger mugger of purpose to conceal
the theft from the Judge, was accounted and punished as a thief himself. As
often as any contention arose amongst them, about the bounds or limits of their
grounds, there were certain surveiors appointed to view and find out the
ancient meares and marks betwixt land and land; against which prescription,
or long continuance of possession was of no force: and if no marks could be
found, then he that sold the land, showed the meare-stones to the Surveyors:
but if the controversy were such, as it could not otherwise be decided, and
the parties appeased, they then fought it out hand to hand: And no one party
might set down a new meare stone or mark, without the consent of the other,
and that in the presence of the Surveior: for if a freeman offended herin, he
was fined at six shillings, and a slave was openly whipped with two hundred
lashes. If one freeman pulled down the wall or ditch of another freeman, he
forfeited 3. shillings, and unto the party grieved, as much as he was
damnified, and he which pulled down either post, pillar, beam, or rafter,
forfeited 3. shillings likewise, and 12. pence for either shingle or tyle, or
any other part of the house, besides restitution for the loss sustained.

It was not lawful for any one to take a pledge or distress without the Dukes
permission: for he which did, was forced safely to restore the pledge or
morgage so taken to the owner, and paid unto the Duke 40. shillings for a fine:
and if the thing so morgaged or distrained, happned to miscarrie in his hands,
he then made satisfaction to the owner, at the discretion of the Judge. He
which cut down another man's standing corn that was ripe, paid for composition
six shillings; and if he denied the fact, he was deposed himself, and
produced six men to be sworn with him, that he took a true oath. He which
destroyed another man's corn or grain by enchantment or sorcery, and was
thereof convicted, forfeited 12 shillings, and was forced to provide food for
his whole family, that had his corn so destroyed, for all the year following,
and restored unto him over and above, the value of that which was destroyed:
but if he denied the fact, he then either purged himself by the oath of 12.
men, or by battle. If any man either by his means or abetment, enticed
another man's servant to run away from his master, he was enforced to bring him
again, and forfeited for a man servant 12. shillings, and six shillings for a
maid: but if he denied it, he purged himself either by the oath of a full
Jury, or by combat.

No one might either kill or hurt another man's cattle, though he found them in
his own grounds dammagefesant, but he might impound and detain them, until he
had made it known unto the owner, or unto his neighbors, what loss he had
sustained, and then the owner of the cattle was to set him forth as much
other ground, as that which was eaten. In gathering in of their harvest, every
one that was damnified by an others cattaile, was recompensed by the owner of
the cattaile, who ought not to make the offense greater then it was, but he
which killed an other man's cattaile in breach of this law, took the dead
carcass himself, and gave unto the owner an other beast as good as his was.
If he struck out his eye, he paid unto the owner the third part of the
price, that the beast was worth, and if he cut off either tail or ear, he
paid twelve pence and a tremissis for every horn. But he which committed any
of these outrages, either for hatred, contempt, or despite, his penalty was
doubled, he which took an other man's horse or ox to keep for hire, and lost
him by his own default, paid the full price for him, and had no hire, but if
he purged himself by his oath, that the beast was not lost by his neglect,
then he had the hide allowed him.

He which received into his house an other man's goods (were it gold, silver
apparel or any thing else) either to sell or to keep, and that his house,
together with those goods were burned by misfortune, if he would depose that
his own goods were burned with them, and that he had no profit nor commodity
by those goods so committed unto him, he made no restitution for them.

If a house were on fire, and one making show to quench the fire, did steal
and purloine any thing thence, he paid fouretimes the value of that which he
stole, and made composition besides according to the Statutes.

If a thing was in contention betwixt two to whom the property belonged, it
was not lawful for any one whatsoever either to give it or sell it, until it
was decided to whom the right property did appertain. If a woman buried her
husband and remained a widow afterward, she had an equal portion with one of
his children, both of the goods and of the yearly profit of the living, but if
she married an other husband, she then took such goods only as she had of
her own, and her dower, and departed the house the same day she married, and
that portion which was allotted unto her, after the death of her husband,
during her widdow-hood, was equally divided amongst her children.

If a man had children by diverse wives, they all of them equally inherited, but
the mothers children inherited such goods only as belonged unto her, and the
son of a bondwoman might not inherit with the son of a freewoman. If a
man died without issue and made no will, his wife so long as she kept her
self widow, enjoyed the one half of all her husbands goods, and the other
half remained to his kinsfolk: But if she died, or married again, she then
presently departed, and carried with her such goods only as were her own, and
due unto her by the law, and that part which she had was distributed to her
husbands kinsfolks likewise. If either man or woman died and neither devised
their goods by testament, nor gave them away in their life time, and had no
kindred living within seven degrees, then were all their goods confiscate and
escheated into the Dukes Exchecker. He which sold any thing and took money for
it, was to confirm the sale either by writing, or in the presence of two
witnesses at the least, and no sale was firm and good, unless he which sold
it did it voluntarily and unconstrained. He which sold an other man's goods
without the owners consent or priuity, restored the same again, and an other
as good as that was besides, but if the thing so sold could not be gotten
again, then he paid two other things as good as that was which he sold. He
which bought any thing and gave earnest for it, was forced to stand to his
bargain, unless the other party were willing to release him, or else he lost
the thing he gave earnest for, and paid the full price agreed upon,
notwithstanding: If a man sold a thing which was naught, he was constrained to
take it again at any time within three days, or else he was deposed and
brought one other to swear with him, that he knew not of the fault, and so
the bargain stood current.

If a bondman purchased his free-dome by his own purse, and not with his
masters money, and the deceit were discerned, he was restored again to his
master, because his master received no other thing for him, but that which
was his servants, which he knew not of. And the same law that was in buying
and selling, was likewise in exchanging.

If any one entered into an other man's ground, and claimed it for his own, he
paid for his rashness six shillings, and restored the ground to the owner
again: A witness produced to give testimony, neither could nor ought to be
resisted, unless in case of one that is dead, in which case he was to make
good his evidence by battle, and if he hap to get the victory, he was then
creditteds, and no longer impugned. If there were many witness, then one was
elected by lot to swear, and the manner of his oath was thus: I am elected as a
witness, and I offer my self to be deposed, and as God shall help me and
him whose hand I hold, I am produced as a witness to speak the truth,
touching this matter now in question, and then joining all their hands together
to swear and protest the truth, he alone holding in his other hand one other
that swears with him, deposed as seems him good, and if he swore false and
was convicted of perjury, he restored and made good unto the party damnified
by his false oath, as much as he was hindered thereby, and paid twelve
shillings more for composition, or else defended his innocence by battle.

If one champion killed the other in battle, if he were a freeman, then the
party that unjustly procured him to undertake the combat, paid twelu
shillings for composition, but no more. He which sold any thing from a freeman
that was dead and buried, paid unto his parents or friends forty shillings,
and restored that which he stole away. He that murdered a freeman secretly,
casting his body either into a river or other base place, whereby he was
deprived of due sunerals and exequies, did first pay forty shillings, and
afterward a were-geld. If a freeman was slain and cast into a river, or into
the sea, and after his body hapt to be cast upon shore, if any one tumbled him
into the water again, he forfeted forty shillings. And if a servant or
bondman were so slain and cast up, then he which adventured to throw him in
again forfeted nine pounds. He which slew a man and took his apparel from
him, paid twice the worth of his apparel, and he which cut or mangled the
carcass of a dead man paid twelve shillings for every member he so cut or
mangled. He which found the body of a dead man, and out of his compassion
affoorded it burial, lest it should be devoured by beasts or birds, the
friends or master of the dead man gave him twelve pence for his pain. He
which removed an other man's ship or boat out of his place, restored unto the
owner either the same again in as good plight as it was, or an other as good.
But if he took it out of the water, and concealed and denied it being asked,
it was accounted as theft, and he then paid for it as if he had stole it: He
which stole a hound restored him back again, or an other as good and paid
six shillings besides, and three shillings for a sheap-heards cur: And these
were the laws that the Bauarians lived under not many ages since, and diverse
of them be yet in force at this day.

The Bauarians be earnest and devout Christians, and will go on pilgrimage by
great troops, to Churches and Monuments a far off, and especially to a Temple
in Aquisgrane: And within their own Province there be two notable and famous
places, both for miracles of the Saints, and great concourse of pilgrims,
which are the blessed Virgin Mary of Ottinga and Saint Wolfangus. The country
yields no vines, unless some few in the south part thereof, for it is full of
mountains and great woods, the trees whereof afford great plenty of Acornes,
and wild Apples, by which means they have great store of hogs, so as
Bauaria furnishes other countries of Europe with as many swine, as Hungary
does with oxen, and the people themselves be very hoggish and perticipate of a
swynish nature, so as in comparion of al other Germans, they may justly be
termed barbarous and fauadge, and surpassing al others in two horrible and
abominable vices, that is to say cruelty, and theft: Their apparel is for the
most part blew, and they go more commonly in boots then in shoes: upon that
side of Bauaria toward Austria, lies part of Carinthia and part of Stiria:
Carinthia is a mountanous country, and bordereth Eastward upon the people
called Carni, and upon the West and South upon Stiria, and so reaches to the
Alps of Italy, and Forum Iulij.

In Carinthia be many fruitful valleies and hills for wheat and other grain,
there be many great meeres and rivers, the chief whereof is the river Drauus,
which running by Stiria and Pannonia falls into Danubius, and is not much
inferior to the river Savus.

This country is under the dominion of the Archduke of Austria, and when a new
Prince is ordained and takes upon him the government of their commonweal,
they observe a strange solemnity, the like whereof is not used in any: other
country, the manner of it is this. In a large valley near unto the town of
Saint Vitus, are remaining The manner how the Carinthians elect their Duke.
the ruins of a decayed City, near unto which place in a plain field
stands there on end a great marble stone, and when a new Archduke is to be
created, a country clown (to whom that office descends by inheritance)
stands upon the stone, having upon his right hand a black Cow in Calfe, and
a Mare upon his left, so lean as she is nothing but skin and bone, and round
about him stand a great rabble of country people, and others gazing at him, in
which interim a great multitude of nobles and gentlemen in gallant and
sumptuous attire, having the ensigns of principality carried before them,
conduct the new Prince toward the stone, the Prince himself being meanly
arrayed in a clownes cap, high shoes and a sheap-heards staff, and seeming
indeed rather a silly sheap-heard then a powrefull Prince: when the clown upon
the stone perceives him coming so gallantly attended, he cries out with a
loud voice in the Slauonian tongue (for the Carinthians be Slauonians) who is
this that comes so proudly? to whom the whole multitude make answer that the
Prince and governor of the country is coming, what is he (says the clown)
is he a just and upright Judge? Does he regard the welfare of his county? Is
he of a free condition and worthy of honor? Is he a professor and defendor of
the Christian religion? And all the people ^^erre that he both is and will be
such a one, then the clown again demands: how or by what right he can
displace him from his seat, to whom the master of the Dukes household
answers and says: the Duke shall give thee for thy seat sixty pence and
these two beasts which stand on each side of thee, besides that thou shall have
all the Dukes apparel he now wears, and both thou and all thy family shall
for ever after be free from tribute, which said the clown gives the Duke an
easy blow upon the check, willing him to be an upright Judge, and so
receiving the rewards promised, he departs from the stone, and the Duke
gets up into his place, and there drawing a naked sword, and brandishing it
round about upon every side, he speaks unto the people, and promises them to
be an equal and just Judge and governor, the report is also that they give
him drink in a clownes cap, which he drinks in token that ever after he
will be sober, and continent.

After this he goes thence to the Church of Solemnensis, that is situated
upon a hill near adjoining, and is dedicated to our blessed Lady, and called
after her name, and there he hears mass, which done he puts off the
base attire which he wore till then, and putting on a coat armor, he
banketteth and feasteth with his nobles, and lastly he returns again into
the same field, and there sits in Judgment, doing right unto every one, and
casting and reckoning his yearly revenues.

This honor of inuesting the Prince is given unto clownes, for because they
were the first in that country that embraced the Christian religion, the
Nobility and Princes remaining in error until the time of Charles the Great,
in whose days they were baptized, and became earnest followers of the faith
likewise.

The Duke of Carinthia was master of the Emperors A severe punishment against
thieves.
hounds, whereupon the deciding of all controversies and contentions,
concerning huntsman and hunting, was referred unto him. And when any one is
accused before the Emperor for any such cause, he must answer his accusors in
the Slauonian tongue. They have an other custom in that Province which is
chiefly put in use about the town called Klagen concerning theft, which is
most strickt and severe; and withal very unreasonable, for there if one be but
suspected of theft he is insta^tly trussed up, and the next day after he is
hanged they inquire of the suspicion, and then if he prove guilty in deed,
they suffer him to hang still, until he rot and fall down peecemeale, but if it
appear that he was unjustly put to death, then is he buried, and his funerals
performed at the common cost of the city. The Carinthians wear for the most
part cloakes made of such wool as their own country sheep bear, and self
colloured, and cappes upon their heads, their language is the Slauonian tongue.

But the Stirij be a more rude and rusticall kind of people, The description
of Stiria.
having marvelous great throats, yea their throat boales are so big as they
are an impediment unto their speech, and that which is more (if it be truly
reported of them) the women that give suck will cast their throats behind
their backs like a wallet, to the end they should not hinder their children in
their sucking: the cause of this strume or great throats, they attribute to
the water and air whereof they drink, and be nourished. The Stirians
resemble the Germans both in speech, habit and behavior, excepting those
that dwell about the river Dravus, that speak the Slauonian tongue. There is
much Salt made which they carry into other countries, and exchange it for other
commodities. There be also mines of Iron and Silver, though but little gotten,
which happens through the negligence and carelessness of the Princes and
governors.

This country was once called Valeria, it is very mountanous and craggie,
excepting the East part thereof next unto Pannonia, and there it is very plain
and even.

Of Italy, and of the manners of the Italians: of Romulus also and his civil
institutions. CAP. 18.
ITALY a Region of Europe, was first Italy first called Hesperia, and then
Ocnotria.
called Hesperia, of Hesperus the brother of Atlas, who being expelled by his
brother, left his name both unto Spain and Italy: But Macrobius is of opinion,
that it was called Hesperia of the star Hesperus, which is their evening
star. It was also called Oenotria, either for the goodness of the wine which
is made in Italy, for Ocnum in Greek signifies wine) or else of Oenotrius
King of the Sabines. And lastly it was named Italy of Italus King of Scicily,
who taught them the Art of husbandry, and gave them laws to live under, for
he coming into that part wherein Turnus afterward reigned, called it after
his name, as is proved by Virgil in these verses thus translated by master
Phaer.

There is a place the Greeks by name Hesperia do call,
An ancient l^nd, and fierce in war, and fruitful soil withal:
Out from Oenotria they came that first did till the same,
Now Italy men say it is called so of the Captains name.
But Timaeus and Varro hold opinion, that it was called Italia, of the great
store of goodly Bulls which be there Italy why so called.
bred, above other places, for Bulls in the ancient Greek tongue were called
Itali. That part of Italy which is next unto the mouth of Tyber is called
Latium, even as that part is called Ausonia (according to Aristotle) which is
next unto the Tyrrhen fea.

Italy is in form like a cross, and situated betwixt the Adriattick and the
Tuscan sea; and extending from the Alps and the hill Appenine, reaches unto
the city Rhegium, and the Brutian shores: Toward the end it deuideth it self
into two parts, whereof the one looks into the Ionian sea, and the other into
the Scicilian: in the utmost part whereof stands the city Rhegium.

The length of Italy from Augusta Praetoria, passing by The length of Jtaly.
Rome and Capua to the city Rhegium, (according to Solynus) is a thousand and
twenty miles, and the breadth where it is broadest, four hundred and ten miles,
and a hundred thirty and six where it is narrowest, having as it were a belly
ietting further out then the rest, in Agro Rh^^ith, which now is confined with
the river Rubicon, sliding by the side of the Adriaticke sea:

Italy is divided into many Regions, for from the river Jtaly divided into many
Provinces.
Varus to the river Macra is Liguria, where Genoua is the chiefest city: from
Macra then to Tyber is Hetruria, the Metropolitan city whereof is Pisa; from
Tyber unto Lyris is that part of Italy called Latium, wherein stands Rome:
and the city Antium (which we call Netnut) is situated within the province
upon the shore side: from Lyris unto the river Sarnus is Campania, where Naples
is chief city: from Sarnus to Silarus, is the country called Picentum, the
two greatest towns whereof be Surrentum and Salernum, betwixt Silarus and
Laius is Lucania, of which province the most notorious towns be Pestum and
Buxentum, with us called Beluedere: from the river Laius to the promontory of
Leucopetra, is the country called Brutium, wherein stands the city of
Rhegium Iulium: from the promontary of Leucopetra to the promontory of
Iapigium, otherwise called Salentinum, is the borders or frontires of great
Greece, wherein are situated the two famous cities Croton and Tarentum: from
Iapigium to Brundusium is Calabria, wherein is Hydruntum: from the city
Brundusium to the hill Garganus now called Saint Angelus hill, is Apulia,
wherein stand the cities Barium or Barry and Salapia: from the hill Garganus
to the mouth of the river Sarnis, is the country of the Frentani, in which
Province Isconium is chief city: from the river Sarus to the river Apernus is
the coast of the Marrucini, and therein is the city Orton: from Apernus to the
river Aesius, whilom the utmost bounds of Italy dwell the Piceni, whose city
is Ancona: from Aesius (or Asius as others write it) to Rubicon, the latter
confines of Italy, be the Senones, whose chiefest towns are Phanum fortunae,
Pisaurum and Ariminum: from Rubicon to the mouth of the river Padus, live the
people called Boij, amongst whom is the city Rauenna: betwixt Padus and Tilta
vemptum, is the Venetians country, wherein stands the famous and renowned
city of Venice: from Tilia vemptum to Natison, are the people called Carni or
Foroilienses, and in that province is Aquileia: from Natison to Arsia are the
Iapyges and Istri and therein is the city of Tergestum, and the river Formio
which is now the utmost limits of all Italy.

The hill Appenyne deuydeth all Italy as it were into two clymates or regions,
leaving the one part toward The hill Apenine deuideth Italy into two parts.
the west and South, and the other toward the North and East: This hill takes
his beginning from the Alps, and from thence runs into Liguria, and after
that it parts Cisalpine France and Picenum, from Hetruria and Sabinia and so
passes to the City Ancona, from whence it auerteth his course and extends
into Apulia, and the hill Garganus, seperating the countries of the Marucini,
the Peligni, and the Frentini, from Latium and Campania, and so finisheth his
race from the hill Garganus, when it comes to the promontory of Leucopetra,
having upon the one hand Apulia, Calabria, the confines of great Greece and
Picenum, and the Lucani and Brutij upon the other. Italy of all other countries
is most wholesome and healthsome, both for sweenesle of the air and temperature
of the heavens, it abounds with all sorts of metal, The praise of Jealy.
Ceres adorneth her feelds, and Phoebus dallyeth upon her hills: the forests,
parkes and chases be safe and secure for passengers, and replenished with
goodly trees of sundry kinds, which yield great variety of fruits and
commodities to the inhabitants: of wynes and oils there is plenty, and
exceeding great store of all sorts of grain, their sheep carry very fine
fleeces, and their oxen and bulls of all other places be most beautiful,
their rivers, lakes, and pooles be clear and full of fish, and delightsome: of
havens and port towns there be great abundance, the land her self in sundry
places making (as it were) Roades and breaches into the sea, for the exceeding
desire she has to avail mankind, whereby she becomes (as I may say) the
lap and bosom, that opens and offers traffic and trading into all
countries, so as she is justly Italy the nurse of all nations.
termed of some, the nurse of all other nations, and elected by Gods divine
providence, as parent and Princess of all other Provinces, and such a one as
should gather together under one head, and government, all dispersed dominions,
and should assuage and mitigate the rage and rudeness of many barbarous
people, and (by the divine help of learning and the Latin tongue) should unite
and bring to sociable conference, all nations, though never so different in
life and language: for to pass over many people and kingdoms which the
Romans have wone and The commendations of Rome.
conquered with their armies and cloquence, the City of Rome alone is as amply
stored with examples of all virtues, as the Grecians with all their eloquence
are with precepts, yea they themselves deuining (as it were) that their land
should become the head and governor of all others, when they surnamed one part
thereof great Greece.

In a word, it was not without the divine providence ordained, that where that
most wise and omnipotent God had rejected all other nations, it pleased him to
make that the chief Empire, fortress and defense of all people, that should
afterward be the seat, throne and chair of the head of Gods Church, and the
Christian religion: The The stature and complexion of the Italians, and how
they differ.
Italians differ much amongst themselves both in countenance and stature, for
in Cisalpine France, and about the gulf of Venice, the people be of a pale
complexion, neat in their apparel, and curious in their speech: but the
inhabitants of Hetruria, Latium, Campania, Lucania and the Brutij be of a more
brown and swartie complexion, and their hair black, in stature they be lower
and withal very lean, and in apparel and speech more plain and simple. The
Piceni and those which dwell on the skirts of the Adriatticke sea, until you
come to great Greece, have much resemblance to the former, but in Apulia,
Calabria, and in the uppermost parts of Italy toward Greece, their speech and
behavior does little differ from the Greeks.

Throughout all Italy, and in a manner throughout all Europe, it is not lawful
for any man to have more wives than one, and all diuorses betwixt man and wife,
had their original from the City of Rome, for there it was that Spurius
Carbillus, complaining of his wives barrenness, was the first that ever was
divorced from his wife. The Citizens heretofore consisted of three sorts of
people, Three sorts of Citizens.
that is to say, slaves, libertines (which were such as were once slaves, and
were manumitted and made free) and freemen. The freemen were likewise divided
into three orders Three orders of Freemen.
or ranks, to wit, the Plebeians, the Equestri, and the Patritij; the
solemnizing of their sacrifices and sacred rites was committed to Priests and
Flamins, besides whom they had diverse colleges and societies of religious
persons, whereof some did sacrifice to one God, and some to an other. The
Dictator was most honored of all other officers, and bore The Dictator their
chiefest officer.
the greatest sway amongst them, from whom no appeal was sufferable, for he
bearing a Kinglike government, they had no higher officer to whom they might
appeal: the dignity of the Dictator continued but half a year, and for the
most part they came to that high office by degrees, as being first Questors or
Treasurers, then Aediles, or ouer-seeers, and after that Praetors or chief
Justices, then were they made Consuls, then Censors, and then they attained to
the highest office of all, which was Dictatorship. But yet it did not always
necessarily follow, that the Dictator had born all those offices before
recited, for he was oftentimes elected out of some inferior office for his
valor and worthiness, yet he had chiefest power and authority over all those
civil governors, as likewise over all officers that bore rule in the wars,
for in military affairs they had their degrees of governors, as well as in
domestical businesses, for there the common soldiors yielded obedience to the
Centurions, the Centurions to the Tribunes, the Tribunes to the Lieutenant, the
Lieutenants or deputies to the Consuls, or unto their Vice-presidents by them
assigned to rule in their steeds, and all these together with the Captains and
conductors of horsemen, were subject to the authority of the Dictator. In wars
that were lawfully begun, soldiers might continue for the space of ten years,
if in all that time they never skirmished with the enemy, nor were sommoned
away to wage wars in other countries. Besides this lawful making of wars,
whereof I now speak, there was an other sort of warfare called Causaria, which
was when the army for some reasonable cause was dismissed, and the camp
removed. This latter manner of warfare as it was not so honorable as the first,
yet did it carry with it no touch of ignominy nor disgrace, because they were
called thence for some special cause; Seruius Tullius ordained, that none
should be soldiors but such as were betwixt the age of seventeen years, and
eight and forty: those which were men of peace went always in gowns, and the
soldiers in short cassocks and coat armors. When they intended to make
battle against any country, they would first send an herald or officer at
arms to denounce wars, and being once entered into it, they might not leave it
but for some lawful cause.

All the cities of Italy were either confederats with Rome, or such as were
newly inhabited by those that came out of Rome, and were called Colonia, or
Municipia, which were such Cities as had liberties and privileges proper
Three sorts of Cities.
and peculiar to themselves: of which sort some were made by plurality of
voices, and some otherwise, and those Cities called Municipia, were ever
governed by their own decrees, but the Cities called Coloniae were accounted
as members of Rome, and lived under the Roman law. In the cities or
corporations called Municipia, where there were Burgesses and Free denizens
together, their chiefest officers were called Decurions, which were the same
that Senators were at Rome. The order of the Patritij were distinguished from
the Equestri by their purple robes, and the Equestri were known from the
Plebeians, by their gilden garments, if he which had the chiefest authority,
and bore the prerogative royal amongst them, had misdemeaned himself, his
cause was discerned by the whole body of the city, and the hearing and
determining of all other capital offenses, was committed to certain Judges
elected by lots to that dignity, out of that band of soldiers which were
assistants to the Magistrates in matters of life and death for that year: The
deciding of all civil contentions, belonged to the Praetor of the Centumuiri,
and so in like sort other crimes were committed to the consideration of other
Magistrates: And such generally were the manners and customs of all the people
and cities of Italy, which institutions and form of government, they received
from Romulus.

Now Romulus (after he had finished and perfected the walls, ditches, forts of
defense, and all other necessary buildings of the City of Rome:) ordered and
disposed the state of the city in manner following. First he divided the
whole multitude of people into three parts or ranckes, selecting out of every
of those orders or degrees, How Romulus disposed the citizens of Rome into
sundry orders and degrees.
the chiefest and worthiest men to govern and rule the rest. After this he
made a subdiuision, distributing each of those three several parts into ten
equal and indifferent portions, and setting as governors over every portion
the best and most substantialest men amongst them; he called the three greater
parts Tribes, and the lesser Curiae or wards: the governors of the Tribes he
likewise called Tribunes, and the Presidents of the wards, Centurions: The
Curiae or wards were lastly divided into lesser bands, called Decuriae, and
their wardens or leaders he named Decurions.

All the people being thus divided into Tribes and The ground divided into
thirty equal parts.
wards, he then made like partition of the land, dividing it into thirty
equal parts or portions, and allotting unto every ward their part thereof, he
reserved only so much for himself, as was sufficient for him wherein to build
Temples and places for sacrifices, leaving also some little in common to them
all: And thus this first partition both of the people and ground, wrought a
common equality amongst them. This done, he made a second division of the
people only, giving unto every one stipends and honors, according to the
worthiness and dignity of their persons, and seuerring those which were
honorably descended, and of approved virtues, and that were wealthy withal,
and had issue to inherit after them, from those which were poor, needy and
ignoble, he named those men of basest and meanest condition Plebeians, and the
Nobility he called Patres or fathers, whereof insued, that the whole descent
and posterity of the Patres, were ever after them called Patritians.

When Romulus had thus separated the better sort of people from the worse, the
rich from the poor, the noble from the ignoble, he then ordained them laws to
live under, allotting unto every of them their proper offices and functions,
according to their degrees and calling. To the Patritij he gave power to do
sacrifice, to bear offices, to The office of the Patritij.
decide controversies, and to see that every one had his right, to participate
with him in the government of the commonweal, and to have a vigilant regard
and provident respect of the safty of the city: the Plebeians or comminalty
(both for that they were poor and wanted experience) were eased from bearing
offices, and only employed some in husbandry, some in feeding of cattle, and
some in handy-crafts, or other profitable trades. And to the end that all these
several sorts of people should live peaceably, and free from contention one
with an other, and neither the poor injured by the rich, nor the rich envied
by the poor, he committed the Plebeians to the care of the Patritians,
permitting every one of the comminalty to choose one of the Patritij whom he
pleased, for his Advocate and defendor, calling that a Patronage or protection.
How the Patritians and Plebeians behaved themselves one toward another.
And thus the poor being taken into the protection of the Patritians, he
instituted for them both, their proper duties one toward an other, which was
that the Plebeians should reverence their patrons, and the patrons defend their
clients whom they had taken into protection, and so he united them together in
friendly affection and civil conjunction, making it dishonest and utterly
unlawful for either of them to accuse the other, or for the one to give
testimony against the other, or that there should be any hatred or enmity
betwixt them; by which means, unity and mutual concord was most firmly settled
and established amongst the Romans.

After this he elected an hundred Counselors, out of the Patritians, the
manner of their election was this; First he himself assigned and nominated one
to be his viceroy, The Centumviri elected, which were after called Senators of
Rome.
or Lieutenant in the government of the commonwealth, when he went to the
wars, out of the confines of his own country: then he commanded the Tribes
to choose out of every Tribe three, of the best esteem amongst them, for
gravity, wealth and honor: after which nine so elected by the tribes, he
likewise commanded the Curiae or wards, that every ward should choose three of
the Patritians, whom they thought most fit for that purpose, which done, adding
to the ninety elected by the thirty wards, the nine that were chosen by the
three Tribes, and that one chief Captain or Commander assigned by himself,
they all of them made up the complete number of a hundred Counselors, which
number of Counselors were by the Romans in short time after their
institution called the Senate of Rome, and they themselves for their reverence
and authority called Fathers, and for theit age and gravity Senators: Moreover
after all this, he elected out of the most generous and renowned families,
three hundred young men, of the choysest and strongest The election of three
hundred young men called Celeres.
amongst them, which were first pricked and nominated by the suffrages of the
Curiae or wards, every ward nominating ten as in the former election of the
Senators, and this their election was afterward by him confirmed: And those
three hundred young men stood ever in readiness about him as a Court of guard
to defend his person, and were all of them called by this general name
Celeres, for their speediness and readiness at all assayes to execute the
Kings command.

Furthermore, the offices and duty of the King were prescribed as follows;
First by his authority regal he The office of the King.
was chief head and principal governor of sacrifices, sepulchers and temples
consecrated to divine service, wherein he ought not do any thing that redounded
not to the glory of their gods: next he was in duty bound to observe and keep
the laws and customs of his country, he had also power to sommon a Senate, to
assemble the commons, and in military affairs, he had chief Empire and
command over all: To the Senate was given power The office of Senators.
and commission to hear and determine all complaints and controversies that
were brought before them, which was done by voices of the Senators, and the
sentence was ever given on his side that had the most voices.

The Plebeians or cominalty had also these three privileges, The privileges of
the Plebeians.
to create Magistrates, to make laws, and determine of wars when the King
was so pleased, nor was this power absolute in themselves, but it must ever be
approved and allowed by the Senate, neither yet had every person his particular
voice, but every ward was called severally, and that which was agreed upon by
the mayor part of the words, was referred to the consideration of the Senate.
But now this manner of giving voices is changed and altered in most places, for
neither has the Senate power to discern and give allowance of the ordinances
and decrees of the commons, but rather the commons have authority to alter or
allow the statutes established by the Senate.

By this division of Romulus the three hundred young men of his guard called
Celeres, did not only accomplish The office of Celeres.
his commands in matters concerning the civil estate and government of the
City, but they had also the managing of military affairs, so as when the King
intended to raise an army, it was needelesse for him to create Tribunes oner
the Tribes, decurions over the wards, or governors and praefects of his horse
men: but it was enough for him to command the Tribunes, and they the
centurions, and then the Decurious by their instructions were to bring forth
such soldiers as they thought fittest for that purpose, by which means they
would be altogether in readiness at an instant: He elected also a thousand
fighting-men which (as some write) he called Milites, because they were a
thousand in number.

And then the more to show his Majesty, and to be The Milites elected.
thought more honorable in the eyes of his people, he ascribed and took unto
himself tytles, marks and ornaments of Empire and honor, as to go in
sumpteous attire, and to have ever going before him twelve Sergeants or
Ministers of execution, which he called Lictores, The lictores ordained.
carrying every one a bunch of rods in their hand: In ordering these Sergeants
or executioners to march before him, it may seem his intent was by them (being
in number twelve) to represent the twelve Augures or south sayers, which told
him by divination and conjectures of things to come, which manner of diuiners
he called Vultures, though some be of opinion that in that ceremony he
immitated the Hetrussi or Tuscans, who being Twelve sorts of people in number,
when by general consent they elected a chief Magistrate, that should have the
sovereignty over them, every one of those twelve Trybes or sorts of people,
would present unto their governor such a Sergant, Bedell ot apparytor, to make
way before him, and to be ever in readiness for execution of any project, from
whence likewise were undoubtedly deryued the little Chariots with chaires of
estate in them, wherein the Roman Kings used to ride: their kirtles or robes
which they wore under their mantles of estate, and all their other ensigns and
ornaments of honor: Now Romulus the better to settle, secure and strengthen
the state of this City, invented and devised this honest pretense and
stratagem following (intending it wholly to the honor of his Gods) for he
erected and builded up a Temple, or Church in a dark and shadowed place, into
which if any stranger did fly and take sanctuary he would undertake and secure
them (in argument of the awe and reverence he bore vnvnto his Gods) that their
enemies should not wrong, molest or disturb them, promising further that if
they would stay with him he would make them partakers of the privileges of his
City, and give them a portion of the ground which he had gotten by the wars
to live upon: Then did he make an institution that no city gotten by the
sword, should be utterly ruinated and destroyed, or brought into bondage and
slavery, but that there should be colonies and competent companies of people
sent thither from Rome, answerable to the quantity of ground so gotten, there
to inhabit and dwell, and that those conquered Cities, should be accounted
as under Cities unto Rome, and within the compass of the commonweal.

But after the death of Titus Tatius (which whom Romulus reigned five years
both over the Sabinians and ^^wes made by Romulus.
the Romans who were then united together into one people) he began to be
more religious, and instituted diverse new statutes and decrees as well private
as public. first he made a law concerning Matrimony, that the wife should
have equal power with her husband over all their money and goods, and as much
authority in their sacrifices, VViues made equal to their husbands.
and that she should live in as good sort as her husband and be called Mistress
over the house, as well as he Master, and that if he dyed without Issue his
wife should succeed him, and inherit all his goods and possessions, and if he
left children behind him, yet she should have an equal share with them: That
if she were convicted of adultery it should be lawful for her husband or his
kinsfolk to kill her, and that if she drink any wine at her own house, she
should be punished as an adultresse: by means of which institution, arose
this custom amongst the Romans, that the husbands when they had been a
broad It was Death for a woman to drink wine
and came home to their houses, should embrace and kiss their wives and
daughters, of purpose (as Fortius Cato interprets it) to smell whether they
had drunk any wine, thereby approving, that as corruption is the beginning of
madness, and frenzy, so is drunkenness the forerunner of rottenness and
corruption.

Then he ordained that parents should have full power over their children, to
dispose of them as they pleased, to restrain and keep them under, to beat
them and bind them and set them to all drudgery, yea it was lawful for What
power parents had over their children.
them to slay them, or sell them for slaves, and if any were sold by his
father, and of him self regained his liberty, his father might sell him
again, and again after that, if he were so disposed; The contents of this
law was three hundred years after the institution thereof written in twelve
tables, but yet the rigor and authority was first mitigated and abridged by
Numa Pompilius, next King to Romulus, for he ordained, that if the son did
marry by his fathers consent, all the authority his father had over him before,
was then extinct; from this severe law Romulus proceeded to other ordinances,
establishing that no freeman should exercise any art or occupation, wherein
his work was done sitting, as Taylers, Shoomakers, Scriueners, etc. and that
the Citizens should practice themselves in husbandry, as well as in martial
discipline, whereby in aftertimes it was a great commendation for one to be
accounted both a good soldier and a good husbandman, for the King thought it a
point of great imperfection, in any man, to be ignorant in either of these
exercises, but that to be skillful in manuring and tilling the ground, and
expert in feats of arms, should inseperably go together, according to the law
of the Lacedaemonians, and in time of peace his will was that they should wholly
give themselves to husbandry, permitting them notwithstanding to buy and make
provision of such things they wanted, when necessity constrained them
thereunto. And in argument that he was not unmindful of matters of religion,
he ordained and made Temples, Altars, and Images of the gods; adding
thereunto festival days, and times of solemnity, oblations, sacrifices,
holidays, fayres and martes, wherein as well to buy any thing they wanted, as
also to understand their laws and many other things, pertaining to the honor
of their gods, excluding notwithstanding out of the city all foreign and
outlandish sacrifices, and especially those which were solemnized after the
ceremonies of the Greeks, those only excepted which were dedicated and
celebrated in honor of Heroules, and were long since instituted in the days
of Euander.

Dionysius Halicarnasseus, following the opinion of Varro herein, says that
Romulus ordained three score priests to make public sacrifices, through every
tribe and every ward, annexing unto them as their assistants, the diuiners and
southsaiers: every ward likewise had his proper Genius, or spirit, which they
supposed did defend them, and their proper ministers to do sacrifice unto
them: but the goddess Vesta was generally worshipped of all.

And lastly he divided and digested the year into ten months, by all which
ordinances and decrees it may easily be gathered and plainly perceived that
Romulus was most skillful and expert in all matters both divine and human,
and that they detract much from his glory and wisdom, which report that the
people of Rome lived without morality amongst themselves, or religion toward
their gods, until the reign of Numa Pompilius. And these were the civil
institutions ordained by Romulus.

But Numa Pompilius that afterward succeeded him in the Kingdom, in some part
altered and in some part Numa Pompilius and his laws.
added unto his Statutes, and first in following the course of the Moon, he
disposed the year into twelve months, whereas before Romulus made it to
consist but of ten, and altering the order of the months, he set January
and February before March (whereas till that time March was the first month and
the beginning of the year) and so he made March for to be the third in order
and rank: Next he appointed some days to be festival and holy, and some
other as dismal, ominous and unlucky, wherein he would not any way meddle with
the people or begin any business.

After this he created one chief Flamin or Priest to do sacrifice to
Jupiter, whom he called (Dialis) and honored him with a roabe of dignity and
chair of state, he then created two other priests, one to sacrifice to Mars
and the other to Romulus, and these were also called Flamines, for the caps of
honor which they wore upon their heads: moreover he elected the Virgin
Vestals which for the first ten years did nothing but learn the rites and
manner of sacrifising, the next ten years they spent in doing sacrifice
themselves, and the third ten years they taught and instructed nouisses and
fresh comers into that profession, and then at the thirtith years end it was
in their choice, whether they would mary or continue still in that course of
life.

And those Virgin Vestals were maintained at the common cost of the City, and
reverenced with titles of perpetual virginity, and other ceremonies, but if any
of them were convicted of incest, her sentence was sorrowfully pronounced by
the Citizens, that she should be set quick in the ground, at the gate
called Collina, which is in the hill Quirinalis and there covered with earth
till she were dead. He dedicated also unto Mars twelve other priests which
he called Salij, whose office was upon certain days in the month of March
(which took his name of the god Mars) to lead a solemn dance in some of the
principal places of the City, they were clothed with coats of diverse
colors, and their uppermost garments were red and changeable, they had swords
by their sides hanging in brazen belts, in their right hand they carried lances
and rods, and brazen bucklers in their left, and upon their heads they wore
high hats waxing sharp toward the crown.

These priests which for their solemn dancing the Romans called Sallij
(according to the opinion of Dionysius) did little differ from the Coribantes
or Sibilles priests, which the Greeks called Curetes: finally he created a
Bishop or high priest, to whom he gave supreme authority over all infreior
priests, and in him it lay to appoint what oblations should be offered, upon
what days and in what Temples. Besides all these holy orders of priests and
religious persons, he ordained the Feciales or herraulds The Feciales ordained.
to denounce war or peace, and they were to have a special regard that the
Romans should not make wars against any unjustly, and if the Romans were
injured or robbed by any others, these Feciales were to require restitution of
the goods wrongfully taken and detained, but if they denied to make
restitution, then were they to denounce open war against them.

Their power was likewise to deliver offenders to be punished, to those whose
goods they had injuriously taken, if wrong were offered to Legates or
Ambassadors, they were to correct it, and if the causes were honest and just,
they might conclude a peace, and break it again if it appeared that the
League was unlawfully established.

And if either the captain, or chief conductor of the army, or the whole army
in general, had done any thing contrary to their oths and alleagance, in them
it rested wholly to punish the offense.

This done he limited their times of mourning, commanding that the death of
infants under three years old, should not be lamented at all, and that for
elder children they should bewail them as many months as they were years
old, so as it exceeded not ten months, which was the uttermost time prescribed
for mourning for any ones death.

When Numa Pompilius had established these laws, for the government of the
commonwealth, he then severed and distributed the people into sundry companies
and societies, according to their arts and profession, as minstrels,
crafts-men, head-carpenters, dyers, shoomakers, tanners, masons, potters, etc.
making of diverse of those arts one fraternity or body politic. Seruius
Tullius The people divided into sunday bands called Classes, and centuries.
divided the whole multitude of citizens into sundry orders, ranckes or armies,
which he called Classes, and into centuries or bands consisting of a hundred
men, the manner of his disposition of them was thus.

In the first order or degree he inroled those who were The first Classis.
taxed in their subsidy books at a hundred thousand Asses, and of this order
there was fourscore centuries, consisting indifferently of young men and old,
so as the old men should ever remain at home to save and defend the city, and
the youth were to try the fortune of wars abroad; he then commanded them
both, to wear armor and weapons both of defense and of offense, as helmets,
shields, priuie-coates and boots to defend themselves, and spears and swords
to offend the enemy: to this first rank or degree he added two centuries of
workmen, or pioners, which were to cast trenches, build rampires, and to make
all their engines and instruments of war, and they ever went unarmed, to be
always in readiness for any labor.

The second order or degree consisted of twenty centuries, and were such as
were taxed betwixt seventy The second Classis.
five and a hundred thousand Asses, they were divided into young and old as the
former order, and tolerated to wear the same armor and weapons the other did,
save only the coat of fence which they might not wear.

The third order was of such as were taxed at fifty thousand The third order or
Classis.
Asses, and they consisted of as many centuries as the other, and did nothing
differ from them in their weapons, saving that they wore no boots.

The fourth order was taxed at five and twenty thousand The fourth Classis.
asses, and they wore no other weapons but little Iauelins or darts. And the
fifth and last degree consisted of thirty centuries, their warlike weapons were
slings and The fifth and last degree.
stones, and they were valued at forty thousand, and with these were cessed and
taxed the cornetters and trumperters, which were three centuries in number, the
rest whose substance was but small, he both spared from the wars, by reason of
their poverty, and remitted their tribute.

After this division he ministered an oath to the Citizens, that they should make
a just estimation of their goods, and declare out of what family and stock
they were descended, what children they had, and of what age and by what names
they were called, and whether any of them had wives, and where every of them
dwelt: and if any of them dealt doubly with him, and falsified their oaths and
fidelity, all their goods were (ipso facto) confiscate and taken from them, and
they themselves first whipped and then sold for slaves.

The companies of footmen being thus distributed, he elected out of the
chiefest of the Citizens, nine orders of horsemen, so as the whole number of
horseme reckoning those that were ordained by Romulus, and those which were
afterward added by Tarquinius, were now two and twenty centuries: to every
centuary he allowed ten thousand pieces of money out of the common treasury,
to buy them horses, and two thousand pieces a year to keep them, besides, all
the widows of the city paid unto the horsemen yearly pensions toward their
better maintenance, every one according to her ability: And so all the whole
number of horsemen and footmen were a hundred ninty and three centuries, and
every century kept their place and dignity in giving their voices, and they
that were best able bore the greatest charge in the wars, and gave their
voices first. For Seruius thought it fitter that the centuries should pay
tribute according as they were valued, and not perticularly by the pole, as
they did before.

The centuries of horsemen were to mingle their voices, amongst the centuries
of the first rank of footmen, which were fourscore centuries as is said
before, and so Dionysius reckons, that there were fourscore and eighteen
centuries, that had the first place in giving their voices, which were more
then all the centuries of the other orders, whereof insues, that what ever was
concluded by the suffrages of the first order, was immutable, but if the voices
of the first degree were divided, which happened but seldom, then the
centuries of the second order were called, and if they could not agree, then
the others after them in their course, but it was very rare that ever it should
come to the centuries of the last order.

And thus by the wisdom of King Tullius, all the orders seemed to have an
equality of voices, but yet the priority was granted to those which were at
greatest charge, and though none were excluded, yet was all in a manner done by
the centuries of the first order, and the equites or horsemen: For they created
magistrates whom they pleased, they established laws and denounced wars, which
three privileges and prerogatives were before by Romulus given to the
Plebeians or communalty.

But when Taquin the last Roman King, was deposed and banished Rome, the
form of this government was clean altered and changed: for in steed of Kings
they created Consuls, who had all the types and ornaments of honor given unto
them, that the Kings had before, saving only the crown, and the gown wrought
with palms, which the Kings used to wear after they had atchiued any
conquest: And when Brutus, the defender of their liberties, was by the voices
of the centuries made The Kings put down and Senators ordained.
fellow Consul with Collatinus, he bound the Citizens by an oath, that they
should never after that suffer any one man to reign over them as their King:
Then he ordained three hundred Senators, and one chief ruler over the
sacrifices, whose office was to perform all things belonging to sacrifices,
that the King before was wont to do.

Valerius (who was the third Consul) permitted it lawful to appeal from the
Consuls to the comminalty, forbidding under pain of death that no one should
accept of any office, without the consent of the commons, and that the Citizens
should be eased of tribute, which made men more willing to fall to trading and
other labors; adding thereunto an other law, whereby it was present death for
any one to affect any kind of government for his own private profit: He then
appointed the Temple of Saturn to be the common treasury, wherein to keep
the revenues of the City, and suffered the people to create two Treasurers, or
Chamberlanes, to see the disposing thereof: Not long after this they agreed to
have such a magistrate, as from whom they might not appeal, and him they
called a Dictator, (a dictando) by reason of the authority he had to command,
The Dictator elected.
or rather (a dicende) because he was not elected by the voices of the people,
but by him only that bore the chiefest sway in the city.

In ordayning this high office of Dictatorship, the Romans may seem to have
imitated the Greeks, who (as Theophrastus writes in his book Deregno) were
wont to make certain chief officers whom they called Esimnetes, to rule over
them for a time limited. For the Dictator of Rome continued in his place and
dignity but half a year, and was never created but in time of war, or other
imminent danger of the City, and then he had power to elect new magistrates
and officers under him, as the master or captain of the horsemen, who in
authority was next unto him, especially over the horsemen and best soldiers,
and was assistant to the Dictator as the Tribune was to the King: And when
Spurius Cassius, and Posthumous Cominius were Consuls, they gave the people
commission, to choose them magistrates of great reverence and authority, to be
their protectors against the violence of the Consuls, expressly forbidding that
no Patritian Tribunes of the people ordained.
should take that office upon him, and these high officers were called the
Tribunes of the people.

These Tribunes grew in short time so proud and insolent, as they would
cassire and make void the decrees of the Consuls and Senate at their pleasure,
unless they agreed with their humors, and of them at the first (whether it
were by general consent, or foreshewed by divination, or whether religion
moved them) were but two in number created, shortly after there was an other
added to them, and in the end they came to be five.

There was in Rome three sorts of Parliaments, or societies of people to choose
officers: the first called Curiata, or assembly of the wards, which was ever
summoned by the Lictors or Sergeants: the second Centuriata, which was of such
as were divided into sundry Centuries or degrees, according to their age and
ability, as is said before: and to this they were called by a trumpeter or
cornetter. And the third was of such as dwelt in diverse parts of the country,
and paid tribute unto the city. By the Parliament or conuocation-house of the
Centuries, where the Consuls put down, and the Decemviri created, to whom all
the power The Decemviri created, and Consuls put down.
and Empirie of the Senate descended, even as the authority of the Consuls was
first derived from the Kings: nor was it lawful in any case, to appeal from
them. These Decemviri when they went about to make any new laws, would do it
in this manner: first, one of them had a whole day allowed him to consider what
was fitting to be don; in which day he bore the greatest authority, and when
he had set down his opinion in writing, the next day was allowed for another,
and to have the like prime place in government: and so likewise the rest every
one his several day: and when every one had had his day, and their opinions,
and doings written in several tables, and laid before them altogether, they
then collected and confirmed what they thought good out of every ones sentence,
and so calling them the laws of the ten tables, they published them to the
people.

And there went ever before him, that had the chiefest Jurisdiction, twelve men
carrying bundels of rods, and the other nine had every one his Usher going
before him.

But this kind of government continued not long, for even as the power and
authority of the Tribunes was utterly banished out of the city by the
Decemviri, so (upon mature consideration) it seemed good to the Patricians,
that the Tribunes in requital should extinguish and put down theirs. And then
was there a law ordained, that whatsoever was decreed by the Plebeians, should
go current through all the people: and if any one hindered or impeached the
Tribunes or Aediles in their judgments, his head should be sacrificed to
Jupiter, and his whole family that were free, should be sold for slaves at the
Temple of Ceres.

After this there was another Council created out of the Plebeians, and then
was it made lawful and tolerable for the Plebeians to marry, and enter into
consanguinitie with the Patricians. Besides these, there were created two
Censors, who had the charge over the Scribes, the keeping The two Censors
created.
of the tables, and the order and form of taxing, and leuying of money, and
mustering soldiers committed unto them.

This petty office being but mean at the first institution, grew in process
of time to an incredible height, in so much as the whole raines of correction
and civil discipline, were in conclusion let loose into their hands: for the
government of the Senate, the Equites and Centurians, were so curbed and
restrained, as they had power only to decide controversies touching honor and
reproach: and in the Censors consisted the chiefest sovereignty, as to view and
ouersee public places, to give pensions to the people, and again to tax them
with exactions and tribute: to consecrate sacrifices every fifth year for the
purgation of the city, to displace and thrust the Senators out of the city,
or to defame them: and these continued in their office for five years, and
then new were created in their rooms. Then was there another Magistrate
created to hear and determine matters, whom they called a Praetor, and to him
was committed power and authority, over A Praetor ordained.
all public and private dealings, and to constitute and ordain new laws and
statutes, and to abrogate and repeal the old: Of these Praetors there was
first but one created, and he was called Vrbanus Praetor, because he had the
government of the citizens, to whom (he alone being not able to undergo so
great a burden, by reason of the great access of strangers that daily
resorted thither to dwell) there was afterward another Praetor added, and him
they called Praetor peregrinus, as having the charge over aliens and strangers,
and this kind of government was called Ius honorarium, for the great honor
and dignity that belonged to the Magistrates: for they had all the ensigns
and ornaments attributed unto them, that before belonged to the Kings, and
their apparel and furniture was almost equal to the Consuls.

In this state did the city of Rome continue until Julius Caesar's time, who
reduced the government into a Monarchy again, by taking upon him the name
of Imperator, which kind of government by Emperors did long after continue,
and then began to be celebrated at Rome the The manner of celebration of the
games called Ludi Circenses.
plays called Ludi Circenses, the solemnity whereof was thus: The whole
train of Players issuing orderly from out the Capitol, passed by the forum,
into a great circle or rundle of ground, like a theater, made for the
Spectators to behold the games; And first went the sons of the Equites, that
for age, strength, and agilitie were most fit for exercises, both on foot and
horseback, riding upon horses, and distinguished by their companies and
Centuries, to show unto strangers and forrainers, the great hope the city
conceived of her future happiness, by the exceeding aptnes and towardnes of
their youth: after them followed the wagoners with chariots, some drawn with
four horses, and some with two, and some others leading little low horses,
that would stand without the bridle.

And after them followed the champions that were to try the masteries, as
wrestling, running, and the whirleabout, called Caestus, which was done with
plummets of lead, being all of them naked saving their priuities, then
followed the troop of dancers, leapers and vaulters in their companies, the
men first, the young striplings after, and then the children: in the next rank
unto these followed the trumpetters and minstrels, some playing upon flutes,
some upon pipes, and some with a kind of Iuory harpes with 7. strings called
Dulcimers: the leapers and vaulters were apparelled in red coats, girded in
the wast with brazen belts, and swords at their sides, and the men's swords were
shorter then the others, they had also brazen helmets, and great plumes of
feathers: before every company went men that were skillful in those kind of
exercises, to show them the manner of that dancing and skipping, and other more
violent and warlike motions, by words in meeter consisting of four syllables.
They practiced also the Enoplian dancing, otherwise called the Pyrrhichian
dancing, invented (as is supposed) by Pallas, though some of a contrary
opinion think, that the Curetes were the first authors of that kind of
dancing. Then followed the troop of the Satyrisci with an Enoplian dance:
these Satyrisci were figured into Sileni and Satyrs, and they used taunting
and scoffing motions in their dancing, and had also a consort of music
following after them. Then went there a company with censors in their hands,
casting round about them sweet odors, amongst whom were diverse that carried
upon their shoulders the images of their gods, all gilded with gold and
silver: and last of all followed the chief Magistrates of the city, attended
with great troops, making show by their easy pace, and demure looks, of great
devotion and religion. The place or circuit of ground appointed for both these
sort of dancers to practice in, was three stadia and a half in length, and
four akres in breadth: so that whole compass of ground lying betwixt
Pallatinum and Auentinum, having gates in three several places to go in and
out, was able to hold an hundred and fifty thousand spectators, which were
orderly placed upon Skaffolds round about the Theater: there were also acted
within this Theater diverse Interludes, the beginning whereof at Rome was thus:
there Jnterludes, and how they began
were certain fencers, or such as could flourish a two hand sword, sent for
from Hetruria, who dancing there after the stroke of the music, made diverse
sorts of motions after the Tuscan manner: these fencers or dancers, the youth
of Rome did afterward imitate, pronouncing at the first their jests and
devises in harsh verses, their motions also being as disagreeable, as their
voices were untuneable, but in tract of time, by much practice, they came to
more perfection: so as they were as cunning in those exercises, as the
Hetrurians, and then the professors thereof were called Histriones; for Hister
in the Tuscan tongue, is Ludio in Latin, which signifies a player: and in time
they utterly abandoned those disorderly and confused kind of verses, which they
used at the beginning, as most scurrill and dishonest, and began to settle
themselves to more civil and decent motions, pronouncing their speeches and
Satyrs with more harmony, and singing pricke-song to their instruments.

Lucius Andronicus digressing somewhat from these Satyrs, devised fables unto
their arguments, and caused the^ to be pronounced with a low voice, he
appointed a boy also to sing before the minstrell, and at his side he set the
players to act their parts, and so by little and little it grew from a
ridiculous toy to be an art, and then the Roman youth leaving off the dancing
and mimicke actions, used by the Histriones, or players, fell to acting of
Comedies composed in good verses, and this was the beginning of their fables
and merry interludes, and these kind of plays being derived from the people
called Osci in Campania, were ever after put in use, and the histriones
forbidden the practice of those sorts of plays.

Now the manner how the Senate and people of Rome How the Romans deified their
Emperors.
did consecrate and deifie their dead Emperors, was thus: first (as Herodianus
writes) they placed in the portall or entrance into the Emperors palace, an
image made like unto the dead Emperor, upon a bed of iuorie decked and
garnished with gold, so as the image lay upon the bed pale and wan like one
that were sick; and about the bed upon the left hand, for the most part of
the day, sat all the Senate attired in black, and the Noble-mens wives upon
the right hand in white, (for white was then used by women for mourning attire)
and they then used no curiosity at all in their apparel: and thus they did
for seven days together: the Physicians all that while visiting the Image, as
though it had life, and telling them that his death was near approaching: at
the end of the seven days (as though the Emperor had then died) all the youth
of the Order of the Equestri and Senators, carried the bed betwixt them,
whereon the image lay, by the way called sacra via, where none might pass but
living Priests and dead Emperors unto the Forum, and there placing it in the
pulpit, wherein they used to plead and make orations, a great sort of boys
and girls of the order of the Patricii, (the whole company being orderly
placed on each side of the pulpit) did sing in a mournful and lamentable
Ditty certain hymns in commendation of the dead Emperor. Then did they carry
the Iuorie bed with the Image on it from the forum, to campus Martius, (which
is a field nere Rome, wherein they used all manner of exercises) and there
placed it upon a high throne of estate made of wood, and four square, and
rising higher by degrees, and narrower toward the top, in manner of a
watchtower, all the troup being decked in gold and purple, and adorned with
images and ensigns of iuorie, and diverse other pictures: within the hollownesse
of which throne was set a great pile of dry wood: then was the image placed
upon the second step or degree of the throne, with all sorts of odors and sweet
perfumes, which were brought thither from all parts of the city, and the
noblest young men of the Order of the Equestri, clothed and attired in linen
garments, rode round about the throne with a Pyrrhichian motion, and solemn
gate, and with them all the Nobility in chariots and coaches: and last of all
the successor of the deceased Emperor brought a torch ready light, and
delivered it to the people, who set the pile on fire at the bottom of the
throne. And when the fire began to burn, they had a devise, that an Eagle
should fly out from the top of the building, which wilfully and foolishly they
supposed to be the soul of the Emperor, flying and ascending into heaven, and
all the Roman Emperors that were consecrated by these absurd ceremonies, they
ever after superstitiously honored as gods: And thus much of the state of the
city. All parts of Italy be now perfect and religious Christians, and
obseruers of the ceremonies of the Roman Church, some few excepted, which
dwell in the uttermost part toward Greece, which indeed be more then half
Grecians: no man may have more wives then one, from whom they may not be
divorced, but by the permission of the bishop of Rome. The eldest sons of
Princes and Noblemen inherit their fathers possessions, but amongst private
men all the issue male do equally inherit, so as they be legitimate, (like our
gauelkind in Kent:) The law of Italy is of three sorts: first, the spiritual
law, whereof the Bishop is head, then the Emperors law, which is general over
all, and the particular laws and orders of each several city which particular
customs do much differ one from another, and yet all concur for the good
government of their cities. In some cities the examination of all civil
matters, is committed unto certain Judges, and in some again to the
Magistrates of the same city, for every city has not one and the same form
of government. The chiefest of the Nobility of Italy addict themselves unto
the wars, and the meaner sort unto learning: and to be a priest is a more
venerable title, then to be a Nobleman: for of al learned men, the Divines be
best esteemed, and next unto them the Lawyers: the Physicians live in greater
wealth then admiration: and Mathematicians Logicians, Astronomers, and Poets,
be more famous amongst themselves, then amongst the people, but Grammarians of
all others be less esteemed, who only live and dye among children. Merchants
live now in as great fame as ever they did, and painters, caruers of images,
and bellfounders be better esteemed then husbandmen; although husbandry in
times past was preferred before al trades. The Romans of all the Italians be
most given to breeding cattle, and yet they busy not themselves therewithal,
but have them looked to and kept by strangers and hirelings.

Their fashions in apparel are not every where alike, for The apparel of the
Italians.
the Venetians go sumptuously in long loose garments, and the citizens of
Venice more rich then other cities of that state. The Florentines and
Hetrurians be very neat and civil in their attire, but not so costly as the
Venetians, but about Millain, and in Aemilia and Liguria, they go very gallant,
but their garments be shorter then in Venice. And the Courtiers of Rome excel
them all in length of their garments and variety of colors, but the citizens
of Rome be more sparing and frugall, yet fine enough, and especially the women:
and in the Realm of Naples, they go neat but not so gorgeous, and strange
fashions be there in more request then their own. In all other parts of
Italy their apparel is more simple and plain, but of sundry fashions and
altering every day: In Aemilia and al Cisalpine France the better sort of women
imitate the Spaniards in their apparel, and the Noblemen the French. The women
of Rome of late do much affect the Tuscane fashion, and the Venetian Ladies
were wont to lay open their breasts, arms, and shoulders, but now degenerating
from their own customs, and following the Spaniards, they cover all with
loose sleeves: The ancient Roman coin and images of metal, do argue, that
the Italians were wont to go ever bare headed, and bare legged, al but
soldiers, and that in time of wars only, but now they use both hats and
stockings, and the custom of covering their heads may seem to be derived from
some other country.

In times past they used no placards, nor stomachers, as as by the proportions
of their old statutes and pictures may be gathered, but now that attire is much
taken up by the Roman youth. The language now used in Italy is not the same
it was heretofore, nor altogether differing from it, but grown more barbarous,
and composed of diverse languages, according to the sundry sorts of people, that
have possessed the Provinces: for they which dwell about the shore of Histria,
speak the Venetian tongue, which is very eloquent and grave, but compounded of
sundry tongs (and so is every several speech in Italy) yet heretofore it was
more simple, and not so pleasant to the ear, as now it is. In Corinth they
have a mixed language, and somewhat different from the Italian tongue: but it is
not so harsh in sound, as the speech used in Taruisium, Patauium, Verona,
Vicentia, Mantua, and Ferrara, and in all of them the citizens use finer terms
than the countrymen: but in Cisalpine France they be almost mere strangers to
the Italian tongue, though otherwise there is no gallanter a country in all
Italy. Their speech in Rauenna, Ariminum, Pisaurum, Fauentia, Bononia,
Flaminia, and throughout all Aemilia, is very Rhetorical, and the Tuscans
speech is very concise, like as it is in Laconia, and sounds better in
strangers mouths then their own: moreover, at Rome by reason of the great
concourie of people, that flock thither daily from all parts, their language is
well improued. The Piceni, the Sabines, and Marsi speak thick and short, and in
Vmbria, Apulia, and Lucania, together with the Brutii and Samnites, and the
rest of Italy their speech is more barbarous, and but little borrowing of
strange languages, saving that in the Realm of Naples they much affect the
Spanish tongue. And to conclude with the opinion of Antonius Sabellicus herein,
in his 11. Aenead, and first book: Search (says he) throughout all Italy, and
you shall find no one people, city, nor Province, but they somewhat differ in
language one from another.

Of Liguria, and of the ancient manners of the Inhabitants of that country.
CAP. 19.
LIGVRIA, a mountenous Province of Italy, is situated betwixt the rivers Varus
and Macra, having on the one side the hill Appennine, and the river Po on the
other, and so adioyneth unto Tuscia. The chief city of this Province is
Genoua: this contry was called Liguria, of Lygistus the son of Phaeton, by
turning Y into V, (as Fabius Pictor is of opinion.) The first inhabitants of
this country (as Thucydides supposes) were people called Siculi, who once
inhabited a great part of Italy, and being thence expelled by those people of
Italy, called the Oenotrians, they seated themselves in the i will of Sicily: The
people of this Country live very painefully and hardly, for their grounds be
ouer-grown with thick woods, the trees whereof be marvelous good timber for
ships, and of such a thickness, as they be eight foot square at the least,
for which cause many be employed in felling of woods, and breaking of timber,
and many others in ridding their grounds from stones, whereof they have such
store, as they can hardly plough or dig for them, by which means although they
take great pains, yet receive they but small profit of their great labor,
whereof it proceeds, and from their sparing diet, that their bodies be
generally very lean, but strong withal, and the women as well able, and as
much accustomed to undergo any labor, as the man: They be much given to
hunting of wild beasts, the flesh whereof supplieth their wants of fruits and
grain, and by reason of their continual snowes, and often hunting and running
over craggie and steep mountains, they be both nimble and strong: their
chief diet is either the flesh of wild beasts, or homebred cattle, and their
drink is for the most part water: many of them also live upon such herbs and
roots as their country affords, being in a manner destitute both of bread and
wine, the most necessary nourishments, and profitablest provision for mankind:
their beds for the most part is the bare ground, without couerture of either
house or coat, unless they repose themselves in such hollow caves, as nature
has provided for them: and this is their manner of life which they have ever
used. Their women moreover, be as strong as other country men, and the
strength of their men is almost equal unto beasts. And the report is, that the
gallant and lusty Frenchmen have bin often foiled in single conflicts, by
these lean and macilent Ligurians: their armor is more light then the Romans,
their fouldiers coats be short, and their sheelds long. Some of them also
wear Bears skins, and Lions skins, and arming swords, and some have altered
their weapons and armor to the fashion of the Romans, whom they have
imitated in that point. They be a cruel and stout people, and exceeding
ingenious, not only in warlike affairs, but in all other businesses: at this
day they be much given to merchandise, and traveling by sea, wherein they be
so expert and hardy, as they will sail by the maine sea of Lybia and
Sardinia, in hulkes or cockboates, so badly rigged and furnished, as in any
man's judgment, they are not able to brook the sea; willingly opposing
themselves to all dangers of the sea, which be so many as they be oftentimes
in extreme hazard in storms and tempestuous wether to be cast away.

This people (as Sabellicus writes in his first book and 7. Aenead) is yet so
proud, rebellious, and reuengefull, as they have much exercised the Romans in
wars, to their no little prejudice. Their chief victuals at this day is
flesh, milk, and drink made of barley.

Of Tuscia, and of the ancient manners of the Tuscans. CAP. 20.
TVSCIA, a famous country in Italy, was so called of their sacrifices: (as some
suppose) for the Greek word Thuein does signify to sacrifice, or else of the
latin word Thus, which signifies Frankincense, by reason that Frankincense is
much used in sacrifices. Other ancient Writers are of opinion, that it was
called Tuscia, of Tusculus, the son of Hercules. It was once called
Tyrrhenia; but whether it was so called of Tyrrhenus, the son of Atis, or of
the son of Hercules and Omphales, or (as some others affirm) of the son of
Telephus, who conducted Colonies into that country, it rests doubtful and
uncertain. Dionysius will needs have it to be called Tuscia, of those circles
made without the walls of cities, for men to solace themselves in, called
Tyrses, which is a manner of building the Tuscanes much use. The Romans call
the people of this nation, sometimes Tuscans, and sometimes Hetruscanes, but
the Greeks call them Tyrrheni.

The ancient wealth of this people is well declared by the name of their sea,
stretching all along by the side of Italy, and also by the confines of their
country, extending from the Tuuscane to the Adriaticke sea, and in a manner to
the top of the Alps: so that it is manifest, that all that compass of ground
that lies betwixt the Alps and Appennine, was once inhabited by the Vmbri,
who were thence eiected by the Tyrrheni, and the Tyrrheni by the French: the
French were likewise displaced by the Romans; and the Romans by the
Longobards, who lastly left their name unto that nation: so as for as much as
concerns their name, all those which were called Latini, Vmbri, and Ausones,
were once called by the Greeks by this general name Tyrrheni. There be some
hold opinion, that the city Tyrrhena, is that which is now called Rome. These
people of Tyrrhenia were of an exceeding strength, and of large dominions, and
erected many stately and rich cities: they were also very strong by sea,
insomuch as they were lords thereof so long, till the Italian sea had lost his
name, and was by them called the Tyrrhen sea. They be able likewise to make an
infinite army of footmen fit for the wars, and they were the first that
invented the trumpet, which is so necessary an instrument for the wars, and by
them is called Tyrrhenum. They give and ascribe many honors and titles of
dignity unto their Captains, and conductors of their armies, as Lictors, or
Sergeants to go before them, to do execution upon offenders, little drayes or
carts made like chariots, with chaires of estate, which they called Praetextae,
and Officers called Fasces, that carry bundels of rods before them, an Iuorie
scepter; and many other things: besides, they may have porches or galleries
annexed to their horses, for their servants and attendants to sit and repose
themselves in, which kind of building was afterward imitated by the Romans,
and by them bettered, and translated into they Commonwealth. The Tuscans be
great scholars, and much given to divinity, but more to the study of natural
Philosophy; wherein, and in the interpretation of the thunder and lightning,
and in the art of Southsaying, they excel all others so far, as at this day
they be admired throughout all the world, and their wisemen much sought unto.
Moreover, they be very expert in their sacrifices, insomuch as the Romans
which have ever been very studious and careful, not only to maintain and
uphold, but to increase and augment the true and sincere Religion, did send
yearly (by the decree of the Senate) unto the Tuscanes, ten of their chief
Princes and Magistrates sons, there to be instructed in their manner of
sacrificing.

From thence came unto the Romans that vain and idle talk of evil spirits:
And from thence likewise came the celebration of the Feasts of Bacchus, which
by the consent of all good men, and due punishment inflicted upon the first
authors and inuentors, is now utterly rooted out of Italy, as a thing most
pernicious and hurtful. The ground in this country is sufficient fruitful,
yet by their study or industry it is much amended. They eat usually twice a
day, and then they fare very daintily, and feed liberally, using to cover their
tables with curious carpets, and fine table cloths, distinguished and set with
flowers, cups of gold of sundry fashions to drink in, and great store of
ministers and servants to attend upon them, which are not all slaves, but many
of them freemen and citizens: This people is generally more superstitious
then warlike.

Of Galatia in Europe, and of the old customs of that country. CAP. 21.
GALATIA, a spacious country in Europe, lies (as Diodorus Siculus writes)
beyond that part of France called Celtica, and extends Southward to the
Ocean, and the shore adjoining, and to the hill of Hircinia in Germany, and from
the bounds of Ister or Danubius, up unto Scythia: It was so called of Galatis
the son of Hercules, and of a certain woman of Celtica, it is inhabited of
many sorts of people, Galatia why so called.
and lies very far Northward, and therefore so cold in the winter, as all
their waters be frozen over, and the ice so exceeding thick, as whole armies
with horses, chariots, and munition may safely pass over the rivers without
peril: Galatia has many great rivers running through it, some taking their
beginning from deep standing pooles, and some from springs issuing out of
rocks and mountains, whereof some disburthen themselves into the Ocean, as
the Rhene, and some into the sea called Pontus, as Danubius, and some others
into the Adriaticke sea, as Eridanus, which is also called Padus or Po, and all
these rivers be so congealed and frozen over all winter, as all passengers may
securely go over them, especially if chafe or straw be thrown upon the ice
for slipping.

By reason of this violent coldness, the country is utterly and altogether
destitute both of oil and wine, in stead whereof they make a certain drink
of barley, which they call Zitum, they use also to drink a certain water or
mead wherein they wash or steep their honey combs.

They take great delight in drinking wines, buying it of merchants, and
drinking it without putting any water to it, and they be so weak brainde, that
a little of it will overcome them, and make them drunk, and then they be
either lion drunk and fall a raging, or swine drunk and go to sleeping: This
their inordinate desire of wine makes many Italians, in hope of gain, to
bring it unto them both by water and by land, and they be so greedy of it as
for a measure of wine called Amphora, they will sell one of there own sons
to make a page or waiting boy of.

Silver there is none in Galatia, but gold in great abundance, and that so
naturally, as when the rivers that flow out of hills exceed their banks, and
ouer-flow the meadows, they leave behind them upon the grass, a golden sand,
or gravel, which being afterward tried and forged, and the pure gold
severed from the dross, both men and women use it to addorne themselves
withal, making thereof bracelets, ringes and chains all of massy gold,
whereof they wear great store, guilding their brest-plates, curets, and armor
with gold also.

The richer sort observe a ceremony peculiar to themselves, and withal very
strange, which is to skatter gold upon the flowers and pauements of their
Churches, which they offer as an oblation unto their gods, and it is strange to
see, how that the common people (notwithstanding they be covetous and greedy
of gold) be so zealous and religious, as they will not once offer for to take
up one piece of that gold so carelessly disperced abroad, or so much as touch it.

The people of Galatia be tall of stature, soft skind and pale of complexion,
and though their hair be naturally red, yet will they seek out means by art,
to bring that natural color to a deeper die: they curle and friszell their
hair with a curling pin or crisping wire, casting the locks of their
foreheads behind them on their shoulders, so as at the first sight, they look
like boys, Satires or wood gods, using such art in making their locks bushy
and thick, as they differ but little from horse-manes: some of them shave
their beards, and some suffer them to grow long, and especially the nobility,
who do not so much as cut the hair of their eyelids, and for their beards
they suffer them to grow in such a length and breadth, as the will almost cover
their bodies, so as they can neither eat nor drink, but that the meat will
stick in their beards, and the drink trickle down as from a conduit pipe.

They eat their meat sitting, but not upon stools and forms, but upon
wolves skins, and dogs skins cast on the ground, and they be attended by
little boys, having their fires made close by them, wherewith they boil and
roast their meat, and ever the best men eat the best meat, as the Poet
writes, that the greatest honor was by the nobles attributed to Ajax, when he
overcame Hector in single combat. Such meat as they have, they will give unto
their guests, but they will first know the cause of their coming. And their
manner is when they have filled bellies to fall a brabling, and oftentimes upon
light occasations they will fight very desperately, for so natural is their
inclination to wrangling, as it is grown into a habit. This opinion of
Pythagoras is crept in amongst them, and by most of them plainly maintained,
that the soul is immortal, and that after a certain time that it is departed
out of the body, it goes into an other, and therefore some of them will write
letters, and cast them into the pile of wood prepared to burn the dead body,
as though they should read them when they be dead: When they travel, and when
they fight they be carried in Chariots drawn with two horses, having one to
sit before the wagon to guide the horses, and an other to go by to drive
them; and when the battle is begun, they first encounter their enemies, by
casting darts from their Chariots, and when their darts be spent they alight
from their Chariots and fight on foot: And some of them be so desperate and
careless of death, as they will fight naked: Their watchmen and guard for
their bodies be the porest sort of freemen, which they use also for waggonners
and to carry their shields, and their place is to go in the forefront of the
battle, provoking and challenging the hardiest and stoutest of their enemies
to fight with them hand to hand, ever shaking and brandishing their naked
blades, the more to terrify and daunt their foes: and when any captain or
common souldior behaueth himself valiantly, and atchieueth any notable
victory, they cease not to extol and commend both him and all his ancestors,
giving unto every souldior commendations due for his valor and merits, and
detracting from the acts of their enemies, as base and contemptible, though
never so worthy of honor.

They cut off the heads of their vanquished enemies, and hang them about their
horse-neckes, besprinckling and goring with blood their spoils, armor and
furniture; and then giving them to their servants, who set them as signs of
conquest over their masters gates, with as much exultation and triumph, as
many do the skins and heads of wild beasts they have taken in hunting: but
if they hap to vanquish any noble men, they cut off their heads, and spice
and season them with sweet spices, diligently preserving and keeping them in
bags and cases, to show them for a vante to their guests and strangers, and
after sell them for a trifle to their parents, children or other friends to
keep as a memorall.

The Galatians garments (to make them seem terrible) be of skins with the
hair on and unshorn, these garments be of sundry colors, and by them
called (Braccas) they wear also cassockes or short clokes, stripped or rayed
either with gold, or some other thing and well lined, and thick for winter,
but against summer they have them slender and thin, they use also thick
earthen vessels distinguished with flowers.

Their warlike weapons and armor be long shields, proportionable to the stature
of their bodies, and trimmed according to every ones several device, for some
have the shapes of beasts figured in brass, and set on the tops of their
shields, which is both an ornament to the shield and a defense for the body:
their helmets be all of brass decked with more bravery then their shields,
upon the crest whereof stands either some horns, or else the picture of some
bird or beast: they have trumpets in like manner, but very ill favored ones,
and such as yield a rude, harsh and untuneable sound: some of them wear iron
brest-plates, and some other again no other armor but what nature affoordeth
them, going naked and wearing long two-handed swords guirded to their right
sides with chains or girdles of brass, some wear short coats trimmed with
gold and some silver girdles, and their darts which they use in the wars and
call lances, have iron pikes above a cubit long and two handful broad, and their
swords be almost as long and as big as hunting staves, or bore-speares,
whereof some be straight and some crooked, being very fit both to anoy their
enemies, as also to dig and make holes in the ground. In countenance they be
terrible and austere, in speech grave and severe, their language is brief and
obscure, and for the most part carrying a double sense and doubtful
understanding: they be great boasters of themselves and dispisers of others,
menacers, braggarts and detractors, proud and puffed up in their own opinions,
sharpe-witted and learned withal: They have a certain manner of Poets or
Musitions which they call (Bardi) that sing unto Organs and wind Instruments,
as others do to the Harp or Lute, praising some in their songs and sonnets and
dispraysing others: but those that be of greatest estimation and honor
amongst them, be the Philosophers, which they call Saronidae: Diuyners and
South-saiers be also there in great request, and highly honored and obeyed of
the common people; these (by their sorceries and sacrifices) foretell things to
come, using (when they consult of any weighty affairs) a ceremony most
horrible and execrable, and almost incredible, for they cut a man's throat with
a sword, and when he faints, they judge of future events, both by his falling
and sincking down, as also by ripping up his members, and opening his intrals
and bowels, and by the effusion of his blood.

And they will never offer sacrifice without some one of these Philosophers,
supposing that no sacrifice can be acceptable, unless it be offered by some
of those nature serchers, being (in their opinions) men most near to the
Gods. And their Poets be of such reverence and estimation, as when the battle
is set in array, their swords drawn, and their darts thrown, if any of these
Poets aproach near unto the battle, the whole host, yea and the enemy
himself, will at his coming abstain from fight: so as even amongst these
rude and barbarous people, anger will yield to wisdom, and Mars give place to
the Muses.

The Galatian women be equal unto the men both in strength and bigness of
body: there boys be for the most part white, and old men carry a very grave
and fatherly aspect: The Galatae that dwell under the North Pole and be nearest
unto Scythia, and therefore more barbarous then the other, are said to feed on
man's flesh; like unto those that inhabited that part of Britany called Iris.
These Northern Galatians, through their courage and cruelty, are reported to
be those people, that once ouerrun almost all Asia, and were called Cimmerij,
and are thought to be the very same that afterward by corruption of the name,
for Cimmerij were called Cimbri: they live after their old accustomed manner by
rapine and stealth, little regarding such things as they have of their own,
for the great desire they have to steal and filch from others.

And these Galatae be they, who (after they had sacked Rome and spoiled the
Temple of Appollo at Delphos) subdued and made tributary unto them a great part
both of Europ and Asia, utterly ruinating many Kingdoms, and possessing their
lands: for those that came into Greece, called that part of the country they
inioyde there, Gallo-Gretia, or the Region of Galatia in Asia the less: It is
bounded on the East with Cappadocia, and the river Halis, with Asia and
Bythinia on the West, on the South lies Pamphilia, and Pontus Euxinus on the
North: But those Cimbri whereof now we speak, were people of an intolerable
cruelty, using such blasphemous and impious ceremonies, in their sacrifices of
their gods, as is strange and incredible, for they had ever following and
attending upon their hoastes, certain women priests that were very skilful in
diuinations, the hair of their heads was hoare and gray, and their garments
white, and they had under those white gowns yellow smockes made of fine
linen, and clasped together with brazen buttons or copper claspes, they had
girdles about their wastes and went barefooted: and if any captives were taken
and brought into the camp, they were incountred by these she priests with
their naked blades, and by them lug'd and drawn upon the ground unto a place
where stood a brazen pot or kettle, conayning twenty Amphora's, over which
stood a pulpit or high seat, where-into they would nimbly ascend, and take the
captive up with them, and there cut his throat over the caldron, and ever as
the blood distilled and ran into the kettle, they would pronounce their
prophesies: of some they would rippe the bellies and bowell them, prophesing by
their intralls of their success in the wars: And every fifth year they would
sacrifice one of their own people, that was guilty and condemned of some
crime, by fixing him quick upon spears or stakes: and all the beasts and
cattaile, that they took from their enemies, they would kill and slay as well
as the captives, and either burn them upon piles of wood, or put them to death
by some other kind of torture, and the Cimbrian women as they were very
beautiful and goodly women, so were they marvelous luxurious and wanton: There
beds were beasts skins laid upon the bare ground, upon which when they
slept, they would have upon each side of them, an excubitor or watchman: there
carts also when they had any wars were covered with skins, whereon they
would labor and strike so hard, as they would make a horrible and ill favored
noise and clankering: But their impudency was of all things most admirable and
odious, for they so far exceeded the bounds of modestic, as they would offer
their naked bodies to men in the open streets, esteeming it no fault, but
rather condeming those for dastards and fainte-hearted cowards, that should
refuse their offered favors: Valerius Maximus reports, that the Cimbri and
Celtiberi would exult and rejoice when they were in the wars, because if they
died there their ends were honorable and happy, but if they languished in any
disease, they would lament and be sorrowful, accounting that kind of death
as base and reproachful.

Of Gallia, and of the ancient customs and latter manners of the Frenchmen.
CAP. 22.
GALLIA a broad Country of Europe, is situated betwixt the inner The bounds
of Gallia.
French sea and the Britain Ocean, the river of Rhene, the Alps and the
Pyrenean hills. The Pyrenean hills include it in upon the West and the Britain
Ocean upon the North: upon the East lies the river of Rhene, which inuironeth
as much of France from the Alps to the Ocean, as the Pyrenaean hills do from
the inmost to the uttermost sea, and upon the South it is enclosed with the
Narbon sea: It is called Gallia of the whiteness of the people for (gala) in
Greek signifies milk. Gallia why so called.
All that part of France which is called tonsa or togata Gallia is also named
Cisalpina, and is comprehended within the limits of Italy, and all that part
which is called Transalpina, or France beyond the Alps, is surnamed Gallia
Comata, and is by Historiographers divided into three Provinces, of the three
sorts of people that inhabit The division of France.
therein (to wit) Belgica, Celtica and Aquitanica, which three Provinces be
thus bounded and limited: Belgica is all that Country which lies betwixt the
rivers Scaldis and Sequana, from thence then to the river Garumna is the
Province of Celtica, which is all that which is now the country of Lions, and
from that again unto the Pyrenaean hills, is the country of Aquitanica, once
called Armorica: Augustus deuideth France into four parts, by adding to those
three the Province of Lions: And Ammianus makes many subdiuisions, by
distributing the country of Lions into two parts, and Aquitanica into two
parts. Braccata Gallia which is also called Narbon, was so called of a certain
fashion of mantles or breeches The several provinces, of Gallia Belgica.
called Braccae which by them were much worn: Gallia Belgica which adioyneth
unto Rhene, speaks for the most part the Almaine tongue, and comprehends
many provinces, as Heluetia, Alsatia, Lotharingia, Luxenburg, Burgundy,
Brabant, Gelderland, Holland and Zeland, all which may be more rightly
accounted part of Germany then of France, but that the river of Rhene has
divided it from Germany: And surely I see no reason why hills and rivers should
limit and bound Kingdoms, but rather the language and government, and that each
Country should extend as far as his own proper language is spoken. The
Romans called the people of Gallia by one general name Celtae, after the name
of their King, and Gallatae of Galata his mothers name: but they be now called
Franci and Gallia France, of those people of Germany so called by whom it was
al subdued, as Baptista Mantuanus writes in his book entitled Dionysius, and
Anthonius Sabellicus in his third book of the tenth Aeneade. The Dictator
Caesar says that the French men do differ much amongst themselves, both in
language, laws and institutions, and that many things be common to most of
them, as to be factious, which is a general aspertion not The French men a
factions people.
only unto Citizens and Burgesses, but in private families also, for every one
as he excels others in wealth or wisdom, contendeth to have the souerainty,
and to advance his own faction, coveting to have all things done by his own
direction rather then by others, though as wise and wealthy as himself: an
other institution they have very ancient and grounded upon good reason, that
is, that the common people should live in security and not be injured by the
nobility, for but for that, there is no country in the world wherein the
clownes live in greater contempt and slavery then in France, for there was held
little difference betwixt them and slaves, being never called to any public
council but oppressed with tributes, or constrained to lend their money without
security, in so much as they were content to retain to noble men and
gentlemen, yielding themselves as slaves and bondmen unto them, only to be
freed from other men's extortions and wrongs: There were two sorts of men that
carried most estimation amongst them, which were the Equites and the The office
of the Druides.
Druides, some likewise did attribute as much honor to Poets and Prophets, as
unto the Druides, for that the Prophets bended their whole courses to find out
the causes of natural things, and the Poets wholly employed themselves in
praises and poems: and all these were by Caesar called by the name of Druidae:
These Druidae had the charge and oversight of al sacrifices both public and
private, their function was also to expound and interpret their religion, and
to instruct and bring up children and young men in learning and decipline, for
the assemblies and troops of such youth were much accounted of; to them was
committed likewise the disciding of controversies, the bounding and limitting
of men's grounds, and power to punish offenders by death, torments, or
otherwise, and if either private person or Magistrate offered to withstand or
gainsay any of their decrees, or refused to stand to their awarde, they would
interdict and forbid him to come to their sacrifices, which amongst that people
was the greatest punishment that could be inflicted: The Druides shunned the
communication and company of all men, least they should be polluted, and no
one could have justice, or be honored and reverenced according to his place,
dignity and deserts, if any of these Druides were against it.

They had one that was the governor and Archpriest over them, who bore the
chiefest sway, as head of the whole order, and ever as one of those prouosts or
governors died, an other was elected in his room out of those Druides, either
by worthiness of person or plurality of voices. This council or Senate of
Druides assembled at one time of the year at Lions, which is about the middle
of France, and there they kept their Sessions for the hearing and determining
of all controversies that were brought before them from al parts of the
Country, which kind of Judgment, and establishing of laws and statutes was
afterward received amongst all the nobles and commons of France (the
superstition being first brought out of Britany) and by them called the
Parliament, of which I will speak more hereafter. The Druides were exempted
from the wars, and had immunity from tribute, and whosoever addicted himself
to that kind of profession must learn by heart thousands of verses, yea so
many as some of them spent twenty years in conning verses without book, nor
was it lawful for them to commit any thing to writing, that belonged to the
knowledge of that science, for that they avoided all means that might either
be a help unto their memories, or anywise concern the authority of that
discipline, and also that their idle superstitious rites might not be laid
open to the common people: and yet all other sorts of Gauls and themselves in
all other matters, both public and private, used at that time the Greek
character: The Druides believed and preached the immortality of the soul, and
that after her departure out of one body, she removed into an other, by which
means al fear of death being taken away, they were more hardy and venturous to
undergo al dangers.

They would reason and dispute much of the stars and of their motion, of the
magnitude the world and sytuation of the earth, and of the natural causes of
things, and power of their profane gods, they held a position likewise that
the world was eternal and that the elements of fire and water prevailed one
against The Equites, an other sort of people.
an other by turns: An other sort of religious persons and which were most
devout of all others, were those they called Equites, and they, when they fell
into any dangerous disease, or any other peril of their lives, would offer for
the recovery of their health, or avoiding of imminent danger, a human
sacrifice, which sacrifice must ever be solemnized by the assistance of some
one of the Druides: Some others of that sect had great huge Images made hallow
and covered with twigges, into the concauity whereof they would put men alive,
and then set fire about the Image until all were consumed away.

The punishment inflicted upon thieves and offenders, they esteemed most
grateful and acceptable to their gods, and all those ancient Gauls held the
god Mercury in great veneration, as first founder and inuentor of all arts and
mysteries, the chief guide and conductor in all their travels, and very
propitions unto them in traffic and trading. All the spoils they took in
the wars, they vowed and consecrated unto Mars for their victory obtained, so
as in many Cities you might see great heaps of warlike spoils laid together,
and if any one stole any part of the prey to his own purse, he was severely
punished.

The Gauls persuaded themselves that they were the of spring of Pluto the god
of riches, and therefore they celebrated the beginning of their feasts the
night before the feast day, supposing that night to be consecrated unto Dis:
The men suffered not their children once to come into their sights, before they
were grown to man's estate, that they were able to manage arms, holding it
unfitting and absurd, that the son while he is a child should approach
near the presence of his father: The husbands look how much money they
received with their wives in portion, so much did they add unto it out of
their own stock, and all the increase that came of that coin, was reserved
and kept for him or her that was suruiuer.

The husbands had power and authority of life and death, as well over their
wives as over their children: and Husbands had power to kill their wives.
if any man's wife were convicted of witchcraft or sorcery, she was put to
death by her husbands neighbors and friends, either by fire, or by some other
grievous torments: In their funerals, all those things which the deceased
person held dear unto him in his life time, yea the beasts he loved best, were
burned with him: and not much before the Country was conquered by Julius
Caesar, their servants and retainers were burned with their Masters dead
bodies.

In their Cities (which were marvelous well governed) a few of the most worthy
and substantialest men amongst them, ruled the rest, having at the first one
chief ruler over them, who continued his office for a year, and in wars
they used likewise to appoint one to take the charge and command upon him of al
matters belonging to the wars.

If any private person heard any thing spoken by strangers touching the
commonwealth, they were to make report thereof to the Magistrates, though some
things they might conceal without danger. It was not lawful for any one to
mutter any thing in secret of the commonwealth but in public places, and he
that came last into the councel-house was put to death. If any factious fellow
raised any tumult or mutiny, there was sent unto him an officer with a sword in
his hand ready drawn, to proclaim silence, and if he desisted not at the
second or third proclamation, the officer would curtaile so much of his cloak
or cassocke (thereby to put him to disgrace) as the remnant that was left would
serve him to no purpose. The chief Magistrates had golden maces carried before
them, they wore chains about their necks and bracelets on their arms. The
common people wore short cloakes, and in steed of coats a loose garment slit
on the one side, that would scarce cover half their buttocks: their wool is
very rough, long and shaggy, so as their cassockes they called (Lenae) were
marvelous rugged and hairy.

They took great delight in trimming and dressing their hair; They be tal of
stature and for the most part pale of complexion, and their armor and weapons
are answearable to the proportion of their bodies, for they wore long swords
hanging at their right sides, and long shields proportionable to their spears,
wherewith they might cover their thighs, some of them also had bows and were
very good archers, but yet they used shooting more in fowling and birding, then
in the wars, and few of them would go into the field either with slings or
clubs.

They lay upon the ground and eat their meat sitting upon straw, the
substance of their meat was either milk or flesh, and especially hogs-flesh,
for they have such store of swine feeding in their fields, and so large, so
strong, and so swift, that strangers that know not their nature, are as
fearful of them, and in as much danger as if they were wolves. They have
sheep in as great abundance as swine, whereof when they be fed and powdered
they send many to Rome and diverse other parts of Italy and there sell them.

Their buildings and dwelling houses were made of wood in proportion of shells,
being very large with many spars or rafters. They be naturally cruel and
simple withal, and in the wars more valiant then politic, and much more
addicted to follow the wars then husbandry: The French women be exceeding
fruitful, in so much as Gallia Belgica alone, sent unto the wars at one
voyage, above three hundred thousand fighting men: when they have had any
victory they be wonderful joyful, and as much amazed after an overthrow:
Their custom was when the battle was ended and the soldiers departed the
field, to cut off the heads of their vanquished foes, and to hang them at
there horse necks, and so to carry them home, and there to stick them upon
poles, for a spectacle unto others. But the heads of worthy and renowned
soldiers (if any such were slain) they would season with odors of Cedar-tree,
and keep them for strangers to look upon, not suffering them to be ransommed
for their weight in gold: The ancient Country guise was to wear chains of
gold, bracelets and garments spangled with gold.

In their Diuinations their manner was to strike a man (ordained for that
purpose) upon the back, and then by his impatience and manner of affliction in
his death to Judge of future events. They had other sorts of human sacrifices
also, for some they would shoot to death and then hang them upon gibbets within
their Temples, and some of them would make a great huge Image, and put therein
men, wood, sheep and diverse other sorts of cattaile, and so sacrifice them
altogether.

The Frenchmen by reason of their continual labor, and exercise, were wont to
be very macilent, lean and lanck bellyed, for they were so careful to avoid
all pampering and excess, that if any young man's belly did outgrow his girdle,
he was openly punished.

But at this day the Frenchmen by reason of their commerce, The latter
customs of the French.
conversation, and continual acquaintance with the Romans, are greatly
altered from what they were, and their manners much bettered: for they be now
most ardent professors of the true Religion, and all under the government of
one King. Their marriages be solemnized after the Italian rites: they be very
studious in all the liberal arts, and in divinity especially, which is well
demonstrated by the great multitude of Students in the city of Paris, which is
now the most famous and renownedst University in all Christendom.

The laws in France be executed by Magistrates, but instituted by the kings:
their horsemen in time of wars go al in complete armor, and their footmen in
light harness: they have many good archers that shoot well in long bows, and
their bows be not made of Cornell trees like unto their bows in Scythia, and
in all the East country, but of Yew, or some other hard wood: their Ordinance
is carried along with their armies in carts, and they fight more rather in
order, one seconding another, then in troops, and with more courage and
cruelty, then skill or policy, although their cunning be sufficient to manage
their military businesses. Their Ambassadors to denounce wars, or treat of
peace, they call Heralds, who be loyal subjects to their Soueraign. The
Frenchmen be very religious, their Bishops of mighty power and dignity, and
all the Clergy in general of high reverence and veneration: in their divine
ceremonies they use much singing, by reason whereof the study of music is in
a manner peculiar to that nation: Their fashions in their apparel and shoes
be much altered in our age: for (says Sabellicus) when I was a boy, all the
Courtiers and Gentlemen of France (the Clergy only excepted) wore short
cloakes with sleeves, that would hardly reach to their mid thighs, pleated
from the top to the bottom, and stuffed or quilted about the shoulders. Their
shoes were tipped on the snoutes with thin horns, half a foot long, such as
are pictured in arras and tapestrie: and their bonnets which they called
(Bireta) were high and sharp toward the Crown: but all these ancient
fashions be now laid away, and new fangles invented: for the shoes they now
wear be broad-nosed, (like a Bears foot) and narrow heeled, and their
garments be much more loose and long then before they were, reaching down to
the calves of their legs, with loose sleeves slit on one side, and laced all
over with lace of diverse colors, set on lattise-wise: their hats be for the
most part read and very large, but their bonnets called (Bireta) be much
bigger then their ordinary hats, and very unfitting for their heads;
butotherwise, were it not for these unhandsome hats, no nation could compare
with them for neatness and gallantnesse in apparel. And now of late years
their manner of attire is much imitated by the Italians, who do wholly follow
the French fashion, manifestly presaging thereby what afterward came to pass.
The women be not so variable and fickle in following every new fashion, as the
men be, but keep their old fashion still. Baptista Mantuanus in his book
entitled Dionysius, makes a description of France to this effect: Of all the
parts of th'Vniuerse, fair France is not the least,
A wide, a large, and spacious land, and equal to the best:
It eastward ioynes to Italy, and westward unto Spain,
And compassed upon the South with the huge Ocean maine,
And wholly bounded on the north with famous river Rh^i^e.
With men, beasts, and all sorts of grain this land does much abound.
The earth is fruitful, and the air is whole some, sweet, and sound,
Not p^stred with such poisonous beasts, as is the Lybian coast,
Nor like the Hyperborean hills still mantled over with frest:
It is not fryde like India pale, with Phoebus scorching beams,
Which barren makes the fattest fields, on whom he spreads his gleams,
Nor is there such extreme sharp cold, nor such perpetual night,
Like Island, and the frigid Zone, where Sol scarce shows his light;
Nor does their land lie soakt in fennes, like unto Aegipts soil,
But temperate heat and moist does yield inc^ease with little toil.
And a little after the same Author says: The Gauls are of a fiery mind, and of
complexion white,
Which is the cause they were so called, as diverse Authors write:
Nature beheld the Paphian Queen when she gave them their hew,
Whereby of colors white and red a perfect union grew.
In dancing, plays, and pleasant verse consist their chiefest joys,
Most pron^ they are to banqueting, most prore to Venus toys:
Yet be they zealous toward their God, and for they are free borne,
Tabase themselves with servitude, their haughty minds do scorn:
No lying, nor hypocrisy can harbor in their breast,
But like free men, so free of speech, all rudenes they detest.
To hunt fish, f^wle, the fields, and floods, and hills they often haunt:
Long wars has so inured them, no foes their minds can daunt.
Their chiefst delight is barbed horse, with yerking spur to gall,
Bows spears, shields swords, and Brigandines to them are natural.
By day to suffer heat of Sun, to watch in fields all night,
To bear huge armor on their backs, amid their foes to fight.
To run through dangers, swords and pikes, to oppose themselves to death
For king, or kin, or country dear, to spend their dearest breath.
They much delight, and there in think their honor most does stand.
And for the Goat (if stars speak truth) is ruler of their l^nd: Capricorn
rules in France.

From's influence (if we so may iud^e) this is the effect insues,
A wavering heart, unconstant breast, mind greedy still of news.


I think it not amiss in this place to make some description The Parliament of
France.
of the Parliament of France, which is the worthiest commendation, and greatest
ornament belonging to the Court of France: by whom, or from whence this court
of Parliament was first instituted and derived I can gather no more certainty
by writers than I have signified before, that by all likelihood the Druides
were the first authors thereof, and that it has continued ever since, though
now much differing from what it then was: for the Parliament (as the Council of
the Druides before) was held yearly at Lions, at times appointed by the King
in this manner:

They assembled thither from each several city of the Province, all such as
were skillful in their laws and customs, (being thereto chosen aforehand) to
do equity and justice unto all that would bring their causes before them by
way of appeal: but because this institution was at the first uncertain, and
not well settled: the seat of this Court of Parliament was afterward translated
from Lions, and is now established at Paris, and certain Judges appointed to
hear, and finally to determine all appeals whatsoever: of these Judges there
be foure-score which have annual stipends out of the Kings Exchequer, for
their better maintenance. They be divided into four Courts, and every Court
above other, and each has his proper Presidents, or chief Justices.

In the first Court or Chamber (as they call it) sit sour chief Judges or
Presidents, and thirty Counselors or Assistants, and these hear all
complaints, controversies, and delays, and set down what is Law in every
case: and if the matters be light, or lately begun, they end and determine
them. In the second and third Court or Chamber sit in each eighteen, whom
they call Aequati, as having equal authority, and these be called Councellers
of Inquests and Inquisitions, because they have the chief stroke in
Inquisitions and verdicts; and of them, some be lay, and some Clergymen, and
each of these chambers or courts has four Presidents: These when they have
set down their opinions touching any matter in question, some one of the
Presidents at certain times appointed, delivers their sentence to the first
Court of Parliament, which is there by them so ratified and confirmed, as no
one can appeal from it; and he which is found guilty before them, must pay
unto the Courts threescore pounds of Tours weight; and some are adjudged to
pay more, according to the quality of the offense: but if the party so
condemned think, that his cause was not well understood and discussed, and
that he had some injury done him, thereby receiving some loss or hinderance,
he may bring the matter (thus crazed by misinformation) again into question
before the Judges, but it shall not be heard, unless he pawn and put into
their hands, an hundred and twenty pounds to stand to their censure.

The fourth Court in the Court of Requests, and is kept by the Masters of the
Kings palace, or Masters of requests and supplications, and none shall have
their causes heard there, but only the kings servants, or such as have some
privileges from the King, and they shall not be molested in other Courts: of
this Court there be only six Judges, and it is lawful to appeal from them
to the Parliament. If in handling controversies any great difficulty arise, it
must be decided by the assembly of all the Judges and Counselors of every
Court together, which happens oftentimes in matters proposed by the King,
touching the government of the Commonwealth: for no law can be thoroughly
established without the consent of this Senate or Parlament-house.

In this Parliament the Peers of France, and other masters of Requests that be
the kings favorites, may sit as assistants unto the Judges, and their places be
next unto the Presidents of the first Court or Chamber: but all matters
touching the king, or any of the Peers be defined and determined by the Peers
themselves, and the Judges of the first Court.

There be twelve chief Peers elected out of all the Nobility The 12. Peers of
France.
of France, whereof six be spiritual men, and six temporal: the spiritual
Peers be the Bishop of Rhemes, the Bishop of Lavdunum, and the Bishop of
Langres, (which be called Episcopi Duces, or chief Bishops) the Bishop of
Beuvois, the Bishop of Noyon, and the Bishop of Challons, (which be Episcopi
Comites, or secundarie Bishops:) The six secular Peers be the Duke of
Burgundy, the D. of Normandy, and the Duke of Aquitania, (which be chief
Princes or Archdukes) the Duke of Flanders, the Duke of Tholousa, and the Duke
of Campania, which be secundary Princes.) These twelve (according to the
opinion of Robertus) were first instituted by Charles the great, who taking
them with him into the wars, called them his Peers, as having equal power
in assisting of the King, and they were ever present at his coronation, and
yielded obedience to no other Court but only to the King, and his Court of
Parliament.

And these be the ancient and later manners of the Gauls and Frenchmen, and
their customs most worthy of memory.

Of Spain, and of the manners of the Spaniards. CAP. 23.
SPAIN, the greatest country in Europe, The commendations and riches of Spain
and her bounds
is situated betwixt France and Affricke, and bounded with the Ocean sea, and
the Pirenaean hills: It is comparable to any other country, both for fertility
of soil, and abundance of fruits and vines, and so sufficiently stored with
all kind of commodities, that be either necessary or behoofull, as it
affords great part of her superfluity to the city of Rome, and all Italy
over. If you require gold, silver, or precious stones there they are in
abundance, if mines of Iron, and sundry other metals, you shall find no
defect; if wines, it gives place to none; and as for oils, it excels all
other nations of Europe: besides that, they have such store of salt, as they
never boil it, but dig it out of the earth in full perfection. Yea there is no
part of their ground (be it never so barren) but it yields increase of one
thing or other the heat of the Sun is not there so violent as in Affricke,
nor be they tossed with such continual storms and tempestuous winds, as
France is, but there is an equal temperature of the heavens, and wholesomnes
of the air over all the Region, it being greatly wasted with marine winds,
without such foggie mists and infectious exhalations as proceed from fennes and
moorish grounds. There is great plenty of hemp, flax and broom, the pill or
skin whereof serves to tie up their vines: and it affords more vermilion then
any other country besides. The currents of their rivers be not so swift and
violent, as they thereby become hurtful, but gentle and mild to water and
manure their fields and meadows, and the arms of the Ocean sea which adioyne
unto them, afford great store of fish: and yet for no one thing was Spain
more commended in times past, then for the swiftness of their horses, whereof
grew this fiction, That the Spanish horses were conceived of the winds.

Spain takes her beginning at the Pyrenaean hills, and winding by Hercules
pillars, extends to the Northern Ocean, so as all places contained within
that compass, may justly be said to be of Spain. The breadth of Spain, (as
Appianus writes) is ten thousand stadia, and the length much answerable to the
breadth: it joins unto France only at the Pyrenaean hills, and on al other
sides it is enclosed with the sea: it is distinguished and known by three
names, Tarragon, Bethica, and Lusitania: Tarragon (the chief cities whereof
were called Pallantia, and Numantia, now called Soria) at the one end joins
unto France, and unto Bethica and Lusitania at the other: The Mediterranean sea
runs by the South Side thereof, and upon the North it lies opposite to the
Ocean: the other two provinces be divided by the river Anas, so as Bethica (the
chief cities whereof were Hispalis and Corduba) looks Westward into the
Atlanticke sea, and into the Mediterranean upon the South: Lusitania lies
opposite only to the Ocean, the side of it unto the Northern Ocean, and unto
the Western at the end: the city Emerita being once the chief City of that
Province.

Spain was first called Iberia, of the river Iberus, and after Spain why so
called.
that Hesperia, of Hesperus the brother of Atlas, and lastly, it was named
Hispania, of Hispalis now called Sibilia. Their bodies be very apt to endure
both hunger and labor, and their minds ever prepared for death: they be very
sparing and strict both in their diet and every thing else, and they be much
more desirous of wars then of peace. So much, as if wars be wanting
abroad, they will grow to civil dissension and homebred garboiles among
themselves: They will suffer torments even unto death, rather than reueile a
thing committed to their secrecy, having more care of their credits, and trust
reposed in them, then of their lives. They be marvelous nimble and swift of
pace, and of an unquiet and turbulent disposition: their horses be both speedy
and warlike, and their arms more dear unto them then their blood.

They furnish not their tables with dainty and delicate meats, unless upon
festival days, and they learned of the Romans (after the second Carthaginian
wars) to wash themselves in cold water: but for all this in so many ages as
have passed since their first original, they never had any notable or famous
Captain, that ever achieved any great Conquest, but Viriatus only, and he
indeed held the Romans in play some ten years with variable success of
fortune.

The women dispatch all business both within doors and without, and the men
employ themselves either in wars, or to purloyning and stealing from others:
they wear short black garments made of rough woll like goats hair: their
shields or bucklers which they use for their defense in the wars, be little
ones made of nerves and sinews, which they will weeld with such agilitie, as
they avoid all dangers both of darts, arrows, and hand-blowes. Their darts be
all of Iron and crooked, their helmets of brass and crested, and their swords
of Iron, and as broad as the palm of ones hand; wherewith in a troop or
croude, they will make great slaughter.

They have a devise to make Iron very tough and strong for weapons, which is,
to beat and hammer it into thin plates or sheets, and then to lay those
sheets in the ground so long, till the weakest of the Iron be rusted away,
and none left but what is marvelous pure and strong, and of this they make
their swords, and other weapons for the wars, which be so substantial and
good, as neither shield nor helmet can withstand them, but that they kill all
before them: and of these swords every one commonly carries two. Those which
have any regiment in the camp, after they have escaped the conflict on
horseback, forsake their horses, and help the footmen, they will fling their
darts a great way from them, and that with great skill, and they will endure the
fight a long time, and their bodies be so nimble and quick, as they can easily
fly from their foes, and set upon them again as occasion is offered They be so
desirous of wars, that for the least cause that is, they will swarm together
by troops, and sing for joy when they encounter their foes.

In peaceable times they practice singing and dancing; for which exercise they
be very light and active: toward their enemies and evil persons they practice
great cruelty, but to strangers much bounty and humanity: for they be so
forward to intertaine strangers and travelers, as they will every one strive
to exceed other in courtesy, with a kind of emulation, esteeming those most
worthy of honor and in greatest favor with God, that have most strangers to
accompany them: The women wear iron chains or jewels about their necks, with
crooked or bending crests, that compass the head from the neck behind over
the crown, and so hang down upon their foreheads, unto which they fasten
their veiles when they please to mask their faces, which they account a great
ornament unto the^.

In like manner in some part a little struck of a wheel co^passeth their
heads, and is bound to the sinews in the hinder part of the head, and reaches
down to the lappes of their ears, waxing, by little and little, sharper and
narrower toward the top. Some shave off all the hair of the forpart of their
heads, and some others have a pillar of a foot long, standing upright upon
their foreheads, to which they fasten their hair, and then cover it with a
black cap or bonnet. They feed of diverse sorts of flesh, and make drink of
honey, whereof the country has sufficient store, and such wines as are wanting
in their own, are brought unto them out of other countries: and although they
be very neat and cleanly in their diet, yet is it strange to see, what a
beastly and filthy custom they generally observe, which is, to wash their
whole bodies, yea and to rub their teeth with urine, accounting it very good
and wholesome for their bodies. But (to omit nothing that may bring us to a
perfect knowledge and understanding of the country) all the Region now called
Spain, was heretofore divided into the further and nearer Spain; the nearer
Spain is that which is now called Tarragon, extending to the Pyrenaean hills:
and the further Spain by reason of the length, is divided into two Provinces,
Bethica, and Lusitania: Spain also was once divided into five kingdoms, which
were, Castile, Arragon, Portugal, Navarre, and Granata.

Of Lusitania, and of the ancient manners of the Portugals. CAP. 24.
LVSITANIA, a Province in the furthermost part of Spain, and at this day
called The bounds of Portugal.
Portugal, has Bethica on the South, Tarragon on the East, and the Ocean sea
upon the West and North. It was first called Lusitania, (according to Pliny)
of Lusus the father of Bacchus, and Lysa his luxurious and dissolute companion.

Of all Spaniards, the Portugals be most valiant, subtle, active and nimble,
and through their extraordinary skill in navigations have found out more
strange and unknown lands, than any people in the world again: Their shields
which they use in the wars be two foot broad, and made crooked toward the
upper end where they hold their hands, (for other handle they have none) and
these will they use with such agility, as they will thereby easily avoid both
arrows, darts, and hand-blowes: They have also short swords or poynards
hanging by their sides, and some have brest-plates made of linen cloth, and
yet but few wear other privy coats or crested helmets, but only such as be
made of nerves or sinews.

They be very skillful in darting, and can cast them a great way from them,
they continue the battle long, and by reason of their nimblenes, quick
agility, and lightness, they will easily fly from their enemy, and again
pursue him, as makes most for their advantage: footmen have their legs
harnessed, and every one a bundle of darts, and some carry Iauelins pointed or
headed with brass. There be some Portingals dwelling near the river Durius,
which are said to live like unto the Spartanes: these use two kind of
ointments, and sulphury or fiery stones to warm them withal, and all cold
things are washed. They eat all one kind of meat, which is wholesome, though
it be homely: when they sacrifice, they cut not the beast in pieces, but
opening his belly, they look into the bowels or garbage of the oblation, as
also into the veins of his side, and by handling of them conjecture of things
to come. Another kind of divination they have by men's intrals, and especially
captives; in doing whereof they first cover the man ordained for that purpose,
with a cassocke, and then the Augur or Southsayer makes an incision in the
bottom of his belly, and by his fall prophesies of future events, which done,
they cut off the right hands, and offer them to their gods.

Those Portingals which inhabit on hills fare but meanly, they drink water,
and lie upon the bare ground: They suffer their hair to grow long, and to hang
down about their shoulders dangling like women, and they fight with Myters
upon their heads, in stead of helmets. Their daintiest meat is bucke goats,
which they also sacrifice to Mars, as they do captives and horses.

They have also (in imitation of the Greeks) their Hecatombes, which are
sacrifices made with an hundred beasts of all sorts, and (as Pindarus is of
opinion) they sacrifice and offer every hundredth thing likewise. They have
their Gymnick plays, (which are so called, for that they be done by naked men)
and these plays are exercised with weapons, horses, plummets of Lead, called
the Whirle-about, running and disordered fighting: and sometimes they divide
themselves into parts, and fight one side against another.

These mountainous Lusitanians feed two parts of the year upon Acornes,
which when they have dried and ground into meal, they make bread thereof and
so eat it. In stead of wine (whereof those parts are barren) they have drink
made of barley, and that they ever drink new, as soon as it is brewed.

When kinsfolk and friends are assembled together to banquet, in stead of oil
they use butter, and have seats made in the walls for them to sit in; where
every one takes his seat according to his worth or gravity, and ever in
their drinking, they use to sing and dance after music; leaping and capering
for joy, as the women in Boetica do, when they join all their hands together,
and so fall a dancing: Their apparel (for the most part) is black cassockes,
which they will wrap about them, and so lie themselves down to sleep upon
straw or litter: They eat their meat in earthen platters, as the French men
do, and women wear for the most part red garments.

In stead of money they use thin plates of silver, or else exchange and
barter one commodity for another. Those which are condemned to dye, are stoned
to death, and Parricides are carried from out the confines of their hills, or
beyond some river, and there covered and ouer-whelmed with stones. They
contract matrimony after the manner of the Greeks, and (according to the
custom of the Egyptians) bring those which are sick into the streets, to the
end that those which have been troubled with the like griefs themselves, may
show them how they were cured. And these be the customs used in those
mountainous and northern countries of Spain.

It is reported, that those Spaniards which inhabit the utmost parts of
Portingall, when they be taken prisoners by their enemies, and ready to be
hanged, they will sing for joy: That the men there give dowers to their wives,
and make their sisters their heirs, who do also marrv their own brothers. And
that they be so barbarous and bloudyminded, that mothers will murder their
own children, and children their parents, rather then that they should fall
into the hands of their enemies. They do sacrifice to a god, whose name is
unknown: when the Moon is in the full, they will watch all night every one at
his own door, dancing and skipping all the night long. The women have as good
part of all profits and increase as men have, for they practice husbandry, and
be obedient and serviceable to men, when they themselves are with child.

The Spaniards make poison of a kind of herb much like unto Persley, which
offends not upon a sudden, but by little and little, and this they always
have in readiness for any one that wrongs them, in so much as it is said to be
proper to the Spaniards to be great poysoners, and that their custom is also
to offer themselves to be slain and sacrificed for those to whom they are
newly reconciled.

Of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and of many other Islands, and of the
manners and customs of the Inhabitants. CAP. 25.
ENGLAND, otherwise called great Britain, is the greatest Island contained
England also called great Britain.
within the bosom of the Ocean: It is in the form of a triangle, much like
unto the I Will of Sicily, and is wholly embraced and infolded within the arms of
the Ocean, in no part touching, but altogether divided from England once called
Albion.
the continent. It was first called Albion, of the white cliffes or rocks that
show the country a far off unto passengers. Some are of opinion, that after the
destruction of Troy by the Greeks, the Troianes (guided by the Oracle of
Pallas) rigged a navy, betook them to the seas, and (arriving in this Island)
fought many battles with the Giants, which then inhabited the country,
destroyed some, expelled the rest, and possessed the soil themselves. These
also (continuing their possession many years together) were afterward driven
thence by the Saxons, a warlike people of Germany, under the conduct of Angla
their Queen. The The Saxons once Lords of England.
Inhabitants wholly vanquished and expelled, and their soil and substance
shared amongst soldiers, utterly to extinguish and root out all memory of
the former name and nation, they called the country Anglia, after the name of
Angla their guide and gouernesse. Some others are of Anglia why so called.
opinion, that it was called Anglia, as being an angle or corner of the world.

Upon the North it lies opposite to France and Spain, and the circuit or
utmost bounds of the whole Island, is about 1836. English miles. Their longest
day consists The compass of England.
of seventeen hours: their nights are light in the Summer season: the eyes of
the Inhabitants are gray, their stature tall, and their natural complexions so
comely, so fair and so beautiful, as Saint Gregory seeing by chance certain
English boys in Rome, and demanding of what Country they were, said that they
might well be called, Angli, their faces and countenances resembling the
Angels, and lamenting that such diuilish Idolatry should harbor in such divine
features, he shortly after effected, that the faith of Christ was planted in
the Country.

In war they are undaunted, and most expert Archers, their women be
marvelous comely and beautiful, their common sort of people rude, barbarous
and base, their nobility and gentry, courteous, civil and of singular
humanity. They salute one an other with cappe and knee, and encounter the women
with kisses, lead them into Tauernes and there drink together, which they
deem no touch to their reputations, if therein be discovered no lascivious
intent.

If they have wars, they delight not in subuerting cities, destroying,
burning, and consuming, corn, cattaile or country, but bend their forces wholly
to the destruction of their enemies, and he that is vanquisher has command of
all.

England of al other provinces, was the first that embraced England the first
Christian Island.
the Christian religion: The country abounds with cattaile and wool: wolves
it breeds none, nor norisheth any that are brought thither, in so much that
their flocks may feed at liberty without fear or guide. The country is rich
in metals, as lead, copper especially and some silver, there is also the
Magerite or pearl, and the stone Gagates (there called Iette) which burnoth in
water and is extinguished with oil. In steed of wine (whereof the land is
barren) they use a kind of licor which they call Ale and Bear, and they have
much wines brought them out of other countries.

There be many villages, borrowes and cities, whereof London is the chiefest
of the nation, the Kings seat, and London the chief city.
the most famous for traffic and trading.

These are their customs and manners they use in this age, which are much
differing from their customs they used the time of Julius Caesar, for at that
time it was not lawful for them to eat Hare, Hen or Goose, and yet The
ancient manners of the Britans.
would they norish and keep them for their pleasures. The people that
inhabited the middle part of the country, lived (for the most part) upon milk,
and flesh (being utterly destitute of corn) and clothed themselves with
skins. Their faces they would die with woad, to the end that in battle they
might breed a great terror to their enemies: They wore long hair hanging down
about their shoulders, and shaued all parts of their bodies but their heads:
one woman would have ten or more husbands at one time, and it was lawful for
the brother to enjoy his brothers wife, the father the sons, and the son
the fathers, and the children were accounted children to them all: Strabo
(dissenting from the opinion of Caesar) says, that the English are far
taller then the Frenchmen, and of a shorter hair: Thick woods served them in
steed of cities, wherein they builded them cabbines and cottages, harboring
themselves and their cattaile under one roof. The country is more subject to
rain then snow, and when the weather is fair, the earth is covered sometimes
with a black cloud, that for the space of four hours together you shall see
no Sun at high noone

Scotland the uttermost part of Britan toward the Scotland denided from
England.
North, is divided from the other part of the Island only with a river or
small arm of the sea.

Not far distant from Scotland lies Ireland, the people whereof use one
kind of habit, in no point differing one from an other. They speak all one
language and use the self same customs. They have nimble wits and are very
apt to revenge, using great cruelty in the wars, though otherwise they be
sober and can endure all manner of wants with great facility. They are
naturally fair, but nothing curious in their apparel.

The Scots of whom I spoke before (as some are of opinion) were so called of
the paynting of their bodies, Of Scotland.
for it was an usual and ancient custom there (and especially amongst the
rudest and barbarous kind of people) to paint and die their bodies, arms and
legs with varnish or vermillion, which custom (if all be true as is written
by ancient authors) was practiced by the Britans, especially in time of war,
the more to terrify the enemy as before is said.

Aeneas Siluius says, that the shortest day in winter there, is not above
three hours long, and it is a thing worthy the noting to see how poor folks
there stand about the Temples of their gods, begging stones of passengers for
them to burn, for the country affoordeth but small store of fuel, and the
stones which they crave and get together in this manner, are of a fat and
sulphery condition, and will burn like coals: Aeneas says that he heard there
was a tree in Scotland, that in Antumne when the leaves were withered, they
fell of the tree into a river, and by virtue of the water were turned into
birds. This tree he says he sought for in Scotland, but could not find it,
and that lastly it was told him, by some that knew the Country well, that this
strange miracle was to be seen in one of the Isles of Orcades.

And thus far mine Author, concerning the estate of this Island, by which
appears the little acquaintance both he and those writers out of which he
frames this collection had with it, for else would they not so slightly have
slipped over the commendation of so worthy a Country, and therefore I thought it
not amiss, in this place to supply their defects with this short addition of
mine own, wherein happily you may perceive a more lively description of this
our Realm of Great Britany, and the condition of the inhabitants then could
well be expected from mere strangers.

BRITANNIA, sometimes called Albion, the worthiest and renownedst Island of all
the world, is in compass as is said before (according to the opinion of the
best writers) about 1836. English miles: It is sytuated in a most mild and
temperate clymate, the air being neither too hot in Summer, nor too cold in
winter, through which temperature it abounds with all sorts of grain, fruits
and cattaile, that be either necessary or behoueful for man's life: for besides
that the Country is wholesome, pleasant and delightsome, there be such store
of ponds, rivers and running waters for fish and foul, such abundance of
forests and chases for timber and fuel, such large fields and champion grounds
for corn and grain, such pastures and meadows for sheep and cattaile, such
orchards and gardens for pleasure and profit, such hunting and hawking in
fields, fluds and forests, such strong castles, such stately buildings, such
goodly cities and walled towns, such beautiful houses of the Nobility
disperced in all parts of the country, such large territories, such renowned
universities for the advancement of learning and good letters, such practice of
religion, such places for pleading, such traffic and trading, such
maintenance of Justice, such generous dispositions in the nobles, such
ciuility amongst citizens, such intercourse amongst the commons, in a word such
is the pomp, riches and flourishing state of this Realm, under the government
of our most gracious Prince King James, that England at this day is so amply
stored with natures richest gifts that she is not only furnished with things
sufficient to serve her self, but sends forth sundry of her superfluous
commodities into other countries also, and for all things may justly be
compared, if not preferred to any country in Christendom: who were the first
inhabitants of this Island, and why it was so called, I find it so diversely
reported that I rather leave every man to his opinion, then by setting down
mine own incur the censure of ignorance and indiscretion: but howsoever,
although it has bin inhabited by sundry nations, and divided into several
Kingdoms, yet do I not find that ever it admitted any other form of
government but the Kingly authority only, no not when it was dismembered into
many Kingdoms, but that then every King had a perfect and absolute command
over his subjects, nor that any King of England, either then, or since it grew
into a Monarchy, did ever receive his authority from any other Prince as his
supreme, but that every King within the limits of his Kingdom was (next unto
God) sole and absolute governor, the idle example of King John only excepted,
who without consent of his commons, or establishment by act of parliament,
forced thereunto by the rebellion of his Nobles aided by the Dolphin of France,
resigned his crown to the Popes Legate, and received it again at his hands
only to appease the Pope being then his enemy.

To pass over the several peoples that have inhabited this Island, and the
times of their continuance, as Britans, Romans, Danes and Saxons, and to come
to times more nere unto us, for that my purpose is not to wade in uncertain
waters, but briefly to touch the present state and condition of my country, too
slightly slipped over by mine author.

William surnamed the Conqueror bastard son to Robert the sixth Duke of
Normandy, and cousin german unto King Edward the Confessor by the mothers
side, pretending a title unto this Kingdom by the gift of Edward his
kinseman, and also by a covenant confirmed by oath betwixt Harrold and him,
entered this land, slew King Harrold in battle and obtained the crown by
conquest, upon the fourteenth day of October 1066. He alterred the whole state
of the country, dispossessed the Inhabitants, and distributed their lands by
portions unto his people that came in with him, he reigned twenty years, eight
months and sixteen days, and left the Kingdom to William his third son,
surnamed William Rufus, who was flaine in hunting, after he had reigned twelve
years, eleven months and eighteen days, and having no issue, left the
government to Henry his brother, and youngest son to William the Conqueror.

Henry the first, surnamed Henry Beuclarke, reigned five and thirty years,
four months and eleven days, and dying without issue male, left the crown
unto Stephen Earl Morton and of Bologne, son to the Earl of Bloys, and
Adela, William Conquerors daughter, and nephew to King Henry the first.

Stephen reigned eighteen years, eleven months and eighteen days, and Henry
son to Maude the Empress, whose mother was Maude Queen of England, wife to
King Henry the first and daughter to Margaret Queen of Scots, who was daughter
to Edward the son of Edmund, surnamed Ironsyde (by which means the Saxon
line was again restored) succeeded in his Kingdom.

Henry the second reigned four and thirty years, nine months and two days,
and then departing this life left the managing of the estate unto his third
son Richard surnamed Richard Ceur de Lion.

Richard the first reigned nine years, nine months and two and twenty days,
and dying without issue, his brother John (disinheriting Arthur and Eleanor,
the right heirs to the crown, as being the issue of Ieffrey Duke of Britan
his elder brother, who was fourth son to Henry the second, and died before
his father) took upon him the government. John reigned seventeen years,
seven months, and Henry his eldest son reigned in his steed.

Henry the third reigned six and fifty years, and one month, and left his
son Edward surnamed Long-shankes to rule after him.

Edward the first reigned four and thirty years, eight months and nine
days, and exchanging his Kingdom, for the Kingdom of heaven, left the crown
to his son Edward of Carnaruon so called because he was borne there.

Edward the second reigned nineteen years, seven months and six days, and
being then deposed, the government was committed to Edward his son.

Edward the third reigned fifty years, four months and seven days, and left
the Kingdom unto Richard his grandchild, the son of Edward the Black
Prince, who died before his father.

Richard the second was deposed, when he had reigned two and twenty years,
fourteen weeks and two days, and Henry Plantagenet, son to John of Gante
Duke of Lancaster, fourth son to Edward the third got possession of the crown
rather by force then by lawful succession.

Henry the fourth reigned thirteen years, six months, and four days, and
his son Henry succeeded him in the Kingdom.

Henry the fifth, whose valor France well knew, reigned nine years, five
months, and four and twenty days, and left the government to his son Henry
likewise.

Henry the sixth reigned eight and thirty years, six months and nineteen
days, and Edward Earl of March, eldest son to Richard Duke of York,
clayming the crown by liniall descent, from Lionel Duke of Clarence, third
son to Edward the third, and elder brother to John of Gante Duke of
Lancaster, succeeded him in the government.

Edward the fourth reigned two and twenty years five weeks and one day and
left the Kingdom to his son Edward.

Edward the fifth was murdered by Richard Duke of Gloucester, youngest son to
Richard Duke of York, and youngest brother to Edward the fourth, when he had
reigned only ten weeks and four days.

Richard the third having butchered his Nephews, and usurped the crown of
England, was slain by Henry the Seventh when he had reigned two years, two
months and five days, and left the Crown unto the said Henry, who was next
heir from the house of Lancaster, and married Elizabeth, Daughter unto Edward
the Fourth, next heir from the house of York, by which marriage he reunited
the two long divided houses of York and Lancaster.

Henry the Seventh, reigned three and twenty years, eight months and
nineteen days, and left the Kingdom to Henry his Second son, for his
eldest son Arthur died before his father without issue.

Henry the Eight, reigned seven and thirty years, ten months and one day, and
left the charge of the government to Edward his son.

Edward the Sixth, reigned six years, five months and nineteen days, and
Queen Mary his eldest sister succeeded him.

Queen Mary reigned five years, five months and two and twenty days, and
her sister Queen Elizabeth reigned after her.

Queen Elizabeth reigned four and forty years four months and fourteen
days. She was the mirror of the world for Government and (her sex
considered) beyond compare admirable, religious, prudent, magnanimous,
merciful, beloved, evil spoken of by none but only the wicked, never to be
remembered of any true hearted Englishman, but which rejoicing for her birth,
and sorrowing for her death. Her Virgin life was such, as that (for politic
respects) being moved to marry in the first year of her reign, her answer
was that that estate liked her best, wherein she then lived with all concluding
for satisfaction to her subjects with a Deus Prouidebit, God shall provide an
heir for this Kingdom, which blessed be God therefore, our eyes have after
four and forty years of her gracious reign now to our comfort seen. But for
your better satisfaction, I will here set down her words at large as they are
penned by Master Stow in his Annals of England.

AS I have had good cause, so do I give you all my Stowes Annal Anno Eliz.
primo.
hearty thanks, for the good zeal and loving care you see me to have, as well
toward me, as the whole estate of your Country: your petition, I perceive,
consists of three parts, and mine answer to the same shall depend of two.

And to the first part, I may say unto you, that from my years of
understanding, since I first had consideration of my self, to be borne a
seruitor of almighty God, I happily chose this kind of life, in the which I
yet live, which I assure you, for my own part, has hitherto best contented my
self, and, I trust, has been most acceptable to God. From the which, if
either ambition of high estate offered to me in marriage by the pleasure and
appointment of my Prince, whereof I have some records in this presence (as you
our Treasurer well knew) or if the eschewing the danger of mine enemies, or the
avoiding of the perrill of death, whose messinger, or rather a continual
watchman, the Princes indignation was no little time daily before mine eyes,
by whose means, although I know, or justly may suspect, yet I will not now
utter, or if the whole cause were in my sister her self, I will not now
burden her therewith, because I will not charge the dead: if any of these, I
say, could have drawn, or diswaded me from this kind of life, I had not now
remained in this estate wherein you see me, but so constant have I always
continued in this determination, although my youth and words may seem to some
hardly to agree together, yet is it most certain and true, that at this day I
do stand free from any other meaning, that either I have had in times past, or
have at this present, with which trade of life I am so thoroughly acquainted,
that I trust in God, who has hitherto therein preserved, and led me by the
hand, will not of his goodness suffer me to go alone.

For the other part, the manner of your petition I do well like, and take it
in very good part, because that it is simple, and contains no lymitation of
place or person: if it had been otherwise, I must needs have misliked it very
much, and thought it in you a very great presumption, being unfitting, and
altogether unmeet for you to require them that may command, or those to
appoint, whose parts are to desire, or such to bind and limit, whose duties
are to obey, or to take upon you to draw my love to your likings, or to frame
my will to your fantasy: For a guerdon constrained, and a gift freely given,
can never agree together. Nevertheless if any one of you be in suspect, that
whenever it may please God to incline my heart to another kind of life, you
may well assure your selves, my meaning or resolution is not to do or
determine any thing, wherewith the Realm may, or shall, have just cause to be
discontented, or complain of imposed injury. And therefore put that clean
out of your heads, and remove such doubtful thoughts, for I do assure you,
what credit my assurance may have with you I cannot tell, but what credit it
shall deserve to have, the sequel shall declare; I will never in that matter
conclude any thing that shall be prejudicial to the Realm, for the benefit,
weal, good and safety whereof, I will never shun to spend my life.

And whomsoever my chance shall be to light upon, I trust he shall be such, as
shall be as careful for the Realm, and you, I will not say as my self, because
I cannot so certainly determine of any other, but at the leastwise, by my
good will and desire, he shall be such, as shall be as careful for the
preservation of the Realm, and you, as my self. And albeit it might please
Almighty GOD to continue me still in this mind, to live out of the estate of
marriage, yet is it not to be feared, but he will so work in my heart, and
in your wisdoms, as good provision by his help may be made in convenient,
whereby the Realm shall not remain and stand destitute of an heir to succeed
me, that may be a fit Governor, and peradventure more beneficial to the
Realm and generality, then such offspring as may come of me.

For though I be never so careful of your well doings, and mind ever so to
be, yet may issue grow out of kind, and become perhaps ungracious. And in
the end this shall be for me very sufficient, that a marble stone shall
declare, that a maiden Queen having reigned and ruled such a long time, lived,
and died a virgin.

And here I end, and take your coming unto me in good part, and give unto
you all eft-somes my hearty thanks, more yet for your zeal and good meaning,
then for your petition.

And thus far Stowe.

THIS good Queen ELIZABETH was the last of the Royal issue of King Henry the
eight, she died without any issue her self and left the Kingdom unto James
King of Scotland, and next heir to the crown of England.

King James the first of that name since the Conquest by the death of Queen
Elizabeth, united the two famous Kingdoms of England and Scotland, which had
been long divided, the crown of England rightfully and linially descending
unto him from Margueret, eldest daughter to Henry the seventh, and Elizabeth
wife of the said Henry, and eldest daughter to Edward the fourth, which
Margueret was married to James the fourth King of Scotland, who had issue James
the fifth, father unto Mary the last Queen of Scots, who was mother unto James
the sixth King of Scotland, and of great Britan France and Ireland the first.

To omit Ireland an Island under our Kings dominion, the people whereof of late
years have grown to more ciuility, by conuersing with other nations, and to
speak something more in particular of this Island as now it is, we may divide
the whole Island of Britanny into three parts, that is to say England, Wales
and Scotland.

Scotland the North of this Island, having for a long time been a Kingdom of
it self severed and distinct from England, is now by this happy union (as I
said before) made one again with England, and both of them governed by one
King and Monarch.

This Country in respect of England is very barren and mountanous, and the
Inhabitants, especially the vulgar sort, far more rude and barbarous: their
language in effect is all one with the English, the Northern Scots excepted,
which speak and live after the Irish fashion, nor is their any difference in
their religion, but all causes and controversies be there determined by the
civil law, as in most other Countries, for with our common laws of England
they are little acquainted.

Wales an other part of this Island, and the proper habitation of the Britans,
expelled thither out of England by the Englishmen, was governed by Princes of
their own blood until the reign of Henry the third, who slew Lhewellen ap
Griffith, the last Prince of the British race, united that Province unto the
Kingdom of England, and forced the Inhabitants to swear fealty and
alleagiance unto Edward of Carnaruan his eldest son, whom he made Prince of
Wales: After the decease of Edward the first, this title of Prince of Wales lay
dormant during all the reign of Edward the Second, and was again revived by
Edward the Third, who created his son Edward surnamed the Black Prince, Duke
of Cornwall, Earl of Chester and Prince of Wales, and ever since has this
title been duly conferred unto the eldest sons of the Kings of England, for
the time being, and now lastly, and but lately by our dread sovereign Lord
King James, unto Henry Frederick his eldest son, the hopeful issue of a
happy father, borne certes (as evidently appears in his minority) to be a
perfect mirror of chiualry, for the advancement of our country and common
wealth, and the subversion of his enemies.

The Inhabitants of Wales, though they be much improued, yet do they not
equal the English in ciuility, nor their soil in fertility: Their whole
Country consists of twelve shires (that is to say) Anglesea, Brecknocke,
Cardigan, Carmarden, Carnaruon, Denbigh, Flint, Glamorgan, Merionneth,
Mongomerry, Pembroke, and Radnor-shire, and four bishops Seas (to wit) the
Bishopric of Saint David's, the Bishoppricke of Landaffe, the Bishopprick of
Bangor, and the Bishoppricke of Saint Asaphe. They have a language peculiar to
themselves, yet do they live under the self same laws the Englishmen do, but
for because that part of the Island is far remote from London, the Kings seat
and chief tribunal of Judgment, where the laws are executed and pleas heard
for all the Realm, and by reason of their different language, the King by his
commission makes one of his nobles his deputy or lieutenant under him, to rule
in those parts and to see the peace maintained, and Justice ministered
indifferently unto all. This governor is called the Lord president of Wales,
who for the ease and good of the country, associate with one Judge and diverse
Justices, holds there his Terms and Sessions for the hearing and
determining of causes within Wales and the Marches. This Court is called the
Court of the council of the Marches of Wales, the proceedings whereof are in
a mixed manner betwixt our common law, and civil law.

England, accounting Cornwall for one, though much differing in language, is
divided into 41. parts, which are called counties or shires, the several names
whereof are these following, viz.

Berck-shire. Bedford-shire. Buckingham-shire. Bishoppricke of Durham.
Cambridge-shire. Cornwall. Cumberland. Cheshire. Devon-shire. Dorcet-shire.
Darby-shire. Essex. Gloucestershire. Huntingdon-shire. Hertford-shire.
Hereford-shire. Hampt-shire. Kent. Lincolne-shire. Lecester-shire.
Lancaster-shire. Middle-sex. Monmoth-shire. Northumberland-shire. North-folke.
Northamptonshire. Nottingham-shire. Oxfordshire. Rutland-shire.
Richmond-shire. Sussex. Surrey. Suffolk. Somersetshire. Staffordshire.
Shrop-shire. Wilt-shire. Westmore-land. Worcestershire. Warwicke-shire.
Yorke-shire.
Every shire is divided either into Hundreds, Lathes, Rapes, or Wapentakes, and
every of those into sundry parishes, and Constable-weekes, and over every shire
is one principal governor, called the Lieutenant of the shire, and a Sheriff
to collect money due unto the King, and to account for the same in the
Exchequer; as also to execute his writs and processes: and for the more
particular peace of each several part of the country, there be ordained in
every County, certain of the worthiest and wisest sort of Gentlemen, who are
called Justices or conseruators of the peace; under whom high Constables,
Coroners, petty co^stables, headboroughs, and tything-men have every one their
several offices.

England moreover, is divided into two ecclesiastical provinces, which are
governed by two spiritual persons called Archb. to wit, the Archb. of
Canterbury, (who is primate and Metrapolitan of all England,) and the Archb. of
York, and under these two Archb. are 26. Bishops, that is to say, 22. under
the Archb. of Canterbury, and 4. under the Archbishop of York.

In the Province of Canterbury are these Diocesses bounded as follows.
1 and 2 The Diocesses of Canterbury and Rochester, which have under them all
the County of Kent: 3 The Diocese of London, which has Essex, Middlesex, and
a part of Hartford shire. 4 The Diocese of Chitchester, which has Sussex. 5
The Diocese of Winchester, which has Hamptshire, Surrey, and the Isles of
Wight, Gernsie and Iersey. 6 The Diocese of Salisbury, which has Wiltshire
and Barkshire. 7 The Diocese of Excester, which has Devonshire and Cornwall.
8 The Diocese of Bath and Wels, which has Somerset shire only. 9 The
Diocese of Gloucester, which has Glocestershire. 10 The Diocese of Worcester,
which has Worcester shire, and a part of Warwick shire. 11 The Diocese of
Hereford, which has Herefordshire, and a part of Shropshire. 12 The Diocese
of Couentrie and Liechfield, which has Staffordshire, Derbyshire, and the rest
of Warwickeshire, with some part of Shropshire. 13 The Diocese of Lincoln,
which has Lincolneshire, Leicestershire, Huntingtonshire, Bedfordshire,
Buckinghamshire, and the rest of Hartfordshire. 14 The Diocese of Ely, which
has Cambridgeshire, and the I Will of Ely. 15 The Diocese of Norwich, which has
Northfolke and Suffolk. 16 The Diocese of Oxford, which has Oxfordshire. 17
The Diocese of Peterborow, which has Northamptonshire and Rutlandshire, 18
The Diocese of Bristow, which has Dorcetshire.
And to these are added the four Bishopprickes of WALES. viz.
19 The Bishop of S. David's. 20 The Bishop of Landaffe. 21 The Bishop of
Bangor. 22 The Bishop of S. Asaph.
In the Province of York are these four Diocesses comprehended within these
limits following. viz.
1 The Diocese of York, which has Yorkshire, and Nottinghamshire. 2 The
Diocese of Westchester, which has Chesshire, Richmondshire, a part of
Flintshire, and Denbighshire in Wales. 3 The Diocese of Duresme, which has
the Bishoppricke of Duresme and Northumberland. 4 The Diocese of Carlisle,
which has Cumberland, and Westmerland.
And to these are added the Bishoppricke of Sodor in the I Will Mona.

The whole number of Parish Churches, and impropriations in all these several
Diocesses are reckened about 131209.

Having thus divided the whole kingdom of England into shires and Bishops
seas; it rests, to say something of the Cities and Corporations, whereof
there be so many, and that so goodly and so well governed, by sundry Orders of
Officers, as I think but few countries in Christendom go beyond it: of all
which, London the Metrapolitan city of the Island, is most famous, both for the
great concourse of strangers, that continually flock thither from all parts of
the world: some for merchandise, some for manners: as also for the conueniencie
of the place, being situated upon the famous river of Thames, beautified with
rare and sumptuous buildings, both of Prince and Peers: (who for the most part
keep their resiance in or near unto the same, as being the only place of
Parliament, and holding of pleas for the whole Realm.) And for the great
multitude of Students and practitioners in the laws, which there keep their
Terms of pleading four times in the year, which set together, is about one
quarter, during which time the Judges and all other Courts keep their Courts
and Sessions, and at other times is vacation and ceasing from execution of the
laws: These Judges, Sergeants, and other Students and practitioners of all
sorts have their lodgings, and dyets in 14. several houses, whereof two are
only for Judges and Sergeants, and are therefore called the Sergeants Innes:
the next four are the four famous houses of Innes of Court, the only
receptacle of Gentlemen, students and Counselors, and the other eight be
inferior houses to the Innes of Court, furnished with Atturneys, Solicitors,
and young Gentlemen and Clerks, that are to live and study there for a space
as probationers, before they be thought fit to be admitted to the Innes of
Court, which eight houses be called the Innes of Chancery.

This city and suburbs is divided into six and twenty wards, and about an
hundred and twenty Parishes: The chiefest Magistrate there under the King, is
the Lord Mayor, under whom are diverse inferior Officers over every several
company and ward, who do all of them attend the Mayor when he takes his oath in
such seemly manner, as he that beholds their stately Pageants and devises,
their passage by water to Westminster and back again: their going to Paul's,
the infinite number of attendants of Aldermen, and all sorts of people: their
rare and costly banquets, and all their form of government, surely I suppose,
he will hold opinion, that no city of the world has the like.

This superficial commendation of this renowned city of London shall suffice
for all: and therefore I will pass over the rest in silence, for that there is
no one thing worthy memory in any city or town of the whole Realm, that
the like or better is not to be found in the city of London: the Universities
only excepted, which are the nurse-gardens, and Seminaries of all good arts
and sciences. And of these there be two, Oxford and Cambridge, which consisting
of sundry Colleges and Hals erected and founded by godly and devout founders
and benefactors, and endowed with large rents, and revenues, for the
maintenance of poor scholars, who are there maintained, and instructed in
learning of all sorts: and being next unto London, the two Worthies of our
kingdom; and in truth the most famous Universities in Christendom. I think
it not amiss (omitting to speak any thing of the citizens and townsmen, or
the divided government betwixt them and the Universities) to recite in
particular the names of the Colleges and Hals in both Universities, their
founders and benefactors, and the times of their several foundations.

First therefore of Oxford, (without addition of superiority, for that (as the
Proverb is) As proud goes behind as before:) there be contained in that
University, (besides nine hals, viz. Gloucester hall, Broad-gate, S. Mary hall,
Albaine hall, White hall, New Inn, Edmund hall, Heart hall, and Magdalin hall;
which differ from the Colleges, for that the Colleges have lands to maintain
their Societies, which the hals in Oxford do want; and therefore though al
scholer-like exercises be there practiced as well as in the Colleges, yet in
respect of the want of maintenance they do in part resemble the Ins in court)
sixteen Colleges, that is to say:

1 University College founded by Alured king of the Saxons, in the year of
our Lord, 872. 2 Baylyoll College founded by John Baylyoll, king of the Scots,
in the year of our Lord, 1263. 3 Martin College, founded by Walter Martin,
bish. of Rochester, in the year of our Lord, 1273. 4 Excester College, and
Heart hall founded by Staphel^n bishop of Excester, in the year of our Lord,
1316. which said College was much augmented by Sir VVillia^ Peeter, Secretary
to king Henry the eight, in the year of our Lord, 1566. 5 Oriall College,
founded by Adam Brown, brought up in the University of Oxford by king Edward
the second, in the year of our Lord, 1323. 6 Queens College, founded by
Robert Eglesfield, Chaplin to Philippe, king Edward the thirds wife, in the
year of our Lord, 1349. 7 New College, founded by Willyam VVicham bishop of
Winchester, in the year of our Lord, 1375. 8 Lincoln College, founded by
Richard Flemming, Bishop of Lincoln, and increased by Thomas Rotheram, Bishop
of the same Diocese, in the year of our Lord, 1420. 9 All Souls College,
founded by Henry Chechelsey, Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year of our Lord,
1437. 10 Magdalin College, and Magdalin Hall, founded by William VVainflet,
Bishop of Winchester, and Chancellor of England, in the year of our Lord, 1456.
11 Brazen-nose College, founded by William Smith, Bishop of Lincoln, in the
year of our Lord, 1513 and lately increased by Doctor Nowell, Deane of Paul's.
12 Corpus Christi College, founded by Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester, in the
year of our Lord, 1516. 13 Christ's Church, founded by Cardinal Wolsey, in the
year of our Lord, 1526. and endowed with lands by king Henry the eight. 14 S.
John's College, founded by Sir Thomas White, Mayor of London, in the year of
our Lord, 1557. 15 Trinity College, founded by Sir Thomas Pope Knight, in the
year of our Lord, 1566. 16 Jesus College, founded by Hugh Price, Doctor of
the civil Law.
There is another College now in building, the foundation whereof is already
laid by M. Waddam of Merryfield in Somersetshire.

CAmbridge was first a common school, founded by Sigebert, king of the East
English, in the year of our Lord God, 637. since which time it has been so
increased and augmented, that at this day it is equal to Oxford: it consists
(reckoning Michaell house, and Kings hall for two, which have been since added
to Trinity College) of eighteen Halles and Colleges, the Halls having lands
belonging to them as well as the Colleges: for there is no difference there
betwixt Halles and Colleges, but in name only, saving that the Colleges have
more lands then the Hals, and therefore maintain more Scholars then the hals
do: the names of the houses, and by whom and when they were founded and
augmented, is as follows:

1 Peter-house, founded by Hugh Bishop of Ely, in the year of our Lord, 1280.
2 Michaell house, founded by Sir Henry Stanton Knight, one of the Judges of the
common Bench, in the year of our Lord, 1324. 3 Trinity hall, founded by
William Bateman, in the year of our Lord, 1354. 4 Corpus Christi College,
founded by John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, in the year of our Lord God,
1344. 5 Clare hall, was first called Scholar hall, and afterward the
University hall, and being burnt with fire, was afterward re-edified by
Elizabeth, daughter of Gilbert Clare, Earl of Leicester, in the year of our
Lord God, 1326. and by her called Clare hall. 6 Pembroke hal founded by Mary
Countess of Pembroke, in the year of our Lord, 1343. 7 Kings hall, repaired
by king Edward the third, in the year of our Lord, 1376. 8 Kings College,
founded by king Henry the sixth, in the year of our Lord, 1441. 9 Queens
College, founded by Margaret wife to king Henry the sixth, and finished by
Elizabeth, wife to K. Edward the fourth, in the year of our Lord God, 1448. 10
Katherine hall, founded by Doctor Woodlabe Provost of Kings College in
Cambridge, in the year of our Lord, 1459. 11 Jesus College, founded by John
Alcocke, Bishop of Ely, in the year of our Lord, 1504. 12 Christ's College,
founded by Queen Margaret, Grandmother to King Henry the eight. 13 Saint John's
College, founded by the said Queen Margaret, in the year of our Lord God,
1506. 14 Magdalin College, founded by the Lord Audley, in the year of our
Lord, 1509. and enlarged by Sir Christopher Wrey, Lord chief Justice of
England. 15 Trinity College founded by k. Henry the 8. for the enlarging
whereof he added thereunto Michael house and Kings hall, and made thereof one
College in the year of our Lord, 1546. so as now the names of Michaell house,
and kings hall is almost worn out of memory. 16 Gonvel and Caius College,
first founded by one Gonvell, about the year of our Lord, 1348. and perfected
by John Caius Doctor of Physic, and by him called Gonuell and Caius College,
in the year of our Lord, 1557. 17 Emanuell College, founded by Sir Walter
Mildmay, in the year of our Lord, 1588. 18 Sidney-Sussex College, founded by
Francis Sidney, Countess of Sussex, for the erecting whereof she bequeathed at
her death five thousand pounds, it was begun in the year of our Lord, 1597.
Now having thus far spoken of the Country in particular, it rests to say
something with like breuity of the several sorts of people that inhabit the
same, their proceedings in courses of law, as well spiritual as temporal, and
their several Courts. The whole number of English men may therefore be divided
into these four ranckes or degrees of people, that is to say, Gentlemen or
Noblemen, Citizens, Yeomen, and artificers or laborers.

Of Gentlemen or Nobility there be two sorts, to wit, the king himself, the
Prince, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Vicounts and Barons. And this sort of
Gentlemen are called Nobilitas mayor, and the second sort of Gentlemen or
Nobility, which are also called nobilitas minor, consists of Knights,
Esquires, and private Gentlemen, into which rank of gentry are added Students
of the laws and scholars in the Universities: next unto the Gentry are
citizens whose fame and authority (for the most part) extends no further
than their own cities and boroughes wherein they live, and bear rule, saving
that some few of them have voices in our high Senate of Parliament: The third
order or degree are the Yeomanrie, which are men that live in the country upon
competent livings of their own, have servants to do their business for them,
serve upon Iuries and Inquests, and have generally more employment in the
government of the commonwealth, then citizens have. And the last and lowest
sort of our people are artificers or laborers, which though they be rude and
base in respect of our gentry, yet are they much improoued and bettered by
conuersing with Gentlemen, citizens, and yeomen: so as if those authors were
now living, that have written so contemptuously of all estates of our people
under the degree of gentry, and saw the civility now generally practiced
amongst most of us, they would not for some few of the rascalitie, censure and
condemn all as base and ignoble.

All these several sorts and degrees of people in our kingdom, may more
briefly be divided into two Orders or ranckes, that is to say, the Nobility
and the Commons: under the title of Nobility are comprehended all the
Nobilitas mayor, together with the Bishops that have place in the upper house
of Parliament: and by the commons are meant the nobilitas minor, citizens,
yeomen, and laborers, who by common consent elect from amongst them Knights
and Burgesses to possess the lower house of Parliament, who have their voices
there in the name of the whole multitude of commons, for the making and
establishing of laws, ordonances, and statutes.

The Parliament therefore is the highest and most absolute Sessions or judicial
Senate in the whole kingdom, consisting of the King himself: and the Lords
spiritual and temporal in their own persons, which is the higher house, and
the whole body of the commons represented by the Knights and Burgesses lawfully
elected, and those are called the lower house.

In this high Court of Parliament are such new laws made and ordained, and such
old statutes abrogated and annihilated in part or in all, as are agre^^ upon
by consent of both houses, and confirmed by the King, so as whatsoever is there
decreed and constituted, is inuiolably to be observed, as established by the
general assembly of the whole kingdom.

There be three manner of ways by one custom of England, whereby definitive
judgments are given, by act of Parliament, by battle, and by great assise. The
manner of giving Judgment in the Parliament in matters depending betwixt Prince
and subject, or party and party, concerning lands and inheritances, is by
preferring of bills into the houses of Parliament, and by the allowance or
disallowance thereof: but such bills are seldom received, for that the
Parliament is chiefly summoned and assembled, for the settling and establishing
of matters for the good of the King and commonwealth, and not to busy
themselves in private quarrels.

The trial by battle likewise, though it be not utterly abrogated, and
altogether annihilated, yet is it quite grown out of use at this day.

So as the most usual manner of Judgment, is by the verdict of twelve men,
lawfully impaneled and sworn to give a true verdict concerning the matter in
question, be it for life or land, or any thing tending to the hurt or good of
any subject whatsoever.

These twelve men ought to be Legales homines, as we term them, that is, men
of good quality, fame, and ability, and they are to give their verdict
according to their evidence, before a lawful Judge, in their Sessions, at
terms and times usually appointed for those purposes. And for that there be
many suites of diverse natures, therefore be the trials thereof in diverse courts
and before diverse Judges, whereof the chiefest bench or tribunal seat of
Judgment is the Kings bench; so called, for that the Kings of England have sat
there themselves in person, and this Court is chiefly for pleas of the Crown,
the Judges whereof be called Justices of the Kings bench, and they be commonly
four or five in number, whereof one is head, and therefore called the Lord
chief Justice of the Kings bench, and by that place he is also Lord Chief
Justice of England.

Next unto the Kings bench, is the Court of Common pleas, which is for all
matters touching lands and contracts betwixt party and party: and of this
Court be likewise four or five Judges, the chiefest whereof is called the Lord
chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and this court may well be called the
Common Pleas, as being the chiefest place for the exercise of the Common law.
And there may none plead at the Common pleas bar, but Sergegeants at the law
only; whereas in all other Courts, counselors that be called to the bar may
plead their Clyents causes, as well as Sergeants.

The third Court for practice of the common law, is the Exchequer, where all
causes are heard that belong to the Kings Treasury. The Judges of this Court
are the Lord high Treasurer of England, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, the
Lord chief Baron, and three or four other Barons, which be called Barons of
the Exchequer.

Besides these three Courts of the common law, and the court of the Council
for the Marches of Wales, whereof I have spoken before, there is a Court for
the North part of England, which is likewise called the Council, having a
President, Justices and assistants, as in the Council of Wales, and the same
form of proceeding. And for the more ease and quiet of the subject, the King
by his commission sends the Judges and Barons of the Exchequer, twice a year
into every several County of the country, as well to see the laws executed
against malefactors, as for the trial and determining of causes depending
betwixt party and party.

These two Sessions are usually called the Assizes or Goal delivery, and their
manner of proceedings, is by Jurors who are to give their verdicts according to
evidence.

And for because the time of these Judges commission, is over short to
determine all matters, that may arise in half a year, the Justices of peace
in their several Counties, have their Sessions likewise, which be kept four
times in the year, and be therefore called the quarter Sessions; in which
Sessions are heard and determined all petty causes, for the more ease of the
Judges in their circuits.

And for the better maintenance of peace in every part of the Realm, there be
diverse other petty Courts, as county Courts, hundred Courts, town Courts,
Leets, Court Barons, and such like: all which hold plea according to the course
of the common law.

Next unto these Courts of common law is the Court of Star Chamber, which is
the court of the kings Council: and therein sit as Judges the L. Chancellor as
chief, the L. Treasurer, and the rest of the privy Council both spiritual and
te^porall, to gether with the chief Justices of both benches. And in this
court be censured all criminal causes, as perjury, forgerie, cousenage,
ryots, maintenance, and such like. The court of Wards and Liueries is next,
which is a court of no long continuance, being first ordained by Henry the 8.
the matters that are determinable in that court, are as touching wards and
wardships: and the Judges are the Master of the wards and liueries, the
Attorney of the court of wards, and other officers and assistants.

Then is there the Admirals court, which is only for punishment of misdemeanors
done at sea, the Judges of which court be the Lord high Admiral of England,
and a Judge, with other officers.

The Duchy court, which is a court for the determining of matters depending
within the Duchy of Lancaster, wherein be Judges, the Chancellor of the Duchy,
and the Attorney.

And a late erected court called the court of the Queens revenues, for the
deciding of controversies amongst the Queens tenants.

Next unto these, are the courts of Equity, which are, the Chancery, and the
court of Requests. The court of Chancery, which is commonly called the court of
conscience, is chiefly for the mitigation of the rigor of the common law,
wherein the Lord high Chancellor of England is chiefest Judge and moderator, to
whom are joined as assistants, the M. of the Rolls, and certain grave Doctors
of the civil law, which are usually called Masters of the Chancery.

The court of Requests is much like to the Chancery, and is chiefly for the
kings servants: the Judges whereof, are the Masters of Requests, which be
always reverent men, and well seen in the civil law: and one of them is ever
attendant on the King to receive supplications, and to answer them according to
the Kings pleasure.

Having thus passed over the several courts of common law, the courts of
Equity, and those which are of a mixed nature, betwixt the common and civil
law, I will only name the spiritual courts, the chiefest whereof are these:

The first and most principal, is the convocation of the Clergy, which is a
Synod of the chiefest of the Clergy of the whole Realm, held only in
Parliament time, in a place called the Convocation house, where cannons are
ordained for church-gouernment. And this court may be called a general
Council: next unto which are the particular Synods of both Provinces,
Canterbury and York, and are called provincial Synods. Then is there the
Archb. of Ca^terburies court, called the Arches: the court of Audience: the
Prerogative court: the court of Faculties: and the court of Peculiars; with
many other courts in each several Dioces. In all which courts, what matters
are there handled, their Judges and assistants, and all their whole manner of
proceedings, I leave to the report of such, as are better acquainted in those
courts.

And thus much may suffice for the present estate of our country, as it is now
in the ninth year of the reign of our dread Soueraign Lord, K. James the
first, whom God grant long to rule and reign over us.

OF IRELAND.
HIBERNIA, an Island bordering upon Britain on the North and West side, and
much about half as big as Britain, was so called (according to some) ab
hyberno tempore, that is to say, of the winter season. The ground there is so
exceeding rank, and the grass so pleasant and delicious withal, that their
beasts in Summer time will kill themselves with feeding and supersluosly
grazing, if they be not driven from pasture some part of the day.

This Island breeds neither spider nor toade, nor any other venomous or
infectious creature, nor will any live that are brought thither out of other
Countries, but dye instantly as soon as they do but touch this Countries soil.

Bees there be none, the air is very temperate and the earth fruitful, and
yet be the people exceeding barbarous, uncivil, and cruel. For those which
prove vanquishers in their battles, swill and drink up the blood of their
slain enemies, and then defile and gore their own faces with it, And whether
they do right or wrong, it is all one unto them.

When a woman is delivered of a male child, the first meat she gives him,
she puts into his mouth with her husbands sword point, signifying by that
manner of feeding, (and also praying after her country fashion) that the child
may dye no other death, but in the field amongst his enemies. Their greatest
gallants adorn the hilts and pummels of their swords, with beasts teeth, which
be as white as Iuorie, and brought thither out of other countries. And their
chiefest delight and greatest glory is to be soldiers.

Those which inhabit the hilly and mountainous part of the country, live
upon milk and apples, and are more given to hunting and sporting, then to
husbandry. The Sea betwixt England and Ireland is very raging, unquiet, and
troublesome all the year long, and (but in summer) hardly nauigable: Yet do
they sail over it in boats or whirries made of Ozier twigs, and covered with
Ox hides or buffe skins: they abstain from meat all the while they are upon
the seas. And this sea (according to the opinion of the best writers) is in
breadth one hundred and twenty English miles. The inhabitants of the I Will of
Sillura, retain Syllura.
as yet their old customs and course of life, money they have none, nor no
marketting, but give and take one of an other, furnishing themselves rather by
exchanging one thing for an other, then by buying and selling: They believe in
the gods, and as well women as men, be very skilful in predictions and
sooth-saying.

Those which possess the Isles called Eubudes (whereof there be five) live
altogether on milk and fish, not caring The Jsles called Eubudes.
for corn nor any kind of fruits. These Islands are separated one from an
other only by a little river, and are all under the government of one King,
who possesses nothing in private to himself, but occupies all in commune
with his subjects.

Their laws enforce him to equity and right, and least coueteousnesse should
divert him from truth, he learneth Justice through poverty, as being
maintained at the public charge, without having any thing proper to himself,
no not so much as a wife, in so much as enjoying the company of women by turns
with his subjects, he is utterly deprived of all hope of issue, that he may
justly say are his own.

The utmost Island in the British seas is Thyle, wherein, in the Summer
solstice, when the Sun is in Cancer, The Island called Thyle now called
Jsland.
there is almost no night, and as little day in the winter solstice: The
Inhabitants in the beginning of the spring live amongst their cattaile with
herbs and milk, and in winter with fruits of trees, for the Island yields
great store of apples: They have certain marriages, but enjoy their women in
commune like the Inhabitants of the Eubudes.

There be other Islands also in the Mediterranean sea toward the West, which
of the Greeks be called Gymnesiae, because the people thereof go naked, but
of the The Gymnesiae or Baleares.
Romans, and by the Inhabitants themselves, they are called Baleares, of
slinging or casting of stones, because they be more expert in that exercise,
then any other people. The biggest of these Islands, is the greatest Island
that is excepting seven, which are Sicilia, Sardinia, Creta, Eubaea, Cyprus,
Corsica and Lesbos: It is distant from Iberia now called Spain one days
sailing.

The lesser of them lies more Eastward, and abounds with all kind of
cattaile, and especially mules, which be greater then other country mules, and
will bray louder: both of these Islands are fertile and fruitful, and well
replenished with people. They be very greedy of wine (whereof their country
yields none) and in steed of oil (which is also wanting) they anoint their
bodies with swines grease, and masticke mingled together. Women there are in
far more estimation then men, in so much as if a woman be taken prisoner,
they will ransom her with three or four men.

Their dwellings are in hollow caves, made in steep rocks, which are their
only covering and defense for their bodies: And they are so far out of love
with gold and silver, as they forbid it to be brought into their Island,
supposing that by wanting money, they are in security from all plots of
treason: And therefore at such time as they served in the Carthaginian wars,
they brought home nothing with them, but wine and women, which they bought with
the money they received for pay. Their manner of marriages are both strange and
prodigious, for all the brides family and friends that are present at the
nuptials, lie with her one after an other according to their age, and the
bridegroom last of all: the form of burials also is proper to themselves,
and different from all other people, for they dismember and cut the dead body
into small pieces, and put them into a vessel and so cover the vessel with
stones.

Their weapons are every one a sling, and there budgets to put stones in, the
one he hangs about his neck, an other he guirdeth about his waste, and the
third he carries in his hand, their stones are bigger then other men are well
able to throw, and yet will throw them so strongly that they fly with such
violence as if they were shot out of a pecce: And with these stones when they
assault any city, will they wound and kill their enemies that guard and defend
the walls and bulwarks of the city, and bre^^ their shields and helmets,
and all other kind of armor: and they will level so rightly, as they will
very seldom miss the mark they aim at, for they be trained up in this
kind of exercise from their childhood, and thereunto constrained by their
mothers, who will set a piece of bread upon a stake for them to throw at, and
give them nothing to eat, before they have stroke the bread off the stake with
a stone.

Now having entered into the relation of Islands, opportunity is offered to
speak somewhat of a new found Island sytuated in the South part of the Ocean
sea, and Of the Jsland found out by Iambolus.
of the strange things that are reported to be in that Island, as also of the
cause and manner of the finding thereof, which was thus.

One Iambolus being in his youth trained up as a scholar, after the death of
his father (who was a merchant) betook himself to merchandise, and sailing
into Arabia for spices, he with all his partners were surprised and taken by
Pirates and Robbers, and one of his fellows and himself being by those
thieves set into the fields to keep sheep, were afterward found and taken
away by certain maritine Aethiopians, and by them carried over into Aethiopia,
where (for because they were strangers) they were assigned to be a sacrifice
and expiation to the gods of that Country, for those Aethiopians which lived
upon the sea coast, had an ancient custom of six hundred years continuance,
which they received by Oracle from their gods, to expiate and make satisfaction
to their gods with two men: the manner whereof was this: They had a little
bark or boat, provided for that purpose, that was able to brook the seas,
and which two men were able to govern: and into this vessel they put Iambolus
and his companion, and victuals for six months; commanding them that
(according to their Oracle) they should direct their ship and sail South ward,
and that then they should attain to a fortunate Island, the people whereof
were marvelous courteous and civil and flourished in great felicity: Into which
Island if they arrived in safety, their own Country should for six hundred
years after enjoy perfect peace and happiness: But if (through the terror or
tediousness of the seas) they diuerted their course, that then (as impious and
wicked varlets) they were causers of great calamities that should fall upon
their region.

This done and the boat lanched out, those maritine Aethiopians are said to
keep that day holy, and to do sacrifice to the seas, praying for their good
success, and that their expiation, may take good effect: When Iambolus and his
companion were thus committed to the mercy of the sea, and had been long
tossed in storms and tempests, after four months sailing, they arrived into
an Island in form round, and in compass about five thousand stadia, into
which when they were entered, some of the Inhabitants came to meet them, and
some others running toward them (being greatly amazed, and wondering at the
coming of strangers into their Island) received them very courteously, and
bountifully offered them such things as their country afforded.

The Inhabitants of that Island, are nothing like to us, either in stature or
manners, for though they carry the same proportion of body and members, yet be
they far taller then we are, the most of them being above four cubits hie,
and notwithstanding their exceeding height, their bones be not solid like
ours, but flexible like nerves or sinews, by which means they exceed us in
agility and nimblenesse of body, and they are so strong with all, as what ever
they grasp with their hands can hardly be wrested from them. They be a very
beautiful, comely and well featured people, and their skins so smooth and so
slike, as you can hardly perceive any wrinkle or hair upon any part of their
bodies.

The hollownesse of their ears is much wider then ours, and their tongues as
far different, for nature (assisted with their ingenious wits and
dispositions) has endued them with this extraordinary privilege, that their
tongues are naturally so cleft and divided from the root to the tip, as they
seem to have every one two tongues, by which means they do not only speak
a human and intelligible voice, but they can truly imitate the chirping and
singing of diverse birds likewise, and that which is more strange, they will
talk and confer with two several persons, of several matters, at one and
the self same time, the one part of the tongue speaking and giving answer
unto one, and the other part to the other: The air is there very pure and
wholesome all the year long (according to the saying of the poet, that apples,
pears and grapes will rotte and corrupt upon the trees and vines) and the
days and nights are ever of an equal length, and when the Sun is directly
over their heads, there is no shadow of any thing toward the South.

All the people of one stock or kindred live together, so as they exceed not
the number of four hundred: their chiefest abode is in the fields, for the
earth naturally produces great store of fruits, without tillage or travel, in
so much as through the virtue and quality of the Island, and temperature of the
air, they have more then they are able to spend.

There be a kind of reeds growing in that Island, which bear great store of
fruit like unto white vetches, the fruit of these reeds they gather and
sprinkle with warm water, and then every grain will be as big as a Doves
egg, which they afterward grind or beat into meal, and make thereof a
kind of bread, which in taste is most pleasant and delicious.

There be many great springs, and fountains of water, whereof some be hot
and serve for bathes, and to cure diseases, and some cold, and withal
marvelous sweet and very physical likewise.

They be a people very industrious and greedy of learning, and especially of
Astrology: Their letters which they use in sense and signification, are eight
and twenty, but their carecters are but seven in number; for every caractar
has four several significations or interpretations, and they write not from
the left hand toward the right, as we do, but begin at the top and write
downwards.

They be very long of life, the most of them living the full age of a hundred
and fifty years, and (for the most They have a time prefixed how long to live.
part) without any sickness at all: and if any hap to fall either into an ague
or any other infirmity of body, they are compelled by their law to die
forthwith: They are also appointed how long they shall live, which age when
they have accomplished, they willingly procure their own deaths, some by one
means and some by an other: There is an herb in that country, upon which if
any one lay his body, he falls into a sweet and delectable An admirable
herb.
slumber, and in that sheep departs his life without pain.

Marriages they have none, but women be there common to all, and children
equally loved of al and brought up in common amongst al, so as no man can say,
this is my wife, or this is my child: yet oftentimes they take the children
from their nurses, least mothers should afterward reknowledge their own
sons: through which community it happens that (being void of ambition and
affectation, or curious desire of that which nature denies them) they live
quietly, and peaceably without sedition or dissension. There be also in that
Island certain beasts, which though they be little of body, yet in respect A
rare beast.
of their nature and virtue of their blood, they be most rare and admirab,
they be of a round body like unto a Tortoise or Seacrable, and have two lines
crossing their middle, upon every end whereof stands an ear and an eye, so
as they hear with four ears and see with four eyes, and yet have but one
belly or paunch that receives their meat, and round about their body grow
many feet, with which they can go backward and forward at their pleasure, the
blood of this beast is said to be of a marvelous strange efficacy, for if a
body be cut and mangled into pieces (so as it appear to have life in it): and
be anointed with the blood of this beast, every part will instantly grow to
other, and the body will be whole again.

Every family or company that live together, do likewise breed and norish up
great birds of a diverse nature, and by those birds they make trial how their
children will prove afterward, for they set them when they be very young
upon the backs of the birds, and if they sit fast when the birds biginne to
flutter and fly, without fear of falling, those children they bring up, but
if they show themselves dastardly and timorous, they are rejected and thrust
away, and suffered to live no longer, as being unprofitable for any exercise
of the mind: And the eldest of every kindred or company that so live together
is Lord, and commander over the rest, to whom they yield obedience, as to their
King, and when he accomplisheth the age of an hundred and fifty years, he
depriueth himself of life (for so their law commands) and he that is next unto
him in age takes the government upon him: The sea that incloseth the Island is
very boisterous and rugged, yet is the water most pleasant and delightsome in
taste, the North pole and many other stars which are seen in our Horison
appear not in theirs.

There be other seven Islands of like quantity, and of like distance one from
an other, and endued with like Seven other Jslands.
manners and laws as this is: The Inhabitants of these Islands use the fruits
of the earth (which she bountifully affords of her own accord) very
sparingly, for their diet is simple, and they covet for nothing but to suffice
nature, they eat flesh sometimes boylde and sometimes broyld, and dress
their meat themselves, rejecting the Art of Cookery, and all seasoning of
their meats with salt or spices, as frivolous and unnecessary. They worship
the Firmament, the Sun, and the rest of the celestial bodies, they catch
diverse sorts of fishes and birds, and they have great store of Olyue trees and
Vines, which naturally hold their increase, so as they have Olives and Grapes
in abundance, without travel or cost.

These Islands also produce serpents that be great ones, but nothing hurtful,
the flesh whereof is marvelous sweet and delicious. Their garments are of a
sine white Cotton or Down, which grows in the middle of Reeds, which being
dyed with the Iuyse of these sea fishes that colors purple: they make
themselves purple garments thereof. There be also diverse sorts of living
creatures of strange and almost incredible natures: They observe a certain
order and strict course in their diet, eating but only one kind of meat
upon one day, for some day they eat fishes, an other day fowls, an other
flesh of beasts, and sometimes Oil, and the table where they eat their meat
is very mean and simple.

They be addicted to diverse exercises, for some serve and are served in
course, some are employed in fishing, some in fowling, some in sundry Arts and
manual occupations, and all of them in general are busied in some one thing
or other that redoundeth to their common good.

In their sacred ceremonies, and upon holy days, they sing lawdes and himnes
in honor of their gods, and especially of the Sun, to whom they dedicate
themselves and their Islands.

They bury their dead bodies upon the sea coast, covering the carcass with
sand, that by the flowing and inundation of the waters, there may be a great
heap of sand in the place where the corpse are buried.

The canes whereof they eat the fruit (as they say) do increase and decrease
according to the disposition of the Moon: The water of their fountains is
both sweet and wholesome, always hot, unless it be mingled either with wine
or cold water.

When Iambolus and his companion had lived in that Island seven years, they
were forced to depart, for the Ilanders held them to be evil livers, and of
bad behavior and conversation, and therefore providing their ship ready, and
victualling her, they set forward on their journey, though fore against their
wills, and at the four months end they came to the King of India, by whom
they were afterward safely conducted through Persia, and brought into Greece.

Of the Island called Taprobane and of the manners of the Inhabitants. CAP. 26.
TAPROBANE before man's venterousnesse (by exquisit, searching into Of Taprobane.
every creek and corner of the sea) had truly and thoroughly discovered it,
was held to be (as it were) an other world, and that wherein the Antipodes were
supposed to dwell: But Alexander the great, by his prowess and valor,
removed the ignorance of this common error, which did much augment and
increase the glory of his name: for Onesicritus the prefect of his navy,
being by him sent to search out what manner of land it was, what commodities it
yielded, and how and by whom it was inhabited, made it most apparent and
manifest unto us.

The length of the Island is seven thousand stadia, and five thousand in
breadth, and it has a river running through the middle of it, that deuideth it
into two parts: Some part of this Island is wholly replenished with beasts, and
Elephants, which be far bigger then India breeds any, and some part of it
is well peopled: There be great store of Pearls and precious stones of
diverse kinds: It is situated East and West, and begins at the sea called
fretum Indioe: from Prasla a country in India into Taprobane, at the first
discovery thereof, was the space of 25. days sailing, but it was with such
boats as the river of Nilus carried, that were made of reeds, for at this day
with our ships it is not above seven days sail.

The sea that deuideth the Island in twain, in many places is very shallow,
being not above seven foot deep, but in some other places again, the
channel is so exceeding deep that no anchor can reach the bottom: In
sailing they observe not the course of the stars, for the North pole and the
seven stars do never appear to their view, and the Moon is no longer
seen in their Horizon, but from the sixth day after his change to the
sixteenth, but the clear and radiant star called Canopus shines there very
bright, and the Sun rises upon their right hands and sets upon their
left. With coin they were altogether unacquainted, until the reign of the
Emperor Claudius, and it is reported that they were greatly amazed at the
sight of money, because it was stamped with sundry figures and similitudes, and
yet in weight and substance was all one: In stature and bigness of body, they
exceed all other men, of what nation so ever.

They dye and color their hair brown, their heirs be gray or blew, their
visage grimme and stern, and their voice harshe and terrible. Those which dye
an untimely death, live commonly till they be a hundred year old, but those
which spend out the full course of nature, live till they be marvelous old,
farte exceeding man's ordinary frayltie: They never sleep in the day time, and
but part of the night neither, for they ris^ exceeding early: Their buildings
be mean and low, and their victuals always alike, they have great store of
Apples, but no Vines.

They honor Hercules as their God. Their Kings are elected as well by the
voices of the commons, as by the nobility, for the peoples care is to choose
one of great clemency, and vnprooueable manners, and such a one as is well
stricken in years, and withal that has no children, for he which is a father,
is not there admitted to be a King, be he never so good and virtuous: and if
the King at any time during his reign, hap to have a child, he is therefore
instantly deposed, and deprived of all Princely jurisdiction: and this they
do, for because they will not have their kingdom become hereditary: Moreover,
be their King never so just and upright, yet will they not commit the absolute
government wholly into his hands, for to the end he should not be sole Judge in
capital causes, there be forty Rectors or Guides annexed unto him as his
assistants, and if the judgment of the King, and his forty assistants seem
partial or distasteful to any one, he may from them appeal to the people, who
have likewise seventy Judges allowed them for the determining of such causes as
come to them by way of appeal, and the sentence that is pronounced by these
seventy Judges must of necessity stand inviolable.

The King in his apparel differs much from the people, and if he be found
guilty of any offense, and thereof convicted, he dies for it, yet not with
such a death as any one should lay violent hands upon him, but by common
consent he is shut up in some close place from the sight and company of all
men, and there famished to death.

This people be generally addicted to husbandry, and hunting of Tigers and
Elephants, for other common beasts they little regard: and some delight in
fishing for shell fishes, the shells weereof be so big, as one shell will
make a house sufficient to contain a whole family: The greater part of this
Island is burned with the heat of the Sun, and is therefore desert, upon the
side of the Island beats a sea that is very green. They esteem much of gold,
whereof, and of all sorts of precious stones, they garnish and beautify their
pots. They have great store of Marbles and Margarites, and very big ones.

And these be the people, countries and nations, whose manners, customs and
institutions, are commended unto The conclusion of the book.
us by Historiographers, and which by any means I could collect out of them:
yet I confess there be many other, which I have either wholly omitted, or
lightly passed over, because I could not write more of them, than I found in
other Authors, having never by traveling into those parts, been eye witness
of them my self, nor could otherwise attain to the perfect knowledge thereof,
neither do I think it possible for me or any man else, to know and declare
the manners of all nations, but God only, to whom nothing is hidden, nor
nothing impossible, for he only it is that first laid the foundation of the
earth, it was he that first founded the depth and bottom of the sea, and
pointed unto us the passages through the deep, he only it is that so
bountifully has bestowed upon us, wealth, dignities, honor and riches, and all
other commodities necessary for our being, and he it is that has allotted
unto every one his profession and course of life wherein to employ himself,
for some he has ordained to be husbandmen, permitting then to grow wealthy
by vnripping the bowels of the earth, to some others he has given the sea,
wishing them to provide their livings, some by fishing, and some by
merchandise, some others he has addicted to the study of Sciences and
Philosophy, that thereby they may attain to honor and estimation, and some
others he has put in places of authority to govern and praecede the rest: And
therefore it is no marvel, that all men are not of one condition, nor of one
nature, nor yet endued with like manners, seeing we perceive such difference
and variety in kingdoms and countries, as that one country produces white
people, an other swaithy, an other tawny, and some clean black, or like unto
flowers which grow in Assyria: and even so has God appointed, that people
should be of variable minds and dispositions, as other things are, and that
every one should rest contented with that course of life, that God has
appointed for him.

FINIS.
The manners of diverse nations, collected out of the works of NICHOLAS
DAMASCEN.
THE Thyni (which be a people of Of the Thyni.
Thrace) receive such as have suffered shipwreck, or fallen into poverty by
their own defaults, very courteously and friendly, and all strangers likewise
which come willingly unto them, are highly honored; but those which come
perforce, whether they will or no are as severely punished.

The Aritoni kill no kind of beast, they have their Oracles Of the Ariton^.
written in lots, which they keep in golden couers.

The Dardani (a people of Illyrium) be washed only Of the Dardani.
three times in all their lives, that is to say, when they be borne, when they
be married, and when they lie a dying.

The Galactophagi (a people of Scythia) live not in Of the Gelactophagi.
houses as most of the other Scythians do, their sustenance consists for the
most part of Mares milk, which serves them both for meat and drink: They be
seldom overcome in battle for that their provision of victuals is in every
place and at all turns in readiness. This people forced Darius to return
home without conquest: they be marvelous just one toward an other, as having
both wives and wealth in common to all: they salute old men by calling them
their fathers, the young men their children, and their equals brethren: of this
people was Anacharsis, one of the seven wise men, who came into Greece to
learn the laws and ordinances of other nations: Homer remembers this people,
where he says, the Mysi fight nigh at hand, the Agaui milk Mares, and the
Galactophagi and Abij be most just men. And the reason why he calls them
Abij, is, either because they would not till the earth, or for that they lived
without houses, or else because they only used bows in the wars (for a bow
of the Poets is often called Bios: there is not one amongst them all (as is
reported) that is either stirred with envy, swelled with hatred, or stricken
with fear, by reason of their exceeding great Justice, and community of all
things. The women there be as warlike as the men, and go with them to the
wars when need requires, and therefore it may well be true, that the Amazons
be women of such valerous and generous spirits, as that they went forth with an
army unto Athens and Scicily, at such time as their abode was about the poole
of Maeotis.

The women of Iberia do once every year being their Of the Iberi.
whole years work, into an open and public place, in presence of all the
people where certain men be elected by voices, as Judges to censure of their
labors, and those which by them are adjudged most laborious, are most honored,
and in highest estimation: they have also a girdle of a certain measure,
within the compass whereof, if the belly of any will not be comprehended, they
be thereby much disgraced.

The Vmbrici in their battles against their enemies, Of the Vmbrici.
hold it unfitting for the vanquished to survive, and that it is necessary
either to overcome the enemy, or to be slain themselves: This people when
any controversy happens amongst themselves, fight armed, as if they made
war against their open enemies, and he which kills his adversary in fight,
is supposed to have the iustest cause.

The Celtae (a people inhabiting near the Ocean) account it a disgrace for any
one to withdraw himself, or Of the Celtae.
lean his body to a wall, or house: when any inundation comes toward them
from the sea, they arm themselves to meet the flood, and make resistance
until they be drowned, never retiring back, nor showing the least fear of
death any manner of way: They wear their swords as well when they be occupied
in the affairs of their commonwealth, as in the wars, and a greater
punishment is infllicted upon those which kill strangers then Citizens, for
the first is punished with death, the other with banishment: And those above
all others be most honored, which atchiuing any victory, have thereby
purchased any ground for their public use: the gates of their houses be never
shut but stand always open.

Amongst the Pedalians (a people of India) not he Of the Pedalij.
which is chief in the sacrifice, but he that is most prudent of all those
which be present, deuineth, and they desire nothing of the gods in their
prayers but Justice, only the Praysij or Phrasij succor with sustenance their
neighbors afflicted by famine.

The people called Telchines dwelled first in the I Will of Creete, and afterward
inhabited the I Will of Cyprus also: Of the Telchines.
from whence they removed into Rhodes, and inioyde that Island, where they
began to be very malicious and envious, and exercising themselves in
Mechanical Arts and imitating the works of their elders, they were the first
that erected the Idol of Telchinian Minerua, which is as much to say, as
envious Minerua.

It is not lawful amongst the Tartessians, for the younger to give testimony
against the elder. Of the Tartessij


The people of Lucania exercise judgment and inflict punishment as well for
luxury and sloth, as for any other Of the Lucani
offense what-so-euer, and he which is proved to lend any thing to a luxurious
person, is fined at the value of the thing lent.

Amongst the Saunites or Samnites is once every year a public Judgment
pronounced, both of young men Of the Samnites.
and maids, and which of the youngmen is adjudged best, by the censure of the
Judges, shall first make his choice which of the Virgins he will have to his
wife, and the second to him, chooses next, and so of all the rest in order.

The Limyrnij have their wives in common, their children be likewise brought up
at their common charge, until Of the Limyrnij
they accomplish the age of five years, and in the sixth year they be brought
together, into one place, where all the fathers be assembled to make conjecture
whom every child does most resemble, which done they assign unto every father
the child that is likest unto him, and by that means every one acknowledges
his own child as near as he can, and brings him up as his own, whether he
be so or not.

The Sauromatae or Sarmatae pamper and gorge themselves with meat for the
space of three days together, Of the Sauromatae.
that they may be thoroughly filled: they obey their wives in all things, as
their Ladies and Mistresses, and noe maid there is admitted to marry, before
she has been the death of some enemy.

The Cercetae punish all offenders so severely, as they Of the Cercetae.
prohibit them to sacrifice: And if any marryner or governor of a boat,
split, or run his ship or boat upon a rock, all men that pass by him
spit at him in contempt.

The Mosyni keep their Kings in strong castles, and if Of the Mosyni
any of them be adjudged careless of the commonwealth he is there famished
to death: The grain which the earth yields there, is equally distributed
amongst the people, saving some small part thereof which is reserved in common,
to relieve strangers.

The Phryges or Pryges abstain from al swearing, so as they will neither
swear themselves, nor constrain others Of the Phryges
to swear: And if any man amongst them kill a laboring or draught ox, or
privily takes or steals any instrument of husbandry, he is punished with
death: They bury not their Priests when they be dead in the ground, but place
or set them upright upon pillars of stone of ten cubits high.

The Lycij attribute more honor to their women then Of the Lycij.
to men, and all of them take their names after their mothers: In like manner
they make their daughters their heirs, and not their sons, And if any
freeman be convicted of theft, he is punished with perpetual servitude: They
give not their testimony in deciding controversies at an instant, but always
at the Months end that they may have time enough to delibrate what testimony to
give.

The Pisidae at their bankets sacrifice the first of their feasts to their
parents, as unto the Gods, the protectors Of the Pisidae.
of alliance and friendship; Their sentence for the misusing of things laid
to gage is most severe, for he which is there convicted deceytfully to put
them to other use, then taken in adultery, he together with the addulteresse
woman, are for a punishment led through the city sitting upon an ass, and
that for the space of certain days appointed.

The Aethiopians attribute the chiefest honor unto their sisters, and the
Kings leave their sisters children to Of the Ethiopians.
succeed them in their Kingdoms, and not their own, but if there be no such
children, to whom the right of succession belongs, then they choose for
their King he that is most endued with valor and comeliness of personage:
piety and justice are much practiced amongst them; dwelling houses they have
none but live altogether without doors, and when (as many times it happens)
much of their goods lies abroad in the common ways, yet they be so true as no
one steals any thing from them.

Amongst the Buaei (a people of Libia or affricke) Of the Buaei.
a man has dominion over the men, and a woman over the women.

The Basuliei (a people of Lybia) when they make wars join their battles in
the night and keep peace all the Of the Basuliei
day.

The Dapsolybies assemble themselves together into Of the Dapsolybies.
one place, and marry at the same time they be so assembled after the setting
of the seven stars: their manner of marrying is thus; after they have
banqueted a while their lights or torches (for their meetings for this purpose
are in the night) are put forth and extinguished, and then they go unto the
women sitting by themselves in the dark, and which of the women any man shall
take at adventures, her he has to his wife.

Amongst the Ialchleueians (a people of Libya, (when Of the Ialchleueians.
many corriuals go about to obtain the love of one woman, they suppe all
together with the father of the woman they desire in marriage, where they spend
the supper time in taunting and scoffing one another with pleasant quippes and
Jests, and he whom the woman does most arride, and best conceive of has her
to his wife.

The Sardolybies make no provision of household stuff, but only of a cup and
a sword. Of the Sardolibies.


The Alytemij (a people of Libia) choose the most pernicious Kings, they can
get, but for the rest of the people he Of the Alitemij
which is most just, is of greatest dignity.

The Nomades (a people of Libia also) in their computation Of the Nomades.
of times, account by the nights and not by the days.

The Apharantes (a people of Libia) are not distinguished and known by proper
names, as other people be, Of the Apharantes.
they reuyle the Sun at his rising, because he produces and brings all
evils to light, and they account those daughters the best, which keep their
virginity longest.

When any of the Baeotians are become banckrupts, Of the Baeoti.
and not able to pay their debts, they are brought into the common market
place, and there constrained to sit together and be covered all over with a
basket, and those which have this punishment inflicted upon them, are accounted
for ever after for infamous persons, which punishment (as some think) was
imposed upon the father of Euripydes, who had his beginning from the people of
Baeotia.

The Assiryans sell their virgins in the open market to any that desire to
marry them, and those which be most Of the Assirij.
beautyfull, be first sold, and then the rest, but when they come to the most
deformed they make proclamation by a common crier how much money any one will
take to marry them; and so by this means that which is gotten for the sail of
the fair virgins, is bestowed in placing the foul, in like-manner they join
together those that in their manners be most like for gravity and humanity.

With the Persians that which is esteemed dishonest to be done is held
unfitting to be spoken, if any one kill his Of the Persae.
father they esteem him a changeling and not a natural child, if the King
command any one to be beaten or whipped, he is as thankful, as if he had
receued a great benefit, because the King remembered him: they which have many
children are for that cause regarded of the King, and they teach their children
as well to speak the truth as to learn any art whatsoeue^.

Amongst the Indians when any one is deceived or cozoned Of the Indi.
of that which he lent or left in trust with an other, he brings not his
action against him that deceived him, but imputes the fault to him self,
because he trusted him: if any one cut of the hand or pull out the eye of an
artificer he is punished with death for it: he which is guilty of any heinous
offense, is by the Kings command shaven, which is the greatest ignominy amongst
them that may be: when an Indian man dies, one of his wives which he most
loved in his life time is laid on the pyle and burned with him: And there is
great controversy and strife amongst them, (every one having their friends to
speak and plead for them) who shall be she that shall be burned, with her
deceased husband, for each one desires it.

The Lacedaemonians think it not fitting nor honest Of the Lacedemonij.
to bestow themselves in learning any other arts then such as belong to the
wars: the men diet all together in one place, they reverence all old men as
their parents: and as the men have exercises proper to themselves, so have the
maids likewise to themselves: It is not lawful for strangers to dwell at
Spatta, nor for a Spartane to travel into other countries: they give power and
license to their wives to take the fairest men they can find to beget children
of them, whether they be Citizens or strangers. It is unseemly for a Spartane
to make any gain of any thing: their money is made of Lether, and if any man
have either gold or silver found in his house, he dies for it: They account
it the greatest glory that may be, to show themselves humble and obedient unto
Magistrates: and far more happy are they accounted amongst them, that dye an
honorable death, then those which live in great prosperity: Their children (by
a certain custom they use) are whipped round about a pillar, till most of
them be run away, and those which tarry still under the whipps, have
Garlands given them for a reward, for they hold it dishonest to take any dastard
for their companions schoole-fellowes or friends. Old men when they draw near
their deaths, be censured who of them have lived well, and who otherwise: when
an army is conducted without the limitts of their country, a certain Priest
which they call (Pirphorus) that is to say, a fire-bearer, makes and kindles
a fire at the Altar of Jupiter their guide, which fire he carries before the
King, keeping it ever from going out. The King when he goes to the wars is
attended with Prophets and Soothsayers, Physicians and Minstrils, and they use
Pipes or Flutes in the wars in steed of trumpets, and those which fight be
adorned with garlands. All men arise to the King to do him reverence, but the
officers called Ephori: and the King is sworn before he enter into his
Kingdom, to govern according to the laws of the commonwealth.

The Cretenses were the first of all the Grecians that obeyed Of the Cretenses.
the laws ordained by King Minos, who was first that obtained dominion of the
sea: This Minos when he invented and framed those laws fained that he
learned them of Jupiter, and therefore for the space of nine years, together
he would usually go unto a certain hill, wherein was a den consecrated to
Jupiter, and ever when he returned back, he brought some new laws to the
Cretenses, as though he had been their instructed by Jupiter. Of this Minos
and his fained conference with Jupiter, Homer speaks thus. Amongst them
(says he) is the City called Gnossus, where Minos who had often conference
with the great god Jupiter, reigned nine years.

The Cretensian children be brought up altogether in one public place, and that
very hardly and painefully, for they be much accustomed to hunting when they
be young, and to run barefooted, as also to go armed to the Pirrichan vawting
or leaping (whereof Pyrrichicus, Cydoniates a Cretensian born, is said to be
the inuentor) which is a very laborious and difficult exercise for youth: The
men in like manner eat together in one public place, and by reason of their
sustenance and provision, all things be indifferently ministered unto them: the
gifts or presents which amongst them be in most request, be weapons.

The Autariatae, if any of there soldiers faint or sick, by Of the Autariatae.
the way, will rather kill them, then leave them living in a strange place. The
Triballi set their army in four squadrons, or orders, the first rank
consists of those which Of the Triballi.
be feeble and weak, the next unto it of such as be strong and lusty, the
third of horsemen, and the last of women, which (when all the rest be put to
flight) stick to their enemies, still pestring and afflicting them with their
reuilings and skoldings.

The Cusiani bewail those which be borne into the world, and account them
happy and blessed that depart Of the Cusiani.
out of this life.

The Cij when they have burned their dead bodies, gather Of the Cij.
up all their bones and beat them to poulder in a mortar, and then taking
ship, they lanch into the deep, where putting the poulder into a sieve, they
scatter and disperce it in the wind, till all be blown away and consumed.

The Tauri (a people of Scythia) when their King is dead, Of the Tauri.
bury with his body such of his friends as he loved best in his life time, and
on the other side the King when any of his friends die, cutteth off part of the
lap of his ear, either more or less as his deceased friend was of deserts.

The Sindi, when they bury any one, look how many Of the Sindi.
enemies he slew in his life time, just so many fishes do they cast into his
sepulcher with him.

The Colchi bury not their dead bodies in the ground, but hang them up upon
trees. Of the Colchi.


The Panebi (a people of Libya) when their King is dead, bury his whole body in
the ground, but cut off his Of the Panebi.
head, and reserve it, guilding it with gold, and esteeming it as a sacred
relicke.

FINIS.
Certain things concerning America or Brasil, collected out of the History of
JOHN LERIVS.
THe Barbarous Americans that inhabit the land of Brasil, be called
Tououpinambaltij: The stature and disposition of the Barbarians.
their bodies be neither prodigious nor monstrous, but in stature much like
unto ours that live in Europe: yet be they more lusty and strong then we,
sounder and less subject to diseases, few of them being either lame or blind,
so much as of one eye, neither be any of them deformed, and although they live
until they be a hundred and twenty years of age (reckoning their years by
the Moons, which computation they only The age of the Barbarians.
observe) yet do few of them wax gray or hoar, which argues the country to
be of a marvelous temperature, which being never dried with any colds or
frosts, has both herbs, fields and trees ever green and flourishing. And the
people themselves being void of all cares and The Barbarians neglect all
world^y things.
troubles, which age men before their times, seem as the proverb is, as
though they had drunk of the fountain of youth: and for because they go not
into muddy and unwholesome waters or pestilent springs, which be the causes of
many diseases, that consume us before our time, weaken and make feeble our
bodies, excruciate and vex our minds, and in the end destroy both the one and
the other, therefore be they free from all such infirmities: Distrust,
coueteousnesse, strife, envy and ambition, have no place amongst them, their
complexions be not altogether black, but by reason of the vehement heat of
the Sun, somewhat swarthy, like unto the Spaniards: Both men, women and
children go altogether naked without covering any part of their bodies, as
being ashamed of All Barbarians go naked.
their nakedness, nor be their bodies full of hears (as some are of opinion)
but even as any hears appear upon their bodies they pluck them off, either
with their nails, or else with certain little pincers or nippers which they
have from the Christians, their beards and the hairs that do grow upon their
eye liddes and eyebrows, they pull up by the roots, the which is the cause
that many of them be purblinde and squinteyed, which same fashion is used of
the Peruerses in the Isle of Cumana.

The hair of the hinder parts of their heads they let grow, and shave all
the fore part of the heads of their male children when they be young,
beginning at the crown like unto the religious order of Munkes, suffering it
to grow long behind down to their necks like old men.

In that same country there be certain herbs of the breadth of two fingers,
and somewhat crooked, which do grow up long and round, like the reed that
covers the ear of that great millet, which the French men call Arabian
wheat, and with two leaves of this herb, stitched together with a cotton
threede, some old men (but neither young men nor children, nor yet all old men
neither) do cover their privy parts, and sometimes also they hide them with
little rags or clouts; wherein at the first sight, may seem to appear some
little spark of natural shamefastness, if the did it for that cause, but it
is more probable they do it to hide some disease or infirmity, wherewith
those parts be molested and grieved in their old age: Moreover their custom
in that country, is to make a hole in the neither lip of every child when he
is young, and to put into the hole a certain bone, polished and made smooth
and as white as Iuory, in fashion big and square at the one end, and sharp
at the other, this bone is placed in good and exact order, upon the brother part
of the grinding teeth, and therewith a devise they have, skrewed in and set
fast having the sharp end standing an inch or two fingers breadth out of the
lip, and is so artificially fastened to their goomes, as they will take it out
and put it in again at their pleasure: And this sharp and white bone they
wear only when they be young, for when they grow in years, that they be
called in their language (Coromi Ovassau) that is to say tall and well grown
stripling, then in steed of this bone they put into the hole a certain green
stone, being a kind of counterfeit Emerald.

The Tououpinambaultij will often times for their delight take these stones out
of their lips, and put their tongues through the holes, so as they may seem
to those that behold them to have two mouths, but whether this strange
spectacle be pleasing, or whether it does make them more deformed, it is easy
for to be judged: Some of them also, not contented to carry these green
stones in their lips, make holes through both their cheeks, and put stones
into them for the same purpose.

As for their noses, whereas the mid-wiues with us, use when a child is newborn to stretch forth his nose with their fingers, to make it more comely and
sharp, the custom of the people of America is clean contrary, for they
account those children most comely that have the flattest noses, and therefore
as soon as an infant is borne, they press his nose down flat to his face,
with their thombes (much like as they use to do, to certain whelps in
France:) in this point those people disagree very much, from the Americans that
dwell in a certain country of the Kingdom of Paruania, who are said to have
such great noses, as they use to hang at them, in golden threeds, Emeralds,
Saphires, and other little stones both white and red.

These Brasilians die and varnish their bodies with diverse paintings and
colors, stayning their legs and theighes so black, with the iuise of a
certain fruit, which they call Genipat, as they seem to such as behold them
a far off, to wear black breeches like Churchmens sloppes: and that iuise
which is strained or pressed out of that black fruit called Genipat, enters
so deep into their skins, as it will hardly be got out in ten or fifteen
days, though they wash them never so often in that time.

They wear also about their necks a Jewel made of a kind of bone that is
very smooth and slike, and as white as Alablaster, this bone they call Yaci
(borrowing that name of the moon, which in their language is so called) it is
above two handful long, and is tied about their necks with a cotton thread,
and so hangs down upon their breasts.

In like manner they polish and make smooth and even with a stone they have,
diverse little pieces of shelles workeing them till they be thin and round
like unto a penny, and then boring a hole in the middle of them, they put a
great many together upon a cotton threede, and wear them about their necks
like a chain, these chains in their language be called (Bou-re) and they
wear them in imitation of the little chains of gold, which are usually worn
amongst Christians, and that which of many is called Buccinum, may very well
be the same, whereof we see many women to wear girdles with us. These
barbarous people likewise make these chains, they call Bou re of a certain
kind of wood that is black and hard, and namely, as Matheolus witneseth of
the tree called Sicomorus, which is much like unto a wild fig tree, and this
tree is much used in those chains, because in weight and brightness it is
very like unto Iette.

Furthermore the Americanes have great store of hens, the breed whereof they
first had from the Portingals, from these hens they pluck all the white
feathers, and with their instruments of iron (which now they have) and before
when they had none of those instruments, then with sharp stones, they hacke
and chappe into very small pieces the softest of those feathers, and putting
them, when they be chopped small into hot and seething water, die them with a
certain red color of Brasile, this being done they anoint their bodies with
a clammie gum, for to make the feathers stick on, and then cover and deck
themselves all over both body, arms and legs with those feathers, painting
them also with diverse colors, so as they seem to be covered with a down,
or soft wool like unto young pigions, and other birds new hatched.

Whereupon it is very likely, that when diverse of our Countrymen came first
into those coasts, and saw them so attired, and not searching out the reason
thereof, spread abroad this rumor, that the barbarous Americans were hairy all
over their bodies, though the matter be far otherwise, for they be not
naturally so, but this rumor arose by the ignorance of the cause, and being
once spread abroad was easily believed to be true.

There is one has written that the Cumani use to anoint themselves, with a
certain gum or clammy ointment, and then trim themselves with feathers of
diverse colors, like these Americans.

The manner how the Tovovpinamkij (for so they be also called) attire their
heads is thus, besides the shauing of the forepart of their heads, in manner
of a Monks crown, and the hairs of the hinder parts, hanging down long to
their necks (as is said) their manner is to wear frontlets or ornaments for
their foreheads of feathers of sundry colors, orderly disposed and set
together, these frontlets do much resemble the Periwigs, used to be worn, by
noble women, who may justly be said to receive that kind of attire from the
Barbarians: they be called in their language Yempenambi.

They wear earings also made of very white bones, not much unlike unto those
bones which (as we have said before) young men put into the holes of their
lips: In that country is a bird which they call Toucan, all her body is as
black as a raven, and about her gorge she has a ring of downy feathers that be
yellow, and under that an other ring of vermillion color, from this part of
the bird that is yellow, they pull of the skin (the bird being never the
worse) and dry it, and so lay a round piece thereof upon each of their
cheeks, making them for to stick on with a kind of wax that they had which
they call Trayetic: which being fastened and made fit, one would think they
had bridles in their mouths, and that the yellow rounds were bosses gilded
with gold.

These people, if they either prepare themselves to the wars, or (according
to their custom and sollemne pomp) to kill any captive, to be devoured, to
the end that nothing may be wanting, to make them fine and brave, they put on
their garments, settle on their cappes, put bracelets upon their arms, of
diverse colored feathers, as green, red, yellow, blew, and such like, so
artificially and cunningly compacted and joined together, with slender Canes,
and cotton threedes, as I think there is scarce any imbroderer in all France,
that can set in order, and make fit those feathers, with more industry and
curiosity then they do: in so much as the garments wouen and trimmed in this
precise manner, may be thought to be made of a hairie kind of silk: the same
kind of trimming do they likewise bestow upon their wooden clubbes.

The last kind of their garments are made of Estridge feathers, which in color
be brown or russet, and which they get from their borderers, (whereby we may
guess, that those great birds be bred in those parts) the garments be made in
this manner:

They sow all the quilles of the feathers together in rank one by another,
disposing of them so orderly, as no one fether stand out longer than another,
which done, they put the one side to the other, and make it round like a rose
or canopie: and this strange garment in their language is called Araroye.

This bundell they put upon their backs, binding it fast with a cotton
threede, and the stalks nearest unto their skins, wherewith when they be
decked and arrayed, they seem as though they carried upon their backs, a cage
or coupe to put young chickins in.

Those which would be accounted most warlike, (that they may better manifest
their strength, and show that they have slain many enemies, and also for a
vaunt how many captives they have killed, to be devoured) cut and gash their
breasts, arms, and thighs, and then stain and color the wounds and gashes
with a certain black dust, the prints of which gashes remain in their flesh
to their deaths, representing to those which behold them, brest-plates and
sloppes cut after the Heluetian manner: When they give themselves to
banqueting, carrousing, and dancing, (wherein they spend much time) the more
to stir up their minds thereunto, besides their horrible clamors, outcries,
and houlings, they have a certain fruit that has a hard shell, in form and
bigness like unto a Chestnut: out of this shell they take the kernel, and put
little stones into the place where the kernel was, so tying a great many of
them upon a thread, put them upon their legs, like unto bells used here in
England by morris dancers: no less noise would they make in their hopping and
skipping, if the shells of snayles were used in the same manner, which do not
much differ from those rattling instruments they use in dancing And in these
things the barbarous people exceedingly delight, and take surpassing pleasure
in them when they be brought unto them.

In that Country also grows a certain kind of tree, the fruit whereof in
fashion and thickenesse is like unto an Estridge egg, through which they bore
a hole, in such manner and fashion as boys with us bore holes in nuttes to
make Whirligigges, and put therein little stones, or the bigger corns or
grains of millet, or any other convenient thing, and then putting through the
hole a stick of a foot and a half long, make thereof an instrument which
they call Maraca, which will make a huge noise and rattle louder than a swines
bladder with peace in it: and therefore those barbarous people carry them ever
about with them in their hands.

And thus far have I spoken in brief, of the disposition, manners, customs,
apparel, and behauior used by the Tovovpinambaltii.

There is brought unto them from the Christians a curled or wrinkled cloth,
some red, some green, and some yellow, whereof they make them all manner of
garments, these the Christians do give unto these barbarous people, and have
for them in exchange, victuals, marmosets, munkies, Parrats, Brasile wood,
cotton, Indian pepper, and many such like things which are very good
merchandise: And most of them wear loose and flaggring breeches, and all the
parts of their bodies else bare, some of them again will wear no breeches,
but a cote reaching down to their buttockes, where with when they be clothed
and ready to go abroad, they will behold themselves oftentimes, and instantly
put it off again, and leave it at home, until it be their humor to wear it
again, which makes all our people that behold them to laugh at them, and in
like manner do they with their shirts and caps.

But for as much as can be said of the external habit of their bodies, both of
men and children, I suppose I have spoken sufficiently, and therefore if out of
this my description, any one desire to represent unto his mind one of these
barbarous men, let him first imagine, that he beholds the shadow and
resemblance of a naked man, with all his members and lineamentall proportion
fitly framed and set together, the hairs of his body plucked off with
pincers, all the forepart of his head shaven, with holes in his lips and
cheeks, in which be put either sharp bones or green stones, ear rings
thrust through his ears, his body dyed with diverse colors, his thighs and
legs stained and colored with that black painting called by them Genipat,
and about his neck a chain made of the shell which they call Vygnoll, and
then you shall see and easily discern the perfect picture of those that live
in that country.

The Tovovpinambaltian women do usually carry their little children in their
arms, wrapped and swadled in a Cotton scarffe, who embrace and wind about
their mothers sides with both their legs: They have beds also made of
Cotton like nets, and hanged up from the ground: Their best fruit is that
which they call Ananas.

But now if you will imagine in your mind, a barbarous man in another fashion,
he shall be disrobed of that ridiculous attire and anticke habit, and his
whole body dawbed with a glewish and slimie gum, and their feathers chopped
small, shall be cast upon his body: and when he is attired with this
artificial Wool, or Feather-downe, how fine a fellow he will seem unto you,
I need not to show.

Moreover, whether he retain his natural color, or be disguised in diverse
colors, or in feathers: yet let him have those garments, cappe, and fether
bracelets, which we have described, and then certainly he is arrayed in the
best manner he can be: but if you please to give him his garment made of that
curled cloth, and (as we have said their custom is) to cloth him with his
cote, all the other parts of his body being naked, and one sleeue yellow, and
the other green: by these marks you may suppose him to be either an idiot, or
an artificial fool: To conclude, if you will add to these, his instrument
called Maraca, and his bundell of feathers, which they call Araroye, set
handsomely upon his back, his rattling instruments also made of shelles, with
stones in them bound unto their legs, by this representation you must imagine,
he is dancing and drinking.

Many patterns and figures are not sufficient to express the extraordinary
care and industry of those barbarous people, in attiring their bodies,
according to the whole description which before we have set forth: for no
similitude can make a lively representation of the whole matter as it is,
unless every thing be in their proper colors, but the attyring of those
women, which they call Quoniam, and in some places where they have acquaintance
and commerce with the Portugals, they name them Maria, how much more excellent
it is than the others, let us diligently mark and consider. For first of all,
as we said in the beginning of this chapter, the women go naked as well as the
men, and all of them pluck off their hairs as men do, leaving not a hair
upon their eyebrows or eyelids: but as concerning the hair of their heads,
they differ much from men: for the men (as is said) shave all the foreparts of
their heads, and let the hinder parts grow long, but women there do not only
nourish their hairs on their heads, but (like our Country-women) use often to
comb and wash them, as also to bind and wrappe them up, with Cotton head-laces
dyed black, though for the most part they go with their hairs loose and spread
abroad, like unto those ancient mad-brained Bacchides of Rome: for they much
delight to have them hanging down, and flaggering about their shoulders.

In another thing also the women differ from the men; for they make no holes in
their lips as men do, and therefore they adorn not, nor beautify their faces
with Jewels and stones, but they make such great holes in their ears; as when
their eare-rings be forth, they may put in their fingers: and their
eare-rings be made of that great shell, which they call Vignol, being in
whiteness and length, like unto a midling candle, so as if you behold them
afar off hanging upon their shoulders, and dangling upon their breasts, you
would judge them like the hanging ears of a hound.

As for their faces, they trim them in this fashion, and in doing thereof,
every one helps other: first, they paynt with a pencill a circle in the
middle of their cheeks, either read, blew, or yellow, in form of a cockle or
snaylehouse, sterring them until their faces be varyed and distinguished all
over, with those sundry colors: in like manner do they paynt the place, where
the hair of their eye-lidds and eyebrows did grow, (which fashion I have
heard, is used of some light house-wiues in France.) They have bracelets also
made of pieces of bones, cut like fishscales, or Serpents scales, joined and
made fast with wax mingled with gum, so artificially and finely, as they
cannot be amended by any artificial skill or cunning, they be an hand-breadth
in length, and do somewhat resemble the bracelet or wrist-band, which is used
with us in blowing of bellows.

They usually also wear bright and exceeding white chains, which they call
Bou-re, but they wear them not about their necks as men do, but about their
arms in stead of bracelets: and for this purpose they have a great desire of
glasse-buttons, either yellow, blew, or green, with holes in them, and put
upon a threede: these they call (Maurobi) and whether we go into their villages
or marches, or that they approach near unto our castles or bulwarks, they
vrgently seeeke to get of us some of these buttons, offering us their fruits,
and other commodities in exchange: and oftentimes they will urge us for them
with these glauering words: Mair Deagat-orem amabe mauroubi, that is to say,
You are a good Frenchman, give us some bracelets of your glass buttons. In
like manner do they importunatly require of us combs, which they call Guap or
Kuap: glasses also which they call Araua, and other such like trinckets,
wherein they take great delight. But above all things, this seems most
strange, that although their bodies, arms, thighs, and legs, be not
distinguished with diverse colors like men, and that they use not those
ornaments of feathers, yet could we never entreat them, to put on any clothes
made of that curled cloth, or smocks, though we oftentimes offered them: for
they persisted in that stubbornenesse, from the which I think they be not yet
reclaimed, alleging for excuse, the ancient received customs of all the
borderers. For all of them use when they come near any waters or rivers, to
fall down and to take up water with their hands, to wash their heads, and
oftentimes (like duckes) they will plunge and diue into the water ten times
in one day, and then to put off their garments so oftentimes in the day, would
be very troublesome unto them: an excellent and goodly reason sure, yet must
we needs allow it, for we could nothing alter or dissuade them by disputing
with them, for so great a delight is nakedness unto them, that not only the
free Tovovpinambaltian women, which lived upon the Continent, would thus
stubbornely reject all apparel, but the captives also and slaves, which we
bought of them, and which we used as villains, and drudges, to defend our
castles, could not be restrained, but would every night before they slept, put
off their smockes and all their other apparel, and wander naked up and down the
Island.

To conclude, if the power were in themselves either to take or leave their
garments: (for we could hardly force them to put them on by beating) they had
rather endure the heat of the Sun, and hurt their arms and sholders with
carrying stones and earth naked, then to put on any clothes. And thus much is
sufficient to speak of the ornaments, bracelets, and all the other complete
attire of the American women, and therefore without any further Epilogue to my
speech: I leave it for every one to conceive of, as to him seems good, and
will in this place add a word or two of the bigger sort of children, those
which be three or four years of age, and which they commonly call Canomi
mitri: for in these we were much delighted: they be fatter of their bodies, and
of a whiter bone then any children with holes in their lips, their hairs of
their heads shorn round, and their bodies oftentimes painted: And in this
manner they would come dancing by flocks to meet us, when we came to their
villages. And for to have us give them some things, they would often repeat
these flattering words, Covtovassat amaebe pinda: that is, good fellow give me
these hooks: and if they obtained of us, what they desired, as oftentimes they
did, and that we threw some ten or twelve little hooks upon the sand, they
would strive and scramble for them, and greatly exult and rejoice, and lying
along upon the ground, would scrape in the earth like Conneys, which was no
little pleasure unto us: Finally, although I diligently perused and marked
those barbarous people, for a whole year together, wherein I lived amongst
them, so as I might conceive in my mind a certain Idea, or proportion of
them, yet I say, by reason of their diverse gestures and behauiours, utterly
different from ours it is a very difficult matter to express their true
proportion, either in writing or painting: but if any one covet to enjoy the
full pleasure of them, I could wish him to go into America himself. But
perhaps you will say it is more then one days journey: that is truth indeed,
and therefore I will not persuade any one to enterprise the matter over rashly.

But before I conclude my speech, I must say something to answer those that
either think or write, that the often familiarity with those barbarous naked
people, and especially with the women is a great provocation to lust and
lasciviousness, I say therefore, that although at the first sight that
nakedness may justly be accounted the nourishment of concupiscence, yet
notwithstanding as experience has made manifest, it is most true, that men by
that uncivil and uncomely nakedness, are not so much as stirred in their
minds to lust, so as I dare presume to affirm, that gallant and gorgeous
attire, painted beauties, counterfeit hair, crisped and frisled locks, those
great and costly rayles which women wear so artificially folded, and wreathed,
those lawne gorgets, loose and flaggering garments, and such other like,
wherewith our women do so busily falsify and counterfeit themselves, are more
hurtful and dangerous, then the nakedness of those barbarous women, although
in beauty they be nothing inferior unto them, so as if it were lawful for
others, (observing a decorum) to follow their fashions, I could allege very
substantial reasons to make good my opinion, and refute all arguments that can
be objected for proof of the contrary.

But not to dwell longer upon this matter, I refer me to the testimony of
those which sailed with me into Brasilia, and which have beheld both the one
and the other, yet would I not have my words wrested to that sense, as though I
any ways approved that nakedness, against the authority of the holy
Scripture, which says, that Adam and Eua perceiving they were naked after
their sin, were ashamed, for I detest the heresy of those, which having
violated the law of nature, (not well observed in this case, of those wretched
and miserable Americans,) do their uttermost endeavors, to bring in this
wicked and beastly custom.

But what I have said touching these rude people, tends to no other end, but
that it may appear, that we are no less faulty, who condemning them that go
naked without regard of shamefastness, do our selves offend as grievously in
the contrary, to wit, in sumptuous and gorgious apparel: And now having
described the external habit and trimming of the Barbarians, it will not
break square or order to say something in this place, of their manner of
diet: And this is chiefly to be noted, that although they neither sow nor
have any kind of corn or grain, nor plant any Vines, yet notwithstanding (as
I have often found true by experience) do they live most finely and daintily,
though they be utterly destitute of bread and wine: for they have two sorts of
roots, the one called Aypi, the other Manyot both of which wax so exceedingly
within three or four months, that they will be a foot and an half long,
and as thick as a man's thigh: these the women (for men be never troubled with
the business) pluck up and dry against the fire, mingling them with that
which they call Boucano, sometimes also they bruise and break them in pieces,
when they be green and fresh, with sharp flint stones fastened to a beam, as
we are wont to grate Cheese and Nutmegs, and make thereof a very fine white
meal or flower, so as that new meal being steeped in water, the whole Iuise
which is pressed out of it, (of which I will speak by and by) does taste and
savor like new and moist Wafers made of Wheat: insomuch, as after my return
into France, every place where I came smelled thereof; which renewed the memory
of that wherewith those barbarous and rude peoples houses or rooms be
usually washed and sprinkled, with so great hindrance and loss is that meal
made of those kind of roots.

For the preparation of this meal, the women of Brasilia devise great earthen
Vessels, very fit for that use, containing every one a bushel, or
thereabout, which being set upon the fire, they put thereunto the meal, and
ever as it boyleth, the gourd being cut in the middle, they take out that which
is within, and use the utmost rind in steed of dishes to eat pottage, and
this when it is boiled is like unto little comfits. Of this flower or dowe they
make two sorts, for one manner is thoroughly boiled and hard, which they call
(Ouy-entan) and this they carry into the wars with them, because it will
keep longest, the other sort is less boyld and softer, and that they call
Ouy-pov, in this respect this is better then the former, because it tastes
like the crummes of white bread, but that first savor whereof I spoke before,
becomes more pleasanter and sweeter by boiling; And as this meat, especially
when it is new, is of an excellent savor and taste, so is it very nourishing
and easily concocted, yet notwithstanding (as I have tried) they cannot by any
means make bread thereof: but they will make it into a lump, which smells
like a batch of wheat dowe, and is marvelous fair to look upon, and as white
as fine wheat flower, yet in boiling it is so dried and crusted upon the
outside, that it being cut or broken, the inner part thereof is marvelous
dry, and like as it was before it was boiled. Whereby I am induced to think,
that he was much deceived, which first reported (not well regarding my
speeches) that those which dwell two or three degrees beyond the Aequinoctiall
line (which people be certainly the Tououpinambaltij) did eat bread made of
rotten wood, which is to be understood of these roots whereof we spoke. And
both sorts of meat in making a kind of gruell which they call Myngant,
especially if it be mingled with fat broth or liquor, is then like unto Ryce,
and being so seasoned, it tastes very well and delicately. But the
Tououpinambaltij, both men, women and children, from their Cradles upwards, do
eat this kind of dry meal or dowe instead of bread: whereunto they are so
apt by often use, that with the ends of their fingers they will take it out of
their earthen vessels, and throw it steadfastly into their mouths, without
loosing the least crumme, and therein we oftentimes assaide to imitate them,
but being little exercised, we spilled it upon our faces, and therefore
unless we would be ridiculous, we must needs use spoones. Moreover those
roots called Aypi and Manyot be sometimes chopped when they be green into
little gobbets, of the meal whereof being moist, the women make round balls,
which being pressed betwixt their hands, they wring out of them a certain
liquid white Iuise like unto milk, and putting it into earthen vessels, set it
out in the sun, by the heat whereof it does curde and cream over like
milk, and when they eat it they power it into dishes made of shells, wherein
it is boiled as we are wont to boil eggs.

Moreover, the root Aypi is not only accustomed to be made into meal, but
it eats also very well being roasted in the Ashes, whereby it will wax
tender and cleave, and be very like in taste unto Chestnuts broyld upon the
coals, and being so ordered it is very good to eat, but the root called
(Manyot) is far otherwise, for unless it be made into dowe and boiled, it
is a very dangerous meat; the stalks of both those roots be like one unto an
other, and of the bigness of low Juniper, and the leaves be like unto an
herb called Peony or Pyony. But that which is most to be wondered at in these
roots of Brasile called Aypi and Manyot, is the great abundance of them, for
the branches of them which be as brittle as hemp stalks, how many so ever of
them be broken and put deep into the earth, without any husbandry at all,
within two or three months space, will bring forth a great abundance of
roots.

The women in like manner do plant that great Millet whereof we spoke before,
which we commonly call Sarrasins wheat, or Arabian wheat, and which those
barbarous people call Anati, and of that also they make a certain meal which
they boil and eat, in the same manner, as I said they do the other: And thus
much suffices to say of the manners, apparel and diet of the Americans: and
he which desires to understand more, let him read the Indian history of John
Lerius, out of whom we have gathered that which we have here set down.

FINIS.
The faith, religion and manners. of the Aethiopians, Living within the
dominion of Precious Joan (commonly called Prestor John) together with a
declaration of the league and friendship established betwixt the Emperors of
Aethiopia and the Kings of Portugal.
Damianus a Goes a Portugal Knight, being Author and interpretor.
Hereunto is added certain Epistles of Helena, who was grandmother to David
Precious Joan, and from the same David, to the Bishop of Rome, and to Emanuell,
and John Kings of Portugal: very worthy the reading the same:
Damianus a Goes and Paulus Jouius being interpretors.
The deploration of the people of Lappia,
collected by the same Damianus a Goes.
Damianus a Goes, a Knight of Portugal,
to Pope Paulus the third, health.
THere is nothing wherein we ought to be more careful and vigilant, and more
diligently to endeavor our selves, than that by our labor, cost, punishment of
our bodies, yea martyrdom it self (if by other means it cannot be effected)
all people of the world may be brought and won to the faith of Christ, and
being once won, may then be reduced to live in an uniformity and one manner
of living. The care and regard whereof does more especially belong to you
(right reverent Pope Paulus) than to all the rest of us, as being high Bishop
over all, the Vicar of Christ, and head of the universal Church under him;
Wherefore it is your part (which with the great hope of all men you have
already begun) to cure the calamities where with the Church is daily oppressed,
and with your care and industry so to effect it, that all the whole world may
obey and believe in one only Christ, and embracing the true belief, may be
obedient unto you (as unto Peter's successor) and to your admonitions in all
things which pertain to the salvation of their souls: which when you have
brought to pass, we will say that by your means, the Prophecy of one
sheapheard, and one flock is fulfilled, the true commendations whereof when you
have obtained, which of the Popes may be deemed so famous as your self, either
in honor, happiness or merit, or to whom with so much right may we yield the
triple Crownc, as to your self? For the obtaining whereof, although the times
be otherwise very unfortunate, yet have you many occasions ministered unto you.
I call the times unfortunate by reason of those calamities, which in Europe are
by your self to be cured, for of none be we more strongly resisted, then of
the enemy that lives at our elbow, but let us now omit to speak of those
troublesome cares, which, (we be well assured), are ever in your mind, and
come to other matters more calm and temperate, which carry great hope, that as
it were an other new world embracing the faith of Christ, may acknowledge your
holiness, Majesty and Empire: Wherefore if you shall so handle these
businesses, that the Church both in Aethiopia, and Europe (having you her
governor and protector) may escape and avoid all peril and shipwreck, and
arrive into the haven of salvation, we shall then sing in your praise that
Prophetical Canticle contained in the Book of Wisdom, viz. I will pass
through all lower parts of the earth, I will behold all those that sleep, and
illuminate all those that trust in the Lord, behold I have not labored for my
self only, but for all those that seek the truth. Now at length is the time
wherein we trust, that this Prophecy will be fulfilled by you, behold here
the Aethiopians, a large and spacious nation, and most desirous of Christ,
whose Emperor a man of great sanctity, desiring the amity and friendship of
the Christian Princes of Europe, has sent his Ambassadors unto you, and to the
mighty and invincible Kings of Portugal, by whom (as by his letters does
appear) he does not only covet Christian friendship and charity betwixt
himself and the Princes of Europe, but also (perceiving the bitter discords
and dissentions that continually reign amongst them) does most devoutly and
fervently admonish and exhort them to Christian peace and concord, a matter
whereof all of us may be ashamed, for now the Queen of Saba rises up and
calls us into judgment, reprehending our faults, Christ's Prophesies be now
fulfilled: And those which he elected are by little and little fallen out of
his fellowship, and his commandments and promises are come unto those, which
were teputed Ethnicks and strangers unto Christ: for the Emperor of Aethiopia
with all the kingdoms under his dominion, as by this our declaration shall
appear, covet nor desire nothing more, then to live under your discipline,
neither is he ignorant by the doctrine of the Apostles, which he has divided
into eight books, that the government and principallity of all the Bishops of
the world, belongs and is due to the Bishop of Rome, whom plainly and godlyly
he is willing to obey, desiring of him to be well and holily instructed in the
institutions and ordinances of the Church of Christ, for which purpose he
coueteth with great desire, to have learned me^ sent unto him, and not
contented therewith, to the end that the memory of his desires may remain to
all posterity, he entreats that the truth of this matter may be recorded
and registered in the Popes Annals, that so his Epistles and most godly
requests, may be enlightened by the Ecclesiastical history, and that those
which shall be borne hereafter, may know at what time and under what Pope
these things were done: And I nothing doubt but that your holiness has
already sent, or forthwith will send unto him, learned men and skillful in the
Scriptures; and well instructed in other arts, by whose learning and industry,
and also by the preaching and labor of many others, already sent thither by
the renowned Kings of Portugal Emanuell and John his son, you will so handle
the business, that all the Christians living in Aethiopia and India, may by
little and little, yield obedience to the laws of the Roman Bishops, whom
they fear not already to confess to be the Vicars of Christ; and so they
being once, by your endeavor, joined unto us by the true religion, and gathered
together into one fold, under one shepherd Christ, we may perceive that the
mercy of our Lord is confirmed over us, that his kingdom indureth for all
ages, and that his power extends unto all generations, and then all flesh
shall praise his holy name for ever and ever. But least my exhortation may
seem more tedious then is needful, especially unto him of whose life and
doctrine, we are, and ought, all of us to be imitators, I will proceed to my
declaration, which I will set out more at large, that thereby I may more
plainly show upon what grounds and principles, this sacred league and amity
betwixt Prestor Joan and the Kings of Portugal was established, hoping that in
declaring those things which be true and lawful, I may inflame the minds of
the Readers, and accite them to those designements, whereby the faith of Christ
may be more abundantly planted, preached, and reverenced in all corners of
the earth.

In the year from the birth of our Savior and redeemer Jesus Christ, one
thousand, four hundred thirty and three, John the first King of Portugal,
surnamed of famous memory, he which freed Portugal from the often incursions
and assaults of the Castilians, wherewith it was almost made vast and desolate,
departing out of this mortal life, of all his other sons which he left
behind him, his son Henry excelled in learning, and especially in the study
of Mathematickes, who for the great desire he had to know the motion of the
heavens, lived a single life, and for that he might more deeply and
accurately meditate and consider the course of the stars, he lived in a holy
promontory called Saint Vincents head, which place he chose out, for that the
heavens be there for the most part calm and temperate, least the clouds
interposing themselves betwixt the heavens and his instruments, his
consideration, and judgment of the course of the heavens, might be thereby
hindered.

This Henry to the end he might receive some fruit of his studies, determined
to seek out with his own ships, and at his own charge, that which by often
watchings he had found out to be so, to wit, that the Atlantic Ocean flows
into the Indian, and the Indian again into the Atlanticke, and thereupon
sending ships thither diverse times, they entered into great part of the
Atlantic shore, wherein many towns, cities, and Islands were discovered and
found forth: in all which places by his means, the faith of Christ was made
known, and Churches there erected, especially in those Islands which before
lay desert, the principal whereof was the Island of Wood, commonly called
Medeyra, now a most famous and fruitful Island. But in the end, (as there is no
certainty in mortal matters) in the year of our Savior Christ, one thousand,
four hundred and three score, this Henry was surprised by death, and for that
he was never married, he had lest al which he had got by his voiages and
traueling by sea unto the crown of Portugal as his proper inheritance: which
being given by his own hands, continued unto the time of John the second of
that name, without envy or emulation of other foreign kings or Princes, In
which Kings days Columbus a Genoan borne a very skillful Sayler, being
repulsed, unregarded and dismissed, by the same King John, (to whom he
promised to discover the West Indies,) by the aid and furtherance of Ferdinand
and Elizabeth King and Queen of Castile, he most fortunately attempted the
voyage, and found out those large and ample provinces, to their great and
unspeakable profit, showing also how they might come to them by ships: This
John oftentimes reuoluing in his mind the affairs of the East Indies, of
whose fruitfulness many and sundry things were delivered by ancient writers

Amongst his other great labors and costs, whereof he was no niggard, he
determined to send certain men skillfull in the Arabian tongue unto those
provinces, and especially unto Prestor John, whereof two of them which he sent
were Alfonsus of Payua borne at the white Castle, and another John Peter of
Couilham both Portingales. These luckely began their journey from Schalabiton,
the seventh day of May, in the year of our Savior Christ, one thousand four
hundred foure-score and six, and fayning them selves to be Merchants for their
more quietter passage, they iournyed first to Barchiona, from thence to Naples
and so to Rhodes: then taking their journey from Alexandria, they arrived
lastly at Cayre, and their getting the company of some Merchants they took
their iourny toward Thor: where taking shipping they arrived near a certain
city called Cuaquen, sytuated on the Ethiopian shore, from thence they sailed
toward Adenes, where they agreed betwixt themselves, that Alphonsus should
return again into Aethiopia unto Prestor John, and that Peter should go
forward into India, but John having found out Calecut Goa, and the whole shore
of the Malabars, sailed to Zofala, and from thence again to Adenes, and so
went straight to Caire, expecting to find his companion there and that they
might return together into Portingale to their king (for they appointed when
they went from Adene, to meet again, at a time limited, at the same Cayre)
whither when he was returned he received letters from King John out of
Portugale, by the hands of two Jews, whereof one was called Rabbi Abraham a
Biensian, and the other Joseph a Lamacensian, by which letters he was
certified, that his fellow Alfonsus was there dead, and whereby he was also
commanded not to return into his country before he had vewed Ormuzia and
saluted Prestor John, of whose state the king did greatly desire to be
certified.

Wherefore John Peter not knowing what his companion Alphonsus had done in his
life time, went back again to Adenes accompanied with the same Rabbi Abraham
and sent Joseph back again to the King with letters, signifiing his travels
and what he had done, and so taking water sailed from Adenes to Oromuzia, where
leaving Abraham the Jew and dispatching him with more letters to the King, he
determined to sail toward Mecha, which when he had deseryed he ernestly
desired to see mount Synai, from thence he departed to Thor, and again taking
shipping and passing over the straights of the Erythrean sea, he came to Zeila
and from thence went all the rest of the way on foot, unto the court of
Prestor John, who was then called Alexander, of whom being very courteously
received he delivered unto him the letters which he had from King John
offerring into his hands also the Topography or Map, wherein he might see all
our voyage. This Alexander determining to send him back to his King, was
prevented by death that he could not do it, who being dead his brother
surnamed Nau, succeeded him in his place, of whom this John Peter could never
obtain license to depart into his country, and Nau dying likewise, his liberty
to depart was in like manner denied him by David the Son of Nau and next
heir to his Kingdom, but seeing he could by no meaues have leave to depart
from that province, and to mitigate and assuage the exceeding desire he had to
return home, the King bestowed upon him most ample and large gifts, and then
he took to his wife a noble woman, of whom he begot many children.

This man our Ambassadors found out in the court of Prestor John, and had
conferrence with him, from whence when they departed in the year of our Lord
one thousand five hundred twenty and six, they were very desirous to take him
with them into their country, and he himself was as willing to depart, but
they could never get leave of king David, for he ever answered to their
desires, that he received that man of his father Nau when he received his
Kingdoms, and that he would regard him with the like care and love as he did
his Kingdoms.

And that there was noe cause why it should be irckesome to him to live
amongst the Aethiopians, where, both from his fathers liberality and his own
he had received great wealth and riches: This John Peter (as our Ambassadors
reported) was skillful almost in all languages, for which cause, and more
especially for his wisdom (which was very great,) was he so earnestly retained
of the Ethiopian Emperors, from whom they exactly understood the estate of
Portugal and their nauigations, by the often recytall whereof, (as he was very
learned and eloquent,) he purchased the love and affections of the people of
Aethiopia, both to himself and to us all, After John the second King of
Portugal was dead, and Emanuell most happily succeeded him in his Kingdom, he
sent a navy whereof Vascus a Gama was gouenor, in the year of our redemtion
one thousand four hundred ninty and seven, for Aethiopia, who disankerring at
Vlysbone, and recovering and escaping that dangerous point, called caput
bonaespei at last arrived in East India, where by arms they reduced many
provinces and cities under our subjection, and government; which news being
made known in Aethiopia by the borderers, as also by some Portugalls which at
that time came out of India to Prester John's Court, Helena the grandmother of
David, (who by reason of David's non age, had the administration and government
of his Kingdoms) sent one Matthew Armenius a skillful man and learned in many
languages, into Portugale to King Emanuell, and (that his Embassage might carry
more credit and authority) she sent with him a noble young man called Abesynus,
which two I have often met in our Court, and have had familiar conference with
them, This Matthew came by diverse iournies to Goa unto Alphonsus Albuquercus
viceroy there, of whom he being received very courteously, and dispached
thence liberally rewarded, he arrived in our navy at Vlispone, in the year of
Christ 1513. who showing to the King the cause of his Embassage, presented him
with a cross finely wrought, made of that tree whereof our Savior Christ was
Crucified, which cross I have oftentimes seen and worshipped, while my
brother Fructus a Goes was the Kings chamberlain and had it in his custody:
the Queens letters which he brought unto King Emanuell purported thus much.

A letter of Helena the grandmother of David Precious John Emperor of
Aethiopia, written unto Emanuell King of Portugal in the year of our Lord.
1509.
IN the name of God the Father the Son and Holy Ghost, one God in three
presons, the health grace and benediction of our Lord and Redeemer Jesus
Christ, Son of the blessed Virgin Mary, borne in Bethlem, be upon our dear
brother, the most Christian King Emanuell, governor of the sea, and conqueror
of the Barbarous and incredulous Moors: Our Lord God prosper thee and give
thee victory over all thine enemies, and that your Kingdoms and dominions (by
the devout prayers of the Messengers of our Savior Christ, to wit the four
Evangelists S. John, Luke, Mark and Matthew, whose sanctity and prayers be ever
thy defense, may extend and stretch themselves wide and broad.

These are to certyfie you most dear brother, that there came unto us from
your great and famous Court, two Messengers, whereof one was called John, who
affirmed himself to be a Priest, and the other John Gomez and desired of us
soldiers and provision for the wars, wherefore we have sent unto you our
Ambassador Matthew, the Brother of our service, with the license of Mark the
Patriarch, who gives us his benediction, sending us Preests from Jerusalem,
he is our father, and father of all our dominions, the pillar of the faith of
Christ, and of the Holy Trynitie, he at our request sent unto your great
Captain and leader of those Soldiers, which make wars in India for the
faith of our Savior Jesus Christ, to signify unto him, that we were ready
and willing to send unto him Soldiers and provision for the wars, if need
required; and because we have heard it reported that the Prince of Caire has
sent forth a great Navy against your Forces, to be revenged (as we be well
assured) of the losses and damages which he has often received of the
Captains of your Army which you have in India, whom God of his great
goodness vouchsafe to assist, and so to prosper their proceedings every day
more and more, that all those unbelievers may once become subject to your
government. We therefore to withstand their assaults will forthwith send an
Army which shall stay at the sea of Mecha, that is to say, at Babel mendell,
or if you think it more fitting, at the haven of Inda, or Thor: that so you
may destroy, and root out all those Moors, and miscreant unbelievers from the
face of the earth, so as the gifts and obiations which be brought and offered
at the holy Sepulcher be no more devoured of dogs: for now is come that time
promised, which (as is said) Christ and his mother Mary foretold, to wit, that
in the latter days a King should arise from out some Christian Region, that
should abolish and bring to naught the universal stock of the Barbarians and
Moors. And now certainly is that time come, which Christ promised to his
blessed Mother. Moreover, what ever our Ambassador Matthew shall say unto you,
accept it, and give credit unto it, as that which proceeds from our own
person, for he is one of the chiefest of our Court, and therefore have we sent
him unto you: We would have committed these things unto your Messengers, which
you sent hither, but that we were afraid lest our businesses might be taken
otherwise then we intended. We have sent unto you by this Matthew our
Ambassador, a Cross made (undoubtedly) of a piece of that Tree, whereupon our
Savior Christ was crucified at Jerusalem. Which piece of sacred wood was
brought to us from Jerusalem, and thereof we made two Crosses, whereof one
remains with us, the other we have delivered to our Ambassador to be
presenred to you, the wood is of a black color, and hangs at a little
silver ring.

Furthermore, if it shall seem good unto you, either to give your daughters in
marriage to our sons, or that we shall give oue our sons to your daughters,
it shall be very acceptable unto me, and profitable to us both, and the
beginning of a brotherly league betwixt us, which conjunction of matrimony, we
shall ever desire to enter into with you, as well hereafter, as for the present
time.

And thus we end with our prayer unto God, that the salvation and grace of our
redeemer Jesus Christ, and of our blessed Lady the Virgin Mary, may extend and
remain both upon you, your sons and your daughters, and all your family.
Amen.

Moreover, these are to certify you, that if we would make wars, and join
our Armies together, we should (by Gods help) be strong enough, utterly to
destroy and root out all the enemies of the faith of Christ. But our kingdoms
and dominions are so situated in the middle of the land, as by no means we
can have passage into the sea. In the sea therefore we have no power, wherein
(praise be given to God) you be the strongest of all Princes. Jesus Christ be
your guide, for your affairs, which you have done and achieved here in
India, seem rather to be done by miracle, then by man; but if you would
furnish a Navy of a thousand ships we will give you provision, and
abundantly minister unto you all things necessary for such a Navy.

This letter, with some other Articles of the Faith, religion, manners, and
state of the Ethiopians, which Matthew expressed before King Emanuell and his
Council, I have by the entreaty of John Magnus Gothus, Archbishop of Vpsalia
in the kingdom of Suetia, with whom I had extraordinary familiarity and
frindship in Prussia, translated out of the Portingall language, wherein I
found it written, into Lattine: which letter, together with the said articles,
were afterward imprinted at Antwerp, without my priuity.

These things understood from the Ethiopian Ambassadors, King Emanuell (as he
was exceeding wise, and most desirous to increase the Christian religion)
instituted an Embassage sufficiently furnished with very grave and reverend
men, the chiefest whereof were Edward Galuanus, a man well stricken in years,
and of great wisdom and experience. And Francis Aluarez, a Priest, and of
very renowned authority with the King, who was also old, and of unreprovable
manners: both which I have known by sight. These two, and Matthew the Ethiopian
Ambassador, sailed toward India, under the conduct of Lupo Soarez the Viceroy,
and after his death, under Viceroy Didaco Lupeza a Sequeira, who was Lupos
successor, with a Navy well furnished, which he had prepared against the
Turks, by whom they were brought to a haven called Arquicum, situated upon the
Erythraean shore, and under the dominion of Prester John, into which haven the
ship arrived upon the second day of April, in the year of Christ 1520. In
which journey Edward Galuanus dyed in Camara, an Island in the Erythraean sea,
and Rhodericus Limius was placed in his stead, who with his fellows in
Embassage set forwards on their journey from the said haven of Arquicum,
toward the Court of Prester John, having Matthew with them as their guide and
companion (for that young man Abesynus, whom I formerly mentioned, was dead
before this time.) And in this journey Matthew dyed likewise, and was buried in
a famous Monastery called Bisayn, after whose funerals performed, they set
forwards on their intended journey, and after great travels, infinite labors,
and many dangers, they arrived at the Court of Prester John, of whom,
Rhodoricke with his associates, were very honorably received, and he having
perfected his business, and received new message, was sent back again unto
King Emanuell: which done, he went to the haven of Arquicum, but found not the
Navy there of whom Ludouicus Menesius was governor, and which came purposely
thither to carry them back again: for they stayed so long, that the ship
could no longer expect their coming, by reason of the outrageous and vehement
tempests within those coasts, by an admirable secret of nature, blow six
months together from one climate, and the other six months from the other.

At Arquicum he found letters with the Governor of the town, left there by
Praetor Ludouicus, perporting the death of king Emanuell: wherefore he
determined to return again to Prestor John's Court, at whose return Prester
John writ letters unto the Pope of Rome, committing them to Francis Aluarez, to
be carried to him at Rome.

All these having remained in those provinces for the space of six years, in
the the end, together with the Ethiopian Ambassador, whom Prester John sent
anew unto our King, entered into one of the Kings ships at Arquicum, which was
there laid for the purpose, in the month of April in the year of Christ
1526. and disankering thence, sailed toward India, and at length by tedious
travels at sea, they returned to King John at Lisbon, in the month of July, in
the year 1527. who retained the Ethiopian Ambassador with him, touching
certain points of his Embassage, unto the year 1539. and sent Francis Aluarez
unto Pope Clement the seventh, with letters from Prester John, from whom he
came as Ambassador. Which letters the Pope received at the hands of the said
Francis Aluarez, at Bononia, in the month of January 1533. In the presence of
the Emperor Charles the fifth; of which letters, and of others written to
Emanuell, and John King of Portugal, Paulus Iouius, a very learned man was
interpretor, who has translated them out of the Portingall language, wherein
they were written, into Latin, as here you may see.

A letter from David the most renowned Emperor of Aethithiopia, written to
Emanuell, King of Portugal, in the year of our Lord 1521. Paulus Iouius being
interpretor.
IN the name of God the Father, as he always has been, void of all
beginning: in the name of God his only son, who is like unto him, and was
before the stars gave light, and before he laid the foundation of the Ocean,
who at another time was conceived in the womb of the blessed Virgin, without
the seed of man, and without marriage, for in this manner was the knowledge of
his duty: in the name of the holy Ghost, the Spirit of sanctity, who knows
all secrets that be, where he was before, that is of all the altitudes of
heaven, which is sustained without any pillars or props, he who amplified the
earth, which before was not created nor known through all parts, from the east
to the west, and from the north to the south. Neither is this the first or
second, but the undivided Trinity in the only eternal Creator of all things,
of one only council, and one word for ever and ever Amen.

These letters are sent by Atani Thingil, that is to say, the incense of a
virgin, which name was given him in baptism, but now at his first entrance
into his kingdom, he took the name of David, the beloved of God, the pillar
of faith, a kinsman of the tribe of Judah, the son of David, the son of Solomon,
the son of the pillar of Sion, the son of the seed of Jacob, a son of the hand
of Mary, and the carnal son of Nav Emperor of great and high Ethiopia, and of
great kingdoms, lands, and dominions, king of Xoa, Caffate, Fatigar, Angote,
Boru, Baaligaze, Adea, Vangue, Goiame (where is the head of the river Nilus) of
Damaraa, of Vaguemedri, Ambeaa, Vagne, Tigri Mahon, of Sabain, where Saba was
Queen, and of Bermagaes, and Lord unto Nobia the end of Egypt.

These letters I say, be sent from him, and directed to the high, mighty, and
invincible Lord Emanuell, who dwells in the love of God, and remains firm
in the Catholic faith; the son of the Apostles Peter and Paul, King of
Portingall, and of the Algarbians, friend of Christians, enemy, judge, Emperor
and vanquisher of the Moors and of the people of Affricke and of Guiennea,
from the Promontory and Island of the Moon, of the red sea of Arabia, Persis
and Armutia, of great India, and of all places, and of those Islands and
adjacent Countries: spoyler and ouerthrower of the Moors, and strange Paganes,
Lord of Castles, high Towers, and Walls, and increaser of the faith of Christ.
Peace be unto you King Emanuell, who (by Gods assistance, destroyest the
Moors, and with your Navy, your Army, and your Captains, driuest them up and
down like unbelieving dogs. Peace be unto your wife the Queen, the friend
of Jesus Christ, hand-maide of the virgin Mary, the mother of the Savior of
the world. Peace be unto your Sons, who be as a Table well furnished with
dainties, in a green Garden amongst the flourishing Lillies. Peace be unto
your Daughters, who are attired with garments, and costly ornaments, as Princes
Palaces be garnished with Tapestry. Peace be unto your kinsfolks, which be
procreated of the seed of the Saints, as the Scripture says, the sons of
the Saints be blessed both within doors and without. Peace be unto your
Counselors and officers, your Magistrates and Lawyers. Peace be unto the
captains of your castles and borders, and of all matters of munition. Peace be
unto all your Nation, and to all your inhabitants (Moors and Jews excepted.)
Peace be unto all your parishes, and to all that be faithful to Christ and to
you. Amen.

I understand my Lord, King, and Father, that when the report of my name was
brought unto you by Matthew our Ambassador, you assembled a great number of your
Archbishops, Bishops, and Prelates, to give thanks unto Christ our God for
that Embassage, and that the same Matthew was received very honorably, and
joyfully, which thing did exceedingly rejoice me, and for which I in like
manner, and all my people with me, praised God, with great devotion. But it
grieved me when I understood that Matthew was dead in the Monastery of Bisain
in his return home, when he should have entered into the limits of our
Country, yet I my self sent him not, because I was then a child of eleven
years of age, and had scarce taken upon me the government of my kingdom after
the death of my father, but Helena the Queen, whom I did reverence as my
mother, and who governed the kingdom for me, she sent him. That Matthew was a
Merchant, and his right name was Abraham, but he called himself by another
name, that he might travel more securely through the Moors, yet
notwithstanding he being known to be a Christian by the Moors in Dabull, was
there cast into prison, which when he had signified unto the Prefect of your
Army, the same prefect sent diverse valiant men to deliver this Christian out
of that vile prison, which he did more willingly, understanding that he was my
Ambassador, and when he had delivered him from the hands of his enemies, he
committed him to your ships, to be brought unto your presence. That Matthew
declared his message in my name unto your King, and writ unto me that he was
honorably received, and abundantly rewarded with gifts of all sorts, which is
likewise affirmed by your messengers, which Didacus Lupez de Sequeira, chief
Governor of your Fleet, sent unto us, who presented those letters unto us
which Edward Galuanus that died in the Isle of Cameran, should have brought.
Upon view of which letters I greatly rejoiced and praised God, conceiving great
pleasure, when I beheld the breasts of your Messengers marked with Crosses, and
proved by enquiring of them, that they observed the Ceremonies of the Christian
Religion, which be most infallible true: and I was exceedingly stirred up with
a singular devotion, when I understood that they found their way into Ethiopia
by miracle: for they told us that the Captain of the ship wandering long by the
Arabicke sea, and therefore dispairing to find our haven, determined to leave
this business vndispatched, and to return into India, the rather for the cruel
tempests wherewith they were tossed upon the sea, but in the same morning
betimes that he intended to retire, a red Cross appeared unto him in heaven,
which when he had worshipped, he commanded the Mariners to turn the
foredeckes of their ships that way as the Cross stood, and so by Gods
appointment was our haven discovered and found out, which thing I held to be
miraculous. And surely the Governor of that Navy is beloved of God, seeing he
obtained so great felicity, as no man before him had obtained of God. This
mutual Embassage was formerly spoken of by the Prophet in the book of the
life and passion of S. Victor, and in the books of the holy Fathers, that a
great Christian King should make peace with the King of Ethiopia: yet did I not
think that this would have come to pass in my days, but God knew the
certainty, that his name might be extolled, who directed the Messenger unto
me, that I might send the like unto you again, my Father, and friend in
Christ, that we may remain in our Faith, seeing I never had any Messenger,
nor certain knowledge from any other Christian King.

Hitherto the Moors have been about me the sons of Mahomet and Gentiles,
some of them be slaves, which know not God, some others worship the fire and
blocks, some others adore the Sun, and some suppose Serpents to be Gods.
With these I never had peace, because they refuse to come unto the truth, and
to these I preach the faith in vain. But now I am at quiet, and God has given
me rest with all mine enemies, and yours, for when I march in Arms against
them in the bounds of my Country, they turn their faces and fly from us,
and our Captains and Soldiers have the conquest of them and their Camps:
neither is God angry with me (as the Psalmist says) and God fulfilleth the
desires of those Kings which require just things, yet this belongs not to our
praise, but the praises are to be given unto God, for he it is that has
given the world unto you, and has granted unto you the lands of the Gentiles
for ever, and the lands of other people from the limits of your own Country,
even to the entrance into Ethiopia. Wherefore I give incessant thanks unto
God, and declare his great and incomprehensible power and majesty, conceiving
great hope that the sons of those people which come under your dominion,
shall undoubtedly be partakers of the truth of religion, and therefore I
praise God, and hope that your sons, and my self, and you also, shall
exceedingly rejoice for the good success of these things. And you ought
continually to pray unto God, until he give you his grace to obtain the holy
Temple in Jerusalem, which is now in the power of the enemies of Christ, the
Moors, Gentiles, and Heretics, which if you bring to pass, your estimation
and renown shall be replenished with all praise.

But three of those Ambassadors which came unto me with the said Matthew, and
the great Prefect of your Navy came down to Macua to commune with the King
of Bernagaes, who is subject to our government, and forthwith sent Ambassadors
unto me, and great gifts which were most dear and acceptable unto me: but yet
your fame and renown was more dear and precious unto me then all jewels and
treasures whatsoever. But let us omit these things, and confer amongst our
selves how we may invade and take the infidels Countries, for which purpose I
shall willingly give one hundred thousand thousand drachmaes of gold, and as
many fighting men, timber, iron, and copper likewise, for to build and furnish
a Navy, besides great store of furniture and provision for wars, and we
will accord and agree friendly together, and for because it is not my custom,
nor fitting for my dignity, to send ambassadors to require peace, and seeeing
you your self have formerly required it, with great sincerity (to confirm the
sayings of our Savior Christ, for it is written: Blessed be the Teet which
bring peace,) therefore I my self am most ready to embrace it, after the
manner of the Apostles, which were of one consent, and of one heart. O King,
and my Father Emanuell, God who is only one, the God of heaven, and always of
one substance, never waxing younger or older, preserve and keep thee in safety.
He which brought the message from you unto us was called Rhodericus Lima, he
was the head and chiefest man of that embassage, and with him was Francis
Aluarez, whom for his honesty of life, singular religion, and justice, I have
held most dear, and especially for that being demanded of his faith, he
answered thereunto very fitly and truly. And therefore you ought to exalt him,
and to call him master, and to employ him in converting the people of Macua,
and of Dalaca, of Zeila, and of all the Islands of the red sea, because they
be in the bounds of my kingdoms.

And I have granted unto him a Cross, and a staff in token of his authority,
and do you command that these things may be given unto him, and that he may
be made Bishiop of those Countries and Islands, because he well deserves it,
and is very fitting to administer that office, and God shall do good unto thee
that thou may be always strong against thy enemies, and constrain them to
prostrate themselves at thy feet, I pray God prolong thy life, and make thee
partake of the kingdom of heaven, in the best place, even as I wish for my
self, for with my ears have I heard much good of you, and I see with mine
eyes that which I thought I should never have seen, and God will make all
things to go well with you, and your seat shall be upon the tree of life,
which is the seat of the Saints. Amen.

As a young child I have done what ever you commanded me, and will do if your
Ambassadors come hither, that we may aid one another by our mutual forces: and
I shall give, and cause to be given unto all your Ambassadors which shall come
hither, what ever you will signify to be done, and as you did at Macna, at
Dalaca, and at the ports in the streights of the red sea, that we may be
prosperously joined together, both in Council and action, as I do chiefly
desire: for when your Forces shall come to those Coasts, I will speedily be
with them with my Army also, and because there be no Christians in the
Marches of my Country, nor any Churches for Christians, I will give unto your
people those lands to dwell in, which be nearest unto the dominion of the
Moors, for it behooves that you bring your beginnings to a good end. In the
mean space send to me learned men, and caruers of Images of gold and silver,
workers of copper likewise, and of Iron, of tin, and of lead, and Artificers
to imprint books for the Church in our language, and some that can make gold
foil, or thin plates, or rays of gold, and with the same can guild other
metals, these shall be courteously entertained in my house, and if they shall
desire to depart, I will give unto them large and ample rewards for their
labors. And I swear by God, Jesus Christ the son of God, that I will freely
suffer them to depart when they please. This I most boldly and confidently
desire, because your virtue is apparent unto me, and your goodness well
known. And for that I know you love me well, whereof I am most assured,
because for my sake you received Matthew very honorably, and liberally, and so
sent him back again: and therefore I covet to desire those things, neither be
thou ashamed of it, for I will truly accomplish and perform all things. That
which the Father desires of the Son, cannot be denied, and you are my
Father, and I your Son, and we be coupled and joined together, and as one
brick is joined to another in a wall, so we being so to agree together, in one
heart, and in the love of Jesus Christ, who is the head of the world, and those
which be with him be likened to brickes joined together in a wall.

Letters from the said DAVID, Emperor of Aethiopia unto John the third of that
name, King of Portugal, written in the year of our redemption 1524. and
interpreted by Paulus Iouius.
IN the name of God the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and of all
things that be made either visible or invisible: in the name of God the son
Christ, who is the son and Council, and prophet of the Father: in the name
of God the holy Ghost, the Advocate of the living God, equal to the Father and
the Son, who spoke by the mouth of the Prophets, breathing upon the Apostles,
that they might give thanks and praise unto the holy Trinity, which is ever
perfect in heaven, and in earth, in the sea, and in the deep. Amen.

I surnamed Virgins Frankincense, which name was given me at my baptism, and
now taking upon me the government of my kingdom, I have also assumed the name
of David, the dearly beloved of God, the pillar of the faith, the issue or
stock of Judah, the son of David, the son of Solomon Kings of Israel, the
son of the column, or pillar of Sion, the son of the seed of Jacob, the
son of the hand of Mary, and the son of Nav by the flesh, send these letters
and message unto John the most high, mighty, and potent King of Portugal, and
of the Algarbians, the son of King Emanuell: Peace be unto you, and the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ remain always with you. Amen.

At that time that the power of the King your father was reported unto me, who
made war against the Moors, the sons of the abominable and accursed Mahomet,
I gave great thanks unto God for your increase and greatness, and for the crown
of your conversation in the house of Christianity. In like manner I took
pleasure by the coming of your Ambassadors, which reported unto me that kings
speeches, whereby a singular love, knowledge, and friendship was established
betwixt us, utterly to extirpe and drive away those wicked and accursed Moors,
and unbelieving Gentiles, which dwell between your kingdoms and mine. But
while I was thus joyful, I heard that your father and mine was departed out of
this life, before I could dispatch my Ambassadors from hence unto him: and
therefore my joy was suddenly turned into sadness, so that in the great sorrow
of my heart all the States and Noble men of my Court, and Ecclesiastical
Prelates, and all which live in Monasteries, and all our subjects wholly, made
great lamentaion with me, so as the pleasure we conceived of the first message,
was equalled and extinguished with the sorrow of the last.

Sir, from my first entrance into my kingdoms unto this present time, no
message nor messenger has come unto me either from the King or kingdom of
Portugal; but in the life time of the King your Father, who sent his Captains
and Governors unto me, with Clearkes and Deacons, which brought with them all
solemn provision and apparel for the Mass, for which I rejoiced greatly, and
received them honorably, and shortly after dismissed them, that they might
return with honor and peace. And after they came to a Haven of the sea, which
is within my limits in the red sea, they found not the great Governor of the
Navy there, whom your father had sent, for he expected not their coming, but
certified me that he could not stay their coming, for that your custom is
to create a new chief Governor of the Fleet once every three years, in
which mean time he that was newly created, came thither, and this was the
cause that the Ambassadors stayed longer then was needful. But now I send my
Messages by Christopher, the brother of Licontius, whose name at his baptism
is Zoga Zabo, which is as much to say, as the grace of the Father, and he
shall manifest my desires before you.

In like manner I send Francis Aluarez unto the Pope of Rome, who in my name
shall yield my obedience unto him, as is fitting.

O Sir King, and my brother, give ear and attend, and endeavor to embrace that
friendship which your Father opened betwixt us, and send your Messengers and
Letters often unto us, for I greatly desire to see them, as from my brother,
for so it should be, seeing we are both Christians. And seeing the Moors
which be wicked and naught, accord and agree together in their sect. And now I
pretest I will never hereafter admit any Ambassadors from the Kings of Egypt,
nor from other Kings, which send Ambassadors unto me, but from your highness,
which I much desire should often come: for the Kings of the Moors account me
not their friend, by reason of our disagreement, and disparitie in religion:
yet they feign friendship, that by that means they may more freely and safely
exercise merchandise in our kingdoms, which is very profitable unto them, for
they carry great store of gold (whereof they be very greedy) out of my kingdoms:
though they be but hollow friends unto me, and their commodities bring me but
little pleasure, but this has been tolerated, because it has been an
ancient custom of our former Kings, and though I make no wars upon them, nor
utterly overthrow them, and bring them to destruction, yet in this I am to be
borne withal, lest, if I did so, they should violate and pull down the holy
Temple which is at Jerusalem, wherein is the sepulcher of our Savior Christ,
which God has suffered to be in the power of the wicked Moors, and also least
they should make level with the ground other Churches which be in Egypt and
Syria. And this is the cause why I do not inwade and subdue them; which thing
greatly irketh me, and I am the rather persuaded so to do, seeing I have no
bordering Christian king to assist me, and to cheer and encourage my heart in
that, or the like enterprise.

And therefore my self (O King,) have no great cause to rejoice of the
Christian Kings of Europe, understanding that they agree not together in one
heart, but that wars be very rife amongst them. Be you all of one
Christian-like mind, for you ought all of you to be content of a firm peace
amongst you.

And certainly, if any of my neighboring Christian Kings were joined with me
in an amiable league (as they ought) I would never depart from him one hour.
And of this I know not well what I should say, or what I should do, seeing they
seem to be so ordained by God.

Sir, send your Messengers more often unto me, I beseech you, for when I look
upon your letters, then me thinks, I behold your countenance. And surely
greater friendship arises betwixt those which be far distant, then those
which dwell near together, by reason of the great desire wherewith they be
delighted, for he which has hidden treasures, though he cannot see them with
his eyes, yet in his heart he ever loves them most ardently, as our Savior
Jesus Christ says in the Gospel, where thy treasure is, there is thy heart
also.

And in like manner ought you to make me your treasure, and to cowple your
heart sincerely with mine. O my Lord and brother, keep this word, for you be
most prudent, and (as I hear) much like unto your Father in wise-dome, which
when I understood, I forthwith gave praise unto God, and laying aside all
grief, conceived joy and said: Blessed is the wise son, and of great
estimation, the son of King Emanuell, which sits in the throne of his
fathers kingdoms. My Lord beware then, faint not, seeing thou art as strong as
thy father was, nor show thy forces to be weak against the Moors and
Gentiles, for by the assistance of God, and thine own virtue, thou shall
easily vanquish and destroy them, neither shall thou say that thou had small
power left thee by thy father, for truly it was great enough, and God shall
ever bring thee help.

I have men, money, and munition, in abundance, like the sands of the sea, and
the stars of heaven, and we joining our forces together, may easily destroy
the rudenes and barbarousnes of the Moors. And I desire nothing else of you
but skillful men, which be able to instruct my soldiers to keep their orders
and ranks in battle. And thou, O King, art a man of perfect age, King Solomon
took upon him the government of his kingdom when he was but twelve years of
age, yet of great power and more wise then his father. And my self likewise
was but a child of eleven years of age when my father Nav departed this life,
and being entered into my Fathers seat, by Gods ordinance, I obtained greater
wealth and forces then ever my Father had: for in my power be all the
borderers and Nations of the Kingdom. Wherefore both of us ought to give
incessant thanks unto God for so great benefits received.

Give care unto me my brother and Lord, for this at one word I desire of you,
that you will send unto me learned men, that can carue images, imprint books,
and make Swords, and and all kind of weapons for the wars: head Masons
likewise, and Carpenters, and physicians that have skill to make medicines and
cure wounds.

I would also have such as can draw gold into thin plates, and be able
curiously to carue and ingraue gold and silver, and such likewise as have
knowledge to get gold and silver from out the veins of the earth, and to work
in all manner of metal mines. Besides these, I shall much esteem of such as
can make couerings for houses of lead, and will teach others how to make tiles
of chalk or clay.

To conclude, I shall have use of all manner of Artificers, and especially of
such as can make Gunnes. Help me therefore, I pray you, in these things, as
one brother should help another, and so God will help you, and deliver you
from all evil, God will hear thy prayers and petitions, as he has received
holy sacrifices at all times, as first of all, the sacrifices of Abell, and of
Noe when he was in the Arc, and that of Abraham when he was in the land of
Madian, and that of Isaac when he departed from the Ditch or Trench of the
Oath, and that of Iocob in the house of Bethlem, and of Moses in Egypt, and
Aaron in the Mount, and of Ieson the son of Nav in Galgale, and of Gedeon in
the Coast, and of Sampson when he was a thirst in the land of drought, and of
Samuel in Rhama, of the Prophet, and of David in Nacira, and of Solomon in the
City of Gabeon, and of Helias in mount Carmell, when he raised from death
the Widow woman's son, from Rhicha above the pit, and of Iosaphat in battle,
and of Manasses when he sinned, and converted again unto God, and of Daniell
in the Lions Den, and of the three brethren, Sydrach, Mysaach, and Abednago
on the fiery furnace, and of Anna before the Altar, and of Nehemias, which made
walls with Zorababell, and of Mathathia with his sons, over the fourth part
of the world, and of Esau upon his blessing, even so our Lord will receive your
sacrifices, and supplications, and will help you, and stand with you against
all persuersnes, and ouerth wartnes at all seasons, and every day.

Peace be with you, and I embrace you with the arms of sanctity, and in like
manner I embrace all those which be of your Council of the kingdom of
Portugal, Archbishops likewise, and Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, and all men
and women whatsoever. The grace of God, and blessing of the Virgin Mary the
mother of God be with you, and with you all. Amen.

Letters from the same most renowned David, Emperor of Ethiopia, unto the Pope
of Rome, written in the year of our Lord 1524. and translated into Latin by
Paulus Iouius.
IN the name of God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and of all
things visible and invisible: in the name of God the Son Jesus Christ, which
is the same with the Father from the beginning of the world, and is light of
light, and true God of true God: in the name of the holy spirit of the living
God, who proceeded from God Father.

These letters I the King do send, whose name the Lions do worship, and by
the grace of God, I am called Athani Tinghil, that is to say, the incense of a
virgin, the Son of King David, the son of Solomon, the son of a king by
the hand of Mary, the son of Nav by the flesh, the son of of the holy Apostles,
S. Peter and S Paul by grace.

Peace be unto you most just Lord, holy, mighty, pure, and sacred Father: unto
you, which are the head of all Princes, and fear no man, seeing no one can
speak evil of thee: unto you, which are the most vigilant Curate and obseruer
of souls, and friend of strangers and and peregrines.

O holy master, and preacher of the faith, enemy of all those things which
offend the conscience, lover of good manners, sanctified man, whom all men laud
and praise.

O happy and holy Father, I yield obedience unto you with great reverence, for
you are the peace of all things, and deserve all good, and therefore it is
fitting that all men should show their obedience unto you, as the holy Apostles
command to yield obedience to God. This truly belongs unto you; for so also
they command us to worship Bishops, Archbishops, and Prelates. In like manner
that we should love and reverence you, as our father, fear you as our King,
and have confidence in you as in God. Wherefore I humbly confess, and with my
bending knees say unto you, O holy father, that you are my father, and I your
son. O holy and most mighty father, why did you never send any unto us, that
you might better understand of my life and health, seeing you be the
shepherd, and I your sheep? For a good sheepeheard will never forget his
flock, neither ought you to think that I dwell so far remote from your
regions, that messengers cannot come unto me, seeing your son Emanuell, the
King of Portugal, has sent Ambassadors unto me, very conveniently, from his
kingdom, which is the furthest from us in the world, and if God had spared him
life, and not incited him so suddenly to heaven, (without doubt) those things
which we then had in hand, had been brought to a happy conclusion. But now I
much desire to be certified by some trusty messengers, of your holiness
health and happiness, for I never yet heard any message from your holiness,
but something I heard of our own people, who to perform their vows, went a
pilgrimage into those parts, but seeing they went not in my name, nor brought
with them my letters from you, their reports are but an uncertain belief: for
I questioning with them, they said they came from Jerusalem, where having
performed their vows, they went to Rome to visit the Churches of the
Apostles, understanding that they might easily come to those places which be
inhabited by Christians. And surely I take great pleasure in their speeches,
because in my sweet cogitation, I do behold the similitude of thy holy
countenance, which seems unto me like the countenance of an Angel. And I
confess, that I do love and reverence that image as an Angellicall likeness,
but yet were it more acceptable and pleasant unto me, deuoutely and diligently
to consider and view your words and Letters.

And therefore I most humbly beseech you to send Messengers unto me with your
benediction, thereby to cheer and exhilerate my heart, for seeing we agree in
faith and religion, before all things I desire and entreat that you will set
my love and friendship in the principallest part of your heart, as the ring
which you wear upon your finger, and the chain of gold which you put about
your neck, that so the remembrance of me may never be blotted out of your
memory: for with thankful words and letters friendship is increased, it is
embraced with sacred peace, from whence all humane joy springs and arises,
for even as he that is thirsty greatly desires cold water (as the scripture
says) so does my heart conceive an incredible joy from the messengers and
letters which come to me from the furthest parts of the world: neither shall I
only rejoice to hear from your holiness, but also I shall be glad to hear
certain news from all the Kings of Christendom. And full as joyful as those
that in battle do get the best spoils. And this may be done with great
facility, seeing the King of Portugal has made the whole journey plain unto
them, who long sithence has sent his Ambassadors unto us with strong Armies:
but neither when my father was living, nor sithence, have we received any
Message or Letters from any other Christian King, or from the Pope himself,
although in our treasuries of Monuments, and Charters of my great Grand father,
is preserved the memory of those Letters which Pope Eugenius sent into this
Country, when the King of Kings, of all Ethiopia being the seed of Jacob, and
a King to be feared, had the government of this kingdom.

The form of which letters were thus. Eugenius the Bishop of Rome to our
beloved son the King of the seed of Jacob, the King of all the kings of
Ethiopia, and chiefly to be feared, etc.

And in the conclusion of the same letters is mentioned that his son John
Paleologus, which dyed about two years before, the King of the Romaean Kings,
was called to the celebration of the sacred Synod. And that Joseph the
Patriarch of Constantinople, came with him with a great number of Archbishops,
and Bishops, and Prelates of all sorts, among whom were the Proctors or Factors
of the Patriarckes of Antioch, Alexandria and Jerusalem, who when they had
joined themselves together in love of holy faith and religion, the unity of the
Church being ordained and established, all the difficulties and troubles of
ancient time, which seemed erroneous, and contrary to religion, were (by Gods
divine assistance) utterly taken away and abolished: which things being rightly
established and set in order, the Pope himself brought great joy unto them all.

This book of Pope Eugenius we have sent unto you, which we have kept
uncorrupted, and we would have sent unto you the whole order and power of the
Popes blessing, but that the volume of these things would seem too great, for
it would exceed in bigness the whole book of Paul to all the nations he writ
unto.

The Legates which brought these things unto us from the Pope, were Theodorus,
Peter, Didymus, and George, the servants of Jesus Christ, and you shall do well
(most holy Father) to command your books to be looked over, where (I suppose)
some memory of these things which we write of, may be found out. Wherefore holy
father, if you will write any thing unto us believe it confidently, that we
will most diligently commit it to our books, that the eternal memory of those
things may remain to our posterity, and surely I account him blessed whose
memory is preserved in writing in the sacred city of Rome, and in the seat of
the Saints, S. Peter and S. Paul, for these be Lords of the kingdom of
heaven, and judges of the whole world. And because that this is my belief, I
therefore send these letters, that I may obtain grace of your holiness, and your
most sacred Senate, that from thence may come unto me a holy benediction, and
increase of all good things. And I most earnestly beseech your holiness to send
unto me some images and pictures of the Saints, and especially of the virgin
Mary, that your name may be often in my memory, and that I may take continual
pleasure in your gifts. Furthermore I heartily entreat you to send unto me men
learned in the Scriptures, workmen likewise that can make images and swords,
and all manner of weapons for the war, grauers also of gold and silver, and
Carpenters, and Masons, especially which can build houses of stone, and make
covering for them of lead and copper, whereby the roofes of the houses may be
defended. And besides these, such as can make glass and instruments of
music, and such as be skillful in music, those also that can play upon
Flutes, Trumpets, and pshalmes, shall be most welcome and dear unto us: and
these workmen I much desire should be sent me from your Court: but if there be
not sufficicient store in your court, your holiness may command them of other
Kings, who will obey your command most readily. When these shall come to me,
they shall be honorably esteemed of according to their deserts, and from my
liberality shall be amply rewarded, and if any shall desire to return home, he
shall depart with liberal gifts whither he please: for I will not detain any
one against his will, though I should have great fruit and benefit by his
industry.

But I must now speak of other matters, and demand of you (most holy father)
why you exhort not the Christian kings, your children, to lay aside their arms,
and as becomes brethren, to accord and agree amongst themselves, seeing they
be thy sheep, and thou their shepherd? for your holiness knows right well
what the Gospel commands, where it is said: That every kingdom divided in
it self shall be desolated, and brought to ruin. And if the Kings would agree
in their hearts, and conclude an assured league and peace together, they might
easily vanquish all the Mahometans, and by their fortunate entrance, and sudden
irruption utterly burst, and throw down the sepulcher of that false Prophet
Mahomet. For this cause (holy father) endeavor your self that a firm peace
and assured league of friendship may be concluded and established amongst
them, and admonish them to be assistant and aiding unto me, seeing in the
confines of my kingdoms, I am on all sides enclosed and encompassed about with
those most wicked men the Mahometane Moors, for those Mahometane Moors yield
mutual aid one to another, and the kings with kings, petty kings with petty
kings, do sincerely and constantly assemble themselves against us. There is a
Moore very near neighbor unto me, to whom the other bordering Moors minister
weapons, horses, and munition for the wars. These be the kings of India,
Persis, Arabia, and Egypt, which things grieve and molest me exceedingly every
day, when I behold the enemies of the Christian religion joined together in
brotherly love, and to enjoy peace, and to see the Christian kings my brothers
to be nothing at all moved by these injuries, nor to yield me any help, as
assuredly behooves Christians to do, seeing the impious brood of Mahomet do
aid and assist one another: neither am I he, that for that purpose should
require Soldiers and provision for wars of you, seeing I have Soldiers left
of mine own: but only I desire your prayers and orisons, wishing also favor
and grace with your holiness, and with all Christian Kings my brethren: for I
must seek to obtain friendship of you, that I may be fully instructed and
furnished of those things which I formerly desired, to the terror of the
Moors, and that my neigbours, the enemies of the Christian faith may
understand that the kings do favor and aid me with a singular care and
affection, which surely will redound to the praise of us in common, seeing we
agree together in one verity of religion and faith, and in this council we
will conform, which shall be firm and absolute with that which shall fall out
to be more profitable. God therefore fulfill all your desires about the praises
of Jesus Christ, and of God our Father, to whom all men give praises for ever
and ever. And you most holy Lord and father embrace me, I beseech you, with all
the Saints of Jesus Christ which be at Rome, into which embracings let all the
boderers of my kingdoms, and those which dwell in Ethiopia be received, and
give thanks to our Lord Jesus Christ with your spirit. These letters your
holiness shall receive at the hands of my brother John King of Portugal, the
son of the most mighty King Emanuell, by our Ambassador Francis Aluarez.

Other letters from the same David, Emperor of Ethiopia, written to the Pope
of Rome in the year of our Lord God 1524. and interpreted by Paulus Iouius.
HAppy and holy father, which art ordained of God to be the consecrator and
sanctifier of all nations, and the possessor of Saint Peter's seat: to you be
given the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever you either bind or
loose upon earth, shall be bound or loosed in heaven, as Christ himself has
said, and as S. Matthew has written in his Gospel.

I the King, whose name the Lions do worship, by the grace of God, called
Athani Tingil, that is to say, virgins incense, which name I received in
baptism, but now, when I first took upon me the government of the kingdom,
I assumed unto me the name of David, the beloved of God, the pillar of faith,
the kinsman of the stock of Judah, the son of David, the son of Solomon, the son
of the pillar of faith, the son of the seed of Jacob, the son of the hand of
Mary, the son of Nav by the flesh, Emperor of great and high Ethiopia, and of
great kingdoms, dominions and lands King of Xoa, of Caffate, of Fatigar, of
Angote, of Baru, of Baaligaze, of Adea, of Vangue, of Goiame (where is the head
of the river Nilus) of Damaraa, Vaguemedri, Ambeaa, Vague, Tigri Mahon, of
Sabain, where Saba was Queen, and of Bernagaes, and Lord unto Nobia in the end
of Egypt. All these Provinces be within my power, and many other, which now I
have not reckoned: nor have I expressed these kingdoms and provinces in their
proper names, for pride or vainglory, but for this cause only, that God may
be praised more and more, who of his singular benignity has given unto the
kings, my predecessors, the government of such great and ample kingdoms of
the Christian religion, and yet surely he has made me worthy of a more
excellent favor and grace, then other Kings, that I might continually deuote
my self to religion, because he has made me Adell, that is, the Lord and
enemy of the Moors, and Gentiles which worship idols, I send unto you to
kiss your holiness feet, after the manner of other Christian Kings my
brethren, to whom I am nothing inferior, neither in religion nor power, for I
within mine own kingdoms am the pillar of faith, neither am I aided with any
foreign help; for I repose my whole trust and confidence in God alone, who
governs and sustaineth me up, from the time wherein the Angel of God spoke
unto Phillip, that he should instruct in the true faith, the Eunuch of the
mighty Queen Candace, the Queen of Ethiopia, as she was going from Jerusalem
to Gaza. And Phillip did then baptize the Eunuch, as the Angel commanded, and
the Eunuch baptized the Queen, with a great part of her household, and of her
people, which has ever sithence continued Christians, remaining for all times
after that, firm and stable in the faith of Christ. And my predecessors having
no other aid but only Gods asistance, have planted the faith in very large
kingdoms, which I my self do likewise daily contend to effect. For I remain
in the great bounds of my kingdoms, like a Lion encompassed about with a
mighty wood, and hedged and enclosed against the Moors that lie in wait for
me, and other nations which be enemies to the Christian faith, and refuse to
hear the word of God, or my exhortations. But I my self being girded with my
sword, do persecute and expel them out by little and little, indeed by Gods
divine help, which I never found wanting, which happens otherwise to
Christian kings, for if the limits of their kingdoms be large, it may easily be
obtained, for that one may assist and minister help unto another, and receive
further help by your holiness benediction, of which I am partaker, seeing in my
books be contained certain letters, which long since Pope Eugenius sent with
his benediction, unto the king of the seed of Jacob, which blessing given by
his own hands, being accepted and taken, I do enjoy, and thereof greatly
rejoice. And I have the holy temple, which is at Jerusalem in great veneration,
unto which I oftentimes send oblations due by our pilgrims, and many more and
fatter I would have sent, but that the passages be hindered by Moors and
Infidels: for (besides the taking away from our messengers our gifts and
treasures) they will not suffer them to pass freely, but if they would suffer
us to travel, I would come into the familiarity and fellowship of the Roman
Church, as other Christian Kings do, to whom I am nothing inferior in the
christian religion, for even as they believe, I confess one true faith, and
one Church, and I most sincerely believe in the holy Trinity, and in one God,
and the virginity of our Lady the virgin Mary, and I hold and observe all the
articles of the faith, as they were written by the Apostles. Now our good God
has by the hand of the most mighty and Christian King Emanuell, made the
passage open and plain, that we may meet by our Ambassadors, and that we
being Christians joined in one faith, might serve God with other Christians.
But while his Ambassadors were in my Court, it was reported unto me that K.
Emanuel was dead, and that his son my brother John had the rule of his fathers
kingdom, whereupon as I was sorrowful for my fathers death, even so I rejoiced
greatly at the happy entrance of my brother into his kingdom, so as I hope
that we ioining our power and forces together, may make open the passages both
by sea and land, by the regions of the wicked Moors, and greatly terrifying
them, utterly expel them from their seats and kingdoms, that the way being
made fit and peaceable, christians may freely come and go to the temple of
Jerusalem. And then shall I be pertaker of his divine love in the Church of
the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul. And I covet greatly to obtain the sacred
benediction of the Vicar of Christ, for without doubt your holiness is Gods
Vicar, and when I hear many things of your holiness by travelers and
pilgrims, that go and come miraculously from our countries to Jerusalem, and
from thence to Rome, they breed in me an incredible joy and pleasure, but I
should be more glad if my Ambassadors could make a shorter cut in their
iourneies to bring news unto me, as my hope is they will once do before I dye,
by the grace of almighty God, who ever keep you in health and holiness, Amen.

And I kiss your holiness feet, and humbly beseech you to send me your
blessing. These letters also your holiness shall receive at the hands of my
brother John King of Portugal, by our said Ambassador Francis Aluarez.

These Epistles translated by Paulus Iouius I have joined to this work, for
the better knowledge of this history, wherein we have changed nor altered
nothing (although in many places they require alteration) some few excepted,
which being badly translated into Spanish, out of the Arabian and Abesenicke
language, did clean alter the whole order of the Epistles. The same Iouius
also in his declaration of these Epistles, has promised to translate into
Latin the book which Francis Aluarez composed, concerning the situation,
manners and behavior of the Ethiopians, in which book he expresses and
sets forth his whole journey or travels. One copy of which book I my self
have in my keeping. But if Iouius surcease to translate it, I would not be
strange to take the matter in hand, although not willingly, unless (most holy
father) it please you to command, and then shall I be more free and safe from
all malicious detractors, who may happily suppose that I undergo the business
not with a desire to further the Christian commonwealth, but rather in
aemulation of Iouius glory. For the doing of which business effectually and
faithfully, I suppose I am sufficiently instructed, for when I had executed my
embassage into Germany and Sarmatia, and was returned unto my king, John the
third of that name, (of whose great courtesy and bounty in receiving of me, I
had sufficient trial) I fell in conference with the Ethiopian Ambassador at
Lisbon, a man honored, and endued with the dignity of a Bishop, admirable for
his credit, doctrine, and eloquence in the Chaldean and Arabian tongue, and in
brief, a man most fit to be sent from the most mighty Emperor of Ethiopia,
unto great and potent princes, for urgent and weighty affairs, his name was
Zaga Zabo, and after an assured and firm friendship was established betwixt
us, I had often conference with him, and reasoned and debated with him,
especially of the manners and Religion of the Christians of Aethiopia: for I
desired to know those things, not by the bare narration of traveling
interpreters, but from a man borne in that Country; and that in his presence,
and receiving it from his mouth. Amongst other things, I showed unto him an
Epistle sent into Portugal by Matthew the Ambassador, which Epistle together
with the Articles which he proposed before King Emmanuel, I translated (as I
have said) into the Latin tongue, and many things I have corrected by his
direction, where the interpretation obtained not sufficient credit, nor
likelihood, which he affirmed, did oftentimes happen both to me and to Iouius:
for as then I had with me the Epistles of the same Iouius, which we conferred
with great diligence, and after unfeigned friendship and the true love of Christ
flourished and was esteemed amongst us, I was imboldened to require of him a
plain and sincere declaration of the faith and religion of the Aethiopians,
and to have it penned down with his own hands, which he granted unto me
with great alacrity, and forthwith began to make description thereof, which
relation of his, I have faithfully translated into Latin, as by the sequel
will appear, wherein I went forward with greater desire, my conscience urging
me that I was not ignorant, that if these things should have perished with me,
they, could never after that be published by any other man: for because they
were so framed and composed after the Chaldean and Ethiopian phrase, as they
could hardly of any man be understood but of my self, who by much
familiarity, might attain to the knowledge of all those things, as well from
the mouth, as from the writings of the said Ethiopian Ambassador.

In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.
THese be the things which be used and observed amongst us Aethiopians, as
touching our faith and religion:

First, we believe in the name of the holy Trinity, the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, who is one Lord, three in name but one in Divinity, three
representations but one similitude, the conjunction of the three persons is
equal; equal I say in Divinity, one Kingdom, one throne, one Judge, one
Charity, one Word, and one Spirit: but the word of the Father, and of the
Son, the word of the holy Ghost and the Son, is the same word; and the word
with God, and with the holy Ghost, and with himself without any defect or
division, the Son of the Father, and the Son of the same Father, without
beginning, to wit, first the Son of the Father without mother: For no one
knows the secret and mystery of his Nativity, but the Father, Son, and the
holy Ghost, and the same in beginning was the Word, and the Word was the Word
with God, and God was the Word, the Spirit of the Father, the holy Spirit, and
the Spirit of the Son is the holy Spirit, but the holy Spirit of his Spirit,
is without any diminution or augmentation: for that the holy Ghost, the
Advocate, or Comforter, the true God which proceeds from the Father and the
Son, spoke by the mouth of the Prophets, and descended in the fiery flame
upon the Apostles in the porch of Syon, who declared and preached throughout
the whole world, the Word of the Father, which Word was the Son himself.

Moreover, the Father is not first, in that he is Father, nor the Son last,
in that he is the Son, even so the holy Ghost is neither first nor last; for
they be three persons, but one God, which sees, and is seen of no man, and
who by his only counsel created all things: and after that, the Son of his
own accord, for our salvation, (the Father himself being willing, and the
holy Ghost consenting thereunto,) descended from his high and heavenly
habitation, and was incarnate by the holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary; which Mary
was adorned with a double Virginity, the one spiritual, the other carnal: he
was also borne without any corruption: the same Mary his mother after her
childbearing remaning a Virgin, and inspired with great wonder, and hidden
fire of Divinity, brought forth without blood, pain, or dolors her Son
Jesus Christ, who was a man innocent, and without sin, perfect God, and
perfect man, having one only aspect. As he was an infant he grew up by little
and little, sucking the milk of his mother Mary the Virgin, and when he
attained to the age of thirty years, he was baptized in Jordan; he walked like
other men, he was weary, he sweat, he was both hungry and thirsty, and all
these things he suffered freely and voluntarily, working many miracles, and by
his Divinity he restored sight to the blind, healed those which were lame,
cleansed the leapers, and raised up the dead, and last of all, he was willingly
apprehended and taken, scourged, beaten with buffets, and crucified, he
languished and died for our offenses, and by his death he overcame death and
the devil, and by his sorrow in his life time, he dissolved our sins, and
bare our griefs, and with the Baptism of his blood, (which Baptism was his
death) he baptized the Patriarchs and Prophets, and he descended into hell,
where was the soul of Adam and his sons, and the soul of Christ himself
which is of Adam; which soul of Adam Christ himself took of the blessed Virgin
Mary: and in the brightness of his divinity, and strength of his cross, he
brake the brazen gates of hell, binding Satan in chains of iron, and redeeming
thence Adam and his sons. Al these things Christ did, wherefore he was
replenished with divinity, and that divinity was with his soul, and also with
his most holy body: which divinity gave virtue to the cross, and which
divinity he ever had, and yet has commune with the Father in Trinity and
Unity: nor did that Christ, while he walked upon the earth, ever want his
divinity, for the least twinkling of an eye. After this he was buried, and the
third day the same Jesus Christ, the Prince of resurrection, Jesus Christ the
chief of the Priests, Jesus Christ the King of Israel, arose again with great
power and fortitude, and after all things were fulfilled which the holy
Prophets fore-shewed, he ascended with great glory and triumph into heaven,
and sits on the right hand of the Father: and he shall come again in
glory, carrying his cross before his face, and the sword of Justice in his
hand, to judge both the quick and the dead; of whose kingdom shall be no end.
I believe one holy Catholic and Apostolic Church: I believe one Baptism,
which is the remission of sins, I hope for and believe the resurrection of
the dead, and the life of the world to come. Amen.

I believe in our Lady, the blessed Virgin Mary, a Virgin I say, both in
spirit and flesh, who (as the mother of Christ) is the charity of all people,
the Saint of Saints, and Virgin of Virgins, whom I do worship all manner of
ways. I believe the sacred wood of the cross, to be the bed of the sorrow of
our Lord Jesus Christ, the son of God; which Christ is our salvation, by whom
we be saved, a scandal to the Jews, and foolishness to the Gentiles.

But we preach and believe the strength of the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
even as S. Paul our Doctor has taught us. I believe S. Peter to be the rock
of the law; which law is founded upon the holy Prophets, the foundation and
head of the Catholic and Apostolic Church, both east and west, where ever is
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ: the power of which Church, Peter the Apostle
has, and the keys of the kingdom of heaven, with which he can shut and open,
loose and bind, and he shall sit with the other Apostles his fellows, upon
twelve seats (with honor and praise) with our Lord Jesus Christ, who in the day
of Judgment shall pronounce the sentence upon us, which day to the Saints,
shall be cause of joy; but to the wicked, grief and gnashing of teeth, when
they shall be cast out into the burning flames of hell fire, with their father
the Devil. I believe that the holy Prophets and Apostles, Martyrs, and
Confessors, were the right imitators of Christ, whom with the most blessed
Angels of God, I worship and honor: and in like manner also do I embrace, and
affect as their followers. Also I believe that vocal and auricular confession
of all my sins is to be made to the priest, by whose prayers (through Christ
our Lord) I hope to obtain salvation. Moreover, I acknowledge the B. of Rome to
be the chiefPastor of the sheep of Christ, yielding obedience unto all
Patriarks, Cardinals, Archb. and Bishops, of whom he is head, as unto the
Ministers of Christ himself. This is my faith and law, and of all the people of
Aethiopia, that be under the power of Precious John; which faith and the love
of Christ, be so confirmed amongst us, as (with the help of our Savior) I
shall never deny it, neither by death, fire, nor sword; which faith all we
shall carry with us in the day of judgment, before the face of the same Lord
Jesus Christ.

Now having gone thus far, I will express the discipline, doctrine, and law,
which the Apostles in their holy books of Councels and Canons, (which we call
Manda and Abethylis) have taught us: and of those books of the ordonances of
the Church there be 8. all which were compiled by the Apostles when they were
assembled together at Jerusalem: whereof making great inquiry of many Doctors,
after I came into Portugal, I found none that did remember them. The
obseruatio^s which the Apostles prescribed unto us in these books, be these
following: First, that we ought to fast every wednesday in remembrance of the
Jews Council; for upon that day they consulted and decreed amongst
themselves, that Christ should be killed: and that we should fast every Friday;
upon which day Christ Jesus was crucified, and died for our sins: and upon
these two days we are commanded to fast till the Sunsetting. They also
enjoined us to fast with bread and water the forty days of Lent; and to pray
seven times in the day and night. By those edicts also we be bound to celebrate
our sacrifice upon Wednesdayes and Fridayes in the evening, because at that
time our Lord Jesus Christ yielded up the ghost upon the holy Cross. They
willed also, that upon Sundaies we should al assemble together in the holy
church at the third hour of the day, from the Sun rising, to read and hear
the books of the Prophets; and that after that we should preach the Gospel,
and celebrate Mass. Moreover, they appointed nine festival days to be
celebrated in memory of Christ, to wit, the Annunciation, the Nativity, the
Circumcision, the Purification or Candlemas, his Baptism, Palm sunday unto the
octaues of good Friday, (as we term it) which be 12. days, the Ascension also,
and the Feast of Penticost, with their holy days. And by the precepts of these
books, we eat flesh every day without any exception, from the Feast of Easter
unto Penticost: neither be we bound to fast in all this time unto the octaues
of Penticost; which thing we do for the more honor and reverence of the
resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ. They will us also to celebrate the day
of the death and assumption of the Virgin Mary, with all honor. Moreover,
besides the precepts of the Apostles, one of the Precious John's, surnamed, The
seed of Jacob, ordained, that besides these days every thirtith year, 3. days
should be celebrated in honor of the same blessed Virgin, he also commanded one
day in every month to be celebrated for the Nativity of our Savior Christ,
which is ever the 25. day of the month: in like manner he appointed one day in
every month to be kept holy in honor of S. Michael. Furthermore, by the
commandment of the Apostles Synods, we celebrate the day of the Martyrdom of
S. Stephen, and of other Martyrs. We he bound also (by the institution of the
Apostles) to sollemnize two days, to wit, the Sabbath; and the Lords day, in
which days it is not lawful for us to do any manner of business, no not the
least trifle. The Sabbath day we observe for this cause, for that God having
perfected the Creation of the world, rested upon that day; which day, as it was
his will it should be called the Holy of Holies, so if that day should not be
reverenced with great honor and religion, it would seem to be done directly
against the will and commandment of him, who had rather that heaven and earth
should perish, then his word, especially seeing Christ himself came not to
destroy the law, but to fulfill it: wherefore we observe that day not in
imitation of the Jews, but at the bidding of our Lord Jesus Christ, and his
holy Apostles: the grace of which Jews is translated unto us Christians. And
upon this sabbath day, Lent excepted, we ever eat flesh: which use is not
observed in the kingdom of Bernagues and Tygri Mahon: the natural people of
which two kingdoms, by an ancient custom, eat flesh upon the sabbath days
and Sundaies in Lent: now we celebrate the Lords day, as other Christians do,
in memory of Christ's resurrection, but we know that the Sabbath day is to be
observed and kept holy by the books of the law, and not by the Gospel: and yet
notwithstanding we be not ignorant that the Gospel is the end of the Law, and
of the Prophets: And upon these two days, we believe that the souls of the
godly departed which remain in Purgatory, be not there tormented, which rest
God has granted unto those souls upon these most holy days: until (the end
of their punishments due for their offenses in this world being determined)
they be delivered thence: for the diminishing of which pains, and to extenuate
and shorten the time of their punishments: we believe, that alms deeds done
for the dead, be very profitable unto those souls which live in purgatory. To
the remission of which souls the Patriarch gives no Indulgence, for that we
believe does belong unto God only, and to the constitution of the time of their
punishment: neither does the Patriark allow any days for Indulge^ces, By the
reading of the Gospel, we be only bound to keep 6. precepts, which Christ
explaned with his own mouth: I was an hungered (says he) and you gave me to
eat, I was thirsty, and you gave me to drink: I was a stranger, and you took
me in: naked, and you clothed me: sick, and you visited me: I was in prison,
and you came unto me: Which words Christ will only pronounce in the day of
Judgment, because the law (as Paul witnesses) shows unto us our sins; which
law (Christ Jesus excepted) no one can keep.

And Paul also says, that we be all borne in sin for the transgression of
our mother Eua, and for her curse and malediction: and the same Paul further
says, that we die through Adam, and live through Christ, which Christ of his
abundant mercy has given unto us these six precepts, to the end that we might
be saved, when he shall come in his Majesty, to Judge both the quick and the
dead, by which words and commandments in that fearful and terrible day of
Judgment, he will pronounce and show unto the good everlasting glory, and to
the wicked fire and eternal damnation. And we reckon but only five deadly
sins (as they term them) which we gather out of the last Chapter of the
Revelation; where it is said, For without shall be dogs, and inchanters, and
whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loves or makes
lies. It is ordained by the holy Apostles in their books of councels, that it
is lawful for the Clergy to mary, after they have attained to some knowledge in
divinity, and being once married they be received into the order of priests,
into the which order none is admitted before he accomplish the age of 30.
years, neithey be any bastards by any means allowed to enter into that most
holy order: and these orders be given by no other but by the Patriarch only,
and where the first wife of a Bishop or Clercke, or Deacon is dead, it is not
lawful for them to mary an other, unless the Patriarch dispense therewith
(which sometimes for a public good is granted to great men) nor is it lawful
for them to keep a concubine, unless they will refuse and put themselves from
saying service, which if they once do, they may never after meddle in
ministering divine matters: and this is observed so strictly that those priests
which have been twice married, dare never take in their hands so much as a
candle that is consecrated to the Church, and if any Bishop or Deacon be found
to have any bastard child, he is deprived from all his benefices, and from his
holy orders, and his gods (if he decease without lawful heirs) come unto
Prestor John, and not to the Patriarch: and the warrant that we have that our
priests may marry is taken out of Saint Paul, who had rather that both Clergy
and Laity should marry then burn: And he also says that a bishop ought to be
the husband of one wife, and that he should be sober and irreprehensible, and
in like manner would he have Deacons: and further, that Ecclesiastical persons
should have their proper wives by lawful marriage, even as secular people
have, but Munckes mary not at all, and both Lay men and Clergy have but one
wife a piece, and matrimony is not contracted before the gates of the holy
Church, but in the private houses of those that bear most sway at the bridal:
we have have also received from the ordinance of the Apostles, that if a
priest be found in addultery, or committing manslaughter, or theft, or bearing
false witness, he shall be deprived and put from his holy orders and punished
like other malefactors: again by the institution of those Apostles, if any
person, either Ecclesiastical or Lay, do lie with his wife, or be polluted in
sleep, he comes not into the Church for the space of four and twenty
hours after: nor is it lawful for menstruous women to come into the Church,
unless upon the seventh day after their sickness, and then to have all their
garments thoroughly washed, which they wore during the time of their monthly
disease, and they themselves purged from all filth: A woman also that brings
forth a man child, must not come into the Church till after the fortith day,
and if she brought forth a woman child then she must not come into the Church
till after the eighteeth day: This is our custom founded upon the ancient law,
and also upon the Apostolic law, which laws, ordinances and precepts, we
observe as diligently in all points as possible may be: Moreover we be
prohibited, that neither swine nor dogs, nor other such beasts shall enter into
our Churches: Also we may not go to the Church but bare footed, neither is it
lawful for us to laugh, walk, or talk of profane matters in the Church, nor
once there to spit, hawke or him, because the Churches of Aethiopia be not
like unto that land, where the people of Israel did eat the Paschall lamb
departing from Egypt, in which place God commanded them to eat it with their
shoes on, and girded with their girdles, by reason of the pollution of the
earth, but they be like unto Mount Synai, where the Lord spoke unto Moses
saying, Moses, Moses, put off thy shoes from thy feet, because the ground
whereupon thou stand is holy ground, and this Mount Synai is the mother of
our Churches, from whom they took their beginning, as the Apostles did from
the prophets, and the New Testament from the Old: Furthermore it is not lawful
for Laymen or Clergy, or for any other person of what condition soever he
be, after he has received the blessed Sacrament of the Altar to spit or
cast, from the morning till the sun setting, and if any do spit he is
severely punished: Also in memory of Christ's Baptism, we be all every year
baptized upon the feast day of the Epiphanie of our Lord, and this we do, not
that we believe that it pertains to our salvation, but for the laud, praise
and glory of our Savior: neither do we celebrate any other feast more
solemly or bountifully, with shows, plays and ceremonies, then we do this,
because upon this day the holy Trinity did first manifestly appear, when our
Lord Jesus Christ was baptized in the river of Jordan, when the holy Ghost
descended upon his head in form of a Dove, and a voice proclayming from
Heaven, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: which holy Ghost
appearing in form of a white Dove, appeared in show and figure of the Father
and Son in one Divinity: In like manner Christ was seen of the holy Prophets
in many similitudes, forms and likenesses, first in form of a white Ram for
the preservation of Isaac the Son of Abraham.

And in like manner, he named Jacob, Israel and Jacob: Judas the Lions whelpe,
to whom he gave power over his other brethren, saying, thou did rise up my
son to the prey, and when thou did rest thou did lie still like a Lion
and Lioness: who shall raise him up.

He also manifested himself to Moses in Mount Synai, in form of a flame of
fire, he showed himself to the holy Prophet Daniel, in similitude of a Rock,
he appeared also to Ezechiell the Son of Man, and to Isaias in likeness of
an infant, he declared himself to King David, and to Gedeon like a frost upon
a fleese of wool, and besides these similitudes recited, he was seen of his
holy Prophets in many other forms, and notwithstanding he was seen in so
many sundry forms, yet he always represented the similitude of the Father
and of the holy Ghost.

And when GOD created the world he said, Let us make man according to our
similitude and likeness, and he made Adam after his own similitude and
likeness, wherefore we say that the Father, Son and holy Ghost are three
countenances in one similitude and divinity: We have received circumcision
ever from the time of Queen Saba, which we observe until this day.

The proper name of this Queen Saba was Maqueda, who was a worshipper of
Idols after the manner of her ancestors, into whose ears when the fame of
the wisdom of Solomon was entered, she sent a certain wise man unto
Jerusalem, to find out the truth, and to certify her of the wisdom of that
King, who being returned and showing the truth unto her, she suddenly
provided her self to take her journey toward Jerusalem: and when she was
thither come, besides many other things which King Solomon taught her, she
learned the law and the prophets, and returning into her country, having
obtained liberty to depart, in her journey, she brought forth a son, which
was gotten by a King, whom she called Meilech, and him the Queen brought up
with her self in Aethiopia, until he was 20. years of age: and then sent him
back unto Solomon his father, that of him he might learn understanding and
wisdom, desiting by her letters, that he would consecrate and make his Son
Meilech King of Aethiopi a before the Arc of the covenant of the will, or
testament of the Lord, and that from thence-forth women should govern no more
in Aethiopia, as then the custom was, but that the male children, should
lineally succeed in the Kingdom.

When Meilech came to Jerusalem, he easily obtained of his father, his mothers
requests, and for Meilech was called David, whom (when he was sufficiently
instructed in the law, and in other disciplines) his father Solomon determined
to send him back to his mother decked in galla^t attire and furniture fit for a
King, and the more to show his bounty he gave unto him noble followers and
companions, and the sons of great men, who should serve him as their King,
Moreover he decreed to send with him Azarias the high priest, the son of
Zadoch the high priest likewise, which when Azarias understood, he exhorted
David that he would entreat liberty of his father for him to sacrifice (for
good success in their journey) before the Arc of the covenant of the Lord:
which being obtained of Solomon, Azarias as suddenly and as secretly as he
could, caused tables to be hewn and squared like unto the tables of the
Testament of the Lord, and when they were perfected, he went to sacrifice, and
in the time of sacrifice he privily, and very cunningly stole the true tables
of the covenant of the Lord from the Arc, and set in there places the
counterfeit tables, which he brought with him, without the priuity of any man
butonly God and himself. This declaration we Aethiopians receive as most holy
and most approved, as by the History of the same King David (which is most
pleasant to read) does appear: the volume of which History is full as thick
as all Saint Paul's Epistles.

When David was come into the borders of Aethiopia, Azarias entered into his
tent, and disclosed and revealed unto him that which thetherto he had kept
secret to himself, that is to say, that he had the Tables of the covenant of
the Lord, which when David understood he ran hastily to the tent where Azarias
had the tables of the covenant of the Lord, and there in imitation of King
David his grandfather, he began to dance (for exceeding joy) before the Arc
wherein the tables were, which when the people saw, and understanding the
matter, they all of them in like manner exulted with mirth and great joy: And
then David passing through much part of Aethiopia came lastly to his mother,
who forthwith yielded up into his hands the government of all the provinces,
laying upon his shoulders the whole care of the Kingdom: And from that time
even until this day (being almost the space of two thousand and six hundred
years) the Kingdom of Aethiopia has lineally descended from male heir to
male heir, and since that time we observe the law of the Lord and
circumcision as before is said, and likewise since that time hitherto, the
offices which Solomon ordained for his son David, for the guiding of his
Court, are kept and observed in the same order and families as they were at
that time, neither has the Emperor himself power to assign others of other
kinreds, to execute those offices of the court: the women likewise by the
commandment and decree of the same Maqueda, be circumcised, she being induced
thereunto by this reason, that even as men have a fore-skinne that covers
their yards, in like manner have women a certain kernelly flesh which is
called Nympha, arysing up in the middle of their privy parts, which is very
fit to take the character of circumcision: and this is done both to males and
females upon the eight day, and after circumcision the men children be baptized
upon the fortieth day, and the women children upon the eighteeth day, unless
any sickness or infirmity happens, which may cause it to be done sooner, but
if any children be baptized before the time appointed, it is not lawful to
give them suck of their mothers milk, but only of their nurses, until their
mothers be purified, and the water wherein they be baptized, is consecrated
and blessed with exorcismes, and that very same day wherein children be
baptized they receive the blessed body of our Lord in a little form of bread:
we received baptism almost before all other Christians from the Eunuch of
Candace Queen of Aethiopia, whose name was Indich, as it is said in the Acts
of the Apostles, which together with circumcision (which we had at that time
as before is said) we observe most holily and Christian like, and by Gods
assistance ever shall observe, nor do we observe or admit of any thing but of
those only which are expressed in the law and the prophets, and in the
Gospel, and in the books of the councels of the Apostles, and if we receive
any things besides those, they be only observed for the time, for that they
seem to appertain to the government and peace of the Church, and that without
any bond of sin: Wherefore our circumcision is not unclean, but the law and
grace is given to our father Abraham, which he received of God as a sign, not
that either he, or his children should be saved through circumcision, but that
the children of Abraham should be known from other nations: And that which is
inwardly understood by the sign or mystery of circumcision we do highly
observe, that is, that we may be circumcised in our hearts: neither do we
boast of circumcision, nor therefore think our selves more noble then other
Christians, nor more acceptable unto God, with whom is no acception of persons,
as Paul says, who also shows us that we be not saved through circumcision
but by faith, because in Christ Jesus, neither circumcision nor the cutting off
the foreskinne preualeth, but the new creature, but Paul preached not to
destroy the law, but to establish it, who was also baptized, and being of the
seed of Benjamin, he also circumcised Tymothy, who was become a Christian, his
mother being an Hebrew and his father a Gentile, knowing that God does
justify circumcision by faith, and the fore-skinne by faith: and as he
himself was made all to all that he might save all. To the Jews he was as a
Jew, that thereby he might win the Jews, and to those which were under the
law, he was as one under the law, although he was not under the law, to the
end he might gain those which were under the law, and to those which were
without the law, he was as one without the law, although he was not without
the law of GOD, but under the law of Christ, that he might get those which
were without the law: and he became weak, that he might gain those which
were weak, which he did to show that we be saved not by circumcision but by
faith.

And therefore when he preached to the Hebrews he spoke unto them in diverse
speeches, like an Hebrew, saying, God heretofore spoke many ways and in many
manners to our fathers in the prophets, showing unto them out of the same
prophets, that Christ was of the seed of David after the flesh. Moreover he
preached unto them that Christ was with our fathers in the tents in the Desert,
and that he led them into the Land of promise by the hand of Joshua.

And Paul also testifies in the same place, that Christ was the chief of
priests, and that he entered into a new tent, which is the Sanctum sanctorum,
The holy of holies, and that with the sacrifice of his body and blood, he
abolished the blood of goats and bulls, whereby none that kills them shall
be justified: and so he spoke sundry ways to the Jews, and also suffering
himself to be worshipped of his people, by many ceremonies in a holy and
uncorrupted faith: Moreover those children with us be accounted half
Christians, which here I understand in the Roman Church be called Paganes,
who because they die without baptism ought to be called half Christians,
because they be children of the sanctified blood of parents baptized, and of
the holy Ghost, and of the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, by which three
Testimonies all Christians be so reputed: because there be three things which
give testimony in earth, the spirit, water and blood, as Saint John witnesses
in his first canonical Epistle: the Gospel also says, a good tree brings
forth good fruit, and an evil tree brings forth evil fruit, and therefore
the children of Christians are not like unto the children of the Gentiles, and
of the Jews, and of the Moors, which be withered trees without any fruit,
but the Christians be elected in their mothers wombes, as holy Ieremias the
prophet, and Saint John Baptist were: Furthermore the children of Christian
women are elected and consecrated by the communication and imparting of the
body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ: for when women great with child do
take the most blessed body of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the infant in
the womb receiving nutriment is thereby sanctified, for even as the child in
the mothers womb, conceiueth either sorrow or joy, according as the mother is
affected, so also is it nourished by the mothers norishment, and as our Lord
says in his holy Gospel, if any one eat my body and drink my blood, he
shall not taste of eternal death: and again, if any one eat of my body and
drink my blood he shall remain with me: and Paul the teacher of the
Gentiles says, the unbelieving husband is justified by the believing wife, and
the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the believing husband, otherwise your
children should be unclean, but now they be sanctified, which, if it be so
that the children of an unbelieving mother be sanctified by the saithfulnesse
of the father, then be they much more holy that be borne of faithful fathers
and mothers: for which cause it is far more holy to call children before they
be christened half Christians, then Pagans: and the Apostles also have said in
their books of councels, that al which believe and be not baptized, may justly
be termed half Christians, who also say in the said books: if Jew, Moore, or
Gentile will receive the faith, he is not forthwith to be admitted, but they
will that he first come unto the gate of the Church, and there to hear
Sermons, and the words of our Savior Christ, that before he be incited and
brought, as it were, by stelth unto the faith, he may know the yoke of the
law, which when he has done he may be called half a Christian, although he
be not baptized, as the Ghospel teaches, he that believes, and is baptized
shall be saved, and he which believes not shall be damned. And our custom
is that women with child before they be delivered should be confessed, and that
then they should receive the Lords body, and those which do not this, as also
the fathers of those children which compel not their wives to do it, be
accounted wicked and evil Christians: Moreover you must understand that
confirmation and chrisme, or extreme unction of oil, be not accounted
Sacraments, nor be in any use with us, as I see they be hear by the custom
of the Roman Church. Also by Moses laws and the ordinance of the Apostles it
is not lawful for us to eat unclean meats, and this we do for the full
observation of the law and the Scriptures, which consist of one and four score
books in both Old and New Testament, that is to say forty and six books of
the Old Testament, and thirty five of the New, which express number of books
of the Scriptures we have by computation from the Apostles themselves, from
which books of the Old and New Testament it is not lawful for us to ad or
diminish any thing, no though an Angel from heaven should endeavor to
persuade us thereunto. And he which dare to attempt any such thing ought to be
reputed as accursed: Wherefore neither the Patriarcke nor our Bishops, by
themselves, nor in their councels, do think or suppose that they can make any
laws thereby any one may be bound to a mortal or deadly sin: for in those
books of councels it is ordained by the holy Apostles, that we should
confess our sins, and what penance we ought to take, according to the
heinousness of each sin, is there set down. They instruct us also how we
should pray, fast, and do deeds of charity: and this is very familiar in use
amongst us, that as soon as we have committed any sin, we forthwith, run
to the feet of the confessor, and this is used both of men and women, of what
estate or condition soever they be of: And as often as we be confessed we
receive the body of our blessed LORD in both kinds, in sweet or unleavened
wheaten bread: and if we should be confessed every day, we should likewise
every day receive the most blessed and reverent Sacrament, and this custom is
common as well to the Clergy as to Lay people: And the Sacrament of the Altar
is not kept with us in Churches, as it is here amongst the people of Europe.
Neither do those which be sick receive the Lords body, until they begin to
wax strong and recover there health: and this is done because all men both Lay
and Clergy, do usually receive it every week twice, and all which be willing
so to do come unto the Church, for it is ministered to none but in the Church,
not so much as to the Patriarch or to Prestor John himself: We always use one
consessor, and do never take any other unless he be absent, and at his
return we go to him again, and the confessors (by there power they have
from the Church) give us absolution of all our sins, reserving no case to the
Bishops or Patriarcke, though it be never so heinous.

Moreover the Priests may not here their confessions, to whom they be
confessed themselves: Both priests also and Munkes, and all Ecclesiastical
Ministers with us live by their own labor, for the Church neither has nor
receives any tithes. Yet it has revenues and lands which both Clerks and
Monks dig and till, either by there own or other men's labor, and other
alms have the none but such as be freely offered in the Churches, for the
burial of the dead, and other Godly matters: neither is it lawful for them to
beg in the streets, nor to extorte or wrest any alms from the people.

In our Churches also is every day only one Mass celebrated, which we account
as a sacrifice, nor is it lawful (by our old ordinances) to solemnize more then
one in a day; and for this Mass we take no hire nor reward: and in the
ministry thereof, the Sacrament of the Altar is not showed as here I perceive
it is. And with us, all Priests, Deacons and Subdeacons, and those which come
unto the Church, receive the body of our Lord: and we say no Mass for the
remission and forgiveness of souls departed; but the dead be buried with
crosses and Orizons, in a certain place, and over the dead bodies we chiefly
amongst other prayers recite the beginning of Saint John's Ghospel, and the day
following the burial of the corpse, we offer alms for him which we do upon
certain days after, upon al which days we keep funeral bankets: and thus
far I have spoken of our faith and religion. But now, for that after our
coming into Portingal, we had many and often disputations and contentions with
diverse Doctors, and especially with our Masters Didacus Ortysius Bishop of
Saint Thomas Isle, and Deane of the Kings Chapel, and with Peter Margalhus,
concerning the choice and difference of meats, it shall not be unfitting to say
something of that matter.

First you must understand, that we observe a difference of meats out of the
Old Testament, which difference is appointed by the word of GOD it self, which
word was afterward borne of the Virgin Mary, and walked and was conversant
with his Disciples, and that word of God I have always accounted an ever
living, whole and inuiolated word, neither did that mouth which heretofore
forbad to eat of uncleanness, say afterward in any part of his Gospel, that
we should eat.

And whereas it is said in the Gospel, that which enters in by the mouth
defiles not the man, but such things as proceed forth of the mouth, he
pronounced not this speech, for because he would break that which before he
had appointed, but that he might refute the superstition of the Jews, which
taxed and blamed the Apostles, because they did eat meat with unwashed hands,
for neither the Apostles at that time that they lived with our Lord Jesus
Christ, did ever use any unclean things, or tasted of those things which be
forbidden in the law, nor yet did any of the Apostles transgress the law, nor
can it be proved by any of our writings, that the Apostles at those times
which followed our Lords passion when they began to preach the Gospel, did
either eat or kill any unclean things, and yet it is true that Paul said,
eat of every thing that comes into the shambles making no question for
conscience sake, and after that, if an Infidel call you to supper, and that
you will go, eat of all things which be set before you, making no question
for conscience sake: and again, if any one shall say, this is sacrificed to
Idols, eat not of it because of him that showed you, and for conscience sake
etc.

All these things Paul speaks to please those which were not yet confirmed in
the faith, because there arose many disputations and contentions betwixt those
and the Jews, for the appeasing whereof he did more easily yield unto them,
and conform himself unto their will, which were not thoroughly confirmed in
the faith. And this he did not that he would break the law, but that by
gratifying others in releasing them from ceremonies, he might thereby win
them to the faith: The same Apostle says, Let not him that eats despice him
that eats not, and let not him that eats not condemn him that eats,
because he which eats, eats to the Lord, and he which eats not, eats
not to the Lord, wherefore it is very unworthily done to reprehend strangers
that be Christians so sharply and bitterly, as I have been oftentimes
reprehended my self, both for this matter and for other things which belonged
not to the true faith: but it shall be better and more standing with wisdom, to
sustain such Christians whether they be Greeks, Americans, or Aethiopians,
or of any other of the seven Christian Churches in charity and imbracings of
Christ, and to suffer them to live and be conversant amongst other Christian
brothers, without contumelies or reproaches; for we be all the sons of baptism,
and join together in opinion concerning the true faith: and there is no cause
why we should contend so bitterly touching ceremonies, but that each one
should observe his own ceremonies, without the hatred railing or inueighing of
other: neither is he that has traveled into other nations, and observes his
own country ceremonies therefore to be excluded from the society of the
Church. Moreover that which we have in the Acts of the Apostles, to wit, how
Peter saw Heaven opened, and a certain vessel descending like unto a great
sheet, bound or closed up at the four corners, wherein were all kind of four
footed beasts and serpents of the earth, and fowls of the air, and a voice
said unto Peter, arise Peter, kill and eat, to whom Peter said, God forbid
Lord, for I did never eat of any thing commune or unclean, and the voice
replied unto him again saying, that which God has made clean do not thou
call commune or unclean: which words being repeated three times, the vessel was
again taken up into Heaven: which done the spirit sent him into Caesaria unto
Cornelius a deu out man, and one that feared God, with whom when Peter spoke,
the holy Ghost fell upon all those which heard the word of God, and when they
had received the holy Ghost, Peter commanded that all Cornelius household should
be baptized: But when the other Apostles and brethren which were in Judea,
heard that Cornelius was baptized, they were displeased at Peter that he had
given Baptism, and the word of God to the Gentiles, saying, why wentest thou
to men that be not circumcised and did eat with them, but when Peter had
declared unto them the whole vision, they were pacified and gave thanks unto
God, saying, And therefore has he given repentance unto the Gentiles for
their salvation. And they remembered the word of the Lord, which he spoke when
he ascended up into heaven Go throughout all the world and preach the Gospel
unto all creatures: he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved, but he
which believes not shall be damned.

Then the Apostles began to preach the Gospel through out all the world unto
every creature, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost; and the sound of them went throughout all the world. And this vision
wherein both clean and unclean things did appear, we in Aethiopia expound
thus: That by the clean beasts was meant the people of Israel: and by the
unclean beasts the people of the Gentiles. And for this cause be the Gentiles
called unclean; for that they be worshippers of Idols, and willingly do the
works of the devil, which be unclean: and whereas the voice said unto Peter,
Kill, that we interpret in this manner, Peter, baptize: and when it is said,
Peter, eat; that is interpreted, as if he had said, Teach and preach the law
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to the people of Israel, and to the Gentiles.

Moreover, it is most certain, that it cannot be found in any place of the
Scriptures, that either Peter or the other Apostles did kill or eat any
unclean beast, after this vision.

And also we must understand, when the Scripture speaks of bread, he means
not meat or corporal nourishment thereby, but the explication and exposition of
Christ his doctrine, and of the Scriptures.

And surely it were well done for all teachers and preachers of this sheet,
which was showed unto Peter, to teach high and great matters, and not petty or
light things, and such as do seem little to appertain unto salvation, nor
thereby cunningly to hunt after this document, as though it should be
convenient or lawful for us to eat unclean things, seeing no such thing can
be gathered out of the Scriptures: for what is the cause, that the Apostles in
their books of Councels have taught us not to eat beasts that be strangled,
suffocated, or killed' of other beasts, or blood, because the Lord loves
cleannes and sobriety, and hates gluttony and uncleanness. And our Lord also
greatly loves those that abstain from flesh, but much more those that fast
with bread and water, and herbs, as John Baptist the Eremite did beyond
Iordane, who did ever eat herbs: and S. Paul the Eremite, who remained in the
wilderness four score years ever fasting: and S. Anthony, and Saint
Macarius, and many other their spiritual children, which did never taste flesh.

Therefore my brethren we ought not to despise and inueigh against our
neighbors, because James says, He which detracteth his brother, or condemns
his brother, detracteth the law, and condemns the law: Paul also teaches,
That it were better for every one to live contented with their own traditions,
then to dispute with his Christian brother of the law: and again, Not to know
more than is behoofull, but to be wise unto sobriety, and unto every one as
God has divided the measure of faith: wherefore it is indecent to dispute with
our brethren of the law, or of the difference of meats, because the meat does
not commend us to God, especially seeing Paul the Apostle says: We shall
neither abound if we do eat; nor want, if we do not eat. And therefore let us
seek those things which be above, and the celestial food, and leave off these
vain disputations. Al these things which I have written concerning Traditions,
I have not done to breed disputation, but that as much as in me lies, I may
defend and protect my country-folkes against the bitter taunts and
reprehensions of many, who setting aside all reverence, will not stick to
defame and revile that most potent Prince precious John and us his subjects,
with slanders and reproaches, calling us Jews and Mahometans, because we
observe Circumcision, and keep holy the Sabbath day, like unto the Jews: and
also for that like the Mahometans, we fast until the Sun going down, which
they allege is unfit for a Christian man to do: and this they object against
us most bitterly, that we allow and hold it as lawful for Priests to marry, as
for lay people: this also they omit not to speak against us, and that most
nippingly; for that we, as it were, distrusting in our first Baptism, be
rebaptized once every year, and that women be circumcised as well as men,
which custom was never used amongst the Jews.

Furthermore, because we hold, that a difference of meats is most religiously
to be observed: and last of all, because we call those children half
Christians, which before Baptism be wont to be called Pagans: to which
slanders and misreports, I am enforced to say thus much; that I may purge our
people from such reproaches and calumnies, and that I may make the Doctors of
the holy Roman church more affable unto us, by whom (how holily I know not) I
have bin forbidden to receive the body of our Lord ever since I came into
Portugal, which is the space of 7. years, and that (which I speak with
grief and tears) I am reputed amongst the Christian brethren as an Ethnicke,
and one accursed, which he that quickens and refreshes all things, may see
and discern, to whose Judgment I commit all these matters.

And I am not sent from my most mighty Lord the Emperor of Aethiopia, unto
the Bishop of Rome, and unto John the most renowned king of Portugal, to move
disputations and contentions: But to begin friendship and fellowship, and not
either to increase or diminish humane traditions: but that I should inquire and
diligently understand, touching the Heresies of Arrius, Prince of Heretics:
whether the Christians of Europe would meet with us to overthrow the opinions
of this man, for the destroying of whose errors, there was a Council assembled
together at Nicea, under Pope Julius, consisting of three hundred and eighteen
Bishops; and withal, that I might know, whether that be observed among the
Christians of Europe, which the Apostles teach in their books of Synods: that
is, That a Council should be celebrated in the church of Christ twice every
year, to dispute of matters of faith: the first of which Councels (by the
Apostles desire) should be assembled at the feast of Penticost, the other the
tenth of October: as also to understand, how we did agree together, touching
the errors of Macedonius; for which cause there was a Council of an hundred and
fifty bishops assembled together at Constantinople, under Pope Damasus: and
likewise of the errors of Nestorius, for whom there was a Council of two
hundred Bishops, assembled together in Ephesus under Pope Celestine. Lastly,
that I might also know of the fourth Chalcedonian council; wherein, for the
errors of Eutiches, were assembled 632. bishops, at which time S. Leo was
bishop of Rome, from which Council, after many disputations, and nothing
concluded for the peace of the church, the matter being left as it was, they
all departed home every one remaining in his own opinion: The books of which
Councels and of others which were celebrated afterward, our most mighty Lord
the Emperor of Aethiopia has in his keeping: and of this cockle which the
enemy of truth, the devil, has sown amongst Christians, my Lord is much
grieved and all his subjects which believe in Christ.

Our countri-men even from the beginning of the primitive Church, have
acknowledged the bishop of Rome to be the chief Bishop, whom at this day we
obey as the Vicar of Christ: In whose court we would often be, but that the
journey is over long, and many kingdoms of the Mahometanes betwixt us, that
may hinder our passage: so as, though you should enter into all those great
dangers, yet you can effect nothing, although that most wise and invincible
King Emanuel, of happy memory, who was the first that by his nauigations,
(not without Gods celestial assistance) made passage into East India, gave
great hope that it might afterward be done more commodiously: for he having
overcome the Ocean with his navy, brought the red sea into his subjection,
being no whit deterred with the greatness of the coast, so as he might
increase the faith of Christ, and (as it were) make a way open to make use of
our friendship.

And seeing that is now done, and that each nation may receive aid from the
other, we hope that in short time, by the Portugals forces and our own, all
the Mahometans, and other unbelieving Ethnickes, shall be driven and expelled
from the whole Erithraean sea, and from all Arabia, Persis, and India.

In like manner we trust, by the power of Jesus Christ, that it will come to
pass, that (peace being established amongst all the Christians of Europe) the
enemies of the cross shall be expelled also from the mediterranean places,
Pontus and other Provinces, that according to the words of Christ, There may be
upon earth, one law, one fold, and one shepherd.

Of which thing we have two Oracles or predictions: one, out of the Prophecy of
S. Ficator, the other of S. Synoda the Eremit, who was borne in the uttermost
rock of Egypt: neither of which two differs from other. And since the time
that my most mighty Lord received the ambassadors of the most famous king
Emanuel, the truth of these oracles does seem to hasten to an end; for truly
our Prince thinks of nothing more, than of that: meditating also (both by his
council and forces) how he may root out all Mahometans from the face of the
earth. For these causes, and for others which I have laid open before the most
famous King John, the son of Emanuel, was I sent hither by my most mighty
Lord as an Ambassador, and not for frivolous and vain disputations: And I
pray with an unfeigned heart, that the great and mighty God may bring the
decrees and endeavors of our Prince, for which I was sent, to a happy end,
and to his glory. Amen.

Having gone thus far, I will now briefly expound something by the way, of the
state of our Patriarch and Emperor. And first you must understand, that (by a
sollemne custom) our Patriarch is created by the voices of our Monks of
Jerusalem, which remain there about the sepulcher of our Lord, his election
and creation is in this manner: The Patriarch being dead, our Emperor Prester
John ^endeth forthwith a speedy messenger unto Jerusalem, unto the Monks
there, (as is said) who receiving the message and the gifts which our Lord the
Emperor sends unto the holy Sepulcher, they presenrly, and with all possible
expedition, elect another Patriarch by the most voices: but it is not lawful
to elect any other, than one of Alexandria, and one of incorrupt manners, and
untainted conversation; who being created, they sign their suffrages, and give
them into the Legates hands that came for that purpose: he forthwith goes to
Cayre, whither when he is come, he offers that creation unto the Patriarch of
Alexandria, whose seat is always there, to be read.

And when he perceives which of the people of Alexandria they have elected, he
foorth-with sends the man ordained to such honors, with the Legate into
Aethiopia, who by an old ordonance ought always to be an Eremit, of the Order
of S. Anthony: with whom the Ambassador goes straight into Aethiopia, where
he is received of all men with great joy and honor: in which business sometimes
is spent a year or two; in all which time, precious John does dispose of the
revenues of the Patriarch according to his pleasure. Now the chiefest office of
the Patriarch, is to give orders; which none but he can either give or take
away, but he can bestow upon none, either Bishopric, or other
Church-benefice: this only belongs to precious John, who dispenceth of all
things according to his will. And the Patriarch being dead, he whose power and
yearly revenues is the largest, is made heir of the whole substance of all his
goods. Moreover, the office of the Patriarch is to proceed to excommunication
against the stubborn, the observation whereof is so strict, as the punishment
of perpetual steruing to death is inflicted upon the offenders.

Indulgences he gives nor grants none, neither be any interdicted the
Sacraments of the church, for any offense whatsoever, be it never so heinous,
but only for homicide: the name of the Patriarchship in our speech is called
Abunna: but he which now executes the office is called Marcus, which was the
proper name given him in Baptism, he is a man of an hundred years of age or
above.

And you must note, that we begin our year in the Kalends of September, which
day always falls upon the vigill of Saint John Baptist, the other festival
days, as the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord, Easter and the rest, be
celebrated with us at the same times they be in the Roman Church.

And this I may not obscurely pass over as though it were not so, that Saint
Philip the Apostle did preach the Gospel and faith of our Savior Jesus Christ
our Lord in our country.

Now if you desire to know of the name of our Emperor, he is fully persuaded,
that he was ever called precious John, and not Presbiter John, as is falsely
bruted abroad: for in one speech it is written with characters, that signify
Ioannes Belull, that is as much to say, as precious or high John: and in the
chaldaean tongue it is Ioannes Encoe, which being interpreted, does signify
precious or high John. Neither is he to be named Emperor of the Abyssini, as
Matheus has untruly declared, but Emperor of the Aethiopians: and Matthew
being an Armenian, could not thoroughly understand our matters, especially
those which appertained unto faith and Christian Religion: and therefore he
related many things in the presence of the most prudent and most potent king
Emanuel of happy memory, which with us are nothing so, and this he did not
with a desire to speak untruths, for he was a good man, but for that he was
not thoroughly instructed in matters concerning our religion: The succession of
his Kingdoms and Empire does not always descend upon the eldest son, but
unto him upon whom the father pleases to bestow it, And he which now
governs the Empire was his fathers third son, which he merited and
obtained by an awful and holy reverence to his father, for when his father lay
a dying, he commanded all his sons to sit down upon his throne, which all
the rest of his children did saving he, and he refused, saying, God for bid
that so much should be attributed unto me, that I should sit in my Lords
chair, whose devotion when his father saw, he endued him with all his
Kingdoms and Empire, he is called David, the power of whose Empire, as well
over Christians as Ethnickes, is large and ample, wherein be many Kings and
petty Kings, Earls, Barons and Peers, and much Nobility, all which be most
obedient to his command: In all whose dominions there is no money used, but such
as is brought from other places, for they give and receive silver and gold by
weight: we have many cities and great towns, but not such as we see here in
Portugal, the reason whereof (for the most part) is, that precious Joan lives
always in camps and tents, which custom is used for this purpose, that the
nobility may continually exercise themselves in military affairs: And this I
may not omit to tell you, that we be compasled about on all sides with the
enemies of our faith, with whom we have many and ever prosperous conflicts,
which victories we attribute to gods divine assistance: written laws we have
none in use amongst us, neither be the complaints of those which sue others
expressed in libells or writings but by words, which is done least by the
couetuousnesse of Judges and counselors controversies should be protracted.
And this more I think sit to show you, that this Matthew was not sent by David
our Emperor unto the most invincible and potent King Emanuell of happy memory,
but by Queen Helena the Emperors wife, surnamed the hand of Mary, who at that
time by reason of David's, nonage, took upon her the government of the
Kingdoms, being a woman without doubt most prudent and holy: And the same
Helen (as she was excceeding well learned) writ two books in the Chaldean
tongue, one of the which is called Enzera Chebaa that is to say, praise God
upon the Organes and instruments of Music, in which book she disputes very
learnedly of the Trinity, and of the virginity of Mary the mother of Christ.
The other book is called Chedale Chaay, that is to say, the son beam,
containing very acute disputations of the law of God. All these things
concerning our faith, religion and state of our country, I Zaga Zabo, by
interpretation the grace of the father, both Bishop and Priest, and Bugana Raz
that is Captain, Knight and Veceroy of the Province, have declared, which I
could not deny at your request my most dear Son in Christ Damianus, nor yet
any other man desiring to be instructed there in, neither is it lawful to deny
it for two causes, the first whereof is, for that I am commanded by my most
mighty Lord Precious John Emperor of the Aethiopians, to satisfy every one
that demands of me, concerning our faith, religion, and provinces, and that I
should conceal nothing, but faithfully declare unto them the truth of al
things both by words and writing; the other reason is, for that I deem it very
fitting and labor well spent, that our names, customs and ordinances, and the
sytuation of our countries should be publicly known, which matters I never
writ unto any one till this time, nor yet declared in words, not that I was
sparing of my labor, but because no Christian, after my coming into
portugal, desired to know such things of me, whereof I could not, nor cannot
but greatly marvel. And seeing by many arguments I perceive that you much
desire the knowledge of our affairs, I beeseech you by the wounds of our
Savior Christ and by his cross to put this my confession of our faith and
religion into the latin tongue, that by your means all the Godly Christians
of Europe, may understand our customs and the integrity of our manners.
Moreover if in your trauells you hap to go to Rome, then let me entreat you
to salute in my name, the Pope and the most reverent Cardinals, Patriarchs,
Archbishops and Bishops, and all other the true worshippers of Christ, by
Christ Jesus in a kiss of peace, and that you will desire of the Pope, that
he will send unto me Francis Aluarez furnished such letters, whereby he may
answer my Lord the Emperor of Aethiopia, that after my long stay I may return
into mine own country and visit my own mansion house, for I have bin long
here detained, that before my death (which by reason of my great age is at the
door) I may effect that which I am commanded. And that having furnished this
Embassage I might dedicat the residue of my life unto God, and only spend my
time in devotion, moreover I entreat you if you find any thing in my writings
not well penned, that you will frame it to the latin phrase, but in such
manner as in no point you alter the se^ce: and lastly I desire you that in your
translation you will search the old and new testament, that you may know from
what place I have alleged my authorities, that you may be more certain in your
translation: but if I have not handled every thing so happily as may satisfy
those which be curious, I am to be pardoned by reason of my want of Chaldean
books whereof I have none, for those I had I lost by misfortune in my iourny:
wherefore being destitute of the use of all books, I could speak of nothing
but what was fresh in my memory, yet have I delivered all things most faithfuly.

Farwell my dear beloved son in Christ. Vlispone the twenty four day of
April, in the year of our Lord God 1534.

When I had finished this business I remembered my self of that place whereas I
say that Christ descended into hell for the soul of Adam, and for the soul of
Christ, which the same Christ received of his mother S. Mary the virgin.

Of which thing we have an assured testimony in those books which we call
the books of governance, which Christ Jesus delivered unto his Apostles, in
which books be expressed these words, which be called the mysteries of
doctrines, by whose authority and testimony we all of us continue in this
opinion without doubting: but after I came into Portugal I found divines
teaching a contrary doctrine against all our opinions, which is so certain, as
we do not only believe this, but also affirm that the souls of all men had
their beginning from Adam, and that as our flesh is of the seed of Adames flesh
so like-wise our soul being, as a candle, kindled by the soul of Adam, had
her original and nature from Adam, whereby it appears that we be all the
seed of Adam both of the flesh and of the soul.

All the relation above said was written and subscribed with the Ambassadors
own proper hand with the Chaldean caracters.

The deploration of the people of Lappia by the same Damianus a Goes.
I Think it not unfitting (most worthy Bishop) to make some mention in the end
of this treatise (because this also appertains to faith and to the union of
the Church) of John Magnus Gothus Archbishop of Vpsalia in the Kingdom of
Suetia, that by him we may be moved to take compassion of the people of Lappia:
for this John Magnus Gothus was borne of very good parents and rich, marvelous
well seen in the Scriptures, and of an honest conversation, and so addicted to
the Roman Church, that for the zeal thereunto, he lost the great
Archbishoppricke of Vpsalia with all the revenues thereunto belonging,
amounting to forty thousand crowns a year, and al his patrimony besides, and
having lost both dignity and goods, and tossed in the variable streams of
fortune he lay close in Prussia, living poorly a long time at the City Daniz
in Germany, where (while I was dispatching my Kings affairs in those parts of
Germany) I grew into great familiarity and indissoluble friendship with him,
and with Olaus Magnus Gothus his brother: which two I afterward found unlooked
for, at Vecenza, in poorer estate then before they were, unto which place they
went purposly, by reason of a council divulged, whereby they conceived much hope
for themselves and redress of their calamities: And when the council was
discontinued and adorned, those good me^ being utterly deprived of al their
goods, wherewith while they inioyed them they often in those Northern parts
contended much in defense of the Roman Church, and yet would have contended (if
matters had prospered) removed to Venice, there to get their living either upon
others liberality, or by their own industry, and labor, which was chiefly in
teaching and instructing others, for other succor could they get none, but that
they reposed their whole confidence in Gods assistance: whither when they were
come, they were very courteously entertained, only of Hieronymus Quirinus the
Patriarch of Venice in his Patriarchship, and there they remain to this day
expecting the divulging of that council; under the Archbishoppricke of Vpsalia
is contained a great part of that large and vast province of Lappia, the people
whereof be ignorant of the laws of our Savior Christ, which (as I understand by
many good and credible men) proceeded from the abominable extortion and
couetuousnesse of the prelates and nobles, for if they were Christians they
should be free from those taxations and tributes, wherewith they as Ethnickes
be punished: on the other side the nobility and Bishops wax rich and welthy,
and therefore they forbid them to be Christians, least bearing the sweet and
delectable yoke of Christ, they might withdraw from there tirany, and
extortion, some part of their gains, and diminish some part of their
taxations, whereby that miserable nation is most beastly and insatiably vexed
and oppressed by those Monarchs, bearing the burden most impatiently, for if
they were Christians they should pay no more tribute unto them than other
Christians pay unto their princes: And therefore nothing regarding the
salvation of so many souls, they prefer their horrible and sacrilegious
gain, before the true Faith and Christian religion: so as they may rightly be
said to carry the keys, and neither enter themselves, nor suffer others to
enter. Q insatiable coueteousnes and intolerable impiety, and from Godly
breasts to be expelled both by weapons, writings and all our forces: and without
doubt it had been quenched and buried by this time, if this good man were
restored to his former dignity, for he desires nothing more, nor meditateth of
any thing more earnestly, than that this people may be reduced to the faith of
Christ: nor does he lament for any thing more, than that by his means (as he
ever desired in his heart) these miserable beasts (as yet by reason of their
impious religion) be not made the flock of Christ, by embracing the Christian
faith: nether does he complain so much for the loss of his Archbishoppricke,
nor that he was thrust from his goods, left him by his ancestors, as for that
he wants strength, aid and substance wherewith to cure this plague of
Lappia, to bring them under the yoke of Christ, and to unite them to the Roman
Church: And this he oftentimes confirmed by his letters sent me: wherewith my
self not fully contented made earnest mention of this business, in the end of
that first Embassage of precious Joan, which I dedicated to the same John
Magnus Gothus: neither did I then satisfy my self in this business, but by
my letters dealt with Erasmus Rothrodamus, that he would commit the cause of
this matter to writing. Afterward living in his company (for I was with him at
Friburg Brisgoia the space of 5 months) I had speeches with him of that
business, by which means he was induced and appointed to frame a just volume of
this matter, but being prevented by death, the substance of the business he had
vndertake^ was utterly dissolved, notwithstanding upon his death, he concealed
not the wicked Ecclesiastical impiety, which truly he did, that he might
accuse al Christians to whom God has granted power and learning, and cry for
reuengement against them in the last judgment before Christ the just Judge of
all men.

the Christian Princes and Monarchs may now see what account and reckoning of
so many lost souls they can make at the last day before the Tribunal seat of
Christ, where is no place for pardon or grace, and where no excuse nor fair
speeches will be received. And you, most reverent Bishop, are only he that can
cure this infirmity, you only are he that can show unto this people the ways
of the Lord, and direct them, that they may walk rightly in the same: you
only are able to redeem them from the lowest hell: by you little children may
come unto Christ, and by the power of thy right hand be delivered from the
bondage and deceits of the Devil, and enjoy the plentiful redemption of
Christ, both in this world and in an other. Behold what reward thou shall
obtain if by your labor that great harvest may be carried into Christ's barn,
and no doubt you will carry it in, if once you begin.

There be at this day with Gostavus King of Suetia and Gothia some great peers
and states that be fallen from the Roman Church: there be some in those
Kingdoms also that do altogether dissent and disagree from the right Diameter
and true course of religion, unto these by your dignity and pastoral function,
may you direct your letters, requiring them by the wounds of our Savior
Christ, (whom all men, though never so far differring from the Roman Church,
do acknowledge to be Gods son and our Savior) that they will permit and
suffer this East and West Lappia, with those large provinces of Finmarchia
Scrifinia and Biarmia (the greatest part where of knows not Christ) to come
and embrace the sweet yoke of Christ: and that they will extort no more from
them, then other Christian Princes are accustomed to take from their subjects,
either by course of law or by voluntary extorsions.

And it were good, not only to send letters, but learned men also, and men of
approved sanctity and holiness of life, that these Provinces may be annexed
to the Roman Church by the faith of Christ: whom (together with the people of
Aethiopia) being reduced to the right law of Christ, although the people be
offended, yet the Lord shall reign, sitting upon the Cherubins, and although
the earth be moved, it shall rejoice, and all Islands shall be joyful.
Farewell right reverend and high Bishop in Christ Jesus, Amen.

From Louaine, in the Calends of September, in the year of our Lord God 1540.

Of the situation of Lappia, and of the inhabitants of that country: by the
same DAMIANVS A GOES.
THE country of Lappia (through which runs the Botnian sea) is divided into
East and West Lappia, the utmost part of which sea is Tornia, upon the East
part it joins unto the white lake, toward the North it compasses diverse
Provinces, and so extends it self to a place unknown, and inclining
Westwards toward Island, it joins unto part of Noruegia: upon the South it
is compassed about with the other part of Noruegia, with Suetia, Finland and
both the Botnias.

East Lappia has in it a church dedicated to Saint Andrew, in the eighty
fourth degree of the elevation of the pole, which is adorned and beautified
with a magnificent and sumptuous Sepulcher, and with men skillful and learned
in the holy Scriptures'. This Church is under the Archbishop of Vpsall, within
whose Diocese it is, and yet, notwithstanding the neighbors round about that
church, whether it be by the carelessness and negligence, or through the
covetousness of the Prelates, and great men, do not acknowledge Christ (as is
reported). Lappia in the Latin tongue is interpreted a foolish and sottish or
hartlesse nation, which name (as I think) is imposed upon them, for that the
soil by the continual and binding cold, being as it were dull, is less apt
either to receive or bring forth fruits: the natural borne people of Lappia
be very strong set, and of a middle stature, they be mauelous nimble and
dexterious in using their bows and darts, which practice of throwing the dart
they exercise even from their infancy, in such sort, that if a boy shoot at a
mark and miss it, he has no meat given him until he have hit the mark:
instead of other garments they wear skins finely sowed together, wherewith
they defend themselves from the cold; which they be so accustomed to endure,
that if need be, they will overcome it without any defense at all of those
skins: their dwellings are in tents, for of houses they have no use, because
they often remove out of one place into another: other course of life have
they none then hunting, fishing, and fowling, wherein they be marvelous
expert and skillful, for in that Province is great abundance of those things.
They use no tillage, and they have ships made without any Iron nails or pins,
which being charged and burdened with fishes dried in the air, and with pelts,
or skins, they transport them to their neighbors, and bordering people, and
get for them in exchange victuals and money, in doing whereof they use no
speech but signs and becks, which only happens through the barbarousnesse and
harshnesse of their language, which their neighbors can by no means
understand, for otherwise they be very wise and cunning in their exchanges.

The people be very valiant and warlike, in steed of horses they use a kind of
beasts, which in their language be called Raingi, being of the stature and
coulor of Asses, having cloven hoofes: they be made and horned like Bucks, but
that they be covered over with a kind of down, and be not so long, nor have so
many branches as Bucks horns have (as we our selves have seen:) these beasts
be of such wonderful swiftness, that in the space of twelve hours, they will
draw a chariot thirty German miles, and in their going, whether they go swift
or softly, by the stirring of the joints of their legs, you may hear a noise
like unto the cracking of nuts. The religion of this people is to worship the
fire and pillars of stone for gods. They presage and judge the event of the
whole day, by every living thing that meets them in the morning: they observe
matrimony, and be exceeding jealous: they be so famous in enchantments, that
amongst many other very strange and almost incredible things to be reported,
which I omit to speak of, they will by their enchantments stay a ship under
full sail, so stone still as no force of winds can remove her: which evil
is cured with Virgins excrements, being laid upon the hatches of the
ships, and upon the benches where the rowers sit to row, for these Virgins
excrements (as I have heard reported by the inhabitants) those spirits do
naturally abhor.

Certain things concerning the Aethiopians, collected out of Joseph Scaliger
his seventh Book: De emendatione temporum.
THis is not the first time that the name of the Christian Aethiopians, has
been heard amongst us, for their Churches be not only at Jerusalem and
Constantinople, but for a space it has been lawful for them to solemnize and
celebrate their sacrifices at Rome and Venice, and many things may be
understood of them and of their customs, both by the Portugals nauigations,
and by the book of Francis Aluarez travels, who went himself into Aethiopia.
For as yet we have only heard of the name of Aethiopia, but it is strange
that the name of the Emperor of Aethiopia, in our great grandfathers days,
was first known to us out of Asia, not out of Aethiopia: for before these
three hundred years the Ethiopian Kings had ever large dominions in Asia,
especially in Drangiana in the confines of Susiana, in India and in Sinus,
until the Tartarian Emperors expelled them from their government in Asia: for
the Abyssini being vanquished and expelled from the country of the people of
Sinae, by Cingis King of Tartary, Vncan the great Emperor of Aethiopia being
slain, shortly after Cincan the son of Cingis, and Cincanus son Bathin
can, did utterly expel and drive out all the Abyssini, from Moin and the
kingdom of Sinae, and compelled them to fly into Afric.

Surely we have often wondered, that a nation at this day altogether ignorant
in seafaring business, should be so mighty and potent, both by sea and land,
that they have enlarged their dominions from Aethiopia to the people of Sinae.

In those days the knowledge of that Emperor came unto us, but by the name of
Prestigian, which in the Persian tongue (now used almost throughout all Asia,
as Latium is in the West) signifies Apostolic, under which name is certainly
understood, a rightful and Christian King.

That the government of the Aethiopians was great and large in Asia, is
signified by the Ethiopian crosses which are in Giapan, Syna, and other
places, as also by the Temple that is situated in the Region of Maabar, and
dedicated to Saint Thomas, which has crosses, and many other things in it, as
are in Aethiopia, and is builded after the Ethiopian fashion, and (that which
is more) retains as yet the Ethiopian name.

FINIS.
A Table of the Chapters contained in the first Book.
THe true opinion of Divines concerning man's original. Chap. 1. The false
opinion of the Ethnicks concerning man's original. Chap. 2. Of the situation
and perfection of the world. Chap. 3 Of Aethiopia, and the ancient customs of
that country. C. 4 Of Aegipt, and the ancient customs of that country. chap.
5. Of the Carthaginians and other people of Afric. Chap. 6.
A Table of the Chapters contained in the 2. Book.
OF Asia, and the most famous nations thereof. chap. 1 Of Panchaia, and of the
manners of the Panchaians. cha. 2 Of Assyria and how the Assyrians live. chap. 3
Of Indaea, and of the customs, and institutions of the Jews. c. 4 Of Media,
and of the manners of the Medes. chap. 5 Of Parthia, and the manner of living of
the Parthians. chap. 6 Of Persia, and of the manners, laws and ordinances of
the Persians. chap. 7 Of India, and of the monstrous and prodigious customs
and manner of living of the Indians. chap. 8 Of Scythia, and of the barbarous
manners of the Scythians. c. 9 Of Tartaria, and of the customs and power of
that people. c. 10 Of Turcia, and of all the manners laws and ordinances of the
Turks. chap. 11 Of the Christians, and of their original, and customs. cha.
12
A Table of the Chapters contained in the 3 Book.
OF the most famous countries of Europe. chap. 1 Of Greece, and of Solons laws
which he made for the Athenians, and which were after established by the
Princes of Greece. chap. 2 Of Laconia, and of the customs and ordinance of the
Laconians or Lacedaemonians, chapter 3 Of the I Will of Creete, and of the customs
most common amongst the Cretensians. chap. 4 Of Thrace, and of the barbarous
manners of the people of Thrace. chap. 5 Of Russia or Ruthenia, and of the the
latter manners and customs of the Russians. chap. 6 Of Lithuani^, and of the
manner of living of those people. cha. 7 Of Liuonia, Prussia, and of the
Soldiers called Marciam in Spain. chap. 8 Of Polonia, and of the later
customs of the Polonians. cha. 9 Of Hungaria and of the Institutions and
manners of living of the Hungarians. chap. 10 Of Boemia, and of the manners of
the Boemians. chap. 11 Of Germany and of the customs of the Germans: chap.
12 Of Saxony, and how the Saxons lived in times past, and how they now live.
chap. 13 Of Westphalia, and of the manner of Judgments ordained for the
Westphalians by Charles the Great. chap. 14 Of Franconia, and of the nature and
customs of that country. chap 15 Of ^ueuia, and how the people of that country
lived heretofore, and how they now live. cha. 16 Of Bauaria, and Carinthya, and
of the laws and customs of that people heretofore, and how they now live.
chap. 17 Of Italy, and of the manners of the Italians: of Romulus also, and his
civil institutions. c. 18 Of Lyguria, and of the ancient manners of the
inhabitants of that country, chap. 19 Of Tuscia, and of the ancient manners of
the Tuscans. chapter 20 Of Galalia in Europe, and of the old customs of that
country, chap. 21 Of Gallia, and of the ancient customs and later ^^nners of
the Frenchmen, chap. 22 Of Spain, and of the manners of the Spaniards. chap.
28 Of Lusitania, and of the manners of the Portugals. chap. 24 Of England,
Scotland and Ireland, and of many other Islands and of the manners and customs
of the Inhabitants. chap. 25 Of the I Will of Taprohane, and the customs of that
people. cha. 26 FINIS. Lib. 3.

NIcholas Damascen of the manners and customs of sundry nations. fol 472
Certain things of America or Brasill, gathered out of the writings of Johannes
Lerius. fol. 483 The faith, religion and manners of the Aethiopians, and the
deploration of the people of Lappia, compiled by Damianus a Goes a Knight of
Portugal, wherein is contained, A letter of Damianus a Goes, a Knight of
Portugal to Pope Paul the third. fol. 503 A letter of Helena the grandmother
of Prestor John Emperor of Aethiopia, to Emanuell King of Portugal, written in
the year 1509. fol. 512 The letters of the most renowned David Emperor of
Aethiopia, to Emanuell King of Portugal, written in the year 1521. Paulus
Iouius being Interpretor. fol. 517 The letters of the same David Emperor of
Aethiopia to John the third of that name King of Portugal, in the year 1524.
fol. 526 The letters of the same Emperor to the Pope of Rome, in the same year
1524. the same Paulus Iouius being Interpretor. fol. 533 Other letters from
the said Emperor to the Pope, the same year. fol. 540 The faith and religion
that the Aethiopians hold and observe. fol. 546 The depl^ration of Lappia. f.
581 The si^uation of Lapp a. fol. 585 A short discourse of the Aethiopians
taken out of Scaligers seventh book, De emendatione temporum. fol. 588
FINIS.

