Boanerges.

OR THE HVMBLE SVPPLICATION OF THE MINISTERS OF SCOTLAND, TO THE HIGH COURT OF
PARIAMENT IN ENGLAND.

2. COR. 4. 13. We believe, and therefore have we spoken.

Printed in Edinburgh.

1624.

2. CHRON. 19. 6. Take heed what you do: for you execute not the judgment of
man, but of the Lord, and he shall be with you in the cause and judgment.


A Preface or Introduction to the Supplication.
THere is a common saying among ours and Gods enemies the Papists, that the
Christian Church must be known by these Characters, Visibility, Antiquity,
Universality, and Consent: but the Spirit of God says, that all these are the
marks of the Beast; and persecution and paucitie the infallible signs of the
true Church: thus began the first prophecy, I will put enmity between thee
and Genesis 3. 15.
the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; thus it continued in John's
Revelation, Then the Dragon Apoc. 12. 17.
was wroth with the Woman, and went and made war with the remnant of her
seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus
Christ. And thus could we spread the testimonies of Scripture like a mantle
exposed to your view, full of delicate resemblances, wherein you might behold
how the true Church of God has been ever without any cessation subject to
scorns, opprobry, the malignant circumstances of time, or fearful
persecution. But withal we pray you remember, that we make not our approches
from Nebuchadnezars heating the oven seven times hotter, but the Dragons Dan.
3. Apoc. 12.
watching the Woman, the Man that sits in the Temple of God as God, those
that be in Moses chair, such as were invested with Aarons ornaments, and in
plain terms the continued persecution which we mean must arise out of the
hate and malice of Christians; yea Preachers themselves, that are opposites to
zealous professors, and this we complain of.

Oh read, read for Gods sake the story of Jeremy, and mark his
persecutions, and who were his greatest enemies? Shemaiah a false Prophet, and
Zephaniah Chapter 29.
the chief Priest in stead of Iehoiada; yea if you step a little further you
shall find, that the king Zedekiah durst not justify his conference with
Jeremy, Chapter 38. 24.
as being afraid of the Princes and Priests: so that in truth he had no friends
but Baruch the Prophet, and Ebedmelech the Moore. And as it was with him, so it
continued with all the rest, until the coming of Christ, and then wherefore
did he call them generation of Vipers? or who were those hypocrites that Christ
exprobrated, but the Scribes and Pharisees who sat in Moses chair, and at last
condemned the Savior of the world to an ignominious death: so that it is
apparent, here was nothing but persecution. And for visibility, did not Eliah
cry out, he was alone, and those that were the true servants of God, durst not
justify their profession? And afterterward, he that was the Author of all
truth, was reputed an impostor and deceiuer of the world.

Oh mark what the Apostle says: For I think that God has set forth us the
last Apostles, as men appointed to death: for we are made a gazing-stocke unto
the 1. Cor. 4. 9.
world, unto the Angels, and to men. Which place of Scripture drives us to
amaze, when we consider the disparitie between the flourishing Churches,
ambitious Prelacie, exalted Bishops, and maiesticke glory of Clergy men in
Europe, and the poverty, persecution and disreputation of the true Church of
God indeed, as either it was in the time of the Apostles, or must be (according
to this prophecy) to the worlds end. Reconcile us then (we pray you) whether
the Apostle only meant the present time, or from the Spirit of God by way of
prediction had reference to after ages, yea the end of the world? but do not
come too near our eyes to dim our sight, or deaf our ears with the fearful
sound of the prerogative of Princes, the high commanding voices of authority,
or the seeming flourishes of the orders of a Church; but plainly out of
coherence of Scripture, rectify our understanding in this point. For if the
Apostles have prophetically set down, and indefinitely concluded, that this
must be the estate of the true Church of God; we shall never believe, but that
outward pomp, pride, wealth, eminency, and the ill sounding accent of
supereoritie over their brethren, can decipher any other thing then Antichrist;
and so must love such in our souls, as either out of Paul's humility content
themselves with that portion which God has allotted, or David's patience endure
the Micols of the world to call them fools.

THE SVPPLICATION OR PETITION IT SELF.
Most gracious Lords,
WHen Paul came to preach at Ephesus, and bring as it were the Ark of God into
the Temple of Dagon, that he might break his neck, it is said, the whole
City was moved, and Demetrius a siluer-smith, who got his living by making of
Images, raised such a hurliburly amongst the people, that they would not endure
any motive for their conversion to Christianity, but cried out, Great is Diana
of the Ephesians. Whereupon the Apostle afterward exclaimed upon them, that he
had fought with beasts at Ephesus. Thus is it with all kingdoms and settled
governments, though never so many thorns and thistles grow up to choke the
good seed, yet if there be a desire to set a crown of gold on the Priests
head, and take away his rags and deformed garments, to bring some leprous
offender to public view, that it may be discerned whether he be unclean or
no; to make the Priests to cleanse the Temple of filth and pigeons dung, as you
read of Hercules who let in the river to carry away the ordure of Angens
stable; to search the unswept corners of vicious men's souls; and in a word to
reform the abuses of a Commonwealth; then shall some Amasiah tell Amos, Bethel
is the Kings Court, and the Kings Chapel, there is no preaching there: then
shall some Prince or Lord tell Zedechiah that Jeremy weakens the kingdom, and
disheartens the soldiers: then shall Sandolet and the rest affright Nehemiah,
when he attempts the discovery of foul enormities: in a word, then shall your
great men and officers, for fear some charming arm of Hecate turn their
inside outward, cry out of innovation, sedition, turbulencie, or some
hare-braind spirit.

But, most gracious Lords, we beseech you remember how worthily King Philip of
Macedon entertained a petitioners presumption, when a certain woman kneeled
before him to deliver a supplication, he rejected her suite, and turned away in
scorn from her: the woman amazed, yet boldly answered, Then cease to be a
King, if thou deniest to hear thy subjects petitions. The King hearing her
voice, but not understanding what she said, returned again, and asked her what
she meant. The undaunted woman repeated the words again; and the magnanimous
Prince, not only pardoned her, but took her up in his arms, and as you shall
read that David blessed Abigail for keeping him from shedding of blood, so did
King Philip bless the woman for telling him his duty, and chid all the rest
for being flatterers and parasites.

Thus do we say to you, seeing our great and considerate Prince has now
condescended to call this high Court of Parliament to hear his subjects
grieuances, and redress the enormities of the Commonwealth; either cease to
sit, and come not there at all, or entertain our petitions, and relieve our
discontents. But because we will not affright Israel, as the ten explorators of
the land of Canaan did, with talking of Enachims and giants, of iron walls and
high towers, that is, with meddling with the Church and government of the
Clergy, either by finding fault with the settled state, or proposing unto you
our manner of discipline, according to other reformed Churches of Europe, the
Confession of Auspurgh, the Harmony of Confession, or other fearful petitions
which in the days of Queen Elizabeth were presented to the Council; we will
at this present contract ourselves, and insist only upon three things. 1.
First concerning Non-residents, and the ill example which the Clergy give by
their ill lives to weak and ignorant souls. 2. Concerning the mixtures of
Papistrie in your kingdom, or conniuing at the impudency of such men, that
with Bells priests eat up the Kings provision, and make him believe the Dragon
did it. 3. Last of all, not to give ear to the Sirens incantations, but tie
yourselues close to the mast of true Religion and Christian policy, that you
be not seduced and brought within the Panthers reach, whose sweet savors and
persumes intoxicateth many innocents and ignorants.

First concerning Non-residents, Formalists, and other abuses of the Clergy;
if it please you to remember, in the Law of Moses, the malefactor or delinquent
in any kind, saved his life if he could once take hold of the horns of the
Altar; yet when the case was against King Solomon, it could not serve Ioabs
turn, but he perished immediately: so is it amongst you, if you can but name
the orders of government and constitutions of the Church, you are able to stop
any disputants mouth, to silence any Preacher; but this shall not serve your
turn in any cause against the majesty of heaven, but the sentence of our
Savior shall be denounced against any hypocritical Formalist under the Sun,
He that knows his masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes. If again he be an ignorant, oh read the prophecy; the flying book
came to one, and he could not open it, it was too fast sealed; it came to
another opened, and he could not read it; and it came to a third, and he
could not understand it. Thus out of ignorance or wilfulness you have silenced
many worthy spiritual stones of Gods building, and traduced those that could
not endure the profane mixtures in religion, with the terms of heretics,
schismatiks and sectaries, terms more affrighting then Jews, Turks and
Infidels: for their misunderstanding themselves may be excused ex magno
inscitia bello, yet Corasim and Bethsaida shall answer the matter more
fearfully.

But, most gracious Lords, notwithstanding these calumniations, or the brand of
malice by intemperate humors; the crime of heresy is not to be imputed to
any, whose faith does wholly rely upon the sure rock of Gods word; they are no
Schismatiks who run for shelter under the comfortable shade of the tree of
the Church of God, such as the Prophets, Apostles, and primitive Church
describe, or such as all the Reformed Churches of Europe take upon them to
defend: nor are they to be reputed Sectaries which embrace the truth always
one and itself, and so impregnable, that all the assaults of Satan shall not
prevail against it: and therefore, Right honorable Lords, we do here exhibit
a petition unto you, so to order the matter, that neither we be thus
scandalized, nor any servant of God put from his estate and maintenance, for
making a conscience against some frivolous ceremonies, which are not things
indifferent (as now is the phrase) if you compel men to the observation; and
therefore to affright them with loss of living, maintenance or imprisonment,
is no brotherly punishment, nor charitable discipline, do rather, as Augustus
did by his Senator, we beseech you.

There was a Roman dwelling in the great city, named Ouidius Pollio, who
determining to invite the Emperor to supper, made a great preparation; but in
the washing of his crystal glasses, the slave broke one of them; for which he
was condemned the next day to be cut in pieces, and thrown into his
fish ponds. The Emperor coming to supper, and hearing of this most cruel
doom for so triuial an offense, commanded all the glasses to be brought into
his presence, and so brake them to pieces: This I do (quoth Augustus) to
prevent further mischief which may happen upon so slight occasions. We will
not apply, but leave all to be thoroughly searched and discussed, and that for
two causes: 1. The one, for that we are confident, you are able in respect of
your singular knowledge in the Scriptures, and hope you are willing in respect
of your honors and sincere piety toward Religion, to convince our errors by
Gods word, and discover our wanderings, if in any thing we be out of the way. 2.
Secondly, that if you find the testimony and confession of faith of honest
religious men agreeable with the word of truth, you will also agree either to
convince us by writing, or give us leave to live without obloquy or infamous
characters in our poor and despised estates, or not to clog our consciences
(as we said) with ceremonies and devices of men. For, what said Stephen King of
Poland, Princes might command the bodies and lives of their subjects, but not
their souls and consciences.

And who, I pray you, are our greatest enemies, but such as live in pomp,
state, glory, feasting, with much abundance and affluencie; such as have
plurality of Benefices, are resident at none of them, and scarce preach once
in a year; such as are Prebends in Cathedral Churches, whose livings are
inordinatly spent upon a number of Drones and devouring panches, Singing-men,
Organists, Queristers, and diverse superfluous officers, which otherwise might
be extended toward the relief of poor scholars and the true servants of God;
and all this is the more lamentable, because many times the place of preaching
is vnsupplied, and when it is supplied, you shall find at least a dozen
Ministers walking in your most frequented Churches without hearing the word of
God at all: to be brief, such are our enemies, as neither know what true zeal
or devotion means, nor once think upon the propagation of religion, or purity
of a sincere life.

Judge, most gracious Lords, whether our souls are truly vexed or no, at the
enormities and gross wickedness of Clergy men; when amongst you there are
such covetous and ambitious Preachers that retain diverse Benefices, offices
and Churchliuings in their hands, and growing rich, are able to purchase
Lordships and Manors, when yet you read the Levites might have no lands, nor
any sordide commutations of rents, keep princely houses and diet with song and
minstrelsie, their wives and children coached in the streets, and equalling
your best Ladies in habit and fantastical attire, feathers, frisled hair,
masks, fans, bodkins, and in a manner using all those fashions for which Isaiah
reprehendeth Isai. 3.
the daughters of Zion in his time. We could name frequenting public
assemblies, common Interludes, Iesabels painting among the women, Herodias
dancing, and all other fearful customs of temptation, wherewith the devil
beguiles the wandering souls of Gods people, and brings poor innocents under
the captivity of sin, who with Heuah dare adventure on the apple, because it
was fair to the eye.

We could tell you, that when Cardinal Woolsey was made Legatus alatere, Lord
Chancellor of England, Archbishop of York, and had a Bull read in public of
all his temporal and spiritual livings, there was such murmuring and repining
among honest civil men, that they durst publikly presage his downfall, and the
Courtiers themselves were amazed at his wealth. The like was spoken of
Gardener, and Cardinal Poole. And many in those days shed tears again to
think that such as had the cure of souls should affect other offices,
dignities and temporal honors; and we pray God there be not the like
corruptions still. As for the vanities of the world, yea life it self, what
are they but bubbles and balls raised out of a little niter and ^ope, as boys
in their pastimes blow up with their quils, and ere they be tossed three times,
they burst of themselves. We must say yet further, that there are such
Formalists, Temporisers, flatterers, and mere parasites, in imitation of the
Courtly priests in the times of Isreal's and Iudahs Kings, that sundry Chaplins
lie watching over Gods true Ministers indeed, and if they preach according to
their consciences and the word of God, or be examined before hand how they
mean to dispose of themselves, they shall be told to their faces that the text
serves not for the times; nor are men to be endured that dare put their rude
hands unto the raw wounds of the government: but we will be bold to say, that
all this Courtly pomp, large revenues, abundance of wealth, and maintaining of
pleasures, are the devils clogs to press their minds and meditation to the
earth and corruptible dross, so that they cannot look up to heaven, nor
affect such things as are above.

To end, lest we never end, many of these temporising Clergy men are so
curious, trim and neat in their apparel, with garters, roses and shoo-strings,
with boots and spurs, with velvet, satin and damask cassocks and tippets,
with horse and coach, and in a word with all worldly pomp and bravery, that
except the color, no man can discover them from Knights and Gentlemen; when
yet a Prophet was known in those days by the habit of a Prophet; and he that
reads shall find that Eliahs leather girdle, Isaiahs nakedness, Ieremies
dungeon, Amos neat-heards staff, John Baptists camels hair, Christ's coat
without a seame, Peter's fishing net, and Paul's laboring with his hands, did
far exceed the proud Priests miters, or the Pharisees philacteries. Here we
might add the frequenting of public Theaters, using all manner of exercises,
gaming, tauernes, wantonness, and such like, insomuch that the Apostles,
especially Jude truly presaged what manner of men they would be, and what
corruptions should creep into the Church; yea our Savior Christ prophesied,
that for these and other gross impieties, at his second coming he should
scarce find faith upon earth. And thus much for the corruptions of your
Clergy, and our expostulation, that you will remember Iethro's counsel to
Moses: Moreover, provide thou among all the people, men of Exodus 18. 21.
courage, fearing God, men dealing truly, hating couetousness.

Secondly, concerning Papists, or the conniuencie at superstitious Popery, or
coming so near the chariot wheels of the Strumpet, to be dashed with the
flingings of her dirt and filth; what is it but to bring in the Syrian idolatry
to be mixed with Samarias 2. King. 17. 25.
sacrifices, for which the Lord sent Lions out of the wilderness to devour
them: what is it, then for Ahas to go to Damascus, and send word to Vrias 2.
Kin. 16. 10. 17 2. Chron. 28.
the Priest to make an altar like unto that in Syria* and set it up in Gods
house; for which both he the Priest and the people were severely punished: what
is it but when a Prophet is sent on Gods errand, 1. King. 20. 36.
and makes known the pleasure of the Almighty, which is not obeyed, and so
the offender is slain and punished. Mark, we beseech you (most gracious
Lords) how jealous God is of his honor, and will not endure any disobedience,
especially the pollutions of idolatry, which are maintained in their profane
religion and sophisticate distinctions and deceits of equivocation. When Rahel
stole her fathers idols, she made no more account of them Genesis 35.
then to tomb them in the straw, and so sat upon them; but as soon as Jacob
came to a resting place, the text says, he presently cleansed his house of
such filthiness and abomination: when Moses detracted Exodus 4. 24.
the time for circumcising his son, the Lord had like to have killed him in the
way; and when it was done, his wife Zipporah reviled him with the name of
bloody husband. Oh how angry and incensed was God at Aarons calfe, insomuch
that Moses in a great rage broke the tables of stone all to fitters; and God
himself would have destroyed Israel Exodus 32.
in the wilderness, and made a greater nation of him. And what are the idols
and images of Papists, with their Roods and Crucifixes, and painted pictures,
but Egypts calves; and Naamans going into the temple of Rimmon, which he knew
was a sin, and so craved mercy? Are not the Papists ashamed of these things,
when among their own Doctors and Schoolmen, it is doubtful and disputable,
whether Solomon was saved or no, by reason of his apostacy?

Would it not make a man's heart to tremble to hear the fearful epithites and
characters wherewith the holy Ghost has branded Papistrie? and is not the Pope
proved to be that Antichrist, not one man, as the devil would deceive weak
Christians, but the Conclaue of Cardinals, and the government of Rome, as it is
now exalted. Oh read, read, read for Gods sake, There must come a departing,
and that man of sin be disclosed, even the son of perdition, which is an
adversary, and exalts himself 2. These. 2. 3. 4. 7
against all that is called God, so that he sits in the temple of God,
showing himself that he is God: and therefore neither Jew nor Turk, nor
Idolater, but a mere Christian Prelate, and should be a Preacher of Gods word:
then he follows with the mystery of iniquity, the revealing of the wicked
man, the consuming of him with the spirit of Gods mouth, his coming by the
working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, in all
deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness, with many other things to the end of the
Chapter.

What think you of Paul's instructions to Timothy, concerning the doctrines of
devils, speaking through 1. Tim. 4.
hypocrisy, having their consciences burned with a hot iron, forbidding meats
and marriages, and giving heed to the spirit of errors to be seduced: so that
you see there must be a doctrine amongst professors of Gods word, prescribing
things abominable to the truth, and it shall be perspicuous to the world, and
plainly revealed, and when it is discovered and made known, the conclusion
follows, without distinction or exception, that it is the doctrine of the
devil: answer then a Gods name, you that must answer before the throne of the
Lamb; is not this Papistrie? and who would be thus defiled? Oh mark the
goodness of God when the guests made excuses, and would not come to the feast,
the Master sent about into the high ways and hedges for the poor, the blind,
the halt and the lame; yea he compelled some to come, that knew not what that
hospitality meant; and yet for all this, when he discovered a man in the
bride-chamber that had not on his wedding garment, he cast him forth, and his
ministers threw him into utter desolation: what then will become of Papists?
can you conceive that the Popes triple crown, his vestments embrodred with
pearl and gold, the Cardinals bloody scarlet gowns, the Priests stately and
pompous copes, the altar-hangings of rich arras, with all those proud and
pompous attires, are wedding garments fit to come into Christ's bride-chamber?
No, no. It is true humiliation and the washing of our sins with his precious
blood must make us fit for admission. What is Calamus, Benimmi, or Storax, says
the Prophet, or a thousand rivers of oil to make us delicately clean, and
smell of perfumes, except the Lord purge and cleanse us, and by the operation
of his holy Spirit wipe away our leprous spots of iniquity, and purify us by
a new sanctification, not by the Purgatory of Papistry, the intercession of
Saints, the Masses of Priests, the merits of works, the Indulgences of the
Pope, the trentals and dirges of cozening Friars, nor in a word the trumperies
and fooleries of processions and puppet plays.

Now come to the hammer that strikes all home, to the stone that pushed the
golden image in pieces, to the iron rod that bruiseth Gods enemies to powder,
the Apocalips I mean, and he that has ears to hear, let him hear. I saw
under the altar the souls of them that were killed for the word of God Apoc.
6. 9.
and for the testimony which they maintained. Oh the bloody massacres of
France, and the cruelty of the Roman Bishops! oh the tyranny of the
Inquisition, and the searches of Jesuits and Priests all over Europe! oh the
fiery trials and persecutions in Queen Mary's days, and those blood-thirsty
enemies of God, Gardner and Bonner, with the rest of Satan's instruments, worse
then Adonibeseck the tyrant, who cut off the hands and feet of 70 Kings. But
understand what follows both to them and all the rest that forget God: And the
Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief
Captains, 15
and the mighty men, and the bondman, and every freeman hid themselves in
dens and among the rocks of the mountains, and said to the mountains and
rocks, Fall 16
on us, and hide us from the presence of him that sits on the throne, and
from the wrath of the Lamb. And he opened the bottomless pit, and there arose
the smoke of 9, 2
the pit, and the smoke of a great furnace, and the Sun and the air were
darkened by the smoke of the pit; And there came out of the smoke Locusts upon
the earth, and 3
unto them was given power, as the Scorpions of the earth have power. What is
all this, and much more that follows, but Popish Priests, false teachers,
heretics indeed, and such as would eclipse and darken the glory of Gods word,
and pervert the doctrine of holy Scripture. Mark the rest, we beseech you: And
when they have finished their testimony, Apoc. 11. 7.
the Beast that comes out of the bottomless pit shall make war against
them, and shall overcome them and kill them: and their corpse shall lie in the
streets of the great City, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, 8
where our Lord also was crucified. And there appeared another great wonder in
heaven, for behold a great red 12. 3
Dragon having seven heads and ten horns; and there 7
was a battle in heaven, Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon; And
the great Dragon that old Serpent, 9
called the Devil and Satan, was cast out, which deceives all the world. And
I saw a Beast rise out of the 13. 1 6
Sea, with seven heads and ten horns, and he opened his mouth unto blasphemy
against God. And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth
of the Dragon, 13
and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet.
And great Babylon came 16. 19
in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the
fierceness of his wrath. Come, I will 17. 1
show thee the damnation of the great Whore that sits upon many waters, with
whom have committed fornication the Kings of the earth. And I saw a Woman sit 2
upon a scarlet colored beast, full of names of blasphemy. Oh read the whole
Chapter with all that follows concerning Romes prophecy, and then consider
with your selves, who would either be a Papist or allow of Papistry in any
Christian government: for either you must discredit this prophecy, or think
the holy Ghost very unmannerly in these epith^tes and titles, or be ashamed of
your profession, and so turn to the Lord (if be possible) by true contrition
and reformation of life.

But, most gracious Lords, we will come nearer home to you, you know what
letters have passed from your Bishops to inferior Ministers, concerning what
and how they shall preach, with certain limitation of handsome language toward
the Papists, that none of these fearful characters in Scriptures shall be once
mentioned against them: you know how the Lord Keeper would feign have moderated
the charges of the Judges of Assise at their solemn Sessions and Assemblies,
as if there were a full determination in the government to repeal all the
Statutes of Queen Elizabeth, yea the King himself against Papists, Priests and
Jesuits. You know how audacious they have been even of late days to justify
their bad dispositions toward the State, and make a public protestation of
their inficious wilfulness, insomuch that some of them dared to say, when we
rejoiced with bonfires at the Princes return, that they were sorry to see so
much wood spent in vain, for there would not be fagots enough left to burn the
Heretics in London.

What then has our gracious Sovereign gotten by this partial charity or
conniuencie at Papists; but at home a general fear lest the Devil should lay
hold upon the latch of the door, and so take advantage of no bodies watching
without; or their negligence within, and politikly enter, and then who knows
not, what a subtle Serpent, raging Lion and watching Dragon he is? And abroad,
injurious reports, that he was afraid of the Popes and Spaines mightiness, or
durst not trust his own greatness against the factious Papists of England, if
they should unite themselves to any foreign Prince; when yet he has had
experience of his own preservation, and the many deliverances of his
predecessor that famous Queen of everlasting memory: for the hand of God is
not shortened, and he has still a cloudy pillar by day, and a fiery pillar by
night to conduct his Israel through the wilderness. If there were no more to
make you abhor Papistrie, then the martyrdom of the Saints in Queen Mary's
days, it were sufficient: Oh horrible cruelty to have men and women burnt for
saying the Lords prayer in the vulgar tongue, and instructing their families in
the word of God. The bloody Bishop Bonner in his own person burnt a poor
servants hand with a flaming link for saying a part of a Catechism: and to
make the spectacle the more ugly, he whipped a man with rods in his garden,
till his fury made his own blood spurt out of his paunch. The rest were not
inferior unto him: for by a Bishops commandment a woman with child was put
to death, and when the infant burst out of her womb, one of the guard pitched
him back again into the fire upon the point of a halbert. To name the rest,
were to write out the whole book; but for this and the rest, we end with the
Poet, Horresco referente.

Shall we step into France, and remember those fearful times of Guisean
massacres, especially Henry of Bourbons marriage, when the Admiral was slain,
of which one writes, that there was more blood spilt then wine drank. Shall we
name the Leagures Oligarchy, and holy conuention of Catholics, when they had
like to have expeld their Prince out of the kingdom, and drove him to a nooke
of Normandy, the town of Deep, and only because he was or seemed a
Protestant. In these wars and times of wickedness, so many outrages and cruel
blood sheddings were committed, that Nero's opening his mothers womb was not
comparable.

You read of a battle in heaven, between Michael and his Angels, and the
Dragon; wherein at last the Devil and all his accomplices were discomfited: if
ever this might be rightly applied, it was to Queen Elizabeth, of who^ it may
well be said with the Poet,

-- Namque haud tibi vultus
Mortalis, nec vox hominem sonat o dea certe.
For if ever the Cherubins spread their wings over the Arc, the God of heaven
took a charge of her person; else could she not have escaped so many attempts,
so many enemies, so many mischiefs, pistols, poniards, poisons, threatenings,
insurrections, invasions, curses, excommunications, hate, and deadly malice,
all which arose from the poisoned spring of the Papists inventions, and flowed
into streams of monstrous impiety, and Popish absolutions for murder. If
there were nothing in the world to be a motive to the abhorrencie of their
religion and actions, the Catastrophe of Henry the 4. of France, surnamed the
Great, would dissolve an heart of adamant, and make men wonder that some
exorbitant vengeance did not fall upon the contriuers: for when was this done?
when he had condescended to their own conditions, the Popes Legate, and the
Papists intercession; but Satan has his instruments; and when the Lord gives
us over, or we give over the Lord, we must endure a strange alteration.

Who can forget, or who can ever be reconciled to any adherents of Popery, when
the Gunpowder plot shall be questioned, and the memory of that Satanicall
machination be renewed, of which I will say no more, but answer with Solon, when
there was a motion made for a law against parricides, You see (says he) how
murder is to be punished; but no man can believe that any dare attempt to kill
his father: so treasons, massacres, slaughters, and villainous attempts may be
proiected, but it is impossible that there should be such a forge in hell it
self, to hammer out so vile a work, as the destruction of a whole kingdom at
once, and the blowing into the air the Nobility and principal wise men of a
Commonwealth. Why Neros wish was not comparable to this, to have all the
Senators heads set on one neck, that he might divide it asunder at a stroke.
If it be thus, most gracious Lords, be judges your selves of our poor
supplication, whether it is not high time to root out Papistrie, and cry with
Sara, that the son of the bondwoman should not dwell with Isaac, and so never
left till Hagar and Ismael were thrust out of doors; or to take that order,
that Popery have not any further footing in in the Land, nor that Man of sin,
that Antichrist of Rome, that son of perdition, that scarlet Strumpet, that
painted Iesabel, and that doctrine of devils be never admitted again or taught
in England, to imposture ignorant souls, and seduce innocent people.

Thirdly, concerning Spanish practices, and the hate that all the nations of
the world bear unto them: for the general (most gracious Lords) we refer you
to the several tractates of many Historiographers, and the great experience of
judicious travelers; but especially to Paragone and Nouita Pernasso written in
Italian, to a letter to the Duke of Sauoy, and a treatise of Figuira a
Portingal Gentleman concerning the conquest of Portingall, written in Spanish
to the Figre of France, the Cheualier of France, the Leaguers Oligarchy, and
the Spanish Monarchy compiled in French; and for our own language, to Sir
Francis Hastings works, and a well composed treatise concerning English
fugitives, with diverse of this sort, wherein you shall see, quasi digito
demonstrata, as in a table well deliniated, the 1. pride, 2. irreligion, 3.
tyranny, 4. treasons, 5. ingratitude, and 6. inhumanitie of the Spanish
nation, wherein we hope one day to satisfy understanding men, and according to
the proverb of Dies dabit quod dies negat, make you partakers of such truths,
that the best friends which Spain has, shall confess the Castilian comes of
goatish barbarous blood, and all the rest are polluted with Mahumetan mixture,
and Moorish affinity. And although it may be objected against such an
attempter,

Non tu plus cercis, sed plus temerarius aeudes; yet iuuante Deo it may be
performed, and we will rely on Mordechais answer to Hester, that if she will
not go in to the King to save her people, God will raise them up means of
preservation from some other part of the earth. But to come nearer home, and to
your selves, as the present stands; Who knows not, since the treaty with
Spain, with what insolency the Papists have proceeded both at home and abroad;
at home they have dared to publish and copy devised pardons, scorned the laws
of the Land concerning Recusancie, boasted of public assemblies, set up
printing Presses in private houses, and justified their idolatrous meetings, as
if the Mass meant to outface the Gospel of Jesus Christ, frequented the
Ambassadors houses with much immodest justification of their Conuenticles,
threatened zealous Ministers for their inuectiues against Antichrist; continued
private inhibitions that no man should speak, write, preach, or practice any
thing against their designs, insomuch that diverse have been imprisoned for
discovering the Spaniards pride and hypocrisy, and many put out of countenance
for inuectiues against the Kings friends, as the term went. Abroad, I am
ashamed to name the sundry pictures they have published both in Antwerp and
Brussels (for all the peace, and treaty with Spain) against the King and his
children, against our Country and Religion, against God and his Anointed; yea
it is wonderful to read the infamous and scandalous lies they have exposed,
as if his Majesty had gone with his Council to Mass to please the Pope and
the King of Spain, as is apparent in Gallo Belgico. What say you to ^oron^
Regi^, a book printed in Brussels against his Majesty's royal person; an
Invectiue against Holland, by laughing at her near nosse unto hell, as being
low ground; and traducing the virtuous Queen Elizabeth most maliciously; John
Kings Legacle Bishop of London; the Gag for the Gospel; the vneasing of
heresy, with diverse others, all which though they be hellish and damnable, yet
are sold by the Devils factor, or a Spanish John, and in a manner winked at in
the State; whereas other relations tending only to the discovery of errors and
abuses in the Church, are not only suppressed, but the authors punished and
imprisoned, to no other purpose, but to discover our fear that we should be
found guilty in Gods sight: so that one has been imprisoned for writing a
letter to the then Marquis of Buckingham against the Spanish march; another for
making or publishing a book, wherein Gondomar apprehended himself mocked and
derided; a third for preaching a Sermon, Be not unequally yoked with Infidels;
a fourth for discovering the incestuous marriages of the house of Austria; a
fifth for revealing the secrets of that tyrannous Inquisition in Spain; a sixth
for applying to the present Ezechias folly in showing the Baby lonish
Ambassadors the treasures of the Temple and the riches of the Palace; a
seventh for making a prayer to be delivered from all infectious Spanish sheep,
by reason you had once a great rot of sheep in England, by an infectious Ewe
brought out of Spain; and diverse others for putting the axe to the root of
the tree, and applying other texts contrary, to your Bishops minds, and some
other Lords who affected Spaines greatness.

But such is your misfortune ((...) p^o^^^nely abuse Gods providence with such
^ cha^^cte^) or the malignitie of time, that having two fac^t^ and befitting
pictures, as your adversaries deserved, they were both suppressed, the plates
cut in p^eces, and the sellers imprisoned; one was of the Kings holding the
Pope^ nose to a grind stone* with the two Archbishops turning the same* another
was made by Mr Ward of Ipswich, concerning 88. and the powder treason, and both
for Gods glory and Englands honor; yet neither they nor any thing else against
the Pope or Spain would be to era^ed: yea when your reverend and honorable
Archbishop* whose Statue deserves to be set up in gold, proved the Lords
Champion against some Papisticall motives, and mixtures to be made amongst you,
some profane tongue called him Puritan Bishop, and wicked stomachs belched
contradiction in his face: but we will urge this matter no further, only pray
that God will protect such as protect true Religion; and assure your Honors,
that the Spirit of God will make them of the synagogue of Satan, which call
Revel. 3. 9.
themselves Jews, and are not; but such as keep the word of his patience,
shall be delivered from the hour of temptation which must come upon all the
world.

We could name other several conferences and disputations since this treaty
with Spain, of which with devilish arrogancy they have boasted that Fisher
the Jesuit so prevailed against Doctor White, that many hearers turned
Catholics; and how the illuminations of the Priests were divine from heaven,
and the Papists Preachers had an Evangelical spirit: oh horrible impudency,
and Spanish blasphemy!

We will not be preiudicate (most honorable Lords) and say, it was a judgment
of God in that fatal Vosper of the Blackfriers, to kill a hundred people with
the fall of a loft, and give you all warning, that God will not be mocked, that
blasphemies shall be revenged, that there is no such enemy to God and his
Church as apostacy: but we will be bold to tell you, that this disaster is
turned upon your own heads; for at Rome there has been solemn Procession,
and from Rome letters of discovery, that in England God has been so angry
with the heretics, (meaning the Protestants) that Churches and lofts have
overwhelmed many of them in their ominous falls. If the devil now be the
father of lies, who could invent such untruths?

You had a tempest of lightning and thunder in July last, and it spared not the
gate house in the Palace of Saint James, we will not say, it was to chide you
for building a Chapel to Idolatry, and swearing to strange articles for the
pleasure of the Spaniard; but may affirm, that if any Bishop was consenting to
such a work, is it any other then when the Leuite became Priest to Micha, and
consecrated his idol. Come, come, be not deceived; if God be God let him be
God; if Baal be God, serve him: and if Spain will match with England, let it
be done without fearful conclusions; and be not ouermatched with a prodigious
treaty.

We are the bolder (most gracious Lords) to enter into these terms with you,
and to prostrate our selves before the throne of our dread Sovereign, with
tears in our eyes and drops of blood from our heart, because we desire that he
would but consider the many and sundry inconveniences the Country has endured
since the peace with Spain; and with what particulars of disgraces and scorn,
we have all been branded since this last treaty about a marriage: let us then
crave pardon, great Lords, if we make a mixture of triuiall and solid business
together, or are careless of method, precedencie of time, or not ranking the
most eminent things in the first place; shall we begin with the complaints of
the whole Land, the swarming and increase of the poor, the decay of trades,
insomuch that in London there are at least a thousand several houses to be
let, and in the principal streets inferior occupations are intruded, to the
disgrace of that great and famous City; the exportation of our gold, the
carrying away of our ordnance, the anticipation of the benefit of our Virginia
commodities, by selling underhand Spanish Tobacco, and such like; and the slack
eventing of our cloth and cottons, by reason Spain and Italy have proclaimed
inhibitions for bringing in any English cloth or woollen clothes amongst them?
Shall we follow with the loss of the Palatinate, the slighting of our
Ambassadors in Germany, the hazard of the Kings children in Prague, the
bereauing them of their inheritance, the bestowing the Electorship upon
Bauaria, and all those perils and indignities we have endured about that
war, when yet we were made to believe there should be a more tractable
composition or orderly course taken, if we would defist from the prosecution?
Shall we continue with your disgraces at home? how ever many gracious things
have been published to reconcile the peoples opinion to the affecting the
Spanish match, all which have yet had the misfortune of diuerting them from it,
either as disallowing the pamphlets that have been that way written, or
esteeming them too triuiall, and only common tricks to get money. With what
scorn did a supposed Spanish mad man advance himself into the Chair of
Estate in the presence at White Hall, and was only dismissed with a jest from
Gondomar, and a shipping out of England? Was there ever such an abuse offered
to a Kings house, as the cutting of his pictures in the princely gallery, when
certain Spaniards were so kindly entertained to be admitted into such private
rooms? Who could have had better welcome then that counterfeit fugitive the
Archbishop of Spalato? and yet in requital he preached publicly in the
Mercers Chapel, that the Church of Rome was a true Church of God; and in
private conference argued as if the Ecclesiastical government of England was
but a mongrell Papistry. How did Gondomar cousen our hospitality, and abuse
his Majesty's favor? for after he and his Priests had been welcomed to many
noble houses in England, and discovered the Ladies humors or dotage upon their
Jesuits, after he had fraughted himself with the knowledge of our kingdom,
and diued (as it were) into the arcana regni; after he had drawn on the net of
political enforcement, concerning the profit and honor of both Nations by this
match, with the iocundity of the Princes in their union; and penselled out the
excellencies of the Infanta Maria: after, we say, that he had as it were made
a faction in England, and knew by name who were Hispaniolized, and for their
private ends (as all temporisers do) neglected the public good either of
Church or Commonwealth. With what a iollitie did he return into Spain, and
boasted there how easy it was to deceive your simplicity, insomuch that we
in Scotland heard more particulars then you in England, that his arguments were
but Elo^chi, and wished in our hearts his wisdom might prove Ahitophels, and
his devices like Perillus bull, of whom Phallaris for his invention made the
first trial.

Shall we prosecute other matters? was it well done, think you, to compose
that book of Rosa Hispanioa, and Anglicum punicum, and expose it to public
view, with an idolatrous and blasphemous frontispeece, Christ coming from
heaven to marry them, when he himself had cursed Israel if they matched with
the Canaanites, and Nehemiah with pulling their hair from their heads, made
the people put away their idolatrous wives; and for the book it self, the
wiser and judicious sort not only derided it for the phrase and fantastical
title unto as fantastical a man, but for the substance and examples which
might be every way, and every one retorted against the other: and for the
frontispeece, the very women in Edenborugh have made good sport to hear of the
jests that have been contrived upon it. At the first, when a certain man
demanded whom those pictures did personate, and answer was made, that the one
was Charles Prince of Wales, and the other, the Lady Maria Infanta of Spain;
and the third, Jesus Christ come from heaven to marry them. Not too fast,
(replied the fellow) but yet I am glad that Christ is between them, for then
sure he will never suffer them to ioyn together, except God give her so much
grace, which seldom happens to a Spaniard, to come out of Babylon, and not be
partakers of her Idolatries. After this, the book lying long on their stalls,
and the man oven angered again at such lukewarm gospellers and tradesmen,
that care not by what for did means, and superstitious filthiness they enrich
themselves, he asked once again what those pictures meant? and they once
again answered, the Prince of Wales, and Princess of Spain, with Christ
between them. Oh, said he, that's impossible! For if Christ meant any such
matter, he would have dispatched it before now: and questionless there would
never have been such delays, and rediculous pride amongst them.

Then followed the Princes journey into Spain, with rigging out a Navy, and
selecting the Commanders to please the King of Spain, as was interpred of some
of the principal Catholic Lords of England, who apparrelled their followers
honorably, and did all things befitting the dignity of the nation; but what
followed upon Brunswicks overthrow? Spain with Ixion bosted, he must lie with
Juno: and the house of Austria swelled so big, that if the tumor of pride be
not pricked down, it will burst with her own greatness and presumption, that
they are not able to raise another Gigantomachia, and with Typhon cast the
mountains against heaven: for presently the noble Prince found a kind of
remisnes and relaxation concerning his first entertainment, and peradventure
being a pathick to some indignities, he and the Navy were all dismissed without
the Lady or any dispatch of the business: so that we in Scotland did wonder
how so great and so wise a King could either be misinformed, or rely on any
Temporiser to go forward with uncertainties; and yet for all this you in
England printed more books of the Princes royal entertainment in Spain, and
like childrens wormseed it was trimmed over with gold and put into candid
stuff, that is, it had brave phrases and oratory, with some things that
sauored of impossibility. A second book told you of a second entertainment
which the Prince had in Spain, and for Spanish business had such an exotik
phrase, that when it came amongst us, we reputed it a very Rhomantidos indeed:
for the author invented words never in any author before, and bestowed as much
pains about killing of bulls and beasts, ioco de cuno, and other sports, like
our countrymen in times past, who ran at S. Quintine, as Homer did in
describing the Trojan wars, Curtius in Alexanders conquests, and Lucan in his
Pharsalia. Then followed a third book of the Princes farewell, and reciprocal
gifts bestowed between Spain and us; and this was as vinegar to the teeth and
smoke to the eyes of the subject: for had not their hearts been seasoned with
the joy and gladness for his return, their mouths had cursed outright, and
wished such deceivers the woman's reward, that for gold betrayed her country,
and so had so much laid upon her, that they pressed her to death.

These collections (most gracious Lords) we have made, not to intercede
against the will of our great King, or pleasure of the Prince, if he have
taken any pleasure in his journey to Spain, but to put you in mind, what you
must trust unto, if you merchandise for any Babylonish trumperies, or mean to
traffic with Spain or Rome for men's traditions and policies: nor are we
presumptuous in any advice, but only to remember you, how the blood of the
Saints lies crying for vengeance, and mourning for their redemption before the
throne of the Lamb, what Rome has done to Gods servants: wherefore Spain
has abused most of the countries of Europe, and with what enforcements the
whole world complains of them all; and then no doubt the God that has bin so
merciful to you and us in these discoueries, will be as merciful in opening
the doors of your hearts to prevent future mischiefs, by exposing unto you
present inconveniences, and assuring you according to that Machiuilian positio^
of fides non est conseruanda cum haereticis; the Pope and all that be his
adherents and lovers of his Holiness, will take the first opportunity and
advantage of any of your weaknesses; but let them know from Gods own mouth,
there is a feast proclaimed for the birds of the air and beasts of the field
to come and prey upon the carkeises of Emperors and Kings, and gorge themselves
with the dainty food of the flesh of Princes.

As for the supposed causes (gracious Lords) of your now Assembly, at this high
Court of Parliament, we guess they may be to redress the public grieuances of
the people, to reform the enormities of the gouernner, to rectify the
disordred lives of particular persons, and to supply the Kings wants as is
great reason; For as the honor of a King consists in the multitude of his
subjects: so the glory of a nation appears in nothing more, then in the
Majesty and Magnificence of a Prince, which cannot be done without
contributions of the subject: and so by consequence, where the people are rich,
the Prince cannot be poor; we pray the God of everlasting happiness so to
direct and prosper all your proiects and consultations, that they may extend to
the glory of God, the honor of the Kings Majesty, the propagation of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, the benefit of the Commonwealth, the flourishing of
this great and happy Island, the reformation of sin and enormitie, and the
confusion of Antichrist with all his adherents.

And the same God that gave Laws unto his people, coming in power of fear,
threatening and judgment, when Mount Sinai did shake like an earthquake under
him, spread his wings over your house, like the Cherubins over the Arc, and
keep you safe from any more Powder plots, especially the Ar^ados, and Spanish
invasion of 88, which must never be forgotten: and would to God it would please
his Majesty as he has done by the 5 of No^e^be^, to to make a festival of
that day of their dissipation, and set up a Pillar of brass upon Dover peer,
with insculping the whole occurrences as they chanced, that the first work
which strangers undertook after their landing, might be to run to the monument,
to understand how God protected you from the Spanish pride and oftentation.

And the same God that appeared to Solomon with a blessed donation of wisdom,
whereby he prostrated himself before the Brazen Alter, praying both for
himself and the people, so govern, guide, and preserve the heart of his
Majesty, in finishing the work he now begins, and opportunity sets forward,
^^ at Europe it self take a pattern of great Britains Royalty, and be driven
to admiration, that true Majesty, religion, piety, love, union, peace,
plenty, and strength of men are met together in one Island, and corner of the
world.

And the same God that made the sea his instrument of vengeance upon Pharaoh,
the heavens to rain down stones upon the head of Sisera, the stars to fight
in their order, the Angel to destroy the host of the Assirians, the fire to
consume the Captains of fifties, hell to open and swallow up Corah and Abiram,
the Lions to destroy the idolaters of Samaria, the Bears to tear in pieces the
mockers of Eliah, and the inferior creatures to serve his turn upon his
enemies; keep you from foreign and domesticke adversaries, especially
outlandish women, who if they have power to tempt Solomon to Idolatry, are
sure to bring a fearful judgment upon him, and his posterity.

FINIS.

